_

A-PDF Image To PDF Demo. Purchase from www.A-PDF.com to remove the watermark (ec age ‏حب . || وب عد‎ ots a er i ‏ديه بعد‎ Ae ak A ek A poe 1
20 ‏امم او امس اح‎ OO ‏يج سس‎
or Ain AN ot 4 VANE fy 14 21 } 1 “/ 1 7 0 4 Pale al ‏ب‎ (“= 0 00

مم0

<
Volume i) hen) 2 7 CM
/

| ‏ل م‎ 1
1 ‏ش‎ . \t) SHH es 6 0 2 ‏ذه‎ ( 113 i

4 Commentary 0 2
ِ 0 ‏ينا‎

7 1 Wl Tho Viruoys Shaikh, AMAllAmMan

} Nuhammad] olin Sait)
١

el

<< لل هه

6 ‏حسدي‎
‎#0
‎-
‏ب"‎
‎—
‎~
‎| = =r...’
— 9
JZ. 0 LAs / 14 Ts
— =i
—
7” 7 -

ee ‏كوول‎

.-
oe
ef
ee
$f OSs
—
ee —
———P ‏ميم ترك‎ EL ‏مسسس مر‎
OO el
Ee 9 Eg ee ee ١” ‏لوبي‎

ee ae

a ‏نت‎

aA

- - سم
~
~
+
~ ~ ب

2011111111 (ale)

4 Authorized by tho Charitable Foundation of
١ Shaikh Muhammad bin Sali Al’ Uthaimin |

.9
ب —_— ا ا ضام لعن عمد اليم - ا اه 7

١ pea
50 ON A\S ١ 2

iL
fi ‏ااا ا‎ 1 1 ١
10 44 ay i |

السببا”تت ا اال 7000000

شرح العقيدة الواسطية

Commentary On Shaikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah’s

AL-‘AQIDAH AL-WASITIYYAH

Volume 1

By:

The Virtuous Shaikh, Al-‘Allamah
Muhammad bin Salih Al- ‘Uthaimin (2)

Authorized by the Charitable Foundation of
Shaikh Muhammad bin Salih Al-“Uthaimin

DARUSSALAM
GLOBAL LEADER IN ISLAMIC BOOKS

Riyadh Jeddah « Al-Khobar « Sharjah
Lahore + London «Houston e New York.

ns ee

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED © ‏أجنيع حقرى الطبع محفرظة‎
‏ولج‎ part of this book may. be reproduced, or utilized in aby form or by any means,

and recording ot by any iaformarion
the publisher,

electronic oF

sworage and retrieval syniem, without the written permission of
First Edition: March 2009
Supervised by:
Abdul Malik Mujahid

HEAD OFFICE
P.O, Box: 22743, Riyadh 11416 K.S.A Tel: 00966-1-4033962/4049432 Fax 4021659

salam,com Website: www.dar-us-salam.com

AUSTRALIA

Ema dbumcaasiretenal cor

+ Darussalam
Int'l Publishing & Distribution SON BHO

54200 Kuala
3200 Fax 03-4:

Email: darussalam@streamyx.

Website: www danissalam.

FRANCE
* Ealions & Libre Esnalan

converts Association of Singapore
Road The Gataxy "71

6, Nima! Road, Colombo-4

* Islamic Books international
Street (North)
Dongri, Mumbai 4000 ‏,و0‎ INDIA
Tel: 0091-22-2373 4180
E-mait bi@ir net
SOUTH AFRICA
* Islamic Do'wah Movement (iDM)

1078 Durban, South Attica
304-6683 Fae O027-91-908-128;

E-mail: darussalam@awainel.net.sa, riyadh@
K.8.A. Darussalam Showrooms:
Riyadh
(Otaya branch: To! 00086-1-4514483 Fax: 4644045,
Malaz branch: Ye! O0068-1-4735220 Fax: 4738221

‘Suwailam branch: Tol & Fax-1-2660422

Tok: 00086 2-6878254 Fax: 6396270
+ Madinah

Tet 00986-04- 8234248, 8290038

Fax: 04-0181121

AixKhobor

Tet: 00966-3-8602000 Fax: 8691551
+ Khamis Mushayt

Tol 8 Fax: OF 07085

* Yanbu Al-Bahr Tel; 050088734 1 Fax 043008027
* Av-Buraida Tol; 0503417158 Fax 06-3806124
UAE
+ Darussalam, Sharjah UALE
Tol: 00071-6-5692625 Fasc 5632624
PAKISTAN
‘Darussalam, 26 8 Lowor M
Tet. 0092-42-72
+ Rahman
Tot: C092.
* Karachi, To
‏معن‎
‎© ‏ب«عامجس مم0‎ Houn
‏عه‎ 79134 To
Tol: 001713-22 0419 Fax: 001117
+ Daruseaiom, Mew York 40 At
erm Yeteet 1217, Te 001-718-625 8
Ve 78-026 $519
‏اام ا‎ dacunsalamny@hotmad.com
+ Dervesatam intmational Publications Lid
Layton Businnss Cont
Unit} Elo Rood, ‏با‎
‎‘0084 20 85309 ‏“ذه‎
‎Wobsite. www dans
Email: infogdarusssilam.com
“+ Darussalam Intorational Publications Limted
Rognats Pare
‏مقا‎ NWE 7RG Tes: OOt4- 207 725 7298
Fine 0044 20 8539 4880

Contents

Introduction

A Brief Biography of Al-‘Allamah Muhammad bin Salih Al-
Uthaimin

His Name, Lineage and Birth:
His Educational Upbringing:

His Teaching:

His Contributions to Knowledge

His Other Works and Endeavors

His Status in Knowledge

His Children

His Death

The Introduction of the Second Edition
Introduction

¢ scholars, May Allah shower mercy upon them, have
orized Tawheed into three

The Second Category: Tawh
The Third Category: Tatheed al-Asmaa wa as-Sifaat
Commentary on the Introductory notes of [bn Taimiyyah

His saying: “In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

His saying: “All praise is due to Allah Who sent His N
with guidance and the religion of truth to make it prevail over
all other religions and Allah is Sufficient as a Witness.’

Concerning his saying: “I testify that there is no deity worthy of
worship except Allah alon no partners in

4n the Name of Allah
The Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful

nn ESI ‏سبد‎

©)Maktaba Dar-us-Salam, 2008
King Fahd National Library Catalog-in-Publication Data
Al-Othaimin, Shaikh Muhammad bin Salih
Al- ‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah- Riyadh-2008
‏,م619‎ 14x24 cn
ISBN: 978-603-500-082-6 (set)
978-603-500-083-3 (Vol.-1)
t-Islam U-Title
240de 1429/6506
Legal Deposit no.1429/6506
ISBN: 978-603-500-082-6 (set)
978-603-500-083-3 (Vol.-1)

—— OSE

186

195

236

241

Contents

ones and given the truth unlike those who say about Allah what
they know not.’

Cone
Exalted

ig his statement: “That is why Allah — Glorified and

He — says:

Conceming his statement: “He — Glorious is He the Most High
— has combined between negation and affirmation regarding

what He attributed to and called Himsel

Concerning his statement; The Ahls-Sunnah wal-Jama‘ah do not

deviate from the message of the messengers; because it is the
straight path, the path of those Allah showered His favor upon
, the martyrs and the righteous.

of the prophets, Siddiqa¢

la:

Concerning his statement: “Included in this is what Allah
attributed to Himself in Surah (chapter) Al-Ikhlas which is equal
to one-third of the Qur’an when He says:

Concert
in the greatest Verse of the Book of Allah when He says’

ig his statement: “And what He attributes to Himself

Concerning the author's statement: “That is why, whoever
١ will remain
20 Shaitin will come near him until it dawns.”

recites this
with him ar

e during a night, a guard from Allah

Concerning the author's statement: “His statement — Glorious is

He the Most High
The author's statement: And His saying: And He is Al-Alim, Al-
Hakim

And His statement: Al-Alim Al-Khabir
And His statement: He knows that which goes.

And His statement: Verily, Allah, He is Ar-Razzaq
Concerning His statement: There is nothing like unto Him.

Concerning His statement: Verily, how excellent is the teaching
which Allah gives to you

“And His saying: It was better for you
The Attribute of Love

The Attribute of Mercy

The Attribute of Pleasure:

The Verses regarding the Attributes of Wrath, Displeasure,
Detestation and Abhorrence

An issue.

6 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

55

60

64

146

146

165

attestation to His monotheism.” 1

Concerning his saying: “I testify that Muhammad is His servant
and Messenger.

Blessing upon
him and his household and provide him abundant peace’

Conceming his saying: "may Allah shower His

Concerning his saying "To proceed; thi eed of those upon
the path of the saved and aided sect till the last hour (that is) Ahlus
Sunnah wal Jami‘ah

Concerning the statement: It (Creed) entails Imdn (belief) in
Allah, His angels, His books, His messengers, the Resurrection
and the Destiny — the good of it and evil of it

Belief in Allah entails four things:

The belief in His existence

What is intended by the belief in angels?
Belief in Messengers

Concerning his statement: And of Femdn in Allah is Eemdn
(belief) in what He describes Himself with in His Book and
what His Messenger 3& has described Him with.

There is nothing like Allah

Concerning his saying: “Rather, they believe that Allah
Exalted is He — there is nothing like Him; and He is the All-

Hearer, the All-Seer.

Concerning, His saying: “They do not deny what He describes

Himself with and do not distort words from (their) right

Places

The Ahlus-Sunnah keep out from Jihad.

Concerning his statement: “They do not engage in Ilhdd
(disbelieve) concerning Allah's Names and His verses (signs)

Concerning His statement: “They do neither engage in Tukyeef
nor liken any of His Attributes to the attributes of His creation
because He, Glorified be He, does not have anything similar to
Him, none coequal to Him and no rival and He — Glorified be
He — should not be compared with His creation”

Concerning his saying: “Because He — Glorified be He —
knows best about Himself and others, His words are the truest
and better in His statement than His creation.’

The author si says: “Then, His Messengers who are the truthful

Introduction 9

In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful

Introduction

All praise is due to Allah. And may the Salah and Salam be
upon our Prophet Muhammad #&, his Household and all of

his Companions.
As for what proceeds:

This is the book: Sharh Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah by the
virtuous Shaikh Muhammad bin Salih Al-'Uthaimin. We are
producing it for the students of knowledge after the
completion of its review by the Shaikh himself, may Allah
he corrected, revised, and added

preserve him. Thus,
important additions to it Therefore, it resulted in an
appealing new form.

The book, Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah, authored by Shaikh Al-
Islam Ibn Taymiyyah, may Allah have mercy upon him, is a
beneficial book summarizing the creed of the People of the
Sunnah and the Jama‘ah with the clearest clarifications and
simplest of expressions. Hence, despite this booklet’s small
size, it is among the best of what has been collected and
written on the topic. There is no better evidence of this,
than the great care of the scholars in explaining it, and
teaching it to the students of knowledge.

Our scholars have been keen to teach their students such
summarizing texts, then, after that, they move on to what is
broader and more encompassing

8 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah
‘The Verses Concerning the Attributes of Coming and Descent... 360
The Attribute of Face for Allah — Glorious i: 372
The Affirmation of Two Hands for Allah — Exalted is He. 384
Affirmation of the Attribute of Two Eyes for Allah 405
Attribute of Hearing and Seeing of Allah — the Most High 423
Affirmation of Attribute of Plot, Secret Plan and Severe

Punishment. 436
Attiributes of Pardon, Forgiveness, Mercy, H nd Might 448
Affirmation of the Name for Allah 461
The Verses of the Attributes of Negation Concerning the

Exaltation of Allah and the Negation of any Equal from Him: 463
The Eleventh Ve 488
The Twelfth Verse: His statement 492
Rising of Allah over His Throne 497

560

569

586

601

618

Affirmation of Allah’s Transcendence Above His Creatures
The Affirma’
The Affirmation of Speech for Allah — Exalted is He

of Allah's Keeping Company with His Creation.

The Affirmation that the Qur'an is the Speech of Allah

The Affirmation that the Qur’an is revealed from Allah — the
Most High

The Affirmation of the Fact that the Believers will see their Lord
on the Day of Ressurection

The author ai: said: “This topic is related in many places in the
Book of Allah; whoever painstakingly reflects upon the Qur'an
in order to seek the g path of the truth will become

idane

evidently clear to him.”

Introduction 11

able to find. So, if it was in the Two Sahilts, or one of them, I
considered them to be sufficient. And if found in other than
them, I would refer it to the most important of them in the
interest of brevity. We also mentioned what was said about
it from authenticity and weakness, taking the statements of
the scholars who are considered in this science, as guide;
without us adding more than that.

I indexed the Hadiths of the text and the commentary, as
well as another index for the topics of the book.

I chose not to mention the biography of Shaikh Al-Islam Ibn
Taymiyyah, considering the numerous biographies pro-
duced about him, may Allah have mercy upon him, to be
sufficient"!

As well, we mentioned a brief biography for Shaikh
Muhammad bin ‘Uthaimin, which was written by our
brother Walid bin Ahmad Al-Husain.

This is the small effort (that I produced), and I am aware
that there are those among the students of knowledge who
are more worthy of this work. Thus, I ask Allah, Exalted is
He, for pardon and forgiveness, and to guide us to
whatever goodness and correctness it contains.

As I see that it is obligatory upon me to thank Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, first and foremost. Then, to the
virtuous Shaikh Muhammad bin ‘Uthaimin, may Allah
benefit with his knowledge, who appointed us to take care
of printing this book, verifying its Hadiths and reviewing it

As | also thank the brothers from Dar Al-Hasan publishing

(Like: ‏فقولا “لم‎ Ad-Durriyyah by Ibn ‘Abdul-Hadi, Al-Kawakib
Ad-Durriyyah by the Shaikh Mari Al-Karami Al-Hanbali, Ar
Radd Al-Wafir by Ibn Nasir Ad-Din Ad-Dimashqi, Al-A ‘lam
Al-‘Aliyyah by Al-Bazzar, and the many others.

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The virtuous Shaikh Muhammad bin Salih Al-'Uthaimin -
may Allah bring benefit through his knowledge - followed
this method. He used to always stress focusing on the likes
of these summarized texts, and memorizing them.

Thus, in his classes on creed, for example, he would teach
the book Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah and Kitab At-Tawhid by
Shaikh Al-Islam Muhammad bin ‘Abdul-Wahhab, may
Allah have mercy upon him. In Figh, (he would teach)
the book 24 Al-Mustaqni’ by Al-Hajjawi, may Allah have

cy upon him, in Al-Fara’id (inheritance law); Manziimah
Al-Qala’id Al-Burhaniyyah, in Nahw (grammar); Al-Ajri-
miyyah, and so on for the rest of his classes.

Consequently, this method had a profound influence in the
souls of his students and those who listened to him. So his
books and audios spread throughout the Islamic lands of
the east and the west, and by that, Allah brought
tremendous benefit.

This encouraged publishing houses to bring out the writings
and booklets of the Shaikh, may Allah preserve him, and fora
long time this was the case with Dar Ibn Al-Jawzi publishers
and distributors. So, all praise is due to Allah, Exalted is He,
and we thank Him for making that easy for us.

This book has been published before. However, in reality, it
was not given its rightful examination and the verification
by the Shaikh, may Allah rectify him. This is why, the

virtuous Shaikh reviewed the book, corrected it, looked it
over and amended what was lacking in the first edition.

Accordingly, this edition of the book is truly better than the
one that preceded it.
My Work in the Book:

I verified the Hadiths and the Athar (narrations) that I was

A Brief Biography

A Brief Biography of
Al-‘Allamah Muhammad bin
Salih Al-‘Uthaimin
1347-1421H

His Name, Lineage and Birth

He is the virtuous Shaikh, the scholar, the Muhaggiq, the
Fagih, the Mufassir, the Wari’, the Zahid, Muhammad bin
Salih bin Muhammad bin ‘Abdur-Rahmén Al ‘Uthaimin,
from Al-Wahbah, from Bana: At-Tamim.

He was born on the eve of the 27" of the blessed month of
Ramadan, in the year 1347 H, in ‘Unaizah - one of the cities
of Al-Qasim - in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

His Educational Upbringing

His father - may Allah have mercy upon him - enrolled him
as a student to learn the Noble Qur'an, with his maternal
grandfather, the teacher ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Sulaiman Ad-
Damigh, may Allah have mercy upon him. Then, he
learned writing and some arithmetic, and the texts of Adab
(literatures), in the Madrasah (school) of Al-Ustadh ‘Abdul-
‘Aziz bin Salih Ad-Damigh - may Allah preserve him - and
that was before he enrolled in the Madrasah of the teacher
‘Ali bin ‘Abdullah bin Ash-Shahitan - may Allah have
mercy upon him - where he memorized the Noble Qur’an

12 Commentary on Al-‘Agidlah Al-Wasitiyyah

and distribution in Jordan, who did the typesetting and
formatting.

In conclusion, I ask Allah, Exalted is He, to make this work
sincerely for His Face, there being no one who has a share
in it. Also, to forgive me whatever mistakes it contains.
Indeed, He is the Hearing, Responding, and may the Salah
and Salam be upon our Prophet Muhammad his
Household and all of his Companions.

Sa‘d bin Fawwaz As-Sumayyil
Al-Khobar

The Author's Biography... 15

as he read (texts) in grammar and eloquence with Shaikh
‘Abdur-Razzaq Al-Afifi, during his tenure as a teacher in
that city.

Upon the opening of the Knowledge Institute (Al-Ma‘had
Al-‘Ilimi) in Ar-Riyadh, one of his brothers! indicated that
he should enroll in it. So he sought the permission of his
Shaikh Al-‘Allamah ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Nasir As-Sa'di
may Allah have mercy upon him - and he granted him
permission and he enrolled in the Institute during the years
of 1372-1373H

During the two years he was enrolled at the Institute in Ar-
Riyadh, he benefited from the scholars that were teaching,
therein at that time, and among them were AL-‘Allamah, AL
Mufassir Shaikh Muhammad Al-Amin Ash-Shingjiti, the
Shaikh, the Fagih ‘Abdul- Aziz bin Nasir Rashid, and the
Shaikh and Muhaddith ‘Abdur-Rahman Al-Afrigi - may
Allah, Exalted is He, have mercy upon them all

During that time, he began studying with his eminence
Shaikh, the ‘Allamah ‘Abdul-‘Aziz bin ‘Abdullah Ibn Baz -
may Allah have mercy upon him. He read before him, in
the Masjid, from Sahih Al-Bukhari, and from the writings of
Shaikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah. He also benefited from him
in the knowledge/science of Hadith, examining the views
of the Fugaha’ of the different Madhhabs, and comparisons
between them. Moreover, his eminence, Shaikh ‘Abdul-
“Aziz bin Baz - may Allah have mercy upon him - is
considered his second Shaikh, due to obtaining (knowledge
from him) and being influenced by him.

Then, in the year 137411, he returned to ‘Unaizah, and
began studying with his Shaikh, Al-‘Allamah ‘Abdur-Rah

‘That being Shaikh ‘Ali bin Hamad As-Salihi, may Allah have
mercy upon him

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

by heart, while he had not yet passed the age of 14

Also, under the guidance of his father - may Allah have
mercy upon him - he was encouraged to seek Shari’ah
knowledge, and at that time, the virtuous Shaikh, Al-
‘Allamah ‘“Abdur-Rahman bin Nasir As-Sa‘di, may Allah
have mercy upon him, was teaching ‘Uiliim Ash-Shari‘ah
and Arabic, in Al-Jami’ Al-Kabir at ‘Unaizah. Furthermore,
he had appointed two of his senior students'"! to teach the
newer students. Thus, the Shaikh enrolled into the circle of
Shaikh Muhammad bin ‘Abdul-'Aziz Al-Mutawwa’ - may
Allah have mercy upon him. Until he obtained from the
knowledge regarding Tawhid, Figh and grammar what he
obtained.

Then, he attended the circle of his Shaikh, Al-’Allamah
‘Abdur-Rahman bin Nasir As-Sa’di - may Allah have
mercy upon him - with whom he studied Tafsir, Hadith, the
Prophetic Sirah, Tawhid, Figh, Usal, inheritance laws, and
grammar. He also memorized summary texts in these areas
of knowledge.

The virtuous Shaikh, Al-‘Allamah ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Nasir
As-Sa‘di - may Allah have mercy upon him - is considered
his first Shaikh; since he took from him the knowledge, by
becoming familiar with it and its methods, more than
anyone else. Therefore, he was influenced by his metho-
dology, his way of fortifying the fundamentals, his method
of teaching, and his manner of following the evidences.

And while Shaikh ‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Ali bin ‘Awdan -
may Allah have mercy upon him - was a judge in ‘Unaizah,
he read texts in the knowledge of inheritance with him, just

© They were Shaikhs Muhammad bin ‘Abdul-'Aziz Al-
Mutawwa’, and ‘Ali bin Hamad As-Salihi, may Allah have
mercy upon them.

The Author's Biography 17

transferred to teaching in the College of Shari‘ah and Usill
Ad-Din in Al-Qasim, part of the Imam Muhammad bin
Sa’ud Islamic University, and he continued a professorship
there until his death, may Allah have mercy upon him

He also taught in Al-Masjid Al-Haram and Al-Masjid An-
Nabawi (the Prophetic Masjid) during Hajj season, Rama-
dan, and summer breaks, from the year 1402H until his
death, may Allah have mercy upon him.

‘The Shaikh - may Allah have mercy upon him - possessed a
method of teaching that is unique in its quality and its
success. He would engage his students and take their
questions. He would also deliver the lessons and lectures
with high eagerness and a soul that is (full of) tranquility
and confidence; delighted in spreading knowledge and
bringing it closer to the people

His Contributions to Knowledge

His magnificent efforts - may Allah have mercy upon him -
became apparent during his more than fifty years of
conferring and sacrificing in the spread of knowledge,
teaching, exhortations, guidance, instruction, delivering
lectures, and calling (Da’wah) to Allah, Glorious and
Exalted is He.

He had great concern for writings and issuing Fatwas and
answers, which were distinguished for their firm founda-
tion in knowledge, resulting in tens of books, treaties,
lessons, Fatwas, Khutbahs, interviews and articles. Similarly,
the result was thousands of hours of audio recordings of
his lectures, Khuthahs, interviews, radio programs, and his
educational lessons in Tafsir of the Noble Qur‘dn, his
distinguished explanations of the Noble Hadith, the
Prophetic Sirah, and texts and textual poems (Manzilmd!)
in the knowledge of Shari‘ah and grammar.

16 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

man bin Nasir As-Sa’di, while continuing his studies by
enrolling in the College of Shariah, which became a part of
the Imam Muhammad bin Sa’ad Islamic University, where
he attained a diploma of higher learning

His Teaching

His Shaikh observed his cleverness and the speed at which
he attained knowledge. Thus, he encouraged him to teach,
while he continued to be a student in his circle, So, he
began teaching in the year 137011 in Al-Jami’ Al-Kabir in
‘Unaizah,

Upon his graduation from the Knowledge Institute in Ar-
Riyadh, he was appointed to teach in the Knowledge
Institute in ‘Unaizah, in the year 1374H.

In the year 1376H, his Shaikh, Al-’Allamah ‘Abdur-Rahman
bin Nasir As-Sa'di - may Allah have mercy upon him -
passed away, so he replaced him as Imm at Al-Jami’ Al-
Kabir in “Unaizah, as Imam for the two ‘Eid prayers in
(‘Unaizah), and teaching in the National Library of
‘Unaizah, of the Jami’, which was founded by his Shaikh -
may Allah have mercy upon him - in the year 1359H.

When his students increased and the library became
insufficient to accommodate them, the virtuous Shaikh -
may Allah have mercy upon him - began teaching in the
Masjid of Al-Jami’ itself. Students gathered around him, and
they flocked from around the Kingdom as well as other
than it, until they have reached hundreds in some of the
lessons. And these students were seriously seeking knowl-
edge, not merely coming to listen. He continued as Imam,
Khatib, and teacher, until his death - may Allah, Exalted is
He, have mercy upon him

The Shaikh remained a teacher in the Knowledge Institute
from the year 1374H to the year 1398H, when he was

The Author's Biography 19

he was the head of the Department of ‘Aqidah (creed).

At the later period of his teaching at the Knowledge
Institute, he participated in the membership of the
Commission of Plans and Curricula for Educational
Institutes. Furthermore, he authored a number of
curricula therein

Member of the Committee for Guidance during Hajj
season, from the year 1392H until his death - may
Allah, Exalted is He, have mercy upon him - for which
he held lessons and lectures in Makkah and its
precincts, and gave Fakods on various issues as well
as Shari'ah judgments.

He headed the Charitable Society of Memorization of
the Noble Qur'an in ‘Unaizah, from its foundation in
the year 1405H until his death.

He delivered numerous lectures throughout the King
dom of Saudi Arabia for diverse categories of people,
as well as delivering lectures over the phone for groups
and Islamic centers throughout the world

He was one of the senior scholars of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia who answered the questions of those
seeking clarification in matters related to rulings of the
religion and its fundamentals, in creed and Shari‘ah.
This occurred via radio programs in the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, and the most popular of those programs
Nur ‘alad-Darb (Light on the Path).

wa

He committed himself to answering questions via
telephone, as well as those written and taken in person.

He arranged scheduled educational meetings; weekly,
monthly and annually

He participated in a number of conferences which were

18 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

In compliance with the principals, rules, and guidelines
which the virtuous Shaikh - may Allah have mercy upon
him - established for the dissemination of his books,
treaties, classes, lectures, Khuthahs, Fatwas and interviews,
the Charitable Foundation of Shaikh Muhammad bin Salih
Al-Uthaimin - with the help of Allah, and His facilitation -
has the duty and honor of the responsibility to produce and
be the caretaker of all of his contributions to knowledge:

Based upon his instruction - may Allah have mercy upon

him - a website was founded specifically for him on
world wide web!"! , for spreading the desired benefit - with
the help of Allah - and the presentation of all of his
contributions to knowledge, from his writings and audio
recordings.

His Other Works and Endeavors

Aside from these fruitful endeavors in the field of teaching,
writing, the office of Imam, giving Khutbahs, Fatwas, and
Daw’ah to Allah - Glorious and Exalted is He - the virtuous
Shaikh - may Allah have mercy upon him - was involved in

many other successful works, including:

“ Member of the Board of Major Senior Scholars in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia from the year 14( )7H until his
death.

4 Member of Al-Majlis Al-‘Ilimt (the Scientific Council) for
the Imam Muhammad bin Sa’td Islamic University
during, the two academic of 1398H-1400H.

Member of the Majlis (Council) for the College of
Shari'ah and Usiil Ad-Din at the Al-Qasim branch of the
Imam Muhammad bin Sa’ad Islamic University, where

‎www.binothaimeen.com‏ لا

The Author's Biography

his advice and his exhortations.

He was awarded the International King Faisal - may Allah
have mercy upon him - Prize for Service to Islam in the
year 1414H. The list of achievements for which the
election Committee for the Board granted the prize,
include the following:

Firstly: His embodiment of the virtuous manners of the
scholars, of which the most prominent is Al-Wara’,
™magnanimity, saying the truth, working for the welfare of
the Muslims, and advice to their elite and average
people.

Secondly: His benefiting the masses with his knowledge,
in lessons, Fatwds, and writings.

Thirdly: His delivering beneficial general lessons in
various regions of the Kingdom.

Fourthly: His beneficial participation in many Islamic
conferences.

Fifthly: Following a distinguished path in Da‘wah to
Allah with wisdom and the best exhortation, and being
an example of living according to the methodology of the
righteous Salaf, in thought and manners

His Children

He had five sons, and three daughters. His sons are
‘Abdullah, ‘Abdur-Rahman, Ibrahim, ‘Abdul-’Aziz, and
‘Abdur-Rahim

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah ALV yyah

held in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Because of his great concern for educational conduct
and exhortation, he demonstrated great concern for
giving guidance and direction to the students for the
proper methodology in the pursuit of knowledge and
its acquiescence, he worked in uniting them and
persevered in teaching them, and he bore their many
questions, showing great concern for their affairs.

And the Shaikh - may Allah have mercy upon him - was
engaged in numerous fields of goodness, areas of
righteousness, and kindness to the people, hastening in
fulfillment of their needs, authoring trusts and cove-
nants among them, and conferring advice to them, with

truth and sincerity.

His Status in Knowledge

The virtuous Shaikh - may Allah have mercy upon him - is
counted among those firmly rooted in knowledge, to
whom Allah conferred - by His Grace and Honor - firm
foundations, a tremendous grasp of the knowledge of the
evidences and following them, the derivation of rulings,
and beneficial points derived from the Book and the
Sunnah, and a profound understanding of the Arabic
language, in meaning, articulation, and eloquence.

And due to what he was blessed with, of the noble
characteristics of the scholars, and their praiseworthy
manners, and the combination of knowledge and action,
the people loved him with a tremendous love, and
everyone held him in the highest esteem, Allah provided
him with their acceptance, and they became at ease with his
views in issues of Figh, and turning to his lessons, his
Fatwas, and his contributions to knowledge, and they drank
from the springs of his knowledge, and they benefited from

The Introduction of the Second Edition

The Introduction of
the Second Edition

Indeed, all praise is due to Allah. We praise Him, ask His
help and His forgiveness. We seek refuge in Allah from the
evil of our selves and our mischief of our deeds. Whomever
Allah guides, none can misguide him. And whomever is
misguided, none can guide him. And I bear witness that
there is none worthy of worship except Allah, Alone,
without partners for Him. And 1 bear witness that
Muhammad is His Servant and Messenger, may the Salah
and abundant Sx of Allah be upon him, his Household,
his Companions and all those who followed them faith:
fully, until the Day of Recompense.

To proceed: Indeed, Allah, Exalted is He, has favored us
with the explanation of Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah which was
authored by Shaikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah, concerning the
creed of the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah, which
was a lecture delivered to the students who studied it
under us in the Masjid. And because of their eagerness in
preserving the lesson, they recorded it, then transcribed it
into writing based upon these recordings

It is well known that the explanation that received from a
lecture is not like the explanation that is written and edited.
That is because the first one is more susceptible to decrease
and increase than the second one.

Many publication companies have requested printing it
And Maktabah Tabariyyah has preceded in that. Thus, it
published it in a fresh look, along with beneficial notes,

22 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-V itiyyah

His Death

He died - may Allah have mercy upon him - in the city of
Jeddah, before Maghrib on Wednesday, the fifteenth of
Shawwal, in the year 1421H.

His funeral prayer was held in Al-Masjid Al-Haram, after
‘Asr prayer on Thursday. Then, he was followed by the
thousands of those who prayed and throngs of attendees,
and buried in Makkah Al-Mukarramah

After the Friday prayer the following day, Salat Al-Gha’ib
(the funeral prayer in absentia) was performed for him, in
all of the cities of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

May Allah shower the mercy in store for the most righteous
upon our ikh, and settle him in His most spacious of
(His) Gardens, and confer His forgiveness and pleasure
upon him, and reward him with goodness for all that he
did for Islam, and for the Muslims.

Al-Lajnah Al- ‘Tlimiyyah (the Knowledge Committee) at the
Charitable Foundation of Shaikh Muhammad bin Salih Al-
“Uthaimin

Website:

www. binothaimeen.com

Email:

info@binothaimeen.com

Introduction

Introduction

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. May the
Salah and Salam be upon our Prophet, Muhammad, his
Household and all of his Companions

Thereafter;

Indeed, this book, entitled Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah was
written by the great scholar of the Ummah in his time: Abi
Al-‘Abbas, Shaiki Ahmad bin Abdul Halim bin
‘Abdus-Salam bin Taymiyyah Al-Harrani, may Allah have
mercy upon him. Who died in the year 728 AH

The prestige of this man - which he is thanked for, and
which we hope Allah rewards him for - in defense of the
truth and the confrontation of the people of falsehood, is
something known to anyone who reads and researches in
his books.

The reality is that he is one of the favors of Allah upon this
Ummah. For by him, Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He,
restrained tremendous dangerous matters from the Islamic
creed

This book is written as a summary, entitled: Al-‘Agidah Al-
Wasitiyyah. It is authored by Shaikh Al-Islam when a man
who was a judge in (a place known as) Wasit came to him,
and complained of the people's suffering from the
methodologies deviating in matters of the Names and
Attributes of Allah. Therefore, he wrote this (book of) creed
which is regarded as the core for the creed of the People of
Sunnah and Jamé‘ah, regarding those issues about which
people spread various innovations, and about which there
is a great deal of baseless talk and conjecture.

24 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

verification and references for its Hadiths, by our brother
Aba Muhammad Ashraf bin ‘Abdul-Magsad bin ‘Abdul-
Rahim, may Allah facilitate him to what is right, and
reward him with good.

But, since the explanation that is received from a lecture is
not like the explanation that is written and edited, | found it
important to read the explanation with great care in order
to produce the explanation in a way that was satisfactory
Therefore, I did that, and to Allah is the praise.
Furthermore, I deleted what is not needed and added that
which was needed

I ask Allah, Exalted is He, to bring benefit by it, as He
brought benefit from its original, and to make us from
those callers to the truth and its supporters. Indeed, He is
Near, and responds.

The author:
Muhammad AlI-Uthaimin
3/1415 AH

Introduction

associating any partner with Him.

The Messengers whom Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
sent to mankind did not invite people to Tawhid Ar-
Rubibiyyah as they invited to Tawhid Al-Uhihiyyah. That is
because those who denied Tawhid Ar-Rubibiyyah are very
few in number, such that those who reject this openly could
not do so within the depth of their hearts. No, by Allah,
except if they had been completely deprived of their
discerning senses, but they rejected it out of arrogance and
condemnable pride.

The scholars, may Allah have mercy upon them, have
categorized Tawhid into three:

Firstly: Tawhid Ar-Rubabiyyah

That is to single out Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, in

three matters: Creating, ownership and disposition of
affairs.

The evidence for that is His statement, Exalted is He:

Surely, His is the Creation and Commandment} (Al-
A’ rif 7:54)

The evidence in the Ayah is that the predicate is mentioned
first, whereas the predicate is supposed to be mentioned
last, and the rhetorical principle is that whenever what is
Supposed to be mentioned last is mentioned first, that
proves specificity.

Besides, consider the introduction of this Ayah with (the
word) Ala (surely) which is used to express caution and
emphasis:

26 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Before we begin to discuss this very marvelous book, we
would like to explain that all the messages of the
Messengers from their first, Nuh, may the Salah and Salam
be upon him, to their last, Muhammad #§ - each of them
was inviting to Tawhid. Allah, Exalted is He, say

من رسول إلا ‎Al 4d) ces‏ لآ إله إلا

4And We did not send any Messenger before you, but
We inspired him (saying): “La Maha Illa And (there is
spt 1), ‏مد‎ worship Me (Alone and none

“y (ALAnbiy

And He, Exalted is He, says:

And verily, We have sent among every Ummah
(community, nation) a Messenger (proclaiming) : “Wor
ship Allah (Alone), and avoid (or keep away from) At
Taghut (all false deities).”» (An-Nahl 16:36)

And that is because the creation was created only for One
and He is Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. They were
created for His worship, so that their hearts would cling to
Him with veneration, exaltation, fear, hope, reliance,
longing and awe, such that they would restrain themselves
from everything in this world that will not aid them in
singling out Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, Alone, in these
matters; since you are a creature, thus, you must belong to
your Creator, who has total control of everything,

That is why the invitation of the Messengers, may the Salah
and Salam be upon them, was for this significant and
important matter, the worship of Allah Alone, without

Introduction 29

And such as His statement, Exalted is He, in the Hadith
Qudsi: “Who is more unjust than the one who tries to create
the like of My creation?”

How do you reconcile between your saying: “Allah is
alone, in creating” and these texts?!

The response is to say: Creation means bringing into
existence, this is specific to Allah, Exalted is He, alone, But
as for changing something from one form to another, this is
not creation in the real sense, even if it is referred to as
“creation” in the case of such formation. But in reality, it is
not a complete creating. For example, this carpenter made a
door from wood; hence, it is said, he created a door. But the
One Who created the raw material of this creation is Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime. All the people, no matter how
powerful they are, can never create an Arak tree, an ant or
a fly.

Listen to the Word of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

40 mankind! A similitude has been coined, so listen to
it (carefully): Verily! Those on whom you call besides
Allah, cannot create (even) a fly, even though they
combine together for the purpose. And if the fly snatched
ya thing from them, they would have no power to
it from the fly. So weak are (both) the seeker and

the sought» (Al-Hajj 22:73)

Those> is a relative pronoun that includes everything

| Reported by Al-Bukhari (5953) and Muslim (2111) from Aba
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him

28 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

éSurely, His is the Creation and Commandment (Al-
A’raf 7:54)

Not for other than Him. As for creation, this is His, and the
commandment refers to the disposition of affairs.

As for ownership, its evidence, for example, is His
statement, Exalted is He:

€ENG ose! ‏ملك‎ gd

éAnd to Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and
the earth» (Al-Jathiyah 45:27)

For this proves His sole right of ownership, Glorious and
Exalted is He. The evidence in this Ayah is as mentioned
before (concerning the last Ayah) regarding putting
forward what should come later.

Therefore, the Lord, the Mighty and Sublime, is Alone in
creating, ownership, and disposition of affairs

If you may ask: How do you reconcile between what you
have acknowledged, and the affirmation of creating for
other than Allah, such as His statement, Exalted is He:

dégyii Sat af Sy

450 blessed be Allah, the Best of creators» (Al-
Mu‘mintin 23:14)

And such as his saying 3% concerning the image makers: “It

will be said to them: ‘Give life to that which you

created.””"!

fl Based on what was reported by Al-Bukhari (5961) and
Muslim (2107) from ‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her,
that the Messenger #% said: “Indeed the makers of these
images will be punished on the Day of Judgment, and it will
be said to them: ‘Give life to that which you created. 7

Introduction 31

authority; I don’t own what is under your authority; but
everything is owned by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. So
from the view of entirety, the ownership of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, is more general and broader owner-
ship.

Secondly: My ownership of this thing is not a real
ownership where I can do whatever | like with it. 1 can
only do with it as the Shari commands and as the real
Owner permits, Who is Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.
Supposing I trade a Dirham for two Dirhams, I do not own
that, and that is not permissible for me. Hence, my
ownership is limited

Besides, I have no control over it from the view of the Qadr.
Because the control is with Allah, and as such, I cannot say
to my sick slave: “Be healthy” and then he becomes
healthy. I cannot say to my able-bodied healthy slave: ” ‏ع8‎
‎sick’’ and then he becomes sick. The real control of affairs is
Allah's, the Mighty and Sublime. If He says to him: “Be
healed,” he will be healed. If He says: “Be sick,” he will be
sick. Therefore, 1 do not have absolute control, from the
view of legislation, nor from the view of ability. So, my
ownership is restricted from the view of controlling affairs,
and limited from being all inclusive and absolutely general.
With this, it becomes clear to us how it is that Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, is alone in ownership.

As for the disposition of affairs, man has the ability to
dispose of affairs, but we say that this ability to dispose of
affairs is limited, just like the two cases that preceded
concerning ownership. So I do not have the ability to
dispose of affairs for everything; I only have the ability to
dispose of the affairs under my custody and control. And
similarly, | do not have the authority to dispose of any
affair except in accord with the Shari’, which allowed this

Commentary on Al-‘Agidal Al-Wi

that is called besides Allah, be it trees, stones, human
beings, Angels or any other thing, everything that they
called upon besides Allah: ¢Cannot create (even) a fly, even
though they combine together for the purpose (Al-Hajj 22:73)

So, if everyone were to individually attempt that, his
incapability would be much more obvious: €And if the fly
snatched away a thing from them, they would have no power
to release it from the fly.» Even those who are called upon
besides Allah, if a fly takes something away from them,
they will not be able to retrieve it from this weak fly. If a
fly falls on the most powerful king on the earth and
sucks up his perfume, this king will not be able to
retrieve this perfume from this fly; the same is the case if
it falls on his food. So, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is
the Sole Creator.

If you may say: How do you reconcile between your
statements: “Allah is Alone in ownership’ and the
affirmation of ownership for creatures, such as His
statement, Exalted is He:

$e soak ‏ما‎ I>

4Or (from that) whereof you hold keys» (An-Nur 24:61)
(And His saying, Exalted is He)
qed SLC ‏أو‎ eget ale Lp
<Except from their wives or (the captives and slaves)
that their right hands possess» (Al-Mu'miniin 23:6)?

The response: The reconciliation can be from two perspec-
tives:

Firstly: Man’s ownership of something is not general and
complete. (For example,) I own what is under my

Introduction

are built upon reverence and awe from the Magnificent
One.

If you love Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, you will indeed
long for what is with Him, and you will long to draw
nearer to Him, and seek the means to draw nearer to Him.
So, you abide in His obedience in a complete manner.
When you revere Him, you will fear Him. Whenever you
want to commit an act of disobedience, you will promptly
sense the greatness of the Creator, the Mighty and Sublime,
and flee from it:

HA de ‏رت‎
‎4And indeed she did desire him, and he: would have
inclined to her desire, had he not seen the evidence of
his Lord. Thus it was, that We might turn away from
him evil and Fahishah (illegal sexual intercourse)}
(Yasuf 12:24)

This is of Allah’s favor upon you. If you intend to commit a
sin, you find Allah before you, so you would be frightened,
full of fear, and stay far away from disobedience, because
you worship Allah, with hope, and awe

Then, what is the meaning of ‘Ibadah (worship)?

The word ‘Ibadah (worship) can be used to mean two
things; to mean the action, and what is done.

It is used to mean the action, which is to worship, and it can
be said: “The man worshiped his Lord” in the real manner
of worship. Its usage to mean worship falls under the
category of using the infinitive name to represent the
infinitive. When it is used to mean the action, we define it
as: subjugation to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, with love

32 Commentary on Al-‘Ag

disposition of affairs for me.

Hence, it becomes clear that our statement: “Indeed, Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, is alone in creating, ownership
and the disposition of affairs’ is universally absolute,
nothing is exempt from that, because nothing we have
mentioned contradicts what is affirmed for Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, concerning that

The Second Category: Tawhid Al-Ulihiyyah

That is to single out Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, in
worship, such that you do not be a slave to other than
Allah. You do not worship an Angel, or a Prophet, a Wali (a
pious servant), a Shaikh, mother or father. You do not
worship, except Allah alone; and single out Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, alone, by deifying Him, and worship.
That it is why it is referred to as the Tawhid of Al-Ulthiyyah
(divinity), and it is also called the Tawhid of Al-'Ibadah
(worship). So in reference to Allah, it is Tawhid Al-
Ulihiyyah, and in reference to the slave, it is Tawhid Al.
‘Tbddah.

Worship is built upon two important things, and they are
love and reverence, whose result

41a Es eh

€Verily, they used to hasten on to do good deeds, and
they used to call on Us with hope and fear> (Al-Anbiya’
21:90)

So, with love, there will be hope, and with reverence, there
will be awe and fear.

That is why worship consists of commands and prohibi-
tions. Commands are built upon hope and longing to draw
near to the One who gave the command. And prohibitions

Introduction 35

(And)

4And verily, We have sent among every Ummah
(community, nation) a Messenger (proclaiming) : “Wor
ship Ald
Taghut (4

(Alone), and avoid (or keep away from) At
all false deities).’"> (An-Nahl 16:36)

And also His statement, Exalted is He

4Allah bears witness that La ‏عالقلا‎ Ila Huwa (there is
no deity except Him), and the Angels; and those hat
knowledge (also give this witness)» (Al '‘Imrin 3:18)

ing

If there is no other virtue of knowledge except this point;
that is Allah informing that none testifies to His Ulnhiyyah
except those having knowledge, (then this suffices), we ask
Allah to make us among them:

4Allah bears witness that La ‏عمقلا‎ lla Huwa (there is
no deity except Him), and the Angels, and those |
knowledge (also give this witness); (He is always)
maintaining His creation with Al-Qist> (Al ‘Imran
3:18)

That is, with justice. Then, He confirms this testimony with
His statement:

إلا هر ‎5A‏ مكبر »

yah

34 Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wasi

and reverence, by doing what He ordered, and staying
away from what He prohibited. Whoever humbles himself
for Allah, Allah will honor him:

But honor, power and glory belong to Allah and His
> (Al-Munafiqun 63:8)

SSENE!

It is used for what is done, that is, the acts of worship, and
according to this meaning, that one can understand how
Shaikh Al-Islam, Ibn Taymiyyah defined it, when he, may
Allah have mercy upon him, said: “Worship is a name that
refers to all of what Allah loves, and is pleased with;
sayings, actions, external, and internal.’"")

This, with which we worship Allah, requires that it be done
with Tawhid, not being done for other than Him; such as
Salah, fasting, Zakah, Hajj, supplications, vows, fear,
reliance and the like, among the forms of worship.

If you say: What is the evidence that Allah is to be singled
out with Lilahiyyah (divinity)?

The response is that; There are many evidences for that,
among them are His statement:

4 ‏فأَعْبَدُونِ‎ bi
» ‏فار‎ We did not send any Messenger before you, but
We inspired him (saying): “La Maha Illa And (there is
no deity except I (Allah), so worship Me (Alone and
none else).’”> (Al-Anbiya’ 21:25)

]11 The letter on Al-’Ubudiyyah which is included in Majmii’ Al-
Fatawa (10:149),
Introduction

there is no deity besides Allah?

The response is that the Uldhiyyah (divinity) of other than
Allah is false Ulahiyyah (divinity), it is merely a name:

They are but names which you have named, you and
your fathers, for which Allah has sent down no
authority.» (An-Najm 53:23)

Their Uldhiyyah is false, so even though they are
worshipped and deified by the one who has strayed; they
are not worthy of that worship. So the deities that are
worshipped, but they are false deities:

€That is because Allah, He is the Truth, and that which
they invoke besides Him is Al-Batil.> (Lugman 31:30)

None of the people of the Qiblah, attributing themselves to
Islam, will deny these two kinds of Tawhid, because Allah,
the Exalted, was indeed singled out in His Rubibiyyah
(Lordship) and Ulahiyyah (divinity); but later some people
started attributing divinity to some human beings; such as
done by the overzealous among the Rafidah who said: “Ali
is a god!” As did their leader ‘Abdullah bin Saba’ when he
went to ‘Ali bin Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with him,
and said to him: “You are indeed Allah!”

But ‘Abdullah bin Saba’ was originally a Jew; he entered to
Islam and claimed partisanship to the members of the
Household to bring confusion to the Muslims about their
religion, was stated by Shaikh Al-Islam, Ibn Taymiyyah,
may Allah have mercy upon him. He said: “This was as
what Paul did when he embraced Christianity in order to

36 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

4La aha Illa Huwa (there is not deity except Him), the
Mighty, the Wise} (Al ‘Imran 3:18)

This is a clear evidence that there is no deity except Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime. I testify to La ilaha ill Allah and all
of you testify to La ilaha ill Allah

This is the testimony of truth. But if someone asks: How do
you acknowledge this while Allah, Exalted is He, affirms
the existence of gods other than Him? Such as His
statement, Exalted is He:

€And invoke not any other Mah (god) along with Allahy
(Al-Qasas 28:88)

And such as His statement:

4And whoever invokes, besides Allah, any other [lah
(god), of whom he has no proof (Al-Mu'minin 23:117)
And His statement:

4H ‏ين‎ BM ‏من ذونٍ‎ SX SN calle we Sal Ya>
4So their Aliha (gods), other than Allah, whom they
invoked, profited them naught> (Hid 11 :101)

And such as the statement of Ibrahim:

}1 لَه دن أله دون 4

ls it the falsehood of Aliha (gods) other than Allah that
you seek?} (As-Saffat 37 :86)

Among other Ayat

How do we reconcile between these, and the testimony that

Introduction 39

caught. What is important is that ‘Ali bin Abi Talib, may
Allah be pleased with him, burnt As-Saba’iyyah (the
followers of ‘Abdullah bin Saba’) with fire because they
Attributed divinity to him

So we say that all of those among the people of the Qiblah,
they do not deny these two kinds of Tawhid:They are
Tawhid Ar-Rububiyyah and Tawhid Al-Ulhihiyyah, even
though some of the people of innovation can be found
#ttributing divinity to a human being.

Wut the category over which there is often disagreement
‘among the people of the Qiblah is

The Third Category: Tawhid Al-Asma’ Wa As-Sifat

This is where there are many areas of disagreement. People
divided into three categories concerning it; they are
likening, denying, or being balanced. And the one who
denies, he either belies, or, he distorts.

The first innovation that occurred in this Ummah was the
innovation of the Khawarij. Their leader rebelled against the
Prophet ##. He was Dha Al-Khuwaysirah from Bani
Tamim, when the Prophet # distributed some gold ore
that came to him. He distributed it among the people, and
this man said to him: “O Muhammad, be just!’”""! This was
the first rebellion against the Shari‘ah of Islam. Then, their
tribulation waxed stronger during the last period of the
feign of ‘Uthman, and during the turmoil between ‘Ali and
Mu’‘awiyah; thus, they declared the Muslims as disbelie-
vers, and made their blood lawful.

‘Then there came the innovation of the Qadariyyah, who are
the Zoroastrians of this Ummah, those who said that Allah,

111 Al-Bukhari (3610) and Muslim (1063 and 148) from Aba
Sa‘id Al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him.

38 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

destroy it”)

This man, ‘Abdullah bin Saba’, said to ‘Ali bin Abi Talib,
may Allah be pleased with him: “You are indeed Allah!”
And ‘Ali bin Abi Talib was not pleased with anybody
exaggerating about his status, so he, may Allah be pleased
with him, out of his fairness, justice, knowledge and
experience, would say on the Minbar in Al-Kafah: “The best
of this Ummah after its Prophet is Aba Bakr, then
“Umar.”?! He was announcing that during the Khutbah,
and this has been reported from him, may Allah be pleased
with him, in Mutawatir form.

The one who said this, and affirmed the virtue of those
humans worthy of that — how could he be pleased with
someone saying to him: “You are Allah?!” That is why he
gave them the worst punishment. He ordered that deep
pits be dug, and they were dug and filled with firewood,
and lit with fire. Thereafter, he cast these people into the
fire, because the gravity of their fabrication — and refuge is
sought from Allah — was not simple.

It was said that ‘Abdullah bin Saba’ fled without being

‎Reported by Al-Lalaka't in Sharh As-Sunnah (2823) from Ash-‏ ذا
‎Sha‘bi. And Shaykh Al-Isldm Ibn Taymiyyah cited it in Minhaj‏
‎‘As-Sunnah (1:29) and indicated those among the scholars‏
‎who reported it. Al-Hafiz graded it Hasan in Al-Fath (12/270),‏
‎Reported by Imam Ahmad in Al-Musnad (1:110) and in Fada’il‏
‎As-Sahabah (397). Also, Ibn Abi ‘Asim in As-Sunnah )2:570(‏
‎and Ibn Majah (106), from ‘Ali bin Abi Talib, may Allah be‏
‎pleased with him. The basis of the Hadith is in Sahih Al-‏
‎Bukhari (3671) from Muhammad bin Al-Hanafiyyah, that he‏
‎said: “I asked to my father (‘Ali bin Abi Talib): ‘Who from‏
‎the people is the most virtuous after the Messenger of Allah‏
‎He said: ‘Aba Bakr.” He said: “I asked; “Then who?’ He‏ “7
‎said: “Then ‘Umar.’‏

Introduction 41

as said by the Khawarij; he is rather in a position between
the two positions, such as a traveler from a city to another,
and he is already on the journey, he is neither in his town
nor in the town he is traveling to, he is rather in a place
between the two places. This is pertaining to the rulings in
this world. But as regards the Hereafter, he is going to
abide forever in Hell.” Therefore, they agree with the
Khawarij concerning his status in the Hereafter; but in this
worldly life, they disagree with them.

This innovation began and became widespread. Then came
the innovation of the oppressors and the Jahmiyyah. It was the
innovation of Jahm bin Safwan and his followers who were
named Al-Jahmiyyah. This innovation occurred, and did not
have to do with the matter concerning the terms given to
people and the rulings concerning them — is one a believer, a
disbeliever, ora Fasiq — nor regarding a position between the
two positions; but it has to do with the Self of the Creator.

Look at how innovations increased in stages from the early
period of Islam, until they reached the Creator, the Sublime
nd Exalted. They gave the Creator the status of a creature

They say as they like; and so they say: This is affirmed for

Allah, this is not affirmed. The intellect accepts that Allah is

deseribed with this; while the intellect does not accept that

He is described with that. So, the innovation of the

Jahmiyyah and the the Mu'‘tazilah began, and they were

divided about the Names and Attributes of Allah into a

number of groups:

1. A group which said that it is never permissible to
describe Allah, neither with existence nor with non-
existence, because if He is described with existence, He
would be likened to existing beings, and if He is
described with non-existence, He will be likened to
non-existing things. Based on this, it is necessary to

4 Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyal

Glorious and Exalted is He, did not decree the actions of
the slaves, they (the actions of man) do not fall under His
will, as they are not His creations. Their leaders and the
extremists among them even said that they (the actions) are
not known to Allah, and were not written in AL-Lawh Al
Malhifiiz (the Preserved Tablet) and Allah is not aware of
what people do until it occurs. They also said “The matter
is new.” Meaning just occurring. These people met the last
part of the period of Companions; they met the time of
Abdullah bin ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him,
Ubadah bin As-Samit and a group of other Companions
but it was during the last end of the era of the Companions

Then the innovation of Irja’ followed which met the time of
many of the Tabi‘in. The Murji‘ah are the ones who say: ” Acts
of disobedience do not cause harm in the presence of faith.”
Are you a believer? If you say yes, he would tell you: “The
acts of disobedience do not cause harm in the presence of
faith;” if you fornicate, steal, consume wine, and murder, as
long as you area believer, then you area believer with perfect
faith, even if you commit all kinds of sins!

However, Shaikh Al-Islam, Ibn Taymiyyah said: “The
assertions of the Qadariyyah and the Murji’ah when they
were rebutted by the Companions who remained, only ha
to do with obedience and disobedience, the believer and
the Fasiq, they did not argue concerning their Lord and His
Attributes.”

Then, came some people who regarded themselves as
rationalists, from those who claimed that the intellect
should be given preference over revelation. So they came
up with a statement that was between the two other
sayings - the view of the Murji‘ah and the view of the
Khawirij. They said; “The one who commits a major sin is
not a believer as said by the Murji’ah, and not a disbeliever

Introduction

This is from Allah's preservation of this Dhtikr. This

based on the wisdom of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
because He, Exalted is He, made Muhammad #§ the last of
the Messengers; so, the message will definitely remain on
the earth; or else, the people would have an excuse before
Allah. So, if the message must remain on the surface of the
earth, it follows that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, based
‘on His wisdom, raises those who will expose an act of
innovation whenever it is introduced. And this is the case,
and that is why | always tell you: Always endeavor to seek
knowledge, because in the future, if we in this land, are not
armed with the knowledge that is built upon the Book and
the Surah, then what has happened to other Islamic lands
Will soon happen to us, Now, this land is the target of the
enemies of Islam, against which they focus, and upon
which they direct all of their tactics, so that they can lead its
people astray. That is why you have to arm yourselves

with knowledge, such that you have clarity in the case of
your religion, and you can struggle against the enemies of
Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, with your tongues and
pens.

All these innovations became widespread after the era of
the Companions. So the Companions, may Allah be
pleased with them, were not researching into these matters,
because they received and understood the Book and the
Sunnah based on their apparent meanings, and based upon
what the Fitrah dictates, and the healthy Fifrah is always
healthy.

But these innovators came to introduce their innovations
into the religion of Allah, Exalted is He, either due to their
lack of knowledge, or their inadequate understanding, or
their evil intentions; so, they corrupted the world with the
innovations they introduced. But we have said: Indeed,

44 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

concerning this matter in the books of the people who are
concerned with the collection and mentioning different
views of people about it, you will see the weirdest things,
about which you would say: “How could a sane person,
not to mention a believer, makes such an assertion?!” But
whoever that Allah does not give light to, he will never
have light! The one whose insight is blinded by Allah is like
the one whose sight is blinded by Allah. Just as the
physically blind person can not see the light of the Sun,
which would damage his sight if he were to look directly at
it, such is the one whose insight was blinded by Allah; if he
stands before the lights of the truth, he will not see them -
and refuge is sought from Allah.

That is why we have to constantly ask Allah, Exalted is He,
to keep us firm upon this matter, and that He not make our
hearts deviate after He has guided us; because this is a
dangerous matter, and the Shaifan enters upon the son of
Adam from every side and every angle, and causes
confusion for him about his creed, his religion, in the Book
of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger. These in reality,
are the innovations that have become widespread in the
Islamic Ummah

However, all praise is due to Allah, no one will ever
introduce an act of innovation except that out of His favor
and generosity, Allah raises against him those who will
expose this innovation, and uproot it with the truth. This is
from the completeness of the proof in the statement of
Allah, Blessed and Exalted is He:

<Verily We: It is We Who have sent down the Dhikr
and surely, We will guard it (from corruption) (Al
Hijr 15:9)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

Commentary On
The Introductory Notes
Of Ibn Taymiyyah

© The saying of the author, may Allah have Mercy upon
him: “In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.”

The Commentary

© Commencing books with the Basmalah'"! is the
practice of all authors, emulating therewith the Book
of Allah; since He revealed the Basmalah in the
beginning of each Sirah (Chapter), and, in conformity
with the Sunnah of the Messenger (3%)

Moreover, the I’rab (syntax) of the Basmalah, clarifying its

meaning, and what it refers to, has been discussed by many

111 (Translation note) That is; the saying - Bismillaah ar-Rahman
ar-Rahim - meaning; in the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful

46 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasi

Allah, Exalted is He, in His Wisdom, His Praise, His Favor
and His Grace - there is no innovation that will be
introduced except that Allah raises against it, those who
will uproot it and expose it

Among those who have extensively clarified and exposed
innovation, is Shaikh Al-Islam, Ibn Taymiyyah, may Allah
have mercy upon him. I beseech Allah to gather myself and
you altogether with him in the Gardens of bliss.

This man — whom Allah has benefited others by, with the
favors He bestowed upon him, blessing this Ummah with
his like — has written this booklet on creed; as I said, in
response to the request of one of the judges of Wasit, who
had complained to him about the innovations among the
people, so, he requested him to write this creed, which he
wrote in response to his request

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 49

“Allah” is a proper noun that is used for Allah Himself, the
Mighty and Sublime. None can be named with it other than
Him. It means the Ma‘lih (Deified One), that is; He Who is
worshipped with love and veneration. It is a derivation -
according to the preferred view - based upon His, the Most
High, statement:
455465 Se OG GM 85 oa 9 if 3p

4And He is Allah in the heavens and on the earth, He

knows what you conceal and what you reveal> (Al-

An‘am 6:3)

This is because ‘in the heavens’ refers back to with the Word
of Majesty (the Name Allah). So it means He is the Ma’lil:
(Deified One), both in the heavens, and on the earth

% “Ar-Rahman” means the Possessor of Extensive Mercy.
Because in the Arabic Language, the Fa‘lan form
indicates extensiveness and fullness. As it is said: “A
man is Ghadban (meaning angry - in the Fa’lan form),
when he is filled up with anger.

“Ar-Rahim” is a name that indicates the action (of
bestowing mercy), because it is in the Fa’il form but
with the meaning of the doer. So it indicates the action.

Hence, “Ar-Raliman ar-Rahim’ will together imply that
Allah’s Mercy is extensive, and that it reaches creatures.
This is what is some scholars have indicated when they say
that Ar-Rahmam refers to Mercy in general, while Ar-
Rahman refers to a Mercy that is specific for the believers.
Therefore, since Allah's Mercy for the disbelievers is
Specific to this world only, it is as if there is no mercy for
them. Because in the Hereafter, when they ask Allah to
temove them from the Fire, appealing to Allah, the Most
High, by His Lordship, and confessing against themselves:

48 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyalt

people, The best of what has been said regarding that, is
that it refers to a verb, which is omitted, coming later, and
is related to the context, So, if you were to say it before
eating, the implication would be: “In the Name of Allah, I
eat,” and if it is before reading, the implication would be
“In the Name of Allah, I read.”

We consider it (the reference) to bea verb, because actions are
based upon verbs, not nouns. And similarly, verbs imply
actions, without any condition, while nouns do not imply
action, except with a condition, because actions are based
upon verbs, whilethey area branch of (the meaning of) nouns.
Furthermore, we consider that it (the referenced verb)
comes later because of two beneficial reasons:

The first: Restriction. Because advancing that which is
done implies a restriction. Thus, (the saying of) “in the
Name of Allah I read,” implies: “I do not read except in
the Name of Allah.’

The second: Starting on the right side with the Name of
Allah, Glorious is He and the Most High.”

And, we consider it to be specific. Because what is specific
better indicates the meaning than what is general. Since we
could say that the indication is “In the Name of Allah, I
start.” But, “in the Name of Allah I start” does not indicate
a specific meaning. However, “in the Name of Allah I
read” is specific; and what is specific better indicates the
meaning, than what is general

(Translation note) That is; since Arabic is read from right to
left, and here, the action is initiated in the Name of Allah,
which is written first, on the right, then after it, meaning left
of it, comes the verb.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 51

His Attributes from all angles, and we also praise Him
because He is Perfect in granting favors and beneficence

4And whatever of blessings and good things you have,
it is from Allah, Then, when harm touches you, unto
Him you cry aloud for help> (An-Nahl 16

The greatest of all the favors that Allah favored His
Creatures with is sending the Messengers, by which there
is guidance for the creatures. That is why the author says:
“Praise be to Allah, Who sent His Messenger with guidance and
the religion of truth.”

What is intended by ‘the Messenger’ here is the class of the
Messengers, since all the Messengers were sent with
guidance and the religion of truth. However, he whom
Allah has completed the Messengership with is Muhammad
(3), because Allah sealed (all) the Prophets by him, and
completed the building with him. As the Prophet (#8)
described himself in relation to the (other) Messengers; like a
man who built palace and completed it, with the exception of
the place of a brick. Thus, the people would come to that
palace and be amazed with it, except for the place of that
(missing) brick. He said: “I am indeed the brick; and I am
indeed the last of (all) the Prophets.’"" (wz).

* Concerning his statement: “with guidance: The
guidance (Al-Huda) means the beneficial knowledge.
It is also implied that the message itself (which he is
sent with) is the guidance and the religion of truth

“The religion of truth’ means righteous actions,
because Ad-Din means actions or the reward for

Reported by Al-Bukhari (3535) and Muslim (2287), from Aba
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-W

tte ou oY

Our Lord! Bring us out of this; if ever we return (to
evil), then indeed we shall be unjustivrongdoers.> (Al-
Mu'miniin 23:107)

They will not meet Mercy, but justice. Then, Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, will say to them:

Kop Yi a ‏لحتو‎ Joy
Remain you in it with ignominy! And speak you not
(AlL-Mu’miniin 23:108)

Praise be to Allah, Who sent His Messe
and the religion of truth to make it prevail ¢
religions, and Allah is Sufficient as a Witness

ooo.

© His saying: “All Praise is due to Allah, Who sent His
Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to make it
prevail overall religions, and Allahis Sufficient asa Witness.

The Commentary

% Concerning his saying: “Praise be to Alléh, Who sent His
Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth :” Allah, the
Most High, is being praised for His Perfection, the Mighty
and Sublime, and His granting of favors. Thus, we praise
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, because He is perfect in

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

exalted. For Allah says: ¢to make itfhim prevail
(‘Liyuzhirahu’), so this religion shall prevail over all
other religions, and over he who has no religion; of
course making it exalted over them is more obvious. This
is because the one who doesn’t have a religion is more
evil than he who practices false religions. Hence, the
religion of Islim shall triumph over all religions whose
people claim that they are upon the truth, and as far as
other than them, then it is more obviously so

Moreover, if the pronoun refers to the Messenger (3%) then
(it means that) Allah shall elevate His Messenger, because
he champions the religion of truth.

Whichever one it refers to, (the most important thing is
that) whoever holds on to this religion of truth, shall
become triumphant and exalted; and whoever seeks honor
through other than it, then he has sought humiliation.
Because there is neither triumph, nor honor and respect,
except through the religion of truth. For this reason, O
brothers, I am calling you to hold on to the Din of Allah
openly and secretly, in your worship, morals and manners.
Also, inviting others to it, until the Millah (creed) is firm
and the Ummah becomes upright.

* Concerning his statement: “and Allah is sufficient (‘wa
Kafit Billahi’) as a witness”: The people of language say:
that the letter “Ba” here is extra. It is to beautify the
pronunciation and to intensify the sufficiency. Also, its
root meaning is “‘wa Kaffi Allah

The author cited an Ayah,""! and if anybody asks: “What is

| (Translation note) Meaning, the author’sstatement: "Who sent
His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to make
it prevail over all religion and Allah is Sufficient as a Witness”
which is taken from Allah's saying in 517741 Al-Fath (48:27).

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

actions, So, an example of it being used for actions, is
the saying of the Most High:

‎Saal >‏ عند

‎€Truly, Ad-Din (the religion) with Allah is Islam> (Al
Imran 3:19)

‎An example of it being used for reward, is the saying of the
Most High:

‎» And what will make you know what the Day of Ad:
Din (Recompense) is?» (Al-Infitar 82:17)

‎Furthermore, the truth is the opposite of falsehood, and it -
that is the truth - includes bringing about good and warding,
off evil, in the rulings (of Shariah) and the information.

‎Concerning his statement: “to make it/him pr
(‘Liyuzhirahu’) over all religion”: the letter “Lam”

‎is for justification. And the meaning of “Liyuzhirahu”

‎to exalt it. For Az-Zuhur (prevail) means exalted, as in
the ‘Zahr (back) of the riding animal is the top of it.
Also, the ‘Zahr of the earth is its surface. As the Most
High says

‎€And if Allah were to punish men for that which they
earned, He would not leave a moving creature on the
surface of the earth» (Fatir 35:45)
As for the (pronoun) “Ha’” in “Yuzhirahu”, does it refer
back to the Messenger or Din?

‎If this pronoun refers to the “religion of truth,” then
whoever fights for the religion of truth shall become

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 5

Allah to keep you, and us, firm upon it. His Da‘wah
remains until now, and (will remain) firm and established
until the establishment of the Hour. Up till now, his Da’wah
still makes lawful the blood and wealth of any disbeliever
who opposes it; so are their women and offspring.!") This
is a practical testimony. Allah never punished, disgraced or
denied him. That is why it came after his statement: “to
make it prevail over all other religions.

‎$e >‏ ل

‎1 testify that La Maha Mla Allah alone, He has no partners,
acknowledging it, to and with Tawhid.
aay Se eee
© Concerning his saying: “And I testify that La Ilaha Wa
Allah alone, He has no partners, acknowledging it, and with

‎Tawhid.’

‎The Commentary

‎* “I testify” meaning I acknowledge with my heart,

‎1) Based on the report of Al-Bukhari (25) and Muslim (22), from

‎Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him: That the
Messenger of Allah (#) said: “I have been commanded to
fight the people until they testify to La ilaha illa Allah (there is
no deity worthy of worship except Allah) and that
Muhammad is Allah's Messenger, perform Salih and give
Zakdh, If they do that, they have kept their blood and their
wealth safe from me - except for a right of Islam - and their
reckoning is with Allah.”

‎54 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎the relationship between the statements ‘Allah is sufficient
as a witness’ and ‘so that He can make it prevail over every
other religion’?”

‎It would be said: The relationship is clear. This is because
this Prophet (3%) came and invited people saying:
“Whoever obeys me, shall enter into Jannah (Paradise),
and whoever disobeys me, shall enter into the ‏”ميزه‎

‎Also, he was saying in the language which speaks for itself:
“Whoever obeys me, I shall keep peace with, and whoever
disobeys me, I shall wage a war against.” He waged wars
against people because of this religion, and made their
blood, wealth, women and offspring lawful, and he was
supported in that and became victorious. He was the victor
and never the loser, So this is how he became established
on the earth; that is, Allah’s establishing His Messenger on
the earth is actually a testimony from Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, that he was truthful and that his religion is
true. This is because everyone who concocted a lie against
Allah, ended up in humiliation, vanity and nothingness.

‎Look at those who falsely claimed Prophethood, what was
their end? They were destroyed and forgotten, such as
Musailimah Al-Kadhdhab, Al-Aswad Al-’Ansi and other
than them, who falsely claimed Prophethood. All of them
vanished! The falsehood of their claim became evident.
They were denied correctness and rightness; whereas the
reverse is the case regarding the Prophet (38), his Da‘wah
(invitation) lasts until now, praise be to Allah. And we ask

‎"As is reported by Al-Bukhari (7280), from Aba Hurairah,
may Allah be pleased with him, that the Messenger of Allah
(8) said: “All my people will enter Jannah, except those who
refuse.” It was said, “O Messenger of Allah, who will
refuse?” and he (#8) said: “He who obeys me will enter
Jannah, and he who disobeys me has refused.”

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

ify.”
* “Muhammad” is the son of ‘Abdullah bin ‘Abdul-
Muttalib Al-Qurashi Al-Hashimi, from the progeny of

Isma‘il bin Ibrahim, who is of the most honorable
descent.

This honorable Prophet is the servant and Messenger of
Allah who worshiped Allah most among all people, and he
is the strongest regarding the establishment of His worship.
He (3) was used to observing prayer in the night until his
feet would, become swollen, and it would be said to him:
“Why are you doing all of this, while Allah has forgiven
your previous and future sins?” He would reply:
“Shouldn't I be a grateful servant?’"! This is because
Allah, the Most High, praised the gratefyl servant, when
He said, regarding Nah:

<Verily, he was a grateful slave > (Al-Isra’ 17:3)
The Prophet (3#) therefore aspired to reach this height, and
to worship Allah as He deserves to be worshipped. Hence,
he was the person with the most Taqwa among the people,
the one who feared Allah most among the people, and the
one who craved most for that which is with Allah, the Most
High.

So, he is the servant of Allah; which implies that he can
neither benefit nor harm, neither himself, nor others. He
does not have any right to Lordship at all. Rather, he was a
servant in need of Allah, wanting of Him, asking Him,
supplicating to Him, hoping from Him, and fearing Him.
Rather, Allah ordered him to publicize and specifically

'1 Reported by Al-Bukhari (4837) and Muslim (2820), from
Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her.

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

pronouncing with my tongue, Because the testimony is
a pronouncement and informing about what is in the
heart. When you bear witness for a person against
another person before the judge, you are expressing
with the tongue what is in the heart. Testimony was
chosen instead of acknowledgement, because the basis
of testimony is taken from the presence of something,
meaning attending and seeing the thing, It is like one is
disclosing what is in one’s heart while expressing it
with one’s tongue, as if one has witnessed the incident
with one’s eyes

“La& ‏عالقلا‎ [lla Allah" means none truly deserves to be
worshiped except Allah.

‘Alone, there is no partner for Him :” “Alone” is used as
an emphasis of confirmation, while “there is no partner
for Him’ is used as an emphasis of negation

‘acknowledging it, and with Tawhid’” is an emphasis of
his saying: “La Ilaha Illa Allah (there is none worthy of
worship except Allah).”

@ Concerning his saying: “I iestify that Muhammad is His
nit and Messenger.

The Commentary

~ We say regarding “I testify” what we said regarding the

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

not have any right, at all, in any of the affairs of Lordship.

If this is the confirmed status of Muhammad (8%) what do
you think of other servants of Allah who are (all) definitely
below him? They can never benefit nor harm, neither
themselves, nor others. This will make clear the impru-
dence of those who call on those whom they consider as
saints, instead of calling upon Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.

* His saying: “and His Messenger’: This is also a
designation that should not be used for anybody after
Allah’s Messenger (2%), because he is the seal (end) of
the Prophets. He is the Messenger of Allah who
reached a place that had never been reached by any
human being. Rather, not even by any Angel from
what we know, except, by Allah, those who carry the
Throne. He reached above the seventh heaven, and
heard the scratching of the Pens of Al-Quda’ (the
Decree),!"! with which Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
decrees regarding His creatures. From what we know,
nobody ever reached this station

And Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, spoke to him directly,
without an intermediary, and sent him to all the creation,
and supported him with marvelous signs that no human
being or Messenger before him had; that is, this Magnifi-
cent Qur’an. For indeed, this Qur’an does not have an equal
in any of the signs given to the earlier Prophets. Hence,
Allah, the Most High, says:

"1 Based on the report of Al-Bukhari (349), that Ibn Abbas, may
Allah be pleased with him, and Aba Habbah Al-Ansari, may
Allah be pleased with him, both said that the Prophet (3%)
said: “Then, I was taken up (into the heavens) until I reached
the level where I heard the squeaking of the Pens.”

Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

convey, that he did not possess any of these matters. So, He
said:

Say: ‘I possess no power of benefit or hurt to myself
except as Allah wills. If I had the knowledge of the
unseen, I should have secured for myself an abundance
of wealth, and no evil should have touched me’ (Al-
A ‘raf 7 :188)

He also ordered him to say:

ل لذ أقول 5
إن ملك

Allah, nor (that) I know the unseen; nor I tell you that
1am an Angel. I but follow what is revealed to me by
inspiration» (Al-An‘am 6:50)

And order him to say

He ded Jo

<a ‏إلا‎

<Say: ‘It is not in my power to cause you harm, or to
bring you to the Right Path.’ Say: ‘None can protect
me from Allah's punishment (if I were to disobey Him),
nor should I find refuge except in Him. (Mine is) but
conveyance (of the truth)» (Al-Jinn 72:21-23)

but» is an interrupted exception. Meaning: I only
convey (this) on behalf of Allah and His Messages.

The summary of the matter is that Muhammad (28) is a
servant of Allah. And this servitude implies that he does

Commentary On The Introductory Notes..

The Commentary

* Concerning the meaning of “May the Salah of Allah be
upon him”, the best that is said regarding this, is what
Aba AlAliyah, may Allah have mercy upon him, said
‘Allah’s Salih upon His Messenger is His praise for him
in the most exalted assembly (the assembly of the
Angels).

As for those who interpreted ‘Salah’ as ‘mercy’, then their

statement is weak; since mercy is for everyone. That is why

the scholars are in agreement (consensus) concerning the
permissibility of saying: “So and so, may Allah have mercy
upon him,” and they differ regarding the permissibility of
saying: “So and so, May the Salah of Allah be upon him.”
And this proves that ‘Salah’ is different from ‘mercy.’
Besides, Allah, the Most High, has said:

‎pre ot Sie me i>‏ كه
‎They are those upon whom are the Salahs from their‏
‎Lord, and mercy (Al-Bagarah 2:157)‏

‎(The use of) conjunction implies variance. Therefore, Salah
is more specific than mercy. Hence, the Salah of Allah upon
his Messenger is His praise for him in the most exalted
assembly

‎> Also his statement: “And upon his Al’: and his “Al’
here means those who follow him in his religion. This is
Reported by Al-Bukhari, from Aba Al-Aliyah in the Tafsir of
Stirat Al-Ahzdb, the chapter: “Indeed Allah and His Angels
send Salah upon the Prophet (prior to number 4797). See Fath
(Al-Bari) 8:532. And its chain was connected by Al-Qadi
Isma’il bin Ishaq Al-Jahdami in Fadlis-Salat “Ala
(95) with a Hasan chain of transmission as was said by Shaikh
AL-Albani

‎€Annd they say : "Why are not signs sent down to him from
his Lord? > signs are only with Allah, and 1 am
only a plain warner.” Is it not sufficient for them that We
have sent down to you the Book (the Qur'n) which is
recited to them?» (AI-‘Ankabit 29:50-51)

‎This suffices from all things; but (only) for he who has a
heart, and can hear and witness. As for the adversary, he
would say as was said by those (adversaries) before him:
“These are but tales of the ancients.”

‎In short, Muhammad (#3) is Allah's Messenger, and the seal
(end) of the Prophets. Allah ended Prophethood with him,
and Messengership as well. Because when Prophethood has
ended, which is more general than Messengership, then
Messengership, which is particular, has also ended. There-
fore, the Messenger of Allah (4%) is the seal (end) of the
Prophets.

‎oo © ‏ل‎

‎Voge des oes oo} all ‏وَعَلَى‎ athe ‏الله‎ Le

‎May the Salah of Allah be upon him, his Al, and his
Companions, and Sallam, with abundant Taslim.

‎--- &  } --

‎© His saying: “May the Salah of Allah be upon him, his Al,

‎and his Companions, and Sallam with abundant Taslim.”

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 63

various kinds of good. Therefore, in this phrase, the author
combined asking Allah, the Most High, to provide various
kinds of good for His Prophet - the most special of which is
praising him among the most exalted assembly - along with
warding off evil from him; and those who followed him.

© Concerning his statement: “abundant (Maziday’: it
means extra or additional. What is intended is Taslim
(peace) added to the Salah. So, it is another supplica-
tion, for Salam (peace), after the (supplication) for Salah.

The (meaning of) Messenger according to the people of
knowledge is: He who was given a particular Shariah
(Legislative Law) and was ordered to convey it

He (##) was made a Prophet by:
in}
€Read!> (Al-’Alag 96:1)

And he was made a Messenger by (Surah) Al-Mud-
daththir.™

Thus, by the statement of the Most High:

4Read! In the Name of your Lord, Who has created (all
that exists)>

Yo His statement:

4Has taught man that which he knew not} (Al-‘Alag
96:1-5)

He became a Prophet

il See Salih Al-Bukhari (nos 3 and 4).

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

when “Al” is mentioned alone or with the Compa-
nions, then it refers to all his followers upon his
religion, since he was sent (as Messenger) until the Day
of Resurrection.

What proves that “Al” refers to those who follow his
religion, is the statement of the Most High regarding the Al
of Fir awn:

Sic Tes cast ‏تَقُوم‎ es

4The Fire; they are exposed to it, morning and
afternoon, and on the Day when the Hour will be
established (it will be said to the Ange "Cause Al of
Fir‘awn to enter the severest torment!" (Ghéfir 40:46)

Meaning those who followed his religion.

However, if it is coupled with the Atha’ (followers), such as
saying: ‘his Al and his Alba’ then the Al are those believers
from among Al Al-Bait (the Household); meaning the
Household of the Messenger

And Shaikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah, may Allah have Mercy
upon him, did not mention the Atha’ here; he (only) said
“his Al and his Companions.” Thus, we say His Al are
those who follow him in his religion, while his Companions
are those who met the Prophet (%), believing in him, and
died upon that.

Joining the Companions to the Al here, is a way of joining
the specific to the general; because Companionship is more
specific than the general following,

% Concerning his saying: “Sallam” abundant Taslim.”

In the word “Sallam’’ there is freedom from harm and
danger, while in the word Salah there is the attainment of

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

I say: The scholars say that if the author had written
book before the introduction and (introductory) address,
then (clearly) what is being referred to does exist, and is
tangible; (thus,) there is no conflict therein. But if he had
not written the book, then the author is referring to what he
had in mind about the meanings which he was to write in
the book

[have a third possibility, which is that the author said this
in consideration of the condition of the one he is
addressing, who is not addressed in such manner, until
after the book had been brought to light and published
Thus, it is as if he (the author) was saying “this, which is
before you, is so and so.” Therefore, these are three angles
of interpretation.

@ Linguistically, “I'tiqad” is the Ifti‘al form of the word
AlAqd, which means and “tying.” But with
the people of terminology, it means a determined
judgement of the mind. It is said; “I firmly believe such
(I‘tigadtu ki
heart (and it is definite). Thus, it is determine
judgement of the mind. So, if it agrees with reality, it

“binding”

1a), meaning I have determined it in my
8

is correct. But if it opposes reality, it is invalid.

Therefore, our belief that Allah is One God is correct; while
the belief of the Christians that Allah is one of three is
wrong. For it opposes reality. Also, the relationship
between that and the linguistic meaning is obvious. That
is because he who firmly believes something in his heart, is
as if he has bound and tied it to the heart in a way that it

does not bolt away

© “Al-Firgah” with Kasra on the (letter) Fa‘, means At-
fah (the group). Allah, the Most High, said

64 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyal

Likewise, by His statement

hthir (enveloped in garments)! Arise
and warn!> (Al-Muddaththir 74:1-2)

40 you Mud

He became a Messenger (28)

To proceed : So this is the I'tiqad of Al-Firgatin-Najiy
1 , aided sect) until the establishment of
the Hour, (that is) the People of the Sunnal
Jamd‘ah.

Manstirah (the sai

t, and the

© Concerning his saying “To proceed : So thi
of Al-Firgatin-)
the establishme

the I'tiqad
lajiyatil-Manstirah (the saved, aided sect)
6 Hour, (that is) the People of the
Sunnah, and the Jama‘ah

The Commentary

* “So, this is the 1/1928: “So, this" is a demonstrative
pronoun, that must necessarily indicate something that
exists. (For example,) whenever I say: ‘this’, I must be
referring to something tangible (and) apparent. But he
the author had written the (introductory) address before
the book, and before this book was brought to light to the
visible world; so how do we harmonize that?

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 67

saved).”” Thus, whoever is upon the like of what the Prophet
(@®) and his Companions were (upon), then he is safe from
Rida’ (innovations). (As for) “All of them shall enter the
Fire, except one” then that one is safe from the Fire.
Therefore, the salvation here, is from Bida’ (innovations) in
this world, and from the Fire in the Hereafter.

© "Al-Mansirah (aided) until the establishment of the Hour :”
the author expresses this in conformity with the Hadith,
wherein the Prophet (38) said

tial’ Godt ‏أمُتى عَلَى‎ ty deb ‏رَالَ‎
‎“A group of my Ummah shall continue to be manifest
(Zahirin) upon the truth.’")

The meaning of ‏اليج‎ (manifest) here is victory, for the
saying of the Most High:

450 We gave power to those who believed against their
enemies, and they became the victorious> (As-Saff
61:14)

Allah, His Angels and the believers aid it, Consequently,
they shall remain supported till the establishment of the
Hour; supported by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, the
Angels and His believers; the human can even be
supported by the Jinn. The Jinn will support him and
intimidate his enemy.

11 tis reported from a number of the Companions, may Allah
be pleased with them, and it is Mutawatir as it is clearly

stated by Shaikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah in Iqtida’ As-Sirat
(1:69), Al-Kattani in Nazm Al-Mutan + (93), Az-Zubaidi in
Lagt ‏“تاشالف‎ Al-Mutandthirah (68), and Al-Albani in Saldt Al-
‘Idain (39-40).

66 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

4For there should separate from every division of them a
group) (At-Tawbah 9:122)

But, Al-Furgah with Damma (on the letter Fa’), then it is
taken from Al-Iftirag (the division).

* “An-Najiyah (the saved)”: is a subject's noun, from Naji
(saved), when he is rescued. It is, safe and secure from
Bida’ (innovation) in this world, and safe from the Fire
in the Hereafter.

The support for this is that the Prophet (g

“This Ummah shall be divided into seventy-three sects ; all
of them shall enter the Fire, except one.

They said: “Which is it, O Messenger of Allah?” He replied

«مَنْ كَانَ عَلَى مِثْل ما أنا ‎gle‏ وَأصْحَابِي»
‎“It is that which is upon the like of what I and my‏
‎Companions are upon“)‏

This Hadith explains to us the meaning of “An-Najiyah (the

"Reported by At-Tirmidhi (2641), Al-Lalaka’i in Sharh As-

Sunnah (147), Al-Hakim (1:129), and Al-Ajurri (15 and 16)
from the narration of ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr, may Allah be
pleased with him, with a chain of transmission including
“‘Abdur-Rahman bin Ziyad bin An‘um Al-Afrigi, who is a
weak narrator due to his poor memory. But the Hadith is
supported by the report from Anas, may Allah be pleased
with him, reported by At-Tabarani in As-Saghir (724) and Al-
“Ugaili in Ad-Du‘afa’ (2:262) and with that, it rises to the
grade of Hasan (good).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 69

Ifyou were to say: How could he say: "The People of the Sunnah
and the Jama‘ah” since they, themselves, are a Jamd‘ah
(Congregation)? So, how could a thing be ascribed to itself?

The response would be that the word Jamd‘ah - a common
noun - primarily means a gathering. It was transferred to
Mean people who are gathered together. Hence, the
Meaning of the People of Sunnah and Jama‘ah becomes:
the People of Sunnah and the gathering. They are being
teferred to as the People of Sunnah because they adhere to
i and they are being referred to as the Peaple of the
Jama‘ah (community) because they are gathered on it
(Sunnah)

Fr this reason, this group does not divide as the people of
‏“مالالا‎ (innovations) do. We find the people of 80“
(innovations), like the Jahmiyyah, the Mu‘tazilah, the Rafidah

and others from the people of Ta’til'!! are divided. As for
this group, it is united upon the truth. Even though some
disagreements may occur among them, yet they are
harmless ones. It is a disagreement where no one accuses
the other of having gone astray by it; their chest is widened
forit.") Besides, they have differed in matters that relate to
ereed.

Flor example, did the Prophet (38) see his Lord with his eyes
Or not? And similarly, does the punishment of the grave
affect both the body and the soul, or the soul only? And
issues like these over which they differ, but they are
Gonsidered branch matters in relation to the fundamentals,
and they are not considered fundamentals. Yet, with that,

MI (Translation note): Those who suspend Allah's attributes

from their meaning
Mi) (Translation note): Meaning, they will make exceptions for

minor disagreements.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Until the establishment of the Hour” : meaning until the
Day of Judgment. Thus, it is to remain supported until
the establishment of the Hour.

Here a problem arises. The Messenger (3) has informed
(us) that the Hour will occur upon the most evil of
creation; and it will not come about until “Allah, Allah”
is not (even) said.”

How do we harmonize between this and his saying: “until
the establishment of the Hour’?

The response is, that it be said: What is intended (by “until
the establishment of the Hour’’) is close to the establishment of
the Hour; based on the Hadith in which he said: “Until the
order of Allah comes.”®! Or, until the establishment of the
Hour, meaning their hour, which is their death. For he who
dies, his (time of Judgment) has occurred. However, the
first interpretation is closer (to being correct); they will,
thus remain supported close to the establishment of the
Hour.

We only resort to this Ta’wil (interpretation) based on the

evidence, since Ta’wil (interpretation) based upon proof is

allowed, because all of it (the text and the implication) is
from Allah.

% “The People of the Sunnah and the Jami‘ah’’: He (the
author) attributed them to the Sunnah because they
adhere to it, and to the Jama‘ah (congregation) because
they are agreed upon it (the Sunnah)

Reported by Muslim (2949) from Ibn Mas‘ad, may Allah be
pleased with him

Reported by Muslim (148) from Anas, may Allah be pleased
with him.

Reported by Al-Bukhari (7312) and Muslim (1920)

‎On The Introductory Notes... 71‏ توملمع ص0

‎they are the Salafin creed, such that the later one, until the
Pay of Judgment, when he is upon the path of the Prophet
(#), and his Companions, then he is Salafi.

‎Preys)‏ والايمًاد

‎It (creed) entails Iman (faith) in Allah, His Angels,
Books, His Messengers, the Resurrection after death, and
faith in Al-Qadar - its good and its bad

‎© Concerning his statement: “Ii (creed) entails Iman (faith)
in Allah, His Angels, His Books, His Messengers, the
Resurrection and faith in Al-Qadar - its good and its bad

‎The Commentary

‎‘The Prophet (3) established this creed for us in reply to
fibril, when he asked the Prophet (3%): “What is Islam?
“What is Iman?” “What is Ihsan?’ “When will the Hour
be?” Regarding Iman, he replied: “That you believe in
Allah, His Angels, His Books, His Messengers, the Last Day
and Al-Qadar, its good and its ‏ناقوط‎

‎© “Faith in Allah:” As for the meaning of Iman
linguistically; many people say that Iman it is At-Tasdig
(trust). As a result, ‘I trust’ and ‘I believe’ mean the
same thing linguistically. Also, we have earlier men-
tioned in the commentary on the Qur'an, that this

‎Reported by Muslim (8) from the narration of ‘Umar bin Al
Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him

‎Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎while they differ, they never accuse the other of having
gone astray, unlike the people of Bida’ (innovations).

‎Therefore, they are gathered upon the Sunnah, so they are
the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah,

‎Furthermore, it is known from the author's statement, may
Allah have mercy upon him, that he did not include among
them whoever opposed them in their path. So the Ash‘aris,
for example, and the Maturidis are not included among
People of the Sunnah and Jamd‘ah in this topic. Because they
oppose them in what the Prophet (#8) and his Companions
followed, regarding accepting the attributes of Allah,
Glorious is He and Exalted, upon their realities. And for
this reason, whoever says (the following) is mistaken: ‘The
People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah are three: The Salafis,
the Ash’aris, and the Maturidis.’ This is a mistake; we say:
How can they all be People of the Sunnah, while they
Oppose one another? What is there after the truth but
falsehood?! And how can they be from the People of the
Sunnah, when each of them refutes the other?! This is not
possible, unless it is possible to unite two opposites, then
yes. Otherwise, then there is no doubt that one of them is
Sahib As-Sunnah (a person of the Sunnah); then which one?
The Ash‘aris? The Maturidis? The Salafis? We say whoever
agrees with the Sunnah, then he is a person (Sahib) of the
Sunnah and whoever opposes the Sunnah; then he is not a
person (Sahib) of the Sunnah So therefore we say: The Salaf
are the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah, and this
description will never be true about other than them, and
since words carry meanings, then let us reflect; how can we
name those who oppose the Sunnah with “the People of
Sunnah’?! It is not possible! How is it possible that we say
about three opposing paths that they are united?! So where
is the agreement?! So the People of Sunnah and the Jama‘ah

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 73

Having Faith in His existence:

If someone says: “What is the proof of the existence of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime?”

We reply that the evidence for Allah’s existence are: The
‘Agi (intellect), the senses, and the Shari'ah. All three prove
the existence of Allah. If you like, you can add the Fitrah
(innate disposition). Therefore, the proofs of Allah’s
existence are four: The ‘Aql, the senses, the Fifrah and the
Shurah, Also, we have mentioned the textual evidences
(Shari'ah) last, not because it is not worthy of being
Mentioned first; rather because we are addressing he who
toes not believe in the Shariah.

As for the evidences from intellect, we ask: Do all these

treatures exist by themselves, or by chance?

If you say they exist by themselves; this is rationally
impossible, it was first non-existent, so how can it exist
when it was non-existent?! The non-existent is nothing until
it exists, then, it is not able to bring itself into existence

If you also say they exist by chance; then we say this is also
impossible O denying one! All the things produced, like
planes, rockets, vehicles and other forms of machinery, do
they exist by chance? He would (definitely) reply that this
is not possible. (If that is not possible); in the same way, itis
not possible, whatsoever, that birds, mountains, the sun,
the moon, the stars, the trees, coal, sand, the seas and other
than that, exist by chance.

[| was said, that a group of As-Sumaniyyah, who are from
the people of India, came to Imam Abu Hanifah, may Allah
have mercy upon him. So, they debated with him
tegarding the existence of the Creator, the Mighty and
Sublime. Iam Aba Hanifah, a very intelligent scholar,

fae an appointment with them, saying that they should

72 Commentary on Al~“Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

statement is incorrect. Rather, Iman linguistically means
approving something out of a trust in it, due to the
evidence that you say: “Amantu bi kadhd (I believe in
this)’ and “Agrartu bi kadha (1 approve of this)” and
“Sadagtu fulanan (I trust So-and-so).” And you do not
say: “Amantu fulanan (1 have faith, So-and-so).””

Therefore, Iman is more comprehensive than mere trust, It
is approving and acknowledgement, that necessitate
accepting the narrations and submission to the rulings
This is Iman; but as for just having faith that Allah exists

this is not Iman - not until it leads you to accepting the
narrations and submitting to the rulings. If not, then it is
not [man

Having Iman in Allah includes four things:

1. The belief in the existence of Allah, Glorious is He and
Exalted.

The belief in His sole (right of) Rububiyyah Lordship.
The belief in His sole (right of) Uluhiyyah (divinity)

4. The belief in His Names and Attributes. 1

wr

Iman will not be established except with (all of) that

So, whoever does not believe in the existence of Allah, then
he is not a believer. Whoever believes in the existence of
Allah, and not in His sole right of Lordship, then he is not a
believer. Whoever believes in Allah and His sole right of
Lordship, but not in His sole right of Uluhiyah (divinity),
then he is not a believer. Whoever believes in Allah, His
sole right of Lordship, and Uluhiyah (divinity), but does not
believe in His Names and Attributes, then he is not a
believer. Even if there is in the last (category) those who are
completely stripped of Iman, and therein whose Iman is
only incomplete.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes..

something, then his prayer is answered. This is a sensible
proof, He himself (the one who denies the existence of
Allah, the Most High) did not call on anyone except Allah,
4nd Allah granted his request. He witnessed that with his
awn eyes! We also hear about those who have past, and
those in our time, whose requests Allah has granted.

While the Messenger (#%) was delivering a sermon to the
people on Friday, a Bedouin entered the Masjid, and said:
"The wealth has been destroyed and the roads have been
(ut off! Ask Allah to provide rain for us,” Anas said: “By
Allah, theré was no cloud in the sky, not even a Qaz‘ah -
Meaning a piece of a cloud — and there was no house nora
home between us and Sal’ — a mountain in Al-Madinah,
from whose direction clouds come -... Immediately after the
Wupplication of the Messenger (#2), there came a cloud like
4 shield, which rose up to the heavens, spread, thundered,
fisued lightening, and it started raining. Thus, the
Messenger (#8) did not come descend (from ae Minbar)
@xcept with rain dripping from his beard (2%)

his is an obvious occurrence, which proves the existence
of the Creator based upon the senses.

Incidents like this abound in the Qur'an; for example

O Spe SiG FB BS IS ‏د تان‎

4Aud (remember) Ayyub, when he cried to his Lord
"Verily, distress has seized me, and You are the Most
Mercifiul of all those who show mercy.” So We answered
his call> (Al-Anbiya’ 21:83-84)

1) Reported by Al-Bukhari (1033), and Muslim (897), from the
narration of Anas, may Allah be pleased with him.

74 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

come back after a day or two. So, they came back; (and)
said: “What do you say?” He said: “I thought about a ship
full of freight and provisions, which sailed the sea, docked,
unloaded what it carried, and left, and it also had no
captain and no dock workers.”

They replied: “You thought of this?!” He replied: “Yes,’
They said: “Then, you have no intellect! Is it imaginable
that a ship sail without a captain, unload itself and leave?!
This is unintelligible!’ He said: “How is it that you can not
comprehend this, yet you reason that these heavens, the
sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, the
animals and people, all exist without a Maker?!” They
realized that this man was addressing them by using their
own sense of reason, and that they were incapable of giving
any reply to this nor its meaning.

A Bedouin Arab was asked: “With what did you know
your Lord?” He replied: “The tracks indicate the direction
of the journey, while the dung indicates a camel. So,
heavens possessing of such towers, and the earth with such
paths, and the sea with such waves - would that not
indicate (the existence of) the All-Hearing and the ‏الى‎
‎Seeing?”

For this reason, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, said:

Were they created by nothing, or were they themselves
the creators?» (Al-Tar 52:3:

Therefore, intellect, firmly and unequivocally, indicates the
existence of Allah.

As for the evidence from the senses concerning Allah's
existence; then indeed the human calls upon Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, saying: “O my Lord!” asking for

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 77

This verse proves that man is inclined by his Fitrah to
testify to the existence of Allah and His Lordship. Whether
We say that Allah brought them out of Adam's back and
made them testify, or we say that this is what Allah, the
Most High, has put acknowledgment of this in their Fitrah.
Hence, this is a (clear) proof that man knows his Lord by
his Fitrah

These are four evidences for the existence of Allah,
Glorious is He and Exalted

As for the evidences of the Shariah, then whatever the
Messengers came with from Allah's Shari‘ahs, containing all
Of what is beneficial for creation, it also proves that He
Who sent it is a Lord, Merciful and Wise. This is
particularly so regarding this Majestic Qur’an, making it
impossible for mankind and Jinns to produce its like

© “And His Angels”: Al-Mala‘ikah (Angels) is plural for
Mal’ak. The origin of Mal’ak is Ma‘lak, it being from Al-
Aliikah. Al-Alikah, linguistically, means “the message.”
Allah, the Most High, said:

4Who made the Angels, messengers with wings,
two...) (Fatir 35:1)

Hence, the Angels are part of the unseen world. Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, created them from light, and made
them obedient and subservient to Him. Each of them has
Specific functions assigned to him by Allah. We know of
some of their functions:

Firstly: Jibril, who is entrusted with the Wahi (Divine
Revelation). He descends with it from Allah, the Most
High, to the Messengers.

Secondly: Israfil, who is entrusted with the responsibility

76 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

As for the proof from the Fifrah; indeed, many of people,
whose Fitrah has not deviated, believe in the existence of
Allah. Even animals without intelligence believe in the
existence of Allah. And the story of the ant, which was
narrated from Sulaiman (#88), (is an example). He came out
to beg (Allah) for water. Then, he found an ant lying down
on its back, raising its legs up toward the heavens saying:
“O Allah, I am a creature from among Your creatures, do
not deny us your provision of water.” He then said (to his
followers): “Go back, water was asked to be provided to
you by the supplication of another (creature),/""!

Subsequently, the Fitrah is inclined to knowing Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, and to single Him out

Allah, the Most High, indicated that in His statement

And (remember) when your Lord brought forth from
the Children of Adam, from their loins, their seed and
made them testify as to themselves (saying): “Am I not
your Lord?” They said: “Yes! We testify,” lest you
should say on the Day of Judgment: “Verily, we have
been unaware of this.” Or lest you should say : “It was
only our fathers aforetime, who took others as partners
in worship along with Allah, and we were (merely their)
descendants after them (AI-A'raf 7:172-173) 7"

Pl In Ad-Durr Al-Manthiar As-Suyati has attributed it to Ibn Abt
Shaibah, Ahmad in Az-Zuhd and Ibn Abi Hatim, from Aba
As-Siddiq An-Naji. See Ijtima’ Al-Juyiish by Ibn al-Qayyim
(221-228). ١ -

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

4Until when death approaches one of you, Our
Messengers (Angel of death and his assistants) take his
soul, and they never neglect their duty». (Al-An‘d
6:61)

He, the Most High, also said:
4% B ail
48ay: “The Angel of death, who is set over you, will
take your souls> (As-Sajdah 32:11)

And he, the Mighty and Exalted, said:

4G Ge ‏الأنشل‎ Ge Hild
lt is Allah Who takes away the souls at the time of
their death> (Az-Zumar 39:42)

There is no contradiction between these three verses, for the
Angels take the soul. Because when Malak Al-Mavwt seizes
the soul from the body, other Angles will be present with
Him. If the deceased is an inhabitant of Jannah (Paradise),
they will have perfume and a shroud from Jannah with
them, they will take this blessed soul, and wrap it in the
#hroud, and ascend therewith to Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, until it is between the two Hands of Allah. He
Would then say (to them): “Write the record of my servant
in the ‘Iiliyyin and return it to the earth.” Thus, the soul will
then be returned to the body for the trial (of the grave, and
would then be asked): “Who is your Lord? What is your
feligion? Who is your Prophet?”

But, if the deceased is an unbeliever - we seek refuge in
Allah (from that) - then, the Angels would descend with a
Shroud and stench from the Fire, take the soul, wrap it in
this shroud, and ascend with it to the heavens; however the
fates of the heavens will be closed before it, then it will be

Commentary on AL-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

for blowing the Sir (Trumpet). He is also one of the bearers
of the Throne.

Thirdly: Mika’il, who is entrusted with the rainfall and
plant life.

These three are entrusted with what brings life. Jibril was
entrusted with the Wali, wherein lies the life of hearts,
Mika‘il is entrusted with rainfall and plants, wherein lies
the life of the earth, and Israfil is entrusted with the
blowing of the Suir (Trumpet), wherein lies the life of the
(dead) bodies on the Promised Day.

This is why the Prophet (#) used to petition Allah by His
Lordship, mentioning them (the Angels) in his opening
supplication during the voluntary night prayer. He would
say: “O Allah, the Lord of Jibril, Mika’il and Israfil! The
Originator of the heavens and the earth, the Knower of the
unseen and the seen! You shall judge among your servants
regarding that which they differed. Guide me by your
permission to the truth regarding that which is differed
over. You certainly guide whomever you will, to the
Straight Path." This is the supplication that he used to
say during the voluntary night prayer, mentioning them
while petitioning Allah by His Lordship.

We also know that among them are those who are
entrusted with the taking the souls of humans or anything
that has a soul. They are Malak Al-Mawt (the Angel of
death) and his deputies. He (Malak Al-Mawt) is not to be
referred to as ‘Izra’il, because it is not confirmed from the
Prophet (2%) that this is his name. Allah says:

ate ‏فريس‎ « 1010

45,558 ‏رسلا وهم ل‎ ya S55) ae ‏إذَا‎ HP

"4 Reported by Muslim (770) from ‘Aishah, may Allah be
pleased with her

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 81

There are also some Angels who write down the deeds of
human beings.

is ‏ما‎ Sis 0 GS USS 0 Gad KE 35>
4But verily, over you (are appointed Angels in charge
of mankind) to watch you, honorable, writing down
(your deeds), they know all that you do} (Al-Infitar
§2:10-12)

Rice £55 ‏من قول إلا لَدَيْهِ‎ Leal GP

“Not a word does he (or she) utter, but there is a
watcher by him ready (to rd it)» (Qaf 50: 18)

One of the companions of Imam Ahmad, may Allah have
Mercy upon him, visited him while he was sick. He found
him groaning from the sickness. He said: “O Aba
‘Abdullah! Are you groaning? Tawus said: ‘Indeed, the
Angels write down everything, even the groan of a sick
person, because Allah says:

ae 65 ad ‏من قولٍ إلا‎ Lal GD

4Not a word does he (or she) utter, but there is a
watcher by him ready (to record it)> (Qaf 50: 18)’”

Therefore, Abu ‘Abdullah began to have (more) patience,
and he stopped groaning,"! because everything is written
down. 4 Not a word does he (or she) utter? - Meaning any

ij
1) For what was reported by Salih bin Al-Imam Ahmad, he

said: “During his sickness prior to death, my father said
“Take out the book of ‘Abdullah bin Idris,’ then said: ‘Read to
me the narration of Laith that Tawas used to dislike
groaning during sickness,’ After that, I did not hear to my
father a groan till he died.” Siyar Alam An-Nubala’ (11:215).

80 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

flung to the earth. Allah, the Most High, says:

oes ‏أو‎ 7 BES TS ‏مس‎ EG al 1S ‏#ومن‎

dant 3 ‏في‎ BN ‏بد‎

And whoew signs partners to Allah, it is as if he
had fallen from the sky, and the birds had snatched him,
or the wind had thrown him to a far off place> (Al-Hajj
22:31)

Allah would later say: “Write the record of my servant in
the Sijjin’") - we ask Allah to protect us.

Those (Angels) are entrusted to take the soul from Malak
Al-Mawt after he takes it out, while Malak Al-Mawt is the
one that removes the soul. Therefore, there is no contra
diction. Furthermore, Allah is He Who orders this (the
taking of the soul) and as such, He is the One Who takes
the soul in the real sense.

Among them (Angels) are those who travel around on the
earth in search of the gatherings of remembrance (of Allah)
Once they find a circle of knowledge, and remembrance (of
Allah), they sit down.?!

11 Reported by Ahmad (4:287) and Abu Dawnd (4753) and

others, Al-Hakim said: “It is Sali (authentic) according to
the criteria of the Two Shaikhs (Al-Bukhari and Muslim)”
and Adh-Dhahabi approved of it. See Aliktm Al-Jand‘iz wa
Bida‘iha by Al-Albant (156).
Based on the report of Al-Bukhari (6408) and Muslim (2689)
from Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him, from
the Prophet (#) who said: “Allah has Angels who go around
the roads in search of the people of remembrance (of Allah).
When they find a people remembering Allah, the Most High,
they call one another - ‘Come to your aspirations.” He said
“So they cover them with their wings, up to the first
heaven.” The wording is that of Al-Bukhari

‎On The Introductory Notes 83‏ بخرمامنان؟

‎they would never return to it again.”""! What this means, is
that the set of seventy thousand Angels that enter today,
are different from those that entered yesterday, and they
will never come back to it again, while still others will
fone, This is evidence of the large number of the Angels.
Vor this fact, Allah, the Most High, said:

‎#And none can know the hosts of your Lord but He>
(Al-Muddaththir 74:31)

‎Among, Angels, there are those in charge of Jannah and the
Hire. The name of the Angel guarding the Fire is Malik. The
Inhabitants of the Fire would say
40 Malik (Keeper of Heil)! Let your Lord make an end
Of usp (Az-Zukhruf 43:77)

‎Meaning: Kill us, putting us to death. So they supplicate to
Allah to kill them, because they are experiencing unbear-
able punishment. He will reply:

‎Verily you shall abide forever> (Az-Zukhruf 43:77)
After then, it will be said to them:

‎indeed, We have brought the truth to you, but most of
you have a hatred for the truth» (Az-Zukhruf 43:78)

‎What is important (here), is that we must believe in the
1) Reported by Muslim (162) from the Hadith of Anas, may
Allah be pleased with him, in the story of Al-Isra’

‎82 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎word uttered by you is written. However, you might be
rewarded or punished for it. This is based on the saying
that was said.

‎Among the Angels are those who succeed one anther in
staying with human beings, (alternating) night and day

‎For each (person), there are Angels in succession,
before and behind him. They guard him by the
Command of Allah} (Ar-Ra‘d 13:11)

‎Among them (Angels) are those who are in (constant)
bowing and prostration to Allah in the heavens, The
Prophet (3) said: “The heaven A tat (creak) and it has every
right to creak.” And the Afit is the Sarir Ar-Rahl (camel's
creaking), Meaning; If there was a heavy load on top of the
camel, you would hear to it a creaking sound due to the
heavy weight of the load. The Prophet (#%) said: “The
heaven creaks and it has every right to creak. There is no
place that could contain four fingers in the heavens except
that there is an Angel standing, bowing, or prostrating to
Allah therein.”""! So these Angles cover the vastness of the
heavens.

‎Thus, regarding Bait Al-Ma'mir (the Oft-Frequented
House) that he passed by during the night of Ascension,
the Messenger (38) said: “Seventy thousand Angels
circumambulate” - or he said “enter” it everyday, and

‎11 Reported by Ahmad (5:173), At-Tirmidhi (2312), Ibn Majah
(4190) and Al-Hakim (2:510), from Aba Dharr, may Allah be
pleased with him. And his wording is: “The heaven creaks,
and it has every right to creak. There is no space for four
fingers, except that there is an Angel there, placing, its head
in prostration to Allah.” The Hadith is referenced by Al-
Albani in As-Sahifiah (1722).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes..

673 ‏عا‎ Sky ar
Who disobey not, (from executing) the Commands they

receive from Allah, but do that which they are
commanded > (At-Tahrim 66:6)

Would He praise them in this manner, while they do not
have intellect?

€ a V5
4They glorify His Praises night and day, and they
never slacken (fo do so)> (Al-Anbiya’ 21:20)

Do we (then) say that they do not have intellect?! They
bey Allah, do what Allah commands them, and convey
the Wali. But we would say: They do not have intellect?!
The most worthy to be described as not having intellect, is
he who says that they do not have intellect

* “And His Books’; meaning, His Books which He
tevealed to the Messengers.

And for every Messenger there was a Book. Allah, the Most
High, said:

indeed We have sent Our Messengers with clear
proofs, and revealed with them the Book and the
Balance} (Al-Hadid 57:25)

This is evidence that every Messenger was given a Book;
but we do not know all these Books. Rather, we only know:
the Suhuf (Scriptures of) Ibrahim and Masa, the Tawrah,
the Injil, the Zabir and the Qur'an. These are six

Some say the Suhuf (Scriptures of) Musa are the same as
the Tawrah. While some others say that they are different

84 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Angels.
And how does one believe in the Angels?

We should believe that they are of the unseen world, not to
be seen; they can also be seen sometimes; although, they
are primarily of the unseen world. They were created from
light, and charged with whatever worship Allah has
charged them with, and they are completely subservient
to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

<Who disobey not, (from executing) the Commands they

receive from Allah, but do that which they are
commanded (At-Talirim 66:6)

We also believe in whatever of their names we know of
And we believe whatever functions of theirs we know of. It
is obligatory upon us to believe in all of this according to
what we know. (We also believe that) they are physical
beings. The evidence for this is the saying of the Most High:

¢Who made the Angels messengers with wings> (Fatir
35:1)

The Prophet (##) saw Jibril in his original form, in which he
was created, with six hundred wings covering up the sky")
as opposed to those who say: “They are merely spirits.”

If someone asks: “Do they have intellect?” We will reply (to
such a person): “Do you have intellect?” Nobody will ask
this question except an insane person. For Allah, the Most
High, said (regarding them):

©) Reported by Al-Bukhari (3232) and (3233), from Ibn Mas‘ad,
may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

dient to Allah .)> (Adh-Dhariyat 51:46)

We may say: His saying: ¢hefore them refers to what has
been mentioned earlier.

Thus, (there are) three proofs from the Qur’an, which
establish that Nah is the first of the Messengers.

And from the Sunnah is what was confirmed from the
Hadith of the Shafa‘ah (Intercession): “The people of the
station of (standing) will be telling Nuh: “You are the first
Messenger who Allah sent to the people of the earth.’
This is clear.

As for Adam, may the Salah and Salam be upon him, he
was a Prophet, and not a Messenger

As regards Idris, many historians - or most of them - and
Some scholars of Tafsir, as well, claim that he was before
Nuh, and he (Idris) was among his (Nuh’s) forefathers.
However, this is a very weak view, which the Qur’an and
the Sunnah refute; and what is correct is what we have
mentioned.

The Last of them is Muhammad (32), due to the saying of
the Exalted:
fds) ‏«وللكن‎
‎But he is the Messenger of Allah and the Last (seal) of
the Prophets» (Al-Ahzab 33:40)

He did not say: “Last (seal) of the Messengers,” because
when He sealed Prophethood, then it is more obvious that
He sealed Messengership.

If you were to say: “Isa, may the Salah and Salam be upon

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (7440) and Muslim (194),‏ للا

‎86 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎If it is the Tawrah, then it is five. But if they are different,
then it is six. Nonetheless, we believe in all the Books
revealed by Allah to (all) the Messengers. Even if we do not
know them by name, we believe in them as a whole.
“And His Messengers”: Meaning the Messengers of
Allah. They are those whom Allah revealed the
Shari‘ahs to and ordered them to convey it. The first
of them is Nah and the last of them is Muhammad (38).

‎The proofs that Nuh is the first of them is the saying of the
Exalted:

‎Verily, We have inspired you as We inspired Nah and
the Prophets after him} (An-Nisa’ 4:163)

‎Meaning, a Wahi (Divine Revelation), like Our Revelation

‎to Nah and the Prophets after him; and that is the
Revelation of Messengership

‎Also, His saying:

‎And indeed, We sent Nah and Ibrahim, and placed in
their offspring Prophethood and Scripture (Book)> (Al-
Hadid 57:26)

‎in their offspring» meaning the offspring of Nah and
Ibrahim; and those before Nah cannot be regarded as
being from among his offspring.

‎As well as, the saying of the Exalted:

‎(So were) the people of Niih before them. Verily, they
were a people who were Fasigin (rebellious and disobe

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 89

pnd anyone among this Ummah is incomprehensible. Then,
how about giving preference in such case?! As a result, this
Ubjective fails right from its foundation, because it is from
Punatiu’ (extremism) and the Mutanajti‘in (extremists) will
perish, as stated by the Prophet (3) 1

Becondly: We say that he (Aba Bakr, may Allah be pleased
With him) is the best of this Ummah excluding ‘Isa.

Thirdly: We say that ‘Isa is not from the Ummah. It is not
Porrect for us to say that he is from his [the Prophet's )
Ummah, since he (Isa, peace be upon him) came before him
{the Prophet (3#2)]; but he will be among his followers when
lw descends, because the Shari“ah of the Prophet (3%) shall
yemain until the Day of Judgment.

If somebody says how can he (Isa, peace be upon him) be a
follower when he shall kill the pig, smash the cross and
‏أفرملا‎ nothing other than Islam. While, at the same time,
falim leaves the People of the Book, provided they pay the
Jieyah?

Then we would reply that: The Prophet (3) mentioning
that these events will occur, establishes it and makes it part
Of his Shari‘ah; thereby abrogating the earlier ruling.

4 “Resurrection after the death”: Resurrection, meaning
- bringing the people out of their graves after their
death. This is part of the ‘Aqidah of People of Sunnah
and Jama‘ah. This is confirmed by the Book, the Sunnah,
and the consensus of the Muslims - and even the
consensus of the Jews and the Christians - because they
also believe in a Day when people will be raised and
recompensed.

As regards the proof from the Qur’an, Allah, the Mighty

Hi Reported by Muslim (2670) from Tbn Mas‘td, may Allah be
pleased with him.

88 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

him, will return at the end times;'!! and he is a
Messenger,” what would then be the reply?

We would reply that he is not coming back with a new
Shari'ah. Rather, he would only rule with the Shari'ah of
Prophet (Muhammad (3

If somebody says that it is agreed upon that the best of this
Ummah, after its Prophet, is Aba Bakr, and ‘Isa shall rule
with the Shariah of the Prophet (s%). Thus, he (‘Isa, peace
be upon him) would (by that) be among his [the Prophet's
(388)] followers. So, how is it correct that we say that Aba
Bakr is the best of this Ummah after it’s Prophet?

Then the answer would be from one of three angles:

Firstly: ‘Isa, may the Salah and Salam be upon him, is a
senger on his own among the Ulu Al-‘Azm (the
ngers of firm resolve); and comparing between him

Based on the report of Imam Ahmad (2921) from Ibn Abbas,
may Allah be pleased with him, regarding the explanation of
this Ayah: and he shall be a known sign for the Hour He
said: “It refers to the coming of ‘Isa the son of Maryam, peace
be upon him, before the Day of Judgment.” Ahmad Shakir
said: “Its chain of transmission is Salih.” And in the Hadith
of Abi Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him, he said
“The Messenger of Allah (38) said: ‘By the One in Whose
Hand is my soul! The son of Maryam will soon descend
among you as a just ruler.” Reported by Al-Bukhari (2222)
and Muslim (155), Ibn Kathir also mentioned the Ha
reported regarding, the descent of ‘Isa the son of Maryam,
peace be upon him, to the earth from the heavens, while
explaining the saying of the Exalted: 4 And there is none of
the people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians) but must
believe in him before his death. And on the Day of
Judgment, he will be a witness against them} (An-Nisa
4:159)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 91

Sublime, on the Day of Judgment without any good deed.
Look at what you have prepared for the Day of
Conyeyence. What have you prepared for the meeting
day? Today, many people busy themselves with this world,
knowing fully well that it is not certain that they will get
What they work for in this world. A person might plan for
tomorrow, or after tomorrow, but he does not reach
fomorrow. Unfortunately, when it comes to what is sure,
many people are heedless of this. Allah, the Exalted, says:
455 SF ‏في‎ ek ‏بل‎
‎4Nay, but their hearts are covered (blind) from
understanding this> (Al-Mu’mintin 23:63)

Regarding the deeds of this world, He, the Exalted, says:

452 Gi ‏هُمْ‎
‎And they have other (evil) deeds, besides, which they
are doing> (Al-Mu'miniin 23:63)

He uses a nominal sentence which implies affirmation and
tontinuity: He, the Exalted, says:

405 % ‏فى عَتْلَوَ‎ CS i>

(It will be said to the sinners): “Indeed you were
hwedless of this’’> (Qaf 50:22)

That is on the Day of Judgment.

4Now We have removed your covering, and sharp is
your sight this Day!’ (Qaf 50:22)

This resurrection — which is agreed upon by all the
Heavenly Revealed religions, and everyone who adheres to

90 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

and Sublime, said:

4The disbelievers claim that they will never be
resurrected (for the Account). Say: Yes! By my Lord.
you will certainly be resurrected.’> (At-Taghdbun 64:7)

He, the Mighty and Sublime, also said:

4After that, surely, you will die. Then, surely, you
will be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection» (Al-
Mu’miniin 23:15-16)

As for the proof from the Sunnah, there are Mutawitir
Hadiths from the Prophet (#8) regarding that

The Muslims have a decisive consensus that mankind will
be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection, meet their Lord,
and be recompensed for their deeds.

So whosoever does good equal to the weight of an atom
(or a small ant), shall see it. And whosoever does evil
equal to the weight of an atom (or a small ant), shall see
it (Az-Zalzalah 99:7-8)

1 ody

4O man! Verily, you are returning towards your Lord
with your deeds and actions (good or bad), a sure
returning, so you will meet» (Al-Inshigag 84:6)

Always remember this meeting and be prepared for it in
apprehension of standing before Allah, the Mighty and

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

ascribed to You.”!"!

for example, we find evils among the decreed creation:
there are snakes, scorpions, predatory animals, diseases,
poverty, drought and things like that. All these things are
vil in relation to humans because they do not suit him.
There is also disobedience, wickedness, disbelief, rebel-
liousness, murder and other than that, all these are evils.
But with respect to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, they are
yood, because Allah, the Exalted, has destined them for a
very important purpose; those who know it, know it, and
those who are ignorant of it, are ignorant of it

Hence, it is imperative that we recognize that the evil
Attributed to Al-Qadar is with respect to the objects of the

decree and the doing, not preordainment which is from the
preordainment of Allah and his doing

Then, you should know that this object of the doing may be
@Vilitself but good in another respect. Allah, the Exalted, says

Evil has appeared on land and sea because of what the
hands of men have earned, that Allah may make them
taste a part of that which they have done, in order that
they may return (by repenting to Allah, and begging
His Pardon)» (Ar-Rum 30:41)

Thisisa good result! Assuch, the evil attributed to the objected
eereed here, isnot evilin reality since it leads toa good result.

Let's take the punishment of committing fornication for
example. The fornicator — who has never been married —

111 Part of the Hadith of ‘Alt bin Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased
with him, reported by Muslim (771).

9 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

a religion — is one of the six pillars of Iman, and an aspect
of the ‘Aqidah of the People of the Sunnah and the Jama’ah
No one who associates himself with any religion would
ever deny it.

* Faith in Al-Qadar - its good and its bad: This is the
sixth pillar, faith in Al-Qadar - its good and its bad

Al-Qadar is the preordainment of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, for all things. Allah, the Exalted, had written the
Destiny of everything fifty thousand years before the

eation of the heavens and earth") as He, the Mighty and
Sublime, said:

Know you not that Allah knows all that is in heaven and
on earth? Verily, it is (all) in the Book (Al-Lawh AL
Mahfiaiz). Verily! That is easy for Allah» (Al-Hajj 22:70)

% His saying: “its good and its bad” : as for ascribing good
to Al-Qadar as good, it is clear; but in the case of bad,
the meaning of it is the bad that was ordained not Al
Qadar, which is Allah’s doing, because there is no evil
in Allah’s doing. All His doings are good and wise; evil
is only with respect to the objects of the doing and
decrees, The evil here is regarding the objects of the
decree and the doing, but not in regard to the doing
itself. That is why the Prophet (#8) said “Evil cannot be

Based on the report of Muslint.(2653) from ‘Abdullah bin
Amt who said: “I heard the Messenger (38) say: ‘Allah had
written the decrees of the creatures fifty thousand years
before He created the heavens and the earth.”” He said:
“And His Throne was upon the water.”

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 95

femoved, except by illness; the doctors would say that
some particular illnesses kill these bacteria in the body, but
you do know not.

‎Summary, what we are saying is:‏ الآ

‎Pirstly: The evil which is attributed to Al-Qadar is with
fegard to the objects ordained by by Allah, as for what
Alh ordains, then all of it is good. The proof is in the
taying of the Prophet (2%): “Evil is not ascribed You’!
Secondly: The evil in the object ordained is not absolute
evil; rather this evil may lead to matters that are good. So
its evilness is a relative matter.

‎‘The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, will later
discuss matters related to Al-Qadar with some details and
@xplain its stages according to the People of the Sunnah.

‎Wes ‏في‎ Achy ‏بِمَا وَصَفَ‎ OY) ral oY

‎Ball lo — deme ‏حول‎
‎And from faith in Allah is the faith in what He describes
Himself with in His Book, and what His Messenger
Muhammad (3) has described Him with.

‎oo > ‏ل‎

‎© Concerning his statement: “And from faith in Allah is
the faith in what He describes Himself with in His Book, and
what His Messenger Muhammad (3%) has described Him
with.”

‎"Its references preceded

‎Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎will be given one hundred lashes and banished for a year.
Without doubt, this is bad for him unto itself, because he
would not find it comfortable. But it is still good from
another perspective, because it is expiation for his sins. So,
this is good, because the punishment of this life is less
severe than the punishment of the Hereafter, thus it is good
for him. Among its benefits is that it would deter others
and make them abstain from fornication, for if someone
intended to fornicate, and knew that the like of this will be
done to him in such case, then he would refrain doing it. It
can even be good for him, because he would never return
to such an act again.

‎With regard to the universally decreed matters, something
might be evil in regard to the object ordained such as
sickness. If a person falls sick, then there is no doubt that
this is bad to him. But in reality, it is good for him, and its
good for him is that it is an expiation of sins for him. A
person might have committed some sins that would not be
atoned for by seeking forgiveness and repenting, due to a
preventative factor; such as insincerity of intention towards
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. Then this sickness and
punishment serve as expiations of his sins.

‎Among its good is that the person may not have recognized
the magnitude of Allah’s favor on him by granting him
sound health, until he becomes sick. Now we are healthy,
and we do not know the significance of sound health; but
once sickness begins, we would recognize the importance
of sound health. Thus, sound health is a crown on the
heads of the healthy; none actually recognizes it except the
sick. This is also good; it makes you realize the importance
of good health.

‎Among its good is that this sickness might destroy some
bacteria in the body which would not ordinarily be

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 97

Allah attributed it to Himself, because it is His Speech,
Glorious and Exalted is He. So this Qur’an is the
Speech of Allah, Allah spoke it, in reality, and every
letter is from Him, because He has indeed spoken it

And in this statement there are some further subjects:

The first subject: That from faith in Allah is the faith in
what He describes Himself with. And its indication is that
faith in Allah - as preceded - comprises the belief in His
Names and Attributes. Because Dhatullah (Allah’s Essence)
is named with some names and described with some
attributes. And, the existence of a mere essence, devoid of
attributes, is not possible. So it is not possible that there
would ever exist a mere essence devoid of attributes. The
idea that there may be some things without attributes could
be imagined, but is unlike the reality; that is, imagination is
unlike what actually occurs. A particular thing without
attributes can never be found in reality.

For example, one’s mind can imagine a particular thing
with a thousand eyes, in each of the eyes one thousand
pupils and one thousand iris’; with one thousand feet, in
each of the feet, one thousand toes, in each of the toes, one
thousand nails; with millions of strands of hair, in each of
the strands, a million of strands of hair, and so on...!! This
can be imagined even if it is not real. But in reality, nothing
can be found without an attribute.

Hence, the belief in the Attributes of Allah, is part of the
belief in Allah. If there is no Attribute for Allah, except that
He exists a necessary existence, and this is as agreed upon
by everybody, then He must have Attributes.

The second subject: The Attributes of Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, are from the knowledge of the Unseen, and
what is incumbent upon man regarding matters of the
unseen is to believe in them as they are, without resorting

96 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidaht Al-Wasitiyyah

The Commentary

“And from faith:” Min (from) here indicates part of
Because we have mentioned that faith in Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, comprises four things: Believing
in His Existence, and His sole (right of) Lordship, and
Divinity, and believing in His Names and Attributes.
That is, part of believing in Allah is the faith in what He
describes Himself with

“With what He describes Himself in His Book”: It
should also be added: “and what He Names Himself’
But the author, may Allah have mercy upon him, only
mentioned the Attributes, perhaps because there is no
Name except that it contains an Attribute, or because
the disagreement regarding the Names is less serious;
none disproves of it except the extreme among the
Jahmiyyah and the Mu'‘tazilah, The Mu‘tazilah, the
Asha‘riyyah and the Maturidiyyah affirm the Names (of
Allah); but they disagree with the People of the Sunmah
and the Jamda’ah in most of the Attributes.

We now say: Why did the author only mention: “What
Allah describes Himself with”?

We say that this is due to one of two reasons: Either
because each Name contains an Attribute, or, because the
disagreement among those ascribing themselves to Islam
regarding the Names (of Allah) is less serious.

* “In His Book”: His Kitab (Book) meaning the Qur’an
Allah, the Exalted, named it a Book because it is written
in the Preserved Tablet, written in the pages carried by
the noble and dutiful Messengers - the Angels - and it is
also written like that among the people, writing it in the
Mushafs. So it is Kitab with the meaning of “writ,” and

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

4And follow not that of which you have no knowledge
Verily! The hearing, and the sight, and the heart, of each of
those you will be questioned (by Allah)» (Al-Isra’ 17: 36)

If we describe Allah with what He has not described
Himself, we would, by that, be pursuing that of which we
Have no knowledge, and therefore falling into what Allah,
the Exalted, has prohibited

As for the proof based on the intellect; the Attributes of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, are from the matters of the
Unseen, and it is not possible for the human intellect to
perceive the matters of the unseen. Therefore, we should
hot describe Allah, the Exalted, with what He has not
ileteribed Himself, and we should not say “how” His
Aliributes are, because that is not possible.

We cannot, in reality, perceive the enjoyments of Paradise
that Allah has described, despite the fact that they are
Wiiwady created. In Paradise, there are fruits, date-palm
frees, pomegranates, thrones, vessels, and the Hir. We
fannot comprehend the realities of these things. If we are
told: “Describe them to us,” we could not do that, because
of the saying of the Exalted:

4No person knows what is kept hidden for them of joy as a
Yeward for what they used to do. (As-Sajdah 32:17)

And also because of His, Exalted be He, saying in the Qudst
Hadith: “I have prepared for My righteous servants that
Which no eye has seen, what no ear has heard of, and what
fs never crossed the mind of any human being,”’""! If this

1) Reported by Al-Bukhari (3244) and Muslim (2824) from Aba
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

98 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

to anything apart from the textual proofs

Imam Ahmad, may Allah have mercy upon him, said:
“Allah should not be described except in the way He has
described Himself, or as His Messenger has described Him.
The Qur'an and the Hadith should not be exceeded.’"!
This means that we should not describe Allah except with
what He describes Himself in His Book or upon the tongue
of His Messenger (#).

This is proven by the Qur'an and intellect:
In the Quran, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, says:

Say: “(But) the things that my Lord has indeed
forbidden are Al-Fawahish (great evil:sins, every kind of
unlawful sexual intercourse, etc.) whether committed
openly or secretly, sins (of all kinds), unrighteous oppres-
sion, joining partners (in worship) with Allah for which
He has given no authority, and saying things about Allah
of which you have no knowledge’ (Al-A raf 7:33)

If you therefore describe Allah with an attribute that Allah
did not describe Himself with, you would have said about
Allah that which you do not know, and this is unlawful
according to the text of the Qur’an.

Allah, the Mighty and’Sublime, also said:

5
ple ay

]11 See: Majmu’ Al-Fatawa by Shaikh AL-Islam (5:26)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 101

The fourth subject: The obligation of holding the textual
proofs reported in the Book and the Sunnah based on their
Apparentness. We should not exceed that.

flor example: When Allah, describes Himself with having
an Eye, should we say: “What is intended by the eye is
weeing, but not an eye in reality?” If we say that, we have
pot described Him with what He has described Himself.

When Allah described Himself, with two Hands saying:

4Nay, both His Hands are widely outstretched» (Al-
Ma’idah 5 :64)

If we say that Allah does not possess a hand in reality; and
that what is intended by the hand is His favor upon His
slaves, then have we described Him with what He
describes Himself? No!

‘The fifth subject: The generality of the author's statement
overs everything with which Allah describes Himself,
among the Attributes of His Essence in meaning (Al-
Ma'nawiyah) and derived from revealed information (Al
Khabariyah), as well as the Attributes of His doings.

The Attributes of His Essence are those which Allah has
never ceased, nor ever will cease to be described with.
‘These are of two types:

Those of meaning (Al-Ma‘nawiyah), such as life, know]-
edge, power, wisdom and the like, and these are examples,
Hot actually mentioning all.

The informative (Al-Khabariyah) : such as the two Hands,
the Pace, the two Eyes and the like from what He named,
while something of that is used to describe us as well

Allah, the Exalted, has never ceased having two Hands, a

100 Commentary on Al-’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

is the case regarding a creation with attributes whose
meanings are known but whose realities are unknown,
what would then be the case concerning the Creator?

Another example: Man has a soul without which he cannot
live. If the soul is not in his body, he would not exist; yet he
cannot describe this soul. If he is asked: “What is this soul
that is in you? What is that thing, which if removed from
you, you will become dead, and if it remains with you, you
will be able to reason, understand and perceive?” He
would sit, look up, think hard, and will never be able to
describe it, even though it is very close to him, and is
within him. He would not be able to perceive it, in spite of
the fact that it is real - meaning, something seen, as is
mentioned by the Prophet (38): “Whenever the soul is
snatched, the sight follows it")

Man will see his soul while it is being taken away. That is
why the eyes remain open at death, looking at the soul
while it has departed the body. This soul will be snatched,
put in a shroud, and ascended with to Allah. Nevertheless,
he cannot describe it while it is within his own body. How
can he then try to describe the Lord in a way that He has
not described Himself!

The third subject: That we should not describe Allah, the

Exalted, with what He has not described Himself. The

evidence for that is also drawn from the textual proofs and

intellect. We mentioned two Ayahs above from the textual

proofs

As for the intellect, we say: This is an unseen matter, it

cannot be grasped by rational contemplation, and we have

given two examples for that

"Reported by Muslim (920) from Umm Salamah, may Allah
be pleased with her.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 103

descending to the lowest heaven during the last third of the
night.

There are some among these Attributes that can be both
Attributes of His Essence and those of His doing. For
example; Speaking is an attribute of doing on its own, but
from the view of its basis, it is a Dhatiyyah Attribute;
because Allah, the Exalted, never ceased, nor will He ever
ease from (having the Attribute of) Speaking, But He only
Speaks with what He wills when He wills; as shall be
tliscussed under the section regarding “Speaking.”

The scholars, may Allah have mercy upon them, termed
these Attributes: “Attributes of doing” because they are
from Allah’s actions.

There are many proofs for it in the Qur'an, for example:

402 0s ‏الشف‎ abc

4And your Lord comes with the Angels in rows upon
rows» (Al-Fajr 89:22)

Fy Gok jap
4Do they then wait for anything other than that the
Angels should come to them, or that your Lord should
come?» (Al-An‘am 6:158)
4Allah is pleased with them and they with Him} (Al
Ma‘idah 5:119)

4But Allah was averse to their being sent forth, so He
made them lag behind» (At-Tawbah 9:46)

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Face and two Eyes, none of that occurred after not having
them. He was never separate of any of these. As Allah, the
Exalted, has never ceased living nor ever will cease living,
nor ceased being All-powerful nor ever will cease being
All-powerful, and so on. Meaning, that His Life would not
need to be renewed, and His Hearing would not need to be
renewed. Rather, He has always been described with these
and shall ever be described with them. And the renewal of
what is heard does not necessitate the renewal of the
hearing. For example, if I hear the Adhan now, it does not
mean that I have just possessed a new ability to hear at that
particular time, but the hearing ability has been with me
since Allah created it for me. However, what is heard is
renewable and this does not have any effect on the
Attribute (of Hearing).

The scholars, may Allah have mercy upon them, termed
them “Attributes of Essence (Diii)” because, as they say,
they are inseparable from the Self Dhat (of Allah); He is not
separate from them.

The Attributes of doing (Al-Fa'liyyah) are related to Allah's

will. These are of two types:

The Attributes with known causes, such as pleasure;

whenever Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, finds any cause

for being pleased, He, the Exalted, is pleased, as He said
if you disbelieve, then verily, Allah is not in need of
you, He likes not disbelief for His slaves. And if you are
grateful (by being believers), He is pleased therewith for
you} (Az-Zumar 39:7)

s

An example of the Attributes with unknown causes, is

(Commentary On The Introductory Notes. . 105

And among them are those who do not take a position
fegarding it, so they do not affirm when the intellect does
Hot affirm it, but they do not deny it, since the intellect does
Hol negate it. They would therefore say: “We do not take a
position,” because to these people, negativism is the
‏لاعن[ مالا‎ proof. When it is not affirmed (by intellect) he
slops and does not negate it

These people now use the intellect to judge what is
fequired or impossible for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime!
Hased on this, whichever attribute the intellect judges that
Allah should be described with, they describe Allah with it,
Wen if it is not in the Book and the Sunnah; whatever the
feanoning justifies its negation for Allah, they negate it even
Hf it is in the Book and the Sunnah,

Therefore, they say, that Allah does not have eyes, a face
or a hand. He does not ascend over the Throne, nor does
Tle descend to the lowest heaven. They resort to distortion
(Tahrif) and refer to their distortion as interpretation
(Twwil). Had they outright rejected the Attributes, they
gould have become disbelievers because they would have
belied (the Qur'an). But they reject them in a manner they
toler to as interpretation (Ta’zvil); which is a distortion to us.

Ih summary, there is no room for intellect in the matters
fegarding Allah’s Names and Attributes.

[fit is said: “What you say contradicts the Qur’an because
Allah said:

0

48S ‏ألو‎ & Sot >
And who is better in judgment than Allah for a people
who have firm Faith?! >» (Al-Ma‘idah 5:50)

‘To choose (in preference) between two things is based upon
fational contemplation.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

4For that (reason) Allah's Wrath fell upon them and in
torment they will abide» (Al-Ma’idah 5 :80)

Affirming these qualities for Allah, the Exalted, does not in
any way indicate imperfection, rather it is from His
Perfection, that He, the Exalted, does whatever He wills.
Those who distort (the meanings of Allah’s Attributes) say
that affirming these Attributes indicates some imperfection;
hence they deny all the Attributes of doing. They say: He
does not come; He is not pleased, He is not angry, He does
not detest, He does not love... They deny all of these,
claiming that these actions are newly occurring events, and
a new event is not established except by a new event. This
is baseless because it opposes the texts, and it is also
baseless in itself, because a newly occurring action does not
necessitate a new doer.

The sixth subject: There is no room for intellect in matters
concerning Names and Attributes; because the revealed
texts are the basis for either affirming or rejecting Names
and Attributes. Our intellect can never make a judgment
about Allah. The basis is therefore the revealed texts, in
contrast to the A. ryyah, the Mu’tazilah, the Jahmiyyah
and others of the people of Ta’ti who use intellect as the
basis for affirming or negating the Attributes. They say
Whatever the intellect judges to be affirmed, we affirm it,
whether Allah affirms it for Himself or not!

And whatever it judges to be negated, we negate it, even if
Allah affirms it! And whatever the intellect does not judge
to be affirmed, nor to be negated; then most of them negate
it, and say: “Positivism is the intellect’s proof,” so if the
attribute is affirmed (by the intellect), we affirm it, and if it
is not affirmed, then we negate it.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 107

4ls then He, Who creates as one who creates not? Will
you not then remember?» (An-Nahl 16:17)

GEE ‏لا لعُونَ‎ af os ‏نَ من‎ J za.
4¢Those whom they invoke besides Allah have not created
anything> (An-Nahl 16:20)

{ean grasp this. It can also understand that Allah, Glorious
and Exalted is He, is not to be described as existent after
nothingness, such would be a form of imperfection, as
Allah said, ‘the Exalted, while remonstrating the idol
worshippers:

Those whom they invoke besides Allah have not created
anything, but are themselves created» (An-Nahtl 16:20)

Then, based upon intellect, it is impossible the Creator
could ever be newly existent.

The intellect can also grasp the fact that it is not possible to
deseribe Allah with any description that is deficient,
because the Lord must be perfect. So it can grasp the fact
that He is free from being incapable, because this is an
attribute of imperfection; for if the Lord was powerless, and
disobeyed, and He wants to punish the one who
disobeyed, and He is incapable, then He can not do it!

Therefore, intellect can grasp the fact that incapability
could not possibly be attributed to Allah. And blindness is
like that as well, and deafness is like that, and so too is
ignorance. These are general matters, we can grasp that
But as for the details, we are not able to grasp that. So we
must stick to the revealed texts.

A question: Is everything that is perfection in our cas
perfection in the case of Allah? And is everything that is

106 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, also said

4And for Allah is the highest description (An-Nahl 16:60)

He, the Mighty and Sublime, also said:

45f2E SG BEY ‏كن‎ SE i>
4Is then He, Who creates as one who creates not? Will
you not then remember?> (An-Nahl 16:17)

And other Verses (Ayaf), where Allah refers to the intellect,
concerning what He either affirms or negates for Himself,
while rebutting the false deities?”

We would reply by saying: The intellect can grasp what it
is required to describe Allah with, Glorious and Exalted is
He, and what He should not be described with, generally
speaking but not specifically speaking. For example,
intellect can understand that the Lord must possess perfect
attributes. However, this does not mean that intellect can
establish every attribute precisely or negate it precisely. It
can only establish or negate generally that He possesses
perfect Attributes and that He is free from imperfections.

For example, intellect can grasp the fact that Allah is All-
Hearing and All-Seeing, Ibrahim, said to his father:

en VOSS ed

4°O my father, why do you worship that which does
not hear and does not see and will not benefit you at
all?’> (Maryam 19:42)

And, that He is definitely the Creator, as Allah said:

432 ‏لا‎ oS Be

Cammentary On The Introductory Notes 109

tf the creation is imperfect with respect to the Creator;
Iwenuse perfection and imperfection are relative.

These are the six subjects under the heading: “What He
escribes Himself with.” All of them are important
Hibjects, and we mentioned them prior to other matters
‏إلا‎ “Agidah because we will build upon them with what
follows if Allah, the Exalted, wills.

® “And with what His Messenger describes Him: The
Messenger’s (38) description of his Lord is divided into
three. categories: By saying, by action, and by tacit
approval.

1 As for sayings, there are many, for example: “Our
Lord! Allah Who is above the heavens! Hallowed be
Your Name, Your order permeates the heavens and the
earth.” And also his (3%) statement while swearing:
“No, by the One who turns the hearts,”!")

2%. As for actions, they are fewer than sayings, for example
his pointing to the heavens, making Allah a witness to
his Companions’ acknowledgment of having conveyed
the Message, and this happened during the Farewell
Pilgrimage at ‘Arafah. He (3) addressed the people,
and asked: “Have I conveyed the Message? They
replied: ‘Yes’ three times, and he (#&) said: “O Allah,
bear witness’! while raising his hand to the
heavens, and pointing to the people. This is a
description of Allah, the Exalted, with transcendence
(Al-Uln) by action.

A man came while he

was delivering a sermon on

The Hadith will be mentioned in its entirety in the beginning
of the second volume - Allah willing.

Reported by Muslim (1218) from Jabir bin ‘Abdullah, may
Allah be pleased with him.

mn

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyal

imperfect in our case, imperfect in the case of Allah?

The answer is no. Because analysis of perfection and defect
is not contingent upon what is attributed to humans, due to
the clear difference between the Creator and creation. But it
is contingent upon the description itself; any description of
perfection is affirmed for Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He.

So eating and drinking in the case of the Creator is a defect,
because its cause is a need, and Allah the Exalted is free of
any need from other than Him. But it is a form of perfection
with in the case of the created. And due to this, if a person
is not eating, then there is no doubt he must be ill or
something like that; and this is a defect

And sleep is a defect in the case of the Creator, but for the
created it is a form of perfection; and the difference
becomes clear.

Pride is a form of perfection for the Creator and a defect for
the created. Because the majesty and greatness cannot be
complete except with pride, so that there can be a complete
authority in which none could compete with Him. That is
why Allah, the Exalted, threatens the one who competes
with Him in pride and greatness. He, the Mighty and
Sublime, said: “Whoever competes with me in either of the
two, I will punish him.”"!

What is important, is that not everything that is perfect
with respect to creation is perfect with respect to the
Creator, and not everything that is imperfect with respect

11 Based on the report of Muslim (2620) from Aba Said al

Khudri and Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with them
both, who both said: “Glory is His lear and Pride is His Rida’;
‘So whoever contends with me, I will punish him.’” Imam
Ahmad (2:414) has reported similarly from Aba Hurairah,
may Allah be pleased with him.

Pemmentary On The Introductory Notes 111

١ ‏اعتزبن‎ whom he (#) asked: “Where is Allah?” She
iwered: “Above the heavens.” He approved of what she
said, and said: “Free her." And, like his tacit approval of
ihe saying of the rabbi, who came and said to him (3%): “We
fame across (in our Book) that Allah places the heavens on
4 Winger, the earth on a Finger and the soil on a Finger...”
Wntil the end of the Hadith. The Prophet (#8) smiled in
Wilirmation of what he said;! and this is a tacit approval

If someone asks: “What is the basis of it being obligatory to
Have faith in what the Messenger (#8) described his Lord
With, or what is its evidence?”

We would answer by saying; Its evidence is in the saying of
Allah, the Exalted: :
(Go Be ‏وا[‎ sys
40 you who believe! Believe in Allah, and His
Messenger, and the Book which He has sent down to
His Messenger, and the Scripture which He sent down
to those before (him)» (An-Nisa’ 4:136)

And every Ayah wherein it is mentioned that the
Messenger (3%) is a conveyor; it is evidence that it is
Obligatory to accept whatever he informed of regarding
Allah’s Attributes, since he (#%) informed of them and
fonveyed them to the people, and all what he informed of
is conveyed from Allah. And because the Messenger (2%) is
the most knowledgeable of all people concerning Allah; the
1M ‘The story of the slave-girl was reported by Muslim (537) in
the Hadith of Mu’awiyah bin Al-Hakam As-Sulami, may
Allah be pleased with him.

Reported by Al-Bukhari (4811), Muslim (2786) (19) from
“Abdullah bin Mas’ad, may Allah be pleased with him.

Ry

Commentary on Ai-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Friday, and said: “O the Messenger of Allah, property has
perished...” and he raised his hands"! (to supplicate). This
is also a description of Allah with transcendence by action;
and others like that from the Hadiths of the Messenger
wherein he mentioned some of Allah's Attributes.

The Messenger (3) would sometimes mention one of
Allah's Attributes and corroborate it with his action. That
happened when he recited the Ayah:

€Truly, Allah is Ever All-Hearer, All-Seer> (An-Nisa’
4:58)

He then placed his thumb on his right ear and the index
finger on his eye.) This is an affirmation of seeing and
hearing with statement and action. We, therefore, say that
the Messenger’s (38) affirmation of Allah’s Attributes can
be by saying or by action - either collectively, or separately.

As for tacit approval, such cases are fewer than those
previously mentioned. For example; his tacit approval to a

1 Reported by ALBukhari (1013), (1014) and Muslim (897)
from Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him.

1 AL-Hafiz said in Al-Fath (13:373): Reported by Aba Dawid
with a strong chain according to the criteria of Muslim, from
the narration of Aba Yunus, from Aba Hurairah, may Allah
be pleased with him: ‘I saw the Messenger (3) recite it - that
is, His saying - “Verily, Allah commands that you should
render back the trusts to those to whom they due up to His
saying - Truly, Allah is Ever All-Hearer, All-Seer. - And he
placed his two fingers."” Aba Yanus said: “Aba Hurairah,
may Allah be pleased with him, placed his thumb on his ear
and the one that follows it (the index finger) on his eye.”
And the Hadith was graded Sahih by Al-Albant in Sahih Abi
Dawid (4738).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 113

As for Tarif (distortion), it means to change, and can be by
expression or by meaning. The preponderance is that Tahrif
tloes not occur by expression. But when it does occur, it
only occurs from an ignorant person. Tahirif by expression,
Means changing the pronunciation, for example, you will
fever hear somebody reciting “Al-Hamda lillahi rabbil-
Alamin” with a Fath on the Dal, except one who is an
gnorant person. This is what is common (of distortions by
expression)

But Tabrif in meaning is the one that occurs the most
among the people. But the faith of the People of Sunnah and
the Jama‘ah in what Allah describes Himself with, is free
from Tahrif - that is from changing the expression or the
meaning.

Those who change the meaning, they call it “Ta’wil
(interpretation)” and refer to themselves as people of
Ta'wil, so that such speech has an acceptable appearance,
and such Ta’wil will not cause the souls to flee from it nor
Object to it. However, in reality what they do is Tahrif. This
is because there is no sound evidence for it, but they are not
Able to say: “Out of Tahrif’ and if they were to say: “This is
Tahrif’ then they themselves would have denied their
Statements. As such, the author, may Allah have merc

upon him, used the word Tahrif instead of Ta’wil, even
though many others who discuss this matter usually
condemn Ta‘wil, saying: “Without Ta'wil.” But the word
used by the author is most preferable, for four reasons:

Firstly, this is the word used in the Qur’an, as Allah, the
ixalted, said:

Krol ‏عَن‎ SAI S52

4Here are some who displace words (Yuharrifian) from
(their) right places.» (An-Nisa’ 4:46)

112 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

most sincere of all people in advising Allah’s servants, the
most truthful of all people regarding what he says, and the
most eloquent of all people in his expressions. As such, he
embodies four qualities that necessitate the acceptance:
Knowledge, sincere advice, truthfulness and eloquence. It
is, therefore, obligatory that we accept everything that he
informed of from his Lord. He (38) is - by Allah - mor:
eloquent, more sincere in advice, and more knowledgeable
than the rationalists and the philosophers whom the people
follow. In spite of this, he would still say: “Glory be to You
I can not enumerate Your praise, You are as You extol

nll
Yourself.”

Without Tahrif (distortion), nor Ta’fil (denial), nor
Takyif (saying how), nor Tam#hil (likening).

-$oo—

@ Concerning his saying: “Without Tahrif (distortion), nor
Ta'til (denial), nor Takyif (saying how), nor Tamthil

(likening).

The Commentary

> This phrase contains a description of the faith of the
People of the Sunnah, regarding the Attributes of Allah
the Exalted. The People of the Sunnah believe in them
with a faith devoid of these four: Tahrif (distortion), Ta’ til
(denial), Takyif (saying how) and Tamthil (likening)

Reported by Muslim (486) from ‘Aishah, may Allah be
pleased with her

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

knowledge of Ta’wil.
Ta’wil is not therefore totally condemnable because it has a
number of meanings, it can mean Tafsir, and it can mean
the end result and destination, and it can mean changing an
expression from what is obvious.
1, So it can mean Tafsir, such as when many scholars of
Tafsir (Qur’anic exegesis) say, when they explain an
: “The Ta’wil of Allah’s statement is such-and-
Then, they would mention the meaning. Here,
Tafsir is referred to as “Ta’wil.” This is because they
interpret the statement; that is to give an interpretation
to the meaning intended by it.
As for Ta’wil with the meaning of a thing’s outcome,
this occurs when it is used in an assertive statement. Its
outcome will therefore be either doing it, if it is a
command, or abandoning it, if it is a prohibition. But if
it is used in an informative; its Ta’wil will mean its
occurrence.

An example of an informative statement is, the saying of
Allah, the Exalted:

al aide ares

Al 1 eb oe ‏قد‎

Await they just for the final fulfillment of the event?
On the Day the event is finally fulfilled (i.e. the Day of
Resurrection), those who neglected it before will say
Verily, the Messengers of our Lord did come with the
truth’ (ALA ‘raf 7:53)

Meaning, these people do not await anything except the
end result and the destination of what they were informed,
the Day in which that which they were informed of comes
Then, those who have forgotten it will say: “Indeed the

114 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The expression used in the Qur'an is more worthy than
others, because it best expresses the meaning.

Secondly, it best expresses the situation, and is much closer
to justice, because it will not be just to refer to the one who
interprets without any proof as somebody who engages in
Ta'wil. We should rather describe him with what befits
him; and that is he is a Muharrif (someone who distorts)

Thirdly, interpretation without any proof is false; it is
obligatory to stay far from it, and keep people away from
it. And using the term Tahrif, rather than Ta’wil, sounds
more detestable, because no one will accept Tahrif, while
Ta’wil appears light, the soul can bear it, and its actual
meaning will therefore wither away. But as for 10/1717, our
mere mentioning it scares away people from it. So using
Tahrif regarding those who oppose the path of the Salaf
(pious predecessors) is more befitting than using the term
Ta’wit.

Fourthly, Ta’wil is not absolutely condemnable. The
Prophet (#) said: “O Allah, grant him the understanding
of the religion, and provide him the knowledge of Ta
(interpretation).""!

Allah, the Exalted, also says:

But none knows its Ta’wil (hidden meanings) save
Allah. And those who are firmly grounded in
knowledge} (Al ‘Imran 3:7)

Allah, the Exalted, commends them for possessing the

‘| Reported by Ahmad in Al-Musnad (2396) and Al-Fasawi in
Al-Ma’rifah wat-Tarikh (1:494) and Ahmad Shakir graded it
Sahih. Al-Bukhari reported it (75 and 143), with the wording;
“© Allah, teach him the Book.”

Panimentary On The Introductory Notes... 117

it is from the category of Tahrif (distortion) and
therefore not from the category of Ta’wil. This second
one is the category of the people of Tahrif regarding the
Attributes of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

or example, Allah, the Exalted, said
deel ‏المرش‎ & >

The Most Beneficent (Allah) Istawa (rose over) the
Throne» (Ta Ha 20:5)

What is obvious in the expression, is that Allah, the
Pixalted, is ascended over the Throne: settled above it and
@xAlted above it. If anybody now says that the meaning of
110107 is He, the Exalted, took over (Istawla) the Throne, we
Will say: “This is your own interpretation, because you
lave changed the expression from what is obvious for it,”
father this is in reality a distortion, because there is no
evidence to prove it; the proof is rather against it, as it shall
be explained - if Allah wills.

As for His, the Exalted, saying:

55 ‏فلا‎ al ‏«أن أثر‎
The event, ordained by Allah will come to pass, so
Seek niot to hasten it> (An-Nahl 16:1)

The meaning of — ¢the event, ordained by Allah» is Allah's
Command shall soon come to pass. This differs from
What is obvious in the expression, but there is evidence
for it, and it is His saying: €So seek not to hasten it.>

In the same manner, is His, the Exalted, saying:

450 when you recite the Qur'an, seek refuge with Allah
from the Shait@n (Satan), the outcast (the cursed one)>

116 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Messengers of our Lord came with the truth.

Another example of it is when Yasuf's parents and brothers
fell in prostration for him, he said:

455 ‏ين‎ SO LE ey

This is the interpretation of my dream aforetime!>
(Yiisuf 12:10)

Meaning - this is the result of my dream, because he said so
after they had prostrated

An example in an assertive statement, is the statement of
‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her: “The Prophet (38)
would often say the following, during bowing and
prostration, after Allah, the Exalted, had revealed to him
the statement:

<When comes the Help of Allah and the conquest (of
Makkah) (An-Nasr 110:1)

(Hewould say)‘O Allah, Glory ‏ماعط‎ You, 0 Allah forgiveme”
out of Ta’wil of the Qur’an.’””")_- meaning, acting upon it.?

3. The third meaning of Ta’wil is changing the expression
from what is obvious. This category is divided into
both what is praiseworthy and what is condemnable; if
evidence proves it, then it is praiseworthy, and it is
from the first category, the category of Tafsir. But if the
evidence does not prove it, then it is condemnable, and

Reported by Al-Bukhari (4967 and 4968), and Muslim (484)
from ‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her.

(Translation note): That is, because what follows that later is
“So glorify your Lord and seek forgiveness.” So he (3#)
obeyed that by doing it during the prayer.

Cominentary On The Introductory Notes.. 119

unlike Ta’wil - some forms of which are acceptable while

some are condemnable. Therefore, calling this (condemn-

able practice) Tahrif is better than calling it Ta’wil for four

reasons.

“Nor Ta’til (denial):” Ta’til literally means “to desert
and forsake” as is in the Word of Allah:

4 abe :
and (many) a deserted well> (Al-Hajj 22:45)
Meaning, forsaken and abandoned

What is intended by Ta’til, is to reject - wholly or partly -
the Names and Attributes that Allah affirms for Himself,
whether in the form of Tahrif (distortion) or Juluid (outright
denial), all of this is called Ta’til. The People of the Sunnah
and the Jama‘ah do not reject any of Allah’s Names or
Attributes; nor do they deny them, rather they completely
approve of them.

If you ask, “What is the difference between Ta’til and
Tahrif?’” We would say: Tahrif occurs with evidences and
Ta'til occurs with what is proven by the evidence. For
example, if somebody says, regarding Allah’s saying:

4Nay both His Hands are extended» (Al-Ma’idah 5 :64)

— that it refers to is His might, then he has distorted the
evidence and denied the correct meaning, because the
intent is the Hand in reality. He has thus denied the
intended meaning, and affirmed a meaning other than
what is intended. If he says: “Nay both His Hands are
extended’ - ‘I don’t know! I surrender the matter with
Allah. | neither affirm the Hand in reality, nor a hand
whose expression is distorted.” We would say: This is a
denier, not a distorter, because he neither changes the

118 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

(An-Nahl 16:98)

Meaning - whenever you want to recite the Qur'an. It does
not mean when you have finished reciting the Qur'an, say
“1 seek refuge in Allah from the accursed Shaitan.” Since,
we have learned in the Sunnah, that whenever the Prophet
(#8) wanted to recite, he would seek refuge in Allah from
the accursed Shaitan,"! not after having completed the
recitation. This Ta’wil is, therefore, correct.

Also, in the report of Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased
with him; “Whenever the Prophet (4) entered the area in
which he would relieve himself, he would say: ‘I seek
refuge in Allah from Al-Khubuthi wal-Khaba’ith.””?! The
meaning of “when he entered’ is when he wanted to enter,
because it is not proper to utter remembrance of Allah
inside such a place. As such, we interpret: “when he
entered” - to mean, when he wanted to enter. This kind of
interpretation is supported with a sound evidence, and it
will be considered a kind of Tafsir.

For this reason, we say that referring to a kind of Ta’wil that
is not based on a sound proof as Tahrif is best, because this
is found in the Qur'an, and it best befits the way of the
Muharrif. Besides, it is better in repulsing others from this
path which opposes the path of the Salaf (pious predeces-
sors), and because every form of Tahrif is condemnable,

‘I Based on the report of Ibn Abi Shaibah and Al-Baihaqt in his

Sunan, as mentioned in Ad-Durr Al-Manthir, from Jubair bin
Mut‘im: “When the Prophet commenced Salaah He
pronounced the Takbir (saying Allahu Akbar) and then said; ‘I
seek refuge in Allah from Shaitan the accursed.”

Reported by Al-Bukhari (142) and Muslim (375), from Anas,
may Allah be pleased with him. (Translation note)
“Khubuthi wal-Khaba'ith’ Meaning, the male and female
filthy things, or the male and female devils.

Penmentary On The Introductory Notes..

Thi, it should also be known that Tafwid — as said by
Miki Al-Islam Yon Taymiyyah") — is among the worst

Potions of the people of innovation and heresy

Whenever one hears about Tafwid, he says: “This is good,
Wailer than this one and that one. I will neither follow the
Poultion of the Salaf, nor the position of the people of Ta’wil.
1 Will rather follow the moderate path, which is safer than
ither of them. 1 would rather say: ‘Allah knows best. I
Woivt know their meanings.” But Shaikh Al-Islam said:
MYhis is among the worst positions of the people of
iievation and heresy.”

And he, may Allah have mercy upon him, has indeed
spoken the truth. If you take note, you will discover that it
holies the Quran, and ascribes ignorance to the Messenger
(#), and provides support for the philosophers

Tt belies the Qur'an, because Allah, the Exalted, says:

And We have sent down to you the Book as an
exposition of everything> (An-Nahl 16: 89)

What exposition is in words whose meanings can not be
Known? Whereas the Names and Attributes are the topic
Most often referred to in the Qur’an, and the most often
Mentioned in the Qur‘an. If it is such that we could not
Know their meanings, can the Qur’an then be an exposition
of everything? Where is the exposition?

These people are saying that the Messenger did not
know the meanings in the Quran that relate to Allah’s
Names and Attributes. If the Messenger (#8) did not know,
it is more obvious that others could not know.

Mn Dar’ Ta‘trud Al-‘Aq! wan-Naql by Shaikh Al-Islam Ton
Taymiyyah (1:121).

120 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyalt

meaning of the expression, nor interprets it in a way that
opposes the intent, rather, he denied the intended meaning,
which is affirming the Hand for Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.

The People of the Sunnah and the Jamda‘ah are innocent of
two paths:

The First Path: The path of those who distort the
expression, by denying the meaning of the reality intended
(distorting it) to a meaning that was not intended.

The second path, and it is the path of the people of Tafwid.

So they (the People of the Sunnah) do not commit Tafwidh
like this person, they rather say: “We say €Nay both His
Hands» meaning: His two Hands, in reality; are
extended}, and they are neither might nor favor.”

The creed of the People of the Sunnah and the Jamd‘ah is free
from both Tahrif and Ta‘til. With this we know the
misguidance or lies of those who say that the path of the
Salaf is Tafwid. Those (who say so) will be considered
misguided if they are ignorant of the path of the Salaf, and
they will be considered liars if they do so deliberately. We
can also consider all of them liars if they do so for either of
the two reasons (earlier mentioned) according to the usage
of the people of the Hijaz'") because “lie” to them can also
be used to mean “mistake.”

In any case, there is no doubt that those who say that the
Madhhab of the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah is
Tafwid are wrong, because the Madhhab of the People of the
Sunnah is to affirm the meanings and surrender the
knowledge regarding its how to Allah, the Exalted.

1 (Translation note): Hijaz refers to Makkah, Al-Madinah and

surrounding areas of their regions.
8

1 ‏/ورهام لل‎ On The Introductory Notes 123

What Allah intends, it is possible that what you say is what
Allah intends.” So they open the door to tremendous evils.
And it was based upon this that the false statement came
Hhout: “The path of the Salaf (the pious predecessors) is
saler, while the path of Khalaf (the later generations) is more
Wiewledge based and wiser.”!

Mik Al-Islam, may Allah have mercy upon him, said:
"Home ignoramuses have said this.’ It is correct; whoever
Mays this, he is an ignoramus.

‘This statement is one of the falsest in utterance and intent;
‏عرلا"‎ path of Salaf is safer while the path of the Khalaf is
more knowledge based and wiser.” How is it more
Knowledge based, wiser, and this one is safer? No safety
at be attained without knowledge and wisdom. The one
Who does not know the way, he can not be safe, because he
Woes not have knowledge. If he had knowledge and
Wisdom, he would be safe. There is no safety except with
howledge and wisdom. If you say: “The path of the Salaf
I Safer,” it is biding that you should say it is also more
knowledge based and wiser, or else you will be contra-
dieting yourself.
Therefore, the correct expression will be: “The path of the
Salaf (pious predecessors) is safer, more knowledge based,
wnd wiser. This is well known. The path of the Khalaf is as
was said:'"!

Upon my life, | have toured all the places

And walked myself in all these abodes

1 never saw except him who placed his hand, confused

™ ‘These two poems were mentioned by ‘Abdul-Karim Ash-
Shahrastani in his book Nihdyat Al-Iqdam fi ‘In Al-Kalam,
and it is not clear who said it. See As-Sawia‘ig by Ibn Al-
Qayyim (1:16).

Commentary on Al’

Stranger still than this, is their saying: “The Messenger (#2)
spoke with speech, regarding Allah's Attributes, but he did
not know their meanings.” He (#8) said: “Our Lord is Allah
who is above the heavens.) But, were he to be asked
about this, he would say: “I do not know!” And like his
statement: “Our Lord descends to the lowest heaven.” If
he was asked, “What is the meaning of, ‘Our Lord
descends, he would reply: ‘I do not know.” And the
same would be applied to other cases.

Is there any defamation worse than this defamation of the
Messenger (zt)? Rather, this is the worst of defamations
Would a Messenger be sent by Allah to clarify for the
people, yet he does not know the meaning of the Ayat
about the Attributes, and the Hadiths regarding them, and
at the same time, he speaks with speech, and does not
know the meaning of any of that!

So these are two routes; belying the Qur'an, and ascribing,
ignorance to the Messenger (38).

And in this, is an opening of the door for the heretics in
their attacks against the people of Tafwid. They say: “You
do not know anything; we are the ones who know.” They
then, begin explaining the Qur’an in ways other than what
Allah intended. They say: “Our affirmation of meanings to
the texts, is better than us being illiterate, not knowing
anything.” They then discussed the statements and
Attributes of Allah the way they like!! The people of Tafwid
cannot refute them because they claim: “We don’t know

"I ‘The Hadith follows in its entirety at the beginning of the
second volume - Allah willing.

"1 The Hadith follows in its entirety at the beginning of the
second volume; and it is in Al-Bukhari (7494) and Muslim
(758) from the Hadith of Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased
with him.

foemmentary On The Introductory Notes...

And
atk 4 Ge ‏ولا‎

4And they will never compass anything of His
Knowledge» (Ta Ha 20:110)

Whivever did as I have done, he will realize what I have
fwalized.”

‘To these we say: Is your way more knowledge based and
Wiker? He who says: “I w 1 die on the belief of the
decrepit of, Naysabur’"! whereas, the decrepit were
Wing the common people, he wishes to return to the
ijnoramuses! Would it be said that he is more knowledge-
ble and wiser? Where is the knowledge they possess?

[| becomes clear that the path of Taftvid is a. mistaken path,
Weenuse it comprises three evils: Belying the Qur’an,
Wietiption of ignorance to the Messenger (3%), and
aking way for the philosophers. Those who say the
position of the Salaf is that of Tafwid have lied against the
Sulaf, They (the Salaf) rather affirmed the expression and the
Meaning. They also accepted it, and they explained it with
ihe best explanation. The People of the Sunnah and the
Jiid'ah neither distort nor deny (Allah’s Attributes). They
Hay, according to the meanings of the texts, as intended by
Allah:

4He rose over the Throne> (Al-A‘raf7 :54)
Meaning - rose above it; its meaning is not: “He conquered
i” And with His Hand, meaning - Hand, in reality, not
Might or favor. So there is no distortion nor denial with

I it was said by Aba Al-Ma‘ali Al-Juwaini, see As-Sawa‘ig by

Ibn Al-Qayyim (1:167).

124 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Upon his chin,
Or him who was gnashing
The teeth in regret

This is the path, upon which he says he did not find anyone
except that he put the hand of confusion on his chin, Such a
person does not have knowledge, and the other one;
gnashing his teeth in regret.
Ar-Razi, who was one of their elders, said:!"!

The end of the prowess of intellects is shackles

And most of the realms hasten to misguidance

Our souls are in loneliness from our bodies
The end of our life is danger and trial
We never benefited from our research all our life
Except that we gathered in it, he said, and they said.

He later said: “I have pondered the path of Kalam, and the
methods of the philosophers; 1 do not find them curing the
ailment nor satiating the thirst. 1 found the path of the
Qur'an to be the closest path. I read regarding the
affirmation (of Allah’s Attributes):

4The Most Gracious rose over the Throne» (Ta Ha 20:5)
€To Him ascend the goodly words} (Fatir 35:10)
And read, regarding the negation:
4s MS old
<There is nothing like unto Him} (Ash-Shiira 42:11)

These lines of Al-Fakhr Ar-Razi were mentioned in his book
Agsiim Al-Ladhat; see As-Sawa’iq by Tbn Al-Qayyim )1:167(

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 127

fi when a man comes and says: “Allah rose above the
Vivone in this manner” and he describes the manner in a
articular way, we say: “This person has spoken about
Allah regarding that whose knowledge he does not
peiens. Did Allah, the Exalted, inform you that He rises
‏لا‎ that manner? No! Allah informed us that He rose, He did
Hwt inform us how He rose.” So we say: This is Tayif and
#peaking about Allah without knowledge. That is why one
Of the Salaf said: “If a Jahmi says to you: ‘Allah descends to
the heaven, how does He descend?’ Reply to him with:
‘Allah (only) informed us of His descent, He did not inform
‏الا‎ how He descends,” This is a very beneficial principle.

Afiother textual evidence is the saying of Allah, the
Hxalted:

So ‏أن عَنْهُ‎
And follow not that of which you have no knowledge.
Verily! The hearing, and the sight and the heart, of each
Of those you will be questioned> (Al-Isra’ 17:36)

1 not follow that of which you have no knowledge;

4Verily! The hearing, and the sight and the heart, of
tach of those you will be questioned>

As for rational evidence: The how of a thing cannot be
known except through one of these matters — witnessing it
Of witnessing its like, or information from a truthful source
About it. Meaning whether you witnessed it yourself, and
you are familiar with how it is, or you have seen its like
Bich as in the case when someone says: “So-and-so bought
١١ Datsun Car, Model 88, year 2000, you are familiar with

126 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Was

them.

“Without Takyif (saying how):” Takyif is not men-
tioned in the Book and the Sunnah, but what is
mentioned is what proves its prohibition.

Takyff is that you mention how the Attribute is. And Takyif

is that it be asked: “How?” If 1 say: “How did Zaid come?”

And you replied: “(He came) riding.” You have described

the manner of his coming. “How is the color of the car?’

“White.” You have mentioned the color.

The People of the Sunnah and the Jamda‘ah do not engage in

saying how Allah’s Attributes are, due to revealed

evidences and rational evidences:

As for the revealed evidences; an example is the statement
of the Exalted:

4Say: “The things that my Lord has indeed forbidden
are Al-Fawahish (great evil sins, every kind of unlawful
sexual intercourse, etc.) whether committed openly or
secretly, sins, unrighteous oppression, joining partners
with Allah for which He has given no authority, and
saying things about Allah of which you have no
knowledge> (Al-A’raf 7:33)

The testimony is in His saying:
4635 ‏ما ل‎ AN | IGE ST
And saying things about Allah of which you have no
knowledge

056 ‏ورهاة‎ On The Introductory Notes 129

Wiformed about it, it therefore becomes obligatory to trust
[| (and he said) “asking about it is innovation.’
Phquiring about the how of it is innovation, because those
Wl were more inquisitive never asked of such; they are
the Companions - may Allah be pleased with them. When
Allah said

4Then He rose over the Throne.> (Al-A‘raf 7:54)
Tey were aware of the magnificence of Allah, the Mighty
wid Sublime, and the meaning, of rising over the Throne,
wil that it was not possible to be asked: “How did He
Wie?” Since you can never comprehend that; if we are
feked (regarding that) we reply: “This question is an
Innovation.”

Te tesponse of Malik, may Allah have mercy upon him, is
W Wale for all of the Attributes. If somebody asks you for
Pimple: “Allah descends to the lowest heaven, how does
He descend?” “Descent is not unknown; the manner is
beyond intellect, believing it is obligatory, while enquiring
Wbeut it is innovation.” As for those who ask: “How is the

1 Reported by Al-Lalaka’i in Sharl: As-Sunnah (664), and AL
Baihaqi in Al-Asma’ was-Sifat (867). In Al-Fath (13:407) Al-
Hafiz said: “Its chain is Jayyid (good).” And it was reported
by Ad-Darimi in Ar-Rad ‘alal-Jahamiyyah (104), and Ibn
"Abdul-Bar in At-Tamhid (7:151). After the saying of Malik,
Shaikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah said: “And this reply is
Confirmed from Rabi‘ah the Shaikh of Malik, and this reply
has been related from Umm Salamah, may Allah be pleased
with her, in wqiif and Marfii’ form, but its chain is not
wuch that is depended upon, And like this, there are others
Whose sayings are in agreement with that of Malik.”
Al-Fatiwa (5:365)

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah AL-Wasitiyyal

how it is, because you have one like it, or (you are familiar
with it) through the report of a trustworthy person. Such a
when a trustworthy man comes to you and says: “So-and
so’s car is like this and that,” and describes it completely,
now you know how it is.

That is why some scholars also gave a subtle reply, saying
The meaning of our statement “without Takyif’ does not
mean that we do not believe it has not how, rather we
believe it has a how, but the negation is of us knowing its
how. This is because Allah’s rising above the Throne
without doubt, has a how, but it is not known. His descent
to the lowest heaven has a how, but it is not known,
because there is nothing existing except that it has a how
but it can either be known, or it could be unknown.

Imam Malik, may Allah have mercy upon him, was asked
regarding Allah’s saying:

sch GN ‏عَلَ‎ eAtp

Most Gracious rose over the Throne> (Ta Ha

“How did He rise?” Malik, may Allah have mercy upon
him, bowed his head until it became soaked up with sweat
Then, he raised his head, and said: “The rising is not
unknown’ meaning regarding its known meaning, because
the Arabic Language is well known to us. Every place
where the word “rise” is used with the preposition
“above”, its meaning is “rise over.” He, may Allah have
mercy upon him, said; “The rising is not unknown, but the
how is beyond intellect” Because the intellect cannot grasp
the how. So when the evidences - revealed and rational -
negate how, then it is obligatory to refrain from it

“Believing it is obligatory” — because Allah Himself

PohimMentary On The Introductory Notes... 131

Wbout, then say just as Imam Malik, may Allah have mercy
Hpon him, said, for there is a precedent for you in that -
Wiking about this is an innovation. Once you say this, such
# Person will never insist on asking you. If he insists, tell
Wi “O you innovator, asking about this is an innovation.
Ask About rulings that you are responsible for. As for your
#king about something related to the Lord, the Mighty
‘Wil Sublime, and His Names and His Attributes, while the
‘Homipanions never asked about it; then we will never

Wevept this from you!”

There are statements reported from the Salaf proving that
| linderstood the meanings of the Attributes of Allah
He revealed to His Messenger (3), as is reported
Al-Awza‘i and others. It was reported from them
Wding the Ayat and Hadiths about Allah’s Attributes:

k to them as they came, without how.”!"!
Proves that they affirmed meanings, from two angles:
lly: They said: “Stick to them as they came”; and it is
1 that they are expressions that came with meanings,
did not come out of folly. Therefore, if we stick to

‘Thwin as they came, this necessitates that we affirm that
‘they have meanings.

‘Weeondly: Their statement: “without hows" because negat-
Wiig how proves the existence of a basis for the meaning,
‘Teeauise there will not be a negation of the how of a thing
‘Wore it mere nonsense and folly. Therefore, this popular
#iying from the Salaf proves that they affirmed meanings
for these texts.

® “Nor Tamthil (likening):” Meaning without Tamthil.
The People of the Sunnah are innocent of likening
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, to any of His creation,

1) Reported by Al-Lalaka’t in Shark As-Sunnah (875),

130 Commentary on Al-Agidal: Al-Wasitiyyah

descent possible while the one third of the night differs
(from one land to another). We reply that asking this
question is innovation. How could you ask a question that
was not asked by the Companions - may Allah be pleased
with them all, They craved for good more than you do, and
for more knowledge of what is obligatory regarding Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, than you do. We are not more
knowledgeable than the Messenger (3%), and he did not
inform them. Therefore, this question of yours is an
innovation. Had we not had a good opinion about you.
we could have described you with what befits you, that is,
you are an innovator.

Al-Imam Malik, may Allah have mercy upon him, said: “
do not consider you except as an innovator.” Then it was
ordered that he (the questioner) be removed. This is
because the Salaf detested the people of innovation, their
statements, objections, assumptions and arguments.

My brother, it is upon you to surrender yourself regarding
this matter. From the complete submission to Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, is to not delve into these matters. That
is why 1 have always warned you against such delving into
what is related to Allah’s Names and Attributes stubbornly
and obstinately, since the Companions - may Allah be
pleased with them - never enquired about such. This is
because once we open these topics for ourselves, other
topics will be open before us, and the barriers will be
demolished, then we will not be able to restrain ourselves
Hence, “We hear and-we obey, and we believe and we
trust. We believe in and trust the information, and we obey
the command, and we hear the saying” so that you can be
safe!

And any person who asks something related to the
Attributes of Allah, which the Companions did not ask

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.

There is nothing like unto Him} (Ash-Shitra 42:11)
There is a clear refutation of Tamthil in this Ayah.
And His saying:
462 A 25 Lp
€Do you know of any who is similar to Him}> (Maryam
19:65)

This is because this Ayah, even if it is in a question form,
has the import of information, because it is an interrogative
With the meaning of a negation

And His statement:

CSI RE A KS ‏«ول‎

#And there is none co-equal or comparable unto Him)
(Al-Ikhlas 112:4)

Alll of these Ayat are evidence of a negation of similarities,
And they are all declarative statements.

Whoever likens Allah to any of His creatures, then he has
indeed belied the information, and disobeyed the order
That is why the Salaf generally pronounced the disbelief of
Anyone who likened Allah to any of His creatures. Hence,
Nu‘aim bin Hammad Al-Khuza‘i, may Allah have mercy
upon him, the teacher of Imam Al-Bukhari, may Allah have
Mercy upon him, said: “Whoever likens Allah with His
eration, has committed Kufr (disbelief). This is because
he combined between belying the message, and the
disobeying the command

‎Reported by Al-Lalaka’i in Sharh As-Sunnah (9: }6) and it was‏ !ا

‎Graded Sahih by Al-Albani in Mukhtasar Al-’LUluw (184). See
Siyar A‘lam An-Nubala’ (10:160) by Adh-Dhahabi.

‎Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎neither in His Self, nor in His Attributes. Tamthil means
to mention similarities for a thing, and the differences
between it and Takyif are generals and specifics.
Because every person who does Tamthil has definitely
done Takyjif, but (on the other hand) not every person
who engages in Takyif has engaged in Tamthil. This is
because Takyif, involves mentioning the how without
coupling it with similarities. For example, if you say: "I
have a pen whose how is such-and-such.” If this is
coupled with the mention of something similar, it
becomes an act of Tamthil. For example, I say: “That
pen is similar to this pen” because I mentioned
something that is similar to another thing, and you
become familiar with this pen by mention of what is
similar to it
The People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah affirm the
Attributes for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, without
similarities. They say: “ Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, has
life, but not like our own life, He has knowledge, but not
like our knowledge, He has sight, but not like our sight; He
has a Face, but not like our faces; He has a Hand, but not
like our hands.” And this is the case with all of the
Attributes. They say: “Indeed, Allah, the Mighty and
ublime, shall never be similar - in what He has described
Himself with - to any of His creatures,”

‎And for this, they have textual and rational evidences:

‎The textual evidences:

‎These are divided into two types: Declarative, and
imperative.

‎Among the declarative, is the statement of the Exalted

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 135

hidden from me." And Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
heard her from above His Throne, and Allah, the Exalted,
heard her on His Throne, and between Him and her, there
Was a distance that is not known to anybody except Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime. Hence, it is not possible to say His
Hearing is like our hearing

Thirdly: We say, we know that Allah is distinct from
¢reation in His Sel

41115 Kurst extends over the heavens and the earth (Al-
Bagarah 2:255),

4And on the Day of Resurrection the whole of the earth
will be grasped by His Hand> (Az-Zumar 39:67)

It is not possible for any creature to be like this. Therefore,
When He is distinct from creation in His Self, and the
Attributes are of the Self - He, the Mighty and Sublime, will
be distinct from creation in His Attributes. Therefore, it is
not possible to draw a comparison between the Creator
and the creation.

Fourthly: We say; among creation, we witness things that
are the same in name, but different in what is named.
People are different in their attributes; this one has strong
ight, and this one weak, this one has strong hearing, and
this one weak, and this one has a strong body, and this one

1) Reported by Al-Bukhari - with a disconnected chain - form.
See Al-Fath; (13:372), and Ahmad had reported it with a
connected chain in Al-Musnad (6:46), and Ibn Majah (188)
with this wording, and Ibn Majah also reported it (2063)
with the wording: “Blessed.”

134 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wi

As for the rational evidences to negate making, similarities
between the Creator and the creation:

Then these comprise various angles:

Firstly, we say that it is not possible to liken between the
Creator and the created in any circumstance; if there was
no difference between them other than the basis of their
existence, it is enough. This is because the existence of the
Creator is necessary; it is ageless and eternal, whereas the
existence of creation is preceded with non-existence, and
will be met with annihilation. So when they are like that, it
is not possible to say they are similar.

Secondly: We find a tremendous distinction between the
Creator and creation, in His Attributes and actions. In His
Attributes, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, Hears every
voice, no matter how hidden or far it ‏,كز‎ Even if it is within
the deepest depths of the seas; Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, certainly hears it.

Allah, the Exalted, revealed, saying:
4Indeed Allah has heard the statement of her that
disputes with you concerning her husband, and com-
plains to Allah. Allah hears the arguments between you

both. Verily, Allah is All-Hearer, All-Seerp (Al-
Mujadilah 58:1)

‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said: “All praise is
due to Allah whose hearing encompasses the voices. I was
in the apartment, and some of her!!! discussion was

(! (Translation note) This is regarding the verse, and the
woman who came pleading.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 137

“You shall definitely see your Lord as you see the moon,
on a night that it is full, you will not have to crowd to see
Him.)

Te (i) said: ‘As’ and the letter Kaf (as) is used for likening,
and this is the Messenger of Allah (3), while it is among
tir principles that we believe what the Messenger (38)
paid, as we believe what Allah says. Answer us regarding
this Hadith.”

We say: We reply regarding this Hadith, and its like, with
1WO answers. The first answer is a summary, while the
Second answer is detailed:

The first is the summarized reply: That it is never possible
that there be a contradiction between the statement of
Allah, and an authentic statement of His Messenger (#),
Hecause each is the truth, and there is no contradiction in
the truth. And, each is from Allah, and what is from Allah,
it cannot be contradictory.

‎Sp‏ كان ين ‎GES as DS lS ae‏ كَزراك

‎4Had it been from other than Allah, they would surely
have found therein: much contradiction» (An-Nisa’ 4:82)

‎if there occurs anything that makes you think there is a
eontradiction, according to your understanding, then know
that this is not because of the text, but based upon what is
i you. If to you, there is a contradiction in texts of the Book
and the Sunnah, it is either because of having little
Knowledge, deficient understanding, or inadequate re-
earch and reflection. If you researched and pondered it,

‎1M) Reported by Al-Bukhari (554), Muslim (633) from Jarir bin
"Abdullah. The Hadith follows in its entirety in the beginning
of the second volume - if Allah permits.

‎136 Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎weak, and this one is a male, and this one a female. And
these are distinctions that exist in creatures of the same
type. So what do you think will be the difference between
creatures that are of different types? The difference
between them is much more obvious. And due to this, it
is not possible for someone to say: “My hand is like the
hand of a camel,” or, “I have a hand like that of an ant,” or,
“1 have a hand like that of a cat.” Now, we have a man,
camel, ant and a cat; each of them has a hand that is
different from the other, even though they (the hands) bear
the same name. Thus, we say: If it is possible that there can
be differences between what is named in creatures, while
there is agreement in the name, then its possibility between
the Creator and the creation is more worthy. Rather, we say
the distinction between the Creator and the created is not
merely a possibility, but a necessity. So we have four
rational angles to proving that it is not possible that the
Creator be similar to any of His creation, in any
circumstance.

‎We may also say, there is evidence in Fitrah (inborn
inclination). And this is due to the fact that man, in his
inborn inclination, without any distortion, recognizes the
distinction between the Creator and creation. If not for this
inborn inclination (Fitrah), he would not go on calling upon
the Creator

‎Now, it becomes clear that Tamthil is negated by textual
proofs, rational proofs and the proof of Fifrah.

‎If somebody says: “The Prophet (2) related some Hadiths
that are not clear to us, do they include Tamthil or not? And
we shall put these before you; the Prophet (38) said:

‏لا تَضَامُونَ فى

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 139

lipon those that are entirely clear, so that everything
becomes entirely clear.

As for detailed answer, we would reply about the text, and
therefore say: The statement of the Prophet (3):

َبَكُمْ كما ترَْنَ ‎Alas YA 5a‏ في

“You shall definitely see your Lord as you see the moon,
On ‏م‎ night that it is full, you will have no trouble in seeing
Him.”

iy not a comparison between what is seen, but it is a
comparison between the seeing. What is being said is: “as
you see the moon, on a night that it is full.” Therefore, the
eomparison is between the act of seeing, and not between
What is seen. What is intended is you shall see Him clearly,
just as you see the moon on the night of the full moon. That
‏الآ‎ why he followed it with his statement: “you will not have
10 crowd to see Him’ or “You will have no trouble in
seeing Him.” Therefore, the confusion is removed now.

‘The Prophet (3) said:

(5545 ‏عَلَى‎ 65 JE ‏الله‎ Op
“Verily, Allah created Adam in His image’™!
» An image is the representation of another, It cannot be
¢omprehended that an image is anything else other than a
fepresentation of another. (Supposing) for example, I write
® paper for you, and you take a picture of it with a camera,
it will come out on paper. Then, it will be said: “This is the
picture of this,” there is no difference in terms of the letters

™ Reported by Al-Bukhari (6227), Muslim (2612) from Aba
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

138 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

you would discover that there is no basis for the contra-
diction which you erroneously imagined.

Or, it is a result of a bad objective and intention, such as
holding to what appears contradictory just to establish a
contradiction, without giving consideration to a harmoni-
zation (of facts), as do those in whose hearts there is a
deviation, who follow that which is not entirely clear (of
the texts).

Asa branch of this summarized answer, it follows that it is
obligatory upon you to refer the texts that are not so clear,
to the texts that are entirely clear, whenever you discover
that which is not so clear; because this is the path of those
who are firmly grounded in knowledge. Allah, the Exalted,

:

It is He Who has sent down to you the Book. In it
are Aydt that are entirely clear, they are the foundations
of the Book; and others not entirely clear. So as for
those in whose hearts there is a deviation, they follow
that which is not entirely clear thereof, secking Al-
Fiinah (polytheism and trials, etc.), and seeking for its
hidden meanings, but none knows its hidden meanings
save Allah. And those who are firmly grounded in
knowledge say: “We believe in it; all of it (clear and
unclear Aydt) is from our Lord.” And none receive
admonition except men of understanding’’> (Al ‘Imran

3:7)

They interpret the texts that are not entirely clear based

‎On The Introductory Notes... 141‏ توما عونا

‎(Av ‏مرتررلق‎ 42:11) It is not possible for the Messenger to
iiller what belies the One who sent him. And the one
Whio said: “He created Adam in His image” is also the
the who said: “Indeed, the first group to enter Paradise
shall enter in the image of the moon.”!"! Do you think
Hat these people that shall enter Paradise shall be in the
liiage of the moon completely? Or that they shall be in
the image of a human being, but they are in the image of
ie moon in terms of clearness, handsomeness, beauty
ond circularity?

‎Ii you are of the first opinion, it means they shall enter
{(Piradise) without eyes, noses and mouths. If we wish, wecan
way: They shall enter (Paradise) as stones. If you are of the
Wecond opinion, then the confusion has vanished and it
Iecomesclear that-whensomething isinthe image of another
thing, it does not necessitate that it is like it in all respects.

‎If you cannot comprehend this, and say: “I don’t under-
Wand from this except that they are similar,’ we say that
there is another response. And that is: The reference here is
Just a form of reference, where the creature is referred to the
Pyeator. His statement - “In His image” is like His saying
feparding Adam

‎And 1 breathed into him (his) soul created by Me>
(Sad 38:72)

‎It is not possible that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, gave
Adam a part of His soul; rather, what is intended here is the
foul that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, created. But, its
particular reference to Allah is out of honor. Such as when we

‎1) Reported by Al-Bukhari (3254) and Muslim (2834) from Aba
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

‎140 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎and words. An image is, therefore, a match of another
image, and the one who said: “Allah created Adam in His
image” is the Messenger (#4) the most knowledgeable, the
most truthful, the best of those who admonish, and the
most eloquent.

‎The summarized response is that we say that it is not
possible that this Hadith contradicts the statement of Allah,
the Exalted:

‎There is nothing like unto Him (Ash-Shira 42:11)

‎If Allah makes it easy for you to harmonize between them,
then, harmonize. If it is not easy, then say:

‎We believe in it, all of it is from our Lord> (Al ‘Imran
3:7)
Our creed is that Allah does not have a likeness; and with
this you can be safe before Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

‎Here is the statement of Allah, and here is the statement of
His Messenger; each is the truth. It is not possible that one
belies the other, because each is information, not a ruling
that can be said to have been abrogated. Thus, I say: One
refutes a form of similarity while the other affirms it. So
say: “Certainly, there is nothing like Allah, and Allah
created Adam in His image.” This is the statement of Allah,
while that is the statement of His Messenger. Each is truth
that we believe in. We say: “All of it is from our Lord” and
remain silent. This is the best that you can do.

‎As for the detailed response, we say: The one who said:
"Verily, Allah created Adam in His image” is the
Messenger of Him who said: ¢There is nothing like Him}

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 143

‎Allah,” “the Camel of Allah,” “the Servant of Allah,”‏ أن
‎because this image (of Adam) is clearly separate from‏
‎Allah, and everything that Allah has referred to Himself‏
‎While it is clearly separate from Him, then it is one of His‏
‎¢reatures, and so, the confusion is removed.‏

‎Wut, if someone says: “Which of them is the safer of the
ieanings, the first or the second?”

‎We say: The first is much safer as long as we find a support
Tor it in the Arabic Language, and the possibility in accord
With the intellect. Then it is necessary that the statement be
Interpreted based upon it. We have found that it is not
jiteessary that an image should be a complete representa-
Hion of another. Therefore, the safest view is to interpret it
Piised upon its obvious meaning.

‎If you say: “What is the image of Allah in which Adam is
heated?” We reply: Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, has a
ace, an Eye, Hand and Foot, the Mighty and Sublime, but it
‏إل[‎ not imperative that these be similar to that of humans.
While there is a form of resemblance, but it is nota similarity,
Us there is a resemblance between the first group to enter
Paradise and the moon, but without being the same.

‎With this, the position of the People of the Sunnah and the
Jumi’ch becomes verified. That is, all the Attributes of
Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, are not the same as the
Wltributes of the creatures; without Tahrif, nor Ta’til, nor

‎Takyif, nor Tamthil

‎We hear in many books that we read (regarding this issue)
mentioning Tashbih. They mention Tashbih referring to
Tamthil. Which of these (two expressions) is better? That we
tise Tashbih or Tamthil? To use Tamthil is better:

‎Firstly: Because the Qur'an uses this expression:

‎142 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎say the “slaves of Allah,” this includes the disbeliever, the
Muslim, the believer, the martyr, the truthful one, and the
Prophet. But if wesay, “Muhammad, the slave of Allah,” this
is a special reference, it is unlike the earlier mentioned
servitude. Thus, His saying: “He created Adam in His
image” means, an image among the images which Allah
created and gave shape. As Allah, the Exalted, said:

‎4And surely, We created you (you father Adam) and
then gave you shape, then We told the Angels,
“prostrate to ‏سمفيق‎ (Al-A‘raf 7:11)

‎The one who was given shape is Adam; therefore, he is in
the image of Allah - meaning; it is Allah who gave him this
image, that is considered the best of all images of among
the creatures.

‎Verily, We created man of the best staturey (At-Tin
95:4)

‎Allah's referral of the image to Himself, is a referral of
honor. It is as if He, the Mighty and Sublime, is showing
concern for this image, and it is for this reason, that the face
should not be struck, marring it physically, nor disgracing
by saying: “May Allah disgrace your face,” while his face
resembles yours; you should not therefore, disgracing it in
meaning. So because it is the image Allah gave shape and
referred to Himself in esteem and honor, do not therefore,
bring disgrace to it physically or in meaning,

‎Then, can this response be considered a form of Tahrif, or is
there something else like it?

‎We reply: There is something else like it/as in “the House

Semmentary On The Introductory Notes... 145

sate this together. This is a form of commonality, and a
forin of resemblance, but there is a difference between the
{Wo kinds of existence. The existence of the Creator is
fWeessary while the existence of the creature is possible

The same with hearing; there is a form of commonality.
Miimans have hearing, while there is hearing for the
Oheitor, but there is a difference between them, while at the
‏ماللا‎ time there is a commonality.

If We say: “Without Tashbih” thereby making an absolute
Negation of Tashbih, a complication will accrue from this.
With this, we realize that the expression “without Tamthil’
ip better for three reasons.

W you ask: “What is the difference between Takyif and
Tamihit?’”

The response is that the difference is from two angles:

The first: Tamthil is the act of mentioning an attribute
fogether with its like. Like when you say: “The hand of so-
aind-so is like the hand of so-and-so,’ Takyif is the act of
Mentioning an attribute without mentioning its like. Such
‏اللا‎ When you say: “The how of the hand of so-and-so is
fuch-and-such.”

Based on this, we say whoever engages in Tamthil has also
@hgaged in Takyi/, but not the other way around.

The second: Takyif will not occur except regarding an
Aitribute or a shape, whereas Tamthil can occur in these, as
well as in numbering, as in His statement - Exalted is He:

in ie = Es ‏«أنّهُ‎
‎oy ose cE Al Sip

#It is Allah Who has created seven heavens and of the
earth the like thereof» (At-Talig 65 :12)

(Like thereof) meaning, in number.

114 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah
There is nothing like unto Him} (Ash-Shitra 42:11)

50 4 LE Gp

Then, do not set up rivals unto Allah (in worship)»
(Al-Bagarah 2:22)

And other Ayéf like that

And all of what is expressed in the Quran, then it is better
than other than it; because we will not find anything more
eloquent than the Qur'an, and more straight-forward to the
intended meaning than it. Allah knows better what He
intends in His statement, therefore, what agrees with the
Qur'an is the most correct. Therefore, we mention a negation
of Tamthil. And this is the same in every place, this is because
employing the expression used by the Qur'an is better than
using any other expression that is just a synonym.

Secondly: To some people, Tashbih means the affirmation
of the Attributes. That is why they call the People of the
Sunnah “the People of Tashbih.” If we therefore, say
“without Tashbih”, the man will not understand from the
term Tashbih except affirming the Attributes. It will there
fore become as if what we were saying to him is “without
the affirmation of Attributes.” The meaning of Tashbih will
therefore indicate a false meaning. So for this reason
avoiding it is better.

Thirdly: To negate Tashbih in its entirety is not correct,
because there are no two things among entities or
attributes, except that they share something together
between them. This commonality is a type of resemblance
If you therefore negate Tashbih absolutely, you are (by that)
negating everything wherein there isa form of resemblance
between the Creator and the creature. For example,
existence: Both the Creator and the creature primarily

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 147

(to something else) shows that such is imperfect. Even, if a
fomparison is made between an imperfect (object) and the
perfect, it makes the perfect imperfect, as it is said:

Do you not see that it diminishes the importance of a spear

Onee it is said that the spear was made from a stick

‎we say here that Allah, the Exalted, has a likeness, that‏ ل[
‎Will necessitate a defect in Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.‏
‎due to this, we say that Allah negated any likeness to‏ 110
‎Mis creatures from Himself, because likeness to the creature‏
‎is 3 kind of imperfection and defect. This is because the‏
‎(feature is imperfect, and likening what is perfect to what is‏
‎Imperfect, makes the perfect imperfect. Even, an ordinary‏
‎fomparison between them makes it imperfect, unless it is‏
‎ised as a challenge, as in the saying of the Exalted:‏

‎> ‏رت‎ tite ep

‎ls Allah better, or (all) that you ascribe as partners (to
Him)? (An-Naml 27:59)

‎And His saying:

‎ier (at at &
‏امه‎ J Aa oh b>
‏وض‎ you know better or does Allah?» (Al-Bagarah 2:140)

‎8 There is in His saying:
¢There is nothing like Him>;

‎® clear refutation against those who claim that Allah,
‘Glorious and Exalted is He, has a likeness.

‎‘The argument of these people is “The Qur'an is Arabic, and
wince it is Arabic, then Allah, the Exalted, has addressed us
in a way that we understand. It is not possible that Allah

‎Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyal

‎HPS AS Ay Sins ‏لله‎ Ob Soest ‏بَلْ‎
‎dail

‎Rather, they believe that Allah, Glorious is He: ¢There is
nothing like unto Him, and He is the All-Hearer and
All-Seer.» (Ash-Shiira 42:11)

‎© Concerning his saying: “Rather, they believe that
Allah, Glorious is He, <There is nothing like Him ; and
He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.>" (Ash-Shuira 42:11)

‎Commentary
‎His saying: “Rather, they believe’ - Meaning ; the People
of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah acknowledge and testify
Allah is such, that there is nothing like Him, as He said
about Himself:
There is nothing like unto Him} (Ash-Shara 42:11)
So here He negated similarity; then He affirmed hearing
and seeing, He negated a defect, then He affirmed
perfection, because the negation of a defect should come
before the affirmation of perfection. This is why it is said
“Evacuation comes before beautification.” The negation of
a defect should be started with first, after which the
affirmation of perfection is mentioned.

‎The word “nothing” is an indefinite pronoun, which is
used to negate, and therefore is all inclusive. Nothing is
ever like Him, the Mighty and Sublime. Meaning any
creature however tremendous it is, it is not like Allah - the
Mighty and Sublime - because to liken what is not perfect

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 149
that are worshipped besides Him do not hear; and even if
they hear, they cannot reply, and they do not see, as Allah
he Mighty and Sublime, said: 1

Those whom they invoke besides Allah have not created
anything, but they are themselves created. They are
dead, lifeless, and they know not when they will be
raised up> (An-Nahl 16: 20, 21) é

They do not possess hearing, nor intellect, nor vision. And
Wf it were assumed that they possess such, they cannot
tespond. :

Bad eve obs Bo 15 oD

Hae A403 ‏وَهُمْ عن‎ ES
#And who is more astray than one who calls besides
Allah, such as will not answer him till the Day of

Resurrection, and who are (even) unaware of their

calls
to them} (Al-Ahgaf 46:5) ne

The People of the Sunnah and the Jamda‘ah therefore believe
‏آلآ‎ a negation of any likeness for Allah, because that is a
iefect, and they affirm hearing and seeing for Him based
tipon His saying: :

4There is nothing like unto Him, and He is the All-
Hearer and All-Seer> (Ash-Shiura 42:11)

The fruit of a person's faith in this, is that it leads the
Hervant to give Him the utmost reverence, because there is
Hothing like Him among the creatures. So, exalt this

148 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

has addressed us in a way we do not understand, and
Allah, the Exalted, has addressed us, saying that He has a
Face, that He has an Eye, that He has two ] fands, and other
than that. And by the dictates of the Arabic Language, we
can understand nothing about these, except what we
witness. Based upon this, it is necessary that the meanings
these words indicate are the same as their indication
among creatures. A hand is a hand, an eye is an eye, a face
is a face, and so on. We only say that because we have a
proof.”

There is no doubt that this argument is baseless; what
makes it so is the clarification that preceded, that there is no
likeness for Allah, and we say that Allah, the Exalted,
addressed us about His Attributes as He did, but we have
certain knowledge that this attribute is in accord with what
is described. The proof of this is contained in what is
witnessed. It is said that a camel has a hand, and an ant has
a hand. Nobody will understand that the hand we attribute
to the camel is the same hand attributed to an ant! This is
the case with creatures; what about descriptions of the
Creator? Definitely, the distinction will be more obvious
and more evident

Based on this, the position of those who claim Tamthil is
refuted with intellect, just as it is refuted with revealed
texts.

“Allah, the Exalted, said:

4He is All-Hearer and All-Seer};
So He, Glorious and Exalted is He, affirmed for Himself,
hearing and seeing, to clarify His perfection, and degrading
the idols that are worshipped besides Him. For the idols

101 ‏بمماحع‎ On The Introductory Notes 151

Peligious verdicts without knowledge; that he will not be
juiced, because he is a wrongdoer.

We warned my brother Muslim, against saying anything
that does not please Allah, whether you say that regarding
Allah, or otherwise.

he fruit of the belief that Allah is the All-Seer, is that you
Will not do anything that angers Allah, because you know
at whenever you are looking at something that is

phibited, while the people do not know it is an unlawful
Wlance, Allah, the Exalted sees this glance, and He knows
What is in your heart

4544 2 ‏وَمَا‎ GAT EE A> |
#Allah knows the fraud of the eyes, and all that the
Ireasts conceal (Ghafir 40:19)

When you believe in this, itis not possible that you ever do
WAything that does not please Him.

Wu should be shy before Allah, as you are shy before the
Hwarest of the people to you, the most respected of them
before you. Therefore, if we believe that Allah is the All-Seer,
We will soon guard against every action that will lead to
@igering Allah; otherwise, our faith in that will be deficient.

Wf somebody points with his finger, his lip, his eye, or his
fwad, to something that is unlawful, while the people
Wound him are unaware, Allah, the Exalted, sees him.
Whoever believes in Him, then he should beware of this. If
We believe in what is implicated by Allah’s Names and
Attributes, then we would have a complete state of
Headfastness (Istiqamah) among ourselves. And Allah is
the One whose Help is sought.

150 Commentary on Al-’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Magnificent Lord that does not have an equal; or else there
will not be any benefit here to your faith that;

€There is nothing like unto Him >

When you believe that He is the All-Hearer, you will soon
be cautious regarding every statement that angers Allah,
because you know that He hears you, and you fear His

unishment. You will soon avoid every statement that
involves disobedience of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
because you believe He is the All-Hearer. If this belief does
not make this happen to you, know that your belief that
‘Allah as the All-Hearer, is without a doubt, deficient.

If you truly believe that Allah is the All-Hearer, you would
not say anything except that which pleases Him, particu-
larly when you are talking about Hi Shari‘ah, as in the case
of a Mufti or a scholar. For this is indeed worse. Allah,

Glorious is He, says:

Then who does more wrong than one who invents a lie
against Allah, to lead mankind astray without knowl-

edge. Certainly Allah guides not the people who are
Zalimin (wrongdoers)> (Al-An‘am 8:144)
Indeed this is among the worst forms of wrongdoing. That
is why He said:

<Verily! Allah guides not the people who are Zalimin
(wrongdoers)> (Al-Ahgaf 46:10)

This is among the punishments for the one who gives

Pommentary On The Introductory Notes 153,

Wiformed us that He has a Hand, we could not have known
that, but we were informed of it. But the case of knowledge,
Hearing and seeing, is different, our intellect can compre-
Hiend this in accord with textual evidences. Thus, we say,
fegarding these Attributes; the Hand, the Face and their
Ike, that they are Dhatiyyah Khabariyyah (Attributes derived
fiom revealed information). We do not say they are
bortions or parts. We rather avoid this expression, while
ii ur case, they are portions and parts. This is because the
farts and portions can be separated from the whole. But
the Lord, the Mighty and Sublime is such, that it cannot be
Wagined that any of these Attributes which He describes
Nitnself with - such as the Hand - could ever cease, because
Tie always was and will be described with them. That is
Whiy we do not say they are portions or parts

Whe Attributes of doing (Al-Fa’liyyah) are those that are
Wihted to His will; He does them if He so wills, and does
Wot, if He so wills. Earlier we mentioned that among the
Altiibutes of doing are those that have causes, and others
That do not have causes, and there are those that are both of
Viateniee (Dhatiyyah) and doing, (Fa'liyyah).

* Concerning his statement: “and they do not distort the
Words from their places:” what is intended by “words”
here is Allah's word and His Messenger’s word.

Whey do not distort it (the word) from its place: meaning;

fom what it proves. For example His statement:

4Nay, both His hands are extended» (Al-Ma’idah 5:64),

Thy (the People of the Sunnah) say: It refers to Hand, in
Wwality, that is affirmed for Allah, without Takyif or Tamthil.
The people of Tahrif say: “It refers to His power or His
favor.” As for the People of the Sunnah, they say power is

Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

They do not negate what He describes Himself with, and
they do not distort the words from their places.

@ Concerning His saying: “They do not negate what He
describes Himself with, and they do not distort the words
from their places.”

Commentary

% His saying: “They do not negate what He describes
Himself with:” meaning; the People of the Sunnah and
the Jama‘ah do not deny from Allah what He described
Himself with, because they follow the text, in negating
and affirming. They affirm all of what Allah affirmed
for Himself, in reality, and they do deny what He
described Himself with, whether it is among the
Attributes of Essence (Dhat) or the Attributes of doing,

Attributes of Essence (Dhat), are those such as living,
power, knowledge, and others like that. These are divided
into Attributes of Essence in meaning (Al-Ma‘nawiyah), and
Attributes of Essence derived from revealed information
(Al-Khabariyah). These are the ones that we find names for
in some or parts of us, such as the hand, the face and the
eye; the scholars refer to them as Dhitiyyah Al-Khabariyyah
(Atributes of Essence in revealed information). Dhatiyyal;
because they are not separable, never ceasing with Allah,
and Allah has never ceased to be described with them. Al
Khabariyyah; because they were conveyed by information
(Khabar); the intellect cannot prove them. If Allah had not

Commentary On The Introductory Notes..

The Commentary
* iis saying: “They do not engage in Ithad...” Meaning;
the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah.
Al Mihail Ninguistically means inclination, based upon which
Wie term Al-Lahd is used for a grave.- Because the grave
Wielines to one side, and it is not (excavated) in the middle.
The (grave) that is (excavated only) in the middle is called
Whiyy, and the Lahd is better than the Shiqg.
tie they do not engage in Iihad regarding Allah's Names,
wwe do they do so regarding His Aydt. The author, may
Allah have mercy upon him, thus indicates for us that liad
Wan Occur in two areas: In the Names and in the Ayat. What
Hie author has indicated in his statement is also proven in
the Qur'an; Allah, the Exalted, says:
4And to Allah alone belong all perfect attributes. So call
on Him by these attributes. And leave alone those who
deviate from the right way with respect to His attri-
‏,مالالا‎ They shall be requited for what they do} (Al-
A’nif 7:180)

Tere, Allah confirms that Ithad is committed regarding His
Names,
Ve, the Exalted, said:
dhs 52 ‏لا‎ Gs ‏ف‎ wid &
4Sirely, those who distort Our Signs to seek deviation
therein, are not hidden from Us> (Fusgilat 41:40)

fe Allah also confirms that Ithad is committed regarding
Min Ayat.

154 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

one thing, while the Hand is another, favor is one thing,
while the Hand is another. They do not distort the words
from places, because Taltrif is the practice of the Jews:

€Among those who are Jews, there are some who
displace words from (their) places (An-Nisa’ 4:46)

So everyone who distorts the texts of the Book and the
Sunnah, then in him is a semblance to the Jews. Beware of
this, and do not imitate those who earned (Allah's) wrath,
some of whom Allah turned into monkeys, pigs, and
worshippers of false deities. Do not commit Talirif, rather
explain the statement (of Allah and His Messenger) as
intended by Allah and His Messenger.

One of the sayings mentioned from Ash-Shaf 1 believe
in Allah, and what came from Allah, as intended by Allah
And I believe in Allah’s Messenger, and whatever came
from Allah’s Messenger, as intended by Allah’s Messen

They do not engage in Ihad concerning Allah's Names
and His Ayat.

© Concerning his statement: “They do nol engage m Thad
concerning Allah’s Names and His ‏".اقل‎

mentary On The Introductory Notes..

Hae committed Ihdd with them.

The basis of Ihad here, is that since Allah affirmed them
(ihe Names) for Himself; it is obligatory upon us to affirm
hein for Him. If we negate them, that is considered Iliad,
wil an inclination away from what is compulsory
Tegarding them. 1

1|100 are some people who deny Allah's Names such as
the extreme Jalmis. They say that Allah never has a Name.
Whey say that if you give Him a name, you have likened
Tiim to the creatures. It is known that this view is baseless
and rejected.

The third type is to reject the Attributes that are proven by
Hie Names. Such a person affirms the Name, but rejects the
‘Altribute that is included in this Name. Such as saying that
Alldh is All-Hearer, but without hearing; the All-Knower,

Wil without knowledge; the Creator, but without creation;

The All-Powerful, but without power...This is popular with
Whe Mu‘tazilah. It is something that is unintelligible

When, they consider these Names ordinary labels, one
different from the other, the All-Hearer is different from the
All Knower, but all of them do not have meaning. The All-
Mearer does not indicate hearing, while the All-Knower
Hoes not indicate knowledge; but they are only labels.

Among them are also others, who say that all these Names
wre one. He is the All-Knower, the All-Hearer, and the All-
Heer, all of them are one. They are not different, except with
WsHpeet to their letter construction. They consider all the
Names as one! All of this is unintelligible. That is why we
May it is not possible to believe in the Names (of Allah) until
We affirm the Attributes that they include.

Verhaps here, we should discuss indications of the Names.
There are three types of indications: Complete indications,

156 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

111:74 with the Names is an inclination away from what is
required regarding them. And there are different types of it:

The first type: To name Allah with what He did not name
Himself, as the philosophers call Him, “the cause of
action,” and the Christians refer to Him as the father, and
they refer to ‘Isa as the son. This is a form of I hdd regarding
His Names. In the same way, if a person names Allah with
any name that He did not name Himself; then he is a
Mulhid with Allah’s Names. The reason for this is that
Allah’s Names are Tazogifiyyah."! It is not possible for us to
affirm any of that for Him except as been affirmed by a text
If you, therefore, call Allah what He has not called Himself
you have thus committed Ilhad and deviated from what is
required.

Calling Allah with what He did not call Himself is a form
of disrespect for Allah, an act of wrongdoing, and a
transgression against His right, because if somebody were
to call you with a name that is not yours, you will consider
him to have transgressed against you and wronged you
This is the case of the creature, then how about the
Creator?!

Therefore, you do not have any right to name Allah what
He did not name Himself. If you do that, you have
committed Ihad with Allah’s Names

The second type is to reject any of Allah’s Names, the
opposite of the first type. So in the first category, Allah was
named with what He did not name Himself, while this
category strips Allah of what He calls Himself, rejecting the
Name, whether he rejects all the Names or some of those
which Allah affirmed for Himself; once he rejects them, he

1 (Translation not it must be based on textual proofs
from the Qur’an and Sunnah:

1 ‏'وواضم اانا‎ On The Introductory Notes... 159

Hbliqatory upon us to affirm all of what a name indicates.
‘Th reject any attribute indicated by the Name is regarded as
١ form of Mhad with that Name; whether the indication for
His Attribute is complete, inclusive, or denotative.

1et tis cite a perceptible example with which all of these
MWlications will be made clear. If I say I have a house. In the
Word “house” each of these three indications are present.
You will understand that the word indicates the entire
WGtise, in a complete manner, and it can indicate the men’s
wilting, place alone. It can also indicate the bathrooms, or
the hallway, as an inclusive indication. This is because all of
‘Whose things are part of the house, and the expression that
oan part of its meaning is an inclusive indication.

Matively, it also indicates that there was a bricklayer
Wh built the house, because there is no house except it
‏عفدا‎ built by a bricklayer.

Whe fourth type of Thad concerning (Allah's) Names, is to
Names and Attributes for Allah while considering
Whem to indicate Tamthil. That is, to indicate that (Allah’s)
‏انالا‎ is like our seeing, and knowledge like knowledge,
Wid forgiveness like our forgiveness, and similar to that.
Wiis is a form of Ilhad, because it is an inclination away
fein what is obligatory regarding them (the Names), since
What is obligatory is to affirm them without Tamthil,

Whe fifth type is to use them (the Names of Allah) for the
Widls, or to derive names from them for the idols, For
Pxample, referring to something that is worshipped as Al-
Nah (the Deity). This is a form of ‏.قرالا‎ Or, to derive names
Wom them for idols, such as Al-Lat from Al-llah, Al-"Uzza
Wom Al-’Aziz and Mannah from Al-Mannan. We say this is a
form of Ihad with Allah’s Names, because what is
Wbiligatory upon you is to use Allah’s Names specifically
for Him, and not to transgress and go beyond the bounds

158 Commentary on Al-“Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

inclusive indications, and denotative indications.

1. A complete indication is when an expression indicates
every implication. Based on this, every name indicates
who is named by it, that is Allah, as well as the
Attribute derivable from the Name.

Inclusive indication refers to the case when an
expression indicates some of its implications. Based
on this, the Name indicates one essence, or one
attribute from the implied indications.

A denotative indication is an indication for something
that is understood, not from the expression of the
Name, but from what it denotes. For this reason we call
it a denotative indication.

For example, the Name Al-Khaliq (the Creator) is a word
that indicates Allah personally, and the Attribute of
creating. Therefore, since the idea indicates both of these
matters, it is called a complete indication, because the
expression proves all of what it indicates, and there is no
doubt that when you say Al-Khdliq then you understand
that He is a creator and He creates. When it is used for “the
Creator” only, or that He creates only, then it is called an
inclusive indication, because it indicates some of its
meanings.

In the case of knowledge and power, it is called a
denotative indication; since it is not possible that He
creates except with knowledge and power; so its indication
of power and knowledge is a denotative indication.

So here, it becomes clear, that if a person rejects one of these
indications, then he is a Mulhid regarding the Name.

Should such a person say: “I believe that Al-Khdliq (the
Creator) indicates the Self of Allah, and the attribute of
creating, but it does not indicate the attributes of knowl-
edge and power.” We say this is also a form of Ilhad. It is

‎On The Introductory Notes‏ ناا للل؟

‎Wil Hie sun and the moon» (Eussilat 41:37)
Atul His saying:

‎WAnd among His signs is this, that He created you
fiom dust, and then - behold you are human beings
Multered!} (Ar-Riim 30:20)

‎gs

‎WAnd among His Ayat is the creation of the heavens
Wid the earth, and the difference of your languages and
tlors. Verily, in that are indeed Ayat for men of sound
Knowledge. And among His Ayat is the sleep that takes
You by night and by day, and your seeking of His
Hourly. Verily, in that are indeed Ayat for a people
Who listen. And among His Aydt is He shows you the
lightning, by way of fear and hope, and He sends down
Water from the sky, and therewith revives the earth after
itt death. Verily, in that are indeed Ayat for a people
Who understand. And among His Aydt is that the
Hewben and earth stand by His Command, then after-
Wards when He will call you by a single call, behold,
You will come out from the earthy (Ar-Riim :22-25)

‎Whese are universal Aydt. If you like; say universally

‎160 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitivyalt

‎such that you derive names for the others that are
worshipped from them

‎These are the types of I//rad regarding the Names of Alli,
The People of the Stmah and the Jama‘ah never commit Idd
with Allah’s Names. Rather, they abide by them as Allah,
Glorious and Exalted is He, intended them: They also affirm
all of what is indicated by them, because what is contrary to
that to be had.

‎As for Ithad regarding the Ayat of Allah, the Exalted, then
Ayat is plural of Ayah, and it is a sign which distinguishes
something from other than it. And Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, dispatched the Messengers with Ayat (Signs) not
miracles. Therefore, the idea of Aydt is better than the idea
of miracles (Al-Mu’jizal)

‎Firstly: Because Ayat is what is used in the Book and the
Sunnah.

‎Secondly: Because miracles can be performed by sorcerers
and magicians and others like them.

‎Thirdly: The word Aydt better expresses the intended
meaning than the word “miracles” (Al-Mu‘jizat). The Ayal
of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, are the signs that prove
the existence of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. Therefore
they are His, specifically. If it were not specific (to Him), it
would not be considered an Ayah of His.

‎The Ayat of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, are divided
into two categories: Universal Ayat and ‏:لم مراك‎ (Legisla-
tive) Ayat.
Universal Ayat are those that are related to creation and
universal matters. For example, His saying:

‎0070 petite ‏لمم سيب‎ * va
‏والقمر»‎ ALS SGA Jat csi S45

‎And from among his Ayat are the night and the day,

Poimentary On The Introductory Notes... 163

Wave any control, nor share, nor do they bring aid (to
Allah); but they are intercessors,” - He says:

Bes 2a ‏إل‎ thn

Mihtercession with Him profits not, except for him
Whom He permits> (Saba’ 34:23)

‎He severed every cause that the polytheists clung too.‏ الا

‎The second category of Ayat are the Shari (Legislative)
It,
“Whey are the revelations with which the Messengers came,
Wich as the Magnificent Qur'an; and it is an Ayah, due to
the Exalted, saying:
‏عنما[‎ are the Ayat of Allah, We recite them to you in
Wulli, and surely, you are one of the Messengers» (Al-
‏باورا‎ 2:252)

‎#And they say: “Why are not Ayat sent down to him

‎his Lord? Say: “The Ayat are only with Allah,
wid Tam only a plain warner. Is it not sufficient for
Wien that We have sent down to you the Book which is
yeciled to them?» (Al-‘Ankabit 29:50-51)

‎Wo He called it “Ayat.”

‎Wiad with them could be either in the form of belying them,
Wistorting them (Tahrif), or opposing them.

‎Welying them is that it be said: “This is not from Allah”

‎162 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyal

‎decreed, and they are Allah’s Ayét, because the creatures
are not able to do that. For example, no one is able to create
the like of the sun and the moon; nor is anyone able to
bring the night during the daytime, nor the day during the
nighttime. So these are universal Aydt.

‎Iihad with them is to ascribe them to other than Allah,
whether independently, as a partner, or aiding (Allah). To
say; “This is from Wali So-and-so,” or “From So-and-so
Prophet,” or “So-and-so Prophet - or So-and-so Wali
shared in that” or; “Aided Allah in it.”

‎Allah, the Exalted, says:

‎tt

‎€Say:; “Call upon those whom you assert (to be
associate gods) besides Allah, they possess not even the
weight of an atom - either in the heavens or on the
earth, nor have they any share in either, nor there is for
Him any supporter from among them'’> (Saba’ 34:22)

‎Thus, Allah negated everything that the polytheists held on
to, by proving that whatever they worshipped, they have
no control over anything in the heavens or the earths,
neither independently, as a partner, nor in aiding Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime. Allah, the Exalted, then brought the
fourth one, saying:

‎Intercession with Him profits not, except for him

‎whom He permits» (Saba’ 34:23)

‎Since the polytheists would say: “Yes, these idols do not

The Introductory Notes...

DU pala als ‏ولا يُقامن‎ DG Vy 05 ‏سَمِي لَه وَكَا‎
"View do not engage in Takyif, nor likening His Attributes
1) dttrilutes of His creation ; because He, Glorious is He, is
Wu that there is none similar to Him, and no co-equal to

10H, and no rival for Him, and He, Glorious and Exalted is
He, is not comparable to His creation.”

Concerning his statement: “They do not engage in

Tukyif, nor likening His Attributes to attributes of His

(ition; because He, Glorious is He, is such that there is

٠ Hone similar to Him, and no co-equal to Him, and no rival

Him, and He Glorious and Exalted is He, is not
Homparable to His creation.”

Commentary

Wis statement: “They do not engage in Takyifi”
Meaning; the People of Sunnah and the Jama‘ah, It
Preceded that Takyif is to mention the how of an
‘Attribute, whether you mention it with your tongue or
‏آلآ‎ your heart. The People of the Sunnah and the Jamd’ah
Hever commit Takyif. That is, they do not say: “The how
Of His Hand, is like this and that,” nor; “The how of His
Pace is like this and that.” So they do not commit Takyif
With the tongue; nor do they do so with the heart,
Weaning; the person’s soul does not imagine how
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, rose over the Throne,
or how He descends, or how is His Face, or how is His
Hand. It is also not permissible to try (imagining) that
Ieeause this will lead to one of these two matters: either
Tamthil or Ta’ til.

164 Commentary on Al-'Aqidah Al-Wisitiyyall

belying it fundamentally, or, to belie what is informed of in
it, while believing in it fundamentally. So he says, for
example: “The story of the people of the Al-Kahf (the Cave)
is not authentic’ and “The story of the owners of the
Elephant is not authentic, Allah never sent flocks of birds
against them.”

As for distortion (Tahrif}, then it is to alter its expression, or
to change its meaning from what Allah and His Messenger
intended. For example, to say: “Rose over the Throne’
means ‘conquered,”” or to say: “The meaning of ‘Our Lord
descends to the lowest heaven’ is; ‘His command
descends.”

As for opposing them, that is by abandoning the
commands and violating the prohibitions; Allah, the
Exalted said regarding Al-Masjid Al-Haram:

4And whoever inclines to evil actions therein or to do
wrong, him We shall cause to taste a painful torment.»
(Al-Hajj 22:25)

Every act of disobedience is a form of I!had with the Shar‘tah
(Legislative) Aydt, because by it one exits from what is
obligated by it; since it is obligatory upon us to implement
the commands and avoid the prohibitions, so if you do not
do that, then this is 11/184.

PHmentary On The Introductory Notes...

#lord of the heavens and the earth, and all that is
fetiveen them, so worship Him (Alone) and be constant
Wil patient in His worship. Do you know of any who is
wiilar to Him» (Maryam 19:65)

) Hal (Do) is an interrogative, but with the meaning of a
‘Wepation. The negation is expressed by an interrogative due
Wi & tremendous benefit; and that is that it is a challenge.
Weeause, here, there is a distinction; if I were to say: “There
Wy Hothing similar to Him” and;

4Do you know of any who is similar to Him}
is because;
Do you know of any who is similar to Him)

diidies 3 negation and a challenge together, so it infers the
ing, of challenge. This is an important principle;
Wiienever a rhetorical question is used with the meaning
Wi Hiegation, then it has the inference of a challenge. It is as
‏لل‎ | am saying: “If you are truthful, bring me something
“Winiilar to Him.” Based on this,

4Do you know of any who is similar to Him>

‎More intense than “There is nothing similar to Him,”‏ إل[

‎® Wis statement: “and no co-equal to Him,” and the
evidence for this, is His, the Exalted, saying:

‎166 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyih

‎That is why it is not permissible for a person to try to know
the how of Allah’s rising over the Throne, or saying it with
his tongue. Rather, he should not ask about its how,
because Imam Malik, may Allah have mercy upon him,
said: “Asking about it is an innovation.” Do not say: “How
did He rise?” “How did He descend?” “How will He
come?” “How is His Face?’ If you do that, we say you are
an innovator. The evidence that Takyif is unlawful has
preceded, and we mentioned the textually revealed, and
intellectual evidences for that.

‎> His saying: “they do not liken” Meaning the People of
the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah. “His attribute to the
attributes of His creation.” This is the meaning of his
earlier statement: “nor Tamthil (likening) We men:
tioned the impermissibility of Tamthil earlier, from both
textually revealed, and intellectual proofs. And that
textually revealed proofs include both declarative and
imperative statements negating Tamthil. So they do not
commit Takyif nor Tamthil.

‎His statement: “because He, Glorious is He,” - the word
Subhan is the infinitive of Sabaha and Tasbilt. Therefore,
Subhan has the meaning of Tasbili (Glorification), but
with a different expression.
The meaning of “Sabbaha’’ (He glorifies) as said by the
scholars is “To keep away from.” The word Sabaha has its
root from Subhu which means “farness;” thus, it means to
distance any deficient trait from Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime. So He, Glorious is He and Exalted, is far from
every imperfection.

‎> His statement: “there is none similar to Him.” The
evidence for this, is His saying:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 169

Say: Life; the life of Allah, the Exalted, can not be
compared with the life of His creation, because of all of
what the word “living” entails.

2. Comparative Qiyds: It is to rank something with its like.
So it would be to make what is affirmed for the Creator
the same as what is affirmed for the created.

3, Preferable Qiyds: Is when the part is more worthy of the
judgment than the basis. The scholars say that this is
used with respect to Allah, the Exalted, based on His

Saying:
‏الأخل ؟‎ JET >

And for Allah is the highest descriptiony (An-Nahl

16:60)

Meaning; every attribute of perfection, then for Allah is the
most exalted of them. So hearing, seeing, knowledge,
power, life, wisdom and their like - what resembles them is
found in creation, but for Allah they are the most exalted,
and most perfect.

That is why sometimes we utilize intellectual evidences
based on preferable Qiyds. For example, exaltedness is an
attribute of perfection in creation, so when it is an attribute
of perfection in the case of creation, then in the case of the
Creator, it is more worthy. We always find this in the
Statements of the scholars.

Thus the statement of the author - may Allah shower
blessings on him: “He is not comparable to His creation” after
Saying : “there is none similar to Him, and no co-equal to Him,
and no rival for Him,” means the Qiyds (comparison) that
determines equality, and that is comprehensive Qiyas and
comparative Qiyas.

Therefore, Qiyds between Allah, and His creation is

168 Commentary on Al-'Agiilah Al-Wasitiyyah

€And there is none co-equal or comparable unto Him>
(AL-Ikhlas 112:4)

atement: “and no rival for Him;” the evidence for

4755 BS ‏أتدَادًا‎

€Then, do not set up rivals unto Allah while you
know} (Al-Bagarah 2:23 3

Meaning, you know that He does not have any rival, And
An-Nidd (rival) means “peer.”

These three words: As-Sami (likeness) Al-Kuf (co-equal)
and An-Nidd (rival) are very much synonymous, because
the meaning of Al-Kuf' refers to the one who suffices for the
other, and nothing will suffice in place of another except its
like. If it is not its like, it would not be sufficient in its place.
Therefore, there is no Kuf for Him; meaning, there is
nothing like Him, Glorious and Exalted is He. The objective
of this negation is to indicate the Perfection of His
Attributes, since due to His Attributes’ perfection, nothing
is like Him.

+ His saying: “He, Glorious and Exalted is He, is not
comparable to His creation.“

Al-Qiyas (comparison) is divided into three categories:
Comprehensive Qiyas, comparative Qiyds, and preferable
Qivas. He, the Mighty and Sublime, should not be
compared with His creation by comprehensive Qiyas nor
comparative Qiyis.

1. Comprehensive Qiyas: This is what is known as the
general type, which covers every individual item, such
that every individual item is included in that general
basis, both in its word and meaning. For example, if we

THnmentary On The Introductory Notes...

“Wecause He is more knowledgeable about Himself and
other than Him, and the most truthful in speech, and
Detter at narrating than His creation.’

® Concerning his saying: “Because He is more knowledge-
fible about Himself and other than Him, and the most
truthful in speech, and better at narrating than His
‏".مام‎

‘The Commentary
“The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, said this as. a

face and introduction to the obligation of accepting

1 is proven by the statements of Allah, the Exalted,
Wyarding His Attributes and other matters. And that is,
What it is obligatory to accept what the information proves,
Whien it includes four qualities:

Virat; That it is based upon knowledge; and he indicated
this by his saying: “Because He is more knowledgeable
Wbout Himself and other than Him.”

Whe second: Truthfulness; and he indicated this by his
Wilement: “And the most truthful in speech.”

Whe third quality: Clarification and eloquence; and he
Widiated it by his saying: “And better at narrating.”

The fourth quality: Safety of the objective and the intent;
sich that the one giving the information intends guidance

by what they are being informed.

The evidence for the first, which is knowledge, is His

170 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyal

prohibited because of the difference between them. There
fore, in the case of legal judgments; if we cannot make
Qiyds between what is obligatory and permissible, or what
is permissible and obligatory, then even more so when it
comes to the topic of comparing attributes between the
Creator and the creation.

If somebody says to you: “Allah exists and a person also
exists, therefore, the existence of Allah is like the existence
of the person by Qiyas.”

We reply: This is not correct, because the existence of the
Creator is necessary, while the existence of the person is
possible.

Supposing he says: “I consider the hearing of the Creator
comparable to the hearing of the created.” We reply: This is
not possible. The hearing of the Creator is necessary, it
cannot be considered imperfect. It covers everything
Meanwhile, the hearing of man is a mere possibility, since
it is possible that a man be born deaf, and the hearing
person also has some imperfection in his hearing, because
his hearing is limited. Therefore, it is not possible to
compare Allah with His creation. So it is not possible to
compare any of the Attributes of Allah with the attributes
of His creation, due to the obvious tremendous distinction
between the Creator and the created.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 173

Allah’s knowledge, because others, apart from Allah, can
‏وكأ‎ be referred to as “knower’ in a way that would
tquate them. But ¢more knowledgeable> dictates that
nobody is equal to Him in this knowledge. He knows
better than every knower. This, without doubt, is perfect
with respect to the Attribute.

We say to him: In the Arabic Language, the active subject
does not prevent equality of the attribute, but as for the
foun of preference, it restricts any share in what it
indicates.

We also say: It is not wrong to say, when comparing,
A'lamu (more knowledgeable), that is, to use a noun of
preference, even if it will be assumed that what is preferred
@ver, is not considered in that meaning, as Allah, the
Fixalted, says:

4The dwellers of Paradise will, on that Day, have the
best abode, and have the fairest of places for repose

(Al-Furgan 25:24)

The noun of preference (Altsanu “best’) is used here, even
though that which is being preferred over, does not posses
Anything of that.""!

‎the case of arguing with an opponent, and presenting‏ آلآ
‎proofs against him, it is allowed to use a noun of‏
‎preference, even if the one being preferred over does not‏
‎possess anything of the quality of the preference. Allah, the‏

‎(Translation note): Meaning, it refers to the inhabitants of
Paradise, and having the best abode, whoever is not in
Paradise, can not be said to have goodness of any sort, so
“best abode” does not infer that there are others that are
good too, but this is better.

‎172 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎statement, the Exalted:
) ‏بض‎ ES SSS CNY SEIT ‏بمَن في‎ Hal hg >
And your Lord is more knowledgeable of who you are
in the heavens and earth. And indeed, We have
preferred some of the Prophets above others» (Al-Isra
17:55)

‎So He is more knowledgeable about Himself, and other
than Him - being more knowledgeable than any other. So
He is more knowledgeable about you than you are
yourself, because He knows what will happen to you in
the future, while you do not know what you will earn
tomorrow.

‎The word A‘lamu (more knowledgeable) is a noun of
preference. One of the scholars missed that, and interpreted
A‘lamu to mean, ‘Alim (knower), and he said:

‎As has ‏عن‎ 5G ‏يمن‎ A ‏ريك هو‎ GD
Truly your Lord is more knowledgeable of who has

‎gone astray from His path, and He is the more knowl
edgeable of those who are guided> (An-Nahl 16:125)

‎- he said that it means that He knows the one who has gone
astray from His path, and He knows those who are guided
He said: “Because A‘lamu is a noun of preference, which
infers the presence of a partnership among the preferred,
and the one preferred over him. But this is not possible in
relation to Allah, rather, ‘Alim (knower) is an active subject;
it does not include co-participation nor preference,”

‎So we say to him: This is an error. Allah, talking about
Himself, says: ¢more knowledgeabley and you are saying
“knowledgeable.” If we interpret ¢more knowledgeable> to
mean “knowledgeable” we are relegating the degree of

Poimentary On The Introductory Notes...

4And who is more truthful in his word than Allah?»
(Ane Nisa’ 4:87)
iw excellence of His narrations includes excellence in
Pspiession, as well as in meaning.

‘Whe evidence of the fourth quality: Safety of the objective
Will intent, is His, the Exalted, saying:
Allah explains this to you lest you go astray.» (An-
Nisa’ 4:176)

PAllah desires to make clear to you, and guide you to
the path of those before you> (An-Nisa’ 4:26)

four qualities that make it obligatory to accept
ation are found together in the statements of Allah.

‘Wiis, it is obligatory upon us to accept the statement of
Allah as it is, and that we not allow any doubt regarding
Whit it proves. Because Allah did speak with this speech
fir the sake of leading the creation astray, rather it is
ded to make things clear for them, and to guide them.
tatements of Allah about Himself, and about others,
1101010 from the One who is the most knowledgeable knower
‏إلا‎ all those who speak; thus, it is not possible that it be
‘Wiiched by other than the truth, and it is not possible that it
"be unintelligible, rather than fluent speech. And if the Jinns
Wid mankind came together to produce its like, then they
Would not be capable of it. So when these four qualities are
Wombined in speech, then it is obligatory upon the one
being addressed to accept what it indicates.

174

Exalted, says:
415 Allah better, or that which they associate with
Him?} (An-Naml 27:59)

What is known, is that what they worship (beside Him)

does not possess any goodness.
Yusuf, peace be upon him, said:

€Are many lords differing among themselves better or
Allah, the One, the Most Supreme?) (Yiisuf 12:39)

While the lords posses no goodness.

The summary is to say, that €more knowledgeable>, which is
mentioned in the Book of Allah, is intended to express its
real meaning. Whoever interprets it to mean ‘Alin
(knower) has indeed committed an error from the view
of its meaning and on the basis of the Arabic Language.

The evidence for the second quality: Truthfulness; is in
His saying:
455 Al & SAAT ‏ومن‎

€And who can be more truthful than Allah in saying?>

(An-Nisa’ 4:122)
Meaning; there is no one that is more truthful than He is,
and truth is that the speech reflects the reality, and no
speech reflects the reality more than that of Allah, the
Exalted. So all of what Allah informed of, it is true, rather
more true than every saying.
The evidence for the third quality - clarification and
eloquence - is His, the Exalted saying:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 177

that He wanted His creation to believe in Attributes that
He does not have, merely to lead them astray, We say to
him: Therefore, what prevents you from affirming two
Hands for Allah?

So, seek the forgiveness of your Lord and repent to Him,
and say; “I believe in whatever Allah, the Exalted, informs
Of about Himself, because He is more knowledgeable about
Himself, and about other than Him, and He is the most
truthful in saying, and He is better in narrating than other
than Him, and His intent is more complete than other than
Him

That is why the author, may Allah have mercy upon him,
Mentioned these three qualities, while we added the fourth,
Which is, the intent to clarify for the creation, and.the intent
{0 guide them, due to His, the Exalted, saying:

#Allah desires to make clear to you, and guide you to,
the path of those before you» (An-Nisa’ 4:26)

This is the ruling concerning what Allah informs about
Himself, through His speech which comprises the four
terms related to speech.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

For example; the saying of the Exalted, while addressing
1

45K EO

<What hindered you from submitting to what I had
created with My two Hands 38:75)

So it is said: In this Ayah is the affirmation of two Hands
for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime; He creates whatever He
wills with them, we therefore affirm them, because the
speech of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is based upon
knowledge and truthfulness, and His speech is the most
excellent of all speech, and the most eloquent and
clarifying. It is not possible that He does not have two
Hands, and that He wanted the people to believe that
about Him. If this is assumed, it would dictate that the
Qur’an is a form of misguidance, since it described Allah
with what He does not have, and this is not allowed. So
when this is the case, then it is obligatory upon you to
believe that Allah - the Exalted - has two Hands, with
which He created Adam.

If you say what is intended by them (the two Hands) is
favor and power;

We reply: It is not possible that this is what is intended
unless you are so insolent against your Lord that you
describe His speech with contrary to the four qualities we
mentioned. We ask: When Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
said: €iwo Hands> - did He know that He has two
Hands? He would answer: “He knew.” We would then
ask: Is He truthful? He would definitely answer: “He is
truthful.” He cannot say that He does not have knowl
edge, or He is not truthful. He also cannot say that He
refers to them (the two hands) because of being inarticu-
late and incapable of expressing Himself. Nor can he say

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...
His Messengers are truthful in whatever they said; so all of
what they informed of about Allah, and about other than
Him from His creation; then they are truthful about it, and
they do not ever lie.

That is why there is a consensus among the scholars that
the Messengers, peace be upon them, are safe from lying.

© “Masdiigin'’ — (those who were entrusted); and
“Musaddagiin” — (the trusted ones). There are two
manuscripts;

Based on the manuscript with “Masdiiqin’’ - those who
Were entrusted, the meaning is that what was revealed to
them is the truth. The Masdiiq is the one informed of the
truth. The Sadiq is the one who comes with the truth. From
this is the statement of the Messenger 3% to Aba Hurairah,
may Allah be pleased with him, when the Shaitén told him:
“If you recite Ayat Al-Kursi, a protector from Allah shall
¢ontinue to be with you, and no Shaitan will come near you
until the morning.” He # said to him: “He told you the
truth but he is a liar." Meaning he informed you of the
truth.

So the Messengers are Masdiigin - whatever is revealed to
them is the truth. The One who sent them never belied
them, nor did the one who was sent to them - Jibril, peace
be upon him - belie them.

{Reported by Al-Bukhari (2311) - with a disconnected chain -
from the Haditl: of Abu Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with
him, when the Messenger of Allah deputized him to guard
the Ramadan Zakah. And in Al-Fath (4:488) Al-Hafidh said:
“This is how Al-Bukhari cited this Hadith here, and he did
not clearly state that it was narrated to him. An-Nasa’i,
Isma‘ili and Aba Nu’aim connected it from various routes.”

178 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wa:

As for what the Messengers informed of;

“Then, His Messengers who are the truthful ones, those
who were entrusted (Musduqan),") unlike those who say
about Allah what they know not.”

— an HH

The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, says:
“Then, His Messengers who are the truthful ones, those
who were entrusted, unlike those who say about Allah what
they know not.”

The Commentary

> His saying: “Then, His Messengers who are the truthful
ones, those who were entrusted ;"” As-Sidig (the truthful) is
he who informs of what reflects the reality. So every
Messenger was truthful in what they informed of.

However, there is no doubt that the chain of transmission
to the Messengers, peace be upon them, must be authentic.
If the Jews say: “Musa, peace be upon him, said so-and-so,”
we will not accept it until we know the authenticity of its
chain of transmission to Masa, peace be upon him. If the
Christians say: “Isa, peace be upon him, said so-and-so,”
we will not accept until we know the authenticity of the
chain of transmission to ‘Isa, peace be upon him. If
somebody says: “Muhammad 3%, said so-and-so” we will
not accept it until we know the authenticity of its chain of
transmission to Muhammad 2.

(1 And in one of the manuscripts it is: Musaddagan.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 181

Jand after land, until his Message reached the East and the
West of the world. So this is credence granted by Allah
through action.

In the same manner, are the Aydt that Allah manifest by his
hands, giving credence to him, whether these Aydt were
legislative or universal. As for the legislative type, he was
Olten asked regarding what he knew not, while Allah
Would reveal the reply:
4G, ‏ين‎ ON Je ‏عَنِ‎

And they ask you concerning the Ruh (Spirit). Say:

“The Ruh is one of the affairs of my Lord...’’>(Al-Isra’

17:85)")

Therefore, this is a confirmation that he is a Messenger. If
he were not a Messenger, Allah would not have responded:
‏ره‎

1]! Based on what is reported by Al-Bukhari (4721) from
“Abdullah bin Mas‘td, may Allah be pleased with him. He
said: “While 1 was with the Prophet #8 at a farm (of the
Ansar) and he was reclining on paim-leaf stalk, some of the
Jews passed by and some of them said to the other: ‘Ask him
regarding the Rh (Spirit). He (another) said: ‘What do you
need from him?’ One of them said: ‘(Do not) lest he respond
with what you dislike’ - but they said: ‘Ask him.’ So they
asked him regarding the soul, and the Prophet ‏وف‎ refrained
from giving any response. Then I realized that he was
receiving revelation, so I stood by my place. When the
revelation ended he 3§ said: And they ask you concerning
the Rul (the Spirit); Say: “The Rih (the Spirit) is one of the
affairs of my Lord. And of knowledge, you (mankind) have
been given only a little.””

180 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

4That this is, surely, the word revealed to a noble
Messenger. Possessor of strength, established in the
presence of the Lord of the Throne. Entitled to obedience
and faithful to his trust» (At- Takwir 81:19-21)

Regarding the version: “Musaddagiin” (the trusted ones) it
means that it is obligatory upon their nations to trust them.
Based on this, the meaning of the Musaddaqin is; legislatively.
That is; it is obligatory that they be trusted legislatively, so
whoever belies the Messenger, or belies them, then he is a
disbeliever. It is possible that there is another interpretation
for Musaddaqan. That is, that Allah, the Exalted, gives
credence to them. And it is known that Allah, the Exalted
gives credence to them, by His sayings and His actions.

As for His sayings; Allah says to His Messenger, Muhammad ‏يله‎
‎4But Allah bears witness by means of the revelation
which He has sent down to you (An-Nisa’ 4:166)

And He says:
4And Allah knows that you are His Messenger (Al-
Munafigiin 63:1)

This is a form of giving credence by statement.

As for His giving credence by action, this is by strengthen-
ing him and manifesting the Aydt. He 2 would go to
people and invite them to Islam, if they refused to accept,
they would pay the Jizyah, if they did not accept that, their
blood, women and wealth would be made lawful. Allah,
the Exalted, strengthened him and gave him victory over

183

Hommentary On The Introductory Notes...

ening of the face is the reward;” So 1
is i; they spoke abi
Allh what they know not through a form of Ane

Theie people who speak about Allah with what they do not
How can neither be truthful, nor entrusted, nor trusted

thier, the evidences establish thi
1 s establish that th i
SMWhat Shaitin inspired them ee

Die to this, He said: <Glorified be

Due i jour Lord, Li

Al- ‏لما‎ (Honor and Might)! (tle free) pact
Wey attribute unto Him! And peace be upon those who
Were sent! And praise be to Allah, Lord of Al-‘Alamin>
(Ap $affat 37:180-182) 1

‎Oe a‏ مد

‎Concerning his statement: “Due to this, He said:

‎) Might)! (He is free) from what they attribute unto Him!
| Atid peace be upon those who were sent! And praise be
Yo Allah, Lord of Al-'Alamin} (As-Saffat 37:180-182)

‎Commentary

‎Concerning his statement: Lihddhd (Due to this) that is:

‎becaus 1
: tal a perfect speech and the speech of His

‎182 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah ALWasitiyyal

‎€They ask you about fighting in the Sacred Month.
Say; “Fighting therein is a heinous thing, but to hinder
men from the way of Allah, and to be ungrateful to
Him, and to hinder men from the Sacred Masjid, and to
turn out its people there from, is more heinous to
Allah.» (Al-Bagarah 2:217)

‎The reply: ¢Say: “Fighting therein...’"» until the end is a
confirmation from Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

‎The universal Ayat are very obvious, there are so many
signs with which Allah supported His Messenger, whether
they came due to a cause or without one, And this is well
known in the Sirah.

‎Therefore, we understand from the word “Musaddagan”’
that they are given credence by Allah with universal and
legislative Ayat, and they are to be given credence from the
view of creation; that is, it is obligatory for them to trust
them. We only interpreted that to refer to trust legislatively
because there are those among the people who trust, and
there are those among them who do not trust, but what is
obligatory is to trust.

‎Concerning his statement: “unlike those who say about
Allah what they know not.”

‎These people are the liars or those who go astray, because
they say what they know not.

‎It appears the author, may Allah have mercy upon him, is
referring to the people of Tabrif, because the people of Taltrif
said about Allah what they know not, from ways. They said:
“He did not intend that” and “He intended this’! They
spoke about negation and affirmation without knowledge.

‎For example; they said: “By face, He did not mean face in
reality.” Here, they spoke about Allah with what they did
not know through a form of negation They then said: “The

(Commentary On The Introductory Notes

perfection by praise.

"So He glorified Himself from what those who oppose the
Messengers attribute to Him, and sent Salam upon those

who were sent, for the safety in what they said, from
defects and flaws.” :

Concerning his statement: “So He glorified Himself from
what those who oppose the Messengers attribute to Him, and
sent Salam upon those who were sent, for the safety in what
they said, from defects and flaws.”

The Commentary

® The meaning of this sentence is clear; it remains to be
said; And He praised Himself due to the perfection of
His Attributes, with respect to Himself and His
Messengers. For He, Glorious is He, is praiseworthy
for His perfect Attributes, and for sending the
Messengers, because of what that contains of mercy
and beneficent for creation. :

Commentary on Al-’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

He said: Glorified be your Lord»; The meaning of
Tasbi preceded; and it is declaring Allah free from
all that does not befit Him.

Concerning His statement: 4Your Lord}; He mentions
His lordship in connection with Muhammad 3, as a
specific lordship, in the same was as mentioning the
Creator in connection to the created.

Concerning His statement: 41074 of Al ‘Izzah (Honor
and Might)>: attaching a noun described to the
description. Among what is well-known is that all
that is lorded over is created. Here He said: €Lord of
Al-‘Izzah (Honor and Might)» meanwhile, Allah's
‘Izzah is not a creation, because it is of His Attributes.

So we say; this is a form of attributing the noun described
to the description, and as such ¢Lord of Al-‘Izzah (Honor
and Might)> will therefore mean here, “the Owner
‘Izzah,’ as it would be said: “the Lord of the house”
meaning, “the owner of the house.”

Concerning His statement: 4(He is free) from what they
attribute unto Him> meaning — from what the
polytheists attribute unto Him, as the author shall
mention.

Concerning His statement: And peace be upon the
those who were sent}, meaning - upon the Messengers.

Concerning His statement: ¢And praise be to Allah,
Lord of AL-’Alaminy: Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
praised Himself, after declaring Himself free of any
imperfections, because in praise there is an indication
of the perfect attributes, and in Tasbih (glorification)
there is a declaration of being far from any defects
Therefore, in the Ayah, He combined being far from
defect with Tasbih (glorification) and an affirmation of

mentary On The Introductory Notes...

the Attributes of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, are
0 Thabitiyyah and Salbiyyah; if you wish you can say,
Witibatah and Manfiyyah. The meaning is the same.

Muthbatah; All of what Allah affirms for Himself, and
Wil of them are perfect Attributes. There is no imperfection
‏الل‎ them in any way. And from their perfection is that it is
possible that what He affirmed indicates Tamthil
ing); because likening (Him) to the creation is a kind
imperfection.

| We understand this principle, we may recognize the
lation of the people of Tahrif, who claim that the
Wiiliatah Attributes necessitate a form of likening, and

i, they started negating them, fleeing from Tamthil.

‎an example; they said that if we affirm a Face for Allah,‏ إلا
‎Wlétates that it would be like the faces in creation.‏
‎interpreting its meaning to mean something else,‏ ,; "

‎# than a face in reality, becomes obligatory.

‎teply to them: Every Attribute that Allah affirms for
fiself, then it is a perfect Attribute. It is never possible
iil there would be an imperfection in any of the Attributes

‎the Attributes Tawgifiyyah the Names, or can they be
n through /jtihad (independent judgment)? Meaning,
[0 it be correct for us to describe Allah, Glorious and

‎We would reply by saying that the Attributes are

‎Tawyifiyyah according to the popular view of the scholars,

‎it as the Names are. Therefore, do not describe Allah,
with what He has described Himself.

‎We say that the attributes are divided into three
Walepories; an absolute perfect attribute; a restrictively

‎2 BOYS

‎“And He, Glorious is He, combined between negation and
affirmation regarding whatever He attributed to, and
named Himself with.”

‎© Concerning his statement: “And He, Glorious is He
combined between negation and affirmation regarding
whatever He attributed to, and named Himself with.”

‎The Commentary

‎The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, explained in
this sentence that Allah combined between negation and
affirmation regarding whatever He attributed to, and
named Himself with, this is because the completeness of
perfection will not be achieved, except with the affirmation
of the attributes of perfection, and the negation of what
contradicts them among the attributes of imperfection. The
author, may Allah have mercy upon him, therefore
indicates to us that Attributes are of two types:

‎Affirmed Attributes: To them, they are called As-Siffat Ath
‘Thabiitiyyah (affirming, Attributes).

‎Negated Attributes: They call them As-Sifat As-Salbiyyah,
from As-Salb and it means the negation. And there is no
problem calling it Salbiyyah (negated), even though some
people hesitated and said: “We would not call them
Salbiyah, we would rather say Manfiyyah (negated).” We
reply to them that as long as Salb has the meaning of Najfi in
the Arabic Language, there is no harm in the difference in
the expression.

‎On The Introductory Notes.‏ /ورماق16ا لال

‎Aid if they intend to deal treacherously with you, they
Wie indeed been treacherous to Allah before (Al-Anjil
W71). :

‎iid not say that He betrayed them, because betrayal is a
‏ال‎ of deception in a situation of trust; therefore, a
W#ption in a situation of trust is an imperfection; there is
i Any praiseworthy element in it. Therefore, the
ibutes of imperfection are generally negated from Allah.

‎Attributes that are derived from the Names are perfect

‎bed with what they indicate, Hearing is a perfect
bite which is indicated by His name, As-Sami (the All-
er). So every attribute indicated by the Names are

‎| Attributes, which are affirmed absolutely for Allah.
make this a separate category, because it does not
‏مكلا‎ much elaboration, while the others are divided into

‎Wee categories as mentioned earlier. So, Allah did not
Himself Al-Mutakallim (the speaker) despite that

‎sh can be good or evil, and it can also be neither good

‎le good is attributed to Him, that is why He did not
Himself Al-Mutakallim (the speaker), because the
mes are as Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, described

‏للا

‎MAnd to Allah alone belong all the most beautiful
Names (Al-A ‘raf 7:180).

‎١
‎“Where is no form of imperfection in them, and as such a
Win of absolute preference was used for them.

‎188 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyalt

‎perfect attribute; and an absolutely imperfect attribute.

‎As for an absolutely perfect attribute, then it is affirmed for
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, such as that He is the One
who speaks, and the Doer of what He wills, and Al-Qadir
(the All-Powerful) and similar to that.

‎As for the restrictively perfect attribute; Allah should not be
described with this except conditionally; such as cunning,
deception, mockery and their like. These are perfect
attributes with a condition. If it is mentioned in opposition
to those who are doing that, it is perfection. But if it is
mentioned generally, it will not be correct ‏ما‎ ascribe it to
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. It is on this basis that it is
not correct to generally describe Him as cunning, or
mocking, or deceiving; rather they should be restricted
So we say that He is cunning against those who are
cunning; He mocks the hypocrites; He deceives the
hypocrites; He plots against the unbelievers. You should
restrict them, because they should not be used except
restrictively

‎As for the absolutely imperfect attribute, Allah is not
described with it in any condition; such as the incapable
one, the betrayer, the blind and the deaf; because they are
attributes of absolute imperfection; and as such, Allah
should not be described with them. Look at the difference
between one who deceives and the betrayer. Allah, the
Exalted, says:

‎<The hypocrites seek to deceive Allah, but He
deceives them (An-Nisa’ 4:142)

‎So He affirms that He deceives those who attempt to
deceive Him. While in the case of betrayal, He says:

1 ‏ومماوم الا‎ On The Introductory Notes...

#And to Misa Allah spoke directly» (An-Nisd’ 4:164)

hese are the ways by which an Attribute can be affirmed
1101001 on this, we say the Attributes are more general than
‘Whe Names, because each Name includes an Attribute,
Whereas each Attribute does not include a Name.

for the attributes that are negated from Allah, the
ity and Sublime, they are many; but those that are
ilitmed are more, because the Attributes that are affirmed
all perfect Attributes. The more numerous and variant
are; the more perfect the One described. The negated
iribuutes are few; that is why we discover that they are
ally mentioned in general, not specified by a particular

ing those who claim that He should be described with
Attribute which He has negated from Himself, or to

the first category is general; as in His, the Exalted,
‘atoterment:

"There is nothing like Him, and He is the All-Hearing,

tie All-Seeing> (Ash-Shira 42:11)
ining, in His knowledge, power, hearing, seeing, might
mah), wisdom, mercy, and other than these among His
Hivibutes. So He did not specify them, He rather says:

there is nothing like Him>

190 Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

If someone says: We have understood the Attributes and
their categories. But what is the way to affirm an Attribute
as long as we are saying that the Attributes are Tawgifiyyal?

We reply: There are various ways to affirm an Attribute

The first way: The Names indicate them. Because every
Name includes an Attribute. That is why we earlier said
that every one of Allah’s Names refers to the Self of Allah,
and the Attribute that is derivable from it.

The second way: That there is a text for the Attribute. Such
as the Face, the two Hands, the two Eyes and the like,
These are mentioned in texts by Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime. And for example; retribution - the Exalted said

Surely, Allah is Mighty, Lord of retribution) (Ibrahim
14:47)

But Al-Muntagim (the one who exacts retribution) is not one
of Allah’s Names, contrary to what is found in some books
where the Names of Allah are listed. This is because
retribution is not mentioned except as a description, or a
restrictive active subject, as in His saying:

We will, surely, exact retribution from the guilty>
(As-Sajdah 32:22)

The third way: To take it from the action. Such as Al
Mutakallim (speaker);""! we take it from:

"(Translation note) Meaning, He may be described as
Mutakalliman “a speaker’ not that it is a Name (as
preceded), and this is so, based upon His statement in the
Ayah.

‎On The Introductory Notes.. 193‏ زابان111110الا

‎Wilvibutes of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, except in

‎Wal, or Specifically, when there is a reason for that.

‎filise the negation of a description does not include

‎tion, except when it implies what is affrimed. For this

‎i, We say that the Salbiyyah attributes which Allah

‎filed from Himself, imply the affirmation of the
lection of their opposites. So His saying:

‎doo ‏ين‎ ES ‏وما‎
‎4and no weariness touched Us>
(plies perfect power and ability. And His statement:
i>
And your Lord does not wrong anyone>’ (Al-Kahf
149)

‎perfect justice. And His statement:

‎0 ‏ع2‎ ssc

‎4 ‏ما تََمَلُونَ‎ yah “al ‏«وَمَا‎
‎WAlid surely Allah is not heedless of what you do (AL

‏)2:85 نمزلا

‎lies perfect knowledge and cognizance, and so on.

‎fore, inevitably, a negated description must indicate
1 is affirmed, and that affirmation is the perfection of
Opposite of what was negated. Otherwise, it (the
gation) would not be praiseworthy.

‎toes not find a mere negation among the attributes
piss from Allah, because a mere negation proves non
Weiitence, and non existence is nothing; so it contains
ier praise nor commendation. And, because it may be

‎i it that if He is unfit to be described with that
Wilibute, it therefore becomes a form of condemnation, and
Wi could be due to incompetence, so it is neither

‎192 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah AL-Wasitiywill

‎This is a general comprehensive negation, indicating
absolute perfection:

‎C8 AS Sip

‎there is nothing like Him)

‎Indicating every form of perfection.
But when there is a detailed negation, you only find it for a
reason; like His saying:

‎4h ‏ين‎ BLED

‎¢No son did Allah beget» (Al-Mu’minun 23:91)

‎This is in refutation to the one who says that Allah has 4
child. And His statement:

‎453 AS op
4He begets not, nor is He begotten} (Al-Ikhlds 112:3)
And His statement:
4And, verily, We created the heavens and the earth,

‎and all that is between them, in six days, and no
weariness touched Us (Qaf 50:38)

‎Since it may be assumed by the mind that does not
consider Allah with His due, that if He created these great
heavens and earths within a period of six days, He would
be exhausted: He therefore says:

‎C5 nt ‏ونا‎

‎40110 no weariness touched Usp

‎Meaning, tiredness and fatigue. It therefore becomes clear
with this, that the negation is not issued regarding the

‎On The Introductory Notes.. 195‏ / مما مور

‎Wares, he does not intend that there are negated Names,
@atise a negated name is not considered a Name of Allah,
Wit his objective is that what Allah’s Names indicate can be

‎‘Mlleming, or negating.

‏ف عُدُولَ ‎BY‏ 24 وَالْجَمَاعَةِ

‎Sell bine « 1 bi

‏وَالصَّدَيقِينَ وَالشهَدَاءٍ والضًّا

‎"So there is no renunciation for the People of Sunnah and

‎Wie Jama‘ah of what those who were sent, came with. For

‎Wideed, it is As-Sirat Al-Mustagim ; the Sirat of those

‎Whom Allah favored, among the Prophets, As-Siddigin,
Adt-Shuhada’, and the righteous.”

‎Concerning his statement: “So there is no renunciation
Jor the People of Sunnah and the Jama‘ah of what those who
were sent, came with. For indeed, it is As-Sirat Al-
Mustagim ; the Si:

‎“® Concerning his statement: “So there is no renunciation
Jor the People of Sunnah and the Jamé‘ah of what those who
Were sent, came with.” Al-'Udal (renunciation) means
turning away and deviation. It is not possible that the
People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah renounce what

‎194 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyilt

‎praiseworthy nor commendable.

‎The first example w indicates incapability, is found ina
poem, wherein the poet says:!")

‎“A tribe never betrays a covenant -

‎Nor do they oppress people, even. a mustard seed's degree

‎The second example that points to incompetence is that you
say: “Our wall does not wrong anybody.”

‎What is compulsory upon us regarding these Attributes
that Allah affirms for Himself, and those that He negated
is that we say: We hear, we trust, and we believe.

‎This is regarding the Attributes, among them are those
affirmed and those negated. As for the Names, they are all
affirmative.

‎However, there are among these affirmed Names of Allily
some that indicate a meaning that is affirming, and others
that indicate a meaning that negating. This is the basis of
categorization between negating and affirming in the case
of the Names of Allah.

‎Examples of those that indicate meanings that affirm are
many. An example of those that indicate a meaning that is
negating is As-Salam. The scholars say the meaning of As
Salam is the one free from all defects. Therefore, it indicates
a negation; meaning there is neither imperfection, nor
defect for Him. In the same way is Al-Qudiis, it is very close
to the meaning of As-Salam, because its meaning is He who
is distinguished from every imperfection and defect.

‎The expression of the author, may Allah have mercy upon

‎him, therefore is sound and correct. In the case of the

‎(The speaker is An-Najashi Al-Liarathi, and his name is Qais
bin ‘Amr; Ash-Sha'r wash-Shu ‘ara’ (1:288).

‎On The Introdu‏ مامه ساانلا

‎Hie Heated ignorance and forgetfulness from Allah, so it is
Wiligatory for us to believe that, because it came from a
enger, from Allah.

‎1015 4 ae FL ‏ربا الى‎ I 0 25 BS ‏مم‎ Sid

‎Wile said: “Who then, © Musa, is the Lord of you
Wwe?” Miisa said: “Our Lord is He Who gave to each
Wiig its form and nature, then guided it aright."> (Ta
Hit 20:49,50).

‎#oNieone asks us: “How do we know that Allah gave to

‎[١ thing its form and nature?” We reply: “Based on the

‎0111011 of Misa,” so we believe in that, and we say that

‎1 #@ each thing its form and nature which befits it. Man

‎this, the camel is like this, the cow is like this, the

‎is like this. Then He guided each created thing to

‎Wit is useful for it and benefits it. Everything knows what
‏تالالا‎ and beneficial for it.

‎if Ant stores its food in its hole during the summer. But it
ii] Not store the grain as it is; it will cut off its top so that it
Hol germinate, because if it germinates, it will be of no
to him, During the rains, when the grain that is put in
hole becomes wet, it will not leave it alone there to be
001 by the rotten odor, it will rather remove it from its
until it dries up in the sun and the wind, then it will

‎it inside!‏ زم

‎@Ver, it is required to clarify that whatever is ascribed

‎the earlier Prophets, it needs to be authentically

‎|, because of the possibility that it is a lie, just like

‎“that Which i is ascribed to the Messenger of Allah #, and
“even more so.

‎And his statement: “of what those who were sent, came with’

‎١ dies this include the rulings or is it that the discussion

‎Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎the Messengers came with.

‎The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, only made
this negation to clarify that due to the completeness of thelt
adherence, it is not possible that they deviate from what the
Messengers came with. They are those who adhere
completely, without deviations at all from what the
Messengers came with. Rather, their path is that they say
“We hear and obey the rulings, and we hear and we trust
the information.”

‎* Concerning his statement: “of what those who were sent
came with;” it is clear that we do not disregard what
Muhammad # came with, because he is the Last of the
Prophets; and it is obligatory for all the servants to
follow him. However, in the case of what came from
other than him, is it allowed for the People of the
Sunnah and the Jami‘ah to turn away from that? They
are not to turn away from that either, because there is
no contradiction in the information that came from the
Messengers, may the Salah and Saldm be upon them,
because they are all trustworthy. It is not possible that
it was abrogated, because it is information (revealed).
Everything that the Messengers informed of about
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is to be accepted, and is
true, and it is obligatory to have faith in it

‎For example: Miisa, peace be upon him, said to Fir'awn
when he (Fir’awn) told him:
TES 6G eek Ho IM i IG JD

‎42% bbe

‎<What about the generations of old?” He said: “The
knowledge thereof is with my Lord, in a Record. My
Lord neither errs nor forgets’ (Ta Ha: 20: 51,52)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

(animal) with undivided hoof» (Al-An‘am :146)

Wut they are lawful in our Shari‘ah.

Therefore, it is possible that we interpret the statement of
Shaikh Al-Islam, may Allah have mercy upon him, to
include information and rulings. And that we say that
Whatever rulings were among the Shariahs of earlier
Prophets, then it is for us, except if there is an evidence
{to the contrary).

Mut there remains a problem; how do we know that this is
fvom the Shariah of the earlier Prophets?

We say; there are two ways for us regarding that: the first
Way: through the Book (the Qur’an). The second way is
through the Sunnah.

Whatever Allah relates regarding the earlier nations, then it
is affirmed, and whatever the Prophet # related (about
them) - in what is authentically related from him - then it is
also affirmed.

As for what remains, we neither attest to it, nor belie it,
@xcept if our Shariah comes with what testifies to what is
Teported from the People of the Book; for we will believe it
Wot because of their reports, but because of what is
fontained in our Shariah, If our Shari’ah comes with what
belies the People of the Book, we will belie it, because our
Sharfah has belied it. The Christians claim that the Al-Masih
ithe Messiah) was the son of Allah. We say: “This is a lie!”
Jews say that ‘Uzair was the son of Allah. We say:
"This is a lie.”
© Concerning his statement, may Allah have mercy
upon him: “For indeed, it is As-Sirat Al-Mustagim’” Fa
innaltu (For indeed it is) is a pronoun that is referring to
what the Messengers came with; and it is possible that
it refers to the way of the People of the Sunnah and the

198 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wa

now has to do with the topic of the Attributes only, and
hence, is it only specific to the information?

If we consider the generality of the expression, we would
conclude that it includes both the information and the
judgments. But if we consider the context, we would say
that the context implies that the discussion concerns
matters of creed, and it is from the topic of information.

However, we say that if the statement of Shaikh Al-Islam,
may Allah have mercy upon him, has to do with creed
specifically, then that is specific, and we do not have
anything to say; but if it is general, it therefore includes the
matters of rulings.

And the scholars differ concerning the rulings that are from

the earlier Messengers. Are they rulings for us if our
Shariah does not come with anything contradictory to

them, or are they not rulings for us?!)

What is correct is that they are rulings for us, and that
whatever rulings are affirmed from the earlier Prophets,
then it is for us, except when our Shariah comes with
something contradictory. If our Shariah comes with any-
thing contradictory to it, it will be in accordance with that.
For example, prostration as a way of greeting was allowed
in the Shari‘ah of Yasuf, Ya’qub and his sons, but it is
unlawful in our Shariah. In the same way, camels were
unlawful for the Jews:

BS ‏ذى‎ JE GE a all Ed
€And unto those who are Jews, We forbade every
There are two narrations from Ahmad. The first; that they
are also rulings for us, and the second; that they are not

rulings for us. Ibn Qudamah mentioned both in Rawdatun-
Nazir (2517)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 201

% Concerning his statement: “ihe Sirat of those whom
Allah favored, among the Prophets, As-Siddigin, Ash
Shuhada’, and the righteou

“The Sirat of those whom Allah favored’ that is their path. He
attributed it to them because they traversed upon it; they
ure the ones walking upon it, as Allah sometimes attributes
it to Himself:

And verily, you are indeed guiding to a Siratin
Mustagim. Allah's Sirat, to Whom belongs all that is in
the heavens and all that is in the earth.» (Ash-Shura
42:52,53)

Insomuch as it is He Who legislated it and established it for
His servants, and that it leads to Him, so it is the Sirat of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, from two angles, and the
believers’ Sirat from one angle. It is Allah’s Sirat from the
two angles that it is He who established it for His servants,
and, that it leads to Him. And it is the believers’ Sirat
because it is they alone who traverse upon it.

#4 Concerning his statement: “the Sirdt of those whom
Allah favored”

An-Ni‘mah (favor): Every virtue and beneficence from
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, upon His servants, it is a
Ni'mah (favor). And every favor that we have is from Allah.
And the favors of Allah are of two categories: General and
Specific. And specific also has two categories: The
particularly specific, and the generally specific

The general refers to that which is for the believers and
Other than the believers. For this reason, if somebody asks

200 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Jama‘ah; and that is following, and not turning away
from it. So what the Messengers came with, and what
the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah go to, it is As-
Sirat Al-Mustagim
Sirat is in the Fa’dl form, with the meaning of Magr
Fardsh (bed) has the meaning of Mafrash, and 5
(planting) has the meaning of Maghiriis. So its meaning is
that of the Maf'ul noun. And As-Sirdt is only said for a
wide, straight path, and it is derived from the term Az
Zarat which means to swallow the morsel quickly; because
when the path is wide, there will be no restriction blocking
the people in it. Therefore, in defining As-Sirat, they say
Every wide path, without slopes nor declines nor bends.

Therefore, the path that the Messengers came with is As.
Sirat Al-Mustagim, the one that has no bends nor crooked-
ness; a straight path without any deviation to the right or to
the left.

This is My straight path. So follow it» (Al-An‘am
8:153)

Based on this, Al-Mustagim is therefore further descriptive
of our explanation of As-Sirat; that it is the wide path which
has no bends in it, because this is Al-Mustagim. Or it is said
it is a restrictive description, because some paths might not
be straight, as Allah, the Exalted, says:

4And lead them on to the path of the flaming Fire
stop them, vereily, they are to be questioned} (As-S
37:23 and 24)

And this path is not straight

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

€And whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger, then
they will be in the company of those upon whom Allah
has bestowed his favor, of the Prophets, the Siddiqin,
Ash-Shuhada', and the righteous (An-Nisa’ 4:69)

These are four categories.

Firstly: The Prophets, they are all of those upon whom Allah
sent revelation and conferred Propethood, and this is
included in this Ayah. Italso includes the Messengers, because
every Messenger is a Prophet, but not every Prophet is a
Messenger. Based on this, the Prophets will therefore, include
the Messengers; so the Prophets includes the Messengers of
firm resolve (Liwlil-‘Azm) and the others, and it also includes
the Prophets who were notsent (as Messengers), and these are
the most exalted category of the creation.

Secondly: As-Siddigin, which is plural of 5104470. So, who
are they? The best explanation of As-Siddiq, is His, the
Exalted, saying:

تلك جاه ‎alah‏ وَسَدَقَ ,4

4And he who brought the truth (As-Sidq), and believed
(Saddagqa) in it» (Az-Zumar 39:33)

And His, the Exalted, saying:

And those who believe in Allah and His Messengers,
they are As-Siddigiin) (Al-Hadid 57:19)

Whoever fulfills faith - and none fulfills faith except with As-
$idg (truthfulness) and At-Tasdiq (trust); then he is a Siddiq.

202 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

us; “Does Allah grant favors to the disbeliever?” We say:
Yes, but these are general favors. They are favors that
maintain their bodies; not those that benefit their religion.
For example food, drink, clothing, abode, and the like. Both
the believer and the disbeliever are included in these.

As for the specific favor, it is what benefits their religion,
like faith, knowledge, and righteous actions; these are
specific for the believers, and they are general for the
Prophets, and the Siddigin, just like the martyrs and the
righteous. But Allah's favors upon the Prophets and the
Messengers are of the most specific kind. Listen to His, the
Exalted, statement:

And Allah has sent down to you the Book and Al-
Hikmah (the wisdom), and taught you that which you
knew not, And tremendous is Allah's grace upon you}

(An-Nisa’ 4:113)

So this is a favor which is more specific, the believers do not
share in it with the Prophets, rather they are excluded from
it.

Concerning his statement: “the Sirdt of those whom
Allah favored” - it is like His, the Exalted, statement:

uide us in As-Sirdt Al-Mustagim. The Sirat of those
upon whom You have bestowed your favors.> (Al-
Fatihah 1 :6,7).

So who are those upon whom Allah has bestowed His
favors? Allah, the Exalted, explains it with His saying:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 205

As for Ash-Shuhada’, it is said that they are those who were
killed in the Cause of Allah, based on His statement:

4And that Allah distinguishes those who believe and
may take Shuhada’ (martyrs) from among you> (AL
‘Imran 3:140)

It is also said that they are the scholars based on His
Statement:

45 ‏وأؤثرا‎ KAI A ‏إلا‎ a

Allah bears witness (Shahid Allah) that there is no god
but He - as do the Angels, and those possessing
knowledge> (Al ‘Imran 3:18).

He, therefore made the people of knowledge witnesses to
what Allah testifies to Himself, and because the scholars
testify to the Messengers’ by proclamation, and to the
Ummah by conveying (the Message).

If it were said that the Ayah is general, for whoever was
killed in the Cause of Allah, the Exalted, as well as the
scholars, because the expression is applicable to both, and
they are not contradictory; then it therefore includes those
who were killed in the Cause of Allah, and the scholars
who testify to Allah’s Oneness, and testify for the Prophet
4% by conveying (the Message) and to the Ummah whom it
is conveyed (then this would be correct).

As for the righteous people, it includes all three categories
that preceded, and those who are below them in rank. So
the Prophets are righteous, As-Siddiqin are righteous, and
the Shuhada’ are righteous. They are listed via the method
of listing the general along with the specific. The righteous
are those that fulfill the rights of Allah and the rights of His

204 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

As-Sidq in creed means with Ikhlds (sincerity), and this is the
most difficult thing for a man, such that one of the Salaf
(pious predecessors) said: “I do not endure a more severe
struggle with my soul over anything like [ do over Al-Ikhlas
(sincerity).” Therefore, one must have As-Sidq in the
objective - and that is the creed - and Al-Ikh sincerity)
for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

As-Sidg in speech, is that one does not say except what is in
accord with the reality; whether that is against himself, or
others. So he maintains justice with himself, and with
others, his father, his mother, his brother, and his sister,
and others.

As-Sidg in actions means that one’s deeds are in accordance
with what the Prophet # came with. And part of Sidg in
actions is that they spring from Ikhlas (sincerity). If they do
not spring from Ikllas; he is not behaving with Sidq,
because his deeds contradict his saying. Therefore, the
Siddig is he who is truthful in his creed, his [kilas, his intent,
his speech, and his actions.

As a general term, the most virtuous of As-Siddigin is Aba
Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him. This is because the
most virtuous of all Ummahs (nations) is this Ummah
(nation), and the most virtuous of this Ummah after its
Prophet is Aba Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him.

And being a Siddiq is a status for men and women.
Regarding ‘Isa, the son of Maryam, Allah, the Exalted, said:

¢And his mother was a Siddiqah> (Al-Ma‘idah 5:75)
It is said: Ag-Siddigah the daughter of Ag-Siddiq about

‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her, and Allah, the
Exalted, favors whom He wills among His servants.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 207

not, nor, is He begotten. And there is none like unto
Him} (Al-Ikhlas 112:1-4)”

‘The Commentary

© Concerning his statement: “Included in this topic, ” itis
implied that by this, he means his own saying: “And He
combined between negation and affirmation re: garding
whatever He attributed to, and named Himself with."
is also possible that he is referring to what ul,
regarding the fact that the People of the Sunnah and the
Jama‘ah describe Allah, the Exalted, with what He
describes Himself, and what His Messenger described
Him with.

In either case, this Sirah, together with what comes after it,
‏إل[‎ included in what was earlier discussed, regarding the
fact that Allah, the Exalted, combined between negation
And affirmation regarding what He attributed to, and
famed Himself with, and the People of the Sunnah believe
in that.

* Concerning his statement: “In Strat Al-Ikhlas’’ As-
Stirah is an expression used to indicate Aydt from
Allah’s Book that are Musawwarah (enclosed); that is,
Separated from what precedes them and what comes
after them, like a building that is surrounded by a
fence.

Concerning his statement: “Stirat Al-Ikhlas” Having
Ikhlas with something, means “cleaning’’. That is that
which is cleaned and nothing remains mixed with it. It
is said that it is named that because it contains Ikhlas for
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and that whoever
believes in it, then he is a Mukhlis. It therefore means
that it is Mukhlisah (purifying) for one who recites it.
That is, that when the person recites it, believing in it,

servants, but they do not hold the previously mentioned
status’ — the status of Prophethood, Siddigiyyah and Ash-
Shahadah (martyrdom witnessing) — they are below them
in rank.

This Sirdt which the Messengers came with is the Sirat of
these four categories of people, so others do not walk upon
that which the Messengers brought.

TAD ‏ا‎ if dus ‏الي‎ Pee
‏يكن‎ ph 0 ‏كذ‎ (de ‏لم‎ © Keats ii 0 Ac

> ‏يرا نسلا‎ ri
Included in this topic, is what Allah attributed to Himself
in Siirat Al-Ikhlas, which is equal to a third of the Qur'an,
when He 54: Say: "He is Allah, One! Allah is As-
Samad. He begets not, nor, is He begotten. And there
is none like unto Him.» (Al-Ikilas 112:1-4)

‎HS‏ سس وات

‎© Concerning his statement: “Included in this topic, is
what Allah attributed to Himself in Surat Al-Ikhla:
is = toa third yt the aie when He

‎> Bb
IN ee ‏ب‎ 50
Say: “He is Allah, One. Allah As-Samad. He begets

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 209

in terms of reward does not necessitate equality in terms of
fulfillment. For this reason, if somebody recit rat Al-
IMilds three times during the Salah, it will not suffice him for
the recitation of Al-Fatihah.

The scholars say that the meaning of it being equal to a
third of the Qur'an is that the Qur’an contains sections
fegarding information about Allah, information about
Creation, and rulings. These are three.
1, Information about Allah: They say that Sirah 4Say ‏د‎
‎“He is Allah, One’’> comprises that
Information about creation; such as the information of
the earlier nations, and information concerning con-
temporary events, and future events.
The third is about rulings, such as “Establish (Salah),’”
“Give (Zakah),”” “Do not commit Shirk’ and the like.

This is the best of what is said about it being equal to a
third of the Qur’an.

® Concerning his statement: “when He says: 4Say: “He
is Allah, One>”

#5iy> is an address to everyone that the address is
Applicable to.

And the circumstances surrounding the revelation of this
Siiraliarethat the polytheists were saying to the Messenger #z:
"Describe your Lord to us.” So Allah revealed this Sirah.)

And itis said that rather the Jews were claiming that Allah
IN Reported by Ahmad (5:133), At-Tirmidht (3364), Al Baihaqi
in Al-Asma’ was-Sifat (nos. 50,607, and 608), [bn Khuzaimah
in At-Tawhid (45), and Ad-Darimi in Ar-Rad ‘Alal-Jahmiyyah
(no. 28), from the Hadith of Ubayy bin Ka’b, may Allah be
pleased with him. In Al-Fath, Al-Hifiz said: “It was recorded
by Al-Baihagi with a Jayyid (good) chain.” (13:356). It was
graded Sahih by Al-Albani in Salih Sunan At-Tirmidhi (268)

208 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

then he has done Ikhlas for Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.

It is also said that it is Mukhlasah - with Fath on the Lam,
because Allah, the Exalted purified it for Himself, not
mentioning in it any rulings, nor any matters of informa
tion about other than Him. Rather, it is information
specifically about Allah. And both of these meanings are
correct, and there is no contradiction between the two of
them.

* Concerning his statement: “which is equal to a third of
the Qur'an,’ the evidence for that, is the saying of the
Prophet 3& to his Companions : “Would anyone of you
be able to recite one-third of the Qur’an in a night?’
They asked : “How is that, O Messenger of Allah?” He
said: “(Allah is One; Allah Samad) is equal to one
third of the Qur‘an.” "!

So this Sarah is equal to a third of the Qur'an, in reward,
not proportion. This is as has been affirmed from the
Prophet 3, that: “Whoever says: ‘There is none worthy of
worship except Allah Alone, without partners, His is the
Dominion, and to Him is the praise, and He has power
over all things’ - ten times, it is as if he freed four people
from among the children of Isma‘il.” 7!

So, if one says this statement of remembrance ten times,
and it Was required upon him to free four slaves, does that
suffice him? We say that this does not suffice him, while the
reward is equal to that as the Prophet # said. An equality

11 Reported by Al-Bukhart (5015) from Abit Sa‘id Al-Khudri,
may Allah be pleased with him, and Muslim (811) from Aba

Darda’ ‏هه‎
‎©) Reported by Al-Bukhari (6404), Muslim (2693) from Aba
Ayytb Al-Ansari 4.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

Then, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime is Altad (One). Ahad
Usually is not used except in the case of a negation, or in
aifirmation in the case of days of the week. It is said: “Al-
Aliad (Sunday), Al-Ithnain (Monday)...” but it comes with
Tespect to affirmation to describe the Lord, the Mighty and
Sublime, because He, Glorious and Exalted is He, is One.
That is He is One in matters that are specific to Him, in His
Gelf, His Names, His Attributes and His actions. ¢One>: He
"has no second, no equal and no rival

* Concerning his statement: “¢Allah is As-Samad>”

٠ This is a clause of continuation, after He mentioned Al-
adaniyyah (the oneness), he mentioned As-Samadiyyah,
used a definite clause for both, to indicate exclusivity.

it is Allah, alone, is As-Samad.

at is the meaning of As-Samad?

Wid Might), His Sovereignty and in all His Attributes. It is
0 said; As-Sumad is the one who does not have any cavity
١ that is without intestines nor abdomen. That is why it is
Waid: The Angels are Samad because they do not have
#avities; they do not eat nor drink. This meaning is related
Thom Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him.) And
lis does not negate the first meaning, because it indicates
Mis self sufficiency from all of His creation.

‘And it is said: As-Samad has the meaning of the Ma‘fil

Hi Reported by Ibn Abi ‘Asim in As-Sunnah (665) with a weak

chain of transmission from Ibn Abbas. It is authentically
transmitted from Mujahi 'As-Samad: the one without an
abdomen as is in As-Sunnah of Ibn Abi ‘Asim (673) and Ibn

Kathir authenticated its report from the Companio
‘Abdullah bin Buraidah. a.

210 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

was created from this and that material, as they were
saying, so Allah revealed this Sarah!"

Whether the causes mentioned are correct or not correct, it
is upon us, whenever we are asked, that is about Allah, that
we say: €Allah is One. Allah As-Samad>

> Concerning his saying: “¢Say: “He is Allah, One}
Huwa is a pronoun. What does it refer to? It is said
that it refers to the one who is asked about. As if he
is saying: “The one whom you are asking about is
Allah.” It is said that it is the pronoun serving as the
main subject, and “Allah” is the second subject, and
“One is the predicate of the second subject. Based
on the first consideration, “He” is a subject, “Allah”
is the predicate of the subject and (the) “One” is the
second predicate.
“ Allah’ is the proper noun that refers to Allah Himself; it is
unique to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. None other than
Him is named with it. Every other Name of Allah follows it
except in a few cases.
The meaning of “Allah” is Al-Ilah (the Deity), that is “the
one who is deified” meaning, worshipped, but the Hamzah
became silent due to constant usage, just as in the case of
An-Nis, (the people) its basis is Al-Unds, and in the case of:
“Hadha khairu min hadha (This is better than this) its basis is
actually: “Hadha akhairu min hadhd, but due to extensive
usage the Hamzah was dropped.

‎Aba Shaikh reported it in Al-’Azamah’ (86) and in its chain is‏ لذ
‎Yahya bin Abdullah Al-Bablati, weak as is in Tagrib and in it‏
‎again is Aban bin Abi Ayyash, Matriik (a rejected reporter) as‏
‎is in Al-Tagrib and As-Suyati refers the Hadith in ‘Ad-Durr Al-‏
‎Manthitr’ (6/504) to Aba Bakr As-Samargandi in ‘Fada’il Qui‏
‎Hiaw Allahu Ahad.’‏

mentary On The Introductory Notes... 213

Sumadiyyah and Al-Ahadaniyyah We say it is an
emphasis, because we have understood this from
What preceded; therefore, its mention will serve as an
@mphasis to what has preceded, and a form of
acknowledging it.
١ because of His Ahadaniyyah and His Samadiyyah, He
jes not beget; because the child is like the father in its
ire, attributes, and even in resemblance. When Mujaziz
Madlaji went to Zaid bin Harithah and his son Usamah,
le both of them were covered up with a Rida’, and their
Were uncovered, he looked at the feet and said: “These
fre from each other.”"! He knew that because of the

Decause of His perfect Ahadaniyyah and His perfect
diyyah; <He begets not». And the father is in need of
Hon, to serve him, spend on him, and support him
he is incapable, and he makes his lineage live on.
Nor was He begotten» because if He was begotten, He
[0 have been preceded by a father, while He, the
ity and Sublime, is the First, nothing was before
j He is the Creator, and everything other than Him
١١ treature, how would He be begotten?

fejecting him being begotten is more comprehensive
Hie intellect than rejecting that he begot. That is why no
elaims that Allah was begotten, while the fabricators
i that He had a son. Allah has negated both of these,
i He began with the negation of having a son because of
Importance attached to rebutting those who claim so.

Reported by Al-Bukhari (6770) and Muslim (1459) from
(1459)

212 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

form, that is Al-Masmiidu ilaihi; He who is betaken to by the
creation for their needs, with the meaning that they incline
to Him, and they reach out for Him, and surrender their
needs to Him. So it has the meaning of the One whom
everyone is in need of

These interpretations do not contradict one another in
relation to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and as such we
say that each of these meanings are affirmed due to the lack
of contradiction among them. We interpret it with a
comprehensive interpretation; we say As-Samad is the
One Who is Perfect in His Attributes, the One whom all
His creatures are in need of; they are dependent upon Him
Therefore, the tremendous meaning of the word As-Samad
becomes clear to you, He is the One independent of any
need from all other than Him, Perfect in all of what is
attributed to Him, and that all other than Him is in need of
Him.

If somebody says to you: “Allah rose above the Throne,
does His rising above the Throne mean that He is in need of
the Throne, such that if the Throne was removed, He
would fall?” The answer is no! Never! Because Allah is
Samad, perfect without need of the Throne. Rather the
Throne, the heavens, the Kursi and all creatures are in need
of Allah; He is independent of any need from them. We
derive this from the word As-Samad.

If somebody asks: “Does Allah eat and drink?” I say:
“Never; because Allah is Samad.”

With this, we recognize that the word Ags-Samad is a word
that covers all the perfect Attributes of Allah, and it relates
to all the imperfect attributes of the creatures. That is why
they are in need of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

> Then, He said: “€He begets not, nor, is He begotten
And there is none like unto Him.» This emphasizes As

Paste pit wall ‏من ذا‎

“
se He described Himself with in the most
ignificent-Ayah in Allah's Book, when He said:
Allah, there is no Ilah except Him, Abbaye AL
i ia sleep, nor slumber overtake Him, For
‘ 0 what is in the heavens and in the earth. Who is
Bin. te trom before Him except .with His
7 i ‏ف‎ 9 hae what is in front of them and what
eae 7 00 will not encompass anything of
ghee ige, except what He wills. His Kurst extends
heavens and the earth, and He is not fatigued
Dy preserving them, and He is Al-Aliyyu (the Mot

High), the ‏مجم لم‎
Bae a 2 a ‘Azim (the Most Magnificent) (Al-

a OO

ncerning his statement: “And what He described

“lag with in the most magnificent Ayah in Allah's Book.
ei 0 ‏رالقللقة‎ there is no Mlah except Him, AL
pe” eae neither sleep, nor slumber overtake
ae 1 5 soit is in the heavens and in the earth.
ec. ie 3 11 Deore, Him except with His
oe ae sabe what is in front of them and what
ili , and they will not encompass anything of

wwledge, except what He wills. His Kurst extends

214 Commentary on Al“Agidah Al-Wi

€Allah has not taken unto Himself any son.» (Al-
Mu'miniin 23:91)

- even in the designation, so He does not beget, nor does He
take a son. The children of Adam could take someone
among them to be their child, someone he neither adopts
nor acquires by Wilayah or other than that, even though
adoption is not legislated. But as for Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, He begets not nor was He begotten. And since itis
possible that it occurs to the mind that something that is
neither a father nor begotten one, yet it is produced, He
negated this wrong assumption which may occur, and said:
4And there is none like unto Him> And when it is negated
that any are like Him, it therefore suggests that He is not
produced. And there is none like unto Him}; That is, none
is His likeness, in any of His Attributes.

There are affirming Attributes and negating Attributes in
this Sirah.

The affirming Attributes: €Allah> which includes Al-
Ulihiyyah (divinity); 4One}> which includes Al-Ahadiyyah,
and 4As-Samad> which includes As-Samadiyyah.

The negating Attributes are: 4He begets not nor was He
begotien> and There is none like unto Him.>

There are three affirming, and three negating, and this
negation contains affirmations of perfection in Al-Aha-

diyyah and As-Samadiyyah.

‎ooo “‏ ف

©ommentary On The Introductory Notes... 217

felerence to content and subjects, then there is a superiority
Ulstinction. So Stirat Al-Ikhlas — containing the praise of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and what it includes
{egarding the Names and Attributes, — is not like Sijrat Al-
Masad — as far as the subjects are concerned — which
Pontains a clarification of the case of Aba Lahb.

hi the same manner, there are distinctions in relation to the
Wifect and strength in the manner of expression; because
You will find some Ayét that are brief, while containing a
sivong deterrence and admonition for the heart, and you
Wind another Ayah that is lengthier than it, but it does not

WoiMprise what the first one comprised. For example, His,
the Exalted, saying:

© 40 you who believe! When you contract a debt for a
) fixed period, then write it down > (Al-Bagarah 2:282)

Subject of this verse is simple; it deals with the matter
inter-relationship among people. It does not contain such
tas that which is contained in this statement of Allah -

Whe Mighty and Sublime -

4Pvery soul shall taste death. And only on the Day of
Resurrection shall you be awarded your wages in full.
$0 whosoever is removed away from the Fire, and
widmitted to Paradise, has indeed is successful. And the
life of this world is only the enjoyment of deception (Al
‘Imran 3:185).

Mp this contains tremendous meanings; restraint, admoni-

216 Commentary on Al“Agidalt Al-Wasitiyyalt

over the heavens and the earth, and He is not fatigued by
preserving them, and He is Al-‘Aliyyu (the Most High)
the Al-‘Azim (the Most Magnificent)» (Al-Bagarah
2:255)""

The Commentary

@ Concerning his statement: “And what He described
Himself with in the most magnificent Ayah in Allah’s
Book, “this Ayah is called Ayatul-Kursi, because the
mention of the Kursf is made therein

¢His Kurst extends over the heavens and the earth>
And it is the greatest verse in the Book of Allah. And the
evidence for that is that the Prophet #4 asked Ubayy bin
Ka’b: “Which Ayah in the Book of Allah is the most
magnificent?” He said to him:
Allah, there is no lah except Him>

He 3 patted his chest, and said: “The knowledge has been
made easy for you, O Aba Al-Mundhir."") That is, the
Prophet # affirmed that it is the most magnificent Ayah in
the Book of Allah, and this is evidence of Ubayy’s
knowledge of the Book of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
There is evidence in this Hadith that parts of the Qur’an are
superior to others, as was indicated by the Hadith about
Surat Al-Ikhids, And this is a subject that requires explana-
tion. So we say, in reference to the Speaker, then there is no
distinction of superiority, because the Speaker (in all of it) is
One, and He is Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. But in

101 Reported by Muslim (810) from Ubayy bin Ka’b ‏.يي‎

fry On The Introductory Notes... 219

the Meaning of 4Al-Qayyiim> is that He maintains

17 07 ‏ها‎ maintaining Himself necessitates that He

tial lent from everything, having no need to eat
ink, nor other than that, and, that other than Hii

be ae itself. Rather, it is in need of Allah, fe

4 ‏ص‎ Bi for its coming into existence, its

Wimiong the meanings of €Al-Qayyum> is that He
ins the others. This is based upon the saying of

Halted:
1 4ES ‏ف تين يها‎ EE ‏مر‎ Sy

Wen He, Who maintains every soul with what it
a s
1

١ ‏اناا‎ is omitted; it is: “As the one who is H
uitted is not like
١ 00 every soul with what it earns is
“at ighty and Sublime. That is why the scholars

] -Qayyiim> is He Who maintains Himself i
ining other than Him. And when it is He Who
ins the others, it necessitates that the others are

ined by Him. Allah, the Exalted, said:

Al SN CS is del 5
d among His Ayat is that the heavens :
4 1 vens and the earl
Wiaintained by His command» (Ar-Rum 30:25). eal

fore, His are the perfect Attri 3
cect ection. tributes, the perfect

3 Names (Al-Hayyu , AL-Qayyiim) are two magni-
lames, with which, if one calls upon Allah, He
. That is why, it is necessary for a person to
sede with Allah using these Names in his supplica-
aying: “4 Ya Hayyu! Ya Qayytim> (0 ‏نم‎ 0

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wisitiyyil

rousal of hope and the instilment fear.

tion, ai It is, for
example, not like the A

regarding debt is longer than it

yah regarding debt, while the Ayili

Concerning the author’s statement: “And what He
described Himself with in the most magnificent Ayalt ‏الأ‎
‎Allah's Book, when He said: Allah, there is no Tit
except Him,}” Allah informs in this Ayah that He is
the sole possessor of Uhihiyyah (divinity), and that is
derived from His saying:

Allah, there is lah except Him>

The style of stating

Because this clause implies a restriction.
ong the strongest

an affirmation after a negation, is ami

manners to express a restriction.

~ Concerning his statement: ” €Al-Hayyu Al-Qayyim>y"
Al-Hayyu; possessing, perfect life, which covers all of
the perfect Attributes; not preceded by non-existence,
nor suffering extinction; and no imperfection in any
form will befall it.

And ¢Al-Hayyu>: is among the Names of Allah, while it
is used for other than Allah. Allah. The Exalted, said:

He brings forth the living (Al-Hayy) from the
(Al-An‘am 6:95)

dead

ke the living, and a share in the name

But the Living is not li
hat is named.

does not necessitate a commonality in w

€Al-Qayytim}: is in the Fay’al form, and this is a method
of exaggeration in the expression, and it is derived from

Al-Qiyam (to maintain).

©ommentary On The Introductory Notes... 221

toes not sleep and it does not befit Him to sleep.”""! This
liribute is one of negation, and it has been said earlier that
the attributes of negation will always contain an affirma-
tion, which is the perfection of the opposite. The perfection
that is contained in His statement {neither sleep, nor
Wiimber overtake Him} is the perfection of life and
Maintenance. It is from the perfection of His Living that
He does not have a need for sleep, and from the

fection of His maintenance that He does not sleep,

cause sleep is only needed by the living due to its
lmperfectness; because it needs to sleep in order to rest
fom the preceding fatigue and to regain strength for
fiture work. And for this reason the inhabitants of
Paradise have a perfect life, in that they do not sleep, as
1 authentically narrated.

Wut if someone says that sleep is a form of perfection with
‘Tespect to man, and as such if he cannot sleep, he will be
ieemed unwell. We reply that it is as eating is a form of
Perfection with respect to man. If he cannot eat, he is
Ponsidered sick. However, it is a form of perfection in one
Way, and a form of imperfection in another way. It is a form
Of perfection because it indicates his physical well-being and
HOtindness, and it is a form of imperfection because the body
Needs it. So in reality it is a form of imperfection,

Therefore, not every kind of perfection relative to creation
Wi 4 kind of perfection for the Creator, just as whatever is
Perfect with regard to the Creator is not perfect with regard
1G the creation. So pride is a form of perfection for the
(reator and a defect in creation. Eating, drinking and sleep
We forms of perfection in the creatures and a form of
Imperfection in the case of the Creator. That is why Allah,

TW) Reported by Muslim (179) from the Hadith of Aba Masa Al-
*Ash‘ari te.

220 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah AL-Wasifiyyalt
Sustainer)/’""!

They are mentioned in three locations of the Mighty Book.
This is one of them. The second is in Sirah Al ‘Imran:

éAllah, there is no Miah except Him, Al-Hayyu, Al-
Qayyiimy (Al “Imran 3:2)

And the third is in Sirah Ta Haz
And faces shall be humbled before Al-Hayyu, AL
Qayyiim, and he will be a failure, who carried wrong
doing> (Ta Ha:111)
These two Names contain self perfection and perfection of
sovereignty. The self perfection is in His word €Al-Hayyu>
and the sovereignty is in His word €Al-Qayyiimy because
He maintains everything, and everything is maintained
by Him.
> Concerning his statement: éneither sleep, nor slumber
overtake Him} As-Sinah (slumber) is drowsiness, it
precedes sleep. He did not say: “He sleeps not”
because sleep may be by choice, but to be overtaken
is by coercion.

Sleep is a form of imperfection. The Prophet #5 said: “Allah

{Ml Based upon what was reported and graded Salis by Al
Hakim (1:509), fom Ibn Mas‘ad, and, Ibn As-Sunnt in ‘Amal
Al-Yawm wal-Lailah (337) from Anas bin Malik, he said:
“When Allah’s Messenger # was concerned about a matter,
he would say Hayyu, Ya Qayyiim, bi-ralimatik astaghith
(O Living, O Sustaining! I appeal for aid in Your mercy.)
At-Tirmidht reported similar (3436).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

* Concerning His statement: <Who is it that can
intercede before Him except with His permission>

#Who is it> is an interrogative pronoun, or we say ¢who>
is an interrogative pronoun. It is not correct to say that
4Dhd> is a relative pronoun in this kind of construction,
Iwcause the meaning of the sentence would be: “Who is
the one, the one?” and this is not correct.

© Concerning His statement: <Who is it that can
intercede before Him except with His permission?» Ash-
Shafi‘ah linguistically means making an odd thing,
even. Allah, the Exalted, says:

<5 ia

4And the even and the odd.» (Al-Fajr 89:3)

As a technical term, it is the act of interceding for another

n in order to bring him benefit or save him from harm.
0 the intercession of the Prophet # for the people
Wt the place of standing (on the Day of Resurrection) so that
Allah will begin judging them; this is an intercession to save
froma harm, while his intercession for the people of Paradise
{0 enter it is one of bringing benefit.

© Concerning His statement: 4With Him - that is with
Allah.

® Except with His permission> that is, His permission
for it. This implies an affirmation of intercession, but
with the condition of His permission. The basis for
that is that if it were not affirmed, the exception in
His saying ¢Except with His permission> would be
futile, without any benefit.

And He mentioned this after His statement: 4107 Him is

What is in the heavens...» which implies that sovereignty

that is uniquely Allah’s, the Migthy and Sublime, is a

222 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyal

the Exalted, says regarding Himself:
4And itis He Who feeds but is not fed (Al-An‘am 6:14)
Concerning His statement: 4For Him is what is in the
heavens and in the earth}; €what is in the heavens>
meaning the Angels, Paradise and other than that
about which we know not.

4And in the earthy all creatures; animals and other than

animals.

> Concerning His statement: the heavens} it implies
that the heavens are numerous, and this is the case.

There is proof in the Quran that they are seven:
» ‏الت‎ wal bg eal esi SD
22
Say : “Who is the Lord of the seven heavens, and the Lord
of the Magnificent Throne?" (Al-Mu'miniin 23:86)

The Qur’an indicates that the earths are seven, without it
being clearly stated, but it is clearly stated in the Sunnah.
Allah, the Exalted, says:

» ENT Gas Se Ge GM ‏أنه‎

4Allah is He who created the seven heavens, and of the
earth, the like thereof» (At-Talaq 65:12)

The like thereof, in terms of number, not in terms of

description.

And in the Sunnah, the Prophet 38 said: “Whoever acquires
a span of land unjustly, Allah will encircle it to his neck on
the Day of Judgment from the seven earths.”!")

(4) Reported by Al-Bukhari (2452) and Muslim (1610) from Sa’td
bin Zaid ‏.هه‎

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 225

‎sie +‏
يدن أنه لِمَن

‎Re

‎4And how many Angels are there in the heavens, whose
intercession shall be of no avail, except after Allah gives
permission to whomsoever He wills and is pleased» (An-
Najm 53:26)

‎That is, being pleased with both the intercessor and the one
being interceded for.

‎If someone asks; what is the benefit of intercession when
Allah knows that the one interceded for shall be saved? The
fesponse is that Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, gives

‎ssion to the one who intercedes to
Honor him, and for him to attain the praiseworthy status.

‎permission of inte!

‎* Concerning His statement: ¢He knows what is in front
of them and what is behind them> Knowledge is to
absolutely comprehend something as it is, and Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime: ¢knows what is in front of
them} - the future - ¢and what is behind} the past.
And the word Ma (what) is general, including every
past and future event. It also includes His actions
and the actions of His creation.

‎* Concerning His statement: ¢and they will not
encompass anything of His knowledge, exc what He
wills» The pronoun <they encompass» refers to the
creation, which is indicated by His saying: €For Him
is what is in the heavens and what is on the earth>

‎Meaning that none in the heavens and on the earth can
encompass any of Allah's knowledge, except that which He
wills.

‎® His statement: ¢of His knowledge} can refer to the
Knowledge of Him and His Attributes. That is, we do
not know anything about Allah, His Self, and

‎224 Commentary on Al-’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyal

‎sovereignty of complete authority, with the meaning that

‎there is no one who is capable to make any exchang¢

‎nor intercession which is itself good, except with Allah's
, and this is from the completeness of His, the
Mighty and Sublime, Rubwbiyyah (Lordship) and author
ity. This clause shows that for Allah is an Idhn (permi

‎sion).

‎permissic

‎And Idhn in its basis means Al-I'lam (proclamation); Allah
the Exalted, said:

‎43 A

‎And an Adhan (proclamation) from Allah and His
Messenger> (At-Tavobaht 9:3)

‎That is, an ‘lam (pronouncement) from Allah and His
Messenger; so bi idhnihi means: His pronouncement that He
is pleased with that

‎There are other conditions for intercession. Among them,

‎that Allah is pleased with both the intercessor and the one

‎interceded for, Allah, the Exalted, says:

‎And they intercede not except for him whom He is
pleased» (Al-Anbiya’ 21:28)

‎And He says:

‎495 A

‎€On that Day, intercession shall not benefit except
whom Ar-Ralimin permits for him, and whose saying
He is pleased with} (Ta Ha 20:109)

‎And there is an Ayah that arranges these three conditions

01110 ‏رماع‎ On The Introductory Notes... 227

the Throne. Rather, the Throne is greater than the
Kurst. It has been reported from the Prophet ## that:
“The seven heavens and the seven earths compared
to the Kursi, are like a ring thrown in a desert, and
the superiority of the Throne over the Kursi is like
the superiority of that desert over this ring."

This indicates the magnificence of these creations; and the
Magnificence of the creation indicates the magnificence of
the Creator.

® Concerning His statement: ¢and He is not fatigued by
preserving them> meaning - preserving the heavens

_ and the earth does not pose any burden to Him, and
it is not taxing for Him.

Whis is among the negating Attributes. The affirming
“Alitibute that this negating Attribute indicates, is perfect
bility, knowledge, power, and mercy.

® Concerning His statement: <and He is Al-‘Aliyyu (the
Most High), the Al-‘Azim (the Most Magnificent)» Al-

Khuzaymah in ‘At-Tawhid’ (248), Al-Hakim ih Al-‘Mustadrak’
(2/282) and he said: “ahi; according to the conditions of the
Two Shaikhs (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) but they did not
teport ‏تاذ‎ and Adh-Dhahabi concurred with him. Ad-
Darqutni also reported it in As-Sift (36) from Ibn ‘Abbas
4, in Mawguf form, and in Maja’ Az-Zawé‘id (6323), Al-
Haithami referred it to At-Tabarani, and he said: “Its
farrators are those of the Saltii.” And in Mukhtasar Al-
“Uline (45), Al-Albani said: “Its chain is Sahih, all of its
narrators are trustworthy.”

Reported by Ibn Abi Shaibah in Al-‘Arsh no (58), Bayhaqi in
“AL-Asma was-Sifat’ (862) from the Hadith of Aba Dharr ‏وف‎
‎And the Hadith was graded Sahih by Al-Albani in As-Silsilah
As-Sahthah no (109), and he said: There is no authentic Marfii’
Hadith from the Prophet 3 regarding the throne except this

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Attributes, except as He makes us know about Him.
And knowledge here may be referring to what is
known, meaning; they do not encompass anything of
what is known to Him, except what He wills. Both
meanings are correct. And we could say that the
second is more general, because the knowledge of
His Self and His Attributes, and other that, all fall
under what is known to Him.

His statement: Except what He wills} meaning;
except that which He wills concerning that which He
taught them about Himself. And Allah, the Exalted,
has taught us many things about His Names, His
Attributes, His universal rulings, and His legislative
rulings. However, these many things (that we know)
are few compared to what is known to Him, as
Allah, the Exalted, says:
WANS 25) ‏مِن أمْرٍ رق وَمَآ‎ Gal ‏«وَسْسَلُوتَكَ عن الروج ل‎
bees

And they ask you concerning the Rak (Spirit). Say:
“The Ruh is one of the affairs of my Lord, and of
knowledge, you (mankind) have been given only a
little} (Al-Isra’ 17:85)

Concerning His statement: 41115 Kursi extends over the
heavens and the earth>: extends» meaning encloses,
that is, His Kurs? surrounds the heavens and the
earth, and is greater than them, because if it is not
greater, it would not extend about them. The Kursf is,
as said by Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with
him, “It is a place of Allah’s two Feet.” It is not

11 Reported by ‘Abdullah bin Ahmad bin Hanbal in ‘As
Sunnah’ (586), Ibn Abi Shaibah in “Al-‘Arsh’ (61), Ibn

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 229

wecording to His saying: ¢For Him is what is in the heavens
dnd in the earth»

The ninth: That the Sovereignty is solely Allah's, the
Mighty and Sublime. We derive this from Him putting the
predicate first.

The tenth: The power and perfection of His authority,
feeording to His saying: <Who is he that can intercede before
Hin, except with His permission?»

Whe eleventh: The affirmation of being in His presence.
This establishes that He is not everywhere. Therein is a
felutation against pantheism.

Whe twelfth: The affirmation of the permission, based on
Vis saying: <Except with His permission>

Whe thirteenth: The comprehensiveness of the knowledge
‏إلا‎ Allah, the Exalted; based on His statement: €He knows
What is in front of them and what is behind them.>

The fourteenth and the fifteenth: That He, Glorious and

Wxalted is He, does not forget what is in the past, based on

Wis saying: €And ‏امات‎ is behind them> and He is not

Ignorant of the future, based on His saying: What is in
nit of them>

The sixteenth: The perfection of Allah’s magnificence, due
1 the creatures’ incapacity of having comprehensive
knowledge of what has to do with Him.

The seventeenth: The affirmation of what He wants,
‏عقن‎ of His saying: €Except what He wills»

The eighteenth: The affirmation of the Kursi which is the
Place of Allah's two Feet.

The nineteenth, twentieth and the twenty-first: The
ifirmation of magnificence, power and ability, due to
Wis Statement: ¢His Kurst extends over the heavens and the

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‘Aliyy is in the Fa’il form, and it is an adjective,
because His, the Mighty and Sublime, exaltedness is
inevitably with His Self. The difference between an
adjective and an active participle, is that the active
participle is temporal, its disappearance is possible,
while the adjective is always accompanying the
described, and it does not separate from it.

And the ‘Ula (exaltedness) of Allah is of two types: The

“Uli of the Self and the ‘Uli of the Attributes.

As for the ‘Lila of the Self, it means He is above everything
in Himself. There is nothing above or beside Him.

As for the ‘Lili? of the Attributes, it is what is being referred
to by this verse:
4And for Allah are all of the most exalted attributes}
(An-Nahl 16:60)

Meaning, that all His attributes are exalted; there is no
imperfection in any of them, in any way.

As for Al- m it is also an adjective - and its meaning is
the possessor of Magnificence; and that is power, pride,
and the like from what is known of what is indicated by
this word.

This Ayah contains five of Allah’s Names: Allah, Al-Hayy,
Al-Qayyum, Al-‘Aliyy, and Al-‘Azim.

It also contains twenty-six of Allah’s Attributes, five of
which are the Attributes contained in these Names.

The sixth: That Al-Ulihiyyah (divinity) is solely His.

The seventh: Negating slumber and sleep from Him, due
to the perfection of His living and maintaining.

The eighth: The comprehensiveness of His Sovereignty,

Mentary On The Introductory Notes... 231

Mile it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six
Ways, then He rose over the Throne. He knows what
whlers the earth and what comes out of it, and what
Wencends from the heaven and what ascends into it. And

| Me is with you wherever you may be. And Allah sees
Wil that you do} (Al-Hadid 57:4)

Hive on this, they assert that He is not Himself exalted,
١ that His ‘Uli is only with respect to His Attribute.
for those who say that He is not described with a
ion; then they say that if we describe Him with that,
lf Would have a body; and bodies are similar. This will
‏مادأ لاا"‎ Tamfthil (likening). Based on this, we reject that
I in any direction.
We can refute these two groups from two angles:
first: Falsifying their arguments.
#econd: Affirming what invalidates their saying with
incing proofs.

i) fdr the first, we say to those who claim that Allah is, in
place, in His Self, that this claim of yours is a false
Which is refuted by the revealed texts and the

Mect.
for the revealed texts, Allah, the Exalted, affirmed about
If that He is Al-‘Aliyy, and the Ayah which you are
§ 05 evidence does not prove your view, because Al
fiyyah! does not necessitate being together in the same
00, Do you not see the saying of the ‘Arabs: “The Moon

Ws With us,” while its position is actually in the heavens? A

will say: “My wife is with me” meanwhile, he is in the

(Translation note): That is, the state of being with, meaning,
in reference to Allah being with you wherever you, are, and
similar to that

230 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyalt

earth} because the magnificence of the creation indicates
the magnificence of the Creator.

The twenty-second, twenty-third and twenty-fourth: The
perfection of His knowledge, His mercy and His preserva
tion, based on His statement: ¢and He is not fatigued by
preserving them>

The twenty-fifth: The affirmation of Allah's ‘Ula (exalted
ness) based on His statement: ¢He is Al-‘Aliyy>

The view of the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah is that
Allah, Glorious is He and Exalted, is exalted in His Self,
and His exaltedness is a personal and eternal Attribute.

Two groups of people oppose the People of the Sunnali
regarding this matter. A group said that Allah is every:
where in His Self, while the other group claims that He is
neither over the universe, nor below the universe, nor in
the universe, nor to the right, nor to the left, and He is
neither separated from the universe, nor connected to it!

Those who claim that He is everywhere, try to prove their
view with the saying of Allah, the Exalted

CEU Hs A SY BS ‏من‎ SY, pee

<There is no secret counsel of three, but He is their
fourth, nor of five, but He is their sixth, nor of less
than that, nor of more, but He is with them wherever
they may be> (Al-Mujadilah 58:7)

They also use His, the Exalted, saying:

Poiimentary On The Introductory Notes 233

1 With this, it is clear that their saying is a negation of the
fevealed texts as well as the intellect, and that the Qur'an
Woes not prove that from any angle of indication; not a
PHinplete indication, nor an inclusive indication, nor a
ilenotative indication.)

Wi for the other group, we say to them:

Your negation of a direction necessitates a negation of the
lord, the Mighty and Sublime. Since we do not know of
Wiything that exists, that is neither above the universe, nor
Iwlow it, neither to right nor the left, not connected nor
Pe parated, except that which does not exist, That is why
Hone scholars say, if it is said to us: “Describe Allah to us as
Mothingness,” we could not find a more truthful descrip-
Of nothingness than this description.
idly: Your claim that affirming direction (for Allah)
iplies that He possesses body. We would dispute with
Mi fegarding the word body (Al-Jism). What is this body
Whose purpose you are driving people away from the
mation of Allah’s Attributes? Do you mean by “body”
i thing that is formed from various things which are in
Heed of one another, each of which can not go on except
With the unity of these parts?! If you mean this, we do not
“BPProve of that. We say Allah is not a bodily being in this
WaMMer. Whoever says that the affirmation of His ‘Ula
Wplies this kind of body, then his saying is a mere claim,
and it is enough for us to say that this is not acceptable!
Wl if you by body, a Self maintaining itself, described as is

itting it, then we do affirm that. We say Allah, the
Thalted, definitely has an essence, maintaining Himself,

ion note): The Shaikh elaborated on these categories
see the comments on the author's saying: “They do
Rot engage in Ilhad concerning Allah's Names and His Ayat.”

Commentary on Al-Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

East while she is in the West. The commander will say to
the soldiers: “Go to the battle, and 1 am with you” while he
is in the office of the command, and they are on the
battlefield. So Al-Ma‘iyyah never necessitates that the one is
with the other in his actual place. The meaning of Al
Ma’‘iyyah will be restricted according to what it is related to,
Sometimes, we therefore say, “This milk is with some
water.” This kind of Al-Ma’‘iyyah indicates a mixture.

A man will say: “My merchandise is with me,” while he is
in his house, not actually with it. And he can also say, while
carrying his merchandise with him: “My merchandise is
with me,” while he is actually with it. So this is one, but its
meaning differs according to what is related to it. Due to
this, we say: Allah’s Ma‘iyyah with His creation is the one
that befits His ‘Izzah (Honor and Might), Glorious and
Exalted is He, like the rest of His Attributes. So it is a
complete and Ma‘iyyah, while He is above the heavens.

As for the evidence that falsifies their saying, from the view
of the intellect; we say that the claim that Allah is with you
in every place would necessitate many baseless implica
tions. It would, therefore, imply:

Firstly: Multiplicity or division (of Allah). And this is
without a doubt an absurd implication. Therefore, the
absurdity of the implication proves the absurdity of what it
implies.

Secondly: We say that if you say He is with you in your
places, this implies that He increases the more the people
increase, and decreases the more the people decrease.

Thirdly: This will also imply that we not consider Him to
be far away from filthy locations! So when you say Allah is
with you, while you are on the toilet, this will be the
greatest disrespect for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

Sommentary On The Introductory Notes

‎Agreement that Allah is above everything.”‏ آلآ

‎As for the intellect, then we say that everyone knows that
AlUli (exaltedness) is an attribute of perfection; and when
i is an attribute of perfection, then it must be affirmed for
Allah, because Allah is described with the Attributes of
Wection. As such we say: Allah is either up, below or
ide, Being below or beside is not possible, because
helow is a form of imperfection in its meaning, while beside
ti 4 form of imperfection because it resembles and makes
‏للا‎ like the creatures. Nothing, therefore, remains except
AP Ula (exaltedness). This is another perspective based on

‏اعم الاسام

‎for natural inclination (Al-Fitrah); then we say that no
will say “O Lord!” except that he finds, in his heart, the
ity to seek the exalted.

‎five evidences are therefore in conformity.

‎for the exaltedness of the Attributes, it is an area of
‏كناكم‎ among all who confess or practice Islam.

‎twenty-sixth: The affirmation of Magnificence for
the Mighty and Sublime, based on His saying: ¢Al-

‎234 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyaht

‎with the perfect Attributes. This is what everybody knows

‎With this, the falsehood becomes clear regarding the saying,
of these who affirm that Allah is Himself in every place, or
that Allah, the Exalted, is neither above the universe, nor
below it, neither connected to it, nor separate from it. We
say that He, the Mighty and Sublime, rose over His Throne,

‎As for the proofs for Al-‘Uli, which affirm the invalidity of
the saying of these people and those people, and those that
affirm what the People of the Sunnah and the Jam’ah say;
there are many evidences which could not be individually
counted. As for their types, they are five: The Book, the
Sunnah, consensus, intellect, and natural inclination (Al
Fitrah).

‎Regarding the Book; there are various categories of
evidence for Allah's ‘Lili mentioned therein. Among them,
the clear mention of Al-‘Ula (exaltedness) and Al-Fawgiyyah
(aboveness), and the ascension of things to Him, and their
descent from Him, and the like.

‎As for the Sunnah; similarly, there are various categories of
evidence for it. The three categories of Sunnah are
concordant on Allah's ‘Uli in His Self, for the affirmation
of Allah's ‘Ula in His Self has been established by the
saying of the Messenger #8, his actions, and his tacit
approvals.

‎As for consensus; before the appearance of these innovated
groups, the Muslims had a consensus that Allah, the
Exalted, had ascended above His Throne over His creation.
Shaikh Al-Islam, may Allah have mercy upon him, said:
“There is not - in Allah's Speech, nor His Messenger’s, nor
in the speech of the Companions, nor those who followed
them faithfully - anything that proves - not a text, nor what
is apparent - that Allah, the Exalted, is not above the
Throne, nor above the heavens. Rather, all their sayings are

foimmentary On The Introductory Notes...
Wind His saying, Glorious is He ;

“He is Al-Awwal (the First), Al-Akhir (the Last), Az-
Zahir, and Al-Batin. And He knows all things,’ (Al-
Hadid 57:3)”.

® Concerning the author's statement: “And His saying,
Glorious is He; He is Al-Awwal (the First), ALAkhir
(the Last), Az-Zahir, and Al-Batin. And He knows all
things.» (Al-Hadid 57:3)".

The Commentary

Concerning his statement: “Glorious is He’; this is

Joined with the statement of the author when he said:
‘What Allah attributed to Himself in Strat Al-Ikhlas,”

PAL Awwal (the First), Al-Akhir (the Last), Az-Zahir, and
WiBiatiny; these are four Names. They are opposite in
Tims of time and place. They imply that Allah, Glorious
Wid Exalted is He, encompasses everything (in knowl-
Wilge), first and last; and like that with respect to place.
80 in that, is an encompassing of time and place.

tle is Al-Awwal (the First)}: The Prophet #% explained
This in his statement: “The One before whom there was
Hothing.”"!

Here, he explained an affirmation with a negation. He,
therefore, made this affirming attribute an attribute of

الل ———

MY Reported by Muslim (2713) from the Hadith of Aba
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

236 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

َلِهَذَا كَانَ مَنْ قر ‎SM os‏ في ‎le OG SBS‏ مِنَ الله

That is why, whoever recites this Ayah during a night, a
guard from Allah will remain with him, and no Shaitan
will come near him until dawn

© Concerning the author's statement: “That is why
whoever recites this Ayah during a night, a guard from
Allah will remain with him, and no Shaitdn will come near
him until dawn.

The Commentary

This is a part of a Hadith reported by Al-Bukhari from Aba
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him, in the story
when the Prophet #§ made him a guard over the Sadagabh.
He, may Allah be pleased with him, apprehended a Shuifdn
there, and he said to Aba Hurairah: “When you go to your
bed, recite Ayat Al-Kursi - €Allah, there is no Ilah except
Him, Al-Hayyu Al-Qayyiim> (Al-Bagarah 2:255) until the
end of the Ayah - A guard from Allah will remain with
you, and no Shaitan will approach you until dawn.” Aba
Hurairah informed the Prophet #% of this, and he (the
Messenger #) then said: “He told the truth to you, but
he is a liar.”

111 [It has been referenced previously.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

4So they (Ya‘juj and Ma’jij) were not able to scale it>
(Al-Kahf 18:97)

hat is rise above it. Regarding its explanation, the Prophet
Wf said: “The One above whom there is nothing” So He is
High above everything.

® And Al-Batiny The Prophet # explained it, saying:
"The one beneath whom there is nothing.” And this
is due to His encompessing everything, but the
Meaning is that with His, the Mighty and Sublime,
@xaltedness, He is the most Near. His exaltedness
does not negate His nearness. So Al-Batin is near,
from the meaning Al-Qarib (close, near)

i names of Allah are indicated to us in this noble Ayah,

are: Al-Awwal (the First), Al-Akhir (the Last), Az-Zahir,

‎Al-Batin, and five Attributes are indicated to us in it:‏ ل

‎g the First, being the Last, being the Most Exalted, and
Nearest, and the absoluteness of (His) knowledge.

‎|! somebody asks: “Are these names interwoven in a way

‎it if you say the First you must say the Last, or is it

‎wed that they be separated from each other?” What is

‎‘Wpparent is that the opposites among them are interrelated

‎Vou therefore say the First, you must say the Last. If you

‎Wy Az-Zahir, you must say Al-Batin, so that the other

‎Aliribute which, along with it, indicates His encompassing
thing) is not left out.

‎Concerning His statement: ¢He knows all things»

‎i§ completes what preceded regarding the four men-
hed Attributes; meaning, and with that, He knows
thing.

‎ils is a form of generality into which specificity can never

‎238 Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wiasitiyyaht

‎negation. We have earlier mentioned that the attributes of
affirmation are more perfect and numerous. Then, why
(did the Messenger convert an affirming attribute to an
attribute of negation)?

‎We answer thus: The Prophet # explained this for the
purpose of emphasizing His precedence, meaning that it is
absolute, a precedence that is not relative; so, it i said.
“This is the first with respect to what comes after ‏“باذ‎ while
there is another thing before it. His explanation with a
negation therefore proves, in a broad way, that it is an
absoluteness precedence, that is why he ‏ويك‎ said: “The One
before whom there was nothing.” This is with respect to
precedence in time.

‎€AL-Akhir (the Last)}: The Prophet # explained it in his
saying: “The One after whom there is nothing.” It should
not be wrongly assumed that this proves that He is last
in the absolute sense, because there things that will exist
forever, and they are creatures; such as Paradise and Fire,
Based on this, the meaning of ¢Al-Akhir (the Last)} is that
He encompasses everything, and there is therefore no
end to Him being the Last.

‎4Az-Zahir>: From the word Az-Zuhur and it is Al-Uli
(exaltedness), as Allah, the Exalted, says:

‎He it is Who has sent His Messenger with guidance
and the true religion, liyuzhirahu (that He may make it
prevail) over all religion> (At-Tawbah 9:33)

‎That is to exalt it, and from this (word) we have the Zahr
(back) of an animal, because it (the back) is at the top of the
animal. Similar to this is His statement:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 241

things include complete mindfulness of Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, the fear of Him, such that one will not feel
fwmorse over what He commands him, nor have an
opinion over what He prohibited him from.

425 ‏الى لا‎
His statement, Glorious is He; €And have Tawwakul

ipon Al-Hayyu, the One Who dies not.» (Al-Furgan
25:58)"

‎nnn‏ اجأ جه ا سس سم

‎© Concerning the author's statement: “His statement,
Glorious is He ;

‎4And have Tawwakul upon Al-Hayyu, the One Who
dies not» (Al-Furgdn 25:58)"

‎The Commentary

‎® Tawakkul: is derived from Wakala (entrusting) some-
thing to another, that is, to consign (the matter) to it. So
the Tawwaku! upon another, is to consign it to him.

‎Home scholars define Tawakku! upon Allah as sincere
Weliance upon Him in conferring benefit and protection
fiom harm, while having trust in Him, Glorious and
Whalted is He, and while using the correct means, And
Wincere reliance means that you rely upon Allah sincerely,
Wich that you do not ask except from Allah, and you do not

‎240 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitivyaht

‎be incorporated. This generality includes His actions and
the actions of His servants, both in entirety and detail; He
knows what occurred and what shall occur. It also includes
the essential, the possible and the impossible. So the
knowledge of Allah, the Exalted is expansive, inclusive,
and encompassing. Nothing is excluded from it.

‎As for His knowledge of the essential, it is as His
knowledge of Himself and His Perfect Attributes. As for
His knowledge of the impossible, it is like His statement

‎¢Had there been in them (the heavens and the earth)

‎gods other than Allah, then surely both would have
beened ruined> (Al-Anbiya’ 21:22)

‎And His saying:

‎Verily, those on whom you call besides Allah, cannot
create (even) a fly, even though they combine together
for the purpose> (Al-Hajj 22:73)

‎As for His knowledge of the possible, then everything that
Allah informs about regarding the creatures is among the
possible:

‎4Knows what you keep hidden and what you disclose}
(An-Nahtl:19)

‎Therefore, the knowledge of Allah, the Exalted, encom
passes everything.
The fruits produced from the faith that Allah knows all

Pommentary On The Introductory Notes

ABut it availed you naught; and the earth, with all its
Pastness, was straitened for you, and then you turned back
in flight. Then Allah did send down His Sakinah upon His
Messenger, and upon the believers, and He sent down
forces which you did not see> (At-Taw vbah 9:25,26)

1
The one who relies upon Allah, but fails to use the means
Which Allah permits for it (his goal), such is not sincere.
ther, to not use the means is a form of foolishness in the
Wellect, and defeceincy in the religion, because it is an
‏كنا‎ criticism of Allah’s wisdom.
ice upon Allah is a half of the religion, as Allah says:
#You alone we worship, and You alone we ask for help>
(Al-Fatiah 1:5). ‘

Wek the help of Allah, the Exalted, is one of the fruits of
akkul;

450 worship Him, and rely upon Him} (Hid 11:123)
upon this, whoever has Tawakku! upon other than
fh, then he will belong to one of these three categories:

To have Tawakkul as reliance and a form of

ip; so this is major Shirk. It is as if he believes that
‘one relied upon is the one who brings every good to
and prevents every harm from him, and he therefore
enders all his affairs to him completely, with respect to
g benefit and preventing harm, combined with fear
the person) and hope in him. There is no difference
fher the one relied on is alive or dead; this is because
type of surrending affairs is not correct except to Allah.

ly: To have Tawakkul upon other than Allah with

242 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyal

seek help, except from Allah; you do not have hope, except
in Allah, you do not fear except Allah, So you rely upon
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, to bring you benefit and to
save you from harm This reliance without trust in Him,
and without using the permissible means (to achieve one’s
good) will not suffice; you should have trust in Him
without any doubt while you use the permissible means
towards achieving (the benefit or protection from harm).
Whoever does not rely upon Allah, but relies upon his
ability, then he will be disgraced. The evidence for this is
what happened to the Companions with their Prophet 2 at
the Battle of Hunain, about which, Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, says:

Lied ‏إذ‎ ES Hs Tee bY

Truely, Allah has given you victory on many
battlefields, and on the day of Hunain, when you
rejoiced at your great numbers (Al-Tawbah 9:25)

when they said: “We shall not be conquered today as a
result of small number.)

ee ao ‏عي‎

شيا وضَافتٌ

Based on what was reported by Al-Baihaqi in ‏11م‎
‎(6:123) from Rubai’ “On the Day of Hunain, a man said: ‘We
shall not be conquered due us being few.’ So that disturbed
the Prophet # and that was the routing.” In Al-Fath (8:27),
AL-Hafiz referred it to Yanus bin Bukair in Ziyddat Al ‘Magazi,
and its chain is Mu‘dal (two successive narrators are missing
between the collector the one he is narrating it from).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 245

ayyu, the One Who dies not, even though He says in
whother Ayah: 3

ye

4And rely upon Al-'Aziz (the Migh ‏نلك‎
‎| ighty), Ar-Rahim (the
Merciful)» (Ash-Shu’ara’ 26:217) .

This is because might was more suitable in that context.

Another perspective is that Al-Hayyu is a name that
PUMprises all the perect Attributes of life. And among the
fierlection of His Life, the Mighty and Sublime, is that He is
the One suitable to be depended upon. 1

17 Concerning his statement; ”4 ‏مرالكا...‎ dies not...>:”
meaning, due to the perfection of His Life, He dies
hot. So the objective of connecting that to what was
before it, is that this is a perfect Life, which cannot
be touched with extinction.

Among the Names of Allah contained in this Ayah: Al-

et and among His Attributes: Life, and the absence of
th, which comprises perferction of the life. So there are
Wo Attributes, and one Name in it.

And His saying : €And He ts Al-‘Alim, Al-Haki
Talirim 66:2) ‘ ‘uae

® The author's statement: “And His saying :

244 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyalt

some of dependance, but with the belief that this is as a
means, and that the affair is up to Allah; such as the
reliance of many people on the kings and leaders regarding,
attaining their livelihood. This is a form of minor Shirk

Thirdly: To rely on a person because he (the one relying) is
a representative of his, and that the one relied upon is
above him, such as a person’s reliance on an agent for his
buying and selling, and_the like in matters where
representation is allowed. This is allowed, and does not
negate reliance upon Allah The Prophet 34 authorized his
Companions for buying, selling and the like.

Concerning His statement: “4upon Al-Hayyu, the One
Who dies not>”

They say that when a ruling is connected with an Attribute,
it indicates an elevation of that Attribute.

If someone asks: Why does the Ayah not read as follows:
“Have Tawakkul upon Al-Qawiyy (the Powerful) and Al-
‘Izzah (the Mighty)” because power and might are more
appropriate from what is clear?

The reply: The reason is because the status of the idols,
which these people depended upon, were that of being
dead, as Allah, the Exalted said:

5 دل مده
يخلفون ‎ED‏ وهم يخلقوت © ‎SY‏

€Those whom they invoke besides Allah have not created
anything, but they are themselves created. Dead, not
living; and they know not when they will be raised}
(An-Nahl 16:20,21).

So He is saying that you should rely upon the One whose
attribute is not like the attribute of these idols; He is Al-

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 247

permits me, or Allah decides my case. And He is the
Best of the judges». (Yusuf 12:80)

Wil as for His, the Exalted, statement:

€in55 Sol, if ‏نس‎
‎4Is not Allah the Most Just of judges?» (At-Tin 95:8)

W includes both the universal and Shariah type. Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, is therefore wise with the universal
Iw and the Shariah law, and He is also Accurate in both of
these; so each of the two rulings are in accord with wisdom.

Wut there is what we know of wisdom, and that which we
Wo not know of wisdom, because Allah, the Exalted, says:

#And of knowledge, you have been given only a little»
| fAl-Isra’ 17:85) x

Then, Wisdom is of two types:

0
Whe first: The wisdom behind something, being in how it
Wy and the condition which it is, such as in the case of the
Puli. It is a great form of worship that is preceded by
Piltification from major and minor impurities, and it is
Petformed in a particular form consisting of standing,
Sitting, bowing and prostration. And the Zakih, which is a
form of worshipping Allah, the Exalted, by giving a part of
Micreased wealth, usually for those who are in need of it, or
Whose that the Muslims have a need for, such as some
Whose hearts are inclined towards Islam.

Whe second type: The wisdom in the objective of the law,
Bitice all the rulings of Allah have commendable aims and
٠ beautiful fruits. Consider Allah’s wisdom behind His
Miversal law; His inflicting great tribulations upon people
for commendable goals, as is in His, the Exalted, statement:

4And He is Al-‘Alim, Al-Hakim) (At-Tahrim 66:2)

The Commentary

Concerning His statement: ¢And He is Al-‘Alim>, the

definition of knowledge preceded, and that the
Knowledge is an attribute of perfection, as well as
the fact that Allah’s encompasses everything, also
preceded.
But as for: €Al-Hakim}>; Ha - Kaf- Min refers to ruling
and accuracy. Based on the first (meaning) Al-Hakim
will be the Law-Giver, while according to the second
(meaning) Al-Hakim will mean the One Who is Accu-
rate. Therefore, this noble Name indicates that the rule
belongs to Allah, and it indicates that Allah is described
with wisdom, because accuracy means precision, while
precision means to put a thing in its place.

So in the Ayah is an affirmation of judgment and wisdom

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, alone is the Law-Giver. The
law of Allah is either of the universal or Shari'ah type. So
the Shari‘ah laws of Allah are the legislations of religion that
His Messengers came with, those that His Books were
revealed with. The universal laws of Allah are what He
decreed upon His servants, in terms of how they were
created, provisions, life, death and the like that, all of which
falls under the meaning of His Lordship and its implica-
tions.

The evidence for the Shariah law, is His, the Exalted,
statement regarding one of Yasuf's brothers:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

The Commentary
» ¢Al-Alim}: The discussion regarding it preceded.

© Al-Khabir>: It means the Knower of the secrets of
affairs. This will therefore be a more specific Attri-
bute following a more general Attribute. We say the
Knower of the obvious affairs and the All-Aware of
the hidden secret affairs; which therefore means that
having the knowledge of the hidden is mentioned
twice; once in a general manner, and the other in a
Specific manner, so that it will not be assumed that
His knowledge is restricted to the obvious matters
only.

As this can be with regard to meanings, it can also occur
With respect to individual subjects, for example:

‎cot Ka Sap‏ نباك

‎Therein descend Angels and the Spirit» (Al-Qadr 97:4)

‎The Spirit is Jibril, and he is among the Angels. We
therefore say it means, the Angels among whom is Jibril
§0, Jibril is specially mentioned as a form of honor for him,
ahd the mention of him is made twice; once in a general
Manner and one in a special manner.

‎Among the Names of Allah in this Ayah are: Al-‘Alim and
AL-Khabir, and among His Attributes are; Knowledge and
Absolute Awareness

‎And in it there are behavioral benefits; that a man’s faith in
that increases his fear and fright of Allah, secretly and

‎Openly.
‎cesses —- ‏لس وإ ب‎

‎Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎time ‏الى عيلوا‎
{Corruption has appeared on land ard sea because of
what the hands of men have earned, that He may make
them taste a part of that which they have done, in order
that they may returny (Ar-Riim 30: 41)
In this, there is a refutation of those who say: The
judgments of Allah, the Exalted, are not based on any
particular wisdom, but merely what Allah willed.
Among Allah’s Names in this Ayah are: Al-'Alim and Al-
Hakint. And among His Attributes are the Knowledge and
the Wisdom.
And in it there are behavioral benefits; faith in the
Knowledge of Allah, and His Wisdom, necessitates
complete tranquility with whatever universal and Shariah
laws He decreed, since that is based on knowledge and
wisdom. Therefore, the soul’s anxiety disappears, and the
breast expands.

‎@ “And His statement:
4AL‘Alim, Al-Khabir> (At-Tahrim 66:3)"

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

the heaven, and that which ascends to it» (Saba’ 34:2)

€And with Him are the Mafitth of the Ghaib; none
Knows them but He. And He knows whatever there is in
the land and in the sea; not a leaf falls but He knows it.
‘There is not a seed in the darkness of the earth, nor
anything fresh or dry, but it is written in a Kitabin
Mubin (Clear Record)» (Al-An'‘am 6:59)

Cake ‏ولا صََعْ إلا‎ Sy Le >
4Anid no female conceives or gives birth but with His
Knowledge> (Al-Fatir 35:11)

And His statement:
tig Kits ‏تم مر‎ a
That you may know that Allah has power over all

things, and that Allah encompasses all things in His
Knowledge> (At-Talag 65:12)

The Commentary
Th these Ayat are details about the Attribute of Knowledge.
The first Ayah:
Gat ‏بست‎ JK Ew Sia AL >
4 ‏يمع‎
‎ile that which goes into the earth, and that which
(umes forth from it, and that which descends from the

Commentary on “Agidah Al-Wasitiyyalt

Concerning His saying : {He knows that which goes into
the earth, and that which comes forth from it and that
which descends from the heaven, and that which ascends
to it» (Saba’ 34:2)

And with Him are the Mafatth (keys) of the Ghaib ;
none knows them but He. And He knows whatever there
is in the land and in the sea; not a leaf falls but He
knows it. There is not a seed in the darkness of the
earth, nor anything fresh or dry, but it is written in a
Kitabin Mubin (Clear Record)» (Al-An‘am 6:59)

And no female conceives or gives birth but with His
Knowledge> (Al-Fatir 35:11)

That you may know that Allah has power over all
things, and that Allah encompasses all things in His
Knowledge> (Af-Talaq 65:12)

© Concerning His saying:

4He knows that which goes into the earth, and that
which comes forth from it, and that which descends from

252 Commentary on Al-Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah Poimentary On The Introductory Notes 253

heaven, and that which ascends to it (Saba’ 34:2) knows them but He. In the sentence, there is a

2 festriction that the keys of this knowledge are with
These are details about what preceded regarding, the Allah via two ways: One of them is through the way

abs ene: ah’s Knowledge. 7 8

absoluteness of Allah's Knowledg: of bringing forward (some sentence elements) and
All that goes into the earth, such as the rain, the seed that is bringing later (another). The second is through the
sown in the earth, the dead, the worms, the ants and others means of negation and affirmation.

¢and that which goes comes forth from it such as water, a a elie i j
Pre and fe Tike aad Bhat which descends from it ee whit ne tesa ‏امي ل‎
‏«تممممرر‎ such as rain, revelation, the Angels, and the Da. but Mafitin ee ot 37 is ee 1 0 3
decrees of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime; ¢and that Mifta Ree ‏را‎ seat = te 2
which ascends to it? such as the righteous deeds, the 7 aa Beet ee ate Pail OL gr
sels, the souls and the supplications. Bn anecns the treasures; therefore the Mafatil of the
Angels, the Ghiaib are with Him; (that is) its treasures. It is also said
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, mentions the absoluteness ¢hie Mafitth of the Ghaiby means its beginning
of His Knowledge in this Ayah, with different details. He Because the key of everything is at its beginning,
then elaborates with more details in other Ayat. Mafitih of the Ghaib will now be based on this, the
١ beginning of Ghaib because all of what is mentioned
The second Ayah: aire things that are the beginning of what comes after
‏ار‎ 0 b>, what is intended with Ghaib is th
‏بهي لوي اي‎ ow ote GR ieee a he Ghaib>, what is intended wi Ghaib is the
Die) aie a ‏لاخ نوكو‎ Ridden, What is hidden is relative, but the absoulte
422 ST ‏إلا فى‎ ot ‏رطب ولا‎ knowledge of the hidden matters is specifically with

¢And with Him are the Mafatih (keys) of the Ghaib; Allah.

none knows them but He. And He knows whatever there ‘These Majatih, whether we say that it means the beginning,
is in the land and in the sea; not a leaf falls but He ‏م‎ the treasuries, or the keys, nobody knows them except
knows it. There is not a seed in the darkness of the Allh, the Mighty and Sublime. No Angel knows them, no
earth, nor anything fresh or dry, but it is written in a “Messenger knows them, so much that the most honorable
Kitabin Mubin (Clear Record) (Al-An‘am 6:59) I Angel Messengers - Jibril - asked the most honorable of

‎id: “‏ - د لآ

‎4With Him}: that is with Allah; it is a predicate that arene a oni aes

‎is made to precede (the subject). 4776 keys) is a : 3 Saree
subject that is suspended. This construction indicates ts “i Bee now lbdgeable “about ‏"كم‎ than “ther one

‎restriction and specificity. Meaning, the keys of all
that is hidden are with Him, not other than Him. He

‎emphasizes this restriction with His statement: «none TW tt was referenced earlier.

‎On The Introductory Notes... 255‏ بوصمامعمروان)

‎Wilended by it, is the rain, because the adversity of
Mifought is eliminated by the rain. Since He is the One
Who sends down the rain, He is the One Who knows the

‎‘Hime of its falling.

‎Whe falling of rain is the key to the life of the earth, and with
Wie growth of plants, there is good for the pasture and all
Wither things that people benefit from. Here is an important
‏الم‎ 4And He sends down the Ghaithy, He did not say:
Vile sends down the rain (Al-Matr)” because rain some-
Wimes falls but without leading to the growth of plants,
® it will not eliminate adversity, and the land will not
Tevived by it. That is why it is confirmed in Sahih
slim: “Drought is not when you are not provided with
but the drought is when you are provided with rain

‎ifid the earth does not sprout anything.’""!

‎Third: The knowledge of what is in the wombs, based

‎His statement: ¢and He knows what is in the wombs.>,

‎is, the wombs of females. He, the Mighty and

‎Biblime, knows what is in the wombs. That is, what is in

‎wombs of the mothers of sons of Adam and other

‎in them. What He knows is general; (that is) He knows

‎erything. What is in the wombs will not be known
ept by He, the Mighty and Sublime, who created it.

‎Wf you say it is said today: They (the doctors) now know
it is contained in the womb; whether a male or a female.

‎this correct? We reply: This happens; it is not possible to

‎ly that, but they cannot know that except after the
ition of the fetus and the appearance of its sex. There

‎other conditions of the fetus that they do not actually

‎. They do not know when (exactly) it will be

‎Reported by Muslim (2904) from Aba Hurairah, may Allah be
pleased with him.

‎254 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎The meaning is that as you do not know it, I do not know it
either, Whoever claims the knowledge of the Hour is a liar,
and a disbeliever. Whoever believes him is also 4
disbeliever, because he belied the Qur‘an.

‎The most knowledgeable regarding Allah’s words
Muhammad 2% - has explained the Mafitih, when he
recited:

‏وَمَا ‎IE FS 6G‏ تحكيب عدا وَمَا تذرى ‎OE‏ »

‎€Verily, Allah, with Him (Alone) is the knowledge of

‎the Hour. And He sends down the Ghaith, and He

‎knows what is in the wombs. And no soul knows what

‎it will earn tomorrow, and no sot] knows in what land

‎it will die. Verily, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Aware>
(Lugman> 31:34)"

‎There are five matters in it:

‎The First: Knowledge of the Hour; knowledge of the Hour
is the beginning of the life of the Hereafter. The Hour is
called so because it is a tremendous Hour, all people are
threatened by it. It is Al-Haggah (the Inevitable) and Al
Wiagi‘ah (the Great Event). The knowledge of the Hour is
with Allah. No one knows when it shall be except Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime.

‎The Second: Sending down the Ghaith from His saying
4And He sends down the Ghaith>: <The Ghaith> is an
infinitive, meaning; elimination of adversity. What is

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (4778) from Ibn Umar, may Allah be‏ انا
‎pleased with him,‏

‎On The Introductory Notes‏ بوروة11 ا

‎i tomorrow is a key for future action; ¢and no soul
Hie in what land it will die¥, is the key to the life of the
‏,م"‎ This is because if a person dies, he enters into
World of the Hereafter. The explanation regarding the
ledge of the Hour and sending down the Ghaith has
Wiled. It, therefore, becomes clear that all of these
١ are the foundations for all that comes after them;
wily, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Aware>

‎When, He, the Mighty and Sublime, said: €And He
Hows whatever there is in the land and in the sea; this
‏للا‎ a form of generalization. Who can count the

‎des on the land? How many realms are there, be
ey animals, insects, mountains, trees and rivers that
fwbody knows about except Allah, the Mighty and
Hiiblime? The sea is also like that. Therein are worlds
What none knows about except their Creator, the
Mighty and Sublime. They say the seas have more
han three times the species that are on the earth,
Heeause the seas are vaster than the lands.

‎He, the Mighty and Sublime, said:

‎#not a leaf falls but He Knows it» (Al-An‘am 6:59)

‎fefers to the details; any leaf on any tree, large or
i, hear or far, that falls, Allah, the Exalted, knows of it
tree that is created, He knows it in the best manner,
‏الال‎ the One Who knows what falls, knows what He,
Mighty and Sublime, creates.
idler the vastness of the knowledge of Allah, the
ghity and Sublime, everything that exists, He knows it;
that which has not happened and what shall happen,
the Exalted, knows it.

‎Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wisifinil

‎delivered, or when it is delivered, for how long will if
remain alive. They do not know whether it will be @
miserable (being) or a successful (one). They do not know
whether it will be wealthy or poor, and other conditions
that are not known. Therefore, most of what has to do will}
the fetuses are matters that are unknown to the creatures,
thus the correctness of the general statement: ¢and [If
knows what is in the wombs>

‎The Fourth: The knowledge of what happens tomorrow)
which is what is after today, based on His statement: ¢Ayif
no soul knows what it will earn tomorrow} This is the key
of attainment of what is in the future. If a person doa
not know what he will earn for himself, then, that ht
does not know what another person will earn is fort
most. But if somebody says: “I know what will happen
tomorrow. I shall go to so-and-so place tomorrow,” or “I
will read” or “I will visit my relatives.” We say that hw
can plan what he will do, but something can prevent
him from doing it

‎The Fifth: The knowledge of the place of death; based on
His statement: ¢and no soul knows in what land it will digy
No one knows whether he will die in his land or if}
another land; in an Islamic land or among disbelievery.
He does not know whether he will die at sea, on land, of
in the air. This is what is witnessed. And he does not
know what hour he will die, because if it is not possible
for him to know where he will die, he can stay at one @
place, but even still, he does not know what time or hout
he will die.

‎These five are the keys of the Ghaib which are not known by
anyone except Allah. They are referred to as the keys of thie
Ghaib; because the knowledge of what is in the wombs is 4
key to the life of this world; €And no soul knows what it will

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

Whatever shall be till the Day of Resurrection was therefore
Written. Then He, Glorious and Exalted is He, put records
‏ألا‎ the hands of the Angels, in order that they write what a
oh does, because that which is written in the Preserved
lablet is what a person will want to do, while the record
Which the Angels write will be the one based upon which a
m will be rewarded or punished. Thus, Allah, the

lighty and Sublime, said:

4 Bee Sugoi >

4And surely We shall try you, until We test those

wong you who strive hard, and the patient>
(Muhammad 47:31).

it as for His knowledge that His servant So-and-so shall
patient or not, that has preceded, but neither reward nor
ishment is based on this.
Third Ayah:
And no female conceives or gives birth but with His
Knowledge> (Al-Fatir 35:11)

His statement: ¢Female> includes any female; whether
human or any other animal that conceives another
Animal. It is clear that such are included in this Ayah,
uch as the cow, the camel, the sheep and the like.
Also included here is anything that lays eggs, such as
birds, because eggs develop inside a bird.

Shari'ah (178), Ibn Abi ‘Asim in As-Sunnah (105) and the
Hadith was graded Salih in As-Salihah (133) and in As-
Sunnah of ‏مطل‎ Abi ‘Asim (1:48-49).

258 Commentary on AL’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyalt

He said: <There is not a seed in the darkness of the earth}, &
small seed not visible to the eyes in the darkness of the
earth; He, the Mighty and Sublime, knows it.

% Darkness: Let's assume there is a small seed
submerged in a seabed, during a dark and rainy
night, the kinds of darkness then are; firstly: the sea
soil, secondly: the sea water, thirdly: the rain,
fourthly: the clouds, fifthly: the night These are five
kinds of darkness among the kinds of darkness of the
earth. Yet with this, Allah, the Exalted, knows about
this seed, and He, the Mighty and Sublime, sees it

He said: nor anything fresh or dry} this is general;
there is nothing except that it is either fresh or dry

He said: <but it is written in a Kitabin Mubin (Clear
Record).>: 4Kitabin}, meaning what is written,
4Mubin>, meaning what is made manifest and
evident, because the verb Abana can be used as 8
transitive and an intransitive. It will therefore be said
“The dawn is clear (Abén) meaning the dawn is
manifest, and it can also be said: “The truth is made
clear (Abin) meaning it is made manifest. What is
intended by the Record here is the Al-Lawh AL-Mahfilg
(the Preserved Tablet). All of these things are known
to Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, and are written
with Him in Al-Lawh Al-Mahfiiz (the Preserved
Tablet), because Allah, the Exalted: “When He cre=
ated the Pen, He said to it: ‘Write.’ The pen said:
“What should 1 write?’ He said: ‘Write whatever shall
be until the Day of Resurrection.”"""!

(Reported by Ahmad (5:317), Aba Dawid (4700), At
Tirmidht (2155), Al-Hakim (2:498) who said it is Sahil, and
Al-Baihaqi in Al-Asma’ was-Sifat (804), Al-Ajurri in Asli

jentary On The Introductory Notes. 261

And that Allah encompasses all things with His
Mimvledge> : everything small or large, related to His
etions, or the actions of His servants, the future or
the present; all of these, Allah, the Glorious is He,
#icompasses them in His knowledge.

Hah, the Mighty and Sublime, mentioned knowledge and

‎after the creation, because creation will not be‏ اللا
‎plete except with knowledge and power. The reference‏

‎١ tivation to knowledge and power is of the denotative

‎ition. It has preceded that indications implied by the
١ (of Allah) regarding the Attributes (of Allah) are of

‎types!
‎ition: It is mentioned in Tafsir Al-Jalalain, may Allah
us and him, at the end of Siirat. Al-Ma’idah:
emplation of the intellect excludes His Self, He does
therefore have power over it (His Self).”
Hlispute this statement from two perspectives:

‎i Virst Perspective: There is no room for intellectual
lation in the matter concerning the Self of Allah
His Attributes. There is even no consideration for
ieetual contemplation in all the matters of the Ghaib.

‎i fuinction of the intellect in this matter is to completely

‎der, and that we know that what Allah mentions of

‎Matters are not impossible. That is why it is said:

‎textual proofs do bring impossibilities, but they

‎d bring replies” meaning - what replies to faculties of

‎Wtellect, because they (faculties of the intellect) hear
it they cannot comprehend nor imagine.

‎{Translation note): The Shaikh elaborated on these
Galegories earlier, see the comments on the author's
saying: ’They do not engage in Idd concerning Allah's
Names and His Aydt,”

‎260 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasifiyyalt

‎% or gives birth but with His Knowledge}; the beginning
of conception is according to knowledge of Allah, its
end and the exit of the fetus is with His Knowledge,

‎the Mighty and Sublime.
The fourth Ayah:
PHM AHH 3s ot FE aS Dy
<i
€That you may know that Allah has power over all

‎things, and that Allah encompasses all things in His
Knowledge} (At-Talag 65:12)

‎% That you may know: the Lam here is used to expres#
purpose, because Allah says:

‎éit is Allah Who has created seven heavens and of the earth
the like thereof (seven). His Command descends between
them (the heavens and the earth) that you may know that
Allah has power over all things, and that Allah encom-
passes all things with His knowledge} (At-Talag 65:12)

‎He has created these seven heavens and the seven earths
and made us know of that, so that we may know, ¢that
Allah has power over all things)

‎Power (Al-Quarah) is a description in which the powerful
one is able to do what he wills to do, without any

‎incapability. He has the power over all things. He has the
power of creating what is non-existent and of exterminal-
ing what exists. The heavens and the earth were earlier
non-existent, then Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, created

‎and originated them in this wonderful congruence.

And His statement €Verily, Allah, He is Ar-Razzag>
(Adh-Dhariyat 51:58)"

“Verily, Allah, He is Ar-Razzaq> (Adh-Dhariyat
 $1:58)"

is evidence in this Ayah for the affirmation of the

‎Sublime. This Ayah came after His saying:‏ ل

‎dop8 ‏أن‎ 4)
And 1 have not created the jinn and mankind except
What they should worship (Me). I seek not any provision

‎١ (Rizq from them, nor do I ask that they should feed
Me> (Adh-Dhariyat 51:56,57) 1

‎people are in need of Allah’s provision, but Allah, the

‎ited, does not want any provision from them, nor that
ould they feed Him.

‎#Ar-Razzigy: is a form indicating extensiveness,"!
from Rizq (provision) that is “the gift.” He, the
Exalted, said:

‎ii (Translation note): See the Shaikh’s explanation of “Ar-

‎Ralinan” at the beginning of the text.

‎262 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyal

‎The Second Perspective: His statement: “He, therefore,
does not have power over it (His Self)’ this is a great
mistake. How does He not have power over Himself, when
He has power over all other things. This statement of his
implies that He does not have power to rise over His
Throne, to Speak, and to descend to the lowest heaven. He
never does anything. This is a very serious mistake!!

‎But if somebody says that maybe by his saying “the
intellect excludes His Self; He does not, therefore, have
power over it (His Self)/” he intended that He does not
have power to affiliate imperfection to Himself. We reply
that this matter is not a matter of absolute generalization,
such that it would need specification and particularization.
This is because power has to do with possible matters,
because what is impossible is not considered something;
not outside nor inside the intellect. Power does not have to
do with impossibility, unlike knowledge.

‎So it is necessary that a person be cautious concerning the
matters of Lordship, because its status is a tremendous one,
and as such what is compulsory upon a man regarding it, is
to surrender and accept it. Therefore, we would generalize
what Allah generalizes, and we say that Allah has power
over all things, without exception.

‎Among the Attributes of Allah, the Exalted, in these Ayat
are: The affirmation of the absolute knowledge of Allah in

‎an elaborate manner, and the affirmation of the absolute
power of Allah, the Exalted.

‎The behavioral benefit derivable from faith in the knowl-
edge and power is that one has strong awareness that Allah
is watching, and the fear of Him.

‎On The Introductory Notes.. 265‏ ارتحا كم

‎Wihige from provision (Min Ar-Rizg)?’> (AL-A‘raf
782)

‎‘and provision.’"") But ‏مد‎ for the filthy
iis among the provisions, it refers to the unlawful.

‎{oF specific provision, it refers to what the religion is
lished with, like beneficial knowledge, miehiecus

‎230 is stated in the noble Aya and He
Nol say: Ar-Razig (the Provider); due to the abundance

‎is provision and the plentiness of those that He

‎les for, in the case of their categories, cannot be
ici, not to mention how many individually. Allah, the

‎WAN there is no moving creature on the earth, but it is

‎of Allah to provide it with provision. And He knows
ta

‎Wwelling place, and its deposit.» (Hid 11:6)

‎Allah provides Rizq in accord with the circumstance.‏ لا

‎11 Wf somebody says: “If Allah ‏كز‎ Ar-Razzdq, then should I

‎1 Seek provisions, or I should stay in my home, and

‎1 Provisions come to me?”

‎the reply is that we say to strive in search for

‎@visions. Just as Allah pardons, this does not mean that

‎whould not do any good deed, and not seek the means

‎١! forgiveness.

‎Tanslation note): Meaning, “good things from,” not
5 8 58

‎"good things, and” indicating that the good things are

‎Oe category of Ar-Rizg.

‎Commentary on AL“Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyal

‎beer
‎“And when the relatives and the orphans and Al
Masakin (the poor) are present at the time of division
then provide them (Farzuqihum) something from it (the
property)» (An-Nisa’4:8)

‎Meaning, give to them. During his Salah, a person ashi
Allah, saying: “Allahummarzugni (O Allah, provide for
me).”

‎Ar-Rizq (provision) is divided into two categories: General
and specific.

‎The general includes everything from which the body
benefits, whether lawful or unlawful, whether the one
provided for is a Muslim or a disbeliever. That is why, Aw
Safarini said:

‎And Ar-Rizq is what is benefited from, of what is lawful;

‎Or its opposite, therefore, dismiss the absurd

‎For He is the Provider for all creations

‎And the creature exists not without any provision
For if you say that Rizg is only the lawful gift, it would
therefore mean that all of those who eat the unlawful are
not being provided for, despite the fact that Allah gives
them what their bodies benefit from. But provision is of
two types: Good and filthy. That is why Allah, the Exalted,

‎“Who has forbidden the nome: of Allah
which He has produced for His slaves, and the good

‎"")Al-Kawékib Ad-Duriyyah by Tbn Mani’ (p. 37)

267

rh Ce ‏كات‎
‎4And Allah is not such that anything in the heavens or

Whe earth escapes Him.Verily, He is ‘Aliman (Knowing),
Qudiran (Able) (Fatir 35:44)

Opposite of Qudrah (ability) is incapability while the
fosite of Quwwah (strength) is weakness.

flip difference between them is that Qudrah (ability) is used
POnscious beings only, while Quzwwah (strength) is used

Onscious and non-conscious beings. Secondly; Quwwah
yjth) is more specific. Every conscious being that has
gth, has ability, but not every able one is strong. For

le, you say that the wi strong (Qawiyyatur), but

Wo not say Qéddiratun (it is able). You say iron is

mwiyun (strong) but you do not say it is Qadirun (able).

a8 regards the conscious being, you say he is Qawiyun
ong) and he is Qddirun (able).

Who is mightier than us in strength?»
the Exalted, said:
«
Do they not see, that Allah, Who created them, is
Wilghitier than they in strength? (Fussilat 41:15)

‘@oncerning His saying: ¢Al-Matin} Ibn ‘Abbas, may
‘Allah be pleased with him," said it means Ash-

Reported by Al-Baihagi, in Al-Asma’ was-Sifat (68), and As-
Guyati mentioned it in Ad-Durr Al-Manthir (6:142) and
attributed it to Ibn Abi Hatim.

266 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyilt

Regarding the statement of a poet:

It is insanity for you to strive for provision -

While in its covering, the fetus is provided for.
This statement is false. As for using the condition of a fetus
as a basis of evidence, the reply is to say that it is nol
possible that a fetus seek its provisions, because it does nol
have the ability, contrary to the one who is able. As such
Allah, the Exalted, said:

‎WH SE 9 AS OS AN SI Sze kl BD‏ ين
433
‎4He it is Who has made the earth subservient to you; so‏

‎walk in the paths thereof, and eat of His provision»
(Mulk 67:15)

‎So one must search for it, and this searching must be it)
accorance with the Shariah,

‎4 Concerning His statement: €Dhil-Quwwah>") Al
Quzwah is an attribute with which the doer is able to
do without any weakness. The evidence of this, is in
His,the Exalted, statement:

‎Allah is He Who created you in (a state of) weakness,

‎then gave you strength (Quwwah) after weakness (Ar-
Rim 30:54)

‎Quwwah (strength) is not the same as Qudrah (ability),
based on His, the Exalted, saying:

‎(Translation note): Meaning, the possessor or owner of Al:‏ آلا
‎Quawwah‏

1 ‏بحام ع هللا‎ On The Introductory Notes...

© His saying:
"His saying : ¢There is nothing like unto Him, and He

‎As-Sami"u (the Hearer), Al-Basir (the Seer)» (Ash-‏ كا
)42:11 ترا

‎And His saying:
dies Ce oF al
#Verily, how excellent is the teaching which Allah gives

‎fo you. Truly, Allah is Sami‘an (Hearing), Basiran
(Seeing) (An-Nisa’ 4:

‎‘The Commentary
® He, the Exalted said:

‎“There is nothing like unto Him, and He is As-Sami‘u
(the Hearer), Al-Basir (the Seer)} (Ash-Shiira 42:11)

‎Whis Ayah was quoted by the author to affirm two of

‎Allah’s Names, and the Attributes that they contain, and

‎they are As-Sami’u (the Hearer) and Al-Basir (the Seer), and

‎In itis a refutation of those who commit 16/1 (deny Allah's

‎Attributes).

‎® His statement: <There is nothing like unto Him> is a
Negation. It is an attribute of negation, and it is
meant to affirm His perfection; meaning, due to His
perfection, nothing among His creatures is like Him.
And in this sentence there is a refutation against
those who commit Tamthil (liken Allah’s Attributes).

‎® His statement: ¢And He is As-Sami‘u (the Hearer), Al-

‎Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎Shadid (the firm, severe, or strong). That is, firm in
His strength, firm in His ‘Izzah (honor, might), firm
in all the attributes of arrogance, and considering its
meaning, it is a form of emphasis of for strength
And we can say regarding Allah that He is Shadi,
but we cannot call Allah Ash-Shadid (the Strong,
meaning, as a Name); but we rather call Him Al
Matin (the Firm) because Allah calls Himself that.

‎In this Ayah, there is an affirmation of two of Allah's
Names; they are: Ar-Razzdg, and Al-Matin, and the
affirmation of three Attributes, they are: provision, strength
and what the Name Al-Matin contains.

‎The behavioural benefit derivable from faith in the
Attributes of strength and provision, is that we would
not seek strength and provision except from Allah, the
Exalted, and that we believe that every form of strength,
regardless of how tremendous it is, cannot oppose the
strength of Allah, the Exalted.

‎“His saying: <There is nothing like unto Him, and He
is As-Sami‘u (the Hearer), Al-Basir (the Seer)» (Ash-
Shira 42:11) And His saying: €Verily, how excellent is
the teaching which Allah gives to you. Truly, Allah is
Sami‘an (Hearing), Bastran (Seeing)> (An-Nisa’ 4:58)"

entary On The Introductory Notes...

"An example of the second is in His, the Exalted, saying to

Misa and Haran:

41 am with you both. 1 hear and I see> (Ta Ha 20:46)

example of the third, by which threat and intimidation
intended, is in His, the Exalted, saying:

4Do they think that We hear not their secrets and their
| Private counsels? Rather (We do) And Our Messengers

vemain with them recording everything» (Az-Zukhruf
43:80).

5 was meant to intimidate and threaten them, since they
‏ع‎ trying to keep secret what He was not pleased with.

The hearing with the meaning of reaching all of what is
‏عاط نقتا‎ is one of the Attributes of Essence, even when the

iidible matter could be something new. And hearing

h implies support and aid is among the Attributes of

Hoing, because it is related to a reason. Hearing with the

ing of the response is also an Attribute of doing.

Concerning His statement: ¢Al-Basir (the Seer)>
meaning the One who reaches all that is visible. And
Al-Basir is used generally to mean the ‘Alim (Know-
ing). Therefore, Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He,
Sees; He sees everything even if it is hidden and He,
Glorious is He, Sees, meaning He Knows the actions
of the servants. He, the Exalted, said:

4S ‏يأ يمَا‎
And Allah sees all of what you doy (Al-Hujurat 49:18)
id what we do is sometimes visible, while other times not

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Basir (the Seer)»; €As-Sami‘u »has two meanings. One
of them is: the One who responds, and the second is: the
One who hears sounds. As for As-Sami‘u with the
meaning the of the One who responds, they give an
example of it in Allah’s statement regarding Ibrahim:

¢Surely, my Lord is the Hearer of Prayer (Ibrahim 14:39)
That is, responds to the supplication.

As for As-Sami‘u with the meaning of hearing sound, they
divide it into a number of categories:

Firstly: Hearing by which it is meant to clarify the
generality of the reach of the hearing of Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, and that there is no sound except that Allah
hears it.

Secondly: Hearing by which support and aid are intended

Thirdly: Hearing by which threat and intimidation are
intended.

An example of the first is His statement:
€Indeed Allah has heard the statement of her that

disputes with you concerning her husband, and com-
plains to Allah» (Al-Mujadilah 58:1)

In this is a clarification that the hearing of Allah, the
Exalted, encompasses all of what is audible. That is why
‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said: “All praise is
due to Allah whose hearing encompasses the voices. By
Allah! I was in the apartment, and some of her discussion
was hidden from me,”"!

"The reference was cited previously.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

ع2 عم عا ‎2h‏

وما ‎bee‏ من انق

€And none conceives among females...» (Fatir
35:11)"

They say that to use additional letters in the Arabic
Langusge for emphasis is an established practice.

The second view: They say the opposite. They say that the
addition is the word Mithl, and the usage is therefore:
“Nothing is as He is.” But this is weak; it is weakened by
the fact that it is only in very few instances, or rare in
Arabic grammar, that nouns are used as additions, unlike
letters. So therefore, when there is no way around us saying
that there is an addition, then the letter Kaf will therefore be
considered the addition. :

The third view: That the word Mithl means “description”
and the meaning will therefore be: “Nothing is like His
description.” And they said: Al-Mith!, Al-Mathal, Ash-
$hibbh, and Ash-Shabbah have one meaning in the Arabic
Language, and Allah, the Exalted, said:

<EREN ‏ويد‎ Bh AI ‏«ثكل‎
‎<Mathalul-Jannah, which is promised for Al-Muttagan
(the people of Taqwa)> (Muhammad 4

Meaning, “description of Paradise.” This is not far from
being correct.

The fourth view: That there is no addition in the Ayah. But
if you say: ¢There is nothing like unto Him} it necessitates
negating any likeness, and when there is no likeness for

{4 (Translation note): Meaning, “min (among)’’ is an

additional word, and Harif in the Arabic Language can
mean a letter or word, while it mostly is used for letter.

Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah AL-Wasitiyyah

le, As such, Allah's seeing is of two categories, and
each of them are included in His saying: €Al-Basir (the
Seer)>
This Ayah includes an affirmation of two of Allah's Names;
they are: As-Sami’u (the Hearer) and Al-Basir (the Seer); and
three Attributes, which are: the perfection of His Attributes
in negating any likenesses, and hearing and seeing.

Of the behavioral benefits derivable from it, are refraining
from any attempt to liken Allah to any of His creation,
realizing His magnificence and perfection, and being
cautious, since He will see you if you do an act of
disobedience to Him, or hear you if you say what He is not
pleased with.

Know that the (Arabic) grammarians argue a lot regarding
His statement:

like unto him)

Such that they said that the letter Kaj that is used before the
word Mithl indicates that Allah has a likeness for which
there is nothing comparable, because He did not say: “not
as He is,” He rather said: iere is nothing like unto Him}
According to the expression, this is what is apparent in
the Ayah, but not its meaning. Because if we say that this
is its apparent meaning, then what is apparent from the
Qur’an would be disbelief, and this is impossible. That is
why the explanations of the grammarians differed
regarding the grammatical analysis of this Ayah accord-
ing to a number of sayings:

The first view: The letter Kaf is an addition, and that the
usage of the statement is “nothing is like Him.” This is a
comfortable explanation. The use of additional letters in
negations is numerous; as it is in His, the Exalted, saying,

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 275

‘ra ie a bearing witness falls under the genarality of His

that you should render back the trusts to those whom
they are due>

And the judgment:

when you judge among people that you should judge
« should
3 8 peop 4 Juag

Then, He, Glorious is He, says:

4Verily, how excellent is the teaching which Allah gives
to you>

"١٠ Concerning His statement: ¢Verily, how excellent is the

| ‘leaching which Allah gives to you> Allah, Glorious is
He, made the order of these two things - proper
Tendering of the trusts and being just in judgment -
an exhortation, because it benefits the hearts, and
everything that benefits the hearts is considered an
exhortation, and there is no doubt that maintaining
these commands is beneficial for the heart.

He then said: €Truly, Allah is Sami‘an (Henri

Basiran (Seeing)> His saying Kana (is)!"! is vob ea
it is not considered to have any relationship with
time (here). It is only intended here to refer to an
Attribute. That is, Allah is described as hearing and

(Translation note): It is in the past tense vil
aan past tense (was) with the

274 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

an example, the one that does exist becomes one. Based
upon this, there is no need for us to interpret it as
anything, They say this happens in the Arabic Language,
such as one’s saying: There is no boy like Zuhair.”

The reality is that if such researches were not presented to
you, then the meaning of the Ayah would still be clear, and
its meaning is that Allah does not have an equal. But this
(discussion) is found in the books, and the preferred view is
that we say the letter Kdf is an addition, but the last
meaning is more comprehensive for the one that is able to
understand it.

> “And His saying:
tik be 6 BS ‏ينا يط بن‎ ap
€Verily, how excellent is the teaching which Allah gives

to you. Truly, Allah is Sami‘an (Hearing), Basiran
(Seeing)> (An-Nisa’ 4:58)”

This Ayah is complementary to His statement:

Verily, Alla commands that you should render back
the trusts to those whom they are due; and that when
you judge between the people, you judge with justice»
(An-Nisa’ 4:58).
So He, the Mighty and Sublime, orders us to render what
was entrusted back to its people, and from this is that a
person bear witness, for him or against him, and that we
should judge whenever we judge between people, with
justice. Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, makes it clear
that He commands us to do what is obligatory in the means
of judgment, and the judgment itself. As for the means of

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 277

Verification. Therefore, this act itself was not intended; it's
Objective was to prove something else. Therefore, you do
Hot have a cause to point, particularly when it is feared
from such pointing, that a person will assume Tamthil; such
‏اللا‎ if there were before you, some avereage folk who do not
Widertand anything as required, then this would require

You to be cautious against that, and there is a suitable
Manner for every gathering.

Tikewise, what is reported in the Hadith of Ibn ‘Umar, may
Allah be pleased with him, wherein the Messenger of Allah
W said: “Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, shall hold His
Heavens and His earths with His two Hands, and say: ‘Lam
Allah” And he clenched his fingers, and spread them
‏اناا‎ So, what is said concerning this Hadith is what was
Paid regarding the Hadith of Aba Hurairah

Prom the behavioural benefits in faith in the two Attributes
of hearing and seeing, is that we will be very cautious
"Miminst disobeying Allah in our speech and our actions.

Add in this Ayah is the affirmation of two of Allah's Names:
AeSamiu, and Al-Basir.

And of the attributes; the affirmation of hearing, seeing,
11110 the command and exhortation, ;

WY Reported by Muslim (2788) from Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be

pleased with him.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyal

seeing. We say, it is not connected with time, because
if we leave it upon its tense implication, it will mean
that this Attribute has stopped; He was hearing and
seeing earlier, as for now, then He is not like that! It
is well-known that this meaning is invalid and false,
and that the intent is only that He is described with
these two Attributes; hearing and seeing, forever, The
word Kana in this context is intended as a verifica
tion.
Concerning His statement: ¢Sami‘an (Hearing), Basiran
(Seeing)» We say regarding this, as we said regarding
the preceding” Ayah. In it, there is an affirmation of
hearing for Allah, with the two categories (previously
mentioned) and the affirmation of seeing, with the
two categories,
Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him, recited this
Ayah, and said: “The Messenger ## placed his thumb and
index finger on his eye and ear.”""! The objective of placing
(of the fingers) like this, was to verify hearing and seeing;
not to affirm the eye and an ear; because the affirmation of
Eye comes in other proofs, The ear is neither affirmed for,
nor negated from Allah according to the People of the
Sunnah and the Jama‘ah, due to the absence of revealed texts
mentioning that
If you say: “Am | allowed to do as the Messenger ‏يه‎ did?”

The answer is that some of the scholars say yes, do as did
the Messenger; you are neither a better guide for creation
than the Messenger of Allah %, nor more careful in
attributing to Allah what befits Him than the Messenger 36

Among them are those who say that you do not have a
reason to do that, since we know that the objective was

(Its reference was cited previously.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...
And His saying:

#And if Allah had willed, they would not have fought

with one another ; but Allah does wh wants’
en, 2255). loes what He wants} (Al-

And His saying:
Po as Be KE ‏إلا ما يتل‎ oy cy Stl
‏اهما‎ to you (for food) are all the beasts of cattle,
except that which will be announced to you (herein)

‘Game (also) being unlawful when y 51 7
' 1 you assume ‏7ل[‎
‎Verily Allah judges as He wants} (Al-Ma’idah 51). :

And His saying:

We tee a Ses ‏ع عه موده‎ £45

Aa S53 ots py pic CS Sab ‏أن‎ af 92 ‏فَمَن‎
‎#80, whomsoever Allah wants to guide, He expands his
chest for Islam ; and whomsoever He wants that he should

go astray, He makes htis chest narrow and closed, as though
he was climbing up to the sky» (Al-An‘am 6:125)”

The Commentary

Whese Ayat affirm the two Attrib i
a mutes of Al-Mashiyy'ah (wi
and Al-Iridah (want, objective, volition). 0 aoe

The first Ayah: His, the Exalted saying:

Alt was better for you to have said, when you entered your
garden : “That which Allah wills (will come to pass)! There

“And His saying: <It was better for you to have said,
when you entered your garden : “That which Allah wills
(will come to pass)! There is no strength but with
Allah!'’> (Al-Kahf 18:39). And His saying: €And if
Allah had willed, they would not have fought with one
another; but Allah does what He wants> (Al-Bagarah
2:253). And His saying: €Lawful to you (for food) are
all the beasts of cattle, except that which will be
announced to you (herein), game (also) being unlawful
when you assume Thram. Verily Allah judges as He
wants.» (Al-Ma’idah 5:1) And His saying: €So,
whomsoever Allah wants to guide, He expands his chest
for Islam; and whomsoever He wants that he should go
astray, He makes his chest narrow and closed, as though
he was climbing up to the sky» (Al-An‘am 6:125)""

It was better for you to have said, when you entered
your garden ; “That which Allah wills (will come to
pass)! There is no strength but with Allah!’> (Al-Kahf
18:39).

ommentary On The Introductory Notes... 281

be taken to be the predicate of a subject that is
omitted, and the usage is: “This is what Allah
willed.” That is, this is not of my volition my
Strength nor my might, but it is with the will of
Allah. Meaning, this is what Allah willed.

Hut if you consider it a conditional element, the verb of the
subordinate clause is €willsp, while the verb of the main
Wlause is considered omitted, while the usage is; “What
Allah wills, shall be” as we are used to sayin; “What Allah
Wills, shall be,.and what He wills not, it can never happen.”

What is intended is that you should have said, when you
Witered your garden “That which Allah wills” so that you
an make yourself free from attaching yourself to your
Mirength and might, and not be amazed by your garden,

© Concerning His Th is stré
8 statement: here is stret
ay is no strength but

la hegates the type, and Quwiwah is an unspecified noun
Hised in this context as a negation, to generalize. Quwzwah

{atrength) is an attribute with which one will be able to do
What he wants without any weakness.

ie Said: “What is the way of reconciliation between the
al lute negation of Quiwzwah except with Allah i
‘Matement: 2 rane

MAllah is He Who created you in (a state of) weakness

then gave you strength (Quwwah) weaknes:
i, obs 1 ah) after weakness...»

And He said regarding ‘Ad:

ta 248

280 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyal

is no strength but with Allah!» (Al-Kahf 18:39).

* Wa Lawli} meaning “Why did you not?” It is used
for specification, but what is intended by it here is
reproach, meaning that he reproached him for forsak
ing this statement
€Your garden}: Al-Jannah means a very large garden
with many trees. It is so called because whoever is
inside it, is covered up by the trees and the branches
of the garden. He is thus, hidden inside them. And
this root (Jin and Nun) indicates covering, and from
it is Al-Junnah with Dammah on the Jim; that which
the person shields himself with during fighting; and
from it is Al-Jinnah with Kasra on the Jim meaning
the Jinn, because they are hidden.

Concerning His statement: ¢Your garden; this is
singular, and what is known from the Aydt is that he
had two gardens, what is then the response since it is
singular here, despite the fact that there were two
gardens? The answer is to say that when the singular
noun is attributed (to something else) it becomes
general, it therefore covers the two gardens, or, that
the speaker wanted to belittle the status of the two
gardens. This is because this was stated to be an
admonishment, and to not be so amazed over what
Allah had provided for him. As if he was saying
“These two gardens are one”, belittling their status.

The first view is closer to the principles of the Arabic

Language.

> And concerning His statement: ¢That which Allah wills
(will come to pass) there is no strength but with Allah};
Ma (that) can be a relative pronoun or a conditional
element. If you consider it a relative pronoun, it will

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 283

* Concerning His statement: €If Allah had willed, they
twould not have fought with one another» The pronoun
here refers to the believers and disbelievers, due to
His, the Exalted, statement:

4 (heii
{But they did disagree. Of them were some who
believed, and of them were some who disbelieved. And if

Alléh had so willed, they would not have fought with
one another (Al-Bagarah 2:253). 1

this is a clear refutation against the Qadariyyah, those
ho reject the link of man’s actions to the will of Allah;
pause Allah, the Exalted, says: €And if Allah had so
md, they would not have fought with one another>
ing; but He willed that they fight one another, so

iy fought one another. He then said: 4... But Allah does
it He wants> That is, he does that which He wants,

‎Al-Iradah (want, objective, volition) here is the‏ ل

‎d to what He, Glorious and Exalted is He, directly
Himself. But with respect to what He decreed upon
ij Servants, it an action that is not directly (attributed

‎7 Him). Because it is known that when a person fasts,

‎Salah, pays Zakah, performs Hajj, and performs

‎the doer, without a doubt, is the person. It is also
that this action of his is with Allah’s volition.

‎not correct to attribute the action of man to Allah‏ الآ

‎ly, because the one who directly performs the action

‎١١ Man, but it is correct to attribute it to Allah, meaning

‎om the view of the decree and creation.

‎282 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎And they said: “Who is mightier than us in strength
(Quwwah)?” Do they not see, that Allah, Who created
them, is mightier than they in strength (Quiowah)?>
(Fussilat 41:15)

‎And He did not say that they did not have any strength, so
He affirmed a form of strength for man?”

‎The response is that the way to reconcile is from one of
two angles:

‎First: The Quwtwah (strength) that the creation possesses is
from Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. If Allah had not given
him strength, he would not have any strength. So the
strength in humans is created by Allah, so there is no
strength in reality except by Allah

‎Second: That what is meant by His saying: 4171676 is no
strength> is “there is no perfect strength except with
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. “

‎In any case, this righteous man directed his companion to
detach himself from his ability and strength, and to
(instead) say that this is by the will of Allah and the
strength of Allah.

‎In this Ayah there is an affirmation of a Name out of Allah's
Names; and that is “Allah,” and, an affirmation of three
Attributes: Al-Ulihiyyah (divinity), Al-Quwwah (strength)
and Al-Mashiyy‘ah (will).

‎And Allah’s Mashiyy'ah (will) is His universal objective
This is executed upon both what He loves, and what He
loves not, and it is executed upon all the servants without
any exception. It is compulsory that whatever He wills
comes to pass, in every condition. Whatever Allah wills, it
must happen, whether that relates to what He loves, and is
pleased with, or not.

Poimentary On The Introductory Notes... 285
>

Die i would say: “Allah has made unlawful for you.” Like
Wit, he would relate that it was made unlawful. He

Wihetimes made something unlawful and attributed it to
Witwelf, but it was with the permission of Allah.

#The beasts of catiley: They are the camels, cows,
sheep and goats.

And His statement: ¢Beasts> (Bahimah); named as
Stich because they do not speak.

Wexeept that which will be announced to you»: Except
that which is announced to you in this Siirah, and
they are mentioned in His saying:

Forbidden to you are Al-Maitah (deceased animals),
Wool, the flesh of swine, and that upon which other
Wan Allah’s Name has been mentioned> (Al-Ma’idah
5:3).

the exception here, there are some which are separate
GIN the permissible category mentioned earlier) while
are connected. As for the deceased animals among
beasts of cattle, it is connected (to what preceded), but
ith regard to the flesh of swine, it is separate, because it is
Of Among the beasts of cattle.

Concerning his statement: ¢except that you should not
Wold game to be lawful}; meaning killing while in
Wirim; because he who does something, he becomes
just as one who makes it lawful, <game> is a wild,
land animal that is consumable. This is the game that
is prohibited during Ihram.

And His statement: Verily, Allah judges as He
Wants.) This is the Shari‘ah type of Iradah (want,
Objective, volition), because the context is that of

Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

But as regards what Allah does Himself, such as His rising,
above His Throne, His Speaking, His descent to the lowes!
heaven, His laughing, and the like, they are attributed to
Allah, the Exalted, as direct actions.

From Allah’s Names mentioned in this Ayah; Allah, and of
the Attributes: Al-Mashiyy‘ah (will), doing, and ALIradah
(want, objective, volition).

The third Ayah: His statement:

<Lawful to you (for food) are all the beasts of cattle,
except that which will be announced to you (herein),
game (also) being unlawful when you assume Thram
Verily Allah judges as He wants» (Al-Ma’idah 5:1)

% Lawful to you...>: The One Who makes it lawful is
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and in the same way,
the Prophet # makes lawful and unlawful, but with
the permission of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

The Prophet 3% said:

“Two kinds of dead objects and two kinds of blood are made
lawful for us’™)

1 Reported by: Ahmad (2:97), Ibn Majah (3314), Ad
Darqutni (4:272) and he said: “The Mawgiif form is more
correct,” and Al-Baihaqi (1:253) and he also preferred the
Mawqif form; except that he said that it has a ruling of
Marfi’, Abd bin Humaid also reported it in Al-Muntakhab
(818) and in Nasb Ar-Rayah (4:202), Az-Zaila’i attributed it
to Ibn Marduwyah, from Tbn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased
with him. See As-Saltiah (1118).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

That is why you find that the Salah, which is the heaviest
‘hing upon the hypocrites, is soothing to the eyes of the
٠/1006. The Prophet ‏وله‎ said: “Women and perfume have
‘Ween made dear to me from your worldly matters, and the
Pulah has been made comforting for my eyes.”""!

Thete is no doubt that the Prophet # is the most perfect of
Wil people in faith, so his breast was opened for the Salah,
d it became a comfort to his eyes.

it is said to a person; “It is obligatory upon you to

form your. Salah in congregation in the Masjid” and he

happy and says: “All praise is due to Allah, who has

ted that for me, had Allah not legislated it, it would

been an act of innovation” and promptly proceeds to

| and is pleased with it; this is a sign that Allah wants him
be guided and that He wants good for him.

| He said: ¢He opens his chest to Islam}; ¢He opens
(Yashrah) meaning; expands, and from this, is the
$latement of Musa, peace be upon him, when Allah
sent him to Fir’awn:

dele ‏لي‎ OS IGP
Mlle said: “My Lord! Open for me my chest."> (Ta Ha
20:25).

ining, expand my chest for me for addressing this man
idl calling him (to You) because Fir‘awn was tyranical and
tinate. 1

Reported by Ahmad (3:128), An-Nasai’ (7:61) and Al-
Hakim (2:160), and he said it was Sahih, and Abu Ya‘la
(6:199), from Anas, may Allah be pleased with him, and in
Ab-Talkhis (3:134), Al-Hafiz said the version of An-Nasa‘i
was Hasan.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyal

legislating. And it is possible for the Shari'ah type of
Irddah also to be of the universal type. So we consider
the judgment (mentioned in the Ayah) to apply to
universal and Shari‘ah judgments; so whatever He
wants to happen, He judged that and made it
happen, and whatever He wants to legislate, He
judged that and legislated it for His slaves.

From Allah’s Names mentioned in this Ayah: “Allah,” and
of the Attributes are: making lawful, judgment, and Al
Iradah (want, objective, volition).
The fourth Ayah: His statement:

pe eee sees

AS Sy Boy bie CS ed at ‏يُرِد‎
‎4 ‏الكل‎ 9 46 He tS ke Ke

<So, whomsoever Allah wants to guide, He expands his
chest for Islam; and whomsoever He wants that he
should go astray, He makes his chest narrow and closed,
as though he was climbing up to the sky> (Al-An‘am
6:125)

Concerning His statement: ¢He expands his chest for
Islam>; what is meant by “wants” here is the
universal Irddah (want, objective, volition), and by the
guidance; the guidance to do what is correct. You
therefore find such a person’s chest expanded to
accept the laws and rites of Islam. He does them
with joy, happiness and hastens to them.

So if you realize this in your own soul, then know that
Allah wants good for you, and He wants guidance for you,
As for the one whose chest becomes tight - and we seek
refuge with Allah - this is a sign that Allah does not want
guidance for him, or else his breast would have beer

expanded.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes..

if he is climbing up to the sky with great difficulty.

From this noble Ayah, we derive the affirmation of Iradah
(want, objective, volition) for Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime. And the Iradah that is mentioned here is the
universal Iradah, not other than that, because He says:
4Whomsoever Allah wants to guide>, ¢And whomsoever He
wants to send astray» This classification cannot be except
in universal matters.

As for the Shariah, Allah wants everyone to surrender to
the legislation of Allah

From the matters of morals and worship (contained in this
Ayah is); it is obligatory upon a person to accept Islam
completely; its fundamentals and its subsidiaries, and
whatever is related to the rights of Allah and the rights
of the worshippers, and that it is obligatory for him to open
his chest to that. If he is not like that, he is therefore of the
second category, those whom Allah wants to send astray.

The Prophet ## said: “Whoever Allah wants good for, He
gives him understanding of the religion.""!

And understanding of the religion demands acceptance of
it, because every person who understands and knows the
religion, he accepts it, and loves it. He, the Exalted, said:

<But no, by your Lord, they have not believed, until
they make you judge in all disputes between them, and
find in themselves no resistance against your decisions,

and accpet with full submission> (An-Nisd’ 4:65).

Hl Reported by Al-Bukhari (71) and Muslim (1037) from
Mu’awiyah bin Abi Sufyan, may Allah be pleased with him

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasiti

And His statement: 410 Isl this is general,
applying to the fundamentals of Islam, its subsidi-
aries, and what is obligatory in it. The more one’s
chest has expanded for Islam and its legislative
decrees, then it is an indication that Allah wants
guidance for him.

And concerning His statement: €and whomsoever He
wanis that he should go astray, He makes his chest
narrow and closed, as though he was climbing up to the
sky> (Al-An‘iim 6:125) Whoever He wants to send
astray, He makes his breast closed and constricted,
that is, severely tight. He then gave an example of
that, in His statement; ¢As though he was climbing up
to the sky» Meaning, as if when Islam was presented
to him, he feels as if he has been burdened by
climbing up to the sky. For this reason, the Ayah
came with: ¢he was climbing up> and did not say:
“ascending; for it is as if he has been burdened with
severe hardship by the climb. And for the one who
feels burdened by the climb, there is no doubt that
he will grow weary and be bored

Let us assume that it was sought from this man to climb a
very high and difficult-to-climb mountain. As soon as he
begins climbing the mountain, he becomes very stressed,
and soon feels very restricted, because he finds great
difficulty in that. Based on what the later people say today,
they say that he who ascends the skies, as he rises and
increases in height (above the earh) the more stress he feels
and the more he becomes constricted and feels the
pressure.

So, whether it is the first or the second meaning, this man to
whom Islam is presented - and Allah wanted him to go
astray - he finds a tightness in his chest, and feels harm, as

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 291

Messenger intended, then this one is in a tremendous state
of danger.

The Categories of Al-Iradah
Al-Iradah is divided into two categories:

The first category: Universal Irddah. This kind of Irddah is
‏ل‎ synonymous to Al-Mashiyy‘ah (will). Therefore,
He wants” has the meaning of “He wills.” And this Iradah:

og telates to what Allah loves and what He does not
love.

Based upon this, if somebody says; “Does Allah want
disbelief?” Say: “In terms of the universal Irddah, then yes,
Me wants that (to occur), and if Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, dod not want it (to occur) it would not occur,

Secondly, it necessarily occurs according to what was
Wanted; meaning that what Allah wanted, then there is no
doubt that it will occur, and it is not possible that this be
opposed.

The Second category: The Shari'ah type of Irddah, and it is

Synonymous to love. So “He wants” in this case, has the
Meaning of “He loves”. It is:

| aaa to what Allah loves. So Allah does not want
lief and rebelliousness according to the Shari‘ah ty;
of Indah, 8 0 se

Secondly, it is not necessary that what was wanted occur,
Meaning, that Allah, might want something, but it does not
®eeur. So He, Glorious is He, wants His creatures to
Worship Him, and He did not necessitate that this want
Weeurred; they may worship Him, and they may not
Worship Him, contrary to the universal Indah,

Wherefore, the difference between the two categories of

290 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyal

So this form of swearing stresses - by use of the statement
4No!}, and swearing particularly by the Rubabiyyah of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, over His slaves, and it is
the mention of Allah’s Rubibiyyah over His Messenger -
it stresses the negation of faith from whoever does not
abide by these three matters:

The First: Judgement of the Messenger 3, based on His
saying: until they make you judge in all disputes between
them> meaning (by you), the Messenger #.

Whoever seeks judgement from other than Allah and His
Messenger, he is not a believer. He is either a disbeliever
whose disbelief has brought him out of the religion, or a
disbeliever whose disbelief is less than that.

The Second: The chest being open to the judgement; such
way that they do not find any resistance in themselves for
his decision. They rather find aeceptance and openness to
what the Prophet #% decided

The Third: That they submit, which is stressesd; meaning
with complete submission.

So beware O Muslim! Of negating faith from yourself. Let
us draw an example for this: Two men were arguing about
the Shari‘ah ruling on an issue. One of them brought
evidence from the Sunnah, while the other found difficulty
and felt constricted by that. How could he abandon who he
follows, so as to follow this Sunnah? This man, without a
doubt, has defecient faith, because the believer, in truth, is
he who, when he has a text from the Book of Allah and the
Sunnah of His Messenger #%, he feels as if he has won the
greatest of spoils, and he will be joyful for that, and say
“All praise is due to Allah who guided me to this.” But so-
and-so, who is partisian to his opinion, and tries to turn the
textual proofs upside down, so that he can make them
agree with what he likes, not what Allah and His

Bommentary On The Introductory

PeMpective in two matters:

The first matter: We will hang our hopes, fear and all our
Pielistances and deeds upon Allah, because everything is
Wording to his Iradah, and this is our realization of

Dawakkul.

Wie weond matter: We will do what Allah wants according

W the Shariah. So when we know that this is what Allah

Wants, from the Shariah type of Iradah, and it is beloved to
that will strengthen our determination to do it.

are some of the behavioral benefits of our recognition
the Inidah. ‏ل‎

first is in accord with the universal Irddah, and the
GOrid is in accord with the Shari‘ah type of Iradah

Aid His saying: 4And do thsan; surely Allah loves the
Mudsinin> (Al-Bagarah 2:195) i

® the Attribute of Love (Al-Mahabbah)
Whose ‏تررق‎ affirm the Attribute of love (Al-Mahabbah).

Whe first Ayah: His statement:

<i 2 ity >

And do Ihsan; surely Allah loves the Muhsinin» (Al-
Baqarah 2:195) ‏مدن‎

292 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasifiyyalt

Iradah is two angles:

1. The universal Iradah, in which it is necessary that what
was wanted occurs, and the Shariah type in which it ‏الأ‎
‎not necessary.

The Shariah type of Inadah is specific to what Allah
loves, and the universal type is general, covering what
He loves and what He does not love.

If somebody says: “How is that Allah, the Exalted, want
that what He does not love exist?” Meaning, how is that He
wants disbelief, or rebelliousness, or disobedience to ocetity
while He does not love that?

The answer is that this is beloved to Allah from one
perspective, and disliked to Him from another perspective
It is beloved to Him for the tremendous benefits in it, and
disliked to Him because it is disobedience.

‘And there is no reason that something can not be beloved
and disliked according to different perspectives.

Here is a man who gives his child - who is the delight and
fruit of his heart and mind - to a doctor to operate on him int
order to remove something harmful inside him. Now if
some person came and tried to tear him open with his
fingernails, rather than a scalpel, he would fight him, But
he is the one who took him to the doctor to cut him open,
while he is looking at him, and he is joyous and happy. He
takes his child to the doctor so that he (the doctor) can heat
the iron with fire until it glows red, and then he takes it (the
iron) and cauterizes his child with it, while he (the father) is
pleased with that. Why is he pleased with that, despite the
fact that it is painful for the child? Because what he wants is
other than that; a tremendous benefit which results from
that.

Our recognition of Al-Irddah benefits us from the behavioral

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 295

people. But a man can sometimes be angry and frown; so
We say that there is cause for this. It can be considered from
Al-Ihsan when there is a cause to rectify the situation. That
is why if we stone an adulterer or whip a fornicator, it is an
act of Ihsan towards him.

‎when dealing in business, and selling, renting, and‏ مقرلا
‎marriage, and other that is included here. Because if you‏
‎deal well with people in these matters, you become patient‏
‎with difficulty, and quickly fulfill the rights (of people).‏
‎This is a kind of generosity. If you transgress by cheating,‏
‎lying, and making false claims, then you have refrained‏
‎from harming others, because these are harms.‏

‎el in worshipping Allah and toward the slaves

‎© Concerning His statement: <Surely Allah loves the
Muhsinin>, this is the reasoning for the command, so
this is the reward for the one who does Ihsan; that
Allah loves him. And Allah's love is of tremendous
exalted status. And by Allah! Indeed Allah’s love is
to be bought by the entire world, and it is more
important than you loving Allah. So Allah loving
you is higher than you loving Allah, that is why He,
the Exalted said: —

‎tay: “If you indeed love Allah, then follow me; Allah
will love you...”"> (Al ‘Imran 3:31).

‎He did not say: “Then follow me, and you shall be
Ponsidered sincere in your love of Allah,” even though the

‎‘hase is like that, but He said: ¢Allah will love you.> That is

‎Why some scholars say: “What is imporant is that Allah
loves you, not that you love Him.”

‎294 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎© Do Ihsan}: (Alsani) it is a verb of command. Al-
Ihsan can be obligatory, and it can be recommended;
whatever is necessary for the fulfillment of an
obligation, then it is obligatory, and whatever is
additional to that is recommended. Based upon that,
we say: €Do Ihsin}> (Ahsani) is a verb of command
that is used for what is obligatory and what is
recommended.

‎Al-Thsan can be in worship of Allah, and can be in dealing
with creatures. The Prophet #% explained Al-Ihsdn in
worshipping Allah, when Jibril asked him"! saying:
“What is Al-Ihsan?” He said: “That you worship Allah as
though you see Him.” This is more complete than what is
lower (in rank), because he who worships Allah as if he
saw Him, he worships Him seeking and hoping in Him.
“For while you do not see Him, He indeed sees you.” That
is, if you never reach this state, know that He indeed sees
you. And the one that worships Allah in this manner, he
worships Him in the state of fear and flight (from His
prohibitions), because He is afraid of the One Who is
looking at him.

‎As for Al-Ihsan in relation to dealing with creatures, then it
is said regarding its explanation, that it is generosity, and
refraining from harming others, and having a cheerful face

‎Generosity: That is beneficence, whether with wealth,
physically, or one’s position.

‎Refraining from harming others: That is, you should not
harm people with your speech and actions.

‎Having a cheeful face: That you should not frown at

‎(4 Reported by Muslim (8) from “Umar bin Al-Khattab, may
Allah be pleased with him.

‎On The Introductory Notes.. 297‏ ماسرو

‎® dequitable> That is, be just and this is obligatory
Being just is obligatory in all matters where equality
is compulsory. Included in that is is justice in dealing
With Allah, the Mighty and Sublime; Allah grants
you favors, thus, from justice is that you abide with
fatitude to Him. Allah clarifies the truth to you; so
yom justice is that you follow this truth. Z

‎tlealing with the creatures is included in that: That you

‎il with people in a way that you would like for them to

‎[ With you. That is why the Prophet 3% said: “Whoever

‎to be delivered from the Fire, and to be admitted into

‎lise, he should believe in Allah and the Last Day at the

‎when his death takes him, and he should deal with
in the manner that he likes to be dealt with.”

‎With people in the manner that you would like them
‘ileal with you. For example: If you want to deal with
WMeone, first consider that for yourself. If somebody deals

‎th you that way, would you be pleased or not? If you
he pleased, then deal with them that way, or else, do
Ht deal with them that way.

‎ite among children, in what you give them, also enters
0 that. The Prophet 2 said: “Have Taqwa of Allah and be
among your children.”7

‎6 among heirs in inheritance is included in that, Each

‎them should be given his share, and nothing should be
qjueathed to any of them through a will.

‎0 among the wives is included in that; you should

‎Reported by Muslim (1844) from ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr, may
Allah be pleased with him.

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (2587), Muslim (1623) from An-
Nu‘man bin Bashir, may Allah be pleased with him.

‎296 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎Everyone claims that he loves Allah, but the issue is, does
the One above the heavens, the Mighty and Sublime, love
you or not? If Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, loves you,
the Angels in the heaven will love you, then you will be
granted acceptance on the earth.) Then the people of the
earth will accept you, and accept what comes from you

‎This is of the immediate glad tidings for the believer.
From this Ayah of Allah's Names is: “Allah,” and of the
Attributes are: Al-Ulahiyyah (divinity), and Al-Mahabbah
(love).

‎ee

‎4And be equitable. Verily, Allah loves those who are
equitable> (Al-Hujurat 49:9)

‏سس سس سن جه هه ‎pcan‏

‎The Second Ayah: Concerning his statement:
4And be equitable. Verily, Allah loves those who are
equitable> (Al-Hujurat 49:9)

‎Based on what is reported by Al-Bukhari (3209), Muslim
(2637) from Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him,
from the Prophet ‏يف‎ who said: “When Allah loves a
servant, He calls Jibril: ‘Allah loves so-and ‏“رمد‎ so Jibril
loves him, and Jibril calls out to inhabitants of the heavens:
‘Allah loves so-and so, so love him’ and acceptance is
placed on earth for him.”

Pommentary On The Introductory Notes... 299
‏تامام‎ y

‘Mjuals and separates between two distinctions. Otherwise,
W @ person intends “justice” when using the word
“equality,” then he will then be considered correct in the
Weaning, but mistaken in the expression. This is why most
Of What is related in the Qur'an (in this matter) is a negation
‏آلا‎ equality.

4Say: “Are those who know equal to those who know
not?’’> (Az-Zumar 39:9)

“Say: “Can the blind and the seeing be equal? Or can
Warkness be equal to light?’ (Ar-Ra‘d 13:16)

“Not equal among you are those who spent and fought
Wefore the Conquest. Such are higher in degree than those
Who spent and fought afterwards» (Al-Hadid 57:10)

Not equal are those of the believers who sit (at home),

| except those who are disabled, and those who strive hard
in the Cause of Allah> (An-Nisa’ 4:95).

Wot a single word was ever related in the Qur'an
mmanding equality, only justice was commanded. And

find that the word “justice” is more acceptable to the

Is. 1 like to call our attention to this, so as to avoid it in

it talks, because some people understand the statement

: fording to its face-value, and will not ponder what it

licates, nor why it is used and its significance to the one

298 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyal

allot for each of them what you allot for the other.

Justice with yourself is included in that, so do not overburden
yourself with any deed beyond your capability. Your Lord
hasa right upon you, and your body has a right upon you

Measure (other things) based on this.

Here it is compusory that we call our attention to the fact
that some people used the word “equality’’ instead of
justice! This is a mistake, Equality should not be said,
because equality can demand equalization between two
things when the judgement demands a distinction between
them. Because of this oppressive call to equality, they began
to say: “Whatis the difference between a male and a female?
The male and female are equal!’’ Such that the communists
said: “What is the difference between the leader and the
subject? It is not possible that anyone have power over
another, even between the father and the child. The father
does not have power over the child...” and so on!

But when we say justice, it is giving everybody what he is
entitled to; this danger disappears. And the expression
becomes faultless.

That is why “Verily, Allah commands Taswiyah (equality)
never occurs in the Qur'an! But:

ah Hb a
€Verily, Allah commands justice» (An-Nahi 16:90)

43 ‏أن‎ Li He 2S Hy:
4And that, when you judge between the people, you

judge with justicey (An-Nisa’ 5:58).

He is mistaken about Islam, whoever says: “The religion of
Islam is a religion of equality!” Rather, the religion of Islam
is the religion of justice, and that combines between two

٠ 1 ‏تمقاون 11لا‎ On The Introductory Notes...

Ht true, we should not stand true to them.
ALMuwahidiin are divided into three categories:

The category of those that are true in their covenant and
athe, it is therefore obligatory upon us to stand true to
Them, because of His, the Exalted, statement:

#50, long as they are true to you (Istaqamii), stand you
fue to them. Verily, Allah He loves Al-Muttagin> (At-
Tawwbah 9:7) °

The category of those who betray and nullify their
venant; so there is no covenant with these people (after
i), based upon His, the Exalted, saying:

4But if they violate their oath after their covenant, and
Wllack your religion with disapproval and criticism, then
Fight the leaders of disbelief, for surely their oaths are
Nothing to them...» (At-Tawbah 9:12)

| third group manifests that they are being true to us,

We fear betrayal on their part. Meaning that you find

pile causes indicating that they want to be treacherous. So

These people, Allah said about them:
ti

If you fear treachery from any people, then renounce
(their covenant) to them (so as to be) on equal terms.
Certainly Allah likes not the treacherous} (Al-Anfil 8:58).

Meaning, renounce the covenant with them, so say “There

300 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyal

who uses it.
The Names and Attributes mentioned in this Ayah were
mentioned previously in Ayat before it.

‎as long as they are true to you (Istagamu), stand‏ ,م45
‎you true to them. Verily, Allah loves Al-Muttagin.>‏
‎(At-Tawbah 9:7)‏

‎ooo

‎The third Ayah: Concerning his statement:
So, as long as they are true to you (Istagami), stand

‎you true to them, Verily, Allah loves Al-Muttagin.>
(Al-Tawbah 9:7)

‎As} (Ma) is a conditional element, the verb of the
conditional clause is contained in ¢€they are true>
while the verb of the main clause is contained in
stand you true>.

‎That is, as long as those with a covenant (Al-Mu‘ahidiin),
concluded with you in Al-Masjid Al-Haram, are true in
fulfilling the covenant, you should stand true to them in
that. This conditional clause, by its express meaning, states
that if they are true to us, it is compulsory that we stand
true to them, and that we fulfill our part of the covenant
with them. It’s understanding also indicates that if they are

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.

Mutatahhirin> (Al-Bagarah 2:222)

© At-Tawwab is an excessive form of At-Tawbah (repen-
tance), and he (the Tawwab) is the one who often
returns to Allah. And At-Tawbah (repentance) is to
return to Allah, from disobedience to obedience.

Its conditions are five:

The first: Al-ikhlas (Sincerity of intention) towards Allah,
the Exalted, such that it is this which carries him in
fepentance fearing Allah, and hoping in His reward.

The second: Regret for the sin he committed. And the sign
of that is that he wishes that it never came from him.

‘The third: Abstention from the sin; by leaving it if it was an
unlawful act, or by fulfilling it if it was an obligation that is
(still) possible to fulfill.

The fourth: The determination to not return to it.

‘The fifth: That it be during the time in which repentance is
acceptable. That is, before the coming of death (to him), and
the rising of the sun from where it sets. If it is at death, or
after the rising of the sun from where it sets, it will not be
accepted.

Thus At-Tawwab refers to the one who often repents. What
is known is that repenting often implies having sinned
Often. From here we understand that no matter how
numerous the sins of a person are, as long as he repents for
ach sin, Allah, the Exalted, loves him. And therefore, one
who repented one time from one sin, then he is more
worthy of being loved by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime;
because Allah loves the one whose sins are numerous when
his acts of repentance are numerous, so he whose sins are
few; then with his repentance, he is more worthy of Allah's
love.

302 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

is no covenant between us and you.” If somebody says:
“Why do we renounce the covenant with them, while they
are Mu‘ahidin?”

We reply that it is due to the fear of them being treacherous,
so we do not trust these people, because it is possible that
they will attack us one day. So for these, we treat them with
the same. We will not betray them as long as the covenant is
upheld, because if the Muslims say: “We fear the treachery
of these these people, so we will (therefore) hasten to fight
them,” We say this is prohibited. Do not fight them until
you have renounced the covenant with them.

* Concerning His saying: ¢Al-Muttagin>: Al-Muttaqin
are those who seek protection (Wigdyah) against the
punishment of Allah, by doing what He commands
and abstaining from what He prohibits. This is the
best and the most comprehensive of what is said
regarding the definition of At-Taqwa.

In this Ayah are the Names and Attributes mentioned

4»
Verily, Allah loves At-Tawwabin and He loves Al-
Mutatahhiriny (Al-Bagarah 2:222)

ee a © ©

The fourth Ayah:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 305

who claim to love Allah, to say to them: “If you are
Sincere in loving Allah, follow the Messenger.’

So whoever initiates something new in the religion of the
Messenger of Allah, and said: “I love Allah and His
Messenger by what I innovated.” We say to him: “This is a
lie. If your love is sincere, then you would follow the
Messenger # and you would not put yourself before him
by introducing what is not from his religion into his
Shari‘ah. Everyone who follows the Messenger of Allah #
most, then he is the most beloved to Allah.

If he loves Allah and esablishes His worship, Allah, the
Exalted, loves him. Rather, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
will give him more than his own works. Allah, the Exalted,
said - in the Hadith Qudst: “He who remembers Me to
himself, | remember him to Myself.” And Allah’s Self is
more magnificent than our selves; “And he who remem-
bers Me in an assembly, I remember him in an assembly
better than it.” And also in the Hadith, whoever draws near
to Him by a hand-span, He draws nearer to him by a
forearm’s length, and he who draws nearer to Him by a
forearm’s length, He draws nearer to him open arm’s
length. He who draws nearer to Allah walking, Allah
approaches him quickly.’"!

Therefore, what Allah, the Mighty and Sublime gives, and
His reward, is greater than your own works.

And the Names and Attributes mentioned in this Ayah are
among those which have preceded.

oo

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (7405) and Muslim (2675) from
Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Concerning the statement: ¢and He loves Al
Mutatahhirin>; those who purify themselves from
ritual impurities, and (purify) their bodies from the
different types of filth, and whatever it is required to
purify oneself from. Here, He combines between
outward and inward purification; the inward purifi
cation is in His saying: €AtTawwabiny and the
outward purification is in His saying: ¢Al
Mutatahhirin>

Allah’s Names and Attributes that were mentioned in this

Ayah are among those that preceded.

saying : <Say: “If you indeed love Allah, then
follow me; Allah will love you...""> (Al ‘Imran 3: 31)

The Fifth Ayah:
“And His saying :
‏تون‎ Gi Ge ZS ‏إن‎ BD
4Say: “If you indeed love Allah, then follow me; Allah
will love you..."» (Al ‘Imriin 3: 31)

The scholars among the Salaf (pious predecessors) called
this Ayah “the Ayah of trial”; meaning - test, because when
some people claimed that they loved Allah, Allah
commanded His Prophet 3 to say to them: ¢If you indeed
love Allah, then follow me> This is a challenge to all those

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 307

© Whoever turns back from the religion of Allah, Allah is
not concerned, because He, the Exalted, has no need of
him. Rather, He will eliminate him, and bring one who
is better than him. Allah will soon bring a people>
instead of them, €He will love them and they will love
Him.> If they love Allah, and He loves them, they
will abide in His obedience.

The completion of the Ayah;
Humble towards the believers, stern towards the
disbelievers> (Al-Ma’idah 5:54).

They are humble before the believers, they lower their
Wings and are lenient with the believers, and they are
peacful with each other. But to the disbelievers, they are
stern and strong. They never exhibit submissiveness before
the disbelievers.

‘The Messenger 3 taught us that: “If you meet them on a
path, constrain them to the narrowest part of it (the
path).”") If the Jews and the Christians meet you, even if
they are a thousand and you are just ten, we will make
things difficult for this group. We will not give way to
them, we will rather force them to its narrows. We will
show them the might of this religion, not ourselves -
because we are human beings, and they are human beings -
Such that it becomes clear to them that the religion of Islam
is dominant, and he who adheres to it is the mighty one.

Struggling in the Cause of Allah, and never fearing

MM Reported by Muslim (2167) from Aba Hurairah, may Allah
be pleased with him.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

And His saying: €Allah will bring a people whom He
will love, and they will love Him...» (Al-Ma’idah 5:54)

مس نس ‎Oo‏

€Allah will bring a people whom He will love, and they
will love Him...» (Al-Ma’idah 5:54)

This is a follow up to the conditional clause that precedes,
wherein He says:

40 you who believe! Whoever from among you turns
back from his religion, Allah will bring a people whom
He will love and they will love Himy

That is, if you turn back from the religion of Allah, that will
not harm Allah in any way;

¢Allah will bring a people whom He will love, and they
will love Him...» (Al-Ma‘idah 5:54)

This is like His statement:
And if you turn away, He will exchange you for some
other people, and they will not be your likesp
(Muhammad 47:38)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

sty

And His saying: ¢Verily, Allah loves those who fight in
Fis Cause in ranks,

The Seventh Ayah: His saying:

Oh OE ‏صَنَا‎ hg Shs ill C4 al yp
Kaye

*Verily, Allah loves those who fight in His Cause in

ranks, as if they were a structure, consolidated> (As-

Saff 61:4)

This Ayah is from Stirat As-Saff, which in reality is the
Suirah of Al-Jihad, because Allah, the Exalted, begins it
with praise for those who fight in His Cause, then He
calls to Jihad at the end of it. Then, between that, He
mentions that Allah will make His religion dominant
over all other religions, even though the polytheists
detest that.

4Verily, Allah loves those who fight in His Cause in
ranks}: no one advances ahead of others, nor lags
behind, even in Jihad.

The Salith is a minor Jihad, in it is a leader whose following
‏ال[‎ Compulsory, if you do not follow him, your Salah
becomes invalid. The Prophet 2 said: “Does he who raises
fils head before the Imam not fear that Allah will change his
Head into the head of a donkey, or make his appearance

308 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wisitiyyah

the blame of the blamersy (Al-Ma’idah 5:54)

They peform Jihad in the Cause of Allah; everyone who
opposes the religion of Allah among the disbelievers, the
rebellious, the heretics, and the apostates, they peform Jiftad
against them. They fight everyone with the weapons they
deserve. Whoever fights them with iron and fire, they fight
him with iron and fire. Whoever fights them with debate
and arguments, they argue with him with the like of that
They struggle for Allah with every type of Jihad.

@ And never fearing the blame of the blamers}, they do
not fear the blame of the people. They speak the
truth, even if it is against themselves. But they
employ wisdom in this Jihid; and they aspire to
achieve the goal. If they see that the Da‘wah demands
some delay in some matters, they delay. If they see
that doing Da’wah demands leniency in some situa-
tions, they use it, because they want to reach a
particular goal, and the means (employed) are
according to what the situation demands.

> Then Allah, the Exalted, says:

4That is the grace of Allah which He bestows on whom
He wills and Allah is All-Sufficient for His is Creatures’
needs, All-Knower> (Al-Ma'idah 5:54)

This Ayah Names and Attributes of Allah that preceded,
with the addition that Allah, the Exalted, is beloved

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

cea

<5 Ba Bip 5
And His saying: €And He is Al-Chafiir, Al-Wadid.>
(AL-Burtij 85:14)

The Eighth Ayah: His saying:
51 Sa ‏هو‎
‎4And He is Al-Ghafir, Al-Wadid.> (Al-Burij 85:14)

© €Al-Ghafiiry: The One Who covers the sins of His
servants and overlooks them.

 €Al-Wadiid>: It is derived from Al-Wadd, and that is
pure love. It carries the meaning; “Waddin" (loving)
and the meaning “Mawdid" (beloved), because He,
the Mighty and Sublime, loves and is loved. As He,
the Exalted, said:

Allah will bring a people whom He will love, and they
will love Him...» (Al-Ma'idah 5:54)

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is, therefore, loving and He
I beloved. He loves His Awliya’ and His Awliya’ love
Him"! They love reaching Him, His Paradise and His
Pleasure.

Tn this Ayah are two Names of Allah: Al-Ghafiir and Al-
Wadiid (The One full of love) and two attributes: forgive-
ness and love.

1 (Translation note): See the Shaikh’s explanation of Awliya’
that appears near the end of the text

310 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

into the appearance of a donkey?’"! And the rows in the
Salah are like the ranks in Jihad. The Messenger 2% would
arrange them for Jihad as he would arrange them for 514/1
As if they were a structure, and a structure, as said by
the Messenger #, “...each part supports the othe:
Each part clings to the other, and as such, He said:

they were a structure, consolidated.» It is not like bei
separated; So Al-Marsis is firm, clinging together.

These people, whom Allah attaches love to because of their
deeds, have a number of qualities.

Firstly: They fight, so they do not lean on residing,
indifference, indolence and inactivity which weakens
matters of the religion and the worldy life.

Secondly: Al-Ikhlas (Sincerity of intent) based on His saying
in His Caused

Thirdly: One supports the other, based on His saying; €in
rows}.

Fourthly: That they are like a building, and a building is an
invulnerable fortress.

Fifthly: Whatever tears at them, it cannot penetrate into
them, based on His word €consolidated>.

Allah attaches love to these people based on these five
qualities.

Reported by Al-Bukhari (691) and Muslim (427) from Abii
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Based on what is reported by Al-Bukhari (6026), Muslim
(2585) from Aba Masa Al-Ash‘ari, may Allah be pleased
with him, from the Prophet (5) who said: “A believer is toa
believer like a structure; one part strengthens the other.”
Then he interlaced his fingers.

Commentary On The Introductory Note:

based upon the saying of the Prophet ‏ييه‎ “Indeed Allah has
taken me as a Khalil just as He took Tbrahim as a Khalil.”

And this Khullah is an Attribute among the Attributes of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, because it is the highest
type of love, and its status is Tawgifiyyah - it is not possible
to affirm that anyone among the human beings is a Khalif
except with an evidence, not even among the Prophets,
May the Salah and Salim be upon them, except these two
honorable Messengers; for these two are the Khualils of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

This Ayah: ¢And Allah took Ibrahim as a Khalil is the
@vidence cited by the one who executed Al-Ja’d bn
Dirham, the head of the denying Jahmiyyah; the first thing
he denied was when he said: “Allah never took Ibrahim
‏اللا‎ 8 Khalil. He never Spoke directly to Masa’’!! So, Khalid
bin ‘Abdullah Al-Qasri,""! may Allah have mercy upon
him, executed him when he brought him out in shackels
‏لزلا‎ the day of ‘Td Al-Adha, and addressed the people
aying: “O people! Sacrifice your Udhiyyah! May Allah
@ecept your animal sacrifices, 1 am using Al-Ja’d bin
Dirham from my Udhiyyah, because he claimed that Allah

MW Adh-Dhahabi said: “The great Amir, Aba Al-Haitham
Khalid bin ‘Abdullah bin Yazid bin Asad bin Kurz Al-
Bajali Al-Qasri Ad-Dimashgi. He was the Amir of the
people of Al-‘Iraq for Hisham, and before that, he was the
governor of Makkah for Al-Walid bin ‘Abdul-Malik, the
for Sulaiman. He was generous, praiseworthy and of a
high rank among the nobles, but there were some issues of
Nasib that were well-known from him. ‘Abdullah bin
Ahmad bin Hanbal said: “I heard Ibn Ma‘in saying:
‘Khalid bin ‘Abdullah Al-Qasri, an evil person who
disparaged “Ali.” See As-Siyar (5:425-432)

312 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

1 wish that the author had added a ninth Ayah regarding
the love, and that about Al-Khullah, due to His saying:

And Allah took Ibrahim as a Khalil» (An-Nisa‘ 4:125).
Al-Khalil is he who is at the highest rank of love. So Al
Khullah, is the highest kind of love; because Al-Khalil is the
one whose love reaches to the inner most depths of the
heart and permeates passages of its veins. No type of love
is ever above Al-Khullah, Describing his beloved, one poet
said

You have indeed permeated the passage of the soul in me
And with this the Khalil is named a Khalil.

The Prophet # loved all his Companions, but he never
took any of them as a Khalil. While addressing the people,
the Prophet # said: “’If I were to have taken anyone from
my Ummah as a Khalil, 1 would have chosen Aba
‏زوق‎

Therefore Abu Bakr is the most beloved of all people to
him, but his love did not reach the status of Al-Khullah,
because he did not take anyone as his Khalil, but there was
the brotherhood of Islam, and its love.

But in the case of Al-Khullah, that was between him and his
Lord. The Prophet #¢ said: “Indeed Allah has taken me as a
Khalil just as He took Ibrahim as a Khalit.’”"7!

We do not know of Al-Khullah being affirmed for any
human aside from these two people. They are Ibrahim and
Muhammad, may the Salah and Salam be upon them both,

Reported by Al-Bukhari (2356) and Muslim (2383)
Reported by Muslim (532) from Jundab bin ‘Abdullah,
may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 315

S0 we say: We affirm Al-Mahabbah based upon intellectual
evidences; just as it is affirmed, according to us, by
evidences in revealed texts. To argue against whoever
tejects that it is affirmed by the intellect, then we say - and
with Allah is the facilitation to do what is correct:

Th the award of Paradise, aid, support, and other than that,
for those who are obedient, there is evidence without a
doubt for Al-Mahabbah. We witness with our own eyes, and
hear with our own ears about those who have preceded,
and those to come, that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
Supports whomever He supports among His believing
ervants, and He aided them and rewarded them. Is this
@nything other than evidence of Al-Mahabbah for those He
Supported, aided and rewarded?

“There are two questions here.

‘The First. How does a person attain the love of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime? This is what every person craves for.
Love is a natural matter, that a person possesses and
Cannot control it. That is why it is seen that the Messenger
Wi said about justice among his wives: “This is my division
fegarding what I control, so do not blame me regarding
that which I do not control."

The Reply: There are many means that lead to Al-Mahabbah
Among them is that a person consider who created him,
and who is it that has been providing him with various

Ml Reported by Ahmad (6:144), Aba Dawud (2134), Ibn
Majah (1971), An-Nasai (7:64), At-Tirmidhi (1140), Ibn
Hibban (10:50), Al-Hakim (2:187), and he said it was Sabi,
and Adh-Dhahabei approved of it. Versions of it differ in
being connected versus being Mursal. See Irod’ Al-Ghalil
(2018).

314 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

did not take Ibrahim as a Khalil, and He never Spoke to
Masa directly.” He then descended and slaughtered
him.”
Ibn Al-Qayyim said about that:!

For this purpose, Khalid Al-Qasri peformed Udhiyyah with

Ja'd

On the Day of the Slaughter of sacrificial animals

Since he said that Ibrahim was not His Khalil

And Miisa was not the close speaker

Everyone who upholds the Sunnah was grateful for the

sacrifice,

Good of you for the sacrifice
Now we have Mahabbah (love), Wadd (love), and Khullah. So
Al-Mahabbah and Al-Wadd are general, and Al-Khullah is
specific to Ibrahim and Muhammad.

It is obligatory upon us, when it comes to matters of the
unseen, to rely upon revealed texts as evidence. But this
does not prevent us from using intellectual proofs to
convince those who reject the idea that Al-Mahabbah is
affirmed by intellectual evidence; like the Ash‘ariyyah, they
say it is never possible that Al-Mahabbalt be affirmed
between Allah and the worshipper. Because the intellect
does not prove that. And all of what is not proven by the
intellect, then it is obligatory to declare Allah’s innocence of
it.

It was mentioned by Al-Bukhart inKhalqu Af'al Al-‘Tbad (no.
12), and Ad-Darimi in Ar-Rad ‘alal-Jahmiyyah (17). Al-
Albani said its chain is strong in Mukhtasar Al-"Uli (13
See Mukhtasar As-Sawa‘ig by Ibn Al-Qayyim (3:1071).
Al-Kafiyah Ash-Shafiyah by Ibn Al-Qayyim with the
explanation of Ibn ‘Isa (1:50).

Commentary On The Introductor

Among them, it is to love what Allah loves of actions, the
verbal, the physical, and those of the heart. Love that which
Allah loves, this will make you love Allah, because Allah
will reward you for this, by putting His love in your heart.
You will love Allah if you do what He loves, and in the
same way, you love whom He loves. The difference
between them is clear. The latter has to do with people,
while the former has to do with actions, because “what” is
tused for non-human beings in terms of action, places and
times, and “who” is used for human beings. If you love the
Prophet 3%; love Ibrahim, love Missa, ‘Isa and others among,
the Prophets, if you love the truthful ones, such as Aba
Bakr, the martyrs, and others whom Allah loves, this brings
about Allah love. This is also among the effects of Allah's
love. It is a cause and an effect.

Among them, is frequent remembrance of Allah, such that
itis always on your mind, until you are such that everytime
you witness anything, it makes you think of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, such that your heart will always be
busy with Allah, turning away from all other than Him.
This will bring about the love of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.

These three factors, in my view, are of the most powerful
causes for Allah’s love.

The second question: What are the behavioural effects
implied from what He mentioned?

The Response:
Firstly: His saying:

And do Ihsan; surely Allah loves the Muhsinin.> (Al-
Bagarah 2 :195)

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wi

favours since he was in his mother’s womb? And who is it
that caused the blood to flow into your veins before you
were placed on the earth, except Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime? Who is it that prevents the various harms from
befalling you after all the causes of the harms have been
set? Many a time you yourself witnessed dangers and
harms that almost befell you when Allah would remove
them from you.

There is no doubt that this will bring about love. That is
why it is related in a Hadith: “Love Allah for what He
nourishes you with of His fayours.”"! I think that if
someone gives you a pen, you will like him. If that is so,
look at all the favours Allah has granted you, they are so
numerous that they cannot be counted; you will love Allah.

That is why when a favour comes to you while you are in
great need, you find your chest expanded, and you love the
one who offered you the favour, and this is different than
constant favors; so you must remember these favours that
Allah gives you, and also remember that Allah favours you
above many of his believing servants.

If Allah grants you knowledge, He has favoured you with
knowledge; or with worship, He has favoured you with
worship; or with wealth, He has favoured you with wealth,
or with family, He has favoured you with family; or with
food, He has favoured you with food. There is no favour
except there is one lower in rank in it. If you recognize this
great favour, you will be grateful to Allah and love Him

Reported by At-Tirmidhi (3789), Al-Hakim (3:150), Al-
Baihaqi in Ash-Shu’ab (1378), At-Tabarani (3:31), and Aba
Nu‘aim in Al-Hilyah (3:211), The Hadith was declared weak
by AL-Albani in his annotation of Figh As-Strah (23)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

Fourthly: Allah, the Exalted, says:

Verily, Allah loves At-Tawwabin... (Al-Bagarah 2:222)

This demands that I frequently turn in repentance to Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime. I should frequently return to
Allah with my heart and my form. A person merely saying:
“1 turn in repentance to Allah” will not really benefit, but
be mindful, and say: “I turn in repentance to Allah’’ while
there is an act of disobedience before you, return to Allah
from it, and repent so that you can gain the love of Allah.

and He loves Al-Mutatalthirin,» (Al-Bagarah 2:222)

When you wash filth from your garment, you should sense
that Allah loves you, because He loves those who purify
themselves. If you perform Wudi', you should sense that
Allah loves you, because you have purified yourself. If you
peform Ghusl, you should sense that Allah loves you,
because Allah loves those who purify themselves.

By Allah we are heedless of these meanings; most of the
time we just perform purification from filth or ritual
impurity, because it is a condition for the correctness of the
‏,اقلم‎ and we do it out of fear of invalidating our Salah. But,
$0 often we fail to realize that this act, is a means of
drawing nearer to Allah, and a means of Allah's love for us.
If we were mindful whenever someone washes a drop of
urine from his garment, that this act will bring about
Allah’s love for him, we would obtain so much goodness;
but we are heedless.

318 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

— dictates that we do Ihsan; and that we crave doing Ihsan,
because Allah loves it, and everything which Allah loves,
we should crave it.

Secondly: His saying,
€And be equitable. Verily, Allah loves those who are
equitable.» (Al-Hujurat 49 :9)

— dicates that we are just, and that we crave justice.
Thirdly: His saying:

Verily, Allah loves Al-Muttagin.> (At-Tawbah 9:7)

— dicates that we should have Taqwa of Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime. We should not fear the creatures in such a
way that, if someone we are shy of among the people is
with us, we leave an act of disobedience, but when he is
not, we commit the act of disobedience. So Taqwa is that we
have Taqwa of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and not
worry about the people. Rectify what is between you and
Allah, and Allah will rectify that is between you and the
people.

O my brother, consider what is between you and your
Lord, and do not worry about other than that;

Truly, Allah defends those who believe> (Al-Hajj 22:38)

Do what is determined by the Shari‘ah, and the end shall be
yours.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

Seventhly, His saying:

Verily, Allah loves those who fight in His Cause in
ranks, as if they were a structure, consolidated> (As-
Saff 61:4)

When we believe in this Attribute of love, we will do these
five things which it demands and requires: Fighting, not
being negligent, sincerity, being in the Cause of Allah, one
of us supporting the other as if we were a building; to
consolidate the tie among us like a solid structure; that we
should be in rows. This demands equality of feeling so that
the hearts do not disagree with one another; this is among
that which strengthens affection. When a person sees
somebody on his right, and someone on his left, he feels
comfortable; if he is surrounded from all angles, then his
determination will strengthen.

Therefore, there are three discussions based on these Aydt.

1, The affirmation of the attribute of love with evidence
from revealed texts

2. Its caus

$. The behavioural effects of having faith in it.

As for the people of innovation those who deny it, they do
not have any proof except very baseless ones. They say:
Firstly: The intellect does not not prove that.

Secondly: That love can only exist between two similar
things, it can never exist between the Lord and the creature;
it can exist between the creatures.

We refute them by saying: We will responded to the first,
Which is that the intellect does not prove that, with two

320 Commentary on AL‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Fifthly: His saying:

4If you indeed love Allah, then follow me, Allah will
love you and forgive you your sins.» (Al ‘Imran 3:31),

This also demands that we have the utmost desire to follow
the Prophet #%, such that we completely follow his path, we
do not exit from it, nor fall short in it, nor add to it, nor
decrease from it

Keeping all of this in mind will protect us from innova-
tions, and it will protect us from neglect, and it will protect
us from additions and extremism. If we are mindful of
these matters, the how would our behavior, our manners,
our character, and our worship be?

Sixthly: His statement:

ot te

40 you who believe! Whoever from among you turns
back from his religion, Allah will bring a people whom
He will love and they will love Him» (Al-Ma'idah 5:54)

Due to this, we are very careful from turning back from
Islam, among which is the abandonment of the Salah
prayer. When we know that Allah is threatening us that if
we turn back from our religion, He will destroy us, and
bring a people whom He will love, and they will love Him;
and they will fulfill their obligations to their Lord, we will
adhere to obeying Allah and avoiding everything that
draws close to apostasy.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 323

dissimilar beings. For example, somebody has an old watch
which never develops any fault nor stops functioning. You
will find him loving it. And supposing that he has another
which consumes half of his time repairing it. You will find
that he detests it. Also, you find that beasts love, and they
are loved

So we, and all praise is due to Allah, affirm that there is
love between Allah and His servants.

And His saying: €In the Name of Allah, Ar-Rahman,
Ar-Rahimy (An-Naml 27:30). €Our Lord! You
encompass all things in mercy and knowledge.» (Ghafir

© The Attribute of Mercy

‘The Commentary
These ‏اقيق‎ affirm the Attribute of mercy:

The first Ayah:

4In the Name of Allah, Ar-Rahman, Ar-Rahim> (An-
Naml 27:30).

322 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Waisitiyyah

replies; one of them is through a submission, and the other
by a refusal.

As for the submission, we say we submit that the intellect
does not prove the attribute of love, but the revealed texts
establish that, and it is an independent fact on its own.
Allah, the Mighty and Exalted, says:

ogi I ts ESN BE >

4And we have sent down to you the Book (the Quran)
as an exposition of everything» (An-Nalil 16 :89)

Since it is an exposition, then it is an evidence all by itself.
The lack of a particular proof does not necessarily mean the
absence of what is being proven; because there could be a
number of proofs for what is being proven, whether
sensory or abstract. As for the sensory; such as a city which
has a number of roads leading to it, if we miss a road, we
enter through the second road. As for the abstract; many a
ruling has a number of proofs. The obligation of purifica-
tion before the Salah, for example has many proofs.

Therefore, if you say that the intellect does not prove the
affirmation of love between the Creator and the creature,
the revealed texts prove it with the strongest of proofs and
the most evident exposition.

The second response: The refusal; that is we refuse the
claim that the intellect does not prove it. We say, rather the
intellect does prove the affirmation of love between the
Creator and the creature as preceded.

As for your saying that the love cannot exist between two
similar things, it is enough to say your claim is not
acceptable since the basic fact is that it is not established.
We say your claim that it cannot exist except between two
similar beings is impossible. Rather it exists between two

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 325

coupled them in the decree: ¢Our Lord! You
encompass all things in mercy and knowledge>

‘This is a general mercy that covers all the creatures even
the disbelievers, because Allah coupled this mercy with
Knowledge. And everything which the knowledge of Allah
feaches - and the knowledge of Allah reaches all things -
then His mercy has reached it. So just as He knows the
tlisbeliever, He has mercy on the disbeliever as well.

However, the mercy for the disbeliever is physically,
bodily, worldly, and highly confined compared to the
Mercy bestowed upon the believer. The one who provides
for the disbeliever is Allah; He is the One who provides
him with food, drink, clothing, shelter and a spouse, and
other than that.

As for the believers, their mercy is more special, and more
tremendous, because it is a mercy of faith, religion, as well
as worldly. That is why you find the believers better in
ondition than the disbelievers, even in the matters of the
World, because Allah says:

Whoever works righteousness — whether male or
female — while he is a true believer, verily to him, We
will give a good life!> (An-Nahl 16:97).

This good life is missing for the disbeliever. Their life is like
that of the beasts. When he is satiated, he defecates, but
When he does not get enough to eat, he sits down and
begins to shout. That is how these disbelievers are. When
they are full, they become pompous, or else they sit down
and begin to shout! They do not benefit from their life. But
as for the believer, if harm befalls him, he perseveres and
has hopes for reward from Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

324 Commentary on AL-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The author cited this Ayah to establish a ruling; it is not an
introduction to what comes after it. The commentary on the
Basmalah (the saying: In the Name of Allah, Ar-Rahman, Ar-
Rahim) preceded. Therefore, there is no need to repeat it.

In it are three of Allah’s Names: Allah, Ar-Raltman, and A 7
Rahim, and from his Attributes are: Al-Ulahiyyah (divinity)
and Ar-Rahmah (mercy).

The second Ayah:
40hs ess of JE es Ep
4Our Lord! You encompass all things in mercy and
knowledge> (Ghafir 40:7)

This is the saying of the Angels:

€Those (Angels) who bear the Throne, and those around
it, glorify the praises of their Lord, and believe in Him
and ask for forgiveness for those who believe, saying:
“Our Lord! You encompass all things in mercy and
knowledge, so forgive those who repent and follow your
way, and save them from the torment of the blazing
Fire! (Ghafir 40:7).

How magnificent faith is! And how magnificent are its
benefits! The Angels around the Throne who bear it, pray
to Allah for the believers.

‎His statement: ¢Our Lord! You encompass all things in‏ ب
‎mercy and knowledge» shows that everything that the‏
‎knowledge of Allah reaches — and it reaches all‏
‎things — then His mercy reaches it. For Allah‏

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

And His saying: €And He is Suey Merciful
(Rahiman) with the believers» (Al-Ahzab 33:43). €Our
Lord! You encompass all things in mercy and
knowledge} (Ghafir 40:7)

And He is expetilly Merciful (Rahiman) with the
believers> (Al-Alzab 33:43).

With the believersp; is attached to Rahkiman, and
bringing forward that upon which an action is
directed, is evidence for restriction, and as such, the
meaning of the Ayah: “He is especially Merciful with
the believers, and not to other than them.” But how
do we harmonize between this Ayah, and the one

Our Lord! You encompass all things in mercy and
knowledge} (Ghafir 40:7)

We say: The mercy here is not the mercy there. This is a
Specific mercy that has to do with the mercy of the
Hereafter, which the disbelievers cannot earn, unlike the
first one. This is the way of harmonizing between them. Or
else, mercy is for everyone, but there is a difference
between mercy that is specific and mercy that is general.

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

If (on the other hand), a good thing happens to him, he is
grateful, he is in goodness in this, and in that. And his heart
is open, tranquil, accepting the decree and the will (of
Allah). He is not anxious during a trial, nor arrogant when
favored with blessings; rather he is balanced, upright, and
moderate. This is the difference between the mercy for this
one and the mercy for that one.

But unfortunately O brothers, there are thousands of us
those who wish to surpass the caravans of the disbelievers
in the world, so much that they make this world their sole
target. If they are given, they become pleased. If they are
not given, then they become angry. These people, no matter
what they have of this worldly affluence, they are still ina
Hell. They never tasted the sweetness of this world. The
one who tastes the sweetness is he who believes in Allah
and does righteous deeds.

That is why one of the Salaf (pious predecessors) said: “By
Allah, if the kings or the princes knew what we experience
(of enjoyment), they would have fought us for it with the
swords, because what obstructed them from these favors is
the rebelliousness (against Allah), the disobedience (against
Allah), and reliance on the world, and that this is the
greatest of their concern and the extent of their know!-
edge.”

Among Allah’s Attributes included in this Ayah are: Ar-
Rubibiyyah (Lordship) and encompassing mercy and
knowledge.

a HOS

Commentary On The Introductory Notes..

The fifth Ayah:
Your Lord has written Mercy for Himselfy (Al-An‘am
6:54)

* Written}; meaning He prescribed Mercy for Himself.
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, in His magnanimity,
His grace, and His generosity, prescribed mercy for
Himself, and gave His Mercy precedence over His
wrath.

eG FAG ‏كَسَبُوا ما‎ wy

4And if Allah were to punish the people for that which
they earned, He would not leave a moving creature on
its (the earth's) surface» (Fatir 35:45).

But His forbearance and mercy make Him leave the
creation to its appointed time.
And from His Mercy is what He mentioned in His saying:
‏.لت‎ Ke Le ‏من‎ ED
4255 Sie ‏َنم‎
‎So that if any of you does evil in ignorance, and
thereafter repents and does righteous good deeds, then
surely, He is Ghaftirun Rahim (Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful)» (Al-An‘am 6:54)
‘This is from His Mercy.

© 4Evil> is an indefinite noun related in the context of
condition, it therefore encompasses all evils, even
Shirk,

328 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Mercy is among Allah’s Attributes included in the Ayah,
and among the behavioral aspects, there is the encourage-
ment for having faith

ooo -—---

OF GA) ‏ل ع سر‎ yee
4b ‏وَسِِعَتَ كل‎ GSP : ‏وَقَوْلَهُ‎
‎And His saying: €And My mercy encompasses all
things (ALA ‘raf 7:15

The fourth Ayah:
qs ‏وَسِعَتَ كل‎ oy)

And My mercy encompasses all things» (Al-A‘raf

7:156).
He, Majestic is His Majesty, says, praising and glorifying
Himself: €And My mercy encompasses all things> He
praised Himself, the Mighty and Sublime, in that His
mercy encompasses everything inhabiting the heavens

and the earth. We say here what we said about the
second Ayah; so refer to that.

OO --—------- =

Hak & KS ‏َقَْله : « كب‎
And His saying: €Your Lord has written Mercy for
Himself} (Al-An‘am 6:54).

ooo -

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

Among the Attributes of Allah included in this Ayah are: Ar-
Rubabiyyah (Lordship), making matters obligatory, and mercy.

The sixth Ayah:

Ce
4And He is Al-Ghafiir, Al-Rahim} (Yunus 10:107).

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is the Al-Ghafir, Ar-Rahim.
He, the Mighty and Sublime, combines between these two
Names, because the punishment for a sin is withdrawn due
to the pardon, and with mercy, the desire is achieved. And
a person is in need of both of these. He is in need of being
pardoned, to be saved from his sins, and he is in need of
mercy, by which he will be successful in the fulfillment of
his desire.

> 4ALGhafir> is a form indicating extensiveness,!"!
derived from Al-Ghafar (pardon) which is the cover,
with protection, Because it is derived from Al-Mighfar
(helmet). And a helmet is something which is put on
head while fighting to protect from an arrow. There
are the two benefits derived from this helmet, they
are that it shields the head and it brings protection.
Therefore, Al-Ghafar is He who covers up the sins of

‎(Translation note): See the Shaikh’s explanation of “Ar-‏ لكآ

‎Rahman” at the beginning of the text.

‎Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎In ignorance»: meaning out of foolishness. What is
intended by it here is not a lack of knowledge; but
foolishness is lack of wisdom, because everyone who
disobeys Allah has disobeyed Him out ignorance,
foolishness, and a lack of wisdom.

‎And thereafter repents and does righteous good deeds,
then surely, He is Ghafitrun Rahim (Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful)» He forgives his sin and has mercy with
him.
He did not end the Aydh with this, except for the reason
that the repenting sinner will earn forgiveness and mercy.
This is from His Mercy which He prescribed for limself;
not, justice would demand that He punish him for his sin,
and reward him for his righteous deeds.

‎If a man commits sins for fifty days, then he repents and
does righteous deeds for fifty days, then what is just is that
we give him the punishment for the fifty days, and the
reward for the fifty days of good deeds. But Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, prescribed Mercy upon Himself. All
of the fifty days of sins will be erased, and they will vanish
within a period of time. He added to that;

‎42s gee BIE ‏«تأوتهلك‎

‎4For those Allah will change their sins into good deeds>
(Al-Furgan 25:70)

‎The previous sins will be converted into rewards for good
deeds, because every sin has been repented from, and
every act of repentance brings a reward. By this, the effect
of His statement becomes clear:

‏سهد له ‎Seek‏
‏2

‏> عل تنه ‎Sh‏

‎4 Your Lord has written Mercy for Himself (Al-An'dm 6:54).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

The seventh Ayah:
€But Allah is the best to guard, and He is the Most
Merciful of those who show mercy} (Ytisuf 12:64)

Ya‘qab said this, when he sent the blood-brother of Yasuf
with his other sons, because Yasuf, may the Salah and Salim
be upon him, said: “You will not be granted measure when
you return, unless you bring your brother along with you.”
They told their father of this message, and due to this
necessity; he sent him along with them, and said this
during his farewell. He said

€Can I entrust him to you, except as I entrusted his
brother to you aforetime, but Allah is the best to guard,
and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy>
(Yusuf 12:64.)

— meaning: You can never protect him, but Allah is the
one who will guard him.

% The evidence in the Ayah here, is His saying: ¢and He is
the Most Merciful of those who show mercy} because it
affirms Mercy for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.
Rather, He clarified that He is the Most Merciful of
those who show mercy. If the mercy of all creatures
was gathered together, the Mercy of Allah will be
stronger and greater. The greatest mercy a creature
would show another is that of the mother to her
child, because the mercy the mother shows for her
child is never equalled by any other. Even the father,
in most cases, he does not have mercy with his

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

His servants and protects them from the evil of their
sins, by pardoning them.

What is confirmed in the Sahih points to this: “Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, shall be alone with His servant on the
Day of Judgment, and make him acknowledge his sins,
saying: “You did such-and-such; you did such-and-such’
until he admits that. Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, will
then say to him. ‘I have covered them up for you in the
world, and I pardon you for them today’!!!

* As for ¢Ar-Rahim}>; then He is the possessor of the
encompassing mercy, and the discussion about that
preceded.

And among the Names included in the Ayah are; Al-Ghafir
and Ar-Rahim. And among the Attributes: Al-Maghrifah
(pardon), and Ar-Rahmah (mercy).

كع ل وار يك

<But Allah is the best to guard, and He is the Most
Merciful of those who show mercy} (Yisuf 12:64)

Based on the report of Al-Bukhari (2441), Muslim (2768)
from Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, who said
“The Prophet 3 said; ‘Allah shall bring the believer close,
and cover him with His Screen, and say, ‘Do you realize
such-and-such sin?’ ‘Do you realize such-and-such sin?’ He
will say, ‘Yes, my Lord’ until when he is made to
acknowledge his sins, and thinks he is destroyed, He will
say: ‘I have concealed it for you in the world, and forgiven
you for it today.’”

you find that a ferocious predator guards its offspring. And
if somebody enters into it in its den with its offspring, it
attacks him to defend them until it drives him away from
its offspring.

The affirmation of the Mercy of Allah, the Exalted, is
proven in the Book, the Sunnah, Ijma’, and by the intellect.

As for the Book, affirmation of the mercy comes from
various angles. Sometimes by the mention of a Name, such
as His saying:

And He Al-Ghafiir, Ar-Rahim> (Ytinus 10:107)
And sometimes with an Attribute, as His saying:

Gog ‏دُو‎ Sali
And Your Lord is Al-Ghafir, Owner of Ar-Rahmah
(mercy)> (Al-Kahf 18:58)

and sometimes by an action, as in His saying:

le EEN ‏ان‎

AS ‏من‎ TS OL

4He punishes whom He wills, and shows mercy to
whom He wills> (Al-‘Ankabit 29:21)

and sometimes by using a noun showing superiority, as in
His saying:
4And He is the Most Merciful of those who show
mercy» (Yusuf 12:64)

And similar to this is mentioned, in the Sunnah.

As for the intellectual proofs affriming mercy for Allah, the
Exalted; among them is what we see of many good things

334 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

children as their mother does.

A woman came seeking her child amongst the captives,
and when she saw him, she held him with affection,
holding him to her chest in the presence of people and the
Messenger of Allah #§. Then, the Prophet 2% said: “Do you
think that this woman would cast her child into the fire.”

They said, “No O Messenger of Allah.” He said: “Allah is

more Merciful with His servants than she is with her
vt]

son.

Exalted is His Majesty; and Mighty is His Sovereignty and
Authority.

If all the mercy of all who show mercy was combined, then
it would still be nothing compared to Allah’s Mercy.

What proves this for you, is that Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime - created hundred forms of mercy, and put just one
of them in this world with which all the creations show
mercy to one another.”!

All creation show mercy to one another, beasts and
humans; that is why you see a defiant she-camel raising
her leg for her child, for fear of hurting it while suckling it,
so that it can feed it with with ease. And in the same way,

{Reported by Al-Bukhari (5999), Muslim (2754) from ‘Umar
bin Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him
Based upon the report of Al-Bukhari (6000) and Muslim
(2752), from Abo Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with
him, he said; “I heard Allah's Messenger 3 saying; ‘Allah
made one hundred portions of mercy; so He kept ninety-
nine kinds of mercy with Him, and sent one portion to the
earth. So from that portion, the creatues show mercy, such
that even the beast lifts up its hoof for its child, fearing that
it would be struck by it.”

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 337

They reject this, they said it is not possible that Allah be
described with mercy!

We refute their position from two angles: A submission,
and a refutation.

The sumbission is that we say, supposing that the intellect
does not prove that, but the revealed texts prove it, then it
is affirmed by another proof. And the general rule with
every sane person is that the lack of a particular proof does
not necessarily mean that what is being proven does not
exist. Because it may be affirmed by another evidence.
Thus, supposing that Ar-Ralimah is not affirmed by the
intellect, yet it has been affirmed by revealed texts, and
how many things are affirmed by numerous proofs!

As for the refutation; we say: Your statement that the
intellect does not prove Ar-Rahmah is false. Rather, the
intellect proves Ar-Rahmah. These favors that are witnessed
and heard about, and these thwarted dangers, what is their
cause? Their cause is Ar-Raltmah without a doubt! Had
Allah not shown His mercy on the servants, He would not
give them favors and protect them from dangers. This is a
widely witnessed matter, the elite and the average witness
it. An average person in his shop or in his market knows
that the these favors are the result of Allah’s mercy!

What is amazing is that these people affirm the Attribute of
Al-Iradah (want, objective, volition) via Takhsis (particular-
ization, or individualization). They said Al-Iradah is
affirmed for Allah, the Exalted, by revealed texts, and the
intellect. With the textual proof, it is very clear; and with
the intellect, because Takhsis proves Al-Iradah

‘The meaning of Taklsis, is that the particularization of how
the various creatures would be, proves Al-Iradah (want,
objective, volition). The heavens are heavens, the earths are
earths, these are stars, this is the Sun, all of these things are

336 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

that result from the command of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime. Among them is the great deal of harm that we see
warded off on the command of Allah. All of these indicates
the mercy of Allah, intellectually.

When people are experiencing drought and famine; the
earth suffers from drought while the heavens are dry; there
is no rain, no plants sprout; then Allah sends down the
rain, and the earth begins to grow, the cattle eat to their
full, and the people drink the water. Even the average
person who does not study, if you ask him: “What is this
from?” He would reply: “This is Allah’s mercy.” No one
would ever doubt this.

So the Mercy of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is affirmed
by evidences in revealed texts, and intellectual evidence.

The ‘Ash‘ariyyah and others among the people of Tatil
(denial) reject describing Allah, the Exalted with mercy

They said that this is because the intellect does not prove
that. Secondly: They said that to show mercy is to be soft,
weak, tranquil toward the one being shown the mercy, and
this does not befit Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, because
Allah is greater than to behave with such mercy, and it is
not possible for Allah to show mercy! They said that the
meaning of Ar-Rahmah is either the want for Ihsdn
(beneficence), or it is Ihsan (beneficence) itself. That it is;
either it is favor, or the want to grant favor.

Now consider how they negated this magnificent Attribute,
which all the believers hope in and long for. If you ask
anyone; what do you want? He will reply: “I want the
mercy of Allah.”

Allah's mercy is near unto Al-Muhsininy (AL-
7:56).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 339

41 shall ordain for those who have Taqwa and give
Zakah ; and those who believe in our Aydt...» (Al-A‘raf
7:156).

And faith; because it is among the means of earning Allah's
Mercy, as He, the Exalted, said:

4And He is especially Merciful (Rahiman) with the
believers» (Al-Ahzab 33:43).

The stronger the faith, the closer the mercy will be to the
‘one who has it, with the permission of Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime. 1

مامه مع سح

لله عَم 55 عنذ»

And His saying : ¢Allah is Pleased with them, and they
are pleased with Him...» (Al-Ma‘idah 5:119).””

ao

@ The Attribute of Pleasure
“And His saying :
C5 ts eS
Allah is Pleased with them, and they are pleased with
Him...» (Al-Md‘idah 5:119).””

The Commentary

This is one of the Aydt about Ar-Rida (pleasure). Allah,
Glorious and Exalted is He, is described with Ar-Rida

338 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

different by means of Al-Iradah; Allah wanted that to be the
heavens, and it was, and that this would be the earth, and it
was, and that a star should be a star, and it was, etc.

So Takhsis - they say - is evidence for Al-Iradah, because if
there was no Iradah (want, objective, volition) then all
things would be one.

We say to them: Glorious is Allah, the Magnificent! This
evidence for Al-Iradah, compared to the evidence in the
claim that Ar-Rahmah only means favor, is weaker and less
evident than the evidence that Ar-Rahmah only means
favor; because the evidence that Ar-Ralimah means favor is
equal, in that both the average and the elite would know it,
while the evidence of Takhsis for Al-Iradah is such that only
the elite among the students of knowledge would know it;
so how do you reject what is more obvious, and affirm
what is more obscure? Is this anything except you
contradicting yourselves?

The behavioral aspects that we benefit from these Aydt:
The behavioral benefit derived here is that whenever a
person knows that Allah, the Exalted, is the Merciful, he
holds on to hope in Allah’s mercy, and expects it. This
belief will encourage him to do everything that leads to
mercy. For example; Al-lhsdn, Allah, the Exalted, says
about that:

isl Si E,5 ail ‏ممت‎ Gp

Verily, Allah's mercy is near unto the Muhsininy (Al-
A’raf 7:56).

At-Taqwa; Allah, the Exalted, said:

Oey

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 341

case of people it is an instinct; and it is not possible for a
person to describe it better and clearer than with its
expression.

We, therefore say Pleasure is an Attribute of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, and it is a real Attribute related to His
Mashiyy‘ah (will), and it is among the Attributes of doing,
He is pleased with the believers, and with those who have
Taqwa, and with the just, and with those who are grateful.
He is not pleased with the disbelievers; He is not pleased
with the rebellious people, and He is not pleased with the
hypocrites. So He, Glorious and Exalted is He, is pleased
with some people, and He is not pleased with some people.
He is pleased with some deeds and detests some deeds.

Describing Allah with pleasure is affirmed by the evidence
of revealed texts, as preceded, and with intellectual
evidence. The fact that He, the Mighty and Sublime,
rewards those who are obedient, and compensates them for
their deeds and their obedience, is proof for Ar-Rida.

So if you say: “Using rewards - as you do - as evidence for
the pleasure of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is
debatable, because Allah, Glorious is He, may give the
tebellious more favors than He gives to the grateful
person.” And this is a strong point.

But the reply to that is that His giving the rebellious person,
who is insistent on His disobedience, is a trap for him, and
it is not done out of pleasure.

As He, the Exalted, said:

her ee

And those who belie Our Ayat, we shall gradually

340 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

(pleasure). He is pleased with the action and the doer,
meaning - Allah's pleasure has to do with the action and
the doer. As for the action, an example is His saying:

455 135 [KS ‏«تَإن‎
‎4And if you are grateful, He is pleased therewith for
you» (Az-Zumar 39:7).

That is; He is pleased with your gratefulness. And, as in
His, the Exalted, saying:

4And I am ae with Islam as your religion} (Al-
Ma‘idah 5:3)

And as in the authentic Hadith: “Allah is pleased with three
matters for you, and He detests three matters for you...’""!
This pleasure has to do with the action.

And the pleasure is also with respect to the doer, as is in the
Ayah cited by the author:

Allah is Pleased with them, and they are pleased with
Him} (Al-Ma'idah 5:119).

Therefore, the Pleasure of Allah is an Attribute that is
affirmed for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and it is about
Himself; it is not separate from Him, as the people of Ta’ti!
(denial) claim.

If someone says to you: “Explain the meaning of pleasure
to me”, you will not be able to explain it, because in the

Reported by Muslim (1715) from Aba Hurairah, may Allah
be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 343

upon obedience to Allah, we know that the source of this is
that Allah is pleased with him.

% O % ----—------

Ua ys ‏جَهَئَمْ‎ FSS LA IEE ‏ومن‎

And whoever kills a believer inientionally, his
recompense is Jahannam to abide therein; and Allah is
angry with him, and curses him.} (An-Nisa’ 4:93).

- OOo

@ The Ayat About the Attributes of Anger, Wrath,
Displeasure, Hatred

The Commentary

The author mentioned five Aydt about these Attributes:

The first Ayah:

dae

a < 4t 4

7

Mert 4B ‏عقف‎ 22
‏متعيدا فجرا‎ Lage Jw ‏ومن‎

And whoever kills a believer intentionally, his
recompense is Jahannam to abide therein; and Allah is
angry with him, and curses him} (An-Nisa’ 4:93).

»© Whoever} is a conditional element implying generality.

© 4A believer> He is whoever believes in Allah and His

Messenger, so the disbeliever and the hypocrite are

342 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

seize them with punishment in ways they perceive not.
And I respite them, certainly My plan is strong.) (Al-
Arif 7:182 -183).

And the Prophet 3% said: “Verily, Allah will respite the
wrongdoer, so that when He seizes him, He will not release
him”

and then he recited His statement:

<Such is the punishment of your Lord, when He seizes
the towns while they are doing wrong. Verily, His
punishment és painful and severe> (Hud 11:102).!

And He, the Exalted, said:

€So when they forgot (warning) which they had been
reminded, We opened for them the gates of every
(pleasant) thing, until in the midst of their enjoyment of
that which they were given, all of a sudden, We took
them (in punishment) and Lo! They were plunged into
destruction with deep regret and sorrow. So the root of
the people who did wrong was cut off. And all praise is
Allah’s the Lord of the worlds} (Al-An‘am 6: 44,45).

As for when rewards come and the person is steadfast

"1 Reported by Al-Bukhari (4686) and Muslim (2583) from
Aba Misa Al-Ash’ari, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 345

meted out for killing, and killing is not a form of Kufr
(disbelief), and there is no sin that deserves Khalid in Fire
according to the People of the Surah except Kufr. And the
teply to this is from a number of perspectives:

The first perspective: That this is about the disbeliever
when he kills a believer.

But this view is nothing, because the recompense of the
disbeliever is to abide in Jahannam, even if he does not killa
believer:

Verily! Allah cursed the disbelievers and prepared for
them a flaring fire (Hell), Wherein they will abide
forever and they will find neither a Wali (protector) nor
a helper» (Al-Ahzab 33:64,65).

The second perspective: That this is with regard to the one
who considers the killing of a believer to be lawful, because
the one who considers killing the believer to be lawful is a
disbeliever!

Imam Ahmad, was amazed with this view, and said: “How
is this? If he considers it lawful to kill him, then he is a
disbeliever even if he does not kill him. He is to abide in the
Fire, even if he does not kill him.”

So this response is also not supported.
The third perspective: That the application of this sentence
is conditional; that is, his recompense is Hell, to abide

therein, if He recompenses him. And there is some problem
with this view.

What would be the benefit of His saying:

344 “Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

excluded from it.

However, whoever kills a disbeliever with whom there is a
treaty, or who lives under protection, or has been granted
security, then he is a sinner. But he does not warrant the
threat mentioned in the Ayah

As for the hypocrite, his blood is clearly protected as long
as he does not make his hypocrisy public.

> And His saying: ¢intentionally> excludes the immature
and the one who lacks sense, because these do not
have any recognizable intention and objective. And it
excludes the one who is mistaken, and the clarifica-
tion of that case is in the Ayah before this.

So, He who intentionally kills a believer, this recompense of
his, is a tremendous recompense.

*  4Jahannam} is one of the names of the Fire
* to abide therein» that is “to reside therein”

& And Allah is angry with him, Al-Ghadab (anger) is an
attribute affirmed for Allah, the Exalted, in the
manner that befits Him. And it is one of His
Attributes of action.

And ¢and curses him}: Al-La’n (the curse) is expulsion
and being distanced from Allah’s Mercy.

So these are the four types of punishment, and the fifth
is in His saying: ¢and a tremendous punishment is
prepared for him

Five forms of punishment; one of which is enough
deterrence and restraint for the one who has a heart.

However, the mention of Al-Khalid (abiding) in the Fire is
problematic according to the Mamnhaj (methodology) of the
People of the Sunnah; because the punishment is to be

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 347

jis feared that this killing may have been caused by his
disbelief, hence he dies upon disbelief, so he abides (in the
Fire).

So in this Ayah, with this understanding, it mentions the
cause’s cause; so intentionally killing is a cause that a
person may die upon disbelief, and disbelief is a cause of
abiding in the Fire.

I think if one considers this well, he would see that there is
ho problem with it.

The fifth perspective: That the meaning of Khalid
(abiding) is a long stay, and that what is intended is not
an eternal stay, because in the Arabic language, Khaliid can
be generally used to mean a long stay, as it is said “So-and-
80 is in prison forever” while prison is not eternal. And
they say: “So-and-so abides like the the mountain abides.”
And what is known is that, the mountains;

My Lord will blast them and scatter them as particles

of dust. Then He shall leave them as a level, smooth
plain> (Ta Ha 20:105,106)

This is also an easy answer; it does not cause concern. So
we say that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, did not
mention “eternally.” He did not say: “to abide therein,
forever” but He said “to abide therein,” the meaning is that
he shall stay there a very long time,

The sixth perspective: To say this is a threat of punish-
ment, and it is possible that it not be applied, because it is a
means of turning from justice to magnanimity. And turning
from justice to magnanimity is honorable and praisworthy.
Based upon this, a poet said:

“And indeed if I threaten him or promise him

Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

AEE 9

t= ‏فَجَرَاوَمٍ‎
‎4and his recompense is Jahannam> (An-Nisa’ 4:93)
if the meaning was “if He recompenses him?” We are now
asking: “If He indeed recompenses him, is this his
recompense?” If it is said yes; then the meaning turns back
into him abiding in the Fire. Then the problem arises again,
and we are not free of it

These are three responses that are not safe from criticism.

The fourth perspective: That, this is a cause, but if a
preventative reason is found, the cause will not result. This
is as we say: Blood relation is a means of inheritance, but if
the relative is a slave, he will not inherit, because of a
preventing factor, which is slavery.

So we say that this action is a cause of abiding (in Hell), but
if the doer is a believer, he will not abide in the Fire.

But the problem still returns to us from another angle, and
that is, what is the benefit of this threat?

We answer; The benefit is that a person who intentionally
kills a believer, then he has done something that is a cause
which he will abide in the Fire for. Now, since a
preventative factor is possible; it may exist or it may not
exist (in his case), so he is therefore in a very grave
situation. This is why the Prophet # said: “A believer will
ever enjoy expanse in his religion as long as he has not shed
prohibited blood." When he sheds prohibited blood -
and we seek refuge in Allah - he may be constricted in the
matter of his religion until he exits out of it.

Based on this, the threat relates to his end result; because it

Reported by Al-Bukhari (6862) from Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah
be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introducto:

except for just cause, nor commit illegal sexual inter-
course - and whoever does this shall receive the punish.
ment. The torment will be doubled to him on the Day of
Resurrection, and he will abide therein in disgrace.
Except those who repent and believe, and do righteous
deeds; for those, Allah will change their sins into good
deeds, and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful» (Al-
Furqan 25:68-70).

This is clear, whoever repents, even from killing, Allah, the
Exalted, will change their sins into good rewards.

And in the authentic Hadith regarding the story of the man
from the children of Israel, who killed ninety-nine people,
and Allah put repentance in his mind. He went to a monk,
and told him that he had killed ninety-nine people, could
he be forgiven? The monk considered the matter to be too
gtave, and said: “You cannot be forgiven.” So the man
killed him, completing the hundredth with him. He was
directed to a scholar, and told him that he had killed a
hundred souls, could he be forgiven? The scholar replied:
“Yes, what would prevent you from being forgiven? But
this village; its inhabitants are wrong-doers, go to so-and-
$o village, therein are people of goodness and right-
eousness.”

Then the man began to travel and emigrated from his
village to the village whose inhabitants were people of
goodness and righteousness. His death caught up with him
on the way, Then the Angels of mercy and the Angels of
punishment began to dispute among one another (regard-
ing who would take his soul) until Allah sent a judge down
to them. He said, “Compare what is between the two
villages, whichever of them he is closest to, he is from its
inhabitants.” So he was closer to the village whose
inhabitants were people of righteousness. So the Angels

Commentary on Al-'Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyalt

I can break my threat and fulfill my promise

I threatened him with punishment,

and promised him a reward ;

T can leave my threat, and fulfill my promise.”

If you tell your son: “By Allah, if you go to the market |
shall hit you with this stick.” Then he went to market;
when he returned, you hit him with your hand. This
punishment is lighter for your son. Therefore, when Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, threatens the one who kills with
this threat of punishment, and then He pardons him, this is
generosity

But in reality, there is something of a problem in this; for
we say if He executes the threat, the same problem still
remains, and if He does not execute the threat, then there is
no benefit it being mentioned.

These are the six perspectives for the response about this
Ayah. The closest (to correctness) is the fifth one, then the
fourth.

An Issue

If the killer repents, is he still liable to this threat? The
answer is that he is not liable to the threat, according to the
text of the Qur'an; based upon His, the Exalted, saying:

ae ‏أل‎ Ati lk GS ase rae:

€And those who invoke not any other god along with
Allah, nor kill such person as Allah has forbidden,

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

themselves, despair not of the mercy of Allah; verily
Allah forgives all sins.'"> (Az-Zumar 39:53).

This is for those who repent.

B. As for the right of the guardian of the one slain, it will
be lifted if he surrenders himself to them. If he goes to
them and says: “I killed him, do whatever you like
with me,” they either avenge, collect the blood money,
or pardon him. The right belongs to them.

. As for the right of the one slain, there is no way to lift it
in this world. Even though what appears to me is that if
he sincerely repents, even the right of the slain one will
be removed; not as a form of disregarding his right, but
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, with His grace, takes
the sin of the killer, and raises the slain in status in
Paradise, or pardons him of his sins, because sincere
repentance leaves nothing. The generality of the Ayah
in Al-Furgan corrobates this:

4And those who invoke not any other god along with
Allah, nor kill such person as Allah has forbidden,
except for just cause...»

Up to His saying:

ners
4Except those who repent and believe, and do righteous

deeds; for those, Allah will change their sins into good
deeds (Al-Furgan 25:68-70).

The Attributes included in this Ayah are Al-Ghadab (anger),

350 Commentary on Al-’Agidah AL-Wasitiyyah

of mercy then took his soul.'*!

Look at how — despite the fact that he was of the children
of Israel — he was forgiven; while Allah had placed
burdens and restraints upon them which He lifted from
this Ummah; so repentance in its case is easier. If that was
for the children of Israel, how will it be for this Ummah?

If you say: “What do you say regarding the authentic
narration from Ibn “Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him:
‘There is no repentance for the killer.’”’!!

Then the response is from one of these two perspectives:

1. Either Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him,
considers it improbable that the killer would consider
repenting, and saw that he would not be guided to
repent, and if he was not guided to repent, then the sin
will not be removed from him; he would rather be
punished for it.

Or to the intent of Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased
with him, is that there is no repentance for him, with
regard to the right of the slain, because the one who
intentionally kills, three rights are related to him:
Allah’s right, the right of the slain, and the third for the
guardian of the one slain.

. As for the right of Allah, there is no doubt that
repentance will remove that; for His statement.

هم 2 ‎Lee‏ مي

€Say: “O My slaves who have transgressed against

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (3470), Muslim (2766) from Aba
5250 Al-Khudr, may Allah be pleased with him.
"1 Reported by Al-Bukhari (4764),

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 353

Meaning, how will their case be during that moment, when
the Angels will take their souls at death, smiting their faces
and backs?

% That} meaning, their faces and backs being beaten.
% is because they>, meaning, the reason for it is;

» <They followed that which Askhat Allah (angered Allah)»
that is what angered Allah, so they became such that
they would do everything that earned the wrath of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, be it beliefs, or
statements, or actions.

But as for that which Allah is pleased with, their state
in regard to it was, as He said:¢And hated that which
pleased Him.> That is, they hated whatever He is
pleased with. Therefore, their result was that awful
end, that at death, the Angels smote their faces and
backs.

Included in this Ayah, from Allah’s Attributes, are the
affirmation of As-Sakhat (wrath, anger) and Ar-Rida (plea-
sure). The discussion has preceded regarding the Attribute of
Ar-Rida (pleasure), but as for (the attribute of) As-Sakhat, its
meaning is very close to the meaning of Al-Ghadab.

4So when they Asafiina (angered Us), We took
vengeance upon them) (Az-Zukhruf 43:55)

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyya

the curse, and preparation of punishment

Of the behavioral aspects; it contains a warning against
intentionally slaying a believer.

And His saying: ¢That is because they followed that
which Askhat Allah (angered Allah), and hated that
which pleased Him> (Muhammad 47:28)

59
That is because they followed that which Askhat Allah

1 Allah), and hated that which pleased Him>
mad 47:28)

That}, indicating what preceded, and that which
preceded is His, the Exalted, saying:

4555, (6,255 ai ‏أشخط‎
‎Then how will it be, when the Angels will take their
souls at death, smiting their faces and their backs? That
is because they followed that which Askhat Allah
(angered Allah) and hated that which pleased Him>
(Muhammad 47:27,28).

anger; because taking vengeance upon the criminals and
punishing the disbelievers is evidence for wrath and anger,
not evidence of pleasure, nor that anger and wrath are
merely vengance.

So we say: This Ayah:
46451)
456 when they Asafiina (angered Us)>
refutes you, because He made vengeance other than the

anger, since the condition (when) is not the same as what is
conditional (vengance was taken).

An Issue

It remains to say: 450 when they Asafiind (angered Us)>; we
know that the meaning of Al-Asaf is sorrow and remorse
over a thing that happened to the one who is remorseful
and cannot revert it, can Allah, therefore be described
with sadness and remorse?

The response: No! We reply about the Ayah, that the word
Al-Asaf has two meanings:

The first meaning: ¢Al-Asaf> meaning sorrow, as in His,
the Exalted, ‏كم‎ Yaq'tib:

لحرن »

“Alas, my grief he Yiisuf!” And he lost sight because
of the sorrow (Yasuf 12:84)

And Al-Asaf is generally used to mean wrath and anger.

The first meaning cannot be used for Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime. And the second is affirmed for Allah; because
Allah, the Exalted described Himself with it, He said:

C4 ES Gack Kip

354 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-V

The third Ayah: His statement:
4b Cai Gas Kip

450 when they Asafiind (angered Us), We took
vengeance upon them} (Az-Zukhruf 43:55)

> 4Asafiina (angered Us)>: Meaning; angered Us, and
earned Our wrath.

>» When} here is conditional, the verb of the condition
is: €Asafiind (angered Us)}, and its response is: ¢We
took vengeance upon them>

Therein is a rebuttal against those who interpreted anger
and wrath to mean vengeance. The people of Ta‘til such as
the Ash‘ariyyah and others, say: “What is intended by anger
and wrath is vengeance, or the volition for vengeance.”
They do not interpret anger and wrath as Attributes of
Allah which He Himself is described with. They say, His
wrath means His vengeance or His volition for vengeance.
They either interpret Al-Ghadab to be the object of the
action, that is separate from Allah, and that is vengeance,
or; as volition, which they acknowledge. They will not
interpret it as an Attribute affirmed for Allah in the real
sense, in a manner that befits Him.

We say to them that anger and wrath are not vengeance.
Vengeance is the result of anger and wrath, as we say:
“Reward is the result of pleasure.” Allah, Glorious and
Exalted is He, was wrath with these people, and angry with
them, and then He took vengeance upon them. If they say
that the intellect does not allow any affirmation of wrath
and anger for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, then we
answer them with what preceded about the Attribute of
Ar-Rida (pleasure); because the topic is one.

And we say, rather, the intellect does prove wrath and

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

have hurried about in your midst (spreading corruption)
and sowing sedition among you} (At-Tawbah 9:47)

Since they were not sincere and were mischief-makers, and
Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, detests mischief-making
and Shirk, therefore:

€Allah was displeased with them being sent, so He
made them the lag behind» (At-Tawbah 9:46)

Means; He made their zeal spiritless toward setting out for

And it was said (to them): “Sit you among those who
sit (at home) .’"> (At-Tawbah 9:46)

It is said: It implies that Allah said that this is what shall
be, and it implies that some of them were telling the others:
“Sit among those who sit (at home); so-and-so did not set
out, so-and-so did not go out” mentioning some of those
whom Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, had excused, such
as the blind and the lame. They said: “When the Prophet 2
returns, we will apologize to him, and he would seek
forgiveness for us, and that is enough for us.’ It is possible
that we harmonize between these two views, because if
such was said to them, and they sat, they would not have
stayed behind except by the decree of Allah, Exalted is He.

In this Ayah there is the affirmation that Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, detests, this is also affirmed in the Book and
Sunnah. Allah, the Exalted, said:

Commentary on AL-‘Agidah AL-Wasitiyyah

So when they Asafiina (angered Us), We took
vengeance upon them} (Az-Zukhurf 43:55)

Included in the Ayah of Allah’s Attributes are Al-Gadab
(anger) and vengeance; and from behavioral aspect; we
derive the benefit that we should exercise caution against
what angers Allah, the Exalted...

ood

But Allah was displeased with them being sent, so He
made them the lag behind> (At-Tawbah 9:46)

‘The fourth Ayah:

<But Allah was displeased with them being sent, so He
made them the lag behind» (At-Tawbah 9:46)

~ Meaning by that, the hypocrites, who did not go out with
the Prophet # to the military expeditions, because Allah
detested them going out with him, because their deeds
were not sincerely for Him, whereas Allah, the Exalted
has no need of any partners, and because if they went
out, then they were as Allah, the Exalted, said:

4Had they marched out with you they would have
added to you nothing except disorder, and they would

The Introductory Notes.. 359

It can be directed to the doer, as in the Hadith: “When
Allah, Exalted is He, hates a servant, Jibril will announce: ‘I
hate so-and-so, therefore hate him.”

<Most hateful it is with Allah that you say that which
you do not do> (As-Saff 61:3) :

nnn OOS

The fifth Ayah: His statement:

<Most hateful it is with Allah that you say that which
you do not do> (As-Saff 61:3)

% Most} (Kabur), meaning; tremendous.

This Ayah is the justification of the Ayah that precedes it
and the explanation of its consequence:

a8

lel ol
405 FUE Sal ce
€O you who believe! Why do you say that which you do
not do? Most hateful it is with Allah that you say that
which you do not do> (As-Saff 61:3)

hy

Reported by Muslim (2637) from Aba Hurairah, may Allah
be pleased with him

358 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

4And your Lord has decreed that you worship none but
Him>

up to His saying

€All the bad aspects of these (the above mentioned
things) are hateful to your Lord} (Al-Isra’ 17: 38)

As it is in this Ayah which the author mentioned:
<But Allah was displeased with them being sent, so He
made them the lag behind} (At-Tawbah 9:46)
The Prophet 3% said: “Allah detests that you engage in ‘he
said, and it was said."

Therefore, detestation is affirmed in the Book and Sunnah;
that Allah, Exalted is He, detests.

The displeasure of Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He,
regarding a thing, can be with regard to the action, as in the
Ayah:

<But Allah was displeased with them being sent, so He
made them the lag behind (At-Tawbah 9:46)

And as in His saying:

GOSS GS Se 2S ‏6ن‎ GS BY

4All the bad aspects of these (the above mentioned
things) are hateful to your Lord} (Al-Isra’ 17:38)

™ Reported by Al-Bukhari (1477) and Muslim (1715), from
Al-Mughirah bin Shu’bah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

€Do they then wait for anything other than that Allah
should arrive to them with a shadow of the clouds and
the Angels? (Then) the case would be already judged.>
(Al-Bagarah 2:210)

Concerning His statement: 410 they then wait...?>,
Hal (Do they)», is an interrogative element intended
to express negation, meaning they do not wait. Every
time that ¢€lll@ (exceptfother than)> occurs after an
interrogative element (in Arabic grammar) the inter-
rogative element expresses negation. This is a (gram-
matical) principle. The Prophet # said: “Are you any
other than a bleeding finger?"

The meaning of <they wail}, here is they expect. That
is, these liars do not expect anything other than that
Allah should come to them upon the shadows of the
clouds, and that is on the Day of Resurrection.

€That Allah should arrive to them with a shadow} ‘Fi
here means “with.” It certainly does not stand for an
adverb of place, because if it was used as an adverb
of place, it will suppose that the shadows surround
Allah, and it is known that Allah, the Exalted, is All-
Encompassing, All-Knowing; nothing of His creatures
surrounds Him. Therefore, ¢fi Zulalin> means “with
a shadow” because Allah, the Sublime and Majestic,

The Prophet #% said it in one of the battles while his finger
bled, he said: “Are you other than a bleeding finger, and in
the Cause of Allah is that which you got.” Reported by Al-
Bukhari (6146) and Muslim (1796), from Jundab bin Sufyan
Al-Bajali, may Allah be pleased with him.

360 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

This is because it is from the worst of matters; that a person
says what he does not do.

The meaning of this, is that if you said something and you
do not do it, you fall under one of the two conditions: You
are either a liar about what you said, but you are afraid of
people; you therefore tell them what is not the truth. Or,
you are just aggrandizing what you say to people. You
command people to do it, but you do not do it, and you
prohibit people from it, and you do it yourself.

Al-Magat (hate) is among the Attributes included in this
Ayah, and that it varies, and of the behavioral aspects is the
caution against a person saying what he did not do.

And his saying: €Do they then wait for anything other
than that Allah should arrive to them with a shadow of

the clouds and the Angels? (Then) the case would be
already judged» (Al-Bagarah 2:210)

© The Aydt Concerning the Attributes of Coming and
Arriving,

The Commentary

The author, may Allah have Mercy upon him, mentioned
four Ayét affirming the Attribute of coming and arriving

The first Ayal; His statement:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

€Do they then wait for anything other than that the

Angels should arrive to them, or that your Lord should
or that some of the Ayat of your Lord should
(Al-An‘am 6:158)

€Do they then wait for anything other than that the
Angels should arrive to them, or that your Lord should
arrive, or that some of the Ayat of your Lord should
arrive!» (Al-An’im 6:158)

* Here, we say about: €Do they then wailp as we
explained about the preceding Ayah; that is, these
people do not expect anything except one of these
situations:

Firstly:

4Other than that the Angels should arrive to them>
that is, to seize their souls. Allah, Exalted is He, says:

ose ae pp te ber nae t
pees Sie ‏وأ التليكة‎
42K aie ‏وذوقوأ‎ 3055

4And if you could see when the Angels take away the

362 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah
when descending to separate His slaves:

41116 heaven shall be rent asunder with clouds> (Al-
Furgan 25:25)

White clouds; tremendous shadows; due to the coming of
Allah, Blessed is He and Exalted is He

* Concerning His statement: €with the shadow of the
clouds}: €Al-Ghamam>; the scholars say they are
white clouds, as Allah says, while mentioning His
favors to the Children of Isra’il:

And We shaded you with clouds (Al-Ghamam)> (Al-
Bagarah 2:57)

The white cloud leaves the weather shining, unlike the
black and the red (clouds), because there is some darkness
in them. It is a more beautiful vision.

Concerning His statement: ¢And the Angels>; “the
Angels,” as the subject, is combined with the expres-
sion of Majesty (the Name) “Allah.” Meaning; “or
that the Angels should arrive to them.” The Angels
will arrive on the Day of Resurrection, because they
will descend to the earth. Those at the lowest heaven
will descend, then the second, then the third, then
the fourth, and like that, until the seventh, to
surround the people.

This is a warning concerning this Day, which will be like

this, It is a tremendous event among the events of the Day

of Resurrection. Allah warns these liars about it.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 365

He mentioned the third situation, between the two, because
it is the period of recompense, and the period of harvesting
the fruit of deeds. At that time, they will not be able to find
salvation from what they did.

The focus of this Ayah and the one preceding it, is to warn
these liars of allowing time to run out against them; then
they will not be able to find salvation from their deeds.

Payee abe re

ths SHY
And His saying: 4€Nay! When the earth is ground to
powder (Dakkan, Dakkan), and your Lord comes with
the Angel, in rows (Saffan, Saffan)> (Al-Fajr 89:21,22)
4And (remember) the Day when the heaven shall be

rent asunder with clouds, and the Angels will be sent
down, descending» (Al-Furgan 25:25)

The third Ayah: His statement:
‏س4‎ ts ‏والمآك‎ SE 5 0 65 6 GM Bg >
<€Nay! When the earth is ground to powder (Dakkan,

Dakkan), and your Lord comes with the Angel, in rows
(Saffan, Saffan)> (Al-Fajr 89:21,22)

© €Nay!}, here is used for warning.

* His statement: ¢Nay! When the earth is ground to
powder, this will happen on the Day of Resurrection.

364 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah
souls of those who disbelieve (at death), they smite their

faces and their backs, (saying): “Taste the punishment
of the blazing Fire’”p (Al-Anfal 8:50)

Secondly:

€Or that your Lord should arrive>
on the Day of Resurrection to judge among them.

407 that some of the Ayat of your Lord should arrive!»

this is the rising of the sun from the west. The Prophet 2%
explained it (the Ayah) as such.)

Allah only mentioned these three situations:

Because when the Angels descend to seize their souls,
repentance will not be accepted from them, according to
His, the Exalted, statement:

4M 25 & SG
4And of no effect is the repentance of those who
continue to do evil deeds until death faces one of them

and he says: “Now I repent’ (An-Nisa’ 4:18)

And in the same way, when the sun rises from the west,
because repentance will not be accepted, then they will not
be able to find salvation from what they did.

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (4636) and Muslim (157) from
Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

The fourth Ayah: His statement:

sail HST Gadi py

4And (remember) the Day when the heaven shall be
rent asunder with clouds, and the Angels will be sent
down, descending> (Al-Furgan 25:25)

© Meaning, remember the Day when the heaven shall be
rent asunder with the clouds.

shall be rent asunder>, meaning it shall be rent
asunder, some then more, and these clouds will come
out from that, with agitating smoke erupting, some
sent out, then more, The heaven is rent asunder with
the clouds, as it is said: “The earth is rent asunder
with plants;” meaning the clouds will bulge out from
the heavens and break up, one after another, and that
is due to the coming of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, to judge among His servants. It is a
frightening and terrible day

Concerning His statement: ¢And the Angels will be
sent down, descending}, they will descend from the
heavens one by one. The Angels of the lowest heaven
will first descend, then the second, then the third,
and like that. In the context of this Ayah, there is no
mention of Allah's coming, but there is an implica-
tion of that, because the rending asunder of the
heavens with clouds is because of His, the Exalted,
coming, based on the evidence of the preceding Aydt.

Radd ‘Ala Al-jahmiyyah (142 and 143) from Ibn ‘Abbas, and
Ad-Dahhak. In Ad-Durr Al-Manthar (5:123), As-Suyuti
attributed it to ‘Abd bin Humad, Ibn Abi Ad-Dunya, Ibn
Jarir, Ibn Al-Mundhir, Ibn Abi Hatim and Al-Hakim, from
Ibn ‘Abbas.

366 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

He emphasized this grinding because of its greatness, and
because it indicates that the mountains, and the mountain
passes, and all other things will be ground to powder, so
much that the earth will become like a tanned skin. Allah,
Exalted is He, said:

Then He shall leave it as a level smooth plain. You
will see therein nothing crooked or curved» (Ta Ha

20:106-107)

And it could imply that the repetition of the ¢Dakkan> is
not for emphasis, but with the meaning; “Grounding
after grounding.”

© He said: ¢And your Lord comes, with the Angel in
rows: €And your Lord comes}, that is, on the Day of
Judgment when the earth had been ground to powder
and leveled, and the people have been gathered, Allah
will come to judge among His servants.

His statement ¢and the Angel> (Al-Malak): the singular
noun of the Angel is used with a definite article to
express generality; that is, all the Angels. Meaning;
the Angels shall descend to the earth.

4In rows}; that is row after row, as in the narration:
“The Angels of the lowest heaven will descend in
rows, and behind them are the Angels of the second
heaven, and behind them are the Angels of the third
heaven,”!!!

Reported by Al-Hakim (4:569-570) and he said: “The
narrators of the Hadith from each level are used as proof,
“Ali bin Jud’an, and even though it is in Mawquif form from
Ibn ‘Abbas, it is quite wonderful.” And Adh-Dhahabi said
“Its chain is strong.” And Ad-Darimi reported it in Ar-

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 369

People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah concerning this
Attribute. They say: “Allah will not arrive, because if you
affirm that Allah shall arrive, you have affirmed that He is
physical, and physical beings are similar.’”

We say this claim and analogy is false, because it opposes
the texts, and He, Exalted, said:

And verily, (either) we or you are rightly guided or in
@ plain error> (Saba’ 34:24)

If you say that this - which opposes the text - is the truth,
then the text becomes false, whereas it is impossible that a
text be false. But if you say the text is the truth, then this
becomes false, inevitably. Then, we are asking: “What is it
that would prevent Allah, the Exalted, from arriving
Himself, in the manner which He wants?” They said that
the preventative factor is that if you affirm that, you have
engaged in Tamthil. 5

We say this is an error, because we know that the manner
of arriving differs, even in the case of creatures. So an able-
bodied person walks as if descending from a high place
due to his ability, but he is not walking arrogantly, and if
you like, then say he is walking arrogantly, is he like the
one who walks leaning on a walking stick, who would not
take another step except after being fatigued?

And arriving differs from another angle. The arrival, for

example, of an important personality or a leader to a town,
is not like the arrival of an ordinary person who is not
recognized.

What does the person of Ta‘fil have to say regarding His,
the Exalted, saying:

368 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The author cited these four Aydt to affirm an Attribute
among the Attributes of Allah; and that is His coming.

The People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah affirm that Allah,
Himself, shall arrive, because He, the Exalted, mentioned
that about Himself. He, Glorious is He, knows best about
Himself, and about others; He is more truthful in His
Speech than others, and is of the best speech. His Speech is
from the most perfect of all knowledge, truthfulness,
exposition, and volition. Therefore, Allah, Mighty and
Sublime, wanted to explain the truth to us, He is the Most
Knowledgeable, the Most Truthful and the Best in
narrating.

However, a question still remains. Do we know the manner
of this coming?

The Response: We do not know it because Allah, Glorious
and Exalted is He, informed us that He shall come, but He
did not inform us of how He will come, and because the
manner of something is not known except through
witnessing it, witnessing its like, or by the report of one
who is honest about it. These four are not found regarding
the Attributes of Allah, the Exalted. And when there is a
lack of knowledge about the essence, then there is a lack of
knowledge about the attributes. That is, its manners; thus,
the essence exists in reality; and we know it. We know
what the meaning of essence is, and what the meaning of
the self is. In the same manner, we know the meaning of
the coming, but the how of the essence, or the self, or the
manner, of the coming is unknown to us. We therefore,
believe that Allah shall come, in reality, and in the manner
that befits Him, which is unknown to us.

The Antagonists of the People of the Sunnah and the
Jama‘ah, and the Rebuttal Against them

The people who engage in Tahrif and Ta’til oppose the

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 371

Is it right for anyone to say: ¢your Lord should arrive»
means His command, with this kind of classification?

If somebody asks: “What do you say concerning His, the
Exalted, saying:
fore G Ade

Perhaps Allah may bring a victory or a decision
according to His Will> (Al-Ma‘idah 5:52)

The answer is: What is intended by that is the bringing of
victory or the decision; but Allah attributed its arrival to
Himself, because it is from Him. This is a style that is
known in the Arabic language. If the action of arriving is
restricted with a preposition, for example, what is intended
by that action of arriving is the noun, which is the object of
that preposition; and when it is loosely used (without any
limitation/ restriction) and attributed to Allah without any
restriction, what is intended by it is the arrival of Allah, in
Teality.

As for the behavioral manners which are derived from faith
in the Attribute of Allah, the Exalted, Coming and
Arriving:

Its fruit is the fear of this event, and this tremendous
occasion, upon which the Lord, the Mighty and Sublime,
arrives to judge and separate among His servants, and the
Angels descend. Nothing will remain before you except the
Lord, the Mighty and Sublime, and all creation; if you doa
good deed, you will be recompensed, and if you do other
than that, you will definitely be recompensed for it, as the
Prophet #¢ said: “Indeed, man will be alone with Allah,
Exalted is He, he would look to his right, so he will not see
anything except what he has sent forth. He will look to his
left; so he will not see anything except what he has sent

Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah
And your Lord comes} (Al-Fajr 89:22)
And its like?
He would say that the meaning is the command of your
Lord comes, because Allah sa:

CAS Se Al Zl ‏«أن‎
‎the command, ordained by Allah will arrive, so seek
not to hasten it> (An-Nahil 16:1)

So - he says - it is necessary that we interpret every form of
arriving that Allah attributes to Himself based on this Ayah,
and wesay that the meaning is the command of Allaharrives.

Then it should be said that this evidence that you cited is
one against you, not for you! If Allah, the Exalted, meant
the arrival of His command in the other Aydt, then what
prevents Him from saying: “His command,” and when He
means command, He says command, and when He does
not mean command, He does not say command. This, in
reality, is a proof against you, because the other Aydt are
not summaries, such that we could say that they are
elaborated upon by this Ayah.

The other Aydt are clear. Some of them even have
distinctions which prevent the possibility that His coming
means command:

4Do they then wait for anything other than that the
Angels should arrive to them, or that your Lord should
arrive, or that some of the Ayat of your Lord should
arrive! (Al-An‘am 6:158)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

The first Ayah: His statement:

QTE sat A ay 85 Ky
And the Face of your Lord full of Majesty and Honor
will abide forever> (Ar-Rahman 55:27)

This is joined to His statement, Exalted is He:

SES 5 25 SO ob GL & SY
<Whatsoever is on it (the earth) will perish. And the
Face of your Lord full of Majesty and Honor will abide
forever> (Ar-Rahman 55:26-27)

Therefore, some of the Salaf (pious predecessors) said: “It is
necessary when you recite;

<i
<Whatsoever is on it (the earth) will perish>
that you continue with His statement:

And the Face of your Lord full of Majesty and Honor
will abide forever>"

So that the imperfection of creation is clear, and the
perfection of the Creator is clear and that is because they
are opposites. This stands for extinction, while the other
stands for eternity -

CG ‏ريْكَ ذو لكل‎ 25 5 0 96 He & ‏كل‎
‎<Whatsoever is on it (the earth) will perish. And the

Face of your Lord full of Majesty and Honor will abide
forever» (Ar-Rahman 55:26-27)

+ Concerning His statement: 4And the Face of your Lord

372 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wiasitiyyah

forth. And he will look before him; he will not see anything,
except the Fire confronting his face. Therefore, protect
yourselves from the Fire, even if it is with a piece of a
date,”!")

So faith in these tremendous matters, without a doubt, will
sire fright in a person, and fear of Allah, Glorious and
Exalted is He, and will make him steadfast in his religion.

And His saying: Everything will perish save His
Face.» (Al-Qasas 28:88) €And the Face of your Lord
full of Majesty and Honor will abide forever> (Ar-
Rahman 55:27)

© The Attribute of Face for Allah, Glorious is He

The Commentary
The author, may Allah have Mercy upon him, mentioned
two Aydt affirming the Attribute of Face for Allah, the
Exalted.

{ Reported by Al-Bukhari (6539), Muslim (1016), and see the
beginning of the second volume.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.

{There is nothing like unto Him} (Ash-Shitra 42:11)

We are ignorant of the nature of this Face, based on His, the
Exalted, saying:

And they will never encompass anything of His
Knowledge> (Ta Ha 20:110) 1

If anybody attempts to imagine the how of this, with his
mind, or to discuss it with his tongue, we say (to him): You
are an astray innovator, saying about Allah what you know
not. And Allah has prohibited from saying about Him what
we know not. He, the Exalted, said:

ae te de

‎Sg‏ مرك ‎a EES Oe, Rie A‏ ما لا

‎ike

‎«Say: “(But) the things that my Lord has indeed
forbidden are Al-Fawahish (great evil sins), unrighteous
oppression, joining partners (in worship) with Allah for
which He has given no authority, and saying things
about Allah of which you have no knowledge.» (Al.
A’rif 733)

‎And He, Exalted is He, also says;

‎4And follow not that of which you have no knowledge.
Verily! The hearing, and the sight, and the heart, of

‎Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasit

‎full of Majesty and Honor will abide forever.>; that is, it

‎will not perish.
Al-Wajh (the Face): Its meaning is known, but its how is
unknown. We do not know how the Face of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, is, just like the other attributes of His.
But, we believe that He has a Face that is described as full
of Majesty and Honor; described with magnificence and
greatness and marvelous light, so much so that the Prophet
3% said: “His Screen is light, if He unveils it, the Sublimity
of His Face will burn whatever His vision reaches in His

‎creation."

‎“The Sublimity of His Face,” meaning its magnificence, its
Greatness, its Honor and its Light.

‎“Whatever His vision reaches in His creation,” and His
vision reaches everything. Based on this, if He unveils this
Screen - the Screen of Light - from His Face - everything
would be incinerated.

‎That is why we say: This Face is a marvelous Face; it can
never be likened to the faces of the creatures. And based on
this, we say that from our creed is that we affirm that Allah
has a Face, in reality, and we derive that from His, the
Exalted saying:

‎¢And the Face of your Lord full of Majesty and Honor
will abide forever> (Ar-Rahimin 55:27)

‎And we say that this Face cannot be likened to the faces of
the creatures, based on His, the Exalted, saying:

‎"Reported by Muslim (179) from Aba Masa Al-Ash‘ari,
may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 377

cence, is worthy of being honored and praised, Glorified
and Exalted is He. The honor of each one is in accordance
with who he is. So, the manner of honoring Allah is to give
Him His due regard and glorify Him in the best manner;
not because He is in need of you honoring Him, but so as to
favor you with reward.

The second Ayah: His statement:

4145 ‏حَالِكُ إِلَّا‎ eh FD

Everything ‘will perish save His Faced (Al-Qasas
28:88)

His statement: ¢Everything will perish} that is, will vanish,
as His statement:

4Whatsoever is on it (the earth) will perish» (Ar-
Rahman 55:26-27)

> His statement: ¢Save His Face} is equivalent to His
statement:

4G il GS ts ep
4And the Face of your Lord full of Majesty and Honor
will abide forever> (Ar-Rahmin 55:27)

The meaning is that everything will become extinct and
will vanish except the Face of Allah, Exalted is He, for it
will remain forever. That is why He said:

His is the Decision, and to Him you (all) shall be
returned) (Al-Qasas 28:88)

376 Commentary on Al’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyal

each of those you will be questioned (by Allah)> (Al-
Isra’ 17:36)

He says here: ¢And the Face of your Lord full of Majesty
and Honor will abide forever> He attached (His) Lordship
to Muhammad 36. This kind of Lordship is the most
special form of Lordship, because Lordship can be
general and specific. The specific one is the most special,
and more special above, like Lordship of Allah to His
Messengers. Therefore the most special Lordship is the
most virtuous without a doubt.

> Concerning His statement: fil! (Dhi)>: is a
description of the Face. The proof is that it is in the
nominative case. If it was an Attribute of the Lord,
He could have said €Dhi Al-Jalalip (using it in a

genitive case) as He said in the same chapter (Sirah):

45 sO ‏ذى‎ dy ‏نم‎
‎4Blessed be the Name of your Lord (Allah), the Owner
of Majesty and Honor» (Ar-Ralman 55:78)

So, when He said: €Dhii Al-Jalali> in the nominative case,

we know that it is a description of the Face.

& <Majesty (Al-falal)p, meaning grandeur and
domination.

% And Honor (Al-lkram)} is the infinitive of Akrama
(He honored) which can be used for the verb in both
active and passive voices. Therefore, Allah, Glorified
and Exalted is He, is to be honored, and the manner
of honoring Him, is by obeying Him; and He honors
whomever is entitled to His honor among His
creatures, with the rewards He prepared for them.

He, because of His majesty, perfect power, and magnifi-

when being used for us, refers to portions and parts. We
will not say it is of the Attributes of His Essence in meaning,
(Al-Ma’‘nawiyah). If we say that we will (by that) agree with
those who change the meaning by making Tahtrif. We do
not say it is a part of Allah, or a section of Allah, because
that will improperly stir the notion of imperfection
concerning Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He.

Besides, the people of Tahrif interpret the Face of Allah to
mean His reward. They said that what is intended by the
face in the Ayah is His reward. Everything will vanish save
the reward of Allah! They, by that, interpreted the Face -
which is the Attribute of perfection - to be a creation that is
clearly separate from Allah that can vanish or exist. The
reward exists after it existed not, and it is possible that it
ceases to exist - if not for Allah’s promise of preserving it -
it would be considered possible based on reasoning, that it
is made transient; meaning - the reward. Do you now say
that the Face of Allah - with which He described Himself -
is of a probable matter or a certain matter?

If they interpreted it to mean reward, it will become a
matter of probability which may or may exist not.

Their position is refuted by the following:

Firstly: It contradicts the apparentness of the expression,
because the apparentness of the expression suggests that
this is a specific face, not a reward.

Secondly: It contradicts to the consensus of the Salaf (pious
predecessors); none of them said that what is intended by
face is reward. Their books are with us, preserved. Bring
out a text from the Companions, or from the scholars
among their students and those who follow them faithfully,
stating that they interpreted it this way; you will never find
a way to that!

Commentary on Al-'Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

3
He is the Eternal Judge, to whom people shall return for
judgment among them.

It is said regarding the meaning of the Ayah: €Everything
will perish save His Face>, that it is; except what is done
for His Face. They said the context of the Ayah points to
that:

5 4 2 1
و كل 5 هَالِك إلا

And invoke not any other Ilah (god) along with Allah,
there is no Ilah (god) except Him. Everything will perish
save His Face. His is the Decision, and to Him you (all)
shall be returned} (Al-Qasas 28:88)

As if He was saying: And invoke not any other god as
partners with Allah, because your deed and your joining a
partner with Him will perish, meaning - be wasted and in
vain - except what you do sincerely for His Face, for that
will remain forever, because the good deed has a reward
that will remain forever in the gardens of bliss.

However, the first meaning is more to the point and
stronger.

Based on the position of those who are of the opinion that it
is permissible to combine the two meanings, we say it is
possible that we consider the Ayah with the two meanings
since there is no contradiction between them; so it is
interpreted in both ways. As a result, it will be said
Everything will vanish except His, the Mighty and
Sublime, Face, and every deed will be in vain save what
is done seeking the Face of Allah, According to either of the
two understandings, the Ayah contains evidence of
affirmation of the Face for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

It is among the Informative Attributes of His Essence that

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 381

morning and afternoon seeking His Face} (Al-An‘am
6:52)

And;

4And have in his mind no favor from anyone for which
a reward is expected in return, except only the desire to
seek the ‏تزه عمط‎ his Lord, the Most High; he surely will
be pleasedy (Al-Layl 92:19-21)

And other Ayaf like these.

The basis is that what is intended by the Face attributed to
Allah, is the Face of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, which
is an Attribute from His Attributes; but there is a word
regarding which the scholars of Tafsfr differ, and that is
His, the Exalted, statement:

445 SS J
€And to Allah belong the east and the west, so
wherever you turn yourselves or your faces there is the
Face of Allah> (Al-Bagarah 2:115)
€So wherever you turny, meaning — wherever you turn
your faces while in Salah, <there>, meaning — there is
the Face of Allah.
Among them are those who say that the Face (here) means
the direction, based on His statement:

For every nation there is a direction to which they face
(in their prayers)» (Al-Baqarah 2: 148)

So, what is intended by face is the direction; that is - there is

Commentary on Al- ‘Agidah Al -Wasitiyyah

Thirdly: Is it possible that the reward is described with
these great attributes:

<ABYG pill ‏«اذر‎
‎Full of Majesty and Honor (Ar-Raltman 55:27)
It is not possible. If we say for example; the reward of the
righteous is full of majesty and honor, this is never
possible. And Allah, the Exalted, described this Face as
being full of majesty and honor

Fourthly: We say, then what do you say regarding the
saying of the Messenger #: “Its Screen is light; if He
unveils it, the sublimity of His Face will burn whatever His
vision reaches among creation.”!"!

Does the reward have this light which burns whatever
Allah's vision reaches among His creation? Never! It is not
possible.

With this, we recognize the falsehood of their saying, and
that what is necessary for us is that we interpret this Face,
according to what Allah intended by it, and that is - a Face
abiding with Him, Blessed and Exalted be He; described
with Majesty and Honor.

If you ask: Should everything that comes regarding the
word (Face) while being attached to Allah be considered as
referring to the Face of Allah - that which is His Attribute?
The response: This is the basis, as it is in His, the Exalted,
statement:

this os)

4And turn not away those who invoke their Lord,

1) Its reference preceded.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 383

And you should know, that this Great Face, which is
described with Majesty and Honor, it is not possible to
encompass it with descriptions, nor is it possible to
encompass it with imagination. Rather, everything you
imagine, Allah, the Exalted, is above that, and greater, as
He, the Exalted, said:

qe ‏يه.‎ GLA Ld

€And they will never encompass anything of His
Knowledge (Taha 20:110)

If it is said: What is the intended meaning in His statement:
‏إلا يمه‎ dis ¥>

¢Everything will perish save His Facey (Al-Qasas
28:88)

If you say the intended meaning is the Essence (of Allah), it
is feared that you have altered the intended meaning. If
you understand the Face to mean the Attribute itself; you
have fallen into error, and that is the opinion held by some
people who do not give Allah His due right, they say; Allah
will vanish except His face. So what do you do?

The Response: If you mean by your saying “except the
essence,” that Allah, Exalted is He, will remain forever; He
Himself, with the affirmation of the Face for Allah, that is
correct. It will therefore mean that He said the Face,
representing the Essence of the One who possesses the
Face. But if you mean by your saying; “except the essence”
that the face is just used to stand for the Essence, without
affirming the Face (of Allah), this is Tahrif (distortion) and it
is not correct.

Based on this, we say €Save His Face}, that is - except His
Essence that is described as having a Face. There is

382 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah
the direction that Allah accepts your prayers when you face
it. They said because it (the Ayah) was revealed concerning
the case of journey, when one observes a non-obligatory
Salah, that such a person should pray facing wherever He
turns his face, or if he is confused regarding the Qiblah, he
should endeavor to find it, and then pray facing wherever
he eventually turns to.

However, the correct position is that what is intended by
the face here is the real Face of Allah. It, therefore, means:
Wherever you turn your faces to, there is the Face of Allah,
Glorious and Exalted is He, because He encompasses
everything, and because it is established from the Prophet
#5 that “When the praying person stands for Salah, Allah
will turn His Face toward him.”""! That is why one is
prohibited from spitting before him, because, Allah is in his
front.

If you pray ina place where you do not know the direction
of the Qiblah, after you have attempted to find it, then
eventually it is discovered that is was actually behind you,
Allah still faces you even in this condition. This is the
correct interpretation that agrees with the obvious meaning
of the Ayah, The first meaning does not contradict it, in
reality.

If we say it means there is the direction of Allah, then there
is proof (for it) whether this proof is the interpretation of
the second Ayah, in the second explanation of the Face, or
something that is related from the Sunnah, For if you turn
your face towards Allah in Salah, that is the direction of
Allah, where He accepts your Salah, while facing it, there is
also the Face of Allah, in reality. Therefore, the two
meanings are not contradictory.

(| Reported by Al-Bukhari (406) and Muslim (547) from Ibn
‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 385

<What prevents you from prostrating yourself to what I
have created with both My Hands} (Sad 38:75)

% What prevents you}, the address is to Iblis.

% €Mi) it is an interrogative pronoun used to express
censure. Meaning - what is that thing that prevented
you from prostrating yourself

Concerning His statement: 416 what 1 have created
with both My Hands>, He did not say: “To one whom
I created,” because the meaning here is Adam, by
mentioning an attribute of his which no one else
shares with him, and that is that Allah created him
with his Hand, so it is not about his person. That is
why when Iblis wanted to assault Adam and degrade
him, he said:

€Shall I prostrate to one whom You created from clay?>
(AL-Isra’ 17:61)

We have established that when €Ma} is used for one that
possesses intellect, then it refers to the meaning of the
description, not the meaning of a particular individual or
person. From its examples is His, the Exalted, saying:

‎marry (other) women of your choice» (An-Nisa’‏ نفلك
)4:3

‎He did not say Man (who) because what is intended is not
the person of a woman, but the intended meaning is the
description. So, here, He said: 410 what (Li-Ma) I have
created with both My Hands» meaning — “This
magnificently described one, which I honored, since I

‎384 Commentary on AL‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎nothing wrong with this. The difference between this and
the saying, of those who engage in Talirif, is that they say
meaning of the Face is the Essence, and He does not
have a Face. We say: the intent of saying the Face is the
Essence, because He has a Face, He then uses it to mean
His Essence.

‎And His saying: €What prevents you from prostrating
yourself to what I have created with both My Hands»
(Sad 38:75)€The Yahud (Jews) say: “Allah's Hand is

‎tied up.” Be their hands tied up and be they accursed
for what they uttered. Nay, both His Hands are widely
‘outstretched. He spends (of His Bounty) as He wills>
(Al-Ma'idah 5:64)

‏لبن © به -

‎© The Affirmation of Two Hands for Allah, Exalted is He

‎The Commentary

‎The author, may Allah have Mercy upon him, mentioned
two Aydt concerning the affirmation of two Hands for

‎Allah.

‎The first Ayah, His statement:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.

And His statement: 410 what I created with both My
Hands> also contains a form of honor for Adam, peace be
upon him, considering the fact that Allah created him
with His Hands.

The people of knowledge said: “Allah wrote the Tawrah
with His Hand, and planted the garden of ‘Adn with His
Hand." These three things were all done with the Hand
of Allah, Exalted is He.

Perhaps we should not forget here, by the virtue of its
appropriateness, one of the sayings of the Prophet #§:
“Indeed Allah created Adam in His image.”!! We have
mentioned that one of the two correct ways of interpretat-
ing it is that Allah created Adam in the image which He
chose, and took care of. That is why Allah attached it to
Himself, to show its nobility and honor. Just as in the case
of the attachment of the camel and the House to Allah, and
in the attachment of the Masjids to Allah. The second view
is that it is in His image, in reality, but that does not
necessitate a similarity.

said: "The Messenger 3% said; ‘One of you gives Sadagah
with a date from what is pure - and Allah does not accept
except that which is pure - and Allah puts it in His right
Hand, and then nurtures it as one of you nurtures his colt
or his young weaned camel, until it becomes like Uhud.””
Reported by Ad-Darimt in Ar-Radd ‘Ald Bishr Al-Marisi (p.
35), Al-Hakim (2:319), and Al-Baihaqi in AL-Asma’ wa3-Sifat
(p. 403) from Ibn ‘Umar, in Mawgif form, And Al-Hakim
said it was Sahih, and Adh-Dhahabi did not criticize that,
and it is as they both said, and the Hadith has the ruling
Marfii’. See Mukhtasar Al-‘Uluw (104) and Hadf Al-Arwah”
by Ibn Al-Qayyim (84).

Its reference preceded.

386

created him with my two Hands” and He did not intend
“to whom I created” meaning - this particular human
being.

His saying: 410 what I have created with both My Hands},
is like the statement of the one who says: “I write with a
pen.” The pen is the instrument of writing. And when
you say: “I produce this with my hand;” the hand is the
instrument of production.

So, 4To what I have created with both My Hands} means
that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, created Adam with
his Hand, and here, He said: “with my two Hands”
which is the dual form, and the letter Nin is omitted
from the dual (noun) for the reason of annexation.

This Ayah contains the rebuke of Iblis for him refusing to
prostrate to what Allah created with His Hand, and that is
Adam, peace be upon him. It also contains the affirmation
of the Attribute of creation, for He says: ‏مل4‎ what I have
created> The affirmation of the attribute of two Hands for
Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He, is also contained in it;
the two Hands with which He performs actions, such as
creation, as we have here; the two Hands with which He
holds (as He says):

وَالارض ‎py Red ee‏ أله
‎They made not a just estimate of Allah such as is due to‏
‎Him. And on the Day of Resurrection the whole of the‏

earth will be grasped by His Hand (Az-Zumar 39:67)

It is with them that He grasps, for Allah, Exalted is He,
takes Sadaqah and nurtures it as a human being nurtures his
colt,

™ Based on the report of Al-Bukhari (1410) and Muslim (114)
from Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him, who

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 389

>» They say: Allah's Hand is tied up» meaning - is
restrained from spending, as Allah, Exalted is He,
says:
tide ‏إل‎ The 15 ‏(نلا تجتن‎
And let not your hand be tied (like a miser) to your
neck} (Al-Isra’ 17:29)

That is, restrained from spending.
And they said:

(a ai yy
Truly, Allah is poor (Al ‘Imran 3:181)

As for their saying: €Aliah’'s Hand is tied up}, they said:
“If Allah's Hand had not been tied up (from spending)
everybody could have been wealthy. The fact that He
provided abundantly for Zaid, but does not provide
abundantly for ‘Amr, is a form of restraint and the lack
of spending!”

They said: Truly, Allah is poor» because Allah says:

Who is he that will lend to Allah a goodly loan so that
He may multiply it to him many times? (Al-Bagarah
2:245)

Then they told the Messenger %: “O Muhammad, your
Lord is needy, now He wants us to lend Him a loan!’ May
Allah destroy them! The Jews also said: “Allah is incapable,
for when He created the heavens and the earth, He relaxed
‘on Saturday, and took a holiday in lieu of a celebration day,
and as such Saturday became their celebration day.” May
Allah destroy them!

388 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The second Ayah:

‎he G tes‏ ب يدا

‎<The Yahid (Jews) say: “Allah’s Hand is tied up.” Be
their hands tied up and be they accursed for what they
uttered. Nay, both His Hands are widely outstretched.
He spends (of His Bounty) as He wills.» (Al-Ma’idah
9:64)

‎© <The Yahad (Jews)>, they are the followers of Masa,
peace be upon him. They were said to have been
named Yahud because they said:

‎Ca Gy

‎Certainly we have turned (Hudna) unto You> (Al-
A’ rif 7:156)

‎And as such, the name is Arabic, because (the verb) Hada -
Yahiid, which is to return, is Arabic. It is also said that its
origin is from Yahudha, the name of one of the children of
‏,طاقن نولا‎ and the Yahiid are those ascribed to him.

‎Whatever it is, it is not important to us whether the origin is
this or that, but we know that the Jews are a group of
people among the children of Israel who followed Masa,
peace be upon him.

‎These Jews are the most insolent and detestable of people,
because the maltreatment of Fir‘awn and his domination
over them ingrained that in their souls; so they showed
maltreatment towards people, even against the Creator, the
Mighty and Sublime. They described Allah, Exalted is He,
with attributes of imperfection, may Allah dust their faces
with shame; and they deserve it.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 391

anything out of His generosity.” They were thus
punished with two things:

By the description they used to insult Allah, Glorified
be He, being true about themselves, by His statement:
Be their hands tied up>

By making what they said occur; by banishing them
away from the Mercy of Allah, so that they do not find
Allah's generosity, magnanimity, and favour.

Then Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, invalidated
their claim, and said; €Nay, both His Hands are widely
outstretched»

Nay} (Bal) here indicates a revocative retraction.

Consider how the expression now varies; ¢Nay, both His
Hands are widely outstretched> because the situation is one
of being praised with generosity and spending with the
two Hands, which is more perfect than spending with
one hand.

> And widely outstretched» is the opposite of their
statement; ¢fied up}; therefore, the Hands of Allah
are widely outstretched, spending liberally. The Pro-
phet 3% said: “The Hand of Allah is full of generosity
(spending a great amount), night and day. What do
you think of what He has been spending since the
creation of the heavens and the earth; what is in His
Right Hard does diminish.”"!

Who is he that can estimate what Allah has been spending
since the creation of the heavens and the earth? Nobody
can estimate it! Yet, with that, whatever is in His Right

(Reported by Al-Bukhari (7411) and Muslim (993) from
Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

390 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

> Here, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, said: €¢The Yahid
(lews) say: “Allah's Hand is tied up.”}: €Hand>:
They made it singular because a hand spends less
than the two hands; that is why the response came
with dual and expansion (that is with two Hands
that are widely outstretched) and said €Nay, both His
Hands are widely outstretched>

For they described Allah with this defect, Allah
punished them for what they said, and He said: ¢Be
their hands tied up> meaning — prevented from
spending. That is why the Jews are the most
avaricious people and the most miserly. They are the
most miserly of all the servants of Allah, and the
most rapacious. It is not possible for them to spend
one small monetary unit, except that they expect that
they will get a Dirham in return! We now see that
they have large and tremendous organizations, but
with these organizations and charities, they want
more and more; they want to control the world.
Therefore, © man, there is no need to ask how do we
harmonize between His statement, Exalted is He: €Be
their Hands tied up> and what is happening today
concerning the Jews! Because these people offer
(things), only to gain more.

4And be they cursed for what they uttered}; that is, they
were being expelled and banished from the mercy of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, because the calamity
is related to what was uttered. When they described
Allah with being stingy, they were expelled and
banished away from His mercy. It was said to them:
“If Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is as you have
said - that He does not spend - He would deny you
His mercy, so much so, that He would not give you

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 393

benefit. It is already known that if you have ten Riydls with
you, and then take them out of the the right drawer, and
put them into the left drawer, and somebody says: “Your
money does not reduce,” it will be said this is a useless
statement!

What is important is that the meaning is; if what is given to
those who ask, was to be removed from His Dominion, that
would not reduce what is with Him, Glorious and Exalted
is He.

And the spending of Allah, the Exalted, is not restricted to
what we acquire in terms of Dirhams or belongings alone,
rather every favor is from Allah, the Exalted, whether the
favor is related to the religion or the world. The rain is
among that which Allah spends on us, and the plants’
seeds are among that which Allah spends.

Will it be said after this, as said by the Jews - may the wrath
of Allah be upon them - €Allah’s Hand is tied up}?

No! By Allah! It will rather be said: “Indeed the Hands of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, are widely outstretched,
with spending and favors that can never be counted nor
estimated.” But if it is asked why did He give to Zaid and
did not give to ‘Amr?’

We say; because the absolute authority and all encompass-
ing wisdom is Allah’s, Exalted is He. That is why He said,
refuting their doubts: ¢He spends as He wills.» There are
among people those whom He gives much, and among
them whom He gives little, while there are among them
those whom He gives an average amount, out of His
wisdom, even though the one who is given little is not
debarred from the grace of Allah, and His spending in
other areas. Allah gives him good hearing, good sight,
sound mind, and other favors that cannot be enumerated.
But for the oppression of the Jews, their hostility, and

392 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Hand does not diminish. This is like His, the Exalted,
statement, in the Hadith Quasi: “O My servants! If the first
of you and the last of you, the men of you and the jinn of
you stand on one plain, and ask of Me, and I grant
everyone what he asks for, that will not reduce what is
with Me, except in the degree which a needle will reduce
(from the sea water) when it is dipped into the sea.’”""!

Let us consider the needle when it is dipped into the sea,
and when you take it out, it will never reduce anything
from the sea. This kind of style is adopted to express with
absolute certainty the lack of reduction, because nothing
reduces from the sea in this example, as is well-known, and
it is impossible that the sea be reduced by this. It is also,
therefore, impossible that the Dominion of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, diminishes, if every man and every
jinn were to stand and asks Allah, Exalted is He, and He
gives everybody what he asks for; that will not reduce
anything in His Dominion.

Do not say: “Yes, it will not reduce because it (the water)
moved from His Dominion to His Dominion.” If this was
the meaning, the whole statement would be considered
useless and meaningless. But the meaning is, if it is
assumed that these marvelous gifts that are given, were
outside of the Dominion of Allah, that would not reduce
anything from His Dominion.

If the meaning is the first one, it would not have any

‎Reported by Muslim (2577) from the Hadith of Aba Dharr,‏ 1لا
‎may Allah be pleased with him. Ahmad said regarding it:‏
‎“It is the best Hadith of the people of Ash-Sham (greater‏
‎Syria).” (Jami’ Al-Uliim wa Al-Hikam (2:34)), and Imam Tbn‏
‎Rajab has an extensive explanation of it in his book Jami’‏
‎Al-‘Uliim wa Al-Hikam.‏

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

Allah’s Handy, we say this singular does not prevent
plurality once it has been affirmed, because the singular
in the genitive case implies a generality.

As regards the dual and the plural, we say Allah does not
possess except two Hands, as that is established in the Book
and the Sunnah. In the Book:

He says in Stirah Sad:

To what I ‘have created with both My Hands» (Sad
38:75)

This is a case of honoring, if Allah had created him with
more than two Hands, He would have mentioned it,
because the more the Attribute with which Allah created
this thing increases, the more the esteem of that thing
increases. Also, He says in Siirat Al-Ma‘idah:

Nay, both His Hands are widely outstretched» (Al-
Ma‘idah 5:64)

In refutation against those who said: €Allah’s Hand> with
singular. The case here is one that calls for numerous
favors, and the more the means of spending are, the
more the spending is. If Allah had had more than two
Hands, He would have mentioned them here. Since the
spending with a hand is spending, but it becomes more
and more perfect with two Hands than one hand; and
with three hands — if it assumed to be so — it would be
more. So if Allah, Exalted is He, had more than two
Hands, He would have mentioned them.

As for the Sunnah; the Messenger 3 said: “ Allah, Exalted is
He, will roll up the heavens with His Right, and the earth

394 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

that they did not consider Allah free of attributes of
imperfection, they said: ¢Allah’s Hand is tied up»

The two earlier mentioned Ayét contain the affirmation of
the Attribute of two Hands for Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.

However, one may say: Allah has more than two Hands,
according to His, the Exalted, saying:

Do they not see that We have created for them of what
Our Hands have created, the cattle?» (Ya Sin 36:71)

4Our Hands> here is in the plural form, so we
understand by this that it means plural; because if we
understand it to be plural, we have, by that, included the
dual form, as well as what is more. So what would be
the response to this? The response is to say: The mention
of the Hand is related in singular, dual, and plural

forms.

As for the Hand that is related in the singular form, the
singular that is in the genitive case implies the plural;
therefore, it includes everything that is established for
Allah regarding Hands. The proof of the generality of the
singular that is in genitive case, is His statement, Exalted is
He:

And if you count the Blessing of Allah, never will you
be able to count them.} (Ibrahim 14:34)

4€Ni'mah (blessing) is singular in the genitive case, which
includes many blessings according to His statement:
never will you be able to count them} therefore, it is not
one, not one thousand, neither a million nor millions.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

statement, Exalted is He:

If you two turn in repentance to Allah, your hearts are
indeed so inclined} (At-Tahrim 66:4)

They were only two, while the word ¢Quiab> (hearts) is
plural, while what is intended with it is just two
hearts,"

And His statement, Exalted is He:
Allah has not put for any man two hearts inside his
body> (Al-Ahzab 33:4)

And like that too, for no woman.

They also argued using His statement, Exalted is He:

If the deceased left brothers, the mother has a sixth>
(An-Nisa’ 4:11)

The word ¢€Ikhwah} (brothers) is a plural, while what is
intended here is dual.

They also argued using the fact that Salah in Jama‘ah
(congregation) results with two persons.

But, the majority of the Arab linguists and grammarians
say that the least number to be considered plural is three,
and that the plural is considered as dual in these texts due
to reasons; otherwise, the least number to be considered as
plural is three.

"(Translation note): Meaning in reference to ‘Aishah and
Hafsah, may Allah be pleased with them.

396 Commentary on Al-‘Agidalt Al-Wasitiyyah

with His other Hand.”"]
He 3 said: “Each of His Two Hands is Right.”"!
He did not mention more than two.

And the Salaf (pious predecessors) have a consensus that
Allah has two Hands, without any addition.

So, we have with us a text from the Qur'an, the Sunnah and
the consensus, that Allah, Exalted is He, has two Hands.
How do we now harmonize between this and the plural:

€Of what Our Hands have created> (Ya Sin 36:71)

We say: The harmonization will be according to one of

these two views:

1. That we say what some of the scholars said; that the
least number that is considered as plural is two, and
based on that €Our Hands> will not refer to more
than two Hands. That is, it is not necessary that it
refers to more than two; hence, it is in accord with
the dual form:

Nay, both His Hands are widely outstretched (Al-
Ma‘idah 5:64)

Then, there is no problem. If you ask what is the proof of
the people that say that the least number to be considered
plural is two? The response is that they argue using His

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (4812), (7412) and Muslim (2787),
(2788) from the Hadith of Ibn ‘Umar and Aba Hurairah,
may Allah be pleased with both of them.

Reported by Muslim (1827) from Ibn ‘Amy, may Allah be
pleased with him

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 399

It is therefore known now, that the harmonization between
the singular and dual is easy, since this is related as a
singular in the genitive case, and therefore it includes
whatever is affirmed for Allah about Hands.
But as for the difference between dual and plural, the
harmonization will be from two view points:

One of them is that the real plural — which is at least three
— is not intended, but what is rather intended by it is
majesty, as Allah, Exalted is He, would say: €Indeed
We...>, <We.,.» and; We said...» and the like, whereas
He is One. But He said this to express majesty. Or to say
that the least number considered being plural is two,
then there will be no contradiction.

As for His statement:

With power (Ayd) did We construct the heaven>
(Adh-Dhariyat 51:47)

The meaning of ¢Ayd> here is power. The intended
meaning by it here is not the Hand, the Attribute of
Allah. That is why He did not attribute it to Himself. He
did not say “With Our Hand.”

The like of that, is in His statement, Exalted is He:
66 ‏ؤي يكت عن‎

4(Rememiber) the Day when the Shin shall be laid bare>
(Al-Qalam 68:42)

Because the scholars of the Salaf have two opinions
regarding His statement:

450 ‏لاعن‎
‎When the Shin} (Al-Qalam 68:42)

398 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Or, that we say that the meaning by this plural is
exaltation, the exaltation of His Hands; the intended
meaning is not that Allah, Exalted is He, has more than
two Hands.

Then, what is intended by the Hand (mentioned) here is the
Self that possesses the Hand. Allah, Exalted is He, had said:

40 ci ET SIG Al ‏في‎ 3c ‏«ظهرٌ‎
‎4Evil has appeared on land and sea because of what the
hands of men have earned » (Ar-Rum 30:41)

That is because of what they earned, whether with hands,
feet, tongues, or any other part of the body. But this kind of
expression is used to refer to the doer himself. That is why
we say that Allah did not create the cattle — which refers to
camels — with His Hand. The difference between His
saying:

Of what Our Hands have done> (Ya Sin 36:71)
And His statement:

To what I have created with both My Hands (Sad
38:75)

Is as if what Allah was saying in the Ayah €Of what Our
Hands have done is what “We have done,” because what
is intended by the Hand (here) is Allah, who possesses
the Hand, while the intended meaning by With both }
Hands} is the two Hands. and not the Self.

And with this, the confusion regarding the Attribute of
Hand which is related in singular, dual and plural forms is
removed.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 401

creatures vary and are different in terms of being large, and
being small, being bulky and being thin..and so on.
Therefore, the fact that hands of creatures are different
Proves that the Hand of Allah, the Exalted, will be different
from the hands of the creatures, and that He, Glorious and
Exalted is He, is more worthy of being unlike them in the
first place.

Besides, the people of Ta’til (denial) among the Mu’‘tazilah,
Jahmiyyah, the Ash‘ariyyah and the like, have opposed the
People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah in affirming the Hand
for Allah, Exalted is He.

They said: “It is not possible that we affirm a hand for
Allah in reality. Rather what is intended by hand is just an
abstract matter, and that is power!! Or, that the meaning of
the hand is favor, because in the Arabic language hand can
be generally used to mean power and favor.

In the long authentic Hadith of An-Nawwas bin Sam‘an,
may Allah be pleased with him, (it is stated): “That Allah
shall reveal unto ‘Isa that: ‘I shall raise some servants
whom nobody will have the hand to fight." And the
meaning of the Hadith is that nobody will have the power
to fight them - they are Ya‘juj and Ma’

As for the use of hand to mean favor, this occurs often;
among such is the statement of the Quraish’s messenger to
Aba Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him: “If it were not
for you having a hand upon me which I did not repay, I
could have replied to you”! ; meaning - “a favor.”

Reported by Muslim (2937) from An-Nawwas bin Sam‘an,
may Allah be pleased with him

Reported by Al-Bukhari (2731) and (2732).And the
messenger of the Quraish was ‘Urwah bin Mas‘ud

400 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasifiyyah

The first opinion is that what is intended by it is “strength.”
And the second opinion is that what is intended by it is the
Shin of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. Whoever considers
the context of the Ayah together with the Hadith of Aba
Sa‘id, may Allah be pleased with him") then he would say
that what is intended by the Shin here is Allah’s Shin.
While, whoever considers the Ayah alone, he would say
that the intended meaning by the Shin is “strength.”

If somebody says: “You affirm that Allah, the Exalted, has a
Hand in reality, while we do not know of hands except the
hands of the creatures, by that, your position will therefore
suggest Tashbih (likeness) between the Creator and the
creatures?” We respond by saying, our affirmation of Hand
for Allah, does not necessitate that we likened the Creator
and the creature, because the affirmation of the Hand
comes in the Qur’an, the Sunnah and the consensus of the
Salaf (pious predecessors), while the negation of likeness
between the Creator and the creature is proven by the
Shariah, the intellect, and senses.

As for the proof from Shariah, that is His statement,
Exalted is He:

<There is nothing like unto Him; He is the All-Hearer,
the All-Seer> (Ash-Shira 42:11)

As for the intellect: It is not possible that the Creator is like
the creatures in His Attributes, because this will be
considered a defect of the Creator.

As for the senses: Everybody can see that the hands of

"The Hadith of Abu Sa‘id is reported by Al-Bukhari (7439)
and Muslim (183).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 403

If somebody asks you where is the consensus of the Salaf
(pious predecessors) related? Bring me a statement from
Abi Bakr, or ‘Umar, or ‘Uthman, or ‘Ali, may Allah be
pleased with them, saying: “The meaning of Hand is Hand,
in reality.” 1 say to him: “Bring me a statement from Abo
Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, ‘Ali and others among the
Companions, and the scholars after them, saying that the
meaning of Hand is power or favor.” He will not be able to
bring that

Therefore, if they had another saying that opposed the
apparentess of the expression, they would have said it, and
it would have been related to us from them. But since they
did not say that, it is known that they took the
apparentness of the expression, and they agreed upon that.

This is a tremendous point; and it is that when there is
nothing related from the Companions, may Allah be
pleased with them, opposing the apparentness of the Book
and the Sunnah, and they did not express other than that -
since they are the ones in whose language the Qur’4n was
revealed, and Prophet #3 addressed them with their
language; so they would certainly understand the Book
and the Sunnah based on what is apparent of it - then if
nothing opposing that is related from them, then this is
their view.

Thirdly: It is highly impossible that favor or power is what
is meant in His statement:

To what 1 have created with both My Hands» (Sad
38:75)

Since that would necessitate that there are just two favors,
while the favors of Allah are innumerable. It would also

402 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

And the saying of the Al-Mutanabbi:

How many has the darkness of the night upon you from hands
Establishing that the Manawiyyah lies

The Manawiyyah is a sect of Majtis (Magians) those who say
that the darkness creates evil, while the light creates good.
Al-Mutanabbi is saying: You are given a lot of provisions
during the night, which shows that the Manawiyyah lie,
because your night brings goodness.

Therefore, the meaning by Allah’s Hand is favor and not
hand in reality, because if you affirm a real hand for Allah,
that will imply antropomophization of Allah, meaning that
Allah has a body, and bodies are similar. With that you fall
into what Allah has prohibited in His statement:

SEM 3 TiS Sid
€So put not forward similitudes for Allahy (An-Nahl
16:74)

We have better evidence than you do, O those who affirm
the reality (of the Attributes). We are saying: Glorified is He
who is free from all forms of accidents, parts and ends!
You will not find the likes of this rhymed prose, neither in
the Book nor in the Sunnah.”

Our response to this is from a number of viewpoints.

Firstly: The interpretation of the Hand to mean power or
favor is contrary to the apparentness of the expression. And
whatever opposes the apparentness of the expression is
rejected, except with evidence.

Secondly: It opposes the consensus of the Salaf (pious
predecessors), since all of them are agreed that the meaning
of Hand is Hand, in reality.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 405

It becomes clear by this, that the view of those who distort
the Attributes of Allah and assert that the meaning of Hand
is power, is false, from a number of viewpoints.

It has preceded that the Attributes of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, are of the matters of the unseen and are known
only by revealed information, for which there is no place
for the intellect. In matters such as these, what is
compulsory upon us is to leave them in their apparentness,
without any opposition to that.

450 wait patiently (O vee of Allah 3) for the
Decision of your Lord, for verily, you are under Our
Eyes.> (At-Tiir 52:48)

@ Affirming the Two Eyes of Allah, the Exalted

The Commentary

The author, may Allah have Mercy upon him, mentioned
three Aydt regarding the affirmation of the two Eyes for
Allah, Exalted is He.

The first Ayah: His statement:

So wait patiently (O Messenger of Allah 38) for the
Decision of your Lord, for verily, you are under Our
Eyes» (At-Tarr 52:48)

404 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

necessitate that the power is two, whereas power has just
one meaning, it cannot be numerous. This expression
highly negates that what is intended by the Hand is either
power or favor.

Supposing that it is possible that what is intended by His
statement:

«Nay, both His Hands are widely outstretched> (Al-
Ma’idah 5:64)

Is His favor - based on interpretation; it is never possible to
intend favor with His statement:

لقت وك
‎€To what | have created with both My Hands>‏

As for power, it is not possible that what is intended by the
two Hands in the two Aydhs all together is power, that is
His statement: 410 what I created with my Hands} - for
power cannot be numerous.

Fourthly: If the intended meaning of the Hand is power,
then Adam will enjoy no superiority over Iblis; not even
over a donkey and the dogs, because they were all created
with the power of Allah. If the intended meaning of the
Hand is power, the proof against Iblis will not be valid,
since Iblis will say: “And |, my Lord, you created me with
your power, with what you have preferred him over me?”

Fifthly: This Hand which Allah affirmed for Himself is
related in such different manners that prevent it meaning
favor and power. It is related with the mention of the
Fingers, Holding, Stretching, Palm and “the Right.” All
these show that power cannot be intended by it, because
power cannot be described with these attributes.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 407
That is, be patient with the decision of your Lord, be it the
universal type, or the Shart‘ah type.

With this, we know that the classification which the
scholars mentioned - that the patience is of three categories:
Patience upon obedience to Allah, patience to stay away
from disobeying Allah, and patience with the decrees of
Allah - that all of this is included in this Ayah:

4So wait patiently for the Decision of your Lord.»

The basis of its inclusion, is that the judgment (of Allah) is
either of the universal type, or the Shariah type; and the
Shariah type refers to the commands and prohibitions;
meanwhile Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, commanded
the Prophet 3 with some commands, and prohibited him
from some matters, and destined some matters upon him.
The commands are such as:

€O Messenger! Proclaim that which has been sent down
to you from your Lord> (Al-Ma’idah 5:67)

And;
<5 se I BP
Invite io the Way of your Lord» (An-Nahl 16:125)

These are serious commands. That is, if it is said to a
person: “Worship your Lord,” he would find it easy to
worship Him. But Da‘wah and conveying (the message) is a
heavy task, because he is burdened by the obstacles and
struggles against him of the others, so the matter becomes

very heavy.

406 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

% The address here is to the Prophet %

» ‏و‎ abr Patience, means “to confine,” and from it is
their saying: “He was killed in captivity (Qutila
Sabran)” meaning, he was killed and he was confined
to be killed

In the Shariah, they say it is to have Sabr with the rulings of
Allah, meaning, confining the soul to the judgments of
Allah; and the judgments of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, Exalted is He, are either of the Shariah type, or
the universal type.

As for the Shariah type, they are orders and prohibitions.
Thus, having patience upon obedience to Allah means
being patient upon the commands, while being patient
against disobeying Him is patience to stay away from the
prohibitions,

As for the universal type: They are the decrees of Allah,
the Exalted. So one must be patient with what He has
willed and decreed

And based upon this meaning, some of them said that
patience has three categories: Patience upon obedience to
Allah, patience to stay away from disobeying Allah, and
patience with Allah’s decrees that are distressing,

So, His saying:
4&5 Sas 5h}
So wait patiently for the Decision of your Lord}
— has three categories:

1. The patience upon obedience to Allah;
2. The patience to stay away from disobeying Allah;
3. And with the decrees of Allah.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 409

zam water to drink! And this is Muhammad 3%, harmed by

them while prostrating to Allah! 9

They would usually bring filth, what was putrid, and
impurities, and dump them at his doorstep! He went out to
the people of Ta’if, What happened? Severe torture! Their
idiots and young lined up beside the walkway, and started
hurling stones at him, until they made his heel bleed so
much that he fainted and did not regain consciousness
except at Qarn Ath-Tha‘alib"!

~ He was patient with the decrees of Allah; but that was
the patience of a believer who believes that the end will
be his. For Allah has said to him:

{1 Based on the report of Al-Bukhari (3231) and Muslim (1795)
from ‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her- the wife of the
Prophet # - that she said to the Prophet #2: “Has there beena
day more severe on you than the day of Uhud?” He said: “I
have faced from your people, what I faced, and the most
severe of what I faced from them, was that on the day of
‘Aqabah, when I brought myself before Ibn ‘Abd Yalil bin
‘Abd Kulal, and he did not respond to what I wanted, I
proceeded, worried, while I headed in the direction I faced,
and I did not recover until I was at Bant Ath-Tha’alib’s place.
So, I raised my head, and a cloud was shading me. I looked
and saw Jibril, who called saying; ‘Allah has heard the
saying of your people to you, and how they stave you off.
And Allah has raised the Angel of the mountain for you, so
you may command him with what you will for them.’ So, the
Angel of the mountain called, and gave me Salam, and then
said:‘O Muhammad, that is with regards to what you will; if
you will that I cover them up with the two rocks,’ and the
Prophet 2 said: ‘Rather I wish that Allah brings from their
loins, those who will worship Allah alone, withoutascribing
any partners to Him.”

408 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidal Al-Wasitiyyah

As for the prohibitions, He prohibited him from Shirk. He
said.

And be not you of the Mushrikin (Al-An‘am 6:14)
And;

ESN 35>

if you join others in worship with Allah, (then) surely
(all) your deeds will be in vain> (Az-Zumar 39:65)

As for the Decreed judgments, he experienced harms from
his people; verbal abuses, and physical abuses, such that
none would be patient with them except the likes of the
Messenger 2%.

They harmed him verbally, by scoffing him, mocking him,

condemning him, and by scaring the people away from

him. They also harmed him with their actions. He was once

in the Ka’bah, the most secure spot on the earth; he was

there prostrating to His Lord, when they went to him with

the intestines of a camel, and put it on his back while he
vas in prostration.!"!

There is no worse harm than this, while knowing that even
if a disbelieving idolator entered the Haram, he would be
safe from them, they would not harm him there. They
would rather honor him; provide him with wine, and Zam-

"Based on the report of Al-Bukhari (3854) and Muslim
(1794) from ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘id, may Allah be pleased
with him, who said: “While the Prophet 3 was prostrating
and some people from the Quraish were around him,
“Ugbah bin Abi Mu’ait came with the uterus of an camel
and hurled it upon the Prophet's #& back.”

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 411

extinction, and that it (the part) can cease to exist.
Meanwhile, the Attributes of Allah can never cease to
exist. They will rather remain forever.

An authentic Hadith from the Messenger of Allah #% has
proven that Allah has only two Eyes, while he was
describing the Dajjal, saying: “He is (A’war) one-eyed and
your Lord is not one-eyed’! In another wording: “He is
blind in his right eye”?!

Some people have said that the meaning of “A‘woar”’ is one
with a defect (in an eye) not one-eyed. There is no doubt
that this is a form of distortion, and the feigning of
ignorance of the authentic wording reported by Al-Bukhari
and others that: “He is blind in his right eye as if his eye isa
protruding grape.” This is crystal clear! The word A’war
in the Arabic Language is not used except to express being
one-eyed, but if it is said: “Awar or ‘Awar” it can be
generally used to mean a defect.

This Hadith proves that Allah has only two Eyes. The basis
of using it as a proof, is that if Allah had more than two
Eyes, stating that when clarifying the matter would be
clearer that saying one-eyed.

This is because if Allah had more than two Eyes, he would
have said: “Your Lord has Eyes,” since if He had more than
two eyes, that the Dajjal is not the Lord becomes even
clearer.

And also, if Allah had more than two Eyes, that would be
from His perfection. Therefore, not mentioning it will be

Reported by Al-Bukhari (3057) and Muslim (169) from the
Hadith of Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him.
Reported by Al-Bukhari (7407) and Muslim (169) from the
Hadith of ‏مطل‎ ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him,

Its reference preceded.

sitiyyah

‎wait patiently (O Messenger of Allah 38) for the‏ و45
‎Decision of your Lord, for verily, you are under Our‏
‎Eyes (Af-Tur 52:48)‏

‎This expresses a feeling of concern and respect. The most
honorable of all things with which one can honor a person,
is that you say to him: “You are under my eye; you are in
my heart,” and the like. So: “You are under my eye” means
— lam watching you with my eyes. This expression is well
known to people. Adequate and complete guard, care and
protection are guaranteed with this kind of expression.

‎Therefore, His statement: 4107 you are under Our Eyes}
meaning — for you are being guarded and protected in
the utmost.
© 4Under Our Eyes>: That is, “Our Eyes are with you,
We are protecting, guarding and caring for you.”
In the noble Ayah, there is the affirmation of the Eye for
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, but it is stated in the plural
form, for reasons that we shall mention, if Allah, the
Exalted, wills.
The eye is one of the Informative (Al-Khabariyyah)
Attributes of His Essence (Adh-Dhatiyyah). It is Adh-
Dhatiyyah because Allah shall eternally be described with
it, and (Al-Khabariyyah) (informative) because what is
named, in our case, refers to portions or parts.
For us, the eye is a part of the face, while the face is a part of
the body. But with respect to Allah, it is not permissible to
say: It is a part of Allah, for it has preceded that this word
(part) is not intended, and that it will suggest splitting the
Creator into parts, and it will also suggest that the part is
the one which can affect the eternity of the whole with its

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 413

rejected.” What will be the answer? The reply is that:
they interpreted it based on the sense conveyed by this
expression, while still affirming the basis, and that is the
Eye. The people of Tahrif only say: “under Our looking”
without affirming the Eye. The People of the Sunnah and
the Jama‘ah are saying: “under Our Eyes” means “under
Our watch”, while still affirming the Eye. But the
mention of Eye here is of a stronger emphasis and regard
than the mere mention of seeing. That is why He said:
For you are under Our Eyes>

The people of Ta‘til (denial) say: “You have surrounded
us with your argument from every angle, rejecting our
Ta'wil; now you engage in Ta’wil by interpreting the Ayah
by other than its apparentness. In Allah's saying: ¢For you
are under Our Eyes}, you take it upon its apparentness,
and when take it upon its apparentness, you commit
Kufr, and when you do not take it upon its apparentness,
you have contradicted yourselves. So one time, you say
Ta’wil is allowed, and another time you say that Ta’wil is
not allowed, and label it Tahrif. Is this anything other
than injustice with Allah’s religion?!”

We say we take it according to its apparentness, whole-
heartedly, and that is our path; we will not oppose it.

They say: “The apparentness of the Ayah is that Muham-
mad #% was inside Allah’s eye; as it would be said: ‘Zaid is
with the house (Bil-Bait)/ ‘Zaid is with the Masjid (Bil-
Masjid).’” They say that the Ba’ is an adverbial particle. So it
would therefore mean that Zaid is inside the house, and
inside the Masjid. Therefore, His statement: €under Our
Eyes> will mean “inside our eyes’!

If you say this, you have committed Kufr, because you have
made Allah a place to accommodate creatures, and
become, by that, Huliliyyah (pantheists). If you do not

412 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

considered a form of neglecting to praise Allah, because a
large number indicates power, perfection and complete-
ness. If Allah had more than two Eyes, the Messenger 38
would have explained it, so that the belief in this perfection
will not elude us.

In his book, As-Sawa’iq Al-Mursalah, Ibn Al-Qayyim, may
Allah have Mercy upon him, mentioned a Hadith, but it is
weak due to a break in the chain of its transmission, and
that is: “If a servant stands up observing Salah, he is
standing between the two Eyes of Ar-Rahman...”.!!!

“Two eyes” is used here, but the Hadith is weak, and we
depend in our creed upon the authentic Hadith; the Hadith
discussing the Dajjal for it is clear to the one who ponders
on it.

‘Uthman bin 5350 Ad-Darami, may Allah have Mercy
upon him, mentioned that in his refutation against Bishr
Al-Marisi, and in the same manner, Ibn Khuzaimah
mentioned it in Kitéb At-Tawhid, and Aba Al-Hassan Al-
Ash‘ari, and Aba Bakr Al-Baqillani also related the
consensus of the Salaf (pious predecessors) on it. The
matter regarding this is clear.

So, our creed, based upon which we worship Allah, is that
Allah has only two Eyes, not more

If it is said: “There are some among the Salaf (pious
predecessors) who interpreted His statement, Exalted is He,
4Under Our Eyes> to mean ‘with Our looking.” Some
known scholars among the Salaf interpreted it to mean
this, and you are saying that Tarif is prohibited and

11 Tbn AF-Qayyim mention it in the book As-Sawd’ig (256) and
in Ad-Da’ifah (1024), Al-Albani said: “Very weak, reported
by Al’Ugaili in Ad-Du‘aft’ (p 24) and Al-Bazzar in his
Musnad (553 - Kashf Al-Astar).”

Commentary On The Introductory Note:

because it would suggest that the Messenger of Allah 3 is
inside Allah’s Eye. This is impossible! Also, the Messenger
of Allah 3& was being addressed while he was on the earth.
If you say he is inside Allah’s Eye, then the meaning of the
Qur'an will be considered false.

This is another angle showing the invalidity of the claim
that the apparentness of the Qur'an is that the Messenger
36 is inside Allah’s Eye, Exalted is He.

And His saying: ¢And We carried him upon something

(Dhat) with planks (Alwah) and nails (Dusr), floating
under Our Eyes, a reward for him who had been
rejected!» (Al-Qamar 54:13-14) €And I endued you
with love from Me, in order that you may be produced
under My Eye> (Ta Ha 20:39)

The second Ayah: His, the Exalted, saying:

46 ‏كان‎ AK GCA 62 0 £3 gill ol ‏عكَ‎ a>
4And We carried him upon something (Dhat) with planks
(Akwah) and nails (Dusr), floating under Our Eyes, a reward
for him who had been rejected!» (AL-Qamar 54:13-14)

© 4And We carried him}: The pronoun “him” refers to
Nah, peace be upon him.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

say that, then you have contradicted yourselves?!”

We say to them: We seek refuge in Allah! We seek refuge in
Allah! Then, we seek refuge in Allah! If what you said is the
obvious meaning of the Qur'an, and you believe that this is
the obvious meaning of the Qur'an, you have committed
Kufr; because whoever believes that the obvious meaning
of the Qur’an is Kujr and deviation, then he is an astray
disbeliever.

Therefore, repent to Allah from your saying that this is the
obvious meaning of the expression. Ask all the Arab
Linguists among the poets and the orators whether they
understand from this kind of expression that the person
being looked at with the eye, is actually inside the eye? Ask
whomever you like among the scholars of Language, alive
or dead!!

If you know the various styles in the Arabic Language, you
will know that this meaning they mentioned and heaped
upon us is never intended in the Arabic Language, not to
mention attributing it to the Lord, the Mighty and Sublime.
So attributing it to the Lord is rejected Kufr, and it is
rejected in the language, the Shari‘ah, and according to the
intellect.

If it is said: “How do you explain the Ba’ contained in His
statement: €Under Our Eyes!>’ We reply that it means
accompanying. If I say: “You are under my eye,” it
means that my eye is accompanying you, and watching
you, and is not neglecting you. Therefore, the meaning is
that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is saying to His
Prophet, “Be patient awaiting the Decision of Allah,
because you are surrounded with Our care, and Our
seeing with the Eye, such that none will afflict you with
any harm.”

It is not possible that the Ba’ here is is an adverbial particle,

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 417

Floating» that is, the thing that was made of planks
and nails, under the Eyes of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime. The intended meaning with the Eyes here is
only two Eyes, as has been explained. The meaning
of floating under them, is “accompanied by Our
watching with Our Eyes.” The particle Ba’ here, is
used to express “to accompany”. It floated upon the
water that descended from the heavens and gushed
forth from the earth, because Nuh, peace be upon
him, supplicated to his Lord saying:

Ihave been overcome, so help (me)!> (Al-Qumar 54:10)
So Allah, Exalted is He, said:

4S0 We opened the gates of heaven with water pouring
forth. And We caused the earth to gush forth with
springs» (Al-Qamar 54:11-12)

Then, this ship was floating under the Eye of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime.

Someone can say: “Why didn’t He say: ‘We carried him on
the ship or we carried him on the boat,’ and instead said:
On something with planks and nailsp?” The response to
this is that He said “something with planks and nails”
instead of “on the boat” or “on the ship,” for three
reasons:

The first reason: To maintain the relationship between the
Ayat and their different parts, for if He said: “We carried
him on the boat”, it would not be in harmony with what
comes before and after the Ayah. And if He said: “on the
ship”, it would also be like that. But for the purpose of

416 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

* Concerning His statement: ¢And We carried him upon
something (Dhat) with planks (Alwah) and nails
(Dusr)>; meaning — “on the ship, possessing planks
(Akeah) and nails (Dusr)’. He, peace be upon him,
constructed this ship; then, when his people passed
by him, they would mock him. Then, he said:

€If you mock at us, so do we mock at you likewise, for
your mocking> (Hid 11:38) ‘

He constructed it according to the order of Allah, and
under the care and custody of Allah. Allah said to him:

And construct the ship under Our Eyes and with Our
Inspiration> (Hid 11:37)

So Allah, the Exalted, was watching him while he was

constructing the ship, and was inspiring him about how to
construct it.

Allah describes it here in His statement: ¢(Dhat) with planks
(Al-Wah) and nails (Dusr)}: <Dhat> meaning; possessing,
Al-Wah; that is, (planks of) wood. Ad-Dusur: What the
wood was bound with, like nails, and rope, and the like.
The majority of the scholars of Ta/sir said that it refers to
the nails with which the planks of wood were held
together."

* Floating under Our Eyes}: This is the evidence:

{This was said by Ibn ‘Abbas, Sa‘id bin Jubair, Al-Qurtubi,

Qatadah, and Ibn Zaid. And Ibn Jarir preferred it. See the
Tafsir of At-Tabari and (that of) Ibn Kathir.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.

The third Ayele His statement:
4And I eadued you with ee from Me, in order that
you may be produced under My Eye> (Ta Ha 20:39)

The address is directed to Musa, peace be upon him:

4 Concerning His statement: ¢And I endued you with love
from Me}, the scholars of Tafsir differ regarding its
meaning.

Some of them said: €And I endued you with love from Mey
means “1 love you.”

Some of them said it means “I endued you with love from
people’ while the cause of that is from Allah. That is,
whoever sees you, they will love you. The proof of thisis that
when the wife of Fir’awn saw him, she loved him, and said:

4G He ‏أو‎ Eas ‏ع أن‎ OS ‏«لا‎
‎Kill him not, perhaps he may be of benefit to us, or we
may adopt him as a son> (Al-Qasas 28:9)

If somebody says: “Is it possible that you understand that
the Ayah carries two meanings?” We will answer yes;
based on the principle, and that is, whenever an Ayah can
convey two meanings which are not contradictory, then, it
may be used for both of them together. Therefore, Masa,
peace be upon him, was beloved to Allah, the Mighty and
Sbulime, and beloved to the people. When they saw him,
they loved him. The reality is that the two meanings are
inter-related, because if Allah loves a servant, He casts his
love into the hearts of the servants.

It is reported from Ibn ‘Abbas that he said: “Allah loved
him, and He made His creation love him.”

Commentary on Al-‘Aq

harmonizing the Aydt in their contexts and words, he said:
4On something made of planks and nails>

The second reason: So that people can learn how to
construct ships, and to know that they are constructed from
planks and nails, That is why Allah, Exalted is He, said:
452 ‏من‎ MG Se US a>
4And indeed, We have left this as a sign, then is there
any that will remember?» (Al-Qamar 54:15)

Therefore, Allah, Exalted is He, left its knowledge as a sign
for people to be able to construct (ships) as He, Exalted is
He, inspired in Nah.

The third reason: To indicate its strength, since it was
made from planks and nails, and the ambiguity here, is to
show its greatness, 5

So the focus was on what it was constructed of.

An example of mentioning the description without the
name of what is being described, is [ Ses the Exalted, saying:

Make you Sabighat> (Saba’ 34:11)
He did not say “Dhuri‘an’’ (coats of mail), because of the
special concern for the benefit of these coats of mail, and

that is that they should cover (and protect) completely. So
this is similar.

And concerning His statement, Exalted is He: ¢floating
under Our Eyes}, we say about this, as we said about
His, the Exalted, statement:

For verily, you are under Our Eyes> (At-Tar 52:48)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 421

Shall I direct you to a household who will rear him for
you, and sincerely they will look after him in a good
manner?» (Al-Qasas 28:12)

They said: “Yes, we would like this.” She said: “Follow
me”. Then they followed her. He, Exalted is He, said:

(EG GS BT ‏ِلك أي‎ S335

4560 did We restore him to his mother, that she might be
delighted, and that she might not grieve> (Al-Qasas
28:13)

He never suckled from any woman, despite that he was of
the age of suckling! This was from the perfection of Allah's
power and the truthfulness of His promise, because Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, said to her:

38h 6 oe Go ‏ولا‎ sil ‏ف‎ ails ale eas UP

And We inspired the mother of Musa, (saying):
“Suckle him (Misa), but when you fear for him, then
cast him into the river and fear not, nor grieve. Verily!
We shall bring him back to you, and shall make him one
of (Our) Messengers’’> (Al-Qasas 28:7)

No one can imagine the degree of a mother’s affection for
her child. Now, it was said to her: “Put your baby in a box
and cast it into the river, he will soon come back to you”. If
not for faith that this woman had, she would not have done
this! To cast her son into the river! Even if he accidentally
fell off from his cradle into the river, it would disturb her,
so what about her throwing him in it? But because of her
trust in the Lord, the Mighty and Sublime, and His
promise, she cast him into the river.

Concerning His statement: ¢that you may be produced

420 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

* Then, He said: €in order that you may be produced under
My Eye> producing something is to fashion the thing
into a particular form, such as turning plates of iron
into an axe, and turing wood into a door, and
producing everything according to its form. There-
fore, production of a house means building a house,
the production of iron, means making utensils with
it, for example, and engines. And the production of a
human means raising him, physically and intellec-
tually. To raise him physically is to provide him with
food, and to raise him intellectually is to teach him
etiquette, manners and the like. This was the case
with Masa, peace be upon him, for he was raised
under Allah's Eye.

When the family of Fir'awn found him, Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, protected him from them killing him, despite
the fact that they were killing the male children among the
Children of Israel. Allah decreed that he, the one for whom
the others were being killed, would be reared in the
household of Fir'awn. The children were being killed
because of him, and he was nurtured in safety under their
care. So look at this marvelous decree!

Of Allah’s nurturing him, is that he was taken to the foster
mothers that would suckle him; but he was never suckled
by any one of them.

4And We had already forbidden (other) foster suckling
mothers for him) (Al-Qasas 28:12)

He never suckled from any other woman. His sister had

been charged by his mother. She went to them and said:

ع + ‎whe ote + MY‏ )و

كْلٍ يني ‎ANG‏ لح ‎chs‏ 21 كوت >4

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

meaning of Eye is only “watching.”

Fourthly: If we say it merely refers to “watching’’ while
Allah affirmed an Eye for Himself, that will necessarily
imply that He sees with that Eye; therefore, there is
evidence in the Ayah that it is an eye, in reality.

indeed Allah has heard the statement of her that
disputes with you concerning her husband, and com-
plains to Allah. And Allah hears the argument between
you both. Verily, Allah is Sami‘un, Basirun> (Al-
Mujadilah 58:1)

OO >

© The Attribute of Hearing and Seeing of Allah, the
Exalted

The Commentary

The author, may Allah have Mercy upon him, mentioned
seven Aydt regarding the affirmation of the two Attributes
of hearing and seeing.

The first Ayah: His statement:

Indeed Allah has heard the statement of her that
disputes with you concerning her husband, and com-
plains to Allah. And Allah hears the argument between

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wi

under Our Eye> in the singular form, does this contradict
what preceded about its plural form? The answer is that
it does not contradict it. The reason for that, is because
the singular in the genitive case conveys a general sense,
it therefore includes whatever is affirmed for Allah
concerning Eyes. Hence, there is no contradiction be-
tween the singular, and the plural, or the dual.

Therefore, it remains, how do we harmonize between the
plural and the dual? The response is that if the least
number considered to be plural is two, then there is no
contradiction, because we will say this plural refers to the
dual, so it will not contradict it. But if the least number
considered to be plural is three, then, three (as a number) is
not intended by this plural. What is intended by it is
exaltation, and to conform between the pronoun of the
plural, and the genitive.

The people of Takrif and Tu’til have interpreted the Eye to
mean “looking” without Eye; they said: ¢Under Our Eyes>
means “while We are watching you’ but there is no eye.
It is never possible to affirm the eye for Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, because the eye is a part of the
body. So if we affirm an eye for Allah, we have, by that,
affirmed parts and a body for Him; and this is impos-
sible. He only mentioned eye to stress that He is watch-
ing. Meaning “as if we are watching you, and for Us is
an eye.” And the case is not like that!

So we reply them, this saying is erroneous for various
reasons:

Firstly: It opposes the apparentness of the expression.

Secondly: It opposes the consensus of the Salaf (pious
predecessors).

Thirdly: There is no evidence for it; that is, that the

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.

and Sublime, is divided into two categories:

1. Hearing that deals with what is heard. Its meaning will,
therefore be; reaching the sounds.

2. Hearing that has the meaning of response. So its
meaning is that Allah answers whomever calls upon
Him, because the supplication is a voice that issues
from the supplicator, and Allah hears his supplication
Meaning — He responds to his supplication. The
menaing is not merely hearing, since there is no benefit
in this; rather the benefit is in Allah responding to the
supplication. ٠

The hearing which means reaching the sounds, is divided

into three categories:

The First: That which is intended to threaten.

The Second: That which is intended to show aid and
support.

The Third: That which is intended to explain the all-
encompassing knowledge of Allah, Glorious and Exalted is
He.

1. As for what is intended to threaten; an example of it is
in His statement, Exalted is He:
55 pe ESTO 1«
4€Or do they think that We hear not their secrets and
their private counsel?» (Az-Zukhruf 43:80)

And His statement:

indeed, Allah has heard the statement of those (Jews)
who sai ruly, Allah is poor and we are rich!’ (Al
‘Imran 3:181)

424 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

you both. Verily, Allah is Sami‘un, Basirun> (Al-
Mujadilah 58:1)

AL-Mujadilah refers to the woman who came to the Prophet
3 to complain against her husband, who had declared Az-
Zihar upon her.

Az-Zihar is when a man says to his wife: “You are to me,
like the back of my mother’ or words similar to that. Az-
Zihar, during the period of Jahiliyyah, was considered a
form of irrevocable divorce. So, she came to Messenger of
Allah #% to complain against her husband, and explained
how the man divorced her with that irrevocable divorce,
while she was the mother of his children. While she was
conferring with the Prophet 3, meaning - she was going
over the matter repeatedly with him, Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, gave her the verdict that is contained in the Ayah
mentioned

The proof in this Ayah is His statement;

Indeed Allah has heard the statement of her that
disputes with you>

In this is the affirmation of hearing for Allah, Glorified and
Exalted is He; and that He hears voices, regardless of how
far away, or hidden they are.

‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said: “Blessed is
He (or she said: “Praise be to Allah”) whose hearing
encompasses every voice. I was on the other side of the
house, and some of her discussion was hidden from
me.“!!l This is the meaning of her narration.

And the hearing, which is attributed to Allah, the Mighty

"I Its reference preceded

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

indeed, Allah has heard the statement of those (Jews)
who say: “Truly, Allah is poor and we are rich!’ (Al
‘Imriin 3:181)

Those who said: Truly, Allah is poor and we are rich> are
the Jews, may Allah destroy them! They described Allah
with imperfection, saying: “Truly, Allah is poor.”

The reason they said this, is that when He, Exalted is He,
revealed His statement:

Who is he that will lend to Allah a goodly loan so that
He may multiply it to him many times?> (Al-Bagarah

2:245)

They said to the Messenger 38: “O Muhammad, your Lord
is needy, He is asking for loans from us.”

Or do they think that We hear not their secrets and
their private counsel? Of course! And Our Messengers
are by them, to record.» (Az-Zukhruf 43:80) Verily! I
am with you both, hearing and secing> (Ta Ha 20:46)
€Does he not know that Allah does see?> (Al-‘Alag

426 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

2. As for that which is intended to express aid and
support, an example of it is His statement, Exalted is
He, to Masa and Haran:

€Verily! I am with you both, hearing and seeing» (Ta
Ha 20:46)

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, intended to support Masa
and Hartin by mention of Him being with them, hearing
and seeing. That is, He would hear what both of them say,
and what is said to both of them, and He saw them, and the
one to whom they were sent; what they were doing, and
what was being done to them

3. As for that which is intended to express the all-
encompassing knowledge of Allah; an example is in
is Ayah, and that is:

3 2 BS ai ‏سيمع‎
‎Indeed Allah has heard the statement of her that
disputes with you concerning her husband, and com
plains to Allah> (Al-Mujadilah 58:1)

And His saying : €Indeed, Allah has heard the statement
of those (Jews) who say: “Truly, Allah is poor and we
are rich! (Al ‘Imran 3:181)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 429

That is, they were with them, recording what they were
doing in secret, and what they said in their private counsel.
The meaning of “Messengers” here is the Angels, who are
responsible for recording the deeds of the sons of Adam.

In this Ayah is affirmation that Allah hears their secrets and
private counsels.

The Fourth Ayah:
42h (TES ‏«إتى‎

Verily! I'am with you both, hearing and seeingy (Ta
Ha 20:46)

The address was directed to Musa and Hart, peace be
upon them. Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, was telling
them: Verily! I am with you both, hearing and seeing.
Meaning, I hear what you both say, and I hear what is
said to you. And I see you, and 1 see the one to whom |
sent you. I see what you do, and I see what is done to
you. This is because they were treated badly, verbally or
physically; if it is verbal, Allah hears it; and if it is
physical, it is seen by Allah.

The Fifth Ayah: His statement:
46, 35
4Does he not know that Allah does see?» (Al-‘Alag 96:14)

The pronoun in ¢Knows he not> refers to the one who was
trying to harm the Prophet ‏ييه‎ according to His
statement:

428 Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The Third Ayah: His statement:

€Or do they think that We hear not their secrets and
their private counsel? Of course! And Our Messengers
are by them, to record» (Az-Zukhruf 43:80)

© As-Sirr (the secret): What someone confides in his
companion. An-Najwa (the private counsel): What he is
discussing privately and talking to his companion
about. It is louder than the secret. An-Nada’ (the call): is
when one raises his voice for his companion.

So these are three things: the secret, the private counsel and
the call.

For example, if someone sits beside you and you are talking
to him secretly such that none else hears you, this is a
secret. But if the discussion is among a group of people,
wherein all of them hear and participate in the discussion,
this is referred to as a private counsel. But as for a call, it
occurs between two people who are far from each other,
These people were secretly talking about disobedience; and
holding a council about that; so, Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, threatened them:

4Or do they think that We hear not their secrets and
their private counsel? Of course!»

% Of coursed (Bala): It is a word of reply, meaning: “Of
course We hear them” and adding to that;

4525 ‏لدي‎ >
And Our Messengers are by them, to record»

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

was doing, and and He also saw him.

Who sees you when you stand. And your movements
among those who fall prostrate. Verily! He, only He, is
As-Sami’, Al-'Alimy (Ash-Shiira 26:218-220) €And
say : “Do-deeds! Allah will see your deeds, and (so will)
His Messenger and the believers’ (At-Tawbah 9:105)

4Who sees you when you stand. And your movements
among those who fall prostrate. Verily! He, only He, is
As-Sami’, Al-'Alim} (Ash-Shiira 26:218-220)

Before this Ayah, there is:

And rely upon the All-Mighty, the Most Merciful»
(Ash-Shira 26:217)

* = The Ru'yah here is the seeing of vision. Because in His
statement:

Who sees you when you stand>

430 Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

¢Have you seen him who prevents, a slave when he
prays? Tell me, if he is upon the guidance? Or enjoins
Tagwa? Tell me if he belies, and turns away? Does he
not know that Allah does see?) (Al-’Alaq 96:9-14)

The scholars of Tafsir have said that the one being referred
to here is Aba Jahl.!"!

In this Ayah, there is the affirmation of the Attribute of
seeing (Ar-Ru’yah) for Allah, Exalted is He. The Ru'yah
attributed to Allah has two meanings:

The First Meaning: Knowledge.

The Second Meaning: Seeing whatever is visible. That is
reaching it with sight.

An example of the first meaning, is in His statement,

Be

Exalted is He, concerning the Day of Resurrection:

Verily! They see it afar off. But We see it (quite) near
(Al-Ma‘arij 70:6-7)

So the Ar-Ruyah here, is the Ar-Ru ‘yah of knowledge; since

the Day is not a physical thing that can be seen, and also at

the same time not far off. Therefore, the meaning of €But

We see it (quite) near> is We know it is near.

> As for His saying: <Does he not know that He does
see?}, it can be considered to mean knowledge, or
the act of the seeing of vision. If it is good to be
considered for both, and there is no contradiction
between them, then it is required that it be consid-
ered to apply to both fo them. So, it should be said
“Verily, Allah sees” that is, He knows what this man

"1 See Ad-Durr Al-Manthar (6:626)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes..

him, so We made him hearer, seer. (Al-Insdn 76:2)

So, Allah, Exalted is He, made the human being a hearer
and seer. And like that; 4 ‘Alim}; because man is also
knowledgeable, as Allah, Exalted is He, said:

toe ‏روه‎

€And they gave him glad tidings of an intelligent son,
having knowledge> (Adh-Dhariyat 51:28)

But absolute knowledge, that is; the perfect knowledge - it
is specifically Allah’s, Glorified and Exalted is He. There-
fore, the restriction with this usage a reality.

In this Ayah, there is a combination of the mention of
hearing and seeing,

The Seventh Ayah: His statement:

* ‏والنؤيئوة‎ As Kee ct >
€And say: “Do deeds! Allah will see your deeds, and

(so will) His Messenger and the believers» (At-Tawbah
9:105)

What comes before this Ayah is:

4Take Sadagah (alms) from their wealth in order to
purify them and sanctify them with it, and invoke Allah
for them. Verily! Your invocations are a source of
security for them, and Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower.
Know they not that Allah accepts repentance from His
slaves and takes the Sadagat (alms, charities) and that

432 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

— it is not correct that it would mean knowledge, since
Allah knows about him before and after he had stood. And
also because of His statement:

¢And your movements among those who fall prostrate};

it corroborates that the meaning here is the Ru’yah of
vision.

> The meaning of the Ayah is that Allah, Exalted is He,
sees him when he stands in Salah alone, and when he
motions among those who prostrate in the congrega-
tional Salah.

€Verily He, only He, is As-Sami’, Al-‘Alim}: meaning -
Allah is the One who sees you when you stand: ¢He,
is As-Sami’, Al-‘Alim>
In this Ayah, there is pronoun in apposition (He); part of its
benefit is to express restriction. So, is the restriction here
absolute or relative? That is, is it a restriction in such a way
that the quality found in the element being, restricted
cannot be found in any other, or is it just relative?

The answer: It is relative in a way and absolute in another
way, because the meaning of €As-Sami’> here, is the
possessor of perfect hearing, which reaches all that is
audible. This is specifically for Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.

The restriction with this usage is a reality. But for hearing
in general, it can be possessed by a human, as it is
contained in His statement:

<Verily, We have created man from Nutfah (drops of
mixed discharge of man and woman), in order to try

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 435

All of these are affirmed for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime

The Ru’yah which has the meaning of reaching what is
visible, is divided into three categories:

— A category which is intended to express aid and
support, such as His statement:
4255 I ‏سكا‎ i>
Verily! 1 am with you both, hearing and seeing.» (Ta
Ha 20:46)

—A category which is intended to show the all-encom-
passing knowledge of Allah, such as His statement:

ily, how excellent is the teaching which He (Allah)
gives you! Truly, Allah is Ever AllAll (An-Nisa’ 4:58)

— A category intended to express threat, such as His
statement:

Sry ‏بَايكُم‎

Say: “Present no excuses, we shall not believe you.
Allah has already informed us of the news concerning
you. Allah and His Messenger will see your deeds}
(At-Tawbah 9:94)

What behavioral benefits we derive from the Attributes of
hearing and seeing:

As for the Attribute of Ru’yah (seeing), by having faith in
that, we will benefit from fear and hope: Fear in the face of
disobedience; because Allah is looking at us. And hope at
the time of obedience; because Allah is looking at us. There
is no doubt that He shall reward us for this, hence, our

434 Commentary on Ab‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Allah Alone is the One Who forgives and accepts
repentance, Most Merciful?» (At-Tawbah 9:103-104)

» He says in the Ayah:

Messenger and the believe

Ibn Kathir and others said, “Mujahid said: ‘This is a
threat” - that is from Allah, Exalted is He, - “to those who
disobeyed His commands, that their deeds shall be exposed
to Him and to the Messenger and the believers, This will
happen definitely on the Day of Resurrection, Allah may
even expose that to people in this world.”

Here, the Ru‘yah includes both that of knowledge and of
vision.

So in this Ayah, there is an affirmation of the Ru’yah with
both meanings: The Ru‘yah of knowledge, and the Ru‘yah
of vision.

A Summary of what Preceded Regarding the Two
Attributes of Hearing and Seeing

> That the hearing is divided into two categories:

1. Hearing that means responding.

2, Hearing that means to reach the sounds.

And that reaching sounds is of three categories.
And like that, the Ru‘yah (seeing) is divided into two
categories:

Seeing with the meaning of knowledge.
Seeing with the meaning of reaching what is visible.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

And He is Severe in Al-Mihal> (Ar-Ra‘d 13:13)

That is, He is severe in punishment. And it is said that
Mihal means to plot (Al-Makar), meaning - strong in
plotting. ‏غ1‎ appears as if based on this interpretation, the
word is considered to be derived from Al-Hilah (ploy), and
that is to plan a trap for one’s opponent until he falls into it.
This meaning is apparently what the author, may Allah
have Mercy upon him, meant, since he mentioned it
alongside the Aydt concerning Al-Makar and Al-Kaid.

Al-Makar; the scholars said its interpretation, is to inflict
harm on the opponent by taking secret steps toward
achieving that. Meaning - that you take some secret steps in
order to inflict harms on your enemy while he does not
perceive; but to you, it was known and deliberate.

Al-Makar can be commendable in a situation, and con-
demnable in another; if it is against one who also hatches
up a plot, it is commendable because that will suggest that
you are stronger than he is. But in other cases, it is
condemnable, and it is called treachery. That is why Allah
never described Himself with it except by way of
expressing opposition and with restriction, as He, Exalted
is He, says:

4So they plotted a plot, and We planned a plan, while
they perceived not» (An-Naml 27:50)

4¢They were plotting and Allah too was planning» (Al-
Anfal 8:30)

But Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, is not described with
it in a general way, one does not say: “Allah is a plotter

436 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

determination for His obedience will grow stronger, while
our want to disobey Him will weaken

As for the Attribute of hearing, the matter regarding it is
obvious; since if a person believes in Allah’s hearing (him),
it necessitates that he believes in Allah’s perfect supervision
over whatever he says, with fear and hope. Having fear, he
would not utter anything evil which Allah, Exalted is He,
will hear from him; and with hope, he will utter the
statements which Allah, Exalted is He, is pleased with.

And His saying: €And He is Severe in Al-Mihdl> (Ar-
Ra‘d 13:13) €And they (disbelievers) plotted and Allah
planned too. And Allah is the Best of the planners (Al
Imran 3:54)

eee

© Affirmation of Attribute of Al-Makar, Al-Kaid and Al
Mihal for Allah, the Exalted

The Commentary

The author, may Allah have Mercy upon him, mentioned
three synonymous Attributes, in four Aydt. They are: Al-
Mihal, Al-Makar and Al-Kaid.

The first Ayah: Concerns Al-Mihal, and it is His saying:

ae

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

This was revealed concerning ‘Isa bin Maryam, may the
Salah and Salam be upon him. The Jews plotted to
assassinate him, but Allah, the Most High, was greater
than them in planning. So Allah raised him to Himself, and
cast his resemblance upon one of them — the one who had
the greater share in the plan to assassinate him, while he
wanted to kill him. When the one who wanted to kill him
entered upon him, then ‘Isa was raised (to Allah). Then, the
people entered and said: “You are ‘Isa!’ He said; “I am not
‘Isa’. They said; “You are the one.” This happened because
Allah had cast ‘Isa’s resemblance upon him. So, this man,
who wanted to kill ‘Isa bin Maryam, he himself was killed.
So, his plot was foiled.

And they (disbelievers) plotted and Allah planned too.
And Alldh is the Best of the planners} (Al ‘Imran 3:54)

42555 ‏رقم لا‎ fees ac, Neos Ud 1

0 te

{50 they plotted a plot, and We planned a plan, while
they perceived not» (An-Naml 27:50) €Verily, they are
but plotting a plot. And I (too) am planning a plan>
(At-Tarig 86:15-16)

The Third Ayah:

438 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

(Makir),” not by way of giving information, nor by the way
of calling Him that. It should not also be said: “Allah is a
Ka’id (secret plotter)” not by way of giving information, nor
by way of calling Him such. For this meaning can
sometimes be commendable and sometimes condemnable,
So, it is not possible that we describe Allah with it in an
unrestricted way.

But, as for His statement, Exalted is He:
4And Allah is the Best of the planners (Al ‘Imran 3:54)

This is a form of perfection. That is why He did not say: “I
plot against the plotters”; He rather said: “And Allah is the
Best of those who plot’. Therefore, His plot will not be
except goodness. That is why it is correct that we describe
Him with that, and say: “He is the Best of those who ‏تامام‎
‎or that we describe Him with the Attribute of plotting by
expressing His opposition. That is, His opposition against
whoever plots against Him. So, we say: “Allah, Exalted is
He, is a plotter against those who plot” based on His
statement, Exalted is He:

They were plotting, and Allah too was planning.» (Al-
Anfal 8:30)

The second Ayah: Concerns the Attribute of Al-Makar
and that is His statement:

And they (disbelievers) plotted and Allah planned too.
And Allah is the Best of the planners (Al ‘Imran 3:54)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 441

<Verily, they are but plotting a plot. And I (too) am
planning a plan> (At-Tariq 86:15-16)

% Verily, they} that is the disbelievers of Makkah €are
plotting» against the Messenger ‏مه رق‎ plotp, there
was nothing like it (their plot) to drive people away
from him and his call, but Allah, Exalted is He, also
plotted a plan, much greater, more calculative, and
more accurate.

And I (too) am planning» meaning; “a plot greater
than their plot’. Allah mentioned some of their plots,
and secret plans, in Siirat Al-Anfal. He says:

(5%
And (remember) when the disbelievers plotted against

you to hold you, or to kill you, or to expel you (Al
Anfiil 8:30)

Three opinions:"!

1. To hold you} - meaning, to imprison you
2. To kill you} - meaning, to exterminate you.
3. 4To expel you} - meaning, to banish you:

The opinion of killing him was the best to them, with the
advice of Iblis, because Iblis came to them in the form of an
old man from Najd. He said to them: “Choose ten young
men from ten clans of the Quraish, and give each of them a
sword. Then, they should all head toward Muhammad and
kill him all at once. In this way, his blood would be placed
‘on all the clans, then the children of Hashim will not be
able to kill any of these young men. Hence, they will resort
to collecting the blood-money, and by that you will be free

T) See Ad-Durr Al-Manthir (3:324).

440 Commentary on Al-’Agidah AL-Wasitiyyah

450 they plotted a plot, and We planned a plan, while
they perceived not» (An-Naml 27:50)

This was concerning the people of Salih. In the city where
he was inviting people to Allah, there were nine groups:

€They said: “Swear one to another by Allah that we

shall make a secret night attack on him and his
household"> (An-Naml 27:49)

“And afterwards we will surely say to his near relatives :
‘We witnessed not the destruction of his household, and
verily! We are telling the truth’ (An-Naml 27:49)

Meaning, that they would kill him during the night, but
they did not witness it, But they plotted and Allah also
plotted. It was said that when they went out to kill him,
they headed to a cave, awaiting the night therein. Then, the
cave closed up upon them, and they perished in it, while no
harm touched Salih and his household. Allah says:

450 they plotied a plot, and We planned a plan (An-
Nami 27:50)

* Makran in both places is an indefinite, used to express
greatness, meaning - they plotted a great plot, while
We plotted a greater plot.

The Fourth Ayah: Concerns Al-Kaid, and that is His

statement:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

4S 155 0 OF aS Had

Verily, they are but plotting a plot. And I (too) am
planning a plan> (At-Tarig 86:15-16)

The indefinite form is used here to express greatness. And
the plot of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is stronger than
their plot.

In that manner Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, plans for
whomever supports His religion, for He shall plan for him,
and aid him. Allah, Exalted is He, said:

Thus did We ene for Yisufy (Yusuf 12:76)
Meaning: We did that by which his purpose was achieved
while no one perceived it. This is from Allah’s grace upon a
man; to save him from the evil of his enemy by way of
plotting against this enemy who desired to inflict harm
upon him.

If you say: “What is the definition of Al-Makar, Al-Kaid, and
Al-Mihal?”

The Response: Their definition according to the scholars, is
the act of hatching secret plans in order to attack the
opponent; meaning, that you trap your opponent via
hidden plans while he knows not. It is commendable if it is
done under the right circumstances, and it is an attribute of
imperfection that is condemnable when it is done under
other than the right circumstances.

It was has been mentioned, that when ‘Ali bin Abi Talib,
may Allah be pleased with him, wanted to engage “Amr
bin Wadd in a duel - the benefit of a duel is that when one
of the two defeats the other, the hearts of his enemies will
break up - when ‘Amr appeared, ‘Ali shouted: “I did not

442 Commentary on Al“Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

from him.” They said: “This is a marvelous opinion. They
all agreed upon ‏“مطل‎

But they were plotting a plot, while Allah, Exalted is He,
was also plotting what was better than that.

He, Exalted is He, said:

ined 1 iy ‏لله‎ Ress o>

€They were plotting and Allah too was planning, and
Allah is the Best of the planners» (Al-Anfal 8:30)

They never achieved what they desired, the Messenger ‏ع‎
‎rather left his house, scattering dust on the heads of these
ten, while reciting:

And We have put a barrier before them, and a barrier
behind them, and We have covered them up, so that

they cannot see> (Ya Sin 36:9)

They were anticipating the Messenger 2% to go out; but he
left, while they perceived not.) Therefore, the plot became
stronger than theirs, because Allah rescued His Messenger
from them and he emigrated

He said here:

See Sirah Ibn Hisham (1:427), Ad-Durr Al-Manthar (3:324)
and As-Suyati referenced it to Ibn Ishaq, Ibn Jarir, Ibn Abi
Hatim, Aba Nu‘aim and Al-Baihaqi in Ad-Dala’i! from Ibn
‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him.

In Mursal form with an authentic chain from Muhammad
bin Ka’b Al-Qurazi. See As-Sirat An-Nabawiyyah As-Sahihah
by Dr. Akram Diya’ Al/Umari (1:207) and see At-Tabagat
of Ibn Sa‘d (1:28).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.

€And when they meet those who believe, they say: “We
believe,” but when they are alone with their Shayatin,
they say: “Truly, we are with you ; verily, we were but
mocking"> (Al-Bagarah 2:14)

Then, Allah said

Ki, ‏ينتير‎ SID
Allah mocks at them (Al-Bagarah 2:15)
The People of the Surnah and the Jamé‘ah affirm these
meanings for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, as reality. But
the people of Tahrif say it is never possible to describe Allah
with them; that the mention of Allah's plot and their plot, is
justmere literal resemblance, the meanings different, such as:

Cie ios eee HN SSD
4Allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased with
Him (AI-Ma’idah 5:119)

We are saying to them: “This is contrary to the apparent-
ness of the text, and it is contrary to the consensus of the
Salaf (pious predecessors).””

Earlier, we stated, that if someone were to say: “Bring us a
statement from Abt Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman or ‘Ali, saying:
‘The meaning of Al-Makar, Al-Kaid, mocking, and deceiv-
ing, is a reality.”

We say to them: “Yes, they recited the Qur'an, and
believed in it. The fact that they did not alter this meaning
that quickly comes to mind, to another one, shows that
they acknowledged it, and that this is a consensus; that is
why it suffices us to say that there is a consensus on it.

444 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

come out to fight two people”. Then ‘Amr turned round.
When he had turned around, ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased
with him, hit him on his knee until he brought down his
head! "J

This was a trick, but it is permissible and commendable
because it was in the proper circumstances. This man did
not come out to honor ‘Ali bin Abi Talib nor to congratulate
him, but he came out in order to kill him, and ‘Ali hatched
a plot against him.

Al-Makar, Al-Kaid, and Al-Mihal, are among Allah's
attributes of doing, which He is not described with in an
unrestricted way, for they are sometimes commendable
and sometimes condemnable,

He is to be described with them in the situation when it will
be commendable, and not when they are not condemnable.
It should be said: “Allah is the Best of those who plot, He is
the Best of those who plan;” or it should be said: “Allah is a
Plotter against the plotters, He Deceives the one who tries
to deceive Him.”

Mockery also belongs to this category. It is not correct to
describe Allah as mocking, in an unrestricted way, because
mockery is a form of jest, and it should be negated from
Allah. Allah, Exalted is He, says:

And We created not the heavens and the earth, and all
that is between them, for mere play» (Ad-Dukhan 44:38)

But, in opposition to one who mocks at Him, it will be
perfection; as He, Exalted is He, says:

BI See Silsilat Al-Ahddith Ad- 775 - the new edition
Maktabat Al-Ma‘arif) by Shaikh Al-Albani

Commentary On The Introductory Notes: 447

So he avoids this because he knows that this is clearly Riba.
But suppose he sells him some goods for twelve thousand
Dirhams, on deferred payment, over a year, and a
document for that is written between them. Then, later
the seller goes to the buyer and says: “sell it back to me for
ten thousand in cash.” Then he (the buyer) says: “I sell it to
you” and they write a document of business transaction
between them

Apparently, this business transaction is valid; but we say
“This is a fraud’; because this man (the first seller) knows
that it is not allowed for him to give him ten thousand in
exchange for twelve thousand. So he said: “I will sell this
merchandise to him for twelve thousand, and buy it back
from him for ten thousand in cash.”

Over time, one can continue in this kind of transaction,
since to people it is a kind of transaction that does not have
any problem, but before Allah, it is a form of deception
involving what He has made unlawful. Allah, Exalted is
He, is watching this wrong doer, so that when He seizes
him, he will not release him. Meaning, He will leave him
while his wealth is increasing and progressing with this
Riba; but when He seizes him, He will not release him.
After that, all of these things will become a loss for him,
and he will end up being bankrupt. One of the statements
common upon the tongue of the people is: “Whoever
engages in fraudulent dealings, he ends up being a
pauper.”

An example in the matter of marriage; is a case of a woman
that has been divorced three times, then she is not
permissible for the husband again until she has married
and divorced another man. In order to facilitate things for
the first husband, a friend of his is then contracted to marry
this woman with the condition (between the two men) that

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

446
Nothing that opposes the apparentness of the statement
has ever been reported from anyone of them, nor that he
interpreted pleasure to mean reward, or Al-Kaid to mean
punishment...” and the like.

Perhaps someone raises confusion among us, saying: “You
are saying that this is the consensus of the Salaf (pious
predecessors)? Where is their consensus (stated or re-
corded)?” We say: “The absence of reports from them that
are contrary to the apparentness of it, is an evidence of the
consensus.”

What we Derive of Behavioral Benefits by the
Affirmation of the Attributes of Al-Makar, Al-Kaid, and
ALMihal

Al-Makar. A person will derive the behavioral benefit of
remembering that Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, is
always watching Him, and he will not plan to do what is
unlawful, and how many plot to do what is unlawful! So
these people who plot to do the unlawful, when they know
that Allah, the Exalted is better at plotting then they are,
and quicker in plotting than them, that will make them
stop such plots.

Sometimes, someone might be doing something, which to
people, appears permissible but to Allah, it is not
permissible. In this situation, he will fear Allah, and be
cautious (of disobeying Him).

There are many examples of stich matters, in business
transactions, and marriage, and other than that.

An example of that in business; suppose a man comes to
another and says: “Lend me ten thousand Dirhams’ and
the other says: “I will not lend it to you unless I collect
twelve thousand in return.” This is Riba and it is unlawful.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 449

four Aydt concerning the Attributes of Pardon, Power,
Forgiveness, Mercy and Honor (Al-‘Izzah).

The first Ayah: Is concerning the Attributes of Al-‘Afu
(pardon) and Al-Qudrah ieee His statement:

Whether you disclose a good deed, or conceal it, or
pardon an evil; verily, Allah is ‘Afuwwan Qadir> (An-
Nisa’ 4:149)

Meaning: If you do a good deed and disclose it to people
or conceal it> from the people; indeed, Allah, Exalted is
He, knows of it; nothing can be hidden from Him.

And in another Ayah:

big
4Whether you reveal anything or conceal it, ay,

Allah is ‘Aliman (Knower) of everything» (Al-Ahzab
33:54)

This is more comprehensive. It includes the good and bad,
and what is not good or bad. Each Ayah has its importance
and area of suitability for the one who ponders it.

> Concerning His statement: 407 pardon an evil>
Pardon (Al-’Afu) is to overlook giving punishment. If
somebody does an evil to you, and you pardon him,
indeed Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, knows of
that. But pardoning, to be praiseworthy for the
pardoner, has the condition that it be combined with
reconciliation, because of His statement, Exalted is
He:

448 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

once the second man has had sexual intercourse with her,
he will divorce her. Then, he does that. So he marries her
properly in the presence of witnesses, and he also gave her
a Mahr, and consummated the marriage, and then divorced
her. When he divorced her, she started the waiting period,
after which, the first husband married her. Apparently, it is
lawful for her to marry the first husband, but in reality she
is not lawful for him, because this is a form of deception

Whenever we know that Allah, the Most High, is quicker in
plotting, and that Allah is the Best of those who plot, that
will make us stay far away from attempting to be deceitful
with what Allah has made unlawful.

And His saying: Whether you disclose a good deed, or
conceal it, or pardon an evil; verily, Allah is ‘Afuwwan
Qadir> (An-Nisa’ 4:149) Let them pardon and forgive.
Do you not love that Allah should forgive you? And
Allah is Ghafitrun Rahim» (An-Nitr 24:22)

© The Attributes of Al-’Afu (Pardon), Al-Maghfirah (For-
giveness), Ar-Rahimah (Mercy), Al-'Izzah (Honor, Might)
and Al-Qudrah (Power)

The Commentary

The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, mentioned

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 451

Or pardon an evil; verily, Allah is ‘Afuwwan, Qadir>
(An-Nisa’ 4:149)

Meaning when you pardon an evil, Allah will pardon you.
We derive this ruling from the subordinate clause: €Verily,
Allah is ‘Afuwwan, Qadir> - meaning that, He will pardon
you despite the fact that He can take vengeance upon
you. And He, Exalted is He, combined here between
pardon and power, because the perfection of pardon lies
in the fact that it is out of power. As for the pardon that
accrues out pf weakness, the one who does this will not
be commended, because he is incapable of taking
revenge. As for the pardon that is not combined with
power, it can be commended, but it is not perfect
pardon. Rather, perfect pardon is that which is done out
of power.

That is why Allah, Exalted is He, combined between these
two names: Al-‘Afuw and Al-Qadir.

So Al-‘Afuaw is the One Who overlooks the evil deeds of His
servants. What is common is that Al-‘Afuw (pardon) is for
forsaking an obligation, while Al-Maghfirah (forgiveness) is
for commission of a prohibited act.

Al-Qadir: The Possessor of power. It is an attribute with
which a doer will be able to perform an action, without any
incapability.

These two Names comprise two Attributes, and they are
Al-‘Afuw and Al-Qudrah.

The second Ayah: Concerning Al-Maghfirah (forgiveness)
and Ar-Raltmah (mercy). His statement:

‎vee 2h {224‏ يفم ى م

‏«وَلِعَفُاْ ولْصَِنَحوا ألا ‎Se‏ أن ‎ally al‏ غفرر ‎ap‏

‎4Let them pardon and forgive. Do you not love that

‎Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎<4 1 PR a ce ‏عَم‎

‎€But whoever forgives and makes reconciliation, his
reward is due from Allah> (Ash-Shara 42:40)

‎The reason for that is that pardon may be a cause of
additional oppression and hostility, or it may be a cause to
end that, without any increase nor decrease in transgres-
sion.

‎1. When it is a cause that increases transgression, then
pardon in such case is blameworthy; it can even be
prohibited, Such as when we pardon a criminal, and
we know - or we have a strong suspicion - that he will
go and commit greater crime. In this case, the one
pardoning will not be commended for doing that, he
would rather be condemned for it.

‎Pardon can lead to the end of hostility. That is, if the
pardoned person becomes ashamed, and says: ‘This
person that pardoned me, it is not possible that I
transgress against him another time, nor anyone else.”
So he is ashamed to be the transgressor. The one that
pardoned will be considered among those worthy to
pardon, so pardoning here is commendable and
recommended. It may even be compulsory.

‎Then, pardon may not have any effect, neither increase
nor decrease; then this is what is best, based on His
statement, Exalted is He:

‎EN GES ‏ود‎

‎€And to pardon is nearer to At-Taqwa> (Al-Bagarah
2:237)

‎>» Here, He, Exalted is He, says:

‎45S fe ‏كن‎ Al EG 5H ‏عن‎

Commentary On The Introductory Notes:

So, Allah, Exalted is He, says:

‎UG) pl Gp‏ الْمَضلٍ متك ‎Ra‏ أن
‎¢And let not those among you who are blessed with‏
‎graces and wealth swear not to give (any sort of help) to‏
‎their kinsmen, Al-Masdkin (the poor), and those who‏
‎left their homes for Allah's Cause> (An-Nuir 24:22)‏

‎All these attributes were affirmed in the case of Mistah: He
was a relative to Abu Bakr, a poor person, and a Muhayir
(one who emigrated):

‎Let them pardon and let them forgive. Do you not love

‎that Allah should forgive you? And Allah is Ghafiirun
Rahim> (An-Nuir 24:22)

‎Aba Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, said (in reply to

‎the statement of Allah); “O yes! By Allah, we love that

‎Allah forgives us.” Then, he continued providing for him.

‎This is why the Ayah was revealed.

‎> Concerning His statement: €Let them pardon} - it
means, “Let them overlook the sin committed against
them.”
<Walyasfaha (and let them forgive)} meaning that
they should turn away from this matter and not talk
about it (afterward). And it is taken from Safhah of
the neck, and that is its side, because when a person
turns away, what appears of him is the side of his
neck,

‎And the difference between Al-‘Afu and As-Safh is that a

‎person might pardon but not forgive; afterward, he would

‎452 Commentary on Al-’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎Allah should forgive you? And Allah is Ghafiirun
Rahim> (An-Nar 24:22)

‎This Ayah was revealed concerning Aba Bakr, may Allah
be pleased with him, and that was because Mistah bin
Uthathah, may Allah be pleased with him, who was the
son of Abu Bakr’s maternal aunt (his second cousin), and
he was among those that were spreading the slander.

‎The story of the slander," is that some people among the
hypocrites attacked the honor of ‘Aishah, may Allah be
pleased with her. By Allah, their focus was not to attack the
personality of ‘Aishah primarily, but their focus was to
attack and tarnish the honor of the Messenger of Allah ‏.كله‎
‎They intended to cause confusion concerning his bed, and
cast him into ignominy, may Allah forbid! But, and to Allah
is the praise, Allah exposed their evil intentions and plans,
and disgraced them! He said:

‎eke SG ie LS SG

‎4And as for him among them who had the greater share
therein, his will be a great torment» (An-Nir 24:11)

‎They attacked her personality, and the majority of those
who were involved in this were the hypocrites, while a
group of the righteous Companions were also involved.
Among them was Mistah bin Uthathah. This act is one of
the greatest means of severing the ties of kinship - that one
should disparage his relation, particularly as this was
concerning the Mother of the Believers, the wife of the
Messenger of Allah ‏كك‎ Reacting on this, Aba Bakr vowed
to stop providing for him.

‎"The story of Al-/fk (the slander) is reported by Al-Bukhari
(4750), (4757) and Muslim (2770) from ‘Aishah, may Allah
be pleased with her.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.

Paradise: “You are My mercy, 1 show My mercy upon
whom I will with you"!

And His saying: €But Al-‘Izzah belongs to Allah, His
Messenger, and to the believers} (Al-Mundfiqun 63:8)

And His saying, that Iblis said: €By Your Might, then
I will surely mislead them all> (Sad 38:82)

The third Ayah: Regarding Al-‘Izzah, and it is His saying:

But Al-‘Izzah belongs to Allah, His Messenger, and to
the believers> (Al-Munafiqun 63:8)

This Ayah was revealed in response to the statement of the
hypocrites:

If we return to Al-Madinah, indeed the more honorable
(AI-A‘zz) will expel the meaner (Al-Munafiqun 63:8)

They thought that they were the most honorable, and the
Messenger of Allah and the believers were the humiliated
‘ones. So Allah, Exalted is He, explained that there was no

{Reported by Al-Bukhari (4950) and Muslim (2846) from
Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

454 Commentary on Al-’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah
still be mentioning this transgression and wrong (against
him); but he would not retaliate; so, forgiveness (As-Safh) is
stronger than pardon

>» Concerning His statement: €Do you not love that Allah
should forgive you? >: 4100 you not > ; is a proposition,
and its response is: “Indeed, we do love that.” So, if
we love that Allah forgive us, then lets undertake the
means to the forgiveness.

Then He said: €And Allah is Ghafiirun Rahim>:
4Ghafir> this is either considered the active subject
of a verbal clause meant to emphasize, or an
adjective. If it is an adjective, it refers to the attribute
that is ever present and affirmed. This is what an
adjective (in the Arabic grammar) indicates. If it is
considered an active subject, it indicates that the
forgiveness often occurs from Allah.

After this, we say it combines the two. It is an adjective,
because the act of forgiveness is an eternal Attribute of
Allah, Exalted is He. It is also an action that He often does,
how often is the forgiveness of Allah, Exalted is He! How
great is it!

* Concerning His statement: ¢Rahim>, this is also an
active subject used to express emphasis. And root
noun for doer of Raham is Rahim, but it changes to
Rahim due to the great amount of Allah’s Mercy, and
the great amount of those that He, the Mighty and
Sublime, has Mercy with.

Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, combined between
these two Names, because they express similar meanings.
In Al-Maghfirah (forgiveness), woes and the consequence of
sins vanish, while with Ar-Rahmah (mercy) that which is
sought is achievement; as Allah, the Exalted, said to

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

its example, is His statement, Exalted is He:

€And he says: “Hand it over to me, and he
overpowered me in speech’ (Sad 38:23)

Meaning he overcame me in speech. So, Allah, Exalted is
He, is Mighty, there is nothing that can overcome Him;
rather, He overwhelms everything.

3. The ‘Izzah of protection means that it is impossible that
any defect or imperfection reaches Allah, Exalted is He

These are the meanings of ‘Izzah which Allah, Exalted is
He, affirmed for Himself. It indicates the perfection of His
dominance and authority, and the perfection of His
Attributes, and to that He is absolutely free of any
imperfection.

It indicates His perfect dominance and His authority in
might and force.

It indicates completion and perfection of His Attributes,
and that there is nothing like Him in might and power.

It indicates that He is completely free of any imperfection

or defect the ‘Izzah of protection.

© Concerning His statement: ¢and to His Messenger and
to the believers» that there is ‘Izzah for the Messenger
#%, and for the believers, and dominance.
However, it is compulsory that we know that the honor
Allah affirms for His Messenger and the believers is not
the same type of honor that belongs to Allah, because
the honor that belongs to the Messenger 3 and the
believers can be overcome by weakness, based on His
statement:

456 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

honor for them, not to talk of being the most honorable,
and that the honor belongs to Allah, His Messenger and the
believers. The meaning of the statement of the hypocrites,
was that the Messenger # and the believers were the ones
that would expel the hypocrites, because they (the
Messenger and the believers) are the people of honor,
while the hypocrites were the people of ignominy. That is
why they always thought that every cry was against them
That was because of their ignominy and panic. Whenever
they met those who believed, they would say: “We
believe’ out of fear and cowardice, but when they were
alone with their devils, they would say: “We are with you,
we were only mocking!” This is the utmost humiliation!

As for the believers, they are honored by their religion.
Regarding their arguing with the People of the Book, Allah
said:

hae 4 ee

Then, if they turn away, say: “Bear witness that we
are Muslims.’ (Al ‘Imran 3:64)

They openly profess it, they do not fear the criticism of the
one who criti

In this noble Ayah is the affirmation of Al-‘Izzah for Allah,
Glorified and Exalted is He

The people of knowledge mentioned that Al-‘Izzah (honor)
can be categorized into three: The ‘Izzah of power, the ‘Izzah
of force, and the ‘Izzah of protection.

1. As for the ‘Izzah of power, its meaning is that Allah,
Exalted is He, is the possessor of mighty power,
meaning that he has no peer.

2. The ‘Izzah of force is the ‘Izzah of dominance; that is -
He dominates everything; subjugating everything. Of

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 459

might with which you dominate others, I will surely
mislead these, and take control of them - that is the children
of Adam - until they leave the guided path for the wrong
path.” The sincere slaves of Allah are exempt from this,
because Iblis will not be able to mislead them as He,
Exalted is He, says:

Certainly, you shall have no authority over My
slaves .> (Al-Hijr 15:42)

So these two Aydt include the affirmation of Al-TIzzah
(Honor, Might) for Allah,

And in the second Ayah, it is affirmed that the Shaitan
acknowledges the Attributes of Allah.

Why should we find among the Children of Adam those
who deny the Attributes of Allah? Is the Shaitan then more
knowledgeable regarding Allah and much wiser than these
deniers?

The Behavioral Benefits We Derive

— Concerning Al-’Afu (pardon) and As-Safh (forgiveness),
when we know that Allah pardons, and that He is All-
Powerful, that will make us always seek His pardon, and
hope for His pardon regarding whatever we neglect among
the obligations.

— As for Al-‘Izzah, we say, that when we know that Allah
is All-Mighty (‘Aziz), it is not possible that we do anything
by which we would be at war with Allah. For example, a
person that is involved in Ribd, his action is that which
Allah is at war with:

And if you do not do it, then take a notice of war from

Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

45) ab pan tl ‏ولقد تصركم‎

And Allah has already made you victorious at Badr,
when you were a weak little force.» (Al ‘Imran 3:123)

It can be overcome sometimes for a wisdom which Allah,
Exalted is He, wills. In the battle of Uhud, absolute honor
did not result for them, because they were eventually
overcome for great wisdoms; the same thing at Hunain,
they fled, so that none remained with the Prophet 2% out of
the twelve thousand soldiers, except one hundred men, or
close to that number"! This caused honor to fade; but it is
temporary.

As for the ‘Izzah of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, it can
never fade out. Based on this, we know that the honor that

Allah affirms for His Messenger and the believers is not like
the honor which He affirms of Himself.

This can also be derived from the general principle, and
that is: That when two things bear the same name, that
does not imply that those two things are completely
identical; and that two things share the same attribute, does
not imply that those two things are completely similar.

The fourth Ayah: Also concerning Al-‘Izzah, and it is His
saying, that Iblis said:

4By Your Might, then I will surely mislead them ally
(Said 38:82)

Iblis chose to swear by Allah’s ‘Izzah, instead of other than
that of Attributes, because the situation was one trying to
overcome another. As if what he was saying is: “By your

(See Fath Al-Bart (8:29).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes
And His saying: Blessed be the Name of your Lord
(Allah), Dhil-Jalali wal-lkram (the Owner of Majesty

@ Affirmation of the Name for Allah

The Commentary

The author, a, mentioned an Ayah affirming the Name for
Allah, Exalted is He, and there are many other Aydt
concerning the exaltation of Allah, Exalted is He, and
negation of a like from Him.

The Ayah concerning the affirmation of the Name

<Blessed be the Name of your Lord (Allah), Dhil-

wal-lkrim (the Owner of Majesty and Honor) (Ar-
Rahméan 55:78)

% <Tabarak (Blessed)}: The scholars said its meaning is:
He is exalted, and proud, when it is used to describe
Allah, such as His statement:

jaf Sap

450 blessed be Allah, the Best of creators» (Al-
Mu’mintin 23:14)

If it is used for describing the Name of Allah, its meaning is
that there is abundant blessings with the Name of Allah;
that is, when the Name of Allah accompanies something,
there will be abundant blessings in such a thing.

460 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Allah and His Messenger» (Al-Bagarah 2:279)

When we know that Allah possesses might that can never
be overcome, then we will not advance toward what Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, is at war with. Armed robbery is
also a form of war:

SS GANT ‏وَرَسُولمٌ وَيسْمَوْنَ في‎ ai
PARE

4The recompense of those who wage war against Allah
and His Messenger and do mischief in the land is only
that they shall be killed or crucified or their hands and
their feet be cut off on the opposite sides, or be exiled
from the land (Al-Ma’idah 5:33)

If we know that armed robbery is a form of waging war
against Allah, and that the ‘Izzah belongs to Allah, it will
prevent us from this act, for Allah, only He, is the All-
Conquering.

We can say that there is an advantage in the behavioral
aspect of this as well, and that is that a believer should
exhibit honor in matters concerning his religion, in such a
way that he does not humble himself before anybody,
whoever such a person is, except before the believers.
Therefore, he should be harsh against the unbelievers and
humble before the believers.

wae HE

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 463

that its meaning is; abundant blessing are with Allah’s
Name; that is, His Name is the cause of abundant blessing
when it accompanies something.

And, concerning His statement:

€Dhil-Jalali wal-Ikram (the Owner of Majesty and
Honor)» (Ar-Rahman 55:78)

> ¢Dhi> meaning owner, and it is a description of the
Lord, not the Name. If it were a description of the
Name, it would be: Dh.

¢ALJalal>: meaning magnificence.
¢wal-Ikram> meaning “Honor”. It is proper, because

honor can be from Allah to the one who obeys Him,
and from the one who obeys Him, to Him.

So, €Al-Jalal> is His magnificence, Himself, and ¢zwal-
Ikram is His magnificence in the hearts of the believers,
so they honor Him, and He honors them

ooo

462 8S ‏لِيَكَيدةٌ هل‎ ES tet

€So worship Him, and be constant and patient in His
worship, Do you know of any who is similar to Him?>
(Maryam 19:65)

$oo-
© The Ayat of the Attributes of Negation (Al-Manfiyyah)

Concerning the Exaltation of Allah and the Negation of
any Equal from Him:

462 Commentary on Al ‘Aqidah Al Wasitiyyah

That is why it is related in the Hadith; “Every noble matter
that is not begun with Bismillah, is severed (from prosper-
ity).”"") Meaning - nullifying the blessing.

Even saying the Bismillah makes permissible what is
prohibited without it. If someone says Bismillah at the time
of slaughtering, an animal becomes permissible to eat, if it
is not said, that animal becomes prohibited and dead flesh.
There is a difference between what is permissible, good and
pure, and the dead animal, the impure animal and the
offensive animal.

If someone says Bismillah at the time of purifying himself
from minor impurity (such as performing Wudi’) it is valid;
if he does not say Bismillah, it is not valid, according to one
of the two opinions

If someone says Bismillah at the time of eating, the Shaitan
would not eat with him; if he does not say it, he (the
Shaitan) eats with him.

If someone says Bismillah at the time of having intercourse,
and says: “O Allah, keep the Shaitin away from us, and
from what you provide for us,” then if a child is decreed
for them, the Shaitan will never be able to harm him

Hence, we say: Tabarak here does not convey the meaning
of “He is exalted” or “He is proud”, rather, it is compulsory

("This Hadith is reported by different wordings and taking
the versions together indicates that it is Hasan or Sahih Li-
Ghairihi and more than one of the Imams have said it is
Sahih, while others consider it to have deficiencies. See
Musnad Al-Imim Ahmad edited by Ahmad Shakir (8697)
and Sahih Ibn Hibban bi Tartib Ibn Balban edited by Shu’aib
Al-Arna’dt (1:173) and Irwa’ Al-Ghalil (1 and 2).

Reported by Al-Bukhari (3271) and Muslim (1434) from
Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 465

So, His statement: 4So worship Him, that is — subjugate
yourself to Him, with love and reverence. And worship:
what is intended by it, is that with which worship is
performed, and the act of worship, which is the action of
the slave, as had preceded in the introductory notes.

* Concerning His statement: ¢And be constant and
patient}: Istabir; its root in the language is Istabir, so
“ was replaced by the Ti’ due to inflection.
‏مد‎ means confinement of the soul, and the
word Isfabir is more emphatic and expressive than
Isbar, for it expresses endurance and tolerance. There-
fore, its meaning is “be patient even if that is harsh
upon you; and persevere in the way that one will
against an opponent while fighting.”
Concerning His statement: €Do you know of any who is
similar to Him?}: The interrogative here is intended to
negate. If the interrogative is used to convey nega-
tion, it also carries the meaning of a challenge.
Meaning, if you are truthful, then inform me: “Do
you know of any who is similar to Him?” That i:
do you know of any who is like Him, who deserves
what He deserves?

The answer is no. So when that is the case, then it is
compulsory that you worship Him alone.

Among the Attributes in it; He said: 4100 you know of any
who is similar to Him? and this is one of the Attributes
of negation.

What does it consist of in terms of the Attributes of
perfection, for we have mentioned in what preceded, that
the Attributes of negation must necessarily imply an
affirmation. What is the affirmation which it includes here?
The answer is: Absolute perfection. The meaning will

464 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah
The Commentary

The first Ayah: His statement

So worship Him, and be constant and patient in His
worship. Do you know of any who is similar to Him?>
(Maryam 19:65)

The author s&s, began with the Attributes of negation. It has
earlier been discussed that the Attributes of Allah, Exalted
is He, are affirmative and negative; that is negation because
perfection will not be ascertained except with affirmation
and negation: Affirmation of the perfect attributes and
negation of those that are imperfect.
% Concerning His statement: 450 worship Him, and be
constant and patient in His worship», this follows what
preceded; His statement:

Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all that is
between them> (Maryam 19:65)

So He, Glorious and Exalted is He, mentioned His
Rubiibiyyah (Lordship):

qo ly ‏و‎
‎4Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all that is
between them.» (Maryam 19:65)

And then, based upon that, He explained that it is
obligatory to worship Him; since all who acknowledge
the Lordship, it necessitates that they affirm the Al-
‘Ubridiyyah (worship), and Al-Uhihiyyah (divinity) or else,
it becomes contradictory.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 467

Then do not set up rivals unto Allah while you know>
(Al-Bagarah 2:22)

This comes after His statement:

AO NG ‏من‎ ad) Se olf | ager pat Ug

& Sts ‏يتل‎ dah bs ANTS Le ol
«5G, jae

40 mankind! Worship your Lord, Who created you and
those who were before you, so that you may have
Taqwa. Who has made the earth a resting place for you,
and the sky as a canopy, and sent down water from the
sky, and brought forth therewith fruits as a provision for
you} (Al-Baqarah 2:21-22)

All of this is from Tawhid Ar-Rubibiyyah. Then, He said:

Then do not set up rivals unto Allah (Al-Bagarah
2:22)

Meaning in Al-Llthiyyah (divinity); since those people who
were being addressed did not make rivals for Allah in
Rububiyyah (Lordship). Therefore, do not make rivals for
Allah in Al-Ulihiyyah (divinity), just as you acknowledge
that there is no rival for Him in Rubibiyyah (Lordship).

* Concerning His statement: ¢Andad (Rivals)p it is
plural of Nidd; it is the thing that is equal or
representative for it, and resembles it.

Concerning His statement: <While you know} meaning,
while you know that there is no rival for Him, It is
as if what is being said here is: Do not set up rivals
unto Allah because you indeed know that there is no
rival for Him. If you, therefore, know that, why then

466

cape pois ‏يِه أندادًا‎

And His saying: €And there is none co-equal or
comparable unto Him> (Al-Ikhlas 112:4) And His
saying: ¢Then do not set up rivals unto Alléh while
you know) (Al-Bagarah 2:22)

The second A ~

BSN Ghee A KS hp
¢And there is none co-equal or comparable unto Him>
(Al-Ikhlas 12:4)

The discussion about this preceded. It means, nothing is
equal to Him. It is an indefinite pronoun used in the context
of negation, it, therefore, conveys a general sense.

In this Ayah, there is a negation of a co-equal for Allah,
Exalted is He. And that is, because of the perfection of His
Attributes, none is equal to him; not in His knowledge, His
Hearing, His Seeing, His Power, His Might, His Wisdom
nor any of His other Attributes.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 469

This also applies to the one who loves the Messenger of
Allah #, as he loves Allah, because you should love the
Messenger of Allah #% with a love that is not like the love of
Allah. Because you only love the Messenger of Allah 2%
because you love Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, not
because He is a caller of Allah. So how about one who loves
the Messenger #8 more than he loves Allah?

Here, it is necessary that we recognize the distinction
between love along with Allah, and loving Allah.

* Love along with Allah, is that you make other than
Allah the same in your love of Him, or more. This is
Shirk.

>» Love for Allah: That is to love something out of love for
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

What Behavioral Benefits we Derive from these Ayat:

Firstly: Concerning His statement:

4Blessed be the Name of your Lord, Dhil-Jalali wal-
Ikram (the Owner of Majesty and Honor). (Ar-
Rahman 55:78)

* If we know that Allah, Exalted is He, is described with
majesty, that will lead us to exalt and revere Him.

* If we know that He is described with Honor, that will
lead us to hope for His generosity and grace; that is, we
will exalt Him with what befits Him in terms of
exaltation and reverence.

Secondly: Concerning His statement:

€ $5) jah Keb}

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

do you set up rivals for Him, and by that contradict
your knowledge? This is also negating. This is taken
from His statement: <So, do not set up rivals unto
Allah» for there is no rival for Him, due to the
perfection of His Attributes

bey ead ny 4.40

لوص النّاس من ‎oe BE‏ دون ‎OI Bl‏ يبوج كسب الله 4

And of mankind are some who take, others besides
Allah as rivals. They love them as they love Allah> (Al-
Bagarah 2:165)

The fourth Ayah: His statement:

4M eh ‏يتم‎ ON A oh ‏من‎ Bs Gl ‏وي‎

And of snaking are some who take, others besides
Allah as rivals. They love them as they love Allah.»
(Al-Bagarah 2:165)

Some who take others beside Allah as rivalsy: they take
them as rivals; that is; in love, as He explained with
His statement: ¢They love them as they love Allah} It is
possible to say that what is intended by rivals is
more general than in love. That is, rivals they
worshiped as they worship Allah, and vow to, as
they vow to Allah, because they love them, as they
love Allah; so they love these rivals as they love
Allah, Exalted is He.

?

This is a form of Shirk in love, when you love other than
Allah as you love Him.

470 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

4S0 worship Him, and be constant and patient in His Fourthly: His statement:
worship> (Maryam 19:65)

OS Mod ‏ين‎ LE El 5>
The behavioral benefit in that is that a slave will worship Ze gee =
His Lord and persevere patiently in His worship, not
deviating, neither tiring nor being board; he would rather
be patient in that, as someone would be patient against his Among its behavioral benefits is that it is not permissible
opponent in combat during Jihdd. for a person to take any other as his beloved, as he loves

Allah. This is referred to as “love along with Allah.”

And of mankind are some who take others besides
Allah as rivals.» (Al-Bagarah 2:165)

‘Thirdly: His statement:
Do you know of any who is similar to Him?) methine
(Maryam 19:65), ‏لد اك‎ ea sea

a 0 Mo ‏لو وك‎
CSI ‏لم يس آم كفو‎ And say: “All praise is due to Allah, Who has not

And there is none co-equal or comparable unto Him> begotten a son (nor any offspring), and Who has no
(AL-Ikhlas 112:4), partner in (His) Dominion, nor He is low to have a
os 7 Wali (helper, protector or supporter). And magnify Him

4505 4 ck ‏الفلا‎ with all magnificence, [Allahu-Akbar (Allah is the Most

Then do not set up rivals unto Allahy (Al-Bagarah Sit ali Bua)
222)

In these Ayat there is the declaration that Allah, the Mighty

and Sublime, is free of any imperfections, so in his heart, a 1, 8
person will feel that Allah, Exalted is He, is free from every The fifth Ayah:
imperfection; and that there is nothing like Him, and He Gal esis RS G
has no rival. With this, one will be able to exalt Him in the 30 pie A ‏ونا وثر يق‎
manner He should be exalted, as far as he could.

eee ‏هه‎

PO %-

And say: “All praise is due to Allah, Who has not
begotten a son (nor any offspring), and Who has no
partner in (His) Dominion, nor He is low to have a
Wali (helper, protector or supporter). And magnify Him
with all magnificence, [Allahu-Akbar (Allah is the Most

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

an imperfection.

*% His statement: €A son> (Walad); includes a male or a
female. There is a refutation therein against the
Christians, the Jews and the polytheists:

The Jews say: Allah has a child! He is ‘Uzayr.
The Christians said: Allah has a child! He is the Messiah.

The polytheists said: Allah has children! They are the
Angels.

* And His statement: €Who has no partner in (His)
Dominion.» this is joined with His statement: ¢He has
not begotten a son> It He is the One Who has no
partner in His Dominion, nor in the creation, nor in
the Sovereignty, and nor in the disposition of affairs.
Everything other than Allah is a creature of Allah, a
slave of His, He disposes its affairs and controls him
as He wills; and none has a share in that with Him.
He, Exalted is He, says:

«ai ‏ف‎

“Call upon those whom you assert (to be
sociate gods) besides Allah, they possess not even the
weight of an speck, either in the heavens or on the
earth.’”» (Saba’ 34:22)
which specifies - while;
€’Nor have they any share in either."> (Saba’ 34:22)

covers any category,

«وََا لَه

472 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Great)]'> (Al-Isra’ 17:111)

% And say>: the address in this kind of situation could
be specifically for the Messenger 3 or general for all
who could be addressed with such. If it is specific to
the Messenger 2 it is specific to him with the aim
that he is the direct addressee, while his Ummah is a
follower to him. If it is general, it will therefore
include the Messenger # and the others as direct
addressees.

All praise is due to Allahy: the interpretation of this
statement has preceded, and that “praise” is the
praiseworthy and perfect quality combined with love
and exaltation.

Concerning His statement: 470 Allah}: The preposition
4to> here, can be used to express entitlement and
specialty.

It is for entitlement because Allah, Exalted is He, is praised
and He is worthy of being praised. While it is for specialty,
because the kind of praise which Allah is entitled to is
unlike the praise enjoyed by any other being; rather, it is
the most perfect, the greatest, the most general and the
most encompassing.

Concerning His statement; <Who has not begotten a son
(nor any offspring)» this is among the Attributes of
negation. ¢He has not begotten a son> for the
perfection of His Attributes and the perfection of
Him not needing a thing from others, that is because
there is nothing like Him. If He had taken a son, then
the child could be like Him. If He had a child, He
would be in need of the child to help and aid Him. If
He had a child, He would be considered imperfect,
because if one of His creatures resembles Him, that is

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 475

He, Exalted is He, said in the Qudsi Hadith; “Whoever has
enmity toward my Wali (friend), | have pronounced war
against him.”!") But the kind of Wali (supporter, friend)
being negated is one required due to lowliness; because
Allah, Exalted is He, has overall might; no kind of humility
reaches Him, due to the perfection of His might.

» His statement: ¢And magnify Him with all the
magnificence.}: meaning - magnify Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, with all magnificence, with your tongue
and your soul. Believe in your heart that Allah is
greater than everything, and that His is all grandeur
in the heavens and on the earth. In the same way,
magnify Him with your tongue, saying: “Allahu
Akbar" (Allah is the Greatest).

From the guidance of the Prophet # and his Companions
is that they would say: “Allahu Akbar” whenever they
ascended a high place! on journeys. The reason being that
when someone ascends a high place, he can feel that he is
superior to everybody, so he should say “Allahu Akbar’ so
as diminish that highness he feels in his heart when he rises
and ascends. And when they descended, they would say:
‘Subhan Allah” (Glorified is He); that is: [ am exalting Him
above this lowliness which | am now.

© And His statement: 4Takbira (with all the
magnificence)>: is an affirming root, intending all
splendor by it; meaning magnify Him with all the

Reported by Al-Bukhari (6502) from Aba Hurairah, may
Allah be pleased with him,

Based on the report of Al-Bukhari (2993) from Jabir, may
Allah be pleased with him, who said: “When we ascended
(an elevation during journeys) we would say the Takbir
and when we descend we said the Tasbif.” And it appears
later in the second volume.

474 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Nor there is for Him any supporter from among
them"’ (Saba’ 34:22)

There is no one aiding Him with these heavens and earth.
intercession with Him profits not, except for him
whom He permits> (Saba’ 34:23)

With this, all the means depended upon by the polytheists,

regarding their gods, were severed. These gods have no

ability to aid in the heavens and earth, nor are they
partners to Allah, nor helpers, nor intercessors, except with

His permission.

* He says:

And Who has no partner in (His) Dominion» (Al-Isra’
17:111)

Concerning His statement: ¢Nor He is low to have a
Wali (helper, protector or supporter).» He does not
have a Wali (supporter, friend); but this is defined by
His statement: €¢Min Adh-Dhull (as a result of being
low)>
<Min} here is for justification. Because Allah, Exalted
is He, has Awliya’ (friends):

€No doubt! Verily, the Awliya’ of Allah, no fear shall
come upon them nor shall they grieve. Those who
believed, and used to have Taqwa> (Yinus 10:62-63)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 477

> glorifies» meaning - declares His freedom of all
attributes of imperfection and defect. Also, (the verb)
Sabbaha could be transitive by itself and it could be
transitive with Lam.

— As for being transitive by itself, then an example is His
saying, Exalted be He:

«لْنَرْمِنَواً ‎aso fl‏ وموّروة
‎ot‏

in order that you may believe in Allah and His
Messenger, and that you assist and honor him, and
(that you) glorify (Allah's) praises morning and
afternoon> (Al-Fath 48:9)

— As for it being transitive with Lam, it occurs often. For
every Sirah that starts with it, it is followed by a ‘Lam’.

The scholars said: When the action (of glorifying) is
intended alone, it is transitive by itself. Therefore, the
meaning of <Wa Tusabbilih will be ‘and you say: Subhan
Allah.’

But when the meaning is to clarify the objective and
sincerity, it is transitive with the ‘Lam’; ¢glorifies Allah> will
therefore mean: “Glorifying Allah sincerely, and as is
deserved.” The preposition ‘Lam’ here shows the perfec-
tion of the will of the one glorifying, and the perfection
of the worthiness of the One Glorified - being Allah.

* His statement: ¢Whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is on the earth> is general, including
everything. However, the Tasbili (glorification) is of
two types: Tasbih with tongue directly and Tasbih by
implication.

As for the Tasbih by implication, it is general:

476 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

splendor magnificence.

The Behavioral Benefits That We Derive from these Ayah:
One will perceive the perfection of the self-Sufficiency of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, from everyone, and His
sole control of the Dominion, and the completeness of His
Might and His authority. Therefore, he will exalt Allah,
Glorified and Exalted is He, as He deserves being exalted,
as much as he could.

We also derive praising Allah, Exalted be He, declaring
that He is free of all defects, just as He is praised for the
Attributes of Perfection.

And His saying: 4Whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is on the earth glorifies Allah. His is the
dominion, and His is the praise, and He is Able to do
all things> (At-Taghibun 64:1)

<Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the
earth glorifies Allah. His is the dominion, and His is
the praise, and He is Able to do all things» (At
Taghabun 64:1)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 479

The mention of its meaning has preceded but
glorifies Allah> is an Attribute of negation, because
its meaning is exalting Him above what does not
befit Him.

criterion to His slave that he may be a warner to the
‘Alamin. He to Whom belongs the dominion of the
heavens and the earth, and Who has begotten no son
(children or offspring) and for Whom there is no partner
in the dominion. He has created everything, and has
measured it exactly according to its due measurements>
(Al-Furgdn 25:1-2)

-- ooo —

The Seventh and Eighth Ayat: His statement:

Blessed be He Who sent down the criterion to His
slave that he may be a warner to the ‘Alamin. He to
Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the
earth, and Who has begotten no son (children or
offspring) and for Whom there is no partner in the

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

4And there is not a thing but glorifies His Praise» (Al-
Isra’ 17:44)

As for Tasbih with tongue directly, it is also general in a
way, but the disbeliever is not included in that, since the
disbeliever does not glorify Allah with his tongue. That is
why the Exalted says:

GES ts sf ‏9سْبَحَنَ‎
‎Glory be fo Allah! (High is He) above all that they
associate as partners with Him} (Al-Hashr 59:23)

And;
4» ‏يَصِْنَ‎ Gal Sb

is Allah! (He is Free) from what they
unto Him!» Saffat 37:159)

Thus, they do not glorify Allah, Exalted is He, because they
associate partners with Him, and describe Him with what
does not befit Him.

The Tasbih by implication means that the condition of
everything in the heavens and on the earth indicates that
Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He, is free from defect and
deficiency. Even a disbeliever, if you contemplate his
situation, you would find that it indicates Allah, Exalted is
He, is free from defect and imperfection.

But as for the Tasbih with the tongue directly, it means to

say: “Subhan Allah.

* And concerning His statement: €His is the dominion,
and His is the praise, and He is Able to do all things>
these last attributes are the attributes of affirmation.

]1 x 481
Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

He also describes him with ‘Ubidiyyah (servitude) in the
context of him being honored with the Mi'raj (ascension),
and says:

405" sl ‏مرت‎ id wa, gt oll GD

Glorified he He Who took His slave for a journey by
night from Al-Masjid Al-Haram> (Al-Isra’ 17:1)

He says in Sirah An-Najm:
455 Te ‏إل‎ GP
‏م45‎ He revealed to His slave what He revealed> (An-
Najm 53:10)
All of this indicates that describing a person 1
Ubadiyyah (servitude) to Allah is considered a kind
perfection, because ‘Ubiidiyyah (servitude) to Allah is rea
freedom. Any one does not worship Him, then he is a slave
of other than Him. Ibn Al-Qayyim, may Allah have mercy

upon him, said:
They fled away from the servitude for which they were

created for 4
So, they were befallen with the servitude to the self and

Shaitan

“The servitude to which they were created for” is the

Commentary on Al- Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

480

dominion. He has created everything, and has measured
it exactly according to its due mea
Furgan 25:1-2)

urements» (Al-

>» Blessed be He> means exalted and revered.

> Blessed be He Who sent down the criterion to His
slave}: He is Allah, the Mighty and Sublime

Concerning His word: €The criterion>; it means the
Qur’an because it separates between the truth and
the falsehood, the Muslim and disbeliever, the right
eous one and the wicked one, between the harmful
and the beneficial, and others like that, wherein there
is basis for criterion. Thus, all of it is a criterion

* 410 His slave }: Muhammad so He described him
with ‘Ubidiyyah (servitude) in the context of the
discussion about revealing the Qur'an to him. This
rank is of the most honorable ranks of the Prophet
38. That is why Allah, Exalted is He, describes him
with “Ubiidiyyah (servitude) in the context of reveal-
ing the Qur'an to him, as it happens here, and as it is
it in His statement:

3

4All praise is due to Allah, Who has sent down to His
we the Book» (Al-Kahf 18:1)

worship of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.
He also describes him with “Ubiidiyyah (servitude) in the AS, hey were befillenswith-servitudes to vine ‏عه‎ and
context of defending, him and challenges (others on his Shaitin” since they bears ‏م‎ Weir souls and Ae
behalf): to Shaitan. Nobody will flee from “Ubidiyyah (servitude) to
Allah, except that he falls into “Ubadiyyah (servitude) to his
whims and desires and his own Shaitan. Allah, Exalted is

& عَبِْن4

And if you are in doubt concerning that which We

have sent down to Our slave> (Al-Bagarah 2:23)  AL-Kafiyat Ash-Shafiyah by ibn “AOayyion. wi
commentary by Ibn ‘Isa (2:466)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 483

And At-Tagdir (measurement) means regulation, or
eternal decree, but the first is more correct, and what
proves that is His statement, Exalted is He:

455 SE ‏«اليّى‎
‎Who has created (everything), and then proportioned
itp (AL-A‘la 87:2)

With this, the Ayah will be considered to have an
arrangement of both a reminder and a lesson, and based
on the second (opinion), it will be seen to be arranged
based on a reminder.

The behavioral benefits we derive from these Ayat:

That it is compulsory to recognize the greatness of Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, and that we declare Him free of

any imperfection. Once we know that, we increase in
loving Him and reverence.

And from the two Ayat of Sirah Al-Furgan, we understand
that this Magnificent Qur'an brings clarification, and that it
is the reference for all of the slaves; and that whenever
someone wants issues to become clear for him, he would
refer to the Qur'an, for Allah called it a criterion:

4Blessed be He Who sent down the Criterion.» (AL
Furgan 25:1)
We also benefit from behavioral instructions:

It confirms and increases our love for the Messenger of

since he was Allah's slave, executing the

sibility of conveying the message, and warning the
creation.

We also derive from it that the Prophet 2% is the last of the

482 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-V

He, said:

po So Si 15K, ‏لهم هوبه‎ Sal ‏من‎ Seip
Have you seen him who takes his awn lust as his lah
(god), and Allah knowing, left him astray» (Al-Jathiyah
45:23)

* Concerning His statement: 411144 he may be a warner to
the ‘Alamin}: the Lam here is for explanation and the
pronoun ¢he> is referring to the Prophet % because
he is the closest of all the antecedents to the pronoun
he » ; and because Allah, Exalted is He, says:

dy 5xl>
4That you warn thereby} (Al-A ‘raf 7:2)
And He, Exalted is He, also says:

GS ‏بد‎ Sp

4That I may therewith warn you and whomsoever it
may reach> (Al-An‘am 6:19)

Therefore, the warner is the Messenger 3.
To the ‘Alamin 9: includes the Jinn and the men.

© Concerning His statement: ¢He to Whom belongs the
dominion of the heavens and the earth>; its meaning had
preceded.

And concerning His statement: €And Who has begotten
no son (children or offspring) and for Whom there is no
partner in the dominion}; its meaning has preceded,
and that these statements are Attributes of negation.

4He has created everything, and has measured it exactly
according to its due measurements»: Al-Khalag (creation)
means originating something in a particular form.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 485

be Allah above all that they attribute to Him! Knower of
the unseen and the witnessed! Exalted be He over all
that they associate with Him!> (Al-Mu‘miniin 23:91-92)

In this Ayah, Allah, Most High, negates having taken a son,
or that there is any god with Him. This negation is further
emphasized with the use of the preposition ¢Min}> in His
statement: ¢Min Walad (any son)» and His statement:
4Min 1121 (any god)p because the addition of any
preposition in the context of a negation or its like, implies
emphasis.

> So, His statement: No som (or offspring or children) did
Allah beget» means - He did not select anybody to be
His son, not ‘Uzayr, neither the Messiah, nor the
Angels, nor other than them; because He is free of
any need from other than Him. So when Him having
a child is negated, then negating that He is a father is
more obvious.

Concerning His statement: €Min Ilah (any god)»: €ilah
(god)> means Ma‘liih (deified) just like Bana’ carries the
meaning of Mabnni (constructed) and Firash carries the
meaning of Mafriish (bedded, or spread out); so Al-Ilah
means Al-Ma‘hih (the deified) that is: - that which is
worshipped, which one is subservient to.

Meaning; There is no god, in truth, along with Him. As for
the false gods, they exist; but since they are false, it is as if
they do not exist. So it is correct to say there is no god along
with Allah.

% 4ldhan> meaning — if there was any god along with
Him.

Each god would have taken away what he had created,
and some would have tried to overcome others} If there
had been any other god equal to Allah, the Mighty

484 Commentary on Al-’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Messengers; hence, we will not believe any claim of
prophethood after him, based on His statement: 410 the
‘Alaminy. If there is any Messenger after him, His
message would end with this Messenger, and it will not
be for all the ‘Alamin (the two worlds: that of mankind
and the Jinn)

€No son did Allah beget, nor is there any Mah (god)
along with Him; (if there had been many gods), behold,
each god would have taken away what he had created,
and some would have tried to overcome others! Glorified
be Allah above all that they attribute to Him! Knower of
ihe unseen and the witnessed! Exalted be He over all
that they associate with Him!» (Al-Mu‘minin 23:91-92)

an HES

The ninth and tenth Aydt: His statement:

a) ‏كل‎ od ‏إذا‎ a) & RE ‏من ور وَمَا كات‎ Sil Lei Cp

عده يرم م مه ع برم سا2

Nghe

No son did Allah beget, nor is there any lah (god)
along with Him; (if there had been many gods), behold,
each god would have taken away what he had created,
and some would have tried to overcome others! Glorified

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 487

makes it rise earlier on this day, because the first god orders
the second god to make it rise; we do not find this. We find
the entire universe, as one, being harmonious and
coordinated; which clearly proves that the sole controller
is one, and that is Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, explains by intellectual
evidence, that a plurality of gods is not possible, since if a
plurality of gods was possible, then this would be the
result. Each of them would have separated from the other,
and each would go to what he created. Therefore, either
one of them would be incapable before the other, or one
them would overcome the other. If in the first case; divinity
(Al-Ulihiyyah) would not be suitable for either of them, in
the second case, the dominant one would be the god,
therefore, there will be only one god.

If it is said: Is it not possible that they could both come to

an agreement, and each of them stay alone with what he
created? The answer is that if it was possible and it
happened, then it would disrupt the organization of the
universe,

Then, their agreement would only be out of mutual fear for
each other. Hence, Rubribiyyah (Lordship) would not be
suitable for either of them due to his inability to subdue the
other.

* Then, He, Exalted is He, says: €Glorified be Allah above
all that they attribute to Him!} That is declaring Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, free from what the disbe-
lieving polytheists describe Him with, those who say
about Allah, Glorified be He, that which does not
befit Him.
<Knower of the unseen and the witnessed!>: The
unseen}: (Al-Ghaib) What is hidden from the people,

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

and Sublime, he would have a dominion that is
specific to him, while Allah would have a dominion
that is specific to Him; meaning - each would have
been with what he had created saying this is my
creation, it belongs to me; and like that, the other.

Hence, each of them would want to take control over the
other, as ordinarily occurs. The kings of the world, each of
them wants to take control of the other so that all dominion
becomes his.

Therefore, they would either prevent one another, such that
each one would be incapable of overcoming the other; and
when each of them is incapable of overcoming the other; it
is not correct that one of them be a god; because Al-Ilah (the
God) is not incapable.

Otherwise, one of them would overcome the other, and as
such, the dominant one is Al-Ildah (the God).

Thus, the issue returns to the fact that there must be one
God for the universe, and it is not possible that there ever
be two gods, because the final outcome can not be other
than one of these two cases.

Just as when we observe the universe in its entirety, we
discover that it is a universe being directed by one;
otherwise, there could have been contradictions in it. One
of the two gods could have said for example: “I want the
sun to rise from the West” while the second could have
said: “I want it rising from the East”. The possibility that
they will have agreed one what they wanted is very
remote, particularly since the situation is that of being in
authority; each would want that his view be decreed.

What is known is that now, we do not observe the sun
rising in a day here and another day there. Or being
delayed one day because the second god prevented it, or

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 489

Meaning, do not coin a similitude for Allah saying: The
example of Allah is like the example of so-and-so; or
associate to Him a partner in worship.

% €Tnuly! Allah knows and you know not}: Meaning that
He, Glorified and Exalted be He, knows that there is
no similitude for Him; He has informed you that He
does not have a like in His statement:

There is nothing like unto Him> (Ash-Shura 42:42)
And His statement:
And there is none 97 unto Him.}. (Al-Ikhlas
112:4)
And His statement:
€Do you know of any who is similar to Him?>
(Maryam 19:65)
And the like. So, Allah knows and you know not.

It can be said that this clause consists of a clear proof that
Allah does not have a similitude, and that it is like drawing
a similitude to negate a similitude, because we do not
know and Allah knows. If knowledge is negated from us,
and affirmed for Allah, where is the similarity? Can an
ignorant one be similar to a knowledgeable one?

A proof of the incompleteness of our knowledge, is that
man does not know what he will do tomorrow:

وما مَذْرى ‎FS‏ 1 تحكيت هذ 4

Commentary on AL-'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

while the ¢witnessed > is what is seen by the people.

4Exalted be He over all that they associate as partners to
Him! >: 4Exalted be He} meaning - He is raised above
it, Hallowed, and Exalted

4Qver all that they associate with Him!}; above the
idols which are taken as gods along with Allah,
Exalted is He.

The Attributes of negation contained in these two Aydt are:
that Allah is free from taking the child that the unbelievers
describe Him with, and from the partner in Llihiyyah
(divinity) which the polytheists associate with Him.

This negation is because of the perfection of His self-
sufficiency, and perfection of His Rububiyyah (Lordship)
and His Ulihiyyah (Divinity).

The Behavioral Benefits We Derive from these Ayat

That faith in this leads the person to being sincere to Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime.

So put not forward similitudes for Allah. Truly! Allah
knows and you know not» (An-Nahil 16:74)

—- $4

The Eleventh Ayah:

4535 ‏لا‎ BN AS ail § SGM & ips ‏«قلا‎

So put not forward similitudes for Allah. Truly! Allah
knows and you know not» (An-Nahl 16:74)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 491

in Ar-Rubitbiyyah (the Lordship) based on the proof in
His statement:

€O mankind! Worship your Lord, Who created you and
those who were before you so that you may have Taqwa.
Who has made the earth a resting place for you, and the
sky as a canopy, and sent down water from the sky,
and brought forth therewith fruits as a provision for
you. Then do not set up rivals unto Allah while you
know’ (Al-Bagarah 2:21-22)

But here, it is in the matter regarding the Attributes:

So put not forward similitudes for Allah> (An-Nahl
16:74)

So, you say for example: “Allah’s Hand is like so-and-so’s
hand; Allah's Face is like the face of so-and-so; Allah's Self
is like the self of so-and-so” and the like; because Allah,
Exalted is He, knows, while you know not, and He has
informed you that He does not have any similitude.

Or, it is said that the affirmation of knowledge for them is
specifically in the matters concerning Rubibiyyah (Lord-
ship), and negating knowledge from them is specifically in
the matters of Al-Lluhiyyah (divinity); since they associate
partners with Allah regarding that; they, therefore,
descended to the level of the ignorant.

From the kind of perfection included in this Ayah is the

490 Commentary on Al-’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah
€No person knows what he will earn tomorrow}
(Luqman 31:34)

And that man does not know the soul within his body:

45 See 5
And they ask you concerning the Rih; Say: “The

Rah: it is one of the affairs of my Lord’’> (Al-Isra’
17:85)

Philosophy, philosophers, and other than them, continue
researching the reality of this soul; they will never discover
its reality, in spite of the fact that it is an element of life.
This shows the inadequacy of the knowledge of the
creatures, and as such Allah, the Most High, says:

5 Li

4And of knowledge, you (mankind) have been given
only a little» (Al-Isra’ 17:85)

If you ask: How do we harmonize between this Ayah:

450 put not forward similitudes for Allah. Truly! Allah
knows and you know not} (An-Nahl 16:74)

CM 4 15S Sap

And His statement, Exalted is He:

Then do not set up rivals unto Allah while you know
(AL-Bagarah 2:22)

The answer is, that He was addressing those who associate
partners with Him in Al-Ulihiyyah (divinity); so he says:
€Then do not set up rivals unto Allah> in worship and
divinity, while; €You know} that there is no rival for Him

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

what is done openly of it or secretly, and sins, and oppr
without right, and that you associate with Allah that for
which He has not revealed any authority, and that you say
about Allah what you do not know." (Al-A‘raf 7:33)

Say}: the address is directed to the Prophet 3%
meaning — say openly to the people.

€Only> (Innama): an article of restriction, and that is
to oppose those who make unlawful what Allah has
made lawful.

unlaiéfuly (Harrama); meaning — prevented. And
the root of this form (Ha', Ra’, Mim) indicates to
withhold, and from it is “Harimul-Bi’r"! for the
earth, which garrisons around it, because it prevents
it from going beyond it.

¢AL-Fawahish>: It is a plural of Fahishah which refers
to the sins deemed to be obscene, such as Zina and
homosexual acts.

As for Zind, Allah said concerning it:

4And come not near fo the Zind (unlawful sexual
intercourse). Verily, it is a Fahishah> (Al-Isra’ 17:32)

As for homosexual acts, Lat said to his people:

€Do you commit the Fahishah?!> (Al-A ‘raf 7:80)

Included in Zina is when a man marries a woman that is
not lawful for him due to factors of kinship, fosterage or

(Translation note) That may be translated as “the retainment
of the well,” meaning the wall of earth surrounding it

492 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

perfection of the Attributes of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, since there is no similitude for Him.

But concerning the behavioral benefit derived from this
Ayah, it is the completeness of our reverence of our Lord,
the Mighty and Sublime, because if we know that there is
no similitude for Him, we will rely upon Him with hope
and fear, and revere Him. We will also know that it is
impossible that any Sultan, king, minister or president be
similar to Him, regardless of how great is their power,
authority and ministry, because there is no similitude for
Allah, Glorified be He.

KS Haw ‏بوم‎ IG AS,

And His saying: €Say: “My Lord has only made Al-
Fawahish unlawful; what is done openly of it or

tly, and sins, and oppression without right, and
that you associate with Allah that for which He has not
revealed any authority, and that you say about Allah
what you do not know’ (AI-A‘raf 7:33)

Say: “My Lord has only made Al-Fawdahish unlawful;

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 495

4The way (of blame) is only against those who oppress
men and wrongly rebel (yabghuna) in the earth> (Ash-
Shura 42:42)

> And concerning His statement: and sins, and
oppression without right} is an indication of the fact
that every form of oppression is without right. It
does not mean that oppression is divided into two
types: rightful oppression and oppression without
right; since all forms of oppression are without right.
Hence, the description used here is a type of
explanatory description, the scholars refer to it as
Sifatun Kashifatun, that is; clarifying, It is as if it is the
explanation about what is being described.

And concerning His statement: ¢And associate with
Allah that for which He has not revealed any authority>
This is connected with what preceded; meaning - my
Lord prohibits you from associating with Allah that
which He has revealed no authority; meaning: that
you make a partner for Him for which He has not
revealed any authority, meaning (any) Hujja (proof).
The Hujjah is referred to as authority because it is the
authority for the one who proves with it.

And this restriction: 4107 which He has not revealed any
authority»: What we say concerning it is like what we
said regarding oppression without right) That is, it is an
explanatory restriction; since all who join partners with
Allah do not have any authority to join partners with
Him.

Concerning His statement: and that you say about
Allah what you do not know» — and He made it
unlawful that you say about Allah what you do not
know; so it is unlawful for us to say about Allah
what we do not know, whether concerning His Self,

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasi

marital relationship. Allah, Exalted is He, says:

ولد
| وسَآة ‎GLE‏
‎And marry not women whom your fathers married,‏
‎except what has already passed; indeed it was a‏

Fahishah, and most hateful, and an evil way> (An-Nisa’
4:22)

Rather, this is even worse than Zind, for He gives three
offensive attributes: Fahishah, hatefulness and an evil way,
whereas concerning Zind, Allah gives it two attributes:

G55 ‏وَسَآءَ‎ FESS ‏كن‎ A>

€Verily, it is a Fahishah, and an evil way) (Al-Isra’
17:32)

>» Concerning His statement: 4 what is done openly of it or
secretly: It is said that the meaning is whose
obscenity is glaring or hidden. It is also said the
meaning is: what is open to people and what is
hidden to them, given consideration to the action of
the doer, not the action. That is, what somebody does
openly before the people, and what he hides from
them.

Concerning His statement: ¢and sins, and oppression
without right> meaning - sin and oppression without
right is unlawful.

Al-Ithm (sin) refers to whatever has a basis in the acts of
disobedience.

Al-Baghi (oppression): Transgression against people. Allah,
Exalted is He, says:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 497

He says: “Allah did not intend that, rather He intended
such-and-such.” We say (to him): “Bring the evidence that
He did not intend such-and-such, and that He intended
such-and-such; and since you cannot provide the evidence,
you have thus spoken about Allah with what you do not
know.” :

And His saying: €Indeed your Lord is Allah, Who
created the heavens and the earth in six days, and then
He Isiawa (rose over) the Throne» (AI-A’raf 7:54)

@ Rising of Allah over His Throne

The Commentary

The author, a& mentioned the affirmation of Allah's rising,
over His Throne, and that it is in seven places in the
Qur'an:

The First Place: His statement in Sarat AL-A’riif
€Indeed your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens

and the earth in six days, and then He Istawa (rose
over) the Throne} (AI-A ‘raf 7:54)

496 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

His Names, His Attributes, His Actions, or His
Rulings. Allah prohibits us from these five things.

In it is a refutation against the polytheists; those who made
unlawful what Allah did not make unlawful.

If somebody asks: Where is the attribute of negation in this
Ayah?

We say that it is: €and that you associate with Allah that for
which He has not revealed any authority, and that you say
about Allah what you do not know} Both are from the
Attributes of negation: €And that you associatey meaning -
do not make a partner for Allah, due to His perfection.
€And that you say about Allah what you do not know) is
also like that, because of His perfection; for it is out of
His complete authority that no one may say about Him
what he does not know.

The behavioral benefit derived from this Ayah is that we
would avoid these five things that Allah, Exalted is He,
clearly stated are unlawful. The people of knowledge have
said that these five unlawful things are among those acts
which all of the revealed Shari‘ahs agreed upon being
unlawful.

Included in speaking about Allah without knowledge is
Tahrif (distorting) with the texts of the Book and the Sunnah
about the Attributes and other than that; for if someone
distorts the texts in the case of the Attributes; such as
saying: “The intended meaning by the two Hands is
bounty” he has said about Allah what he does not know,
from two perspectives:

The First perspective: He negated the apparentness of it,
without knowledge.

The Second perspective: He affirmed for Allah what
opposes it without evidence.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 499

> And concerning His statement: ¢And then He Istawa
(rose over) the Throne}; ¢then> (Thumma) for sequence.

% Istawa meaning elevated above.

<The Throne> is that roof that surrounds the
creatures; we do not know the material of this
Throne (which it is made from); for no authentic
Hadith is related from the Prophet # explaining what
this Throne was created from. However, we know
that it is the biggest of all the creatures that we know
of. 1

The root of the word “Arsh (throne) in the Arabic Language

is the bed which the king specially chooses for himself; and

it is known that the bed which the king specially chooses

for himself will be marvelous and majestic, without an

equal.

There are a number of Attributes of Allah, Exalted is He, in

this Ayah but the author mentioned it to affirm just one

Attribute, and that is; rising over the Throne

* The People of the Sunnah and the Jamd‘ah believe that
Allah, Exalted is He, rises over His Throne, with a
rising that befits His Majesty, and it is not like the rising
of creatures.

If you ask: “What does Istawa’ mean to them?" Its
meaning is transcendence and settling.

Four meanings for its interpretation have been related from
the Salaf (pious predecessors)

The First; Elevated. The Second: Raised. Thirdly: Ascended.
Fourthly: Settled. But ‘elevated, ‘raised,’ and ‘ascended’
have the same meaning; as for ‘settled’, it has a different

‎(Translation note) meaning, to the people of the Sunnah.‏ ل(

‎Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎Who created the heavens and the earthp: He originated
them from nothingness in a perfect and precise
manner.

‎4In six days>: The length of these days are like our
days which we know, because Allah, Glorified and
Exalted be He, mentioned them as an indefinite noun,
so, it will be understood to mean what is known.

‎The first of these days is Yawm Al-Ahad (Sunday) and the
last is the day of Jumu‘ah (Friday).

‎Four of these days were for the earth, and two of them
were for the heavens, as Allah explains in Surah Fussilat:

‎“Do you verily disbelieve in Him Who created
the earth in two days and you set up rivals with Him?
That is the Lord of the ‘Alamin, He placed therein firm
mountains from above it, and He blessed it, and
measured therein its mance in four days equal, for
all those who ask.’’» (Fussilat 41:9-10)

‎So it totaled four days.

‎«Then He Istawi (rose over) toward the heaven when it
was smoke, and said to it, and to the earth: Come both
of you, willingly or unwillingly.” They both said: "We
come, willingly.” Then He completed and finished them
(as) seven heavens, in two days> (Fugsilat 41:11-12)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

Without a sword, nor with flowing blood

“Bishr:” is Ibn Marwan; Istawd; means he took control of
Al‘Iraq. They said that this line of the poem was composed
by an “Arab man, and it is not possible that what is
intended by it, is that he Istawa over AL-‘Iraq, meaning, that
he rose over Al-‘Iraq; especially since at that time, there
were no airplanes with which he could have flown over Al-
‘Iraq.

As for the negating proof, they said: “If we affirm that
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, rises over His Throne in the
manner in which you claim, which is transcendence and
settlement, that will necessitate that He is in need of the
Throne; and this is impossible. Therefore, the impossibility
of what is implied shows the impossibility of what implies
it.

It also implies that He is physical (has a body); because the
Istawa’ of something upon another thing, with the meaning
that it rose above it, means that it is physical

It also implies that He is limited, because he who rises over
something is limited. If you ascended upon a camel, then
you are restricted to a particular space, confined in it, it
being limited as well.”

These are the three things which they claim are implied by
the affirmation that Isfawa’ means exalted and raised.

> The Refutation against them is from various perspec-
tives:
Firstly: This interpretation of yours opposes the interpreta-
tion of the Salaf (pious predecessors) which they agreed
upon. The proof of their consensus is that it has not been
reported that they said this and opposed what is apparent.
If they saw that it was contrary to what was apparent, then
that would have been transmitted to us. None of them ever

500 Commentary on Al-Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

meaning.

Their evidence for that is that in all its etymological
discussions in the Arabic lexicons, it has not come except
with this meaning when its in the transitive form with the
preposition ‘Ala (upon or over); Allah, the Most High, says:

And when you have embarked (istawaita) on (ala) the
ship, you and whoever is with you (Al-Mu’minin
23:28)

And He, the Most High, also said:

€And has appointed for you ships and cattle on which
you ride. In order that you may mount firmly (tastawa)
on (‘ala) their backs, and then may remember the Favor
of your Lord when you mount (istawaitum) thereon
(‘alaihi)> (Az-Zukhruf 43:12-13)

> The people of Ta‘fil (denial) interpreted it to mean
‘conquered’. They said the meaning of:

4Then He Istawa (rose over) the Throne» (Al-A‘raf
7:54)
Is “Then, He took control of it.”

They presented both affirming and negating proofs to
establish this Ta’fil of theirs.
As for the affirming proof, they said: We will prove with
the saying of the poet:

Bishr has conquered (Istawa) Al-'Iraq

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 503

These implications are false, and the falsehood of an
implication proves the falsehood of what implies it.

As for their using the line of poetry as proof, we say:

1. Affirm for us the chain of transmission for this poem,
and the trustworthiness of its narrators; they will never
find a way to that.)

Who is this poet? Is it not possible that he composed
the poem after the Arabic Language had been
distorted; because every saying that is used in Arabic
language as a proof after the distortion of the Arabic
language is not a proof. The Arabic Language began to
be distorted after conquests spread, and the non-Arabs
began to mix with the Arabs, which therefore led to the
alteration in their Language. Therefore, in this is an
implication that it was after the distortion of the
Language.

Your interpretation of; “Bishr Istawa over Al-‘Iraq,” to
mean Istawld (conquered) is an interpretation that is
supported by its context; since it is impossible that
Bishr ascended above Al-’Iraq, to rise over it as he
mounts upon his bed or an animal's back. That is why
we resort to Istmolé in its (the poem’s) interpretation.

We are saying this just as a way of condescending,

"Shaykh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah said: “And no authentic
transmission is affirmed that it is an Arabic poem, and
many of the Inuims of (Arabic) grammar reject it, and say
that it is a fabricated poem not known in the language, and
it is known that if one advances proof with the Hadith of
the Messenger of Allah #, he would need to prove that to
be authentic; how about a poem whose chain of
transmission is unknown? And the Imams of language
have criticized it” “Majmi’ Al-Fatdwa”’ (5/146).

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

said the meaning of Istawa’ is ‘Istawla’ (conquered).

Secondly: That it is contrary to what is apparent in the
expression, because when the term Istawa’ is made
transitive with the use of the preposition ‘Ald (over), it
conveys the meaning of transcendence and settled. This is
what is obvious in the expression. This is its common usage
in the Qur’an and the Arabic Language.

Thirdly: That it implies false implications:

1. It implies that when Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
was creating the heavens and the earth, He had not
taken control of His Throne, because Allah says:

He created the heavens and the earth in six days, and
then He Istawa (rose over) the Throne» (Al-A‘rif 7:54)

And €Then}> (Thumma) restricts the sequence. So, it will
imply that the Throne had been under the control of
other than Allah before the creation of the heavens and
the earth was completed.

The predominant use of the word Istawld is only after a
conquest; whereas, there is none who can overcome
Allah.

Where is the escape route while the God is the Seeker

The one with the disfigured nose is the overcome, not the one

overcoming"!

Among the false implications is that it would be correct
for us to say that Allah Istawa’ over the earth, the trees
and the mountains, because He indeed controls them.

This poem is attributed to Nufail bin Habib; he said it
when Allah sent down the punishment upon owners of the
Elephant. Tafsir Ibn Kathir (4:502)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 505

As for their statement that it implies that He is limited; its
reply is to specifically ask: What do you mean by limited? If
by Him being limited, you mean that He is completely
separate from His creation, as Zaid will have a parcel of
land while ‘Amr also has a parcel of land, when one is
completely separated from the other, this is the truth, there
is no imperfection therein.

But if by him being limited you mean that He is
surrounded by the Throne; then is false, and not implied,
because Allah, Exalted is He, rises over the Throne, and He,
Mighty and Sublime, is greater than the Throne, and
greater than other than it, and that does not imply that the
Throne surrounds Him. Rather, it is not possible that it
surrounds Him because Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He,
is greater and bigger than everything. All the earth will be
grabbed by His Hand on the Day of Resurrection, while the
heavens are rolled up with His Right Hand.

As for their statement that it implies that He is in need of
the Throne; we reply that this is not implied, because the
meaning of His rising above the Throne is that He is above
the Throne; but it is transcendence specific to Him; its
meaning is not that the Throne ever supports Him; for
indeed the Throne does not support Him, and the heavens
do not support Him. This implication which you are
claiming is not possible, because it is an imperfection with
respect to Allah, Mighty and Sublime, and it is not of the
implications of the reality of the Istawa’, because we are not
saying that the meaning of €Then, He Istawa’ over the
Throne> is that the Throne will support Him or carry
Him; the Throne is carried:

€And eight Angels will, that Day, bear the Throne of

504 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

otherwise, we have another answer for this. And that is to
say that the Istawd that is contained in the line (verse) of the
poem means transcendence because transcendence has two
types:

1. Sensory transcendence, such as our ascending upon the
bed.

2. And transcendence in meaning, which means authority
and conquering.

Therefore, the meaning of “Bishr Istawa’ Al-‘Iraq’’ will be
that he ascended, exalting by conquest and force.

But as for your saying that interpreting Istawa to mean
transcendence implies that Allah is a physical entity; its
reply is that whatever is implied in the Book of Allah and
the Sunnah of His Messenger #% is the truth, and it is
compulsory upon us to stick to it. But what is important is
if this is the implication of the statement of Allah and His
Messenger, because there can be what prevents it from
being implied; so, when it is affirmed that it is the
implication, then it should be so, and there is no harm
upon us if we say that.

Then, we ask: What do you mean by the body that is being
denied? If by it, you mean that Allah has no Self, described
with attributes that are inseparable and befitting it, then
your statement is false, because Allah has a real Self,
described with attributes, and He has a Face, a Hand, an
Eye, a Foot. So say whatever you wish to say regarding the
implications which are the implications of the truth.

If, by the body which is denied from Allah, you intend the
body which is composed of bones, flesh, blood and the like,
this is denied from Allah, and saying that Allah’s Istawa’
over the Throne means His transcendence over it does not
necessitate that.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 507

When Abu Al-Ma‘ali Al-Juwaini, may Allah pardon
him, was establishing the methodology of the Ash‘ar-
iyyah, and rejecting Allah’s Istawa’ over the Throne;
rather, he was rejecting Allah's ‘Uli in His Self, he said:
“Allah, Exalted is He, was, and there was nothing other
than him; He is now over what He was over.” He
wanted to deny Allah’s Istawa’ over the Throne.
Meaning: ‘He was, and there was no Throne, and He
is now over what He was over.’ Therefore, He never
ascended over the Throne.

Then, Aba Al-‘Ala’ Al-Hamdhani said to him: “O teacher, let
us leave the mention of the Throne and the rising over the
Throne” - he means, because its proof is of the revealed texts.
If Allah had not informed us of it, we could not have known
of it. — “Inform us about this necessity which we find in our
selves. No sane person will ever say: ‘O Allah’ except that he
finds in his self the necessity to seek the Exalted.”

So, Aba Al-Ma’ali became perplexed and began to hit his
head saying: “Al-Hamdhani confounded me, Al-Hamdha-
ni confounded me!” That was because this is an instinctual
proof which nobody can reject

Surely, your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens
and the earth in six Days and then Istawa (rose over)
the Throne» (Ytinus 10:3) And He says in Strat Ar-
Ra‘d: ¢Allah is He Who raised the heavens without any

506 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

your Lord above them) (Al-Haggah 69:17)

The Angels carry it now, but it does not carry Allah,
Mighty and Sublime, because Allah, Glorified and Exalted
be He, is not in need of it, nor does He require it. With this,
their negating proofs are shown to be false.

The summary of our refutation of their saying is from a
number of viewpoints:

Firstly: That this saying of theirs opposes the apparentness
of the text

Secondly: It opposes the consensus of the Companions,
and the consensus of the Salaf (pious predecessors)
altogether.

Thirdly; That it is not related in the Arabic Language that
the word Istawa means Istawla (conquered) and this line of
poetry used to prove that is not completely usable as a
proof.

Fourthly: That it necessitates false implications:

— Among them, that before the creation of the heavens and
the earth, the Throne was under the control of other than
Allah.

— That the word Istawla (conquered) as usually used,
suggests that there was a struggle for control between
Allah and other than Him, and then later He gained control
over him and overcame him.

— That it is correct that we say - based on your claim - that
Allah Istawa over the land, the trees, the mountains, the
man, and the camel, because He controls these things. If it
is correct to use the word Istawla for something, it is also
correct to use the word Istawa for such thing, because they
are synonymous, according to their claim. With these
points, it becomes clear that their interpretation is false.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 509

nor any that are not seen. If it had pillars, they would be
seen usually; even though Allah, Exalted is He, has
veiled some physical creatures from us for a wisdom
which He wills.

% Concerning His statement: €Then, He Isiawa (rose
above) the Throne> This is the point of reference; what
is said regarding it, is what preceded

And He says in Stirah Ta Ha: 4Ar-Rahman over the
Throne Istawa (rose)> (Taha 20:5)

The Fourth Place, in Sirah Ta Ha: He said:
‏د‎ Je SEY

€Ar-Rahman over the Throne Istawa (rose)> (

أستوئ »

% Ala Al-‘Arsh (over the Throne)> is stated first despite
it being what the 4Istawa (rose) is done to, in order
to indicate restriction, specification and to clarify that
Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, does not rise
above anything apart from the Throne.

And in His mention ¢Ar-Rahman} is an indication of
the fact that He is described with mercy in addition
to His transcendence and greatness.

‎BSS -—‏ ا

‎508 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎pillars that you can see. Then, He Istawa (rose above)
the Throne» (Ar-Ra’d 13:2)

‎nnn DY ‏لج‎

‎+ The Second Place is Sirah Yiinus, Allah, Exalted is He,
says:

‎4Surely, your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens

‎and the earth in six Days and then Istawa (rose over)

‎the Throne} (Yunus 10:3)

‎What say about it, as we have said regarding the first Ayah.
The Third Place, in Stirat Ar-Ra‘d, Allah, Exalted is He,

‎€Allah is He Who raised the heavens without any

‎pillars that you can see. Then, He Istawa (rose above)
the Throne» (Ar-Ra‘d 13:2)

‎He raised the heavens without any pillar>: €Without
any pillary; Does it mean that it does not have any
pillar at all, or it has pillars that are not visible to us?

‎There is a difference of opinion regarding it among the
scholars of Qur‘anic exegesis. Some of them say: the clause
4that you can see» (Tarawnahd) is an adjective for the
4pillar> meaning without any pillars that are seen by
you, and they have pillars that are not seen. Some of
them say: The clause ¢that you can seep (Tarawnahd) is a
new clause that stands on its own. Meaning you see
them like that, without any pillar. The latter view is
closer. The heavens do not have any pillars that are seen,

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 511

dol & ‏ستو‎

it is He Who has created the heavens and the

earth, and all that is between them in six days. Then
He Istawa (rose over) the Throne} (As-Sajdah 3

We say about it as we have said about the two Ayahs of Al-
A’raf and Yui: but there is an addition here: And all that
is between them> Meaning - between the heavens and the
earth. What is between them includes tremendous crea-
tures, deserving to be in the heavens and the earth. Of
these tremendous creatures, some are known to us, such
as the sun, the moon, the stars and the clouds, and
among, them are those that are unknown to us until now

$4

And He says in Siirat Al-Hadid: €He it is Who created
the heavens and the earth in days and then Istawa
(rose over) the Throne.» (Al-Hadid 57:4)

The Seventh Place: In Surat Al-Hadid: He said:

2. ‏فى‎ QE SMG ‏لوت‎
‎» ‏أستوئ & اعرش‎
4He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six days
and then Istawa (rose over) the Throne> (Al-Hadid 57:4)

These are the seven places, in all of them, Allah, Exalted is

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

And He says, in Stirat Al-Furgdn: €Then He Istawa (rose
over) the Throne Ar-Rahman> (Al-Furgin 25:59)

—-- & > > -—-.

The Fifth place:
<

Then He Istawa (rose over) the Throne Ar-Rahman>
(Al-Furgan 25:59)

4Ar-Rahman} is the subject of the verb ¢Istaway.")

And He says in Siirat As-Sajdah: €Allah it is He Who
has created the heavens and the earth, and all that is
between them in six Then He Istawa (rose over)
the Throne} (As-

(Translation note); Meaning, that it is understood as: “Then
Ar-Rahhman Istawa over the Throne.”

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 513

There is a difference of opinion concerning it among the
scholars of Tafsir.There are among them those who said
that their meanings are the same. This is the apparent
interpretation of Ibn Jarir,'"! so the meaning of ¢He Istawa
towards the heaven} is that He rose over to it

Among them are those who said: Rather Al-Istawd’ here
means complete objective. Thus, the meaning, of Istawa
ilaiha is that He focused upon it completely. They
substantiate their interpretation with the fact that the
preposition, Ila, used with it (the verb Istawd) indicates this
meaning, Ibn Kathir, may Allah have Mercy upon him,
held this position, and explained His statement:

¢Then He Istawa towards the heaven» (Al Bagarah
2:29)

To mean the He focused upon the heavens. The meaning of
Al-Istiwa’ here conveys the meaning of the objective, and
turning towards, because it is used with the preposition Id.
As for the one used together with the conjunction of Watw,
its example is such as people's saying: “Istata Al-Ma’u wal-
Khabshatu (the water and the wood)”; to mean that the
water leveled up to the wood.

Asfor whenitis used alone, as in His statement, Exalted is He:

KEES HES GD
4And when he attained his full strength and Istawa>
(Al-Qasas 28 314)

Its meaning (here) is “became complete”

{") (Translation note): Meaning At-Tabari, in his Tafsir

512 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah A fisitiyyah

He, mentions Istawa (rising) that is transitive by the

preposition ‘Ala (above, over)

* Furthermore, the scholars have said: The root of this
form (Sin, Ww Ya’) indicates perfection; (Allah,
Exalted be He, says):

Cad ‏«أتتوّى عل‎
Who has created (everything), and then proportioned it
(Fasawwa)> (Al-A‘la 87:2)

Meaning that He has completed and perfected His creation.
Thus, the origin of the Sin, Waw and Yd’ indicates
perfection.

> Then it (the word Istewa) is (used) in the Arabic

Language in four ways:

With the preposition Ila (to, towards), with the preposition
‘Ala (above, over), together with the conjunction of Waw
(and), and alone.

As for an example of when it is used with the preposition
‘Ala (above, over):

tu & ‏«أستوى‎
‎istawa ‘ala (rose over) the Throne (Al-Hadid 57:4)

As for an example when it is used with the preposition Ila
(to), it is His, Exalted be He, statement:

Then He Istawa ila (towards) the heaven and made
them seven heavens} (Al-Bagarah 2:29)

Is its meaning like the first one, which is used with the
preposition ‘Ala?

40 ‘Isa! I will take you and raise you to Myselfp (Al
‘Imran 3:55) 1

43; Bas Hh

ood =

© Affirmation of Allah’s 1017 (Transcendence) Above
His Creatures

The Commentary

The author, s& mentioned six Aydt concerning Allah's ‘Ula
above His creation.

The first Ayah: His statement:

I will take you and raise you to Myself» (Al
‘Imran 3:55) 1

© The address was directed to ‘Isa bin Maryam, whom
Allah created from a mother without a father; that is
why he was named after his mother. Therefore, it is
said: “Isa the son of Maryam.”

* Allah says: 41 will take you} (Inni mutawaffika) The
scholars mentioned three sayings about it:

The First saying: 41 will take you} (Inni mutawafftka);

meaning “I will collect you.” And from it, is their saying:

“He Tawaffi his right,” meaning collected it.

The Second saying: ¢take you} (mutawaffika) meaning, 1

will cause you to sleep; because sleep is a form of death,
as He, Exalted is He, says:

a
6

514 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

An Important Point:

When we say: “He Istawa above the Throne,” meaning - He
is high above it, then here is a question: “Allah created the
heavens and then rose over the Throne, does that suggest
that He had not been exalted before that?”

The answer is that it does not suggest that, because rising
above the Throne is specific among the absolute transcen-
dence, since rising above the Throne is a transcendence that
is specific for it (the Throne), while the transcendence is
above all creatures. His, Mighty and Sublime, transcen-
dence is affirmed for Him without end, forever. He was
High above all things before He created the Throne. And
Him not rising above the Throne does not imply that He
was not High. Nay, He is High. Then, after the creation of
the heavens and the earth, He rose above the Throne in a
manner that is specific to the Throne.

If you say: We understand from the noble Ayah that when
He was creating the heavens and the earth, He was not
ascendant above the Throne; but before the creation of the
heavens and the earth, was He ascendant above the Throne
or not?

The answer is Allah knows best regarding that.

If you ask: Is Allah’s rising above the Throne an Attribute
of action, or a Self Attribute?

The answer is that it is among the Attributes of action,
because it is dependant upon his will, and every Attribute
that is dependant upon His, is an Attribute of action.

= OS

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. . 517

between them. Thus, He will seize him while he is sleeping.
Meaning that is Allah will make him sleep, and then raise
him. Moreover, there is no contradiction between these
two.

# Concerning His statement: ¢And raise you to Myself>:
Which is the point of reference here. For 410 Myself>
(llayya) implies Al-Ghayah (the utmost). And His
statement: ¢ And raise you to Myself shows that the
one to whom he is being raised is high. So, this
establishes the transcendence of Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime.

If somebody says that what is intended is “I will raise your
status” as Allah, Exalted is He, says:

4502 5 asl GA ‏فى‎ >

4Held in honor in this world and in the Hereafter, and
will be one of those who are near to Allah> (Al ‘Imran
3:45)

We say in reply: This is not right; because the “raise” here
is used with a preposition which is specifically known to be
used to mean above; to express the raising of the body, and
not the raising of status.

% Know that the ‘Lili of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,

is divided into two categories: ‘Uli in meaning, and
‘Uli of the Self.

As for ‘Ulm in meaning, it is affirmed for Allah
according to the consensus of all of the people of the
Qiblah (the Muslims). That is, according to the
consensus of the people of Innovation and the People
of the Sunnah. All of them believe that Allah, Exalted is
He, is Exalted in meaning.

As for ‘Uli in the Self, the People of the Sunnah affirm

Commentary on Al-‘Aqtdah Al-Wasitiyyah

د يفك ب 3

it is He, Who takes your souls by night (when you are
asleep), and has knowledge of all that you have done by
day, then he raises (wakes) you up again, that a term
appointed (your life period) be fulfilled» (Al-An‘am 6:60)

The Third saying: That it is the seizure of death. 41 will
take you> (Inn mutawaffika) meaning - 1 will cause you to
die, Of such meaning is His statement:

4It is Allah Who takes away (yatawaffa) the souls at the
time of their death} (Az-Zumar 39:42)

The view that <will take you} (mutawaffika) means “1 will
cause you to die’ is further (from what is correct);
because ‘Isa has not died; he will descend at the end of
time. Allah, Exalted is He, says:

4And there is none of the people of the Scripture (Jews
and Christians), but must believe in him, before his
death> (An-Nisa’ 4:159)

That is before the death of ‘Isa according to one of the two
opinions (regarding its interpretation). That will be when
he descends at the end of time. It is also said (it means)
before the death of any one of them; meaning - there is
none among the people of Scripture except, that at time of
his death, he is to believe ‘Isa; even if such a person is a
Jew. This saying is weak.

So what remains, is considering the difference between the
taking that means collecting, and the taking that means
sleeping. And we say that it is possible to harmonize

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.

pean

<They fear their Lord above them, and they do what
they are commanded> (An-Nahl 16:50)

3. As for the descent of things from Him, an example is
His statement:

4M Wy Tal ‏الاير مت‎ a>

4He arranges (every) affair from the heavens to the
earth» (As-Sajdah 32:5)

(And)
Verily We: It is We Who have sent down the Dhikr
(the Qur'an)» (Al-Hijr 15:9)

And the like.

4. Regarding the ascension of things to Him, an example
is His statement:

To Him ascend (all) the goodly words, and the
righteous deeds (Fatir 35:10)

And His statement:

<The Angels and the Rith ascend to Him} (Al-Ma‘arij
70:4)

5. As for Him being above the heavens, an example is His
statement:

518 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

it; but the people of Innovation do not affirm it. They
say: “Allah is not, Himself, High.”

So first, we start by mentioning the proofs of the People of
the Sunnah for Allah's ‘Uli, Glorified and Exalted be He, in
His Self. Thus, we say

As evidence, the People of the Sunnah use the Book, the
Sunnah, consensus, the intellect, and the Fitrah to prove the
‘Uli of Allah, Exalted be He, in His Self.

Firstly: The proofs contained in the Book concerning
Allah's ‘Ula are of various categories. Sometimes, by
mention the ‏.17نا”‎ And sometimes, it comes with the
mention of Him being above; sometimes with the mention
of things descending from Him; sometimes with the
mention of things ascending to Him, and sometimes with
the fact that He is above the heavens.

1. As for ‘Uli, an example is His statement:

4Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High> (Al-
4/16 87:1)

2. As for being above

pial Bop
éAnd He is the Irresistible, above His slavesy (Al
An‘am 6:18)

(And)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

had never congregated in a single gathering greater
than that, such that the number of those who
performed Hajj with him were about 100,000, and
those who had died among them were about 124,000,
meaning that the Muslims in general, attended the
gathering. He 2 said: “Listen attentively, have I
conveyed the message?” They said: “Yes.” “Listen
attentively, have I conveyed the message?” They said:
“Yes.” “Listen attentively, have I conveyed the
message?” They said: “Yes.” And he was saying: “O
Allah, be a witness,” pointing to the heaven with his
finger, and pointing with it, at the people. ‏إن‎

Included in this ‏كز‎ his raising his hands toward the heavens
during supplication. This is an affirmation of ‘Ula by
action.

3. As for tacit approval, in the Hadith of Mu’awiyah bin
Al-Hakam, may Allah be pleased with him, he came
with a slave girl, whom he wanted to free. Thus, the
Prophet # asked her: “Where is Allah?” She answered:
“Above the heavens.” The he asked: “Who am I?” She
replied: “The Messenger of Allah.” He said: “Free her,
for indeed she is a believer.””!

This slave girl was not learned, what is common is that
young girls were ignorant; particularly when she was a
slave and not a free girl. She was not in charge of herself.
Yet, she knew that her Lord was above the heavens, while
the lost ones among the children of Adam deny that Allah
is above the heavens, saying that He is not above the
universe, nor below it; nor to the right, nor to the left, or,

1! Reported by Muslim (1218) from the lengthy Hadith of
Jabir bin ‘Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him,
regarding the Hajj of the Prophet #5.

It has preceded, and it was reported by Muslim.

520 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Do you feel secure that He, Who is abave the heavens
(Allah), will not cause the earth to sink with you?> (Al-
Mulk 67:16)

Secondly: As for the Sunnah, it has been narrated from the
Prophet # in his statements, his actions and his tacit
approvals, in Mutawétir narrations.

1. As for the sayings of the Messenger #, they include the
mentioning of ‘Lid and Fawgiyyah (being above).
Among these, his 2% statement: “Glorified be my
Lord, the Most High.”"! And his statement, when
mentioning the heavens, he said: “And Allah is above
the Throne,”!

And the mentioned that Allah is above the heavens, as in
his #8 saying: “Will you not trust me, while I am the trusted
one of He Who is above the heavens,”"!

2. As for actions, an example is his raising his finger
toward the heavens while giving a sermon in the
largest of all gatherings - on the day of ‘Arafah, in the
year of the Farewell Pilgrimage; for the Companions

Reported by Muslim (772) from the Hadith of Hudhaifah,
may Allah be pleased with him.

Reported by Ibn Khuzaimah in Kitab At-Tawltid (1:244), Al-
Lalaka’i in Sharh As-Sunnah (659), and At-Tabarani in Al-
Kabir (9:228). In Al-Majma’ (1:86), Al-Haythami said: “It
was reported by At-Tabarani, and its narrators are
narrators of the Sahih.”"It was also reported by ‏علق‎
‎Bayhaqi in Al-Asmd’ was-Sifat (851), Abu Ash-Shaikh in
Al’Azamah (279), Ad-Darimi in Ar-Radd ‘Alél-Jahmiyyah
(81), and in Al-‘Uld, Adh-Dhahabi said: “Its chain is
authentic.” (Mukhtasar Al-'Uli 48) from the Hadith of Ibn
Mas‘iid, may Allah be pleased with him

Reported by Al-Bukhari (4351) and Muslim (1064) from
Aba Sa’id Al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 523

Our saying “absolute” is a protection against relative
perfection, which will be perfect in a situation, and not in
another situation. Sleep, for example, is an imperfection,
but to the one who is in need of it to make him more
powerful, it is perfection.

Fifthly: As for the proof based on the Fifrah, it is a matter
about arguing and being obstinate are not possible. Every
person instinctually knows that Allah is above the heavens.
That is why if you are suddenly surrounded by a situation
in which you cannot defend yourself, you quickly turn to
Allah to protect you; in such cases, your heart turns
towards the heavens. This happens even to those who
reject the ‘Uli of the Self; they cannot turn their hands (in
supplication) towards the ground. This is the Fifrah which
it is not possible to reject.

They even say that some creatures that do not speak know
that Allah is above the heaven; as in the Hadith wherein it is
related that Sulaiman bin Dawad, may the Salah and Salam
be upon him and his father, once came out to beg Allah on
behalf of the people for rain. When he came out, he saw an
ant lying on its back, raising its feet up towards the heaven,
saying: “O Allah, we are a creation among your creations,
we are not independent of your provision of water. : He
then said to the people, “Go back, you will be provided
with the prayer of other than you “AY ‘This is an inspiration
in the Fitrah

The summary of the matter is, that Allah is above the
heavens, is a matter that is well-known through the Fifrah.

By Allah, if it were not for the spoiled Fitrah of these people
who reject, they would have known that Allah is above the
heavens without having to consult any book, because a

11 it has preceded

522 Commentary on AL‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

that He is in every place!
These are among the proofs from the Book and the Sunnah.

Thirdly: As for the proof of consensus, since the time of the
Messenger # until today, the Salaf (pious predecessors)
agreed that Allah, Exalted is He, is above the heavens in
His Self.

If you ask: “How did they agree?”

We reply by saying that their acknowledgment of these
Aydt and Hadiths with the repetitive mention of ‘Uli,
Fawgiyyah (being above), the descent of things from Him,
and their ascension to Him - without them saying what
opposes that - indicates their consensus upon what they
(the Ayat and the Hadiths) indicate.

That is why Shaykh Al-Islam said: “The Salaf (pious
predecessors) agreed upon that.” He said: “None of them
has said: ‘Allah is not above the heavens’ or ‘Allah is upon
the earth’ or ‘Allah is neither inside the universe nor
outside it, not connected to it nor separated from it’ or ‘it is
not allowed to make a perceptible reference to Him.”

Fourthly: As for proofs based on the intellect, we say: There
is no doubt that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is either
above or below. His being below is impossible because it is
imperfection which implies that something among His
creatures is above Him. So, His ‏انا“‎ would not be
complete, nor would His control be complete, nor His
authority. If His being below is impossible, then being
above is necessary.

There is also another intellectual affirmation, that is to say,
‘Uli’ is an attribute of perfection in everyone possessing
intellect. So when it is an attribute of perfection, it is
necessary that it be affirmed for Allah, because every
Attribute of absolute perfection is affirmed for Allah.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

limitation, do you mean that Allah is separate from His
creation, not within it? This is the truth, based on that
meaning; but we do not use that term, neither as negating
nor affirming, due to what preceded.

As for being physical, what do you mean by a body? Do
you mean a body composed of bones, flesh, skin and the
like? This is false and negated from Allah, because there is
nothing like unto Allah, and He is the Hearing, the Seeing.
Or do you mean by body what sustains itself, being
described with what befits Him? This is the truth, based on
its meaning; but we do not use the term, negating nor
affirming, due to what preceded.

And similarly we say about direction. Do you mean that
Allah, Exalted is He, is in a direction that encompasses
Him? This is false. It is not necessitated by affirming His
Ula. Or, by direction, do you mean a direction of
exaltedness that does not surround Allah? This is the truth;

it is not correct to negate it from Allah, Exalted is He.

<But Allah raised him up (with his body and soul) unto
Himself> (An-Nisa’ 4:158)

- o> -—

The second Ayah: His statement:
€But Allah raised him up (with his body and soul) unto

524 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

matter that is proven by the Fitrah does not need any
research in books.

% Those who deny the ‘Uli of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, in His Self, say: If He was High above the
heavens in His Self, He will be in a direction. If He is in
a direction, He is, therefore, limited and physical; while
this is impossible!

We say, the reply to their saying that it implies that He is
limited and physical is:

Firstly, it is not allowed to falsify the textual proofs with
this kind of reasoning. If this was allowed, every person
who does not want what the textual proofs dictate will
justify his own views with this kind of reasoning.

If Allah affirms ‘Lili for Himself, and His Messenger 2%
affirmed ‘Ula for Him, and the Salaf (pious predecessors)
affirmed ‘Ula for Him, it will not be acceptable for some
person to come and say: “It is not possible that His ‘Ul be
of the Self, because if it was of the Self, then He would be
such-and-such.”

Secondly: We say, that if what you mentioned was correct
about the implication of affirming ‘Uli, then we will still
say it, because the implication of the speech of Allah and
His Messenger is the truth; since Allah, Exalted is He,
knows what His saying suggests. If the textual proofs
concerning ‘Uli had implied any false meaning, He would

have explained that, but it does not imply any false
meaning.

Thirdly: Then, we are asking what is the limitation and the
body that you heaped upon us with all your might?

By limitation, do you mean that something among creation
will surround Allah? This is false and negated from Allah,
it is not necessitated by affirming ‘Ula for Allah. Or, by

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

The third Ayah:

4To Him ascend the goodly words, and the righteous
deeds} (Fatir 35:10)

% To Him: To Allah, the Mighty and Sublime

& Ascend the goodly words: <(the goodly words)» (Al
Kalim) is a noun of a plural category. Its singular is
Kalimah (a word) and the plural of Kalimah is Kalimat
(words). And goodly words comprise all the words
with which one draws nearer to Allah, such as
recitation of the Qur'an, Dhikr (remembrance of
Allah), seeking knowledge, enjoining good and prohi-
biting evil. Therefore, every word by which one

526

Himselfy (An-Nisa’ 4:158)

% <Butp (Bal) is used to oppose the falsity, due to the
falsehood of their saying:

<We killed the Messiah ‘Isa, son of Maryam, the
Messenger of Allah, - but they killed him not, nor
crucified him, but the resemblance of ‘Isa was put over
another man, and those who differ therein are full of
doubts. They have no knowledge, they follow nothing
but conjecture. For surely; they killed him not. But

aes raised him up unto Himself. And Allah is Ever draws nearer to Allah is a goodly word. It ascends to

Mighty, Wise> (An-Nis@’ 4:157-158) Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and reaches Him,
and Allah also exalts good deeds to Himself

Thus, the words ascend to Allah, and the good deeds are

raised up by Allah. Moreover, this shows that Allah is High
in His Self, because things ascend to Him and are raised up.

Allah belied them with His statement: <For surely; they
killed him not. But Allah raised him up unto Himself.»

The point of reference is His statement: ¢But Allah raised him
up unto Himself> because it is clear that Allah, Exalted is
He, is High, in His Self, since raising unto something,
indicates the highness of what is being raised to.

And His statement: 4© Haman! Build me a Sarh that I

3 ‏ل‎ may arrive at the ways. The ways of the heavens, and I

>10 Him ascend the goodly words, and the righteous ‘may look upon the ‏لقا[‎ (God) of Misa, but verily, 1
meets (Fatir 35:10) think him to be a liar (Ghafir 40:36-37)

oo & -------—

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. .

clear} (Al-Isra’ 17:102)

And he did not say: “I do not know.” Rather, he admitted
this information, emphasized with the use of Larn, Qad and
the oath.

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, said in another Ayah:

ay

4And they belied them wrongfully and arrogantly,
though their ownselves were convinced thereof. > (An-
Naml 27:14)

The reference here is that Fir‘awn commanded the
construction of a tower with which he could look upon
the God of Masa, and that indicates that Misa said to
Fir'awn and his people: “Indeed; Allah is above the
heavens.” Therefore, Allah’s “Uli had come in the previous
Shari‘ahs.

And His statement: €Do you feel secure that He, Who is
over the heaven (Allah), will not cause the earth to sink
with you, then behold it shakes (as in an earthquake)?
Or do you feel secure that He, Who is over the heaven
(Allah), will not send against you a Hasib (violent
whirlwind)? Then you shall know how (terrible) has
been My Warning?} (Al-Mulk 67:16-17)

528 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The fourth Ayah:

60 Haman! Build me a Sarh that | may arrive at the
ways. The ways of the heavens, and I may look upon
the Ilah (God) of Mtisd, but verily, I think him to be a
liar» (Ghafir 40:36-37)

Haman was a minister of Fir‘awn, the one who ordered the
construction of the tower is Fir'awn.

>» = ¢Sarh>: That is a tall building.

* <That I may arrive at the ways. The ways of the
heavens» meaning - that I may arrive at the routes
that lead to the heavens.

4And I may look upon the ah (God) of Miisay:
Meaning, so that I may look at Him, and get to Him
directly, because Masa said to him: “Allah is above
the heavens,” so Fir'awn deceived his people by
seeking the construction of this elevated tower, so
that he could climb up it and then say: “I did not see
anyone.” It is also possible that he said so as a
derision, saying: “Masa said that his God is above
the heavens, let us climb up to see him’ deriding
him

Whatever it is, he had said: 41 think him to be a liar> to

deceive people; otherwise, he knows that he (Musa) is

truthful. Musa had said to him:

Le ONG oS Gl ‏إلا رب‎ Se GIG ote lap
€Verily, you know that these signs have been sent down
by none but the Lord of the heavens and the earth as

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 531

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, threatened us with a
punishment from above, and from beneath. Allah, Exalted
is He, says:

a4,

So We punished each (of them) for his sins, of them
were some upon whom We sent a Hasib, and of them
were some who were overtaken by As-Sayhah, and of
them were some whom We caused the earth to swallow,
and of them were some whom We drowned» (Al-
‘Ankabiit 29:40)

Four types of punishment (are mentioned in this Ayah).

Here, (in the Ayah under consideration) Allah mentions
two of them: Al-Hasib (a violent wind with a shower of
stones) and the collapsing of the earth.

The point of reference from this Ayah is His statement:
<Who is above the heavens.» The One above the heavens is
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and this is a proof of
Allah’s “Ula in His Self.

However, there is a problem here, and that is the
preposition Fi being used as an adverb. So, since Allah is
Fi the heaven, then (it will be understood that) the adverb
encompasses what it refers to. Do you not see, that if you
say: “The water is in the cup.” The cup will then
encompass the water, and is wider than the water.

So, if Allah says: €Do you feel secure that He who is in the
heaven> apparently, this implies that the heavens
surround Allah. This apparent meaning is false. And
when the apparent meaning is false, then we know with

Commentary on Al-Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The fifth and the sixth Ayat:

4Do you feel secure that He, Who is over the heaven
(Allah), will not cause the earth to sink with you, then
behold it shakes (as in an earthquake)? Or do you feel
secure that He, Who is over the heaven (Allah), will not
send against you a Hasib (violent whirlwind)? Then you
shall know how (terrible) has been My Warning?> (Al-
Mulk 67:16-17)

The One over the heavens is Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, but He referred to Himself with this because
in this case, He is exhibiting His greatness, and that He
is above you, that He has power over you, controlling
you, prevailing upon you, because it is the One who is
Exalted that has the control over the one below Him.

* Then behold it shakes}: That is, it quakes.

And the reply is that by Allah! We do not feel secure,

rather, we are afraid for ourselves of the earth sinking with

us because, because of our numerous acts of disobedience.

With these quakes, which people today refer to as

mudslides, and rock slides, and the like, it is these that

Allah is threatening us with, but they invent these

expressions so that the matter appears less grave to

intellectually immature people.

2 Will not send against you a Hasib (violent whirlwind)?}:
A Hiasib (violent whirlwind) is a punishment from
above, pelting them with stones, as was done with
the people before them were, like Lat, and Ashab Al-
Fil (the owners of Elephants). The collapse of the
earth is from beneath.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 533

to mean ‘Ald (above). Fir'awn said to the magicians -
those who believed:

4And I will surely crucify you Ff the trunks of date-
palms> (Ta Ha 20:71) j

That is “On the trunks of date-palms.”

Therefore, the meaning of <Who is Fi the heavens} is the
one who is above the heayens. Then, there is no problem
after this. If you ask: “How do you harmonize between
this Ayah, and His statement, Exalted is He:

ay ‏إلّه‎ Gait ‏فى‎

4It is He (Allah) Who is the only Mah in the heavens
and the orily lah on the earth> (Az-Zukhruf 43:84)

And His statement

4 Sis Se GN 35 opal ‏فى‎ al ip
And He is Allah in the heavens and on the earth, He

knows what you conceal and what you revealy (Al-
An‘am 6:3)?” ١

Then the reply is that we say: In the case of the first Ayah:
Allah says:

It is He (Allah) Who is the only lah in the he
and the only Ilah on the earth.» (Az-Zukhruf 43:84)

The adverb here refers to His Uldhiyyah (divinity), that is
His Ulihiyyah (divinity) is affirmed in the heavens and in
the earth, just as you would say: “So-and-so is the Amir in
Al-Madinah and in Makkah,” — while he himself, is in

532 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah ALV

certainty that it is not what Allah intended, because it is

not possible that the apparent meaning of the Book and

the Sunnah would be false.

Then, what is the response concerning this problem?

The scholars said that the response is from one of these two

paths:

1. That we either understand the meaning of As-Sama”
(heavens) to mean “highness” since the use of
“heavens” to mean highness is reported in the Arabic
Language, even in the Quran. He, Exalted is He, says:

6% ‏أي‎ 5G ‏م‎ Est ‏ين‎ >
€He sends down water from the heavens, and the
valleys flow according to their measure> (Ar-Ra‘d

13:17)

What is intended with the As-Sama’ (the heavens) here is
highness, because the water descends from the clouds not
from the heavens, which are the preserved roof, while the
clouds in the heights are between the heavens and the
earth, as Allah, Exalted is He, says:
40NG Seal & ‏الْسَخَرٍ‎ Linas >
nd the clouds which are held between the sky and the
earthy (Al-Bagarah 2:164)

Therefore, the meaning of <Who is above the heavens. is

“One in the highness”. Then, there is no problem after

this; He is, therefore High; nothing is beside Him, nor

above Him.

2. Or, we consider the word Fi to mean ‘Alf (above), and
consider that the heavens that are the preserved, raised,
roof to be the heavenly bodies. The preposition Fi is
used in the Arabic Language, even in the noble Qur'an

Commentary On The Introductory Notes..

earth. Therefore, the fact that He is above the heaven with
His ‘Ulu, does not prevent Him from knowing what you
conceal, and what you reveal on the earth. There is a kind
of weakness in this interpretation, because it requires
splitting the Ayah, and not connecting part of it to the other.
The correct interpretation is the first one. That we should
say:

€GNi 85 OSCE ‏في‎ Ail >

4And He, is Allah in the heavens and on the earthy (Al-
An‘am 6:33)

Means that His Ulihiyyah (divinity) is affirmed in the
heavens and the earth, so it is in accord with the other
Ayah.

Among the behavioral benefits derivable from this Ayah;

If somebody knows that Allah, Exalted is He, is above
everything, such a person will realize the greatness of His
sovereignty and control upon his creation. Therefore, he
will fear Him and revere Him. If a man fears his Lord, and
reveres Him, he would be beware of disobeying Him, and
fulfill His obligations, and leave what is unlawful.

HOS

© The Affirmation of Allah Ma’iyyah With His Creation

The Commentary

The author began with the quotation of the proofs of
Allah’s Ma‘iyyah with His creation; that is, the proofs of

534 Commentary on Al-’Aqidah Al-Wisitiyyah

only one of them. But, in his Imdrah (leadership) and
authority, he is in both, so the Ulithiyyah of Allah, Most
High, is both in the heavens and the earth. But as for
Him, the Mighty and Sublime, then He is above the

heavens.
As for the second Ayah:

4GN! 3 ‏في أَلسَمَوّتِ‎ al 3
€And He is Allah (to be worshipped Alone) in the
heavens and on the earth) (Al-An‘ém 63)

We said about it, as we said about the one that preceded it
4And He is Allah>: That is - He is the Ilah (God) whose
Uhihiyyah (divinity) is in the heavens and the earth. As
for Him, Himself; then He is above the heavens. So the
meaning is that He is the One Who is deified in the
heavens, and the One Who is deified in the earth, so His
Ulihiyyah (divinity) is in the heavens and the earth.

So this Ayah is explained as the Ayah before it is explained.

It is said that the meaning of the Ayah is that you should
recite it:

Soil ‏أَنَهُ في‎ seep
4And He is Allah (to be worshipped Alone) in the
heavens}

Then you stop; then you recite:
4S

4And on the earth, He knows what you conceal and
what you reveal> (Al-An‘am 6:3)

Meaning that He, Himself, is above the heavens, and He
knows what you conceal, and what you reveal, on the

Commentary On The Introductory Notes
statement concerning His Prophet:

4And he said to his companion : “Be not sad (or afraid),
surely Alldh is with us’ (At-Tawbah 9:40)

He said to Masa and Haran:

Verily! Iam with you both, hearing and seeing> (Ta
Ha 20:46)

This (category) is more particular than the specific category
which is restricted to an attribute.

Hence, the Ma‘iyyah is of levels: absolutely general, the
specific that is restricted to a description, and the specific
that is restricted to a person.

The most specific category is the category that is restricted
to a person, then the one restricted to a description, then
the one that is general.

So the general Ma’iyyah implies that He encompasses His
creation in knowledge, power, hearing, seeing, controlling
and so on, among the implications of His Rububiyyah
(Lordship). And the specific Ma’iyyah, with its two
categories, implies His support and aid.

@ The Second Matter: Is the Ma’iyyah a reality or a state of
knowledge of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and His
hearing, His seeing, His Power, His Authority and other
than these meanings that are included in His Rubibiyyah?

The majority of the Salaf (pious predecessors), may Allah

have mercy upon them, said that it is a reference to the

state of knowledge, hearing, seeing, power and the like.
They, therefore, considered the meaning of His saying:

536 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Allah's being with His creation. It is appropriate that he
mentions it after the mention of Al-’Uli; since it may occur
to a person that there is a contradiction between Him being,
above everything, and Him being with His slaves. There-
fore, it is quite appropriate that he mentioned the Aydt that
affirm Allah’s Ma‘iyyah with His creation, after the mention
of the Aydt concerning Al-'Lila

There are some matters regarding Allah's Ma‘iyyah with
His creatures that require further discussion:

The First Matter; Its categories:

The Ma’iyyah of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is divided
into two categories: general and specific.

The specific is also divided into two categories: That which
is restricted to a particular person and that which restricted
to a particular description.

‘As for the general, it is the one which includes everyone,
whether a believer, disbeliever, righteous person and
wicked person. Its evidence is His, Exalted is He,
statement

éAnd He is with you wherever you may be> (Al-Hadid
57:4)
Asforthespecificcategory thatis restricted toa pa rticular
description, an example is His, Exalted is He, statement:

€
Truly, Allah is with those who have Taqwa, and those
who are Muhsiniin (good-doers)> (An-Nahl 16:128)

B. As for the specific category that is restricted to a
particular person, an example is His, Exalted is He,

Commentary On The Introd

creation, while the creatures are nothing compared to Him,
and He is above His heavens?!”

What he, may Allah have mercy upon him, said, is a
refutation of the proofs used by some people of Ta‘fil, who
argued against the People of the Sunnah, saying: “You do
not allow Ta’wil, yet you use Ta’wil in the case of Ma‘iyyah
You say the Ma‘iyyah means knowledge, hearing, seeing,
power, authority, and the like.”

So, we say that the Ma’iyyah is real according to its reality,
but not in the manner that has been understood by the
Jahmiyyah and their like; that He is with people in every
place, and the interpretation of some of the Salaf (pious
predecessors) that it means knowledge and the like, is an
interpretation with what it implies.

+ The Third Matter: Is the Ma‘iyyah among the Attri-
butes of the Self, or the Attributes of action?

There are some details regarding this:

As for the general Ma‘iyyah, it is regarding the Self, because
Allah always was will always continue to encompass His
creation in knowledge, power, authority and other than
that from the meanings of Rubibiyyah.

As for the specific Ma‘iyyah, it is an Attribute of action,
because it follows the will of Allah; and every Attribute that
goes along with a reason, it is among the Attributes of action.
It has preceded in our discussion that Ar-Rida (pleasure) is
one of the Attributes of action, because it is connected to a
reason. If the reason for which Allah will be pleased exists,
the pleasure will be found; in the like manner is the specific
Ma‘iyyah. Once, Taqwa of Allah, or other than it among its
reasons, is found in a person, Allah is with him.

The Fourth Matter: Is it a reality or not?

_Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasi|

¢And He is with you} (Al-Hadid 57:4)

To mean: “He knows about you, hears your words, sees
your deeds, has power over you, He judges among you,’””
and the like; they interpreted it with what that implies.

In this book, and in others, Shaikh Al-Islam, may Allah have
mercy upon him, chose the view that it (Ma‘iyyah) is a
reality in the real sense, and that Him being with us is a
reality in the real sense; however His being with us is not
like as a person will be with another person, in such a case
where it is possible that he is together with that person ina
particular place, because the Ma’iyyah of Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, is affirmed for Him, while He is in His “Lili
(exaltedness), So, He is with us, though He is high over His
Throne, above everything, It is not at all possible that He is
with us in the places that we are.

Based upon this, there is a need to harmonize between it
(Ma‘iyyah) and Al-‘Uli.

The author gave this a separate section, and its explanation
will soon come - Allah willing; and (the explanation) that
there is no contradiction between the ‘Ula and the
Ma‘iyyah, because there is nothing like Allah in all His
Attributes; so He is High in nearness, near in His
Highness."

Shaikh Al-Islam, may Allah have mercy upon him, cited the
example of the moon; he said: “It is said: ‘The moon is with
us while we are walking;’ while it is in the heavens. And it
is one of the smallest creatures; then, how is that the
Creator, the Mighty and Sublime, can not be with the

See the beginning of the second volume.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 541

with a telescope and by that he is with them, because he
can now see them, as if they are directly before him, while
he is far from them. Hence the matter is possible with
regard to the creature; how would it not be then possible
with respect to the Creator?

‘The Third perspective: If it wasimpractical that they both be
true in the case of a creature, it is not impractical in the case of
the Creator, for Allah is more Magnificent and more Majestic,
and it is not possible that the Attributes of the Creator are
compared to, the attributes of the creatures, due to the clear
distinction between the Creator and the creatures.

‘The Messenger #% was saying during his journey: “O Allah,
you are the companion (As-Sahib) on the journey, and the
Khalifah regarding my family.”"") So, he combined between
Him being his companion, and Him being his Khalijah over
his family, whereas this is not possible with respect to the
creature. It is not possible that a person is your companion
on a journey, and at the same time he is your deputy
looking after your household.

It is established in the authentic Hadith”! that; “ Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, would say when the person praying
says: All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the ‘Alamin};
“My servant praised Me.”

How many praying persons will say €All praise is due to
Allah, the Lord of the ‘Alamfn}? They are countless.

How many times does a Muslim praying recite €Al! praise
is due to Allah, the Lord of the ‘Alaminy while another

[Reported by Muslim (1342) from Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be
pleased with him.
Reported by Muslim (395) from Aba Hurairah, may Allah

be pleased with him.

540 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

We have mentioned that. And that from the Salaf are those
who interpreted it with what it implies, which means that
which it is not possible for a person to see other than it.
And from them are those who said it is according to i

reality, but, that it is a Ma‘iyyah that befits Allah, which is
specific to Him.

Furthermore, this is what is clear from the words of the
author here, in this book and others, but, it is to be
protected from false assumptions. Like assuming that Allah
is with us on the earth, and its like, for indeed, this is an
impossible falsehood!

* The Fifth Matter Concerning the Ma‘iyyah: Is there a
contradiction between it and Al-‘Ula?

The answer is that there is no contradiction between them,
due to three perspectives:

The First perspective: Allah mentions both of them
together among what He describes Himself with, if they
were contradictory, Allah would not have described
Himself with both of them.

The Second perspective: We say that there is fundamen-
tally no contradiction between Al-‘Uia and Al-Ma’iyyah,
since it is possible that something to be high while it is with
you. An example being the saying of the Arabs: “The moon
is with us while we are walking, the sun is with us while
we are walking, the star is with us while we are walking”
despite the fact that the moon, the sun and the star are all in
the sky. So, if Al-‘Uli and Al-Ma‘iyyah can be combined
with respect to a creature, their combination with respect to
the Creator is more worthy.

Consider that someone is over a high mountain and is
telling the soldiers: “Go to a far place on the battleground,
and I am with you” while he is watching them from afar

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

He created the heavens and the earth in six days, and
then He Istawa (rose over)» (Al-Hadid 57:4)

(And)

4He knows what goes into the earth} (Al-Hadid 57:4)

And similarly, the pronoun:

45a: sd
4And He is with you> (Al-Hadid 57:4)

So it is obligatory upon us to believe in the apparentness of
the noble Ayah, and that we know with certain knowledge,
that this Ma‘iyyah does not dictate that Allah is with us on
the earth. Rather, He is with us, with His Istawa’ over the
Throne.

When we believe in this Ma’‘iyyah, it will cause us to have
awe of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and to have Taqwa
of Him. Thus, it is reported in the Hadith: “The most
virtuous of faith is that you know that Allah is with you
wherever you are.”!"!

"Reported by At-Tabarani in Al-Kabir and Al-Awsal as
found in Majma’ Az-Zawd‘id (1:60), Al-Bayhagi in Al-Asma
wass-Sifit (907) and Aba Nu’aim in Al-Hilyah. The Hadith
was graded weak by Al-Albani in Da‘if Al-Jami’ (1002). The
Hadith has been stated with the wording: “Purifying the
soul is to know that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is with
him wherever he is.” It was reported by Al-Baihaqi in As-
Sunan (4:95), Ibn Abi ‘Asim in Al-Ahad wal-Mathani (1062),
and Al-Fasawi in Al-Ma‘rifah wat-Tarikh (1:269), with a
Sahih chain, as found in As-Silsilah As-Sahihah (1064)

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

recites ¢You (Alone) We worship and You (Alone) we ask for
help}; when each of the two has his own specific
response (from Allah).

The one who recites ‏الث‎ praise is due to Allah, the Lord of
the ‘Alaminy, Allah will say to him: “My servant praised
Me”. And the one who recites: €You (Alone) We worship
and You (Alone) we ask for helpy, Allah says to him: “This
is between My servant and 1; two halves...”

Therefore, it is possible that Allah is with us in reali
while He is also above His Throne, above the heavens, in
reality. None will understand that these are contradictory
except he who wants to liken Allah to His creation, and
make the Ma‘iyyah of the Creator like the Ma‘iyyah of the
creatures.

We have explained the possibility of harmonizing between
the textual proofs about Al-Uhi and the textual proofs
about Al-Ma‘iyyah; so either that is clear, or else it is
obligatory upon the servant to say; “I believe in Allah and
His Messenger, and I trust what Allah said about Himself,
and His Messenger.” He should not say: “How is that
possible?!” Denying that!

If he says: “How is that possible?” We reply (to him): This
question of yours is an innovation. The Companions never
asked such a question; meanwhile they are better than you.
And the one they would question is more knowledgeable,
more truthful, more eloquent and better at advising than
the one you are asking. It is upon you to admit and avoid
asking how? Why? Instead, surrender yourself completely

Note;

Consider the Ayah, you will discover that all the pronouns
therein are referring to Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

speech of Allah, Exalted is He.

Secondly: Your statement that nothing is understood from

the Ma‘iyyah except mixing and accompanying in a place!

This is not possible.

Al-Ma'iyyah in the Arabic Language is a noun that is

generally used to convey “accompanying,” and it indicates

a broader meaning than what you have claimed. It can

imply mixing; it can imply accompanying in a place; it can

also imply a general kind of accompaniment, while the

places are different. These are three things: 3

1. An example of Al-Ma’iyyah that implies mixing, is to
say: “Get me milk with water” meaning - one that is
mixed with water.
An example of Al-Ma’iyyah that implies being together
in a place, is that you say: “I met so-and-so with so-
and-so, walking together and descending together.”
An example of Al-Ma‘iyyah that does not imply being
together in a place is to say: “So-and-so is with his
soldiers” even though he is in the command center, yet,
he is directing them. Thus, there is no mixing in this
case, nor being together in a place.

It is said: “The wife of so-and-so is with him” even if she is

in the East while he is in the West.

Therefore, Al-Ma‘iyyah - is as said by Shaikh Al-Islam Tbn
Taymiyyah, may Allah have mercy upon him, and as
evident from the linguistic proofs - in its general usage
indicates accompaniment, then, it will be in accord with
whatever is attributed to it.

If it is said:

€Truly, Allah is with those who have Tagwa> (An-Nalil 16:128)

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wiasitiyyal

But as for the people of pantheism, they said: “Allah is with
us in His Self in our places. If you are in the Masjid, then,
Allah is with you in the Masjid. Those who are in the
market, Allah is with them in the market! Those who are in
the toilets, Allah is with them in the toilets!” They never
exalted Him above filth, putridity, and places of vanity and
lewdness.

>» The Sixth Matter: Concerning the doubts of those who
say that Allah is with us in our places, and the
refutation against them.

Their doubt is that they say this is the clear and obvious

meaning of the statement: ¢And He is with you}; because
all the pronouns are referring to Allah:

4 cM Sad
€He it is Who created...)

teal o>
4... and then He Istawa (rose over).,.>

aa?

4... He knows...>

SS YS 2
and He is with you> (Al-Hadid 57:4)

If He is with us, we do not understand anything from this
Ma‘iyyah except mixing, and accompanying in a place.

The refutation against them is from various perspectives:

Firstly: Its apparentness is not as you have said, since if
what you said was what was apparent from it, there would
be a contradiction between the Ayah: that He rises above
the Throne, while He is with every person in every place!
And, it is impossible that there be a contradiction in the

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 547

the earth” then he is a disbeliever; he should be asked to
repent while the truth should be explained to him. He then
either repents; or else, executing him is required.

The following are the Ayat that discuss Al-Ma‘iyyah:

He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six
days and then Istawd (rose over) the Throne. He knows
what goes into the earth and what comes forth from it,
what descends from the heavens, and what ascends
thereto, And He is with you wherever you may be. And
Allah sees what you do» (Al-Hadid 57:4)

He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six
days and then Istawa (rose over) the Throne. He knows
what goes into the earth and what comes forth from it,
what descends from the heavens, and what ascends
thereto. And He is with you wherever you may be. And
Allah sees what you doy (Al-Hadid 57:4)

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

That does not imply mixing nor sharing a place together,
rather, it is a Ma‘iyyah that befits Allah; and what it implies
is victory and support

Thirdly, we say: You describe Allah with this?! Among the
falsest of falsehoods! And worst of deficiencies for Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime! And Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
mentioned it here about Himself as a means of praise; that He
- with His ‘Uli above His Throne - is with the creation, even
though they are below Him. So when you consider Allah to
be on the earth, then this is an imperfection.

If you consider Allah Himself to be with you in every place,
while you enter the toilet; this is the worst of all the forms
of belittling. You cannot say to a king of this world: “You
are in the toilet.” So how can you say that to Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime? Is this anything other than the worst
of all defects? And we seek refuge in Allah.!?

Fourthly: This statement of yours will necessitates one of
two matters for which there is no third; and both of them are
impossible: Either Allah is divided into parts; each part of
Him is ina place; or, He is more than one; meaning that every
god is in a certain direction due to the multitude of places.

Fifthly: We say that this statement of yours necessitates
that Allah is dwells within the creation, so every place in
the universe, Allah is in it. This is a means of submission to
the people of Walidat Al-Wujiad.")

You now see that this statement is false and that such
saying dictates disbelief.

That is why we say that whoever says: “Allah is with us on

(Translation note) “Unity of existence” meaning, nothing

exists but Allah; everything is Him, the peak of the
teachings of Tasawwuf and ‘Ilm Al-Kalam.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 549

inform them of what they did. Verily, Allah is the
knower of everything» (Al-Mujadilah 58:7)

His statement: <There is nop absolutely, meaning - it
is not found.

> His statement: <Najwa (secret counsel) of three}; it is
said that it is a way of attaching the description to
what is being described. Its root is “from three in
secret counsel” and the meaning of €Najwa> is those
who are involved in the secret counsel.

His statement: <But He is their fourth> and He did not
say: “but He is their third’” because He is not from
their kind, as such, the next number will be men-
tioned. But if it were of the same kind, the same
number will be mentioned, Consider His, Exalted ‏كذ‎
‎He, statement concerning the Christians:

ME di Sy BG &,

<Surely, they have disbelieved who said: “Allah is the
third of the three.» (Al-Ma'idah 5:73)

They did not say: “the third of the two,” because they are
claiming that He is of the same kind! In their view, all the
three are gods, and as they claim, they are from the same
kind, and they said regarding Him: “The third of the
three.”

+ His statement: «Nor of five, but He is their sixth} - He
mentions the odd numbers three, and five, and is
silent about the even numbers, but they are included
in His statement: €Nor less than that> And what is
less than three is two. Also, €Nor more} than five,
that is six and beyond.

Therefore, there are no two people, or more, engaged in a
secret council anywhere on the earth, except that Allah, the

548 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The point of reference here, is His statement: €And He is
with you wherever you may be> This is from the category
of the general Al-Ma‘iyyah; because it suggests His
encompassing the creation in knowledge, power, author-

ity, hearing, seeing and other than the meanings of
Rububiyyah.

And His statement : €There is no Najwa (secret counsel)
of three, but He is their fourth, nor of five, but He is
their sixth, not less than that, nor more, but He is with
them wherever they may be; then, on the Day of
Resurrection, He will inform them of what they did

Verily, Allah is the knower of everything» (Al-
Mujadilah 58:7)

—$ oo —

The Second Ayah: His statement:

There is no Najwa (secret counsel) of three, but He is
their fourth, nor of five, but He is their sixth, not less
than that, nor more, but He is with them wherever they
may be; then, on the Day of Resurrection, He will

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...
CEE IS GS ‏لا‎
‎4Do not grieve, surely Allah is with us. (At-Tawbah
9:40)

The third Ayah: His statement:

Do not grieve, surely Allah is with us> (At-Tawbah
9:40)
The address was to Aba Bakr from the Prophet 4. Allah,
Exalted is He, says:

4If you help him not (it does not matter), for Allah did
indeed help him when the disbelievers drove him out,
the second of two, when they were in the cave, and he
said to his companion: “Do not grieve, surely Allah is
with us’ (At-Tawbah 9:40)
Firstly: His help when he was driven out. And €When the
disbelievers drove him out>
Secondly: When they were hiding in the cave, <When they
were in the cave>
Thirdly: During the harsh time when the polytheists stood
at the entrance of the cave, €And he said to his companion :
“Do not grieve>
In these three situations, Allah, Exalted is He, explained

550 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Mighty and Sublime, is with them.

And this Ma‘iyyah is general, because it includes every-
body; the believer, the disbeliever, the righteous and the
wicked. Its implication is that He encompasses them in
knowledge, power, hearing, seeing, authority, arranging
affairs, and other than that.

> His statement: ¢Then, on the Day of Resurrection, He
will inform them of what they did>, meaning - that this
Ma‘iyyah implies recording what they did; so that on
the Day of Resurrection, He will inform them of what
they did. Meaning, He will inform them of it, and
hold them to account for it. This is because what is
intended by informing them is what that implies,
which is reckoning. But if they are believers, Allah,
Exalted is He, will count their deeds and then say: “I
covered them for you in the world, today, I have
pardoned them for you.’’!"!

His, the Mighty and Sublime, statement: Verily, Allah
is the Knower of everything}; everything, existing or
not, possible, necessary, or impossible; everything,
Allah knows it.
Earlier we discussed the Attribute of knowledge, and
explained that the knowledge of Allah reaches everything,
whether the necessary or the impossible, the small and the
large, the evident and the hidden.

1 Its reference preceded, and it is in the Two Saltihs

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

and did not see them. Allah made their vision blind.

As for the statement of the one who said: “A spider came
and weaved a web at the entrance of the cave, and then, a
pigeon flew into the entrance of the cave, so that when the
polytheists came, the pigeon was at the entrance, while the
spider had constructed its nest. They then said: ‘Nobody is
here’ and then went away.) This is false!

It was from the divine protection, and as a clear and
convincing sign, that the cave remained open without any
visible barrier; despite that, they could not see who was in
it. This was the sign. But that the pigeon came and the
spider built its nest; this is inconsistent and contrary to his
statement: “If anyone of them looks at his foot, he will
definitely see us.”

What is important is that some historians, may Allah
pardon them, report things that are strange, odd and
rejected, which are not acceptable to the intellect nor
conveyed authentically.

eee

And His statement: €Verily, | am with you both,
hearing and seeing> (Taha 20:46)

In Al-Majma’ (6:53), Al-Haithami attributed it to Al-Bazzar
and At-Tabarani, and said: “In it is a group I do not know.’
Also, reported by Ibn Sa‘d in At-Tabagat (1:29). See Ad-
Da’ifah by Al-Albani (1128), for he has graded it weak.

552 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

giving His help to his Prophet #% therein.

In this third situation, when the polytheists stood above
them, Abu Bakr said: “O the Messenger of Allah, if anyone
of them looks at his foot, he will surely see us." Meaning
- ‘we are at risk,’ which is similar to the statement of the
Companions of Masa when they reached the sea:

We are sure to be overtaken} (Ash-Shu’ara’ 26:61)
Musa said (in response):

4Nay, verily! With me is my Lord, He will guide me>
(Ash-Shu ‘ara’ 26:62)

Here, the Prophet 2% said to Aba Bakr: €Do not grieve,
surely, Allah is with us> to calm him, and bring a sense of
security to his heart, and he gave the reasoning for that,
by saying: <Surely, Allah is with us>

>» His statement here; €Do not grieve} is a statement of
prohibition, that includes every form of anxiety that
occurred and that will occur. It can be used for the
past or the future.

Al-Hazin (grief): refers to the pains of the soul, and its
severe concerns.

*% Surely, Allah is with us}, this specific Ma‘iyyah,
restricted to the Prophet # and Aba Bakr. It
suggests, in addition to the encompassing which is
the general Ma‘iyyah, it implies help and support.

That is why the Quraish stood at the entrance of the cave

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (3653) and Muslim (2381) from
Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

And His statement: €Truly, Allah is with those who
have Taqwa, and those who are Muhsintin (good-
doers)» (An-Nahl 16:128)

The Fifth Ayah; His statement:

Zt 3 ROH “at
4S! ‏هم‎ Uy ‏أتقوا‎ Gell ‏مَعَ‎
‎Truly, Allah is with those who have Taqwa, and those

who are Muhsiniin (good-doers)> (An-Nahil 16:128)

This came after His statement:

4And if you punish, then punish them with the like of
that with which you were afflicted. But if you endure
patiently, verily, it is better for As-Sabirin. And endure
you patiently, your patience is not but from Allah. And
grieve not aver them, and be not distressed because of
what they plot» (An-Naljl 16:126-127)

Punishing the criminal with what is similar to their crime is
an act of Taqwa. But if more, then it will be oppression and
tyranny, while to pardon is Ihsan.

That is why He said:
€Truly, Allah is with those who have Taqwa, and those
who are Muhsinan (good-doers)> (An-Nahl 16:128)

554 Commentary on AL-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The Fourth Ayah: His statement:

Verily, 1 am with you both, hearing and seeing.>
(Taha 20:46)

This was an address to Masa and Haran when Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, commanded them to go to Fir'awn.
He said:

GEA o HA
Yio gh IAC IGE G Hi oe

4.5) ITE 5) te
4Go, both of you, to Fir‘awn, verily, he has
transgressed. And speak to him mildly, perhaps he may
accept admonition or fear Allah. They said: “Our Lord!
Verily! We fear lest he should hasten to punish us or
lest he should transgress.”” He said: “Fear not, verily! I
am with you both, I hear and I ‏”.عمد‎ (Taha 20:43-46)

Thus, His statement: €/ hear and | see} is a new clause
to clarify what this specific Ma‘iyyah implies, that that
is the hearing and the seeing, and this specific
hearing and seeing indicates help, support and
protection from Fir‘awn, about whom they, both
said:

436 5 Stk fe IEE

4We fear lest he should hasten to punish us or lest he
should transgress> (Ta Ha 20:45)

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 557

Then, the next is patience upon what Allah decrees,
because the decrees of Allah shall occur whether you like
it or not. So you are either honorably patient, or you are
distracted like beasts.

Patience is an exalted rank that cannot be attained except
with something to be patient with. In the case of the person
for whom the ground he walks is cleared away upon his
arrival, and the people stand waiting for whatever he
wants; then there is no doubt that he will suffer exhaustion
of his soul or body, inside or outside.

That is why Allah combined between gratitude and
patience for His Prophet #8.

As for gratitude, he would stand (in prayer) until his feet
became swollen, and he would say: “Should I not be a
grateful servant?”""!)

As for patience, he was patient with the harm he suffered.
For he was inflicted with harms by his people, and by
others among the Jews and the hypocrites, and with all
that, he was still patient.

And His statement: €How often a small group overcame
a mighty host by Allahs Leave? And Allah is with As-
Sabirin (the patient ones)» (Al-Bagarah 2:249)

ge Se Se a SD

(Its references preceded, and it is in the Two Sahihs.

556 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Al-Ma‘iyyah here is specific, and restricted to the descrip-
tion. All among those who have Taqwa, and the Muhsinin,
then Allah is with them.

As for behavioral benefits, the fruit of this for us is the
desire to do /hsén and to have Taqwa, because every person
loves that Allah would be with him.

And His statement: ¢And be patient. Surely, Allah is
with Ags-Sabirin (the patient ones)» (Al-Anfiil 8:46)

ly, Allah is with As-Sabirin (the
patient ones)» (Al-Anfal 8:46)

We have earlier mentioned that As-Sabr (patience) is to
restrain one’s self upon Allah's obedience, and to restrain it
away from disobedience to Allah, and to restrain it from
being angry with what Allah has decreed to occur, whether
with the tongue, the heart, or the limbs.

The most virtuous form of patience is patience upon
obedience to Allah, then in staying away from disobe-
dience to Allah; because one has a choice with these two. If
someone wills, he may obey the command, if he wills, he
may not obey. If he wills, he can forsake a prohibited act; if
he wills, he can decide not to forsake it.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 559

All praise is due to Allah, now they sing of his death, his
and those who were with him!

These people were between nine hundred and a thousand;
everyday, they slaughtered between nine and ten camels,
On the other hand, the Prophet # and his Companions
were just three hundred and fourteen in number,""! with
only seventy camels and two horses, which they alternately
rode. Despite that, they killed the powerful warriors of the
Quraish so much so, that after they were shriveled and
bloated by the sun, they were hauled into one of the wells
of Badr.

So, <How often a small group overcame a mighty host by
Allahs Leave? And Allah is with As-Sabirin (the patient
ones)} since the small group was patient, €And Allah is
with Ag-Sabirin (the patient ones). They were patient in
all of the forms of patience; upon obedience to Allah,
staying away from disobedience to Allah, and upon the
struggle they were afflicted with, and the exhaustion,
and the difficulties in enduring the stress of Jihad. ¢And
Allah is with As-Sabirin (the patient ones)>

These Ayat concerning Al-Ma'iyyah (the company of Allah)
end here. A complete chapter from the author, may Allah
have mercy upon him, shall soon come concerning it

So, what are the fruits that we derive from Allah being with us?

Firstly: Faith that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
encompasses everything, and that with His “Uli, He is
with His creation. Nothing of their affairs is hidden from
Him.

1) Reported by Sa‘id bin Mansur in Mursal form from Abu Al-
Yaman ‘Amir Al-Hawzani. However, At-Tabarani and Al-
Bayhaqi have connected it from another route, from Abu
Ayyab Al-Ansari, as said by Al-Hafiz in Al-Fath (7:291).

558 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The Seventh Ayah:

te “ee ‏ع‎ ae

<How often a small group overcame a mighty host by
Allahs Leave? And Allah is with As-Sabirin (the patient
ones)» (Al-Bagarah 2:249)

How offen}: expressing many, meaning - a small group
overcame a group many times larger, or that many small
groups overcame many larger hosts, but not with their
might nor with their power; it is rather with the permis-
sion of Allah. That is, with His will and power.

An example of such is when the people of Talat overcame
their enemies, though they were larger in number. And the
people of (the Battle) of Badr overcame the Quraish though
they were larger in number.

The people of Badr went out not intending to fight, but to
capture the caravan of Aba Sufyan. When Abi Sufyan
learned of their plan, he cried out to the people of Makkah
saying: “Come out to rescue your caravan. Muhammad
and his Companions have come out against us to capture
the caravan.” And the caravan carried a great deal of
wealth for the Quraish. So, they came out with their chiefs,
their nobles, their pride and their arrogance, displaying
their might, their pride, and their honor, so much so that
Abs Jahl said: “By Allah, we shall not return until we get to
Badr, and we shall stay there for three days. We will be
slaughtering camels, drinking wine, and the songstresses
will be playing music for us. The Arabs will hear of us, and
they will continue to fear us forever.”!"!

{1 Reported by Ibn Jarir At-Tabari (6:262) from Ibn ‘Abbas,
may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 561

4And who is truer than Allah, Hadithan (in
narrating)?» (An-Nisa’ 4:87)

(And)
€And who is truer than Allah Qilan (in saying)?> (An-
Nisa’ 4:122)

And who}: is an interrogative pronoun meant to
express a negation. To express a negation with the
use of an ‘interrogative is more profound than using
an ordinary negation. Because with the interrogative,
the challenge is greater, as if you are saying: “None
is truer in speech than Allah; if you have a contra-
dictory opinion, then, who is it that is truer than
Allah in speech?”

+ His statement: ¢Hadithany and Qilan> are
differentiations for €Asdaq (truer)>

The affirmation of speech in these two Ayahs is derived
from His statement: ¢Asdaq (truer)> because truthfulness
is used to describe the speech. And in His saying:
¢Hadithan> because Al-Hadith is the speech. And in His
statement in the second Ayah: €Qilan} meaning “saying”
and the saying will not be except by an expression.

Thus, in both of them, there is the affirmation of speech for
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and that His speech is true
and honest; there is nothing false at all in it.

The third Ayah: His statement:

CEE 0 ‏أنه‎ 36 GD
4And when Allah will say: “O ‘Isa, son of Maryam!”'>

560 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

Secondly: That when we know that and believe in it, that
will make us have a complete sense of awareness that He is
watching us, for which we will continue in obeying Him,
and stay away from disobeying Him, so much that He
would not miss seeing us in what He commanded us, and
He would not find us in what He prohibited us.

And these are the tremendous fruits for whoever believes
in this Ma‘iyyah.

- Oo © -

SP stay Lan CEL A & Sach 5p : ‏وََولهُ‎
‎of ays Of IG 55> co Evy ‏[التساء:‎ dsl ‏َصَدَّقٌ يِنَ أله‎
]115 ‏[المائدة:‎ ee

And His Statement: €And who is truer than Allah,
Hadithan (in narrating)?} (An-Nisa’ 4:87) €And who is
truer than Allah Qilan (in 1g)?» (An-Nisa’ 4:122)
4And when Allah will say: ‘sa, son of Maryam!"’>
(Al-Ma‘idah 5:116)

5 o> > -
© The Affirmation of Speech for Allah, Exalted is He

The Commentary

The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, mentioned
the Aydt that indicate the Attribute of speech for Allah,
Exalted is He, and that the Qur'an is from His speech.

The First and Second Ayat:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

€There is nothing like unto Him, and He is the Hearer,
the Seer.» (Ash-Shiird 42:11)

[ver ‏[الأعراف:‎ tis ii Gis Se
i

€And the Word of your Lord has been fulfilled in truth
and in justice» (Al-An‘am 6:115) €And to Misa Allah
spoke directly (Taklima)» (An-Nis@’ 4:164) ¢Among
them are to whom Allah spoke» (Al-Bagarah 2:253)
And when Misa came at the time and place appoinied
by Us, and his Lord spoke to him) (AI-A‘raf 7:143)
And We called him from the right side of the Mount,
and made him draw near to Us for a talk with him>
(Maryam 19:52)

The Fourth Ayah: His statement:
hiss ti 59 MAAS
And the Word of your Lord has been fulfilled in truth
and in justice» (Al-An‘am 6:15)

% <Word> is a singular form while in one mode of
recitation, it is Kalimat (words) in plural. They convey
the same meaning, because “word” is singular but it
is attached to another so it is general.

562 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

(Al-Mi'idah 5:116)

His statement: 40 ‘Isd> is a word which is composed
of letters from: 40 ‘Isa, son of Maryam!>

There is an affirmation in this that Allah speaks, and that
His saying will be heard so it will be by voice, and that His
speech is words and sentences, so it will be with letters

That is why it is the creed of the People of the Sunnah and
the Jama‘ah that Allah speaks with words, in reality,
whenever He wills, as He wills, with what He wills, with
letters and a voice that does not resemble the voices of
creatures.

“Whenever He wills” relates to the time.

“With what He wills” relates to the speech, meaning the topic
of the speech, be it commands, prohibitions or than that.
“In the manner He wills’ meaning - how and according to
the description which He wants for that, Glorified and
Exalted is He.

We said that it is with letters and a voice that does not
resemble the voice of the creatures. The evidence for this is
from the noble Ayah

er of oe at 36 5
4And when Allah will say: “O ‘Isa, son of Maryam!’’>
(Al-Ma’idah 5:116)

These are letters. And it is with voice, because ‘Isa shall
hear what He said.

It does not resemble the voices of the creatures, because
Allah says:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 565

saying: “Zaid, himself, has come” or; “Zaid, it is Zaid that
came” the possibility of it being a metaphor is negated.
So, the speech of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, to Masa is
real speech with letter and voice, which he heard. That is
why there was a conversation between them, as is in Sarah
Ta Ha, and others.

The Sixth Ayah: His statement:

ii ‏تن ع‎ id
Among them are to whom Allah spoke} (Al-Baqarah
2:253)
Among them} that is, the Messengers.

whom Allah spoke.>; The Glorious Name €Allah} is
the doer of “spoke.” Its object is deliberately omitted,
returning it back to (whom) and the meaning is:
“Allah spoke to him.”

The Seventh Ayah: His statement:

And when Masa came at the time and place appointed
by Us, and his Lord spoke to him) (Al-A’raf 7:143)

This Ayah indicates that the speech is related to what He
wants, that is, because the speech is after “came” not before
it. That indicates His speech is related to what He wants.

This falsifies the view of whoever said: “His speech is
meaning, which stands on its own; it does not have any
relation to what He wants” as claimed by the Ash'ariyyah.
And in this Ayah is the falsification of the claim of whoever
claims that it was only Masa who spoke, thereby distorting
His statement, Exalted is He:

564 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The words of Allah, the Mighty and Exalted, are fulfilled
according to these two descriptions; in truth and in justice.
And what is being described as truth is the information,
and what is being described with justice is the judgement.
As such, the scholars of Tafsir say:"! “Truthful in the
information, and just in the judgements.”

The words of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, in the
information are truthful; falsehood cannot reach them in
any way, and in the judgements they are just; there is no
oppression in them in any way.

Here, the words are described with truth and justice
Therefore, they are words, because it is the word which is
said to be true or false.

The fifth Ayah; His statement:

4And to Masa Allah spoke directly (Taklima)» (An-
Nisa’ 4:164)

© 4Allah> is the doer, so the speech occurred from
Him.

 4€Taklima> is an emphasizing infinitive. The scholars
explained that the emphasizing infinitive negates the
possibility of a metaphor. It therefore indicates that
the speech is real speech, since the emphasizing
infinitive negates the possibility of a metaphor.

Consider that you say: “Zaid has come;” it will be

understood that he, himself, has come. The meaning can

also be: “Zaid’s information has come” even if this is

contrary to what is apparent. But if you emphasize that,

"1 See Tafsir Ibn Kathir (2:269).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.

dat 25

And His statement : ¢And when your Lord called Masa
“Go to the people who are the wrongdoers.””» (Ash-
Sh‘ara’ 26:10) ¢And their Lord called out to the two of
them: “Did I not forbid you from that tree.’ (Al-A ‘raf
7: 22) His-saying: ¢And the day He will call to them,
and say: “What answer gave you to the Messengers?”»
(Al-Qasas 28:65)

And when your Lord called Masa: “Go to the people
who are the wrongdoers’’» (Ash-Sh‘ara’ 26:10)

@ And when your Lord called> meaning: Remember
when He called.

* The point of reference is His statement: ¢And when
your Lord called Misa>

The purpose of the call is explained by: ‏م46‎ to the people

who are the wrongdoers>.

Hence, that it is a call, indicates that it is a voice, and; €Go

to the people wha are the wrongdoers> indicates that it is

with letters.

Commentary on Al-’Agidah AL-Wasitiyyah

And to Musa Allah spoke directly» (An-Nisa’ 4:164)

By making the Glorious Name (Allah) Mangsub!"!
because with this Ayah, it is not possible to make such
claim, nor to distort it

The Eighth Ayah: His statement:

4And We called him from the right side of the Mount,
and made him draw near to Us for a talk with him
(Maryam 19:52)

And We called him}; the pronoun in the nominative
case (the subject) is referring to Allah; while the
pronoun in the accusative case (the object) is referring
to Musa. Meaning that Allah called Masa.

The difference between Al-Munddah (call) and Al-Munajah
(secret council) is that Al-Munadah is (the call) to someone
who is afar, while Al-Mundjah is (the talk) with someone
who is near; both of them involve speech.

The fact that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, speaks by Al-
Munddah and Al-Mundjah is included in the saying of the
‏مادو‎ “In the manner He wills.”

So, this Ayah is among the evidences that Allah speaks in the
manner He wills, whether by Al-Munadah or Al-Munajah.

(Translation note): Reciting the last letter of the word
“Allah” with Fathah (Allaha) as if “Allah” is the object of
“spoke” rather than reciting it with Damma (Allahu) in
which Allah is the speaker.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

This is Al-Aqidah As-Salafiyyah (the Salaft creed), the belief
of the People of the Sunnah and the Jama’ah

© The Affirmation that the Qur’an is the Speech of Allah

The Commentary

Then, the author, may Allah have mercy upon him,
mentioned the Ayat that proving that the Qur'an is the
speech of Allah.

Many disagreements occurred surrounding this issue,
between the Mu’‘tazilah and the People of the Sunnah,
which resulted in a tremendous amount of evil being
inflicted upon the People of the Sunnah. Among those that
suffered harm for Allah’s sake regarding that was Imam
Ahmad bin Hanbal, may Allah have mercy upon him, the
Imam of the People of the Sunnah. The one about whom
some scholars said; “Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He,
preserved Islam (or they said: aided it) by Aba Bakr during
the day of Apostasy, and by Imam Ahmad during the day
of the Mihnah (inquisition).”"!

The Mifinah was when Al-Ma’man, May Allah pardon us
and him, forced people to say that the Qur’an is created;
such that he began to hold inquisitions with the scholars,
and he killed them if they refused to say so. Most of the

"It was said by “Ali bin Al-Madini, in that which was
reported from him by Al-Hafiz ‘Abdul-Ghani Al-Maqdisi,
in his book Mihnah Al-Imam Alimad bin Hanbal (volume 31).
Also, see Siyar A‘lém Al-Nubali’ (11:196),

568 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The Tenth Ayah: His statement:

4And their Lord called out to the two of them: “Did I
not forbid you from that tree."» (Al-A’raf 7: 22)

% called out to the two of them» the pronoun in the
accusative case (the object) is referring to Adam and
Hawwa’,

Did 1 not forbid you from that tree.> He is
acknowledging that He forbade them from that tree.
This indicates that Allah had spoken to them before,
and that the speech of Allah is with voice and letters.
And it indicates that is related to what He wants,
based on His statement: €Did 1 not forbid you};
because this statement was after the prohibition; it
will therefore be related to what He wants.

The Eleventh Ayah:
4And the day He will call to them, and say: “What
answer gave you to the Messengers?’> (Al-Qasas
28:65)

Meaning — “remember the day when He will call them,”
and that is the Day of Resurrection. The One Who will call
is Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and ¢He will say}

So this Ayah affirms speech from two ways: the call and the
saying.

And collectively, these Aydt prove that Allah speaks with
speech in reality, whenever He wills, with what He wills, as
He wills, with letters and a voice that is audible. It does not
resemble the voices of the creatures.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

discussion concerning the Qur'an.

The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, now begins
to cite the Ayat that establish that the Qur'an is the Speech
of Allah:

And if anyone of the polytheists seeks your protection
then grant him protection, so that he may hear the
Word of Allah} (At-Tawbah 9:6)

er Se

The First Ayah

<i ‏كلم‎ 28 a
4 Cc fe ‏جارك‎

And if anyone of the polytheists seeks your protection
then grant him protection, so that he may hear the
Word of Allah» (At-Tawhah 9:6)

+ Concerning His statement: €Seeks your protection>
meaning seeking your protection -safeguard and
defense.

*% So that he may hear}: 450 that> expresses the purpose;
meaning — if anyone seeks your protection, grant him
the protection so that he can hear the Word of Allah;
that is the Qur’an, and this is agreed upon.

He, only said: <Then grant him protection, so that he may
hear the Word of Allah} because listening to the Word of

Allah, Mighty and Sublime, is definitely effective as He,
Exalted is He, E

570 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

scholars saw that there was some leeway in the matter, and
they began to make Ta’zwil:

~ Either that the situation was one of duress, and if one
under duress says a statement of disbelief, but is convinced
in his heart of faith, then such a person is pardoned

— Or, that the statement be intended as other than is
obvious; making Ta’‘wil, saying for example — and using
his fingers to count — “The Qur'an, the Tawrah, the Injil
and the Zabar; all these are creatures” referring to his
fingers.

As for Imam Ahmad, and Muhammad bin Nuh, may Allah
have mercy upon both of them, they refused that and said:
“The Quran is the speech of Allah, revealed, not created.”
They saw that coercion in this case did not justify them
saying what is contrary to the truth; since that situation
was one of a Jihad, and that coercion is pardonable in the
case of a personal matter. That is, if it has to so with a
person himself. But when the issue is about the preserva-
tion of Allah’s Shari‘ah, then it is obligatory for the person
to put his neck forward in order to preserve the Shariah of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

If, during that time, Imim Ahmad had said that the Qur’an
is created, even if it was due to Ta’wil or because of
coercion; then all of the people would have said that the
Qur'an is created, in which case, the Islamic society could
have changed, all because of coercion, But he was whole-
heartedly determined, so the end became his. And to Allah
is the praise.

What is important is that speaking about the Qur’an is part
of speaking about the Speech of Allah in general. But when
the Mihnah fell into that, and the severe disagreement
occurred between the Mu’‘tazilah and the People of the
Sunnah regarding it, the scholars usually single out a

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

Verily! We have sent it down in the night of Al-Qadr>
(Al-Qadr 97:1)

And, His statement:

And a Qur'an which We have divided (into parts), in
order that you might recite it to men at intervals. And
We have revealed it by stages» (Al-Isra’ 17:106)

— Concerning their saying: “not created,” its evidence is
His statement, Exalted is He:

55 , His is the Creation and the Command} (Al-
54)

So, He made the creation one thing and command another,
because the use of a conjunction dictates variance, and the
Qur'an is from the command, based upon His statement,
Exalted is He:

Inspiration) from Our Command. You knew not what is
the Book, nor what is faith. But We have made it a light
wherewith We guide whosoever of Our slaves We will}
(Ash-Shtira 42:52)

So, if the Qur'an is a command, and it is different than the
creation, it is therefore not a creature, This is because if it is

a creature, then, division into two categories will not be
correct. This is a textually revealed evidence.

As for the intellectual evidence, we say the Qur'an is the

572 Commentary on Al-'Aqidah Al-Wiasitiyyah

G8 HEM AGAK oh Sed Hs 3 >
€Verily, therein is a reminder for him who has a heart
or gives ear while he is heedful (Qaf 50:37)

And how many a person heard the Word of Allah and
believed; but that is with the condition that such a person
understands it completely.

> Concerning His statement: ¢The Word of Allah}, He
attributed the word to Himself. He said: 41116 Word of
Allah» This indicates that the Qur’an is the Word of
Allah; and it is such.
And the creed of the People of the Sunnah and the
Jami‘ah regarding the Qur'an is that they say: The
Qur'an is the Word of Allah, revealed, not created, it
initiated from Him, and to Him it returns.

— Their saying: “Word of Allah: its evidence is His

saying, Exalted is H

Then grant him protection, so that he may hear the
Word of Allah (At-Tawbah 9:6)

And other Ayat which follow.

— Their saying: “revealed:” its evidence is His statement,
Exalted is He:

4 S55 43 Jt

41716 month of Ramadain in which was revealed the
Qur'an} (Al-Bagarah 2: 185)

And, His statement:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

Lord of the Throne} (At-Takwir 81:19-20)

An example of the third — its attribution to Muhammad 3%
— is His statement:
EST ‏كاهن قَليلا ما‎ UR ‏ولا‎ © OAR ‏للا ما‎ BE Ua AD
That this is verily, the word of an honored Messenger
[(Muhammad #%) which he has brought from Allah] it is
not the word of a poet: little is that you believe> [Al-
Haggah (69): 41, 42[(

But, it was attributed to both of them (fibril and the

Prophet) because they convey it, not because it began from
both of them.

— And their saying: “to Him it returns,” there are two
views about its meaning:

Firstly: That it is as reported in some reports, that it will be
ascended with during a night, and people will wake up not
finding the Qur'an before them; neither in their hearts nor
in their Mushafs. Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, would
have raised it unto Himself.!"!

Based upon what was reported by ‘Abdullah bin Mas’ad
from him, that: “The Qur'an is to be taken from between
yourselves. A night would pass on it, then it would be
gone from the Ajwdf (hearts) of men. Thus, not a thing
remains from it.” Also, reported by At-Tabarani, and its
narrators are the narrators of the Sahih, except for
Shaddad bin Ma‘gil; and he is trustworthy. As stated in
Majma’ Az-Zawa'id (7:330), Ibn Hajar said: “Its chain is
Sahih, but it is Mawgif” Fath Al-Bari (13:16). Similar to it, is
Salih in Marfit’ form from the Hadith of Hudhaifah. Reported
by Ibn Majah, and Al-Hafiz said its chain is strong in Al-Fath
(13:16). See As-Salihah by Al-Albani (87).

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Speech of Allah. And the Speech is not an individual that
maintains itself such that it can be separate from Allah. If it
was an individual maintaining itself, separate from Allah,
then we would have said that it is created. But, speech is an
attribute of the one who utters it; if it is an attribute of the
one who utters it and is from Allah, then it is not a creature;
because all the Attributes of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, are not creatures.

Besides, if it was a creature, then what is indicated by the
commands, prohibitions, information and enquiry would
be false, because if these modes were creatures, they would
be considered mere forms that were just created in such
fashion, not indicating meanings, such as the forms of the
stars, the sun, the moon and the like.
— Concerning their saying: “it initiated from Him:
meaning — He is the One that initiated it, and first Spoke it.
The Qur'an is attributed to Allah, and to Jibril, and to
Muhammad 3%:
An example of the first is the statement of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime:
4Then grant him protection, so that he may hear the
Word of Allahp (At-Tawhah 9:6)

It therefore initiated from Him. That is, from Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime.

An example of the second - its attribution to Jibril - is His,
Exalted is He, statement:

3 ie 3 ‏ذى‎ © A 35 SS AD

Verily, this is the saying of @ most honorable
messenger. Possessing power, and a high rank with the

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 577

Muhammad 3%. So, when people eventually turn away
from revering this House, then this Ethiopian man will be
empowered over it. This is the similitude of the lifting of
the Qur'an. And Allah knows best.

The second view concerning the meaning of their saying:
“To Him it returns” is that it will return to Allah in
description. That is, no one other than Allah is described
with it. So, the One speaking the Qur’an is Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, and He is the One described with it.
And there is nothing that prevents us from saying that both
of these meanings are correct.

This is the statement of the People of the Sunnah and the
Jama‘ah concerning the noble Qur’an

The Mu‘tazilah held the view that the Qur'an was created,

and that it is not the Word of Allah. They tried to prove
that with the statement of Allah, Exalted is He:

45S 53 FG BS st ‏كل‎ 3s lp
Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the Wakil

(Trustee, Disposer of affairs, Guardian, etc.) over all
things» (Az-Zumar 39:62)

They said the Qur'an is a thing, and thus falls under the
generality of His statement: €All things

And because there is nothing except it is either a creator or
a creature; and Allah is the Creator while all things, other
than Him, are creatures.

The response to this is from two angles:

First: That the Qur'an is the Word of Allah, Exalted is He,
and an Attribute of Allah, and the Attributes of the Creator
are not creatures.

Secondly: That this kind of expression €All things> is

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

576

This will happen — and Allah knows best — when the
people begin to turn away from it in its entirety. They
would not recite it with their tongue, nor believe it, nor act
upon it. So it will be raised, because the Qur’an is more
honorable than to remain among people who deserted it,
turned away from it, and refused to give it its proper due.

This — and Allah knows best — is like the demolition of
Ka’bah, during the end of time;""! when a short, bowlegged
and black man from Ethiopia comes with his army, from
the sea, to Al-Masjid Al-Haram, and he dismantles the
Ka‘bah stone by stone. Each time he removes a stone, he will
extend it to the one beside him. And like that, they will
continue in passing the stones along, until they will cast
them into the sea. And Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, will
make this possible for them, even though Abrahah came
and tried that with his horsemen, infantry, and elephants,
and Allah destroyed him before he reached the Masji
because Allah knew that He would send this Prophet, and
that the reverence and exaltation of the Masjid would
return to it

But at the end of time, no Prophet will be sent after

[1 Based upon what was reported by Imam Ahmad from
“Abdullah bin ‘Amr, that he said: “I heard the Messenger
of Allah 3% saying: The Ka’bah will be demolished by Dha
As-Suwaigatain from Ethiopia. He will take away its
adornments, and strip away its Kiswa. And it is as if am
looking at him, bald, with contorted calves, striking it with
his shovel and axe.” And it is in Al-Bukhari (1591) and
Muslim (2909) from Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased
with him, who said: “The Messenger of Alah # said: ‘The
Ka'bah will be demolished by Dha As-Suwaigatain from
Ethiopia.” See the book Ashrat As-Sa’ah by Shaikh Yasuf
Al-Wabil (page 231).

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 579

that the commands, prohibitions, information and enquiry
it indicates are all false, since if all these modes were
creatures, they would just be mere objects that were created
in those forms, like the sun was created in its form, the
moon in its form, the star in its form, and the like. Then,
there will not be any command, prohibition, information
and enquiry.

For example, the statement: “Say,” “Do not say,” “Some-
body said” and “Did So-and-so say?” - all of these would
be regarded as merely being inscribed in these forms. So
their indication of any command, prohibition, information
and enquiry would be false. So, they would remain like
pictures and inscriptions that do not imply anything.

As such, in An-Nainiyyah, Ibn Al-Qayyim said: “This saying
would falsify the commands and prohibitions. Because the
command would be understood as something that was
created in this form, without any actual implication. And
the prohibition would be created with this form, without
any objective of an actual implication. And the same with
the information and the enquiry.”

Thirdly: If we say that the Qur'an is created, and that His
attribution of it to Himself is as an attribution of a creature,
it would be correct that we say every word of humans and
other creatures is the word of Allah, since every word of
creation is a creature. This is what happened to the people
of pantheism and those who claim unity of existence, such
that one of them said
Every word in existence is His

Whether it was upon us to render it prose or poem")

"1 This line of poetry is from Ibn ‘Arabi, which he mentioned
it in his book Al-Futihdt Al-Makkiyyah (4:141), See Minhdj
As-Sunnah by Shaikh Al-Islam (2:373).

578 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

general which could refer to what is specific, such as His
statement, Exalted is He, concerning the Queen of Saba’:

€And she has been given all things.» (An-Naml 27:23)

While there many things did not fall under her authority,
such as the dominion of Sulaiman.

* If someone asks; Is there any major difference between
our saying that it is revelation and saying that it is
created?

The answer is yes, there is a great difference between them.

The great inquisition (Al-Mihnat Al-Kubra) abided because

of this during the time of Imam Ahmad.

So when we say it is revelation, it is what is found in the
Qur’an. Allah, Exalted is He, say:
dane &
«Blessed be He Who revealed the criterion to His slave>

(AL-Furgan 25:1)

If we say it is created, it implies

Firstly: Belying the Qur’an, because Allah says:

€And thus We have revealed to you Rian (Inspiration)
from Our Command} (Ash-Shura 42:52)

Allah, Exalted is He, referred to it as revelation to the
Messenger ‏يله‎ If it was a creature, then it would not becorrect
to refer to it asa revelation. Since it is revelation, it cannot bea
creature, because Allah is the One Who Spoke it.

Secondly: If we say that it is a creature, that will necessitate

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

بَمْدِ مَا عَمَلُوهُ ‎pkg‏ ب ‎dep‏

‎spite of the fact that a party of them used to hear‏ :1ه
‎the Word of Allah, then they used to change it‏
‎knowingly after they understood it?} (Al-Bagarah 2:‏

‎4in spite of the fact that a party of them’ used to hear
the Word of Allah, then they used to change it
knowingly after they understood it?} (Al-Bagarah 2:75)

‎* This comes after His statement, Exalted is He:

‎€Do you covet that they will believe in your religion.»
(Al-Bagarah 2:75)

‎Meaning: Do not hope that they will believe in your
religion, that is the Jews

‎% 4A party of them> that is - a group of them, and they
are their scholars.

‎Used to hear the Word of Allah}; it is possible that
what is intended by it is the Qur‘an. That is what the
author apparently intended. So it is an evidence that
the Qur’an is the Word of Allah. It is also possible
that what is intended by it is the Word of Allah,
Exalted is He, to Masa, when he (Musa) chose

‎__Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah ALY Wiasiti

‎And this implication is false, and when the implication is
false, what it implies is also false.

‎So these are three views falsifying the saying that it (the
Qur'an) is created.

‎The fourth view: That we say, if you allow that speech -
which is a meaning that cannot stand on its own except
with a speaker - is a creature, it necessitates that you allow
that all the Attributes of Allah are creatures, since there is
no difference, Therefore, say: His hearing is a creature; His
seeing is a creature, etc,

‎If you refuse, and say that the hearing is a meaning that is
particular to the hearer; it can neither be heard from him
nor seen; unlike the word which is possible that Allah
creates voices in the air and by that be heard.

‎We would say to you that if He had created voices in the air
and they are heard, then what is heard will be considered
an attribute of the air. You, yourselves, do not say this.
How can you consider an attribute to belong to other than
the one it is described with?

‎Together, these four views prove that saying the Qur'an is
created is a false saying. If there was nothing wrong with it
except that it would invalidate the commands, prohibi-
tions, information and enquiry (contained in the Qur'an),
then that would be enough.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes. 583

€They want to change Allah's Words. Say: “You shall
not follow us; thus Allah has said beforehand.” (Al-
Fath 48:15) €And recite what has been revealed to you
of the Book of your Lord. None can change His
Words.» (Al-Kahf 18:27)

The third Ayah: His statement:

¢ MB Si ‏«ريدوت أن‎

(Gu
€They want to change Allah’s Words. Say: “You shall
not follow us; thus Allah has said beforchand.”» (AI-
Fath 48:15)

In this Ayah, there is an affirmation of the fact that the
Qur’an is the Word of Allah, based on His statement:
€They want to change Allah’s Words. Say: “You shall
not follow us; thus Allah has said beforehand ‏ط''.‎

The pronoun refers to the Bedouins, about whom Allah
said in their regard:

4565 ‏رونا‎ GE
Those who lagged behind will say, when you set forth

to take the spoils: “Allow us to follow you.""> (Al-Fath
48:15)

These Bedouins wanted to change Allah’s Words by going
out with the Messenger # but Allah, Exalted is He, had
decreed the spoils for some particular people - that is those
who fought at Hudaybiyyah, But as for those who followed
just to take the spoils, they did not have any right therein.

582 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

seventy men in order that they should be with him,
at the time and place appointed by Allah, Exalted is
He.

Allah spoke to him while they were listening. Then, they
knowingly altered the Word of Allah, Exalted is He, after
they had understood it. I have not seen any scholar of Tafsir
indicating that it means the first interpretation.

In either case, in it is an affirmation that the Word of Allah
is a voice that can be heard. And the Word is the Attribute
of the One Who Spoke it; it is not something separate from
him. So it necessitates that the Qur'an is the Word of Allah,
not the word of other than Him.

* Then they used to change it knowingly after they
understood it>; €They used to change it» meaning, - they
changed its meaning,

Concerning His statement: ¢After they understood it
while they know}: This is the worst of all their deeds
and their audacity against Allah, Glorified and
Exalted is He, that they changed anything after they
had understood it, and it reached their intellect while
they knew that they were distorting it. This is
because the one who ignorantly alters the meaning
(of something) has committed a less abominable error
than the one who changes it (the meaning) after
comprehension and knowledge.

es 3 ao

يدوت أن ‎Wace‏

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 585

that. It is not possible for anybody to change the universal
words of Allah.

If Allah decrees that one will die, none can change that. If
Allah, Exalted is He, decrees that one will be poor, none
can change that. If Allah, Exalted is He, decrees drought,
none can change that. All these matters that occur in the
universe occur from His word, based upon His statement,
Exalted is He:

4Verily, His Command, when He intends a thing, is
only that He says to it, Be!" and it is!» (Yasin 36:82)

But as for the legislative (Shar‘iyyah) words, they can be
changed by the disbelievers or the hypocrites. They change
the words, either in meaning, or expression - if they can - or
both.

>» There is in His statement: ¢His Words> a proof that
the Qur'an is the Word of Allah, Exalted is He.

And His Statement: Verily, this Qur'an narrates to
the Children of Israel most of that about which they
differ> (An-Naml 27:76)

584 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

In the Ayah, there is also an affirmation of “saying” for
Allah based on His statement: <Thus Allah has said
beforehand >

The fourth Ayah: His statement:

4458 JOEY 5 ole ‏من‎ df al ‏مآ‎ Shp
€And recite what has been revealed to you of the Book of
your Lord, None can change His Words.» (Al-Kahf 18:27)

Concerning His statement: €what has been revealed to
you}, meaning: the Quran. The revelation cannot be
anything but sayings; it is therefore not a creature.

Concerning His statement: ¢of the Book of your Lord>,
He attributed to Himself, Glorified and Exalted is He,
because He is the One Who Spoke it, revealed it to
Muhammad # through Jibril - the trustee.

<None can change His Words} meaning — one can
change the Words of Allah. But as for Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, He can replace an Ayah with
another, as He, Exalted is He, says:

WWE ta CALE ah a teed

€ijLe ‏لا‎ 2581

And when We change an Ayah in place of another,
and Allah knows the best of what He sends down, they
say: "You are but a Muftari! (forger, liar).” Nay, but
most of them know ‏جامد‎ (An-Nahl 16:101)

His word: None can change His Words» includes both
universal (Kawniyyah) words, and legislative (Shar‘iyyah)
words.

As for the universal (Kawniyyah); nothing is exempt from

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 587

the Aydt that indicate the Qur'an was revealed from Allah,
Exalted is He.

The First Ayah: His statement:
4G IN ES 55>

And this is a blessed Book which We have revealed>
(Al-An‘am 6:155)

> ‏قرف‎ this> refers to Qur’an.

* 4A Book} (Kilab) meaning — that which is written
(Maktib), because it is written in Al-Lawh Al-Mahfiz
(the Preserved Tablet) and in the pages that are with
the messengers — the Angels — and written in the
Mushafs (the copies of the Quran) in our hands.

> His statement: €Blessed> meaning; possessing blessing,

Thus, it is blessed because it is a remedy for what is in the
chests. If someone reads it while pondering and reflecting
upon it, it then heals the heart of the disease. Allah, Exalted
is He, has said:

4And We send down from the Qur'an that which is a
healing and a mercy to those who believe» (Al-Isra’ 17:
82)

It is blessed for whoever follows it; since with it deeds may
be righteous, externally and internally.

It is blessed for its marvelous effects. The Muslims have
striven against the lands of the disbelievers with it, for
Allah says:

586 Commentary on Al-'Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The Fifth Ayah: His statement:

ae the «

ao od FES ‏إترءيل‎ a b mE OAT ‏هذا‎ Gp
4 ‏عيفر‎

Verily, this Qur'an narrates to the Children of Israel

most of that about which they differ> (An-Naml 27:76)

The point of reference is His statement: ¢Narrates (Yaqussu)
since narrating cannot be except with saying. So, if the
Qur'an is the one that narrates, then it is the Word of
Allah, since Allah, Exalted is He is the One Who related
this narration. Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He, says:

We relaie unto you the best of stories through Our
Revelations unto you, of this Qur'an.» (Yasuf 12:3)

Hence, the Qur’an is the Word of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.

And His Statement: €And this is a blessed Book which
We have revealed» (Al-An‘am 6:155)

ooo

© The Affirmation that the Qur'an is revealed from
Allah, Exalted is He

The Commentary
The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, mentioned

41164 We sent down this ‏ال مللل)‎ upon a mountain, you
would surely have seen it humbling itself and rending
asunder by the fear of Allah» (Al-Hashr 59:21)

»» > -

The Second Ayah: His satatemt:

4 4 ac

Had We sent down this Qur’an upon a mountain, you
would surely have seen it humbling itself and rending
asunder by the fear of Allah> (Al-Hashr 59:21)

A mountain is among the hardest of what there is, the rocks
by which the mountain becomes firm are exemplary in
hardness. Allah, Exalted is He, says:

Then, after that, your hearts were hardened and
became as stones or even worse in hardness} (AL
Bagarah 2:74)

If this Qur'an were to be sent down upon the mountain,
you would surely see this mountain humbling itself and
cleaving out of the fear of Allah.

¢Humbling> that is, submissively.

And from its severe fright of of Allah, €Rending asunder> it
cleaves and tears apart.

And this is sent down upon our hearts, and our hearts -

588 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

€But strive against them with the utmost endeavor,
with it> (Al-Furgan 25:52)

The Muslims were victorious in the Eastern and the
Western lands with this Qur'an, such that they gained
authority over them.

If we return to it, we shall gain authority over the East and
the West of the world, as was done by our predecessors.
We beseech Allah for that.

It is blessed, in that whoever recites it, then he will earn
the reward of ten good merits for every letter of it
recited!" For the word, Qal for example, there are thirty
good merits. This is from the blessings of the Qur’an. We
earn great quantities of goodness by the recitation of a
few Ayat of the Word of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

The summary of the matter is that the Qur’an is a blessed

Book. Every form of blessing results with this magnificent

Qur'an.

* The point of reference is in His statement: ¢Which We
have revealed>

The affirmation of its revelation from Allah is a proof that it
is the Word of Allah.

Based on what was reported by At-Tirmidhi (2910) and the
wording is his, Ad-Darimi (3190), Al-Hakim (1:555) and he
said it is Sahih, and Aba Nu‘aim in Al-Hilyah (6:263) from
the Hadith of Ibn Mas‘td, may Allah be pleased with him,
from the Prophet 3, that he said: “Whoever recites a letter
from the Book of Allah, then for it, he gets a Hasanah (good
merit) and the Hasanah is ten times its like. I do not say
that: AlifLam-Min is a letter, rather Alif is a letter, Lam is a
letter and Mim is a letter.” And At-Tirmidhi said: “The
Hadith is Hasan Sahih Gharib from this route.”

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 591

This makes us ask ourselves: Are we given the knowledge
of everything?

The answer is that we are not given knowledge, except a
little.

It is not possible for us to object to the statement of the One
Who knows the hidden and the witnessed: ¢Wanting to
collapse» by saying: “The wall does not have an Iradah (a
want)! And It does not want to collapse!”

This is one of the evils of metaphors, because it implies a
negation of what the Qur'an affirms.

Is it not Allah, ue is He, Who says:

) ‏هلد ين شقء‎ Seb BMG
<5 5

<The seven heavens and the earth and all that is
therein, glorify Him and there is not a thing but
glorifies His Praise. But you understand not their
glorification» (AL-Isra’ 17: 44)

Do they glorify Him, without wanting to?

He says: ¢Tusabbihi Lahu (they glorify Him)>: the Lam is to

‎Thus, it means sincerely. Is it imaginable to have‏ .زا
‎sincerity without an Irddah (volition, objective, will)?‏
‎Therefore, they will, and everything wills, for Allah says‏
‎And there is not 6 thing but glorifies His Praise.} 1 think it‏
‎is clear to all of us that this is one of the ways of‏
‎expressing generality, because In (here) means Ma (not),‏
‎which negates. Also, A thing} is an indefinite pronoun‏
‎used in the context of negation. <But glorifies His Praise}‏
‎by that, it includes everything.‏

‎O my Muslim brother, if you see that your heart is not
moved by the Qur’an, accuse yourself, because Allah has

‎590 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎except as Allah wills - contract and become hard, neither
opening nor accepting,

‎As for those who believe, when the Ayat (of the Qur’an) are
sent down to them, it increases their faith; but as for those
who have a disease in their hearts; it adds filth to their filth;
and it is Allah whose refuge is sought!

‎The meaning of that is that their hearts become more
inflexible and hardened and it adds filth to their filth. We
seek refuge in Allah from that.

‎If this Qur'an were to be sent down to the mountain, it
would cleave and humble itself due to the greatness of
Allah’s Words sent down upon it

‎In this, there is evidence that the mountains have senses,
because it humbles itself and cleaves. The matter is like
that. The Prophet aid concerning Uhud: “This is Uhud,
a mountain that loves us, and which we love."

‎With this Hadith, we also recognize the refutation against
those who affirm that there are metaphors in the Qur'an.
Those who always raise their flag, using this Ayah as proof:

‎4 ‏يريد أن ينقضّ‎ Ue ‏فيا‎ Lesa
€Then they found therein a wall wanting to collapse>
(Al-Kahf 18:77)
Saying: “How can the wall want?” We say: Subhan Allah!
The Knowing, and the Aware says: <Wanting to collapse} and
you are saying that it does not want! Is this sensible?

‎It is not your right, after this, that you say: “How could it
want?”

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (4422) and Muslim (1392) from
Aba Humaid As-Sa‘idi, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary ‏الفقط و 1ل حت‎ Al Wasipiyyait Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

informed that if this Qur’an were to be sent down upon a
mountain, it would cleave, and the Quran is recited to
your heart, yet and it is not moved. We ask Allah to aid us,

SF ‏لمان‎ US) OSE ot} Syisk coi ‏لكات‎
‎ig

And when We change an Ayah in place of another,
and Allah knows best of what He reveals, they say:
You are but a Muftari (forger, liar)! Nay, but most
of them know not. Say: “Ar-Rih Al-Qudus has brought
it down from’ your Lord with truth, that if may make
firm and strengthen those who believe and as a guidance
and glad tidings to those who have submitted. And
indeed We know that they say: “It is only a human
being who teaches him.’ The tongue of the man they

And when We change an Ayah in place of another, refer to is foreign, while this is a clear Arabic tongue)
and Allah knows best of what He reveals, they say: (An-Nalhil 16: 101-103)

“You are but a Muftari (forger, liar)!" Nay, but most His, the Mighty and Sublime, statement: ¢And when
of them know not. Say: “Ar-Rith Al-Qudus has brought We change an Ayal in place of another> His statement:
it down from your Lord with truth, that it may make 2 8

sf , We change> that is - replace an Ayah with another.
firm and strengthen those who believe and as a guidance

& This is a reference to the abrogation that is mentioned
and glad tidings to those who have submitted. And in His statement Bxalted is He:

indeed We know that they say: “It is only a human on Be 8
being who teaches him.” The tongue of the man they 4G NEE Se ol ‏ثُنيها‎ Non & RS ‏«مَا‎
‎refer to is foreign, while this is a clear Arabic tongue>

(An-Nahtl 16: 101-103) Whatever a Ayah do We abrogate or cause to be

forgotten, We bring a better one or similar to it» (Al-

1
‎Bagarah 2: 106)‏ ع مودو مدا

Allah, Glorified be He, when He abrogated an Ayah, He
replaced it with another Ayah; whether He abrogated it in

The Third, Fourth and Fifth Ayat: His statement: ee
its wording, or in its ruling.

» His statement: ¢And Allah knows best of what He
reveals», this is a clause of refutation. It is among the
best of what be for this context. The meaning is that

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

Allah, Glorified be He.

»© His statement: €You are but} was addressed to
Muhammad #3.

>» His statement: €Mujtari (forger, liar)> — that is, a liar
(as if saying) yesterday, you told us something, and
today you are telling us another thing. This is a lie.
You are indeed a Muftari.

But this statement which they were saying concerning him
bringing an Ayah in replacement of another, is foolishness.
If they had carefully observed, they could have surely
known that the One Who changed the Ayah in the place of
another is Allah, Glorified be He. This indicates his ‏يه‎
‎honesty, because a liar will always beware of saying what
contradicts what he earlier said, for fear of his lies being
exposed, If he was a liar, as they asserted — and that was a
sign of lie — he would not have brought what contradicted
his first statement. This is because if he had said what
contradicted the first statement — as they claimed — his lie
would have been clearly evident. Rather, his bringing what
contradicted the first is a proof of his integrity and
trustworthiness, without doubt.

That is why He said here: ¢Nay, but most of them know
not.» This is a rebutting fact. Its meaning is - rather you
are not a Muftari but most of them know not. If they had
been from among the knowledgeable, they could have
known that if an Ayah is changed in place of another,
that is indeed a proof of the honesty of the Messenger
His statement, Exalted is He: ¢Say: “Ar-Rih Al-Qudus

has brought it down from your Lord with truth’’>. Ar-

Ruh Al-Qudus is Jibril. He described him as such,

because he was free from betrayal, may the Salah and

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Our replacement of an Ayah with another, is neither an
act of foolishness, nor mere folly; rather it is based
upon knowledge of what will benefit the creation. We
therefore change an Ayah in place of another for what
We know is better and more beneficial for creation.

There is also another benefit in this, and that is this change
is not from the doing of the Messenger #; it is rather from
Allah. He sent it down with His knowledge, and changed
an Ayah in place of another with His knowledge, not from
you, O Messenger.

Allah, Exalted is He, says:

: >

527 + |

> 45 ‏عير هنذا أز‎ ght,

4And when Our Clear Aydt are recited unto them,

those who hope not for their meeting with Us, /
“Bring us a Qur'an other than this, or change it.”’
(Yiinus 10:15)

What was the response? The response was by responding
to part of their statement, and leaving some. So, He,
Exalted is He, says:

Say: “It is not for me to change it on my own
accord.’’> (Ytinus 10:15)

He did not say: “1 will not bring a Qur’an other than this.”
Why is that? Because it may be that he would bring a
change from Allah, and if he is not able to change it, then
bringing other that it is much more impossible.

The point here is that the One Who changes an Ayah in
place of another, whether it is its wording, or its rulings, is

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 597

beneficial effect; that it firms those who believe in it,
strengthening them upon the truth.

4 His statement: ¢And as a guidance and glad tidings to
those who have submitted}, that is - a guidance with
which they are guided, a lamp by which their way is
lightened, and glad tidings with which they may
rejoice.

It is glad tidings, because whoever acts upon it, and

submits himself to it; that is a proof that he is among the

successful people. Allah, Exalted is He, says.

4As for him who gives (in charity) and keeps his duty
to Allah and fears Him. And believes in Al-Husna. We

will make smooth for him the path of ease> (Al-Lail
925-7)

That is why one should be happy if he sees goodness in
himself, and that he is steadfastness upon that, and
devoted to it. He should be happy, because this is form
of glad tidings for him, because when the Messenger 3%
was talking to his Companions, he said: “There is none of
you except that his seat in Paradise has been written down,
and his seat in the Fire has been written down.” They
asked; Then, should we leave performing good deeds and
just rely?” He replied: “No, you should do works, for
everyone will be facilitated for what he has been created
for.” Then, he recited:

& Ho ‏لتر‎ :
4As for him who gives (in charity) and keeps his duty
to Allah and fears Him. And believes in Al-Husna. We

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wa:

Salam be upon him. That is why He says in another

€Verily, this is the Word of a most honorable
messenger. Pos. ing power, and high rank with the
Lord of the Throne. Obeyed (by the Angel

worthy there (in the heavens)» (At-Takwir 81:19-21)

His statement: From your Lord}: He said: €From your
Lord» and did not say: “from the Lord of the
worlds” indicating, by that, the specific Lordship
The Lordship of Allah over the Prophet #% is the
most specific of all kinds of Lordship

His statement; €Wiih truth>, this is either a
description of the one who descends, or what was
descended with.

If it is a description for the one who descends, it means that
this descent is truth, not a lie. But if it is a description for
what was descended with, it means that what was brought
is truth.

Each of them is intended. It is the truth from Allah, and it
descended with truth.

Allah, Exalted is He, says:
45 Dy is Shy
And with truth We have sent it down, and with truth
it has descended (Al-Isra’ 17:105)

So, the Qur’an is truth, and what descended with it is truth.

© His statement: ¢That it may make firm and strengthen
those who believey, this is a tremendous reasoning and

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 599

being, while it had been said to them: “Bring its like” and
they could not.

Allah falsified this defamation of theirs, while He, Exalted

is He, says: ¢The tongue of the man they refer to is foreign>

the meaning that €Yulhidin (they deviate)» because this

saying of theirs is a deviation from what is correct, and

far from the truth,

> Also, Al-A’‘jami refers to one who does not speak well,
even if he is an Arab, but Al-’Ajmi - without a Hamza -
is an ascription to ‘Ajam (non-Arab) even when he
speaks Arabic. This tongue which they refer to is
foreign, it cannot articulate well in the Arabic Lan-
guage.

But as for the Qur’an, Allah has said regarding it: €While

this is a clear Arabic tongue}, it, itself, is clear, and

clarifying for others.

The Qur'an is Arabic speech, and is the most eloquent of all

words. How can it come from this ineloquent man one who

cannot clearly express himself?

The point of reference is in His statement: ¢€And Allah

knows best of what He reveals, and His statement: €Say:

ih Al-Qudus has brought it down from your Lord>
tatement: ¢While this is a clear Arabic tongue>

All of this proves that the Qur’an is the Word of Allah sent
down from Him

The author left the Ayah which follows after these because
there is no point of reference therein; but it is beneficial, so
we will mention it. He, Exalted is He, says:

ae
‏الله ولهم عذابٌ‎ pte

598 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

will make smooth for him the path of ease (goodn
But he who is greedy miser and thinks himself
sufficient. And gives the lie to Al-Husna. We will make
smooth for him the path for evilp (Al-Lail 92:5-10)!!

If you see that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, has favored
you with guidance, doing what is right, righteous deeds,
and the love of goodness and the people of goodness, then
be glad; because that is an indication that you are among
the people of the ease, those for whom happiness has been
written for. Thus, He said here: ¢And as a guidance and glad
lidings to those who have submitted»

> His statement: ¢And indeed We know that they say: “It
is only a human being who teaches him."’>

He said: €And indeed We know}, He did not say: “We
have indeed known’ because this statement of disbelief
of theirs can be said again and again; so using the
present tense here is better than using the past tense,
because if He had said: “We have indeed known” some
people might have understood that the meaning of that
is “We knew that they had said so” and not that they
continue in that.

The cause of revelation for this Ayah was that the Quraish
said: “This Qur’an that Muhammad is bringing is not from
his Lord. Rather, it is from someone who teaches him, and
narrates the stories of the early generations to him. Then he
comes to and says to us: “This is from Allah.” I seek refuge
from Allah!

They claimed that it is the word of a human being. It is
quite amazing that they claimed it is the word of a human

8 Reported by Al-Bukhari (4945) and Muslim (2647) from
‘Ali bin Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 601

It is necessary that you take this principle as a precept and
that is: “Believe and you will be guided.”

Those who do not believe in the Ayat of Allah, Allah will
not guide them; they will be blinded to the Qur’an - may
Allah save us - and they will not be able to be guided by it
We ask Allah for guidance, for us and you.

What Behavioral Benefits We Derive from these Aydt:

We learn that if we believe that the Lord of the worlds did
Speak this Qur'an, then that will cause us to revere this
Qur’an, and believe in its sanctity, implement the com-
mands it came with, and abstain from the prohibitions and
warnings that are contained in it, and trust whatever
information that comes in it about Allah, Exalted is He, and
His creatures of the past and what is to come.

© Affirming that the Believers will see their Lord on the
Day of Resurrection

The Commentary

The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, mentioned
Ayat that affirm seeing Allah, Exalted is He

Some faces that Day shall be Nadirah (shining and
radiant). Looking at their Lord} (Al-Qiyamah 75:22-23)

600 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

4Verily! Those who believe not in the Ayat of Allah,
Allah will not guide them and theirs will be a painful
torment. It is only those who believe not in the Ayat of
Allah, who fabricate falsehood, and it is they who are
liars (An-Nalil 16: 104-105)

The meaning of this Ayah is that those who do not believe
in the Ayat of Allah, He will not guide them, and they will
not benefit from His Aydt - We seek refuge with Allah - so
guidance is obstructed from them.

There is a great benefit in this reality, and that is whoever
disbelieves in the Ayat of Allah, Allah will not guide him.
And by understanding the opposite; whoever believes in
the Ayat of Allah, Allah will guide him.

An example of that: We find someone who does not believe
in the Ayat; and he is not guided to the explanation behind
it, such as the statement of some people asking: “How does
Allah descend to the lowest heaven, while He is High
(above the heavens)?”

We answer him saying: Believe and you will be guided. If
you believe that He descends in reality, you will know that
this is not impossible, because it is with respect to Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, and none is like Him

We hear some people saying about His statement, Exalted

4A wall wanting to collapse and he set it up straighty
(Al-Kalif 18:77)
Asking: “How does a wall want?”

We say: Believe that the wall can want, and it will become
clear to you that this does not sound strange and odd.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.. 603

Look at how these faces were made to be ready to look at
the Face of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, because they
have a light of beauty and were readily prepared to look at
the Face of Allah

Thus, there is a proof in this Ayah that Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, will be seen with vision.

This is the saying of the People of the Sunnah and the
Jaméa‘ah. They used the Aydt quoted by the author as proof,
and the Mutawatir Hadiths from the Prophet #, and those
reported by many Companions from him. Many of the
Tabi‘in also reported this from the Companions, and many
of followers of the Tabi‘in'"! reported this from the Tiibi‘in,
etc.

The texts concerning that are absolute, in affirmation and
evidence; because they are from the Book of Allah, Exalted
is He, and in Mutawatir Sunnah of His Messenge:

And they have composed a poem concerning this, saying:

Among the reported with Tawadatur is the Hadith

Of whoever knowingly speaks lies (against me)

And whoever builds a house for Allah and anticipates
reward

And looking, intercession and Al-Hawd

And (concerning) wiping over the Khuff.

These are some of them.

What is intended by his saying “looking” is the looking of
the believers at their Lord

"See Sharh As-Sunnah by Al-Lalaka’l (page 470), Ash-
Shari'ah by Al-Ajurrt (page 251), As-Sunnah by ‘Abdullah
bin Al-lmam Ahmad (1:229), Kitdb Ar-Ru’yah by Imam Ad-
Darqutni, and Hadi Al-Arwah by Ibn Al-Qayyim (204)

602 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

The First Ayah: His statement:

1 0
ibe SO el 325 TH

Some faces that Day shall be Nadirah (shining and

radiant) . Looking at their Lord» (Al-Qiyamah 75:22-23)

>» His statement: €Some faces that Day}, what is meant
by that is the Last Day.

* His statement: €Nadirah>, that is — beautiful; derived
from An-Naddrah, with the letter Ad-Dad, and it is
beauty. Proving that, is His statement, Exalted is He:

this HS
So Allah saved them from the evil of that Day, and

gave them Nadratan (a light of beauty) and joy» (Al-
Insan 76:11)

Meaning, beauty in their faces, and joy in their hearts.

>» His statement: ¢Looking at their Lord>, with the letter
Az-Za’, derived from An-Nazar (to look). Here, it is
transitive with the use of the preposition €at> (ila)
which indicates an objective. It is a kind of looking
with the faces. The looking that is done with the
faces, is with eyes; unlike the looking which is done
with the hearts, for this is done with Al-Basirah
(insight), At-Taddabur (pondering), and At-Taffakur
(reflection). In this case, the looking is done with the
faces, towards the Lord, the Mighty and Sublime,
based on His statement: €At their Lord.>

So the noble Ayah indicates that these beautiful and
handsome faces shall be looking at their Lord, the Mighty
and Sublime, then, their beauty and handsomeness will
increase.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 605

% Looking: What is being looked at is not mentioned;
it therefore includes everything that they will be glad
to be looking at.

The greatest and the most delightful looking is looking at
Allah, Exalted is He, according to His, Exalted is He,
statement:

€You will recognize in their faces the brightness of
delight» (Ai-Mutaffifin 83:24)
The context of the Ayah resembles His statement:

Rab ‏إلى ييا‎ O wet Jee ‏وجوه‎

Some faces that Day shall be Nadirah (shining and
radiant). Looking at their Lord} (Al-Qiyamah 75:22-23)

They shall be looking at whatever they enjoy looking at it.
Among such is looking at evil companions being punished
in the Fire as He, Exalted is He, says:

دا يثنا وكا ‎OF tales 0G‏ مون
‎speaker of them will say: “Verily, I had a‏ 4»
‎companion (in the world), who used to say: ‘Are you‏
‎among those who believe (in resurrection after death).‏
‎(That) when we die and become dust and bones, shall‏
‎we indeed (be raised up) to receive reward or punish-‏
‎ment (according to our deeds)?’ (The man) saidp (As-‏
‎Saft 37:51-54)‏

That is to his companions:

تَلَ مَل ‎ZY‏ مُملِيمنَ»

‎pes‏ إن كن

‎604 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎The People of the Sunnah and the Jamd‘ah say that the
looking referred to here is the looking with the vision of the
eyes, in reality.

‎This does not imply grasping; for Allah, Exalted is He, says:

‎CRON 122,35 ‏ولا‎
‎€No vision can grasp Him} (Al-An’am 6: 103)

‎Just as the knowledge of the heart, it also does not imply
that it can grasp Him. Allah, Exalted is He, says:

‎€And they will never encompass Him, in. knowledge
(Ta Ha 20:110)

‎And we know our Lord with our hearts, but we cannot
grasp His “how” and His reality. And on the Day of
Resurrection, we shall see our Lord with our vision; yet our
vision cannot grasp Him.

‎~ oo > --—-

‎48 apy ED
€On thrones, looking» (Al-Mutaffifin 83:23)

‎The second Ayah:

‎inks ANT ED
4On thrones, looking} (Al-Mutafffin 83:23)

‎© = 4Al-Ard‘ik (thrones)> is the plural of Arikah (throne),
which is a beautiful bed, covered with something like
a mosquito net.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 607

Had it not been for the Grace of my Lord, I would
certainly have been among those brought forth (to Hell)
‘Are we then not to die?”’> (As-Saffat 3 8)

Until the end of the Aydt.

1 say, people used to argue (in amazement) concerning this,
saying: “How can he be in the highest place, and address
one he is looking at, and speak with him, while he is in the
lowest place?”

But now, with the inventions of man, such as satellite,
telephones, television and the like - a person can see
someone inside of it, and speak to him, and look at him,
though he is far away. Yet, we are not able to compare
what happens in the Hereafter with what happens in the
world.

* Therefore, ¢Looking> is general. They shall be looking at
Allah, looking at the their favors and at the punishment
being meted out to the inhabitants of the Fire.

If someone says: “There is a problem here. Why would they
be looking at the inhabitants of the Fire, while making jest
of them and censuring them?”

We answer - by Allah - how many times have the people of
the Fire made the people of Paradise taste punishments,
trials and harassment in the world?! He, Exalted is He,
says:

(pale
<Verily! (During the worldly life) those who committed

crimes used to laugh at those who believed» (Al-
Mutaffifin 83:29)

They laugh whether at their gatherings or while with the
believers:

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

4° Will you look down?'> (As-Saffat 37:54)

This is intended to express suspense... Look down at what?
At this companion:

450 he looked down and saw him in the midst of the
Fire» (As-Saffat 37:55)

I seek refuge from Allah — he saw him in its midst, that is -
its base and bottom...Subhan Allah! This one at the heights
of the ‘Illiyyin while this one is in the lowest of the low, yet
he is looking at him in spite of the great distance!

However, the manner of looking of the people of Paradise
is unlike the manner of looking of the people of the world.
There, a person will look at his dominion, which is a
journey of two hundred years; he shall be looking at the
farthest place just as he is looking at the nearest place, due
to the perfection of his favors. If a person were to look as he
looks in the world, he would not enjoy the bounties of
Paradise. This is because (in the world) his gaze only
reaches what is near, so many things are hidden from him.

So this one looked down from the heights of the ‘Illiyyin to
the lowest of the low, and saw him in the midst of the Fire
He said, addressing him:

<By Allah! You have nearly ruined me> (As-Saffit
37:56)

This shows that he was persistently trying to mislead him
into error. That is why he said: <You have nearly.)
Meaning you came close, and:

Commentary On The Introductory Notes...

4For those who have done good is the best (reward) and
even more> (Ytinus 10: 26)

The Third Ayah: His statement:

ot Si}

4107 those who have done good is the best (reward) and
even more> (Ytinus 10: 26)

and even more> (Wa Ziyadali) refers to gazing at the
Face of Allah,

That is how the Prophet 3% explained it, as affirmed in
Sahih Muslim and others.

In this Ayah there is evidence of seeing Allah, based on the
explanation of the Messenger # who without a doubt, is
the most knowledgeable of all people concerning the
meanings of the Qur'an. He has explained it as looking at
the Face of Allah, which is an addition to the favors of the
Paradise.

So, it is a favor, but not the kind of the favors in Paradise;
because the kinds of favors in Paradise haye to do with
bodies, such as rivers, fruits, other produce, and pure
wives, and the joys of the hearts that come with that. But
gazing at the Face of Allah is the comfort of the heart. The
inhabitants of Paradise will not see any bounty better than
that. We beseech Allah to make us among those that will

"Reported by Muslim (181) from Suhaib, may Allah be
pleased with him.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah
4And whenever they passed by them, used to wink one
to another (in mockery). And when they returned to
their own people, they would return jesting» (Al-
Mutaffifin 83:30-31)

Meaning, they would return (to their people) enjoying
what they said

And when they saw them, they said: ’Verily! These
have indeed gone astray!""> (Al-Mutaffifin 83:32)

Allah, Exalted is He, says:

<But this Day, those who believe will laugh at the
disbelievers. On (high) thrones, looking} (Al-Mutaffifin
34.35)

They shall be looking at them, while they (the disbelievers)
— refuge is with Allah — shall be in the midst of the
Blazing Fire.

Thus, this is from the completeness of justice from Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, by making these people - who
were annoyed in the abode of the world - rejoice over the
favors Allah gave them, and censuring these people who
will be in the midst of the Blazing Fire.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes.

1

could delight in.”!

So whenever something is desired, then it shall be, such
that some scholars say that even if one desires a child, he
will have a child. Whatever they desire, it will be theirs.

He, Exalted be He, says:
4Therein, all that the one’s souls could desire, all that

the eyes could delight in, and you will abide therein
forever.» (Az-Zukhruf 43:71)

> And His statement: ¢And we have more >, that is in
addition to what they desire.

Meaning if someone desires something, he is given that,
and he is given something in addition, as in the authentic
Hadith about the last person to enter Paradise, wherein it is
said that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, would continue to
give him favor after favor, and he would say: “I am
pleased” and He would say to him; “That is for you, and
tenfold its like"! That is, more than what he desires.

Many of the scholars interpreted the “extra” a the Prophet
‏كله‎ had explained the “addition,” that is, gazing at the
Glorious Face of Allah.

So there are four Aydt that the author mentioned indicating

‎Reported by Ima Ahmad (5:352), At-Tirmidhi (2543), Aba‏ لا
‎Nu‘aim in his addition to Az-Zuhd of Ibn Al-Mubarak‏
‎and Al-Baghawi in Sharh As-Sunnah (4385), from‏ ,)271(
‎Buraidah Al-Aslami, may Allah be pleased with him.‏
‎However, the Hadith was graded weak by Al-Albani in‏
‎Da‘if Sunan At-Tirmidhi (459)‏
‎Reported by Muslim (188) from Abd Said Al-Khudri, may‏
‎Allah be pleased with him.‏

‎610 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎see Him.

‎And there will never be another favor equal to this; not the
fruits, the rivers, nor other than that, ever. That is why He
said: ¢and even more> (Wa Ziydadah), that is — in addition
to Al-Husna (Paradise).

‎Ap ys‏ ما ‎ONS‏ ف
‎tement: €There they will have all that they‏
‎desire, and We have more> (Qaf 50: 35)‏

‎The fourth Ayah:

‎<hy GG te th ‏ا‎ A>

‎There they will have all that they desire, and We have
more> (Qaf 50: 35)

‎%  €There they will have all that they desire» Meaning that
is in Paradise — all that they desire.

‎It has been related in an authentic Hadith that a man said to
the Prophet #%: “O the Messenger of Allah, are there horses
in Paradise? For I love horses.” He #% said in reply: “If
Allah admits you into Paradise, you will never desire to
ride a horse of red ruby, with which you would be flown
around whichever part of Paradise you want, except that
you will have it.” The Bedouin Arab said: “Are there
camels in Paradise? For I love camels?” He replied: “O
Bedouin! If Allah admits you into Paradise, in it, you will
get whatever your self desires, and whatever your eyes

Commentary On The Introductory Notes
texts that are not as clear, and intellectual claims

As for the Textual Evidences:
First: His statement, Exalted be He:

And when Masa came at the time and Fie appointed
by Us, and his Lord spoke to him, he said: "© my
Lord! Show me (Yourself), that I may look upon You.”
Allah said: “You cannot see Me, but look upon the
mountain, if it stands still in its place, then you shall
see Me.” So when his Lord appeared to the mountain
He made it collapse to dust, and Musa fell down
unconscious.» (AI-A‘raf 7:143)

The evidence (according to them) in this Ayah, is that the
word Lan (not, never) implies permanent negation, and the
negation is a form of information, and the information
provided by Allah, Exalted be He, is the truth that cannot
be abrogated

The Refutation Against them is from number perspectives:

Firstly: It is not correct that the word Lan is used to express
permanent negation; it is a mere claim that is not supported
by an evidence. Ibn Malik said in “Al-Kifiyyah":
“Whoever considers Lan to express permanent negation

His opinion should be rejected while other than it should
be clung to.”

Secondly: Masa, may the Salli and Salam be upon him, did

not request to see Allah in the Hereafter; he only requested
to see Him then, according to His statement: <Show me

612 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

that Allah, Exalted be He, shall be seen

There is also a fifth Ayah with which Imam Ash-Shafi‘l, may
Allah have mercy upon him, used as evidence, and that is
His, Exalted be He, statement concerning the wicked:

€Nay! Surely, ey will be veiled from seeing their Lord
that Day> (Al-Mutaffifin 83:15

The evidence here is that what is veiled from those due to
wrath, is seen by those others due to the pleasure. Thus, if
the one who earned the wrath are veiled from seeing Allah,
then the people who earned the pleasure are to see Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime.

This is a very strong proof, because if everybody all
together will be veiled (from seeing Allah), then there is no
point in specifically mentioning these people.

Therefore, we say: The Ayatare five. Anditis possible that we
include with them, the statement of Allah, Exalted be He:

45051 At 35 MGMT 222% Jp
€No vision can grasp Him, but His Grasp is over all
vision» (Al-An‘am 6:103)

According to what we will mention in refuting those who
negate it, if Allah wills.

Hence, this is the position of the People of the Sunnah
concerning seeing Allah, Exalted be He, and their evidence.
It is unambiguously clear; none will reject it except
ignorant or stubborn person.

They were opposed in this by groups of the people of Ta’til,
among the Jalimiyyah, the Mu'tazilah, the Ash‘ariyyah and
others, and they tried to prove their view with revealed

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 615

transgression by requesting from Allah what does not befit
Him, if he knew that it was not possible in the case of
Allah. Accordingly, these rejecters would be more knowl-
edgeable of what is required regarding Allah, Exalted is
He, and of what is impossible in His case, than Masa!! And
this is the utmost misguidance!!

From this view, it is clear that in the Ayah, there is evidence
against them, not evidence for them.

And in the same way, every evidence in the Book and the
authentic Sunnah with which someone tries to prove
falsehood, or negate the truth, then it will be an evidence
against him, not an evidence for him

The second evidence of those who negate seeing Allah,
Exalted be He, is His statement:

S ‏اللي‎ 5 SGN AS As ah 226558 Jp

€No vision can grasp Him, but His Grasp is over all
vision. He is the Most Subtle and Courteous, Welkwith
all things» (Al-An‘am 6:103)

In refutation against them, we say the Ayah contains the
negation of grasping; and seeing does not necessarily
indicate grasping. Can’t you see that one can see the sun,
and yet he is not encompassing it by grasping it? So, if we
affirm that Allah, Exalted be He, will be seen, it does not
mean that He will be grasped by this seeing, because to
grasp (with vision) is more specific that mere seeing.

That is why we say that the negation of grasping is
evidence for the existence of seeing, because the negation of
the specific proves the existence of the general, If the
general had also been negated, its negation would be
necessary, and it would have been said: “No vision will see
Him” because such negation indicates the negation of the

614 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

(Yourself), that I may look upon You }, that is now, Allah,
Exalted be He, then said to him (in reply): €You cannot
see Me} meaning; “You cannot see me now.” Then, Allah
struck a similitude for him, with the mountain, while
Allah made it collapse into dust when He appeared to
the mountain. He said: But look upon the mountain, if it
stands still in its place then you shall see Me.>

When Masa saw what happened to the mountain, he knew
for sure that he could not see Allah, and fell down
unconscious due to terrible fear from what he witnessed.

We are saying that to see Allah, Exalted be He, in this life is
impossible because the state of the human is such that it can
not withstand seeing Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. How
would that be, while the Prophet # had said about his Lord:
“His veil is the Light, if He uncovers it, the Sublimity of His
Face will incinerate as far as His Sight reaches in His
creation.”")

But as for seeing Allah in the Hereafter, that is possible
because at that time, people will be in another world,
where their state is different than their state in the world; as
is known from the texts of the Book and the Sunnah about
what will happen to people on the Day of Resurrection,
and their stay in the abode of delight, or the Blazing Fire.
The third perspective: The impossibility of seeing Allah in
the Hereafter — to those who deny it — is based upon their
view that its affirmation will indicates an imperfection with
respect to Allah, Exalted be He, as they have justified their
negation with that. Based on this, the request of Masa to his
Lord to let him see Him, was either because Misa was
ignorant of what is required with regard to Allah, and
impossible regarding His case, or it was an act of

(Its reference preceded.

Commentary On The Introductory Notes 617

greater impact have on the behavioral perspective, because
if someone knows that the best of all rewards is to gaze at
the Face of Allah, the entire world would be less significant
to him. Everything will be sacrificed by him in order to see
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, because that is the goal of
every seeker and the utmost of desires.

If you know that you are going to see your Lord clearly
with the vision of you eyes, by Allah, the world will not be
worth anything to you. So all of the world is nothing,
because gazing at the Face of Allah is the fruit that the
competitors in good deeds are competing for, and that
those who hasten, hasten for, and it is the utmost of the
desire in everything.

So when you know this, would you hasten to that result or
not?

The answer will be yes, 1 will definitely hasten towards
that, without any hesitation.

In reality, to reject that seeing, is a great deprivation, but
faith in it will give the person tremendous drive to end up
at this goal, so it will be easy, and all praise is due to Allah.
The whole of the religion is easy, even if you feel some
discomfort, the religion becomes easy. Thus, its basis is
easy. If discomfort is found, it becomes easy a second time.
If he is not able to execute the obligation, then that is
removed for him. There is nothing that is obligatory in the
state of incapability, and nothing that is unlawful in the
state of necessity.

616 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

specific, not its opposite. And because if the general was
being negated, then, negating the specific would be the
kind of falsehood and deception that the Word of Allah,
Exalted be He, is free from.

Based on this, in the Ayah, there is an evidence against
them, not an evidence for them.

As for the Intellectual Evidences Used by the Rejecters for
the seeing:

They said: If Allah is to be seen, that necessitates that he is
physical, and being physical is not possible for Allah,
Exalted be He, because that would necessitate likening and
comparing.

The refutation against them is that if by seeing Allah, Exalted
is He, it was necessary that He be physical, then it would be
such, but we know with certain knowledge, that He does not
resemble the bodies of creatures, because Allah says:
There is nothing like unto Him, and He is the Hearer,
the Seer» (Ash-Shira 42: 11)

Even though the saying that being physical is to be negated
or affirmed, is among the innovations of the people of
Kalam. Neither its affirmation nor its negation is found in
the Book or the Sunnah

The rejecters have responded to the proofs of the affirmers
(in this matter) with bland responses. They clearly altered
the proofs, so much that it is not hidden to anybody. This is
not the place to mention them (their responses); they are
mentioned in more voluminous books.

The Behavioral Benefits We derive from these Ayat:

As for the issue of seeing (Allah), what would have a

Commentary On The Introductory Notes... 619

support for his view, to gather an argument for falsehood;
but his objective is to seek the truth, for the result will be as
said by the author: “The path of the truth will become evident
for him.” What a marvelous result!

But that is preceded by two matters: Pondering, and a good
intention; so the person is seeking the guidance of the
Qur'an; then, the path of the truth becomes evident for him.

The evidence for this is taken from many Aydt. Among
them are, His statement, the Blessed and Exalted be He:

€And We have also sent down unto you the reminder
and the advice, that you may explain clearly to men
what is sent down to them> (An-Nahl 16: 44)

Also, He, Exalted be He, says:

4(This is) a Book which We have sent down to you, full
of blessings that they may ponder over its Ayat, and

that men of understanding may remember (Sad 38:29)
Also, He, Exalted be He, says:

Have they not pondered over the Word, or has there
come to them what had not come to their fathers of
old?> (Al-Mu'miniin 23:68)

And He, Exalted be He, says:

€And indeed, We have made the Qur'an easy to
understand and remember, then is there any that will

618 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

“And, this topic is related in many places in the Book of

Allah ; whoever ponders the Qur'an, seeking guidance, the
path of the truth will become evident for him.”

The author ‏ركثة‎ said: “And, this topic is related in many
places in the Book of Allah; whoever ponders the Qur'an,
seeking guidance, the path of the truth will become evident
for him.”

Concerning his statement: “This topic’’: Indicating the
topic of the Names and Attributes.

Concerning his statement: “Is related in many places in the
Book of Allah’ that is why there is no Ayah in the Book of
Allah except that you find therein-in most cases -a Name
among the Names of Allah, oranactionof Hisactions, ora
judgment of His judgments. Rather, if you like, then say:
“Every Ayah in the Book of Allah is an Attribute among
the Attributes of Allah;” because the Glorious Qur’an is
the Word of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and every
Ayah therein is an Attribute among the Attributes of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

Concerning his statement; “Whoever ponders the
Qur'an’: Tadabbur regarding a thing, means reflecting
upon it, such as when turns away from it one time, and
turns back to it another, so he repeats the expressions to
understand its meaning. The one who ponders the
Qur’an, does so in this manner.

As for the intention, it is that it be done “seeking guidance.”
So his objective behind pondering the Qur'an is not to find

Commentary On The Introductory Notes

He says:

€And none receive admonition except men of
understanding} (Al ‘Imran 3:7)

And He, Exalted be He, says:

Say: “It is for those who believe, a guide and a healii
And as for those disbelieve, there is heaviness
(deafness) in their ears, and it is blindness for them. They
are those who are called from a place far away (50 they
neither listen nor understand)» (Eussilat 41:44)

620 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah
remember? (Al-Qamar 54:32)

The Ayat concerning this are many, indicating that
whoever ponders over the Qur’an — but with this intention
of seeking guidance from it — he will definitely achieve the
result, and that is the clarity of the path of the truth.

But as for him who ponders the Qur'an to try to confuse
one part of it against another, to have a basis for arguing
falsehood, and to support his views, as is found among the
people of innovation and the people of deviation, such will
be blinded from the truth. And refuge is sought from Allah.

This is because Allah, Exalted be He, says:

4 es ‏ع‎

ينك كلت هن 0 تكتب ‎Hs‏

4It is He Who has sent down to you the Book. In it are
Aydt that are entirely clear, they are the foundations of
the Book; and others not entirely clear, So as for those
in whose hearts there is a deviation they follow that
which is not entirely clear thereof, seeking Al-Fitnah
and seeking for its hidden meanings, but none knows its
hidden meanings save Allah and those who are firmly
grounded in knowledge} (Al ‘Imran 3:7)

Meaning as for those who are firmly grounded in knowl-
edge:

werd 5

‎x‏ كل مِنْ ‎we‏ رَيَنا

‎They say: “We believe in it; the whole of it (clear and
unclear Verses) are from our Lord.”’> (Al ‘Imran 3:7)

‎If they say this, they will be guided to the adequate
explanation of these Aydt that are not entirely clear. Then,

