-Conimentary On Shaikh Abislam
0 1

“AL-WASITIYYAH
522

“The Virtuous Shaikh, ‏طقس ةق الف دام‎
Muhammad bin Salih
AleUthaiinitn, ale:

Authorized by the Charitable Foundation of
Y ‘ahah Muharmad bin Salih Al-Uthaimin

|

NTE
‏شوح العقيدة الواسطية‎
Commentary On Shaikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah’s
AL-‘AQIDAH AL-WASITIVYAH

By

The Virtuous Shaikh, Al-‘Allamah
Muhammad bin Salih ‏على‎ ‘Uthaimin (+)

Authorized by the Churitable Foundation of
Shaikh Muhammad bin Salih Al-‘Uthaimin

canussinan

DARUSSALAM
GLOBAL LEADER IN ISLAMIC BOOKS:

Riyadh > wecaah « Al-Khaza" «Sh
0a" > Sharjah
Lahore ¢ Larden «Houston «New Yark

Supervised by:
Abdo! Malik Mujahid

HEAD OFFICE
‏قرم‎ Box: 22749, Riyadh T1446 K.S.A Tot: 00966 -1-40353082:4043492 Fan: 4021658

salam oom ‘Webs: wae. ‏سمه »عنعن‎ OOM

aysraauta
pani 13 Haon Same Sys?
Reanim
TSS ‏اع‎ Ss at S36
Sim ‏عاد سس‎
cannon
2 Mamees Khato
Boetsomen Ure 05
‏ع‎
‏ا‎ as cans
Settorreare aes
lei Book Savice
Aap Ga Senden ry Mosca. Ot
ira
Wells ann ‏ويج‎ om ‏ناج‎ Fa ‏وان جم‎
menses
* ‏دام ممتي‎
Intl Publlhing & Disttbutlon SDM BHD
iat, Setlwanges (1. Taman Setawangs9
(200 Kania Lump
Forings42628200 Fax: 0242520200
Emak corustaiamfjatearnyecors
‘Woosee ever danisalacom i
FRANCE
0 ‏هروك‎ & unease ‏مدو‎
‎5 ‏مه ا‎
0
0 ‏ف‎
‎SINGAPORE
‎Maslin Converse Agpocleio of Singapore
Onn ‏ا‎ seer
Shgepre 238
Saws rae, a ‏ملاع‎ Pn ‏0ع‎ 603+

‘RI LANKA
Santi 6, ial eas Ce be
ac cgge 118 Seer 1a han ESET

10
+ Islomie Books international
‘3h TendelSiret (Narth
Deg ‏وسار‎ 4000.08, NDIA
Fo 0091222373 4180
‏ا‎
‎SOUTHAFRICA
‎+ jamie Dawah Mover (OM
loa Dealer 4078 Deva Soa Aice
01270 doe ce Tee 0020-5105-1207
Ena arian 3.28

‎danusselam@iaualnet nea, fysch aru‏ سدع

‎KA Darussalam Showroom!

‎Clave banc: Tol 000861 4814888 Far 46445
sea ramet Tel Coes 4736220 Fae 4798221
‘Smell ranch: ol Fs! 2860022

‎+ daar
Jor ocaee 20978764 Fox 0236270
Naainah
Ta. coaes 249294496, 1220058
far o4orstizt
atknobat
Tes 009063 3692900 Fax 6155:
ams shart
Nel & Fa C0968-OTADOCSD

‎+ Yanbu AUB Ta O500867241 Fac 0 BOHR
iBank Fl, 050341716 Fe OF 205128

‎10 Darwaastar, Shari UAE
Fa copr ‏ا‎ 5632029 Por 63024
Shareheearusalamecom

‎PAIGSTAN,

‎eDerusaetar 260 Lower Mat Lahare
Ton ieae e924 D124 Fa TEEAOT?
1 Rabon Market. Gea Stove azar sate
0 00021271205 Far 732070?
agnor 0002214200936 Fax #300097
Tae er ane seronnsr an: S12261812
usa
PO por 75I84 te 17770
ecco 715 1200818 Fee OD" 713722 0421
ina ‏ممصو‎ Gir unestam om
‏ا اي‎ York ote Book
Rew fore 1217 fal 01018 ‏20م‎ 525
1 7 1
‏نيا‎

‎00 iterations Publications La
‏ما‎ Bsiase Genre

‎Unter Ena oad, Layo, Lorton. ‏اع‎ 7BT
Seventy Ze ‏مدعو‎ atc “gen 2005294600
Wotstiecrrwcruasalam cor

‎al RfcagQATUREAGT ‏اذك‎

‎wenn rare alter ted
Pagar beniese 9 tates Foot
Ter At 7a 6207725 ZAG
‏سيا‎ 20 0532 4808

SECTION: Concerning the Sunnah of the Messenger of
Allah 38

The Commentary
Firstly: That it be correctly attributed to the Messenger a.
Secondly: That it correctly proves the ruling,

The author said: “The Suman explains the Qur'dn, and clarifies
it, and proves it, and expounds upon it.”

Then he, may Allah have mercy upon him, mentioned an
important principle: “Whatever the Messenger described his
Loni, the Mighty and Sublime, with, as contained in the
authentic narrations, which were met with acceptance by Ab
Al-Ma‘rifah; faith in it is obfigatory as well.”

SECTION: Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah)...

The Commentary

The second view: Halting: they say: “We will not say “Il is
vacated’ neither would we say: ‘It is not vacant.”

The third view: That the Throne is vacated by I lim,
Among the benefits of this Hadith ate the following:

The Second Hudtle Concerning the Affirmation of Joy:

And there are Five Conditions for Repentance: sensi
The Third Hadi: Concerning the Affumation of Laughing

The Fourth Hudith: Concerning the Affirmation of
Amazement, and some other Attributes

‘nthe Name of lah ;
The Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful

& Maktaba Dar-us-Salam, 2008
ing Fand National Library Catalog-in-Pubiication Data
Al-Othaimin, Shalkh Muhammad bin Salth
‘Al ‏بلقل ويم‎ A-Wasitivyah- Riyadh-2008
S27p, 14x21 om
ISBN: 978-603-500-082-6 (set)
979-603-500-084-0 (Vol--2)
Aslam
‏لت‎

متا

1296508

Legal Deposit no.1420/6506

1SBN: 978-603-500-082-6 (set)
976-603-500-084-0 (Vol.-2)

Contents

SECTION: The Status of the People of the Sunnah and the
Jama’ah among the Various Sects of This Ummah, and that
They are Described with Waxatiyyah (Moderation)...

The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, said: “Rather,
hey occupy the balanced position among Ibe various sects in
the Ummah, just as this Ummah accupies the balanced
position among the (other) nations.”

The Commentary

The First Foundation: Concerning Names and attributes.
The Comunentary

The Second Foundation: Conceming the Actions of Allah
The Commentary

‘The Third Foundation: Concerning the Threat

The Commentary...

‘The Fourth Foundation: The Name of Faith and Religion
‘The Commentary ...

The Fifth Foundation Regarding the Companions, May
Allah be pleased with them :

‘The Commentary

1g Between it and the ‘Ula of Allah, and His
Istiwa’ over His Throne
The Commentary

His statement: “Just ax He ommbines between that, int His
statemertt 3
Question: Is it correct ‏ما‎ say: “He is with us in Tis Self”?

An Important Note

SECTION: Concerning the Nearness of Allah, Exalted is
Ile, and His Response (ta the Calls), and that this Does Not
Negate His ‘Ula and Fawgiyyan...

The Commentary

‎on Al’Agidaly ALWisityya‏ وما عسوم

‎The Fifth Hadith: Concerning the Affirmation of the Foot ‏م‎
‎Ril or ‏(معفوي لم‎ for Allah :

‎The following Attributes in this ‏...د نهاك‎

‎The Sixth Haditt Regaeding the Affirmation of Spe and
Voice...

‎The Commentary: ete oe ate
he Seventh Hatiti: Also Concetning the Affirmation of
Speech. ‏لومم‎

‎‘The Commentary
The Eight Hadttiy Concerning the ‏م‎ Atfirmation of Allan's "Ubi
and some other Attributes: 7 0
‘The Commentary

‎The Ninth Hadith: Also Conceming the Affirmation of Al

‎The Commentary
‘The Tenth Hadith: Also concerning the Affirmation of AFIT
The behavioral benefits in this Hadith:

‎Fleventh Hadith: Also Confeming the ‘affirmation of‏ عمد
‎Transcendence,‏

‎The Twelfth Had: Concerning the Affirmation of Hie
Me‘iyyah with His Creation. : 7

‎‘The Thirteenth Hadith; Concerning the Fact ‘that Alléh is
before the Praying Person

‎“The Fourteenth Hadith; Conceming the @ Affirmation of Alta
and some other Attributes 7 5
The Commentary

‎There are Names and Attributes in this ‏لاقم‎

‎The Commentary 3 9

‎This Hadith contains the following bent:

‎The Sixteenth tindit; Concerning the Affirmation of the fact
that the Believers will see their Lord

‎The Commentary .

Contents

Entering Paradise,
Completion

The Eleventh Event that will occur on the Day 3
Resurrection: Intercession.

Important points. .
‘The Twelith Event that will occur on the Day af Resurrection
‘An Inxportant Point.

SECTION: Concerning the Belief in Al-Qadar (The Divine
Will)...

The Commentary

SECTION: Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar
‘The Commentary .

‘The tirst level of the Belief in Pre-Decree

The Commentary,

These are two places:

‘The Second Level of Beliei in Al-Qadar.

‘Two groups oppose them on this Fundamental:

SECTION: Concerning Abfman (Belief, Creed)...
‘The Causes of Increase in ind (Faith) Ate Four.
The Causes of Decrease in inant (Faith)

The causes of decrease in taith are four:

SECTION: Concerning the Position of the People of the
Sunnah and the Jamd‘ah Regarding the Companions of the
Messenger of Allah .

SECTION: Concerning the Karémat performed by the
Aliya.
Note:

SECTION: Concerning The Practical Methodology Of the
People of the Sunnaft and the Jami’ah.

8 Commentary on ‏توا لا‎ A-Wasitiyyah

SECTION: Concerning the Beiief that the Qur'an is the
Speech of Allah in Realit . 137
‘The Commentary 00 197

SECTION: Cancerning the Belief that the Believers shatl
See Their Lord on the Day of Resurrection, and the Places

of Seeing...
The Commentary

SECTION: Concerning the Belief in the Last Day.
The Commentary 1 7
Important Note

‘An Important Poiat.

‘The arwwer is, that it should be said:

SECTION: Concerning the «Major Resurrection.
The Commentary... 7

‘The Second ‏لمعن‎ to occur on the Day of Resurrection

The Third Event that will occur on the Day of Resurrection ..
‘The Fourth Event that will occur on the Day of Resurrection.
The Fifth Event from what will bapeen ‘on the Day of
Resurrection ee
There are tivo subjects here:

‘the Sixth Event that will occur on the Day y of Judgment

‘The first one: That is clear,

‘The Seventh Event among what will happen 0 on the Day of
Resurrection 0000

‘An Lraportant Point.

‘A Beneficial Point

The Eighth Event that will happen « on the Day of
Resurrection .

The Ninth Event that will happen « tn the Day of
Resurrection: The Sind! (Bridge)

The ‘Tenth Fvent that will occur un the Day of Resurrection:

SECTION:
Concerning the Sunnah of
the Messenger of Allah

Section : Then, concerning the Sumnah of the Messenger of
Allah 85.

The Commentary

% The Sutinah lexically is: the “path” and from itis his ‏ب‎
‎saying: “You will follow As-Sunan (the paths) of those
that came before you’! meaning, their way.
Technically, it means the sayings of the Prophet se, his
actions and his tacit approvals. So, it includes both
obligatory and recommended acts.

The Surmah is the second source for legislating

Reported by ALBukhari (3456) and Muslim (2669) from Aba
Said Al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him.

10 Commentary on AL'Agidah AI-Wasitiyyah

SECTION: Regarding The Manhaj (Method) of the People
of the Sunnah and the Jamd’ah Regarding Commanding
Gaod And Prohibiting Evil, and Other Qualities
Completion... 0

‎for two meaninge:‏ لق ‎iw generally‏ مومه لم

‎The imam is the model
The Concluding Speech ....

Concerning the Sunnah of the Messonger of Allah ‏كف‎ 13

in the Book of Allah, we follow it’ Behold! | was given the
Book and its like along with it”)

That is why the correct position is that the Qur'an can be
ahrogated by the Sunnah once it is authentic from the
Prophet s, and that possible, both according to the
intellect, and the legislation. However, there is no sound
example for that,"

oot.

. Se by ale ‏ييه ونَذلُ‎

The Sunnah explains the Qur'iin, and clarifies it, and
demonstrates it, and expounds upon it

oe d-

The author said: “The Sunnah explains the Qur'an,
clarifies it, prowes it, and expounds upon it.”

Concerning his statement: “It explains the Que'a
Meauing - it elucidates the meaning intended by the Qur'in

Reported by Ahmad (4:152), Aba Dawad (4605), At

Tirmidhi (2663), Ibn Majah (13), and Al-Hakim (1-109).
Sheikh Abmad Shakir commented extensively on the
references and authentication of this Hadith in his
annotation of Ar-Risdal: of Ash-Shafi'i (page 9). See AL
Hadith Hujjah bi Nafsih ft Al‘Agd‘id wa ALAhkam by Al
Albani, and he said it is Sabi.

And it is the view of the majority as quoted from them by
Ash-Shawkam in Irshad Al-Tubl (page 191). 1

12 Commentary on ‏بأمفتوخ ام‎ Al-Wasitiyyalt

‘The meaning of our statement: “The second source” is in
terms of number, not in terms of rank; because its status is
like that of the Qur’an once it (the Sunnah) is authentically
reported from the Messenger

However, the one who looks at the Qur’én (for proof)
needs just one thing; that is it correctly proves the ruling,
while the one who looks in Sunnah needs two things:

Firstly: That it is correctly attributed to the Messenger ‏قة‎

Secondly: That it correctly proves the ruling

So, the one who tries to use the Sunnah has to spend more
effort than the one who tries to use the Qur’an as evidence,
for the chain of transmission of the Qur'an suffices us; its
chain of the transmission is Mutmoatir,"" nothing actually
calls for any doubt in its respect; unlike what Is attributed
to the Messenger 34.

So, if the Sunnah is authentically established from the
Messenger of Allah #4, it’s status is that of the Qur'an
completely, in terms of trusting the information and acting
upon the ruling; as He, Exalted is He, says:

Allah has sent down to you the Book (The Qur'an} und
Al-Hikmah (the Susnah).y (An-Nisa’ 4:113)

‘And the Prophet #i also said: “I should not find anyone of
you reclining on his couch, while one of my orders comes
to him, saying: ‘We do not know of this! Whatever we find

Ml ‘Translation note: A narration reported by a large number of
trustworthy reporters at every level in the chain of its
transmission

Concerning the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎ 15

Perform As-Salah during the waning of the sun til the
darkness of the night.» (AL-sra’ 17:78)

during the wnming of the sun}: meaning, from the waning
of the sun until the darkness of the night; that is, its
utmost darkness, and that is its middle. This is because
the darkest part of the night is its middle.

What is apparent, is that this is one period of time, but the
Sunnah gives the details for this generality:

The time of Zuhr is from the waning of the sun until the
shadow of everything is equal to its size. And the time of
“Agr from that time until the sun turns yellowish; that is the
best time when it could be observed, and up to setting of
the sun out of necessity. The time of Maghrib is from the
setting of the sun until the redness of the twilight
disappears. The time of ‘Ishd’ is from when the redness of
the twilight disappears, until the middle of the night.

There is no time of necessity for ‘Isha’!"" That is why if a
woman becomes pure from menstruation during the latter
half of the night; neither the ‘Isha’ prayer nor the Maghrib
prayer are obligatory upon her, because the lime of “Ish”
ends at the middle of the night. There is no evidence in the
Sunnah that the time of ‘Isid’ extends until the break of
dawn, And the time of Fajr is from the break of dawn until
the rising of the sun, That is why He said in the Ayah:
From the waning of the sun wrtil the darkness of the night}

Translation note: That is because he explained that the Hime
for ‘Agr is until the sun’s color changes, bul out of necessity it
extends up to sunset. And some say the same for ‘Isha’ that
its time is up to the middle of the night, but in cases of
necessity it lasts until Fujr. Sa the Shaikf is saying that there is
no such thing in the case ot ‏لكل"‎

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

as contained in the exegesis of His Statement, Exalted is He:

(For those who hace done good is the best, and even
more > (Yilnus 10:26)

The Prophet 4; explained the meaning of ¢Ard even wore}

to mean, gezing ot the Face of Allah, the Mighty and
i

And make ready against them ull yore can of power»
{Al-Anfil 8:60)
“Listen, power is shooting! Listen, indeed power is
shooting,”

> “and clarifies it:” It clarifies what is general in it
because there are general Aydt in the Qur’an, but the
Sunnah clarifies and makes them clear, For example,
His statement, Exalted is He:

iat a>
And perform As-Salthp (Al Bagarah 2:43)

Allah commands ifs performance, while the Sunnah
explains how of it

And His statement, Glorious be Ile

1 Tey reference preceded. 7
Pl Reported by Muslim (1917) (rom ‘Ugbah bin ‘Amir, may
Allah be pleased with him,

And whatsorver the Messenger gives you, take it; and

whatsoever he forbids you, abstain (from it).) (Al-Hashr
59:7) 1

And His statement:

ail ot >
4And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger. he
has indeed strayed into a plain error.» (ALAltxib 33:36)

As for the specific rulings, the Sunnah relates many rulings
that are not contained in the Qur'an. Among them is what
will be related to us in the first Hadith mentioned by the
author in the section: “Our Lond descends to the lowest
heaven when the last third of the night remains." For
this is not (stated) in the Quran.

Hence, these are four positions of the Sunnah with the
Qur’ar: explaining what appears problematic, clarifying
what is general, demonstrating it, and expounding upon it

The Ladith appears in its complete form later, and itis in the
Two Saath

16 Commentary on AlAgidah Al-Wisitiyyal
and He separated the time of Fajr, so He says:
pall ‏ونان‎
‎tAnd recite the Qur'in in the early dawn.> (ALIsra’
17:78)

That is because there is a separation between the time of
Fajr and the other times before it and after it, so the second
half of the night is before it, and the first half of the day is
after it.

This is from the clarification in Susmaht such that it clarifies
the times. In the same manner is:

4
And give Zakah.y (AL-Bagaral 2:43)

The Sunnah explains the minimum wealth upon which
Yakah is due, and the kinds of wealth upon which it is due.

© And “and demonstrates it” This word includes
explaining, clarifying and expounding. Thus, the
Sunnah explains the Qur'an and clarifies the Qur’én.
And “and expounds upon it:” Meaning that it relates
new meanings and new rulings that are not contained
in the Qur’an.

There are many examples of this. This is because there are

many rulings of the Shar‘ah that are only in the Suniak and

ate pol mentioned in the Qur'an, but it indicates that it’s

(the Sunnah) status is that of the ruling in the Qur'an, ‏علط‎

His statement, Exalted is He:

the oP
He who obeys fe Messenger, has indeed obeyed
Allah 3: (An-Nisd’ 4:80)

Concerning the ‏متمعك‎ of the Messenger of Allah ‏ع‎ 19

And he said regarding As-Siwsk: ’Purifying for the
inouth, pleasing to Ar-Rabb (the Lord).

What is apparent from the statement of the author is that its
acceptance (i.e. a Hadith) has two conditions:

Firstly: that the narrations should be authentic.

Secondly: that Ah! Al-Ma'rifak (kemvledge),?! meaning
{knowledgeable} with Hudiths met them with acceptance.

But this is not what is intended; rather the intention of the
Shaikt, may Allah have metcy upon him, is that the
authentic Hadiths ate accepted by the experts in the field.
Hence, this attribute (which is used to qualify the Hadith) is
an explanatory attribute, not a restricting attribute.

© His statement “with acceptance:” This is an explana-
tion concerning the case uf the authentic Hadiths. That
is, Akl Al-Ma’rifah met them with acceptance because it
is impossible that the Lfadiths be authentic, yet be
rejected by Ah! Al-Ma‘rifih; rather, they would accept
them,

[t is true that there are some Lindiths which appear
authentic, but may have a kind of defect, like the improper
sequence of the narrator, and the like, and such narrations
are not considered among the authentic Hadiths.

@ 116 said: “faith in it is obligatory” based on His saying:

Reported by AlLBukhari in Mu‘aliog (disconnected) form
with a wording that indicates approval (4:158), and reported
with ‏د‎ connected chain by Ahmad (6:62), An-Nasa‘i (1:10),
and Ibn Hibban (2.287), and Al-Baghawr graded it Hasan
(good) in Sharh As-Sunnah (1349),

Translation note; Meaning, the people knowledgeable about
thal field.

Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah
oy Ao ‏وَصْفَ‎ 3
3 500
‏كَدَيكَ‎
‎Whatever the Messenger described his Lord, the Mighty
and Sublime, with, as contained in the authentic
narrations, which were met with acceptance by Ali! Al-

‘Ma’rifth ; faith init is obligatory as well.
~ CO

© Then he, may Allah have mercy upon him, mentioned
an important principle: "Whatever the Messenger de-
scribed his Lord, the Mighty and Sublime, with, as
contained in the authentic narrations, which were met with
acceptance by ‏ألم‎ Al-Mu’rifah ; faith in it is obligatory as
well.”

As such, what the Messenger described his Lord with; and

similarly what he named his Lord; because there are some

Names which the Messenger called his Lord that are not

found in the Qur'an, such as Ash-Shafi (the Healer), The

Prophet 3 said: “Hal (the sick), You are Ash Shall (the

Iiealer), there is no cure except your cure.“

 AcRabb (The Lord): It is never mentioned in the
Qur'an without it being attributed to another word; but
in the Sumah, the Messenger 2% said: “As for the
bowing magnify Ar-Rabb (the Lord) therein.”

‎Reported by ALBukhart (6742) and Muslim (2191) fom‏ اث
‎"Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her.‏

‎"| Reported by Muslim (479), from Ibn “Abhas, may Allah be
pleased with him,

Conceming the Sunnah of the Messenger of ‏قد طقلاخ‎ 21

Ibn Al-Qayyim, may Allah have mercy upon him, has
refuted this principle, and showed its falsehood with many
evidences, in the end of Muklitasar As-Suw'ig

And if they cannot deny it, they distort it, as they distort

texts of the Qur’an.

As for the People of the Sinnal, they accept whatever is

authentic from the Prophet i (both} in the matters of

knowledge and matters of action, due to the evidence that

proves the obligation of accepting that.

4 And His statement: “Aw well”: Meaning, just as it is
obligatory to have faith in what is in the Qur'an,
without Tahrif, 148, Takyif and Tamihil.

The author has mentioned a number of Hadiths, among
them are:

Commentary on Al-“Agidah Al-Wasitiyyal:

40 you who believe! Relieve in Alldh and His
Messenger} (An-Nisa’ 4:136)

And His statement:
40 yor who believe! Obey Allah and obey the
Messenger.> (An-Nisd” 4:59)

And His statement, Exalted is He:

4And (remember) the Day (Allah) will call to them, and
say: "What answer gave you fo the Messengers?” Then
the news (of ‏م‎ good answer) will be obscured 10 them or
‏غم‎ Day, and they will not be able to usk one another .<
(Al-Qasas 28:65-66)

Textual facts regarding this are numerous and widely
known. 1

Then, yeu should know that the position of the people of
desires and innovation when facing the Hadiths that
contradict their desires revolves around two matters: either
denial, or distortion.

So if itis possible for them to deny any of them, they deny
it, such as their saying about their false principle: “Alrid
narrations are not accepted for creed!!""

1) Translation note: Meaning, narrations that only one person
reported.

SECTION:
Hadiths Concerning
The Attributes (of Allah)

Thus, from them are: As his saying #%: “Our Lord
descends to the lowest heaven every night when the last
third of the night remains, saying : Who is it that will call
upon Me so that I cant answer him. Who is it that will ask
Me so that I give him? Who is it that will seek My
forgiveness so that I forgive him?" Agreed upon.

The first Hadith: Concerning the Affirmation of Descent
of Allah to the Lowest Heaven:

That is his statement 28: “Our Lord descends to the lowest

heaven every night when the last third of the night remains,

saying : (Who is it that will call upon Me so that [ can answer

him. Who is it that will ask Me so that I give him? Who is it that

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 25

night begins with the setting of the sun is agreed upon,
however, the disagreement occurred regarding when it
ends. Is it by the break of dawn, or by the rising of the
sun? What is clear is that the night, in the Sharfah
sense, ends with the break of dawn, while astronomi-
cally, it ends with the rising of the sun.

Concerning His statement: “Saying: ‘Who is it that will
call upon me’:” “who” is an interrogative, meant to
express motivation, such as is contained in His

statement, Exalted is He:

(Shall I guide you to a trade that will save you from a
painful torment?> (Ag-Saff 61:10)

And; “that will call upon Me: Meaning - saying: O,
my Lord!

“Who is it that will ask Me” like saying: “I ask You
for Paradise” and the like.

“Who is it that will seek My forgiveness: saying: “O
Allah, forgive me,” or “O Allah, J seek Your forgive-
ness.”

© So that I forgive him:” Forgiveness is the act of
covering up the sin and overlooking it.

With this, it becomes clear to every person who teads this
Hadith, that the intended meaning by descent here is the
descent of Allah Himself, We do not need to say: “Bi Diath
(in His Self)” since the action is attributed to Him, and it is,
by that, His own action. But some scholars say: “He
descends Bi ‏ططق(‎ (in His Self)” for they were coerced and
forced to express such, because there were some who
distort the Hadith, saying: “What descends is the command
of Allah”, Some others say: “What descends is the mercy of

24 Commentary on Al-‘Agidal: Al-Wasitiyyah

will seek My forgiveness so that I forgive him?’ Agreed
apon ‏لا‎

The Commentary

Some of the people of knowledge say that this Hadith is
Mutawatir, but they agree it is from the Hadiths that are
Mashiwirh Mustafidah!! with the people of knowledge of
the As-Sunnah.

Concerning his statement: “Our Lord descends to the
lowest heaven.” His decent, Exalled is He, is real,
because as we have explained earlier, every action
whose pronoun refers to Allah, is attributed to Him in
reality. It is therefore upon us to believe in it, to trust it,
and to say: “Our lord descends to the lowest heaven.”
It is the closest of the heavens to the earth. The heavens
are seven in number. He, the Mighty and Sublime,
indeed descends at this period of the night to draw
nearer to His servants, as He draws nearer to them on.
the evening of (the Day of) ‘Arafah, when He boasts of
those standing (at ‘Arafah) to the Angels.)

His statement: “Every night:” Includes every night of
the year. ٠.

“When the last third of the night remains:” That the

lis reference preceded.

Translation note: A narration reported by not Jess than three
or more - but not up to the number of a Mutawsttir narration.
As that is reported in Sabi Muslin: (1348) from ‘Aishah, may
Allah be pleased with her, from the Prophet # that he said:
“There is no day on which Allah liberates more slaves from
the Fire as the Day of ‘“Arafah. He comes close, and then He
praises them before the Angels saying, ‘What do these
(peopte) want?”

Hadiths Concerning ‘The Attributes (of Allah) 27

refers to the descent of one of His Angels: Is it reasonable
that one of Allah’s Angels is the one saying: “Who is it that
will call upon me so that [1 answer him...” and so on?

It becomes clear with this, that these sayings are false
distortions refuted by the same Hadith,

And by Allah! They are not more knowledgeable of Allah
than the Messenger of Allah; they are not better at
admonishing the servants of Allah than the Messenger of
Allah; they are not more eloquent in their speech than the
Messenger of Allah 38!

They also say: “How do you say that Allah descends? If He
descends, then what about Al-’Uli? If He descends, what
about Al-Istizod’ above the Throne? If He descends, descent
is a movement from one place to another! If He descends,
descent is a new occurrence, and new occurrences can
never exist except by new occurrencest’”

Se we say: This is a false argument, nothing of it prevents
saying that the descent is a reality. Are you more
knowledgeable what befits Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
than the Companions of the Messenger #§?!

The Companions of the Messenger #§ never uttered these
suppositions. They rather said: “We hear, we believe, we
accept, and we testify.””

But you, who come later oppose! You now come and argue
using falsehood, and then say: “How? How?”

We are saying: He descends, we are not talking about His
Istiva’ above the Throne: Has He vacated the Throne or
not?

As for Al-‘Ula, we say: He descends, but He - the Mighty
and Sublime - is High above His ercation, because the
meaning of the descent is not that the heaven contains Him,
or that the other heavens can overshadow Him; because

26 Commentary on Al-‘Agrdal Al-Wiasitiyyah

Allah.” Some others say: “What descends is an Angel from
the Angels of Allah.”
All of these are false, because the descent of Allah’s
command is continuous and permanent. Its descent is not
specific to the last third of the night. Allah, Exalted is He,
says:
He manages and regulates (every) affair from the
heavens to the earth; then it (affair) will go up to
Him} (As-Sajdalt 32:5)

He also says:
1 Rt seme Ain
AS A ‏بيخ‎ dsb
4And to Him return all affairs (for decision).» (Hid
112123)

But as for their statement: “The mercy of Allah descends to
the lowest heaven when the last third of the night remains”
— Subhan Allth (Glorious is Allah)! The mercy does not
descend except during this period?! Allah, Exalted is He,
says:

4And whatever of blessings and yood things you have,
it is from Allah.» (An-Nahl 16: 53)

All blessings come from Allah and they are from the effects
of His mercy, and they come one after the other, all the
time.

And then we say: Of what benefit for us is the descent of
mercy to the lowest heaven?!

After this, we say (in reply) to the one who asserts that it

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 29

saying; “How can He descend in the last third of the night?
When last third of the night leaves the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, it moves to Europe and its environs? Will He
remain forever descending?”

So we say: Firstly, believe that Allah descends at this
particular time. If you believe, there is nothing compulsory
upon you besides that, Do not say: “Ilow? How?” Rather
say: When it is the last third of the night in Saudi Arabia,
Allah descends, and when it is the last third of the night in
America, the descent of Allah will also occur. When the
dawn breaks, the time of the descent ends at every place
according to its situation.

Therefore, our position regarding this matter is to say: We
believe in what reached us from Muhammad, the
Messenger of Allah, that Allah descends to the lowest
heaven when the last third of the night remains, saying:
“Who is it that will call upon Me so that | answer him?
Who is it that will ask Me so that I give him? Who is it that
will seek My forgiveness ‏مه‎ that I forgive him?”

Among the benefits of this Hadith are the following:

Firstly: Affirmation of Al-‘Lifa for Allah, based upon his
statement: He “descends.”

Secondly: Affirming actions of preference which are
Attributes of action, taken from his statement: “Our Lord
descends when the last third of the night remains.”
Thirdly: The affirmation of “saying” for Allah, based upon
his statement: “saying.”

Fourthly: The affirmation of generosity for Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, based upon His statement: “who is he
that will call upon Me? Who is he that will ask Me? Who is
he that will seek My forgiveness?”

28 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah ‏ربنع للق‎

none of His creatures can surround Him, Thus, we say: He
descends in reality, with Ilis ‘Lita in reality, and there is
nothing like Him.

As for His Istiwd’ above the Throne, it is an action; it is not
among the Attributes of the Self. We do not have any right -
in my view - to discuss whether the Throne is vacated by
Him or not. We should rather keep silent about it as did the
Companions, may Allah be pleased with them.

However, there are three views regarding this matter
among the scholars of the People of the Susah: The view
that the Throne is vacated, the view that it is not vacated,
and the view to halt (from speaking of the matter).

Shaikh Al-Islam, may Allah have mercy upon him, in Ar-
Risalat Al-’Arshiyyah said: “The Throne is not vacated by
Him, because the evidences for His Istiwa’ above the
Throne are Muhkamah (decisive), and the Hadith is also
Mulkamah (decisive). And Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
is such that His Attributes cannot be compared to the
attributes of the creatures. So it is obligatory upon us to
leave the texts conceming His Istiwa’ upon their decisive
ness and the text about His descent upon its decisiveness.
And we say: He is Mustawin (ascended) above His Throne,
descending to the lowest heaven, and Allah knows best the
how of that, and our intellects are too short, too base, and
too insignificant to be able to encompass Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime.”

The second view: Halting; they say: “We will not say ‘It
is vacated’ neither would we say: ‘Tt is not vacant.”

The third view: That the Throne is vacated by Him.

The later people who know that the earth rotates, and that
the sun goes around the earth, bring about a problem

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) a1

~The author said: “The Hadith: Meaning; complete the
Hadith,
And the Hadith is; that a man had his riding camel (while
he was traveling), upon which was his food and drink, and
it strayed from him. So, he started searching for it but he
could not find it, and so he gave up all hope of living. Then,
he laid under a tree awaiting death. All of a sudden, he
looked up and saw the rein of his camel ticd to the tree.
Nobody can imagine the degree of his joy except someone
who has had such an experience. Quickly, he took hold of
the camel’s rein, and said: “O Allah, You are my servant,
and I am Your Lord.” He committed an error out of
excessive joy. He could not know how to express himself!

Thus, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is more joyous with
the repentance of a servant of His when he repents than
this man was with his riding camel. Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, is not in need of our repentance; we are rather in
need of 1 ‏سنآ‎ in every situation. Yet, due to His generosity,
the Sublime and Exalted, and His love for ihsan, kindness
and munificence, He is joyous with this joy for which there
is no comparison, when he repents to Him.

¢@ = This Hadith includes the affirmation of the Attribute of
joy for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. Our opinion
regarding this joy is that it is real joy, and the strongest
of all kinds of joy. However, it is unlike the joy
experienced by the creatures.

With respect to man, joy is elation and levity that a person
feels when something that makes him happy occurs. That is
why whenever you are happy, you feel as if you are
walking on air, But with regards to Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, we do not interpret joy with what we know about
ourselves. We say that it is a joy that befils Him, the Mighty

30 Conunentary on Al-'Agidah Al Wasitiyyah

And from the Behavioral Benefits:

Tt behooves every person to seize the opportunity of this
part of the night, to ask Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, to
call upon Him, and to seek His forgiveness.

As long as the Lord, Glorious be He, is saying “Who is he
that will call upon Me?” “Who is he that will seek My
forgiveness?” and “Who” is used to express molivalion, it
behooves us to seize this opportunity, because nothing is
for you in your lifetime except what you spend in
obedience to Allah. The days will soon pass you by. Once
death catches up with you, it will be as if you were just
born at that time; all that has passed will be nothing.

And his saying xg: “Allah is more joyous with the seeking
of repentance of a servant of His, thart one of you will be
with his riding camel..." The Hadith, Agreed upon....

a ‏لك‎

© The Second [Jadith: Concerning the Affirmation of Joy:

That is his statement sg: “Allait is more joyous with the seeking
of repentance of a seraant of His, than one of you will be with Ins
riding camel...” The Hadith, Agreed Upon ‏لل‎

11 Reported by Al-Bukhari (11:102) and Muslim (2102) from a
number of the Companions with different wordings.

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 33

% From the behavioral benefits, it encourages us to strive
our utmost to repent whenever we sin, turning back to
Allah.

Allah, Fxalted is He, says, while describing the pious ones:

4And those who, when they have committed Fakishah.»
(Al ‘Travan 3:135)
Any Fahishah, like Zind, homosexual acts, marrying, the
unlawful relatives...
Allah, Exalted is He, says:
Ge BOS, aT ‏يت‎ kate SS ‏نا‎ ASS iF
‏كبيلاة‎ Hy ‏وَمَفْنًا‎ TERS SES ‏إِنَمُ‎
‎And marry not women whom your fathers married,
except what has already passed ; indeed it was shameful
and most hateful, and an evil way.) (An-Nisa’ 4:22)

GS ‏وس‎ Aes ‏كن‎ A pt I ‏#ولا‎
‎And come not near to unlawful sex. Verily, it is 8
Fahishah, and an evil way. (AL-Isra’ 17:32)

Lat said to his people:
(nil sft
€Do you conueit Al-Fahishuh?> (ALA‘raf 7:80)
Therefore,

سمدم 54

BF ik Hs SAG»
4And those who, when they have committed Al-Fahish
or wronged themselves with evil, remember Allah. ..>

32 Commentary on Ab‘Aqidah Al-Wesitiyyah

and Sublime, like the other attributes of His.

Just as we say that He has a Self, but it does not resemble
our selves; He has Attributes that do not resemble our
atiributes, because the discussion concerning the Attributes
is a branch of the discussion concerning the Self,

We therefore believe that Allah, Exalted is He, has joy as
affirmed by the creature that is the most knowledgeable of
Him, Muhammad #, who is the best advisor among the
creatures, to the creatures, and the most eloquent in what
he said #3.

It would be dangerous for us to say that what is intended
by joy is reward. This is because the people of ‏77ر11‎ say:
“Allah is never joyous. What is intended by joy is His
reward to the repentant, or His will to reward.” This is
because they affirm that Allah, Exalted is He, has a creature
that is separate from him, and that is reward. They also
affirm Al-Iradah (want, will, intent, volition). So they say
about joy: It is the reward given to the creatures, or the
intent to give the reward.

We are saying that what is intended by joy is joy in reality,
such as what is intended by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
is His Self in reality. We can never liken our attributes to
the Attributes af Allah.

In addition to the affirmation of the Attribute of joy for
Allsh, Mighty and Sublime, the perfection of His
mercy, the Sublime and Exalted, and His gentleness
with His servants is also derived from this Hadith. Since
He loves the returning of the one who was disobedient
to Him. And this is a magnificent love. He (the slave)
ran away from Allah, and then he stopped, and
returned to Allah, Then, Allah has this magnificent
joy about him.

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 35

is acceptable. [he acceptance of repentance ceases, with
regard to everybody, when the sun rises from where it sets.
But with respect to individuals, it ceases by the coming of
every individual's moment of death.

Allah, Exalted is He, says:

And of no effect is te repentance of those who
continue to do evil deeds until death faces one of trem
and he says: “Now I repent.» (An Nisa’ 4:18)

It is authentic from the Prophet # that the period when
repentance is accepted will cease when the sun rises from
where it sets. At that time, people will believe; but:

ig.

4No good will it do to a person to believe then, if he
believed not before, nor earned good through his faith >
{ALAn‘am 6:158)"-

If these five conditions are complete, then the repentance is
correct.

+ But, is it a condition for the validity of repentance that
one repent from all sins (he cormmitted)?!

Based on the report of Al-Buhhari (4636) and Muslim (157)
from Abu Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him, who
said that the Messenger of Allah ‏نه‎ said; “The Hour will not
come unti] the sun rises from where it sets, When it rises and
the people see it, they will believe all together, and that is a
time in which the belief of any soul will not profit it” and
then he recited the Ayal,

34 Commentary on Al-“Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

(Al ‘Imran 3:135)
They remember Allah, Exalted is He, in their hearts; they
remember His Greatness, and His punishment and His
rewards for those who repent:

AA aes ote

» ‏لذتربهح‎ AE

4... and ask forgiveness for their sins...
They did what they did, but they remembered Allah,
Exalted is He, in their hearts and sought forgiveness for

their sins, and Allah would forgive them; and the evidence
ist

&... and none cat forgive sins but Allah. (AL ‘Imran
3:135)

Therefore, if you are aware that Allah is joyous with your
repentance; the joy that docs not have an equal, there is no
doubt that you will strive your utmost to repent,

And there are Five Conditions for Repentance:

First: Sincerity towards Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
such that what causes you to repent is not to show-off to
people, to gain status with them, or the like among the
worldly goals.

Second: Expressing remorse for the disobedience.

‘Third: Abstention from it (the sin). And part of abstention
is that when the repentance has to do with the right of a
human being, it is returned to the rightful owner.

Fourth: Determination not to returning to the sin in the
future.

Fifth: That the repentance should be at the period when it

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah)

72
لله
%

لقعم

And his ‏طلة‎ saying: “Allalt laughs ‏كم‎ fo men, one of
whom kills the other and both of them will enter Paradise.”
Agreed upon...

‎oe‏ يل

‎@ The Third Hadith: Concerning the Affirmation of

‎Laughing

‎And that is his ‏يله‎ statement: ‘Allah laughs at two men, one of

‎> In this Hadith, the Prophet #% informed that Allah
laughs at two men; when they both met in while
fighting, one of them killed the other, but both of them
will enter Paradise. And the one of them will not kill
the other except because of severe enmity between the
two of them. Yet afterwards, they will both enter
Paradise, and that enmity will be removed. One of
them was a Muslim, while the other was a disbeliever.
The disbeliever killed the Muslim, and by that the
Muslim was a martyr, and so he enters Paradise. Then,
Allah favored this disbeliever, and he accepted Islam,
and then he was killed as a martyr, or died without
being killed, so he will enter Paradise. So the killer and
the one killed both enter Paradise, and then Altah
laughs at both of them.

‎In this there is an affirmation of laughing for Allah, the

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (2826) and Mustim (1890) from the
narrations of Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

‎whom kills the other, and both of them will enter Paradise .

‎36 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎There is a disagreement concerning this; but the correct
view is that it is not a condition. Repentance from a sin is
valid even while ome still continues to commit others
But for such repenting person, it would not be correct to
refer to him with the description of “the repentant” in
general, and so, it will be said lhat “he repented,” in a
restricted way, not absolutely.

‎So if someone drinks wine and consumes Rib@, then he
repents from drinking wine; his repentance from the wine
is correct, while his sin of consuming Ribd remains. So he
does not hold the rank of the repentant in the general sense,
because he is persisting in some act of disobedience.

‎© Aman in whose case the conditions of repentance are
complete, but afterwards, he returned to the sin
another time, this does not nullify his first act of
repentance, because he had determined not to return to
the sin, but his soul seduced him, and he returned to it
again. It is only required thal he repent the second time;
and like that, whenever he commits a sin, he should
repent - and the favor of Allah is extensive.

‎@) And they are both reported from Ahmad, sec the book
Madérij As-Salikin by Ibn Al-Qayyim (1:273).

Hadiths Conceming The Attributes (of Allah) 39

know that what is intended by pleasure is the reward?!

Now, you said about Allah what you know nat, from two
angles:
The first angle; you changed the text from what is obvious,
without knowledge.
The second; you affirmed a meaning for it that is contrary
to what is apparent, without knowledge.
Then we say to them: If you say Al fradah (intent, will,
volition) is established for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
this will invalidate your principle, because man also has
Irddah as he, Exalted is He, says:
‏رع‎ َِ 5-7 5
‏وارماصاة‎ you are some that Yurid (desire) this world
and some that Yurid (desire) the Hereafter.» (Al ‘Imran
3:152) .

So man has Iradzh. Even, the wall has 12207, as Allah,
Exalted is He, says:

&Then they found therein a wall about Yurid (wanting)
to collapse.» (Al-Kahf 18:77)

Therefore you either negate the Attribute of Ivddah from
Allah (because of this), just as you negate the other
Attributes you negate, or you affirm for Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, what He affirms for Ilimself, even if the
crealure has its kind in terms of the name, but not the
reality,
% The behavioral benefit derivable from this [adith is that
once we know that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
laughs, we will hope for all forms of goodness from Him.

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

Mighty and Sublime, and it is real laughing, but it does
not resemble the laughing of the creatures. It is
laughing that befits His majesty and greatness. It is
not possible that we give examples of it, because it is
not permissible for us to say that Allah has a mouth,
teeth or the like. However, we affirm laughing for
Allah in a manner that befits Him, Glorious and
Exalted is He.

© If someone says: By affirming laughing for Allah, it
necessitates likening Him a creature!

The response is that it does necessitate likening Him to a

creature; because the one who said: “He laughs” is the one

upon to His statement, Exalted is He, was revealed:

There is nothing like Him, and He is the Hearer, the
Seer.> (Ash-Shiird 42:11)

And from another angle, the Prophet would never speak
concerning matters like this except that it was revealed to
him, because it is from the malters of the unseen. It is not
among matters of Ijtihad (deducing rulings from the texts)
regarding which the Messenger ## might make a decision,
and then Allah would acknowledge it or not. But this is
from the matlers of the inseen which the Messenger #
received by the way of revelation.

+ If someone says: “What is intended by laughing is
pleasure. Because when one is pleased with something,
he is happy with it, and laughs as a result, And what is
intended by pleasure is the reward or the intent to
reward” as is claimed by the people of Ta’ti (denial).

In response to this, we say that this is a form of distorting
the words from their places. What is it that inakes you

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah)

And his saying : "Our Lord is amazed al the despair of His
slaves, and closeness of Lis change. Ile is looking at you,
in severe despair, so He continues laughing, knowing that
your relief is near.” A Hasan Hedtth....

© ‏عط‎ Fourth Hadith: Concerning the Affirmation of
Amazement, and some other Attributes

That is his statement 3%: “Our Lord is amazed at the despair of
His slaves, and the closeness of His goodness. He is looking at
you, itt severe despair, so He continues laughing, knowing that
your relief is near.” A Hasan Hadith")

% = Amazement: it is to be astonished by a thing and this
occurs for two reasons:

‘The first reason; The unawareness, on behalf of the one
amazed, of one of the reasons for the amazing incident,
such as when something happens to him suddenly without
any expectation. This is impossible with respect to Allah,
Exalted is He, because He is All-Knowing. Nothing is
hidden from in the heavens or the earth.

Secondly: That the reason (of the amazement) is that this

{1 Brom the Hadith of Aba Razin, according to Ibn Kathir in his
explanation of His saying, Exalted be He: “Or think you that
you will enter paradise” (Al-Bagarah 2:214) and its wording is:
"Your Lord is amazed” and in place of Ghiyarihi (His
change), there is Ghayiihi (His rain).

40 Commentary on AMAgidah ALWasitiyyah

That is why a man said to the Prophet #&: “O Messenger of
Allah, does our Lord laugh?” He said: “Yes.” He (the man)
said: “We will never be devoid of any goodness from the
Lord who laughs.)

When we know this, it inspires hope of having all good
things, because there is a difference between a frowning
person that is hardly seen laughing, and another who
smiles. And the Prophet ‏قية‎ was always cheerful and
smiling #3.

‎Based on the report of Waki’ bin ‘Ads from his paternal‏ ألا

‎uncle, Aba Razin who said: “The Messenger of Allah ‏أذ‎
‎said:"““Our Lord laughs at the despare of his slaves and
nearness of His change.’ I said: ‘O Messenger of Allah! Docs
our Lord laugh?’ He said: ‘Yes.’ He said: “We will never
lack any goodness from the Lord who laughs.” Reported by
Ahmad (4:11,12), Ibn Majah (181), Al-Baihag in ALA:
was-Sifitt (987), Al-Ajurri in Ash-Shari'ah (279), Ibn Abi ‘Asim
in As-Sunnah (1:244), and Al-Albani graded the Hadith Hasan
(good) in As-Silsilah Ag-Sahihah (2810 manuscript as quoted
from him by the brother ‘Ali Al-Halabi in his verification of
Al Agidah Al Wasitiyyah page 41), see also what comes after
Tt.

Hadiths Conceming The Attributes (of Allah)

Who says to something: “Be” and it is?

® “knowing that your relief is near” That is, the
removal of your severe situation is near.

There are a number of Attributes in this Hadith:

Firstly: Ainazement; based on his statement: “Our Lord is
amazed at the despair of His slaves.”

The glorious Qur'an has pointed to this Attribute. Allah,
Exalted is He, says:

Nay [ wondered (‘Ajibtu) while they mock, (As-Soffat 37:
12)
According to the recitation with Damma on the 14’.
- 11 also contains a clarification of Allah’s power, based on
his statement: “And the closeness of His change” and that
His, the Mighty and Sublime, power is perfect. Whenever
He wills, He changes the situation from one siate to the
opposite within a short period of time.
—It also affirms looking, based on his statement: “He is
looking at you.”
—And affirms laughing, based on his statement: “He
continues laughing.”
~ And similarly, knowledge: “knowing that your relief is
near”
—And mercy, because the relief is from Allah, which is
ال١‎ Translation note: Referring to the recitation of As-Safjat 37:1
Meaning, ‘Ajibte (with Damma on the Ta); “I wondered” as
in the recitation reported from Ibn Mas‘ad and others, while
what is popular is “Ajibta @with Fath on the Ta’) which is
“You wondered.”

42 Commentary on Al-’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

thing is outside of what is normal for it, and from what is

appropriate for it; not because of any incapability of the one

that is amazed; such as him doing an action that is

astonishing, whose like is not appropriate for him.

This is affirmed for Allah, Exalted is He, because such

amazement is not as a result of an imperfection, but it is

amazement because of the case of the one doing what is

amazing.

His statement: “Our Lord is amazed at the despair of
His slaves.”

Despair is the worst of all forms of hopelessness; the Lord,

the Mighty and Sublime, is amazed at the entrance of

severe hopelessness into the heart of the slave.

> “And the closeness of His change’ The Waw (and)
means “with” meaning: “with the closeness of Elis
change.”

So, the Lord, the Mighty and Sublime, is amazed at how we

are pessimistic while He, Glorious and Exalted is He,

changes things quickly. He changes a situation to another

situation with just a word and thats “Be” and it is.

% His statement: “He is looking at you:” that is, Allah is
looking at us with His Eyes.
“Tn severe despair” Al-Azil is the one in a difficult
situation, while Qenifin: is plural of Qanit who is the
one that despairs of relief and removal of difficulty

So the Prophet # mentioned the case of man and the case

of his heart. His case is that he falls into a difficulty, and his

heart despairs of hope feeling far removed from the telief.

% “He continues Laughing:” He continues laughing due
to this amazing situation. How do you despair of the
mercy of the most merciful of those who are merciful,

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 45

distress there is deliverance and that with hardship, there is
relief."

Rather, Allah, Exalted is He, says:

Verily, along with every hardship is relief, Verily,
along with every hardship is relief.» (Ash-Sharh 94:5-6)

“And one hardship will not overcome two states relief” as
is related from Tbn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him.

ل له ‎or‏

And his saying : “Hell will continually have (creatures)
cast into it, while if is saying : ‘Are there more?’ Until the
Lord of Al-'Izzah places Rijinhu (His Foot) (and in one
narration : ‘Qadamahu (Ilis Foot) upon it’) so that part of
it contracts upon part of it, and it says: ‘Qat, Qat’.””
Agreed upon

anne. ‏ل‎ DY

“part of the Hadith reported by Inidm Almad (1:307), At-
Tirmidhi (2518), and he said: A Hasan Sahih Hedith and Aba
Ya‘la (2556) from Ibn ‘Abbas. Al-Hafiz Jami” ‏ساف‎ Ulin Wa Al-
Hikam (1:460), Ibn Rajab said, commenting on this Hadith:
“This Hadith has been related from several routes and the
most authentic of them all is that of Hanash As-San‘ani
which At-Tirmidhi reported.”

“ Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

evidence of Allah’s mercy for His slaves.

And with all of these Attributes which this Hadith is
evidence for, it is obligatory upon us to affirm that they are
real for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, according to their
realities, and that we not make Ta’wil with them.

* The behavioral benefit in this, is that when someone
knows this about Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, he
will avoid this matter; that is despairing of Allah's
mercy. And it is for this reason that despairing of
Allah’s mercy is one of the major sins.

Allah, Exalted is He, says:

(Ibrahim) said: “And who despairs of the mercy of his
Lord except those who are astray?’’> (Al-Hijr 15:56)

He, Exalted is He, also says:

8 اسه

“And never give up hope of Allah’s mercy. Certainly no

one despairs of Allah's mercy, except the people who
disbelieve.» (Yusuf 12:87) 1

Therefore, despairing of Allah’s mercy and feeling remote
from His mercy, is one of the major sins. It is obligatory
upon the person to have good thoughts about His Lord. If
he calls upon Him, he is hopeful that He will answer Him.
If he worships Him, according to the dictates of His
Shar‘ah, he is hopeful that Allah will accept it from him. If
he falls into a difficult situation, he is hopeful that Allah
will soon remove it, because of the statement of the Prophet
#%; “You should know that with patience there is help; with

Hadiths Concerning ‘The Attributes (of ‏إطقللخ‎ . 47

question is meant to express request, meaning, “add
more.” The one who says the interrogative here
expresses negation, then he has resorted to what is
far from being right. According to him, the meaning is:
“Do not add more to what is already in me” The
evidence for the falsehood of this Ta’wil is:

His statement: “Until the Lord of Al-TIzzah places
Rijlahu (His Foot) (and in one narration: ‘Qadamahu
(His Foot) upon it’)’ Because this proves that it sought
more. If not, Allah will not put [lis Foot over it such
that it contracts. So, it is as if it is demanding with a
passion for those cast into it that more be added to
those that are in it.

His statement: “Until the Lord of Al-‘Izzah places” He
used “the Lord of Al-‘Izzah” because the situation is a
situation of dignity, supremacy and coercion.

Here, Rabb means Possessor. It does not mean the Creator,

because Al-'Izzah (honor, might) is one of the Attributes of

Allah; and the Attributes of Allah, Exalted is He, are not

creatures.

@ And his statement: “Bia His Foot.” And in another
report: ““Alaihd His Foot.” The meaning of Ff (in) and
‘Ald (on, over) is one and the same here, Also, what is
apparent is that [7 means ‘Ald, As such His statement:

And 1 will surely crucify you Fi the trunks of date-
palms (Té-Hat 20:71)

Meaning; on.
As for ArRijl and Al-Qadain, the meaning is the same
(Foot).

46 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah AL-Wasitiyyal

© = The Fifth Hadith: Concerning the Affirmation of the
Foot (Ar-Rijl or Al-Qadam) for Allah

That is his statement #: “Hell will continually have

(creatures) cast into it, while it is saying: ‘Are there more?’

Until the Lord of Al-‘Izzah places Rijlahu (His Foot) (and in one

narration : ‘Qadamahu (His Foot) upon it') so that part of it

contracts upon part of it, and if says: ‘Qut, Qat’.” Agreed

upon .11[

% Concerning his statement: “Hell will continually have
(creatures) cast into it,” : This will happen on the Day
of Judgment; that is, people and stones will be thrown
into it (the Fire) because Allah, Exalted is Ile, says:

edly ‏ألدّش‎ WBS ait 30
Then, fear the Fire whose fuel is people and stones.»
(Al-Bagarah 2:24)

And it is said that only people will be thrown into it, and
that the stones already exist there, and the knowledge is
with Allah.

“ “Cast into it;” there evidence in this that its inhabitants
— and refuge is with Allah — will be cast into it, they
will not enter it in an honorable manner. Rather, they
will be violently shoved into the fire of Hell: 1

32

<Foery time a group is cast therein, its keeper will ask:
“Did no Warner come to you?’ (Al-Mulk 67:8)

€ Concerning his statement: “Are there more?” The

(1) Reported by Al-Bukhari (7384) and Muslim (2848) from
Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him.

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 49

else, Allah is capable of creating a people and filling it
completcly with them. But He, the Mighty and Sublime,
will not punish anybody without any sin. This is unlike
Paradise; when the people of the world have entered it,
there will remain in it some places that are unoccupied;
then Allah will create some people on the Day of Judgment
to admit thein into Paradise out of His favor and mercy.

Fourthly: That Allah, Exalted is He, has real Rij! and Qadanr
(Foot) that does not resemble the feet of creatures. The
People of the Sunnah call this kind of Attribute, Attributes
of His Essence derived from revealed information (Adi
Dhatiyyah Al-Khabariyah) because it cannot be known
except through information (revealed) and because its
name shares name with some of our bodily parts. But we
will not say, with regard to Allah, that they are parts or
portions, because such description is not possible for Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime.

The Ash‘ariyyah and the people of Tahrif oppose (the People
of the Sunnah) in this matter. They say: “He puts His Foot
on it” means a group of His servants who are bound to
enter it. They claimed that the word Rij/ is sometimes used
to mean “a group” as it is contained in the Hadith about
Ayytb, may the Salah and Salam be upon him,"! that:
Allah sent to him a Rij! of locusts from gold. (They said that
the word ‘Ril’ in this Hadith) means a group of locusts.

This is a baseless distortion because his saying “over it”
makes that impossible.

Besides, it is not possible that Allah attribute the
inhabitants of Fire to [imself, because ascribing something

“1 Reported by Al-Bukhari (3391, 7493) from Aba Hurairah,
may Allah be pleased with him.

48 Commentary on AL‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyal

In the case of man, his Rij! (foot) is called Qadam

(advancing), because it is advanced while walking, for a

person is not able to walk with his foot unless he advances

it.

Concerning his statement: “so that part of it contracts
upon part of it:” Meaning, its parts become contracted
out of the greatness of the Originator's Foot, the Mighty
and Sublime.

Concerning his statement: “And it says: ‘Qat, Qui.”
That is, ‘that is sufficient for me, that is sufficient for
me,’ meaning: ‘I don‘t want anyone else.’

The following Attributes in this Hadith:

Firstly: The aflirmation of speech for inanimate objects;
based on his statement: “while it is saying” and also “and it
says: ‘Qat, Qat’.”’ This is a proof of Allah’s power, Who
gives everything its ability to speak.

Secondly: Warning from the Fire, based on his statement:
“Hell will continually have (creatures) cast into it, while it is
saying : “Ave there more?’”’

Thirdly: The affirmation of the favor of Allah, the Mighty

and Sublime, because Allah guaranteed the Fire that Ie
will fill it, as He said:

4Surely: I shall fill’ Hell with Jinns and men all
together.» (Hud 11:119)

When its inhabitants enter it, and some vacant space
remains in it, it will say: “Are there more?” Allah will put
His Foot over it, and parts of it contract upon other parts,
and it will be filled due to this contraction.

This is from the favors of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, or

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah)

4Say: “(But) the things that my Lord has indeed
forbidden are Al-Fmvihish (great evil sins and every
kind of unlawful sexual intercourse) whether committed
openly or secretly, sins (of all kinds), unrighteous
oppression, joining partners (in worship) with Allah for
which He has given no authority, and saying things
about Allah of which you have no knowledge.» (ALA’raf
733)

The behavioral benefit derived from this Hadith is, the
serious warning against the actions of the inhabitants
of the Fire, fearing being cast into it, as others will be
cast into it.

50 Commentary on AL‘Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

to Allah is a form of honoring it and declaring its
nobility.

Regarding the word ‘Qadam’ (Foot) (as used in the Hadith),
they said that it means the one put forth to guide. That it
means; Allah, Exalted is He, advances one over it, that is,
one who will lead ther to Hell.

This is also false, because the Originator, the Mighty and
Sublime, will not lead the inhabitants of Hell (to it) but:

485 Ge ‏إك كر‎ dt ip

4The Day when they will be pushed down by force to

the Fire of Hell, with a horrible, forceful pushing.» (At-

Tar 52:13)
And they shall be violently thrown into it. So these
distorters fled from one thing, and fell headlong into what
is worse than it. They were fleeing from attributing a Foot
to Allah, but they ended up in insolence and discrediting
the wisdom behind the actions of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.

The summary of the matter is that it is obligatory for us to
say that Allah possesses a Ril and if we want, we say
Qadam (Foot) in the real sense; without likening, and we do
not say “how” the Foot is. Because what the Prophet 2
informed us of, is that Allah, Exalted is He, has a Rij or
Qudam (Foot); he did not inform us how this Ril or Qadam

(Foot) is.

Allah, Exalted is He, has said:

& GAG eo noo ce ‏طقل‎

© Translation note: That is: “His Rijf’ can not mean “Ilis group

of inhabitants of the Fire.”

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 53

> He said: “He will then call out” That is, Allah; the
subject is Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

+ His statement; “With a voice:” is for emphasis, because
a call will not be except with a raised voice. This is as in
His saying, Exalted is He:

4Nor a bird that flies with its two wings, but are
communities like you ‏عل‎ (Al-An‘dm 6:38)

So, a bird that flies only does so with its two wings; this is a
form of emphasis.

* And His statement: “Indeed, Allah orders you to take
out from your offspring a detachment for the Fire:’’
And He did not say: “I order you!” This is out of His
pride and majesty, because He refers to Himself,
Exalted is He, in the third person, saying: “Indeed,
Allah orders you;” such as the king would say to his
soldiers: “The king is commanding you with so-and-
so," with pride and majesty. Allah, Glorious be He, is
the Proud and He is the Majestic.

Similar to this appears in the Qur'an:

<Verily, Allah commands that you should render back
the trusts to those whom they are due.» (An-Nisa’ 4:58)

And He did not say: “I command you.”

+ And His statement: “to take out from your offspring a
detachment for the Fire’ means, a detachment to be
dispatched.

In another Hadith: “He (Adam) said: ‘O my Lord, what is
the detachment to (be sent to the) Fire?’ He (Allah) replied:

3 TAL ee
And his saying: “Allah, Exalted is He, will say: ‘O
Adam!’ He will say: ‘Labbaik Wa Sa‘daik.’ He will then
call out with a voice : ‘Indeed, Allah orders you to take out
from your offspring a detachment for the Fire.” Agreed

@ The Sixth Hadith: Regarding the Affirmation of Speech
and Voice.

That is his statement #8: “Allah, Exalted is He, will say: ‘O

Adam!’ He will say: ‘Labbaik Wa Sa‘daik.’ He will then call out

with a voice: ‘Indeed, Allah orders you to take out from your

offspring a detachment for the Fire.” Agreed upon")

The Commentary

® The Prophet #§ informed regarding his Lord that He
will Say: “O Adam” and this is on the Day of
Judgment. Adam will answer: “Labhaik Wa Sa‘daik,”
“Labbaik:’ Means, a response, after a response.

“Sa'daik:”” Means, happiness after happiness. ‘hus, (the
meaning is that) “I answer your saying, and I am
asking you to make me happy and to support me.”

Reported by Al-Bukhari (7483) and Muslim (222) from Aba
Sa‘td Al-Khudny, may Allah be pleased with him.

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 55

talking to each other in different languages; he conveys
to one of them the meaning of what the other says in
the language which he understands.

There are four conditions guiding the eligibility of being an
interpreter: trust, proficiency in the (source) language from
which he is interpreting, and the (target) language being
interpreted to, and an adequate understanding of the
subject under discussion which he interprets.

Among the Attributes of Allah mentioned in this Haditit
are: Speech, and that it is with a voice that is heard and
understood.

The behavioral benefit from the first Hadith is: “Allah
says: ‘O Adam:” In it is such clarification, that if a
person knows it, then he will be cautious and fear
being ainong the nine hundred and ninety-nine.

And in the second Hadith; the person will fear that
discussion that will ensue between him and his Lord,
the Mighty and Sublime, and being disgraced before
Allah when He, Exalted is He, begins to expose his sins.
Hence, one will abstain from sins, and fear Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime.

54 Commentary on AL‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyat

‘Nine hundred and ninety-nine from every one thou-
sand“)

And his saying: “There is none of you except that His
Lord will speak to him, and there will not be, between him
and Him, an interpreter.”...

© The Seventh Hadith: Also Concerning the Affirmstion
of Speech.

That is his statement #: “There is none of you except that His

Lord will speak to him, and there will not be, between him and

Him, an interpreter.’

The Commentary

* “Except that His Lord will speak to him: Meaning that
will be his case; Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, will
speak to him; “And there will not be, between him and
Him, an interpreter.” And that is, on the Day of
Judgment.

The interpreter is an intermediary between two that are

Reported by Al-Bukhari (6530) and Muslim (222) from Abia
Sa‘id Al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him.

Repotied by Al-Bukhéri (6539) and Muslim (1016) from ‘Adi
bin Haitm, may Allah be pleased with him.

Hadhths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah)

The Commentary
Concerning his slalement: “for Ruqyah for the sick:”
Meaning, the Rugyah when he recited upon the sick.
© Concerning his statement: “Our Lord, Alldh who is in the
heaven.” The discussion about the phrase “in the
heaven” has preceded in the discussion of some of the
Ayat.
Concerning his statement: “Hallowed be thy Name:
Meaning, pure. The “Name” here is singular, but it
includes all the Names. It means: “Your Names are
pure of every imperfection.”
“Your command is in the heaven and the earth: Meaning,
Allah’s command, is carried out in the heavens and the
earth. As Allah, Exalted is He, says:
4He arranges (every) affair from the heaven to the
earth.» (As-Sajdah 32:5)

He also says:

Surely, His is the creation and the command.» (Al-
A’ raf 7:54)

% Concerning his statement: “as Your mercy is in the
heaven, place Your mercy on the carth:”” What is meant

(authentic) in Al-Kérnil (3:1054) and Al-Baihag? in Al-Asmé’
cons-Sift (892), Ton Quédimah in Al-Uhmow (page 48) and
Ad-Darimi in Ar-Raid ‘Ala ALJalmiyyah (70) and An-Nasi‘
in ‘Amal Al-Yewm wal-Lailah as mentioned in ‘Tubfah Al-
Ashraf (8:230).

Commentary on Al-Agidah Al-Wasi!

And his saying for Rugyah for the sick: “Our Lord, Allah
who is above the heaven! Hallowed be thy Name; Your
commarul is in the heaven and the earth, as Your mercy is
in the heaven, place Your mercy on the earth. Pardon us
our Hab (sins) and our errors. You are the Lord of the
pure. Send down mercy from Your mercy, and a cure from
Your cure upon this one in pain,” ‏ود‎ he would be relieved
A Hasan (good) Hadith reported by Abi Dawad and
others...

The Eight Hadith: Concerning the Affirmation of
Allab’s ‘Ui and some other Attributes: And his saying
Jor Ruqyah for the sick: “Our Lord, Allah who is above the
heaven! Hallowed be thy Name; Your Command is in the
heaven and the earth, as Your inercy is in the heaven, place
Your mercy ort the earth. Pardon us our Hab (sins) and our
errors. You are the Lord of the pure. Send down mercy from
Your mercy, and a cure from Your cure upon this one in
puin, so that he can relieved.” A Hasan (good) Hadith
reported by Abit Dawud and others... 1

Reported by Aba Dawtid (8892), Alunad (6:20), Al-Lalaka’t
(648) Al-Hakim (1344) and Ibn ‘Adi graded it Sahl

a

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah)

«إآ فرت أن َيْدَ رت ‎OT os‏ الى ‎GHGS‏ مكل

1 ded only to
1 (Muhammad i) have been commani i
worship the Lord of this city (Makkal), Who has
sanctified it and to Whom belongs everything.» (An-
Nami 27:91)

Therefore, <The Lord of this city> is special; while €And to

Whom belongs everything} is general.

+ “The pure” are the believers; every believer is pare.
This is a form of besecching Allah with this special
form of Rubibiyyah so that Allah accept the supplica-
tion and heal the sick.

His statement: “Send down mercy from Your mercy,
and a cure from Your cure upon this one in pain:
This is the supplication, what preceded it were pleas.
“Send down mercy from Your mercy,:” Mercy is of two
categories:

1 1 Nah; so this is not a

A mercy that is an Attribute of Allah;

creature, and not separate trom Allah, the Mighty and

Sublime. An example of this is His Statement, Exalted is

He:

ملعم مومهو و ‎Mage‏
‏#رريك المْتُورُ ذر ‎Aah‏

¢And Your Lord is Most Forgiving, Owner of Mercy.

(AL-Kahf 18:58)
Its descent is not what is being requested.
The mercy that is a creature but it is one of the effects of
Allah's mercy, and is therefore generally called mercy. An
example of this is His Statement, Exalted is He, in the
Hadith Al-Qudsi concerning Paradise: “You are My mercy.

Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

is to plead; he pleaded to Allah, Exalted is He, that
since He placed His mercy in the heaven, to place it on
the earth.

Af you say: Is Allah’s mercy not also on the earth?

We say he is reciting over the sick Person, and the sick
person is in need of specific mercy to remove his illness.

* Concerning his statement: “Pardon us our Hib (sins)
and our errors:” Pardon is to cover the sin and
overfooking ft. Al-[ub is the major sins, while Al-
Xhatayd (the errors) refers ‏ها‎ the minor sins. This is the
case they are mentioned together; but when they are
separate, they are synonymous. So the meaning is:
“Pardon our major and minor sins” because the pardon
removes what makes one grieve, and results in what is
sought, and because sins can act as a barrier between a
Person and him being facilitated to what is right, so he
is not facilitated to do what is right, and his
supplication is not answered.

Concerning his statement: “You are the Lord of the
pure:” The Rubibiyyah expressed here is specific. As for
general Rubibiyyah; then He is the Lord of everything,
yet Rubuabiyyah can be specific and it can be general,

Listen to the saying of the Magicians who believed:

They said: “We believe in the Lord of the Al-'Alamin
(mankind, jinn and all that exists). The Lord of Misa

and Harin } (AL-A’réf 7921-122)

They generalized, then specified,
Also listen to His, Exalted is He, saying:

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 61

Sublime. He #% is trustee over His revelation, the chief
of all who are trustworthy #, and the messenger and
one bringing him the revelation, Jibril, is also trust-
worthy:

4Ouner of power (and high rank) with (Allah), the

Lord of Throne. Obeyed (hy the Angels in the heavens)
and trustworthy.» (At-Takwir 81:20-21)

There was a cause behind this Hadith; that is, that the
Prophet ## was distributing some gold ore which ‘Ali
sent to him from Yemen, among four people. Then, one
man said to him: “We have more right to this than
those people”. The Prophet 3 thereafter said: “Would
you not trust me, while 1 am the trustee of the One
above the heaven?”

Ala is an expression used as a demand, as if what he
was saying is: “Trust me, because I am the trustee of
the One above the heavens.”

Also, the point of reference is his statement: “The One
above the heaven :”” about which we say as we said about
it in regarding previous Ayat.

60 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

With you, I mercy upon whom I will]

The same with healing, Allah is the Healer, and healing is
from Him, so He is described with healing, and it is one of
His actions, and as such, it is one of His Attributes. But
when it is directed toward the sick person, then it is one of
His creatures, because the healing removes the illness.

And his saying: “Would you not have trust me, while I
am the trustee of the One ubove the heaven?” A Sahih

e rhe Ninth Hadith: Also Concerning the Affirmation of
AL‘Uln.

That is his statement 8: “Would you not trust me, while [am
the trustee of the One above the heaven?!)

The Commentary

* “Would you not trust me’ meaning, “would you not
fegard me trustworthy.”

% “While I ant the trustee of the One above the heaven: ‘Vhe
One above the heavens is Allah, the Mighty and

00

‎US reference preceded, and itis in the Two Sah.‏ بير

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (4351) and Muslim (1064) from Aba
Sa'id Al Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him.

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah)

And His Throne was on the water.» (Hid 11:7)

He said: “And Allah is above the Throne, and He
knows what circumstance you are in:” He is above the
Throne, and with that; nothing in our situations or
actions is hidden from Him, rather, Allah, Exalted is
He, has said:

(And indeed We have created man, and We know what
his own self whispers to him.» (Qaf 50:16)

Meaning, that which is within your mind, Allah is aware of
it, despite the fact that it is not known to anybody.

And his statement: “He knows what circumstance you
are in” indicates that Allah’s knowledge encompasses
all of our circumstances.

+

The behavioral benefits in this Hadith:

If we believe in this Hadith, we will derive certain
behavioral benefits from it, these are glorifying Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, and that He is Exalted, and that He
knows our circumstances; hence, we will abide in His
obedience, such He would not find us missing wherever
He comunanded us, and He would not find us where He
prohibited us.

Commentary on Al-’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

. BES 3518 ‏رَوَاءُ أو‎
And his saying: “The Throne is above the water, and
Allah is above the Throne, and He knows what
circumstance you are in.” A Hasan Hadith reported by
Abi Dawud and others...

© The Tenth Hadith: Also conceming the Affirmation of
AUG

And that is his statement #8: “The Throne is above the water,

and Allah is above the Throne, and He knows what circunistance

you are in.”” A Hasan Hadith reported by Abi Daunid and

others "1

The Commentary

When the Prophet # was mentioning the distance between
the heavens, he #¢ said: “And the Throne is above the
water.” 1

Testifying to this, is His Statement, Fxalted is He:

ea

1) Reported by Ibn Khuzaimah in Kitab At-Tawhid (1:242), Al-
Baihagi in Al-Asm ‘if (581), Aba haikh in Kitt
Al ‘Azamah (279), Al-Lalaka’i in Sharh As-Snnnah (659), Ad-
Darimi in Ar-Radd ‘Ald Al-faluniyyah (81) and in Mukhtasar
AL‘Uluw (103), Adh-Dhahabi said: “Its chain is §
{authentic).”” And Al-Majma’ (1:86), Al-Haithamt in
referenced it to AtTabarani in AlKabir, and said: “Its
narrators are the narrators of the Two Sabihs.”

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 65

This is because they are of the view that whoever affirms a
direction for Allah, then he is a disbeliever; since they say:
The directions are free of Him (Allah).

The fact that the Prophet asked “Where” proves that Allah
has a place (where He is).

However, it is obligatory that we know that Allah, Exalted

is He, cannot be surrounded by places, because He is

greater than everything, and because nothing is above the

cosmos. There is nothing there except Allah; He is above

everything.

> His statement: “Free her, for indeed she is a believer;”
contains evidence that freeing a disbeliever is not
permissible. That is why it is not allowed to free him as
atonement. This is because the disbeliever remaining a
slave with you is a type protection in his case. He will
be under your control and authority and he will be

close to Islam. If you free him, he will be free, and when
he is free, then it is feared that he will return to the land
of disbelief, and continue helping the disbelievers
against the believers.

64 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah AL-Wasitiyyah

And his statement io the slave girl: “Where is Allah?” She
replied: “In the heaven.” He said: “Who am I?" She
replied :” You are the Messenger of Allah” He said : “Free
her, for indeed she is a believer.” Reported by Muslim...

© The Eleventh Hadith: Also Confirming the Affirmation
of Transcendence.

That is his statement 38 to the slave girl: “Where is Allah?”

She replied: “In the heaven.” He said: “Who am 1?” She

replied :” You are the Messenger of Allah” He said: “Free her,

for indeed she is a believer.” Reported by Muslin ©

The Commentary

* His statement: ‘Where is Allah? : “Where’’ enquiring
about the place.

“She said: In the heaven’ Meanjng, above the heavens,
or in the highness (Al-‘Uhi); depending upon the two
possibilities earlier mentioned.”

% “He said: ‘Who am 1?’ She replied : You are the Messenger
of Allah.’ He said : “Free her, for indeed she is a believer.’

To the people of Ta’til, by her statement; “in the heaven’, if

she meant in the highness (Al-‘Uhi), she is a disbeliever!!

{1 Its reference preceded.

PI See the Skaik’s explanation the author's statement: “And
His saying: O ‘Isa! ! will lake you and raise you to Myself. (Al
“Imran 3:55).""

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 67

of faith is that you know ;” proves that faith has different
degrees, because if you know that Allah is with you
wherever you are, you fear Him, the Mighty and
Sublime, and revere Him.

If you are in a dark room, where there is no one else, then
know that Allah is with you; not in the room; but He,
Glorious and Exalted is He, is with you; due to Him
encompassing you in knowledge, power, control, and other
than that among the meanings of His Rubabiyyah.

And his statement : “Whenever any one of you stands to
observe the Prayer, then let him not spit in front of
himself, nor to his right, for Allah is in facing him ; but to
his left or under his feet." Agreed upon...

@ The Thirteenth Hadith: Concerning the Fact that Allah
is before the Praying Person

That is his stalement #3: “Whenever aiy one of you stands to
observe the Prayer, then let him not spit in front of himself, nor
to his right, for Allah is facing him ; but to his left or under his
foot.” Agreed upon ‏لل‎

1 AL-Bukhari (405) and Muslim (547) from Ibn ‘Umar, may
Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary on ‏لاوش سلف‎ Al-Wisitiyyah

And his statement : “The most virtuous of faith is that you
know that Allah is with you wherever you are.” A Hasan
(good) Hadith...

OOD

@ The Twelfth Hadith: Conceming the Affirmation of
His Ma‘iyyah with His Creation.

That is his statement 3%: ‘The most virtuous of faith is that you
know thut Allah is with you wherever you are.” A Hasan (good)
Hadith.

It was reported by At-Tabarani from the Hadith of ‘Ubadah
bin As-Samit.?!

The Commentary

The Hadith indicates the Ma‘iyyah of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, and it has preceded in the (section mentioning)
the Aydt, that Allah’s Ma‘iyyah does not imply that He is on
the earth. Rather, it is absolutely impossible He is on the
earth, because Al-‘Uhi is among the Attributes of the Self
(Adh-Dhatiyyah), which He does not ever separate fram; it is
rather always with Him, Glorious and Exalted is He.

It has also preceded"! that it is of two categories.

The statement of the Messenger #8: “The mos! virtuous

UI its reference preceded.

17 See the Shaikir’s explanation the author's statement: “And
His saying: © ‘Isa! | will take you and raise you to Myself, (Al
‘Tmmin 3:55).

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 6.

The second perspective: Is that it is possible for something
to be high, while it is in front of you; here is a man who
faces the sun during the first part of the day, so, it (the sun)
is in front of him. And he faces it during the later part of the
day, and it is still in front of him, while it is in the heavens.
If this is possible with regard to creatures, it should be
more worthy with respect to the Creator, without a doubt,
The third perspective: Supposing this was not possible in
the case of creatures, yet it is not impossible wilh regard to
the Creator; for Allah, Fxalted is He, there is nothing like
unto Him, in all His Attributes.

The behavioral benefits derived from this Hadith, are
obligation of proper manners with Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, and it indicates that when the one praying
believes in that, it will result in him having Khushu‘, and
fear for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

68 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

The Commentary
“Facing him:” Meaning, in front of him.
Allah, Exalted is He, says:

4And to Allah belong the east and the west, so
wherever you turn (yourselves or your faces} there is the
Face of Alldhp (Al-Bagarah 2:115)

@ “His right” Also, it is reported in another Hadith:
“Because there is an Angel in his right”
And because the right side is more virtuous than the left
side, thus, the latter is better for spitting and the like. That
is why he said: “But to his left side or under his foot’.
If he is in the Masjid, the scholars say that he should spit in
a rag, a handkerchief or in his garment, and rub it in until
the spit dissolves. If someone is in the Masjid at the wall,
and the wall at his lefl is short, he could spit outside if he
will not cause harm to any of the passers-by.
It is derived from this Hadith that Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, is in front of the praying person. But it is
compulsory that we know that the one who said: “He is
in front of the praying person” is also the one who said:
“He is above the heavens.” There is no contradiction
between the two, since reconciling between them is
possible from three perspectives:
The first perspective: Is that the Shar’ combined between
them both (statements), while it will never combine
between two contradictory matters.

(1 Al-Bukhari (416) from Abo Hurairah, may Allah be pleased
with him.

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 71

soul and from the evil of every Dabbah : whose Nastyah You take
hold of. You ave Al-Awwal ; there is nothing before you. You are
Al Akhir; there is nothing after you. You are Az-Zahir ; there is
nothing above you. You are AlBatin ; there is nothing nearer
than you. Settle my debt on my behalf, and suffice me from
poverty.” Reported by Muslin |

The Commentary

This is a tremendous Hadith. The Prophet ‏عق‎ pleaded to
Allah, Exalted is He, with His Rubibiyyah in his saying: “O
Allah, the Lord of the seven heavens and the earth! The Lord of
the Majestic Throne. O our Lord and the Lord of everything!”
This is a form of generalization after particularization by
his saying: “And the Lond of everything.” This form of
generalization after particularization is so that one will not
wrongly assume that the ruling has to do only with has
been specifically mentioned along with it.

Also, consider His statement, Exalted is He:

4! have been commanded only to worship the Lord of
titis city (Makkah), Who has sanctified it aud to Whom
belongs everything.» (An-Naml 27:91)

He says: And to Whom belongs everything>, so that one

will not assume that He is the Lord of only this cily.

> “The One Who splits the grain (Al-Habb) and seed (An-
Nawa):”’ “Al-Habb" refers to the grain of plants and An-
Nawa refers to the seed of seedlings. So the trees that

Muslim (2713) from Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased
with him.

Commentary on AL ’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

1 fet fo Hege
ot ‏ب الشَمَوَاتٍ‎ a te es ae ‏الله‎ la - L585
2 1

And his statement #8: "0 Allah, the Lord of the seven
heavens and the earth, and the Lord of the Majestic
Throne. Our Lord and the Lord of everything. The One
Who splits the grain (Al-Habb) and seed (An-Nawa), The
Revealer of the Tawrah, Injil and the Qur'an : I seek refuge
in You from the evil of my soul and from the evil of every
Dabbah; whose Nasiyah You take hold of. You are Al-
Awwal; there is nothing before you. You are ALAkhir ;
there is nothing after you. You are Az-Zahir; there is
nothing above you. You are ALBatin; there is nothing
nearer than yout. Settle my debt on my belalf, and suffice
me from poverty.” Reported by Muslim.

© The Fourteenth Hadith: Concerning the Affirmation of
‏الاسام‎ and some other Attributes

Tt being his statement #&: “O Allah, the Lord of the seven
heavens and the earth, and the Lord of the Majestic Throne, Our
Lord and the Lord of everything. The One Who splits the grain
(AL-Labh) and seed (An-Nawa). The Revealer of the Tawrah,
Injil and the Qur'an: I seek refuge in You from the evil of my

Nadiths Conceming The Attributes (of Allah)

guidance and light.» (ALMd‘idah 5:44)
He said at the beginning of Stirah Al ‘rin:

it is He Who has sent down the Book to you with
truth, confirming what came before il. And He sent
down the Tawrah and the Injil. Aforetime, as guidance
to mankind. And He sent down the Criterion.> (Al
‘Imran 3:3-4)

» His statement: “I seek refuge in You from the evil of my
soul:”” Meaning, I seek Allah’s protection from the evil
of my soul,

Hence, there is evil in your soul:
And 1 free not myself. Verily, the self is inclined to
evil. (Yusuf 12°53)

Yet, the soul is of two kinds:

— A tranquil, pure soul, that orders what is good.
— An evil soul, that orders evil.

As for An-Nafsul-Lawamah (the self-reproaching soul); is it a
third, or description of the two that preceded?

Ihere is a difference of opinion about that. Some of them
say that it is a third kind of soul, and some of them say that
itis a description of the two that preceded. Se the tranquil
one reptoaches you, while the one urging evil also
teproaches you. So, His statement, Exalted is He:

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah AlL-Wasitiyyah

are produced are either plants whose roots are grains,
or trees whose roots are seeds. So the one for trees is
called Nazwa (seed) and the one for plants is called Habb

(grain).

ans
The splitter of the grain and the seed.} (ALAn‘am
6:95)

This dry grain and seed, which neither grows nor develops,
lhe Lord, the Mighty and Sublime, splits it; that is; He
opens it, so that trees and plants sprout from it. No one is
able to do that, no matter how powerful people become,
they can never split just one grain. And the seed is like that,
it is like a stone; it never grows nor develops, then Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, splits it, it opens up, and then the
seedlings sprout out of it and grow. No one is capable of
doing that except the One Who splits it, Glorious and
Exalted is He.
When he mentioned this tremendous universal Ayah he
then mentioned the legislative Aydt, and these are:
His statement: “The Revealer of the Tawrah, the Injil and
Hie Qur'an: These are the most tremendous Books
revealed by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. He
mentioned them in their chronological order: At-
Tawrah (was revealed) to Masa, AlLinjil (was revealed)
to ‘Isa and Al-Furgdn (the Criterion) was revealed to
Muhammad 3%.
Im this there is a clear text that the Tawrak was a revelation,
as stated in the Qur’an:

Verily, We did send down the Tawrah, therein was

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 75

the earth, And whatever creeps on the earth it contains evil.
As for some of them, then some of them are purely evil in
themselves, as for others, they contain both good and evil,
such that the one that has good in it, it is not free of evil.

* His statement: “Whose Nastyah You take hold of: An-
Nasiyah is the [ronl of the head, He only specified the
An-Nasiyah because it is at the front, It is what is held to
lead the camel and its like. It is also said that he
specified that because the part of the brain where
visualization and memories are is in the front of the
head; and the knowledge is with Allah.

His statement: “You are Al-Awnal, there is nothing before
you :” This is the explanation from the Prophet #¥ of his
saying: “Al-Awwal.” Al-Awwal is one of the names of
Allah.

In explanation of the Ayah we mentioned that the
philosophers call Allah Al-Qadim (the Ancient) and that it
is not of the beautiful Names of Allah, and it is not allowed
that He be named such. But it is allowed to use it about
Him in information. The matter of informing is broader
than that of naming. Because Al-Qadim is not among the
beautiful Names of Allah, and there is an imperfection in
the name Al-Qadim. The reason is that “oldness” can be
relative. Don’t vou see His statement:

Coll oh se BC ‏مَدْرْتَهُ‎ ali,
And the moon, We have measured for it mansions (to

traverse) Hill if retums like the old (AL-Qadim) dried
curved date stalk.} (Yasin 36:39)

The old dried curved date stalk is a newly occurring thing,
but it is old only in comparison to what comes after it.

+ His statement: “You are Az-Zahir, there is nothing above

74 Commentary on ‏_امفتمة لف‎ Al-Wasitiyyah

And I swear by the self-reproaching soul.» (Al
Qivdmah 75:2)

Will include both kinds of soul.

So the tranquil one reproaches you for falling short with an

obligation. If you are negligent with an obligation, it will

teproach you, and when you do what is unlawful, it

reproaches.

The one that orders evil is the opposite; when you do good,

it reproaches you, and it reproaches you when you miss

what it has ordered you to do of evil.

Therefore, reproaching is a description of the two kinds of

souls according to the preferred view.

His statement here: “I seek refuge in You from the evil of

my soul:” What is intended by it (the soul) that orders evil.

His Statement: “And from the evil of every Dabbal,
whose Nasiyah You take hold of:” Ad-Dabbah refers to
everything that creeps on the earth; even the one that
walks on its belly is included in this Hadith. Like His
statement, Exalted is He:

hat Gott of tS Leg EK Eat

4Alldh has created every Dabbah creature from water. Of
them are some that walk on their bellies.» (An-Niir 24:45)

And His Statement:

CEL ‏في الْأَرضٍ إِلَّا عَلَ أنه‎ OS ‏من‎ OG
And there is no Dabbah on the earth, but its provision
is due from Allah} (Lid 11:6)

Even though customarily Dabbah is used to refer to four
legged animals, and more specifically, for the donkey only,
but in the case of this [adith it means all of what creeps on

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah)

commit an act that is unlawful.

Have you not heard of the news of the three; those whom
the cave closed in upon. Fach of them started to plead to
Allah by his rightcous actions. One of them had a cousin
whom he was attracted to and was trying to seduce her,
but she always refused that. Then she was suffering one
year, and she was in need. So, she went to him to seek some
help from him. The man refused to help her unless she
surrendered herself ta him (in fornication). So due to her
necessity, she agreed to that.

So when he sat with her as a man sits with his wife; she
said to him: “O man, fear Allah, do not open the ring
except rightfully.” This word had a strong effect on this
man, since it was coming from the heart, and he promptly
stood up to gel away from her. He said: “I stood up to get
away from her, while she was the most beloved person to
me." She reminded him with this noble admonition,
which led him to abstain (from the evil deed).

Thus, look at the poverty. This woman wanted to sell her
honor because of poverty.

Therefore, the statement of the Messenger #: “Suffice me
from poverty,” the Prophet ## was besceching his Lord to
suffice him against poverty because of the dangerous
pitfalls of poverty,

There are Names and Attributes in this Hadith:

— The Names are: Al-Awwal (the First), Al-Akhir (the
Last), Az-Zahir (the Most High), and Al-Batin (the Most
Near).

11 Reported by Al-Bukhari (465) and Muslim (2743) from Ton
‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah
You’ Az-Zahir is from Az-7uhir as in His saying:

€S0, they (fajaj and Ma‘juj) could not scale it
Cfazharthu) or dig through it.» (Al-Kahf 18:97)

4scale it (Yazhartthu)y: that is, “go over it.”

But as for the one who said that he is Az-Zahir in His Aydt,

this is a mistake. Because no one is more knowledgeable

regarding of the interpretation of Allah's Word than the

Messenger of Allah #4. Ie has said: “You are Az-Zahir, there

is nothing above You.” Rather, He, Glorious be He, is above

everything.

“ His statement: ‘You are Al-Batin, fitere is nothing nearer
fhan You: The meaning is nothing is nearer than
Allah; none disposes of affairs besides Allah, none is
alone with anything besides Allah, none is hidden from.
Allah. Everything, Allah encompasses it, and as such,
he said: “Nothing is nearer than You,’ meaning nothing
empowers instead of You, and none can prevent
anything instead of You, and none can benefit the
one of benefit, from You is the benefit.

His statement: “Settle my debi on my behalf: Ad-Dain
(debt); what is due upon a man in terms of wealth or
right. (For example,) if [ buy something 1 need from
you, and do not pay you its price, then this is referred
to as a debt, even if il is not deferred.

His statement: “Suffice me from poverty” Al-Fagr
(poverty) is the state of having nothing, and there is
no doubt that poverty stresses the soul. And debt
includes humiliation; because the one in debt feels
humiliated by the one he owes, and the poor person is
always in need: perhaps poverty will bring him to

Hadiths Conceming The Attributes (of Allah}

And his statement 3% when te Companions raised their
voices in remembrance: “O you people, be gentle upon
yourselves, for you are not calling one that is deaf nor
absent; you are only calling One who Hears, who Sees
Indeed, the One you ave calling is closer to one of you than
the neck of his riding camel.” Agreed upon...

The Fifteenth Hadith: Concerning the Closeness of Allah,
Exalted is He.

His statement #% when the Companions raised their voices
in remembrance of Allah: “O you people, be gentle upon
yourselves, for you are not calling one that is deaf nor absent ;
you are only calling One who Hears, who Sees. Indeed, the One
you are calling is closer to one of you than the neck of his riding
camel.” Agreed upon ‏ذأ‎

The Commentary
When the Companions were with the Prophet #2 on a

Maju’ Al-Fatdwi (18:326), and Al-Hafiz said in Talkhis Al-
Labir (275): "Ibn ‏ستول لق‎ exaggerated and thus mentioned
the Hadith in Al-Macedii'at\”

Reported by Al-Bukhan (6610) and Muslim (2704) and ‏2ل‎
‎Ahmad in Al-Mrsnad (4402) from Aba Musa AL-Ash‘an,
may Allsh be pleased with him.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah AL-Wasitiyyah

— From the Attributes are: Being the First, being the Last.
‏صل‎ both of these there is encompassing that relates to time.
Being the Most High and being the Most Near; in both of
these there is an encompassing that relates to place.

Among them are: Al-'Lilit, and a general Rubibiyyah, and
Ilis complete Power. Among them are: perfection of His
Mercy and Wisdom, by revealing the Books to judge
among people and to guide them to the path of Allah.

% Apart from ihe Names and Attributes are: Pleading to
Allah by the Attributes of Allah, and warning against
the evil of the soul, and the Prophet # asking Allah to
settle his debt, and to suffice him against poverty, and
clarification of the weakness of the Hadith which
reports that ihe Prophet # asked his Lord to raise
him poor.

Among the behavioral benefit m it: The warning
against the evil of the soul, and the gravity of the
matter of debt, and the incitement to offset the debt as
much as possible; and moderation in seeking and
spending wealth; because when he is moderate in that,
he will be safe, for the most part, from poverty and
debt. 1

جه

Based on the report of AtTirmidht (2352) from Anas, and
that of Ibn Majah (4126) from Abu Said Al-Khudri that the
Prophet #% said: “O Allah, raise me poor, make me die poor
and raise me in the company of the poor on the Day of
Judgment” and it was graded Sahih (authentic) by AL-Albani
in As-Sahihal: (308) and AL-rwa’ (853), Shaikh Al-Islam Ton
Taymiyyah said: “Whether its wording is authentic or not
the praiseworthy poor person is the one who is humble.”

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allsh) 81

the Creator? The Lord, the Mighty and Sublime, is Near in
His Highness. He is nearer to one of us than the neck of his
riding camel.

This Hadith contains the following benefits:

— Init are some of the negating Attributes; a negation that
He is deaf or absent; due to the perfection of Lis Hearing,
Seeing, His Knowledge and Nearness.

— In it, there is, as well, that it is not for a person to cause
difficulty on himself in worship, because when a person
causes difficulty on himself, he becomes tired and fed up.
Sometimes, the body can even be affected. That is why the
Prophet #% said: “Suffice with deeds which you are able to
for Allah, will not be fed up until you are fed up.”

So one should not cause difficulty on oneself; one should
rather encourage himself when he finds that he has the
energy for worship, he employs and engages the energy,
and when he finds listlessness in himself towards matters
that are not obligatory, or that he is inclined to a different
act of worship, then he directs himself toward that.

Such that the Messenger 3% ordered the one who becomes
drowsy during his prayer to sleep, and leave the prayer, he
said: “For when one of you is praying, and he is dozing off,
he does not know whether he is seeking forgiveness or
cursing himself.”"!

And similarly, the Prophet #% would fast so much, that one
would say: “He will not stop fasting” and he would stop
fasting so much, that one would say: “He will not fast

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (1151, 1970) and Muslim (782) from‏ الا
‎‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her.‏

‎21 Reported by Al-Bukhari (212) and Muslim (786) from
‘Rishah, may Allah be pleased with her.

‎80 Commentary on Ak’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah
journey; if they mounted a high place, they would say:
“allahu Akbar (Allah is the Greatest)” and whenever they
descended down a valley, they would say: “Subhan Allah
(Glorious is Allah).”"! This is because if one rises over a
place, he might feel hubris of himself and see that he is high
and great (a special person); therefore, it is appropriate that
in such a situation, he says: “Allain Akbar (Allah is the
Greatest)” reminding himself of Allah’s grandeur, the
Mighty and Sublime.

‎But if he descends, this is debasing and degradation, so he
should say: “Subhan Allah (Glorious is Allah)” to remind
himself that Allah is far above debasement. The Compa-
nions, may Allah be pleased with them, were raising their
voices while making this statement of remembrance. Then,
the Prophet 2% said:

‎% O you people, be gentle upon yourselves :” That is, take it

‎easy on yourselves.

‎& “For you are not calling one that is deaf nor ubsent.”’ You
are not calling one who is deaf, that can not hear, nor
one who is absent, that can not see.

‎“You are only calling One who Hears:’” He hears your
remembrance; “who Sees,” Who sees your actions.

‎“Indeed, the One you are calling is closer to one of you than
the neck of his riding camel :' The neck of a riding camel
is very close to the rider, and Allah, Exalted is He, is
closer to man than this; yet He is above His heavens
over His Throne.

‎There is no contradiction between the nearness and Al-‘Lilt
(exaltedness), because something can be far and close at the
same time. This is with respect to a creature, then what of

‎01 Its reference preceded.

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of ‏رطقلا‎ 83

can be easily understood. All of these people (the
Companions) were travelers; and each of them was on
his riding camel; so if one wants to draw a good example
with which the message would be understood, none was
more appropriate than the one cited by the Prophet #.

And his statement: “Indeed, you will see your Lord, just
as you see the moon on a night that it is full; you will not
Tudammin from seeing Him. If you are able to not be
prevented from prayer before sunrise and one befure
sunset, then you should do sv.” Agreed upor....

>

© The Sixteenth Hadith: Concerning the Affirmation of
the fact that the Believers will see their Lord.

He ‏فيد‎ said: “Indeed, you will see your Lord, just as you see the
moon on a night that it is full; you will not Tudammin from
seeinig Him. If you are able to not be prevented from prayer before
sunrise and one before sunset, then you should do sol
Agreed upon.

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (554) and Muslim (633) from Jarir
bin ‘Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him.

82 Commentary on Al’Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

again.“"] And the same with his voluntary night prayer
versus sleep.

— Imalso includes that Allah is near. And this is proven by
His saying:

a pat ies ‏مث‎ 804% ae
pal ‏دَعَوَةٌ‎ col 25 Gp

4And when My slaves ask you concerning Me, then
(answer them), I am indeed near. 1 respond to the
invocations of the supplicant when he calls on Me.>
(AL Bagarah 2:186)

‎And we derive the following behavioral bencfits from‏ ؟.
‎this Hadith:‏

‎— That we are not to cause difficulty on ourselves with acts

‎of worship, and that our manner of worshipping Allah

‎should be moderate; without negligence nor exaggeration.

‎— It also indicates be cautious of Allah, because He is
Hearing, Near, Seeing, so we will stay far away from
disobeying Him.

‎— It also contains something from the view of aphorisms;
the allowance of comparing one who is absent with one
who is present for the purpose of elucidation, for he said:
“Indeed, the One you are calling is closer to one of you than.
the neck of his riding camel.”

‎— Init as well, is that it one choose words whose meanings

‎"1 As that is reported in ALBukhari (1972, 1973) and Muslim
(1157) from the Hadili: of Ibn ‘Abbas and Anas bin Malik,
may Allah be pleased with them, that: “The Messenger of
Allah # would fast until we would sav: ‘He will not stop
fasting,’ and he would not fast until we would say: ‘He will
not fast again.”

Hadiths Concerning The Attribules (of Allah) 85

narration of Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him,
that he # said: “Indeed, Alléh said: ‘I have divided the
Salah between My slaves and Myself into two halves: If he
says: “Al-Hamdulillahi Rabbi Al-‘Alamin (All Praise is due to
Allah, the Lord of all existence)” He (Allah) says: ‘My
slave has praised Me.”

This includes every praying-person. From what is known,

is that people praying can be reciting this Ayah at the same

time, and Allah says about each one of them; “My slave has
praised Me” at the same moment.

% He said: “Just as you see the moon on a night that it is
full :” That ts, the night when it is round, and that is the
fourteenth and fifteenth night, and it can sometimes be
on the thirteenth night. The middle (of the month) is
the fourteenth. As said by Ibn Al-Qayyim: “Like AL
Badr (the night of the full-moon) on the sixth night after
eight.”

* His statement: “You will not Tudammnun from seeing
Him.” In another wording; “You will not Tudamin:” In
another wording: Tadarrin:

— Tudaman: With a Dammah on the later Ta’ and the letter
Mim softened: Meaning, no Daim will reach you; and Aq-
Daim is Ag-Zulin (oppression); and the meaning is that none
of you will debar others from the seeing, and wrong him by
that, because every one of you shall (clearly) see Him.

— In another wording; “you will not Tuddmurin:” With
Shaddah on the letter Mim and a Fathah or a Dammah on the
later Ta’; Meaning none of you will have to crowd together
with others to see Him; because if something is hidden, not
clearly seen, one would have to lean on the other in order
to be able to see it.

— But as for the wording: “You will not Tadaran” or “You

‎Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah‏ جع

‎The Commentary

‎® His statement: “Indeed, you shall see your Lord:” The
address is to the believers.

‎His Statement: “Just as you see the moon :” This is seeing
of vision, because our seeing the moon is with vision.
Here, he compared one act of seeing to another; so the
seeing will be by vision.

‎% His statement: “Just as you see:” The comparison is
between the acts of seeing, not between what is seen
{that is not between Allah and the moon) because
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, there is nothing like
unto Him.

‎The Prophet # sometimes explained meanings by

‎mentioning real sensory examples, such as when Abu

‎Razin Al-‘Uqaili Laqit bin ‘Amir asked him saying: “O

‎Messenger of Allah! Will every one of us see his Lord on

‎the Day of Judgment? And what is the sign of that in His

‎creation?” The Prophet 2 said: “Every one of you looks at
the moon, Mukhalliyan Biti (being uninhibited)?” He said:

‎“Certainly”. The Prophet # said: “Allah is Greater“!

‎And his statement: “Mukhalliyan ‏“تطاظ‎ Means, alone with.
it.

‎And as established in a Hadith in Salut) Muslim!) from the

‎01 Reported by Imam Ahmad (4:11), Abu Dawad (4731), Al-
Hakim (4:560), who said it is Sahij, and Adh-Dhahabi
affirmed it. And Ibn Khuzaimah reported it in Ai-Tawhid
(438), as did ALAjurtl in Ash-Shuri‘aht (262), Ten Abi ‘Agim in
the Kitab As Sunnah (1:200) and in Zilat Al Jannah, Al-Albani
said: “A Hasan (good) Hadith, its reporters are those of
Muslim except, Waki’ bin ‘Ads and it is also said: ‘Hads.””

‎1 Reported by Muslim (395).

Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of Allah) 87

of mentioning the Ayaft that indicate that; they are four
Ayat. The Hadiths reported concerning this matter are
Mutawétir, from the Prophet #§. Hence, its affirmation
is absolute and its proof is absolute.

Thus, some of the scholars are of the view that whoever
disputes the fact that Allah, Exalted is He, shall be seen, has
become an apostate disbeliever,') and that it is obligatory
upon every believer to affirm that.

He said: “We only allege him to be a disbeliever, because
the evidences are absolute in affirmation, and absolute in
proof, and it is not possible for anybody to say that the
statement of the Messenger ##: ‘You will see Your Lord’ is
not absolute in its proof, since there is nothing firmer in ils
absoluteness than an example of this construction.”

If the Hadith had tread: “You will see Your Lord.” Then
pethaps it would carry some interpretation, and it referred
to certain knowledge comparing it with seeing with vision,
but he clearly stated that we see Him as we see the moon,
and this is sensory.

lt has preceded in our discussion that the people of Ta’ti!
falsely interpret these Hadiths, and explain seeing to mean
knowledge, and the falsification of their saying has

See Hadi Al-Arwih by Ibn Al-Qayyim (pg. 242), for he quoted
the saying of Imam Ahmad and others, that anyone who
denies the seeing of Allah, Exalted be He, is an unbeliever.
Translation note: This is directly after the discussion referred
to previously.

86 _Commentary on Al-Agidah AL-Wisitiyyah

will not Tadarriin:” Its meaning is that you will nol face any
harm. This is because everyone will see Him, Glorious and
Exalted is He, while he is in a state of the utmost tranquility
and rest.

* His statement: “If you are able to not be prevented from
prayer before sunrise and before sunset, ten you should do
so.” “prayer before sunrise” is Salat Al-Fajr while “prayer
before the sunset’ is Salét Al-’Asr.

The “Asr prayer is more virtuous than the Fajr prayer
because it is Ag-Salat Al-Wasta which Allah specified with
the order of its preservation after a general (order to
preserve the prayers).!] However, from another view, the
Fajr prayer is more virtuous than the ‘Asr prayer, because it
is the witnessed prayer as Allah, Exalted is He, says:

And recite the Qur‘in in the early dawn. Verily, the

recitation of the Qur'an in the early dawn is ever-
witnessed.» (Al-Isra’ 17:78)

And it is reported in an authentic Hadith that: “Anyone
who observes the two cool prayers will enter the
Paradise.’""! And they are the Fajr and ‘Asr prayers.

‘ Among the Attributes of Allah in this Hadith, are: The
affirmation that Allah shall be seen. The explanation
regarding this Attribute has preceded®! in the course

Translation note: Referring to Al-Raqarah (2:238); ¢Guard
strictly the prayers, especially As-Salat Al-Wusta>
Reported by Al-Bukhari (574) and Muslim (635) from Aba
Misa Al-Ash’ari, may Allah be pleased with him.
Translation note: See the comments on: Some faces that
Day shall be Nadirah (shining and radiant). Looking at
their Lord.» (Al-Qiyamah 75:22-23).

0 The Attributes (of Allah)
Commentary on AlAgidah Al Wasifiyyal Hadiths Concerning The Attributes (of AllaT) __

obligatory upon us to believe in what Allah informed
of in His Book; except that it is different than the
Qur'an in affirmation; so there are two things we have
to look at in relation to what comes in the Sunnalr:

Wy ‏كنا يُؤْمِنُونَ‎ ve ‏وَالْجَمَاعةٍ ُؤيلونَ‎ Bh Firetly: Its authenticity.

Secondly: If it is proof for that matter.

As for the Qur'an, we have just one consideration and that
is looking at whether or not the Ayah proves that matter
Our clatification preceded regarding the evidences that
prove the obligation of accepting in what the Prophet #5

And other similar Hadtths, with which the Messenger of
Allah i informed about his Lord from whatever he

informed. For indeed, Al-Firgatan-Najiyah, the People of informed of.
the Sunnah and the Jama‘uh believe in that. Just as they : 01 1 oa ١ ‏نو‎ (denial
believe in what Allah informed about in Eis Book ; without % We said: “Without Tobe (distortion) nor Tt 0 ‏لبد‎
‎Tahrif (distortion), nor Ta’til (denial), nor Tak if (satyit and without Takyif ( lescriplion), 1 andl

0 ? i 1 ¥ ne ing).”” The Janation of Uhese preceded! 1
“how’') nor and Tamtlul (likening)... ing).” The exp!

Concerning the statement: “And other similar Ha-

diths...”’ Meaning, look at the likes of these Hadiths

where the Prophet 2% informs about his Lord. So

whichever of them are like these, in affirmation and

evidence, its ruling will be their the same as their

ruling.

Concerning his statement: “Al-Firgataiz-Ndjiyah:” Al-

Firgah, that is; AE-Ta’ifah (the group).

“An-Najiyak” Those who are saved from innovations

in the world, and from the Fire in the Hereafter.

“The People of the Sunnah and the Jama’ah:”” That is those

who hold on to Sunnah and gather upon it.

“They believe in that :’’ That is, in what the Messenger ‏سدم هه‎ 5 5 8
informed. Translation note: See the first section at the beginning of this

volume, 1 1
Translation note: See where the author first mentioned these

terms in the first volume.

“Just as they believe in what Allah informed about in His
Book :” Whatever the Messenger #% informed of, it is
obligatory upon us to believe in il, just in as it is

SECTION:

The Status of the People of the Sunnah
and the Jama‘ah among the Various
Sects of This Ummah, and that They

are Described with Wasatiyyah
(Moderation)

Rather, they occupy the balanced position among the
parious sects in the Ummah, just as this Unemal occupies
the balanced position among the (other) nations...

‘Yhe author, may Allah have mercy upon hint, said:
“Rather, they occupy the balanced position among the
various sects in the Ummah, just as this Umenah occupies
the balanced position among the (other) nations.”

The Commentary

+ His statement: that this Ummal: is the balanced nation
among all the nations, meaning, the earlier nations, and
that is from various perspectives:

— In the case of Allah, Exalted is He: The Jews describe

‘The Status of the People of the Sunnah...

: MEG OS Gi SB ‏أنتااضآ أذ عا‎
And to those who are Jews, We forbade every (animal)
with undivided hoof, and We forbade them the fat of the
ox and the sheep, except what adheres to their backs or
their entrails, or is mixed up with a bone. Thus We
recompensed them for their rebellion . And verily, We
ave Trutlful.» (AL-An‘am 6 :146)
As for this Limmah, they are balanced, goods, pure things
are lawful for them, while filthy things are unlawful for
them.
— Concerning Qisis (the law of retaliation); Qisds was
obligatory for the Jews, while tolerance with
obligatory upon the Christians. As for this Ummah, they are
given the choice Qisas or collecting the Diyah (the blood-
money) or pardoning without taking anything.
Thus, the Ummah of Islam is balanced among the other
nations, between exaggeration and negligence.
Therefore, the People of the Sunnah and the Jamdé‘ah, in
comparison to the sects in this Ummah are like this Ummah
compared to other religions; meaning, they are balanced.
Then, the author, may Allah have mercy upon him,
mentioned five foundations which the People of the Sunnah
and the famd‘ah are balanced compared to the sects of the
Ummah.

92 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Allah, Exalted is He, with imperfections, thus, they
compare [fim to the creatures. ‘Ihe Christians compared
the imperfect creature to the perfect Creator. As for this
Ummah, they neither describe Allah with imperfections nor
compare the creation to Him.

— In the case of the Prophets: The Jews belied ‘Isa bin
Maryam, and disbelieved in him, and the Christians
exaggerated about him, until they made him a god. As
for this Ummah, they believe in him without exaggeration.
They say: “He is the slave of Allah and His Messenger.”

— In the case of acts of worship: The Christians worship
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, without purification;
meaning that they do not purify themselves from filth.
One of them urinates, geiting urine on his clothing; and
then he stands to pray in the church!! And with the Jews is
the opposite; whenever they get any impurity on them,
they will cut it that off of the clothing. So it can not be
purified with water according to them. And they even stay
completely away from the menstruating woman, not eating
with her nor sitting around her.

As for this Ummah, they are balanced; they would say
neither this nor that; the garment is not to be cut off, nor is
prayer performed with impurity. Rather, il will be washed
until the impurity is removed from it, and is to be prayed
in. And they ‏مك‎ not distance the menstruating woman.
Rather, they eat with her, and her husband embraces her
without sexual intercourse.

— Similarly, concerning the matter of unlawful food and
drink; The Christians make all filthy and unlawful things
lawful. As for the Jews, every (animal) with undivided hoof
was forbidden for them, as He, Exalted is He, says:

‎GE a oll esp‏ كُلَّ ذى طم كيرح أل

The Status of the People of the Sunnah... 95

— The Ash’ariyyah affirm the Names and only seven of the
Attributes.

> All of these people are included under the term Ta‘
(denial); but some of them engage in complete denial
such as the Jahmiyyah, while some engage in partial
denial such as the Mu‘tazilah and the Ash‘ariyyalt.

As for the people of the Tamthil of the Mushabbiliah,
they affirm the Attributes for Allah, and they say that it
is obligatory for us to affirm the Attributes for Allah
because He affirmed them for Himself. But, they also
say they (the Attributes) are like the attributes of the
creatures,

These people exaggerate in affirmation, while the people of
Ta’til exaggerate in negating.

So these people say that it is obligatory that Face be
affirmed for Allah, and this Face is like the best face of the
children of Adam. They say that it is because Allah has
addressed us with what we can perceive and understand.
He says:

4And the Face of your Lord full of Majesty and Honor
will abide forever .p (Ar-Rahindn 55 :27)

We do not perceive nor understand anything from the Face

(mentioned) except what we see, and the best of all faces

which we can see is that of human being.

So according to their claim, it (the Face) — and refuge is

sought from Allah — is like the most handsome young

mant! And they claim that this is sensible!

3 As for the People of the Sunnal and the Jama‘ah, they
say: We take the truth which is with the two sides, We

‎Commentary on Al-’Agidah ALWisitiyyalt‏ يو

‎e pre First Foundation: Concerning Names and Attri-
utes

‎JM ge ‏الله سبْحَائهُ وتغالى‎ obs

‎So they are balanced on the topic of the Attributes of. ‘Alli,
Clorious and Exalted is He, between the people of the Ta’til

‎(denial) of the Jahmiyyah, and the people of the Tamthil
the Mushabbihah... ea mii of

‎Soo. 0
The author said: “So they are balanced on the topic of the
‏ييه‎ of Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, id the
people of Ta'tit (denial); the Jahmiyyah, and the

‎Tamthil ; the Mushabbihah.”” ad people of

‎The Commentary

‎These are two extremes: The people of Ta'tif; the Jahmiyyahr,
and the people of Tamihil; the Mushabbihah mu

‎The Jahmiyyah reject the Attributes of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime; rather, the extremists among Ihem éven reject the
Names, saying: “It is not permissible for us lo affirm a
name nor an attribute for Allah, because if you affirm a
name for Him, you are likening Him with those that are
named, and if you affirm an attribute for Him, you are
likening Him to the the described! Hence, we affirm
neither a name nor an attribute! Whaleyer Allah ascribes
to Himself of names, it is just metaphorical; not that He
should be recognized with these names.”

‎— The Mu'‘tazilah deny the Attributes and affirm the
Names,

The Status of the People of the Sunnah... 977

© The Second Foundation: Concerning the Actions of
Allah

They are Wasat (balanced and moderate) on the topic of the
actions of Allah; between the Jabriyyah and the Qadar-

ل ‎GPP Y‏ ا

‘The author said: “They are Wasat (balanced and moderate) on
the topic of the actions of Allah ; between the Jabriyyah and the
Qadariyyah.”

The Commentary

The people are divided into three categories on the topic of
Qadar (the Divine Decree):

— A category that believes in the decree of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, and exaggerated in its affirmation,
such that they denied the person's ability and choice. They
say that Allah is the Doer of everything; and the servant
has no choice nor ability. He only does the act under
coercion. Rather, some of them even claim that the action of
the slave is the Action of Allah. And for this reason, the
people of Jttihad (unity of existence) and Hulal (pantheism)
fall in this category, and these are the Jabariyyah.

— The second category says that the slave is independent
in his actions; Allah does not have any will ability in them,
such that some of them went to the extreme of saying that
Allah does not know the slave's action except when he
does it; but He does not know anything. These are the
Qadariyyah, the Zoroastrians of this Ummah.

Commentary on Al‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

take the truth in the topic of negating imperfections; so
we do not liken, and we take the truth regarding the
topic of affirmation; so we do not deny. Rather,
affirmation without likening, and negating imperfec-
tions without denying. We affirm but without likening,
50 we take the evidences from here and there.

The summary is that they are Wasat (balanced and
moderate) concerning the topic of the Attributes (of Allah),
between the two extreme groups: A group that exaggerates
in declaring Allah free of imperfections and negation; and
they are the people of the Ta’ti of the Jelimiyyah and others,
and the other group which exaggerates in affirmation (of
His Attributes), they are the Mumaththilah (those who
liken).

The People of the Sunnah and the Jamd‘ah say: We will not
exaggerate, neither in affirmation nor in negation. We
affirm without likening; due to His statement, Exalted is
He:

“Te ay a. 7 ‏ل ست م‎
«Nothing is like unto Him, He is the All-Hearing, the
All-Seeing .» (Ash-Shiura 42:11)

The Status of the People of the Sunnah...

© The Third Foundation: Concerning the Threat

And on the topic of Alldh’s threat, between the Murji’ah
and the Wa’idiyyah among the Qadariyyah and others...

The author said: “And on the topic of Allah's threat, between
the Murji’ahi and the Wa'tdiyyah among the Qadariyyah and
others.”

The Commentary

The Murji’at: It is the subject of Arja’ “he postponed.”
Meaning, delayed. From it is Allah’s saying Exalted is He:

€They said: Delay him and his brother.» (ALA‘raf
7111

They are named Murji’ah either from Ar-Raja’ (hope)
because of their preference to the evidences proving hope
fin Allah’s Mercy) over the evidences of the threat, or from
AllIrja’ meaning: deferment; due to them deferring actions
trom the name of faith.

So they say deeds are not part of faith, and faith is
acknowledgement of the heart alone.

That is why they say that actions are not part of faith, and
that faith is acknowledgement of the heart alone.

And this is why they say that the one who commits a major
sin, such as the fornicator, the thief, the one drinks wine,

cn Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

the first category exaggerates in affirming Allah's Actions
and His Might and Power, and they say that Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, coerces the person to do whatever he
does; and the person does not have a choice.

And the others exaggerate in affirming the slave's ability,
and they say that neither the Divine Power nor the Divine
Wish have anything to do with the slave's action. He is the
absolute doer with absolute choice.

~ The third category: The People of the Sunnal and the
lama‘ah, they say: We take the truth that is with each of the
two sides; so we say: The actions of the slave occur with the
Will of Allah, and the creation of Allah. It is never possible
that something exist in the Dominion of Allah without Him
having willed it. And the person has a choice and volition,
and there is a distinction between the action which he is
®oerced to do and the one which he chooses. So the actions
Of the slaves occur by their choice and volition, and with
that; they happen with the Will and Creation of Aflah.

However, there still remains a problem for us: How can
they be a creation of Allah while they are the act of man’s?

The answer is that the slave's actions come from volition
and ability, and the One Who created the volition and
Power in him is Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. If Allah
Wills, He can deny you the power, so you would not be
able to do it. And if someone was able to do something but
he does not wish to do, the action will not occur from him.

Every capable person who does action, then it is done with
his volition, except the one who is compelled (by someone
ele), So we perform actions with our choice and ability,
and the One Who created the choice and ability in us is
Allah.

ee

The Status of the People of the Sunnah... 101

* The cause of the difference between the Wa‘idiyyah and
the Murji‘ah is that each of them views the texts with
one eye alone, looking at only one side.

— These people looked at the promising texts, so Lhey put
the person under the pramise, saying we take this, and we
leave other than it, and we interpret the threatening texts to
refer to the disbeliever.

— As for the Wa'idiyyuk, they are on the opposite. They
looked at the threatening texts, so they took them, and
were heedless of the texts of the promise.

That is why their scale tips to one side, because of their
looking at only one side.

@ The People of the Sunnah and the Jamé‘ah take this and
that. They sav the threatening texts are decisive; so we
take them. And the texts of the promise are decisive; so
we take them. So they take from the texts of the
promise what refutes the Wa’idiyyah, and from the texts
of the threat what refutes the Murji‘ah, So they say that
the one who does the major sin deserves lo enter the
Fire - so that we will not consider the threatening texts
in to be in vain - without him abiding in it - so that we
do not consider the texts of the promise to be in vain.

So we take both evidences and we look with both eyes.

100 Commentary on Al-Agidah Al-Woasitiyyah

and the highway robber, he does not deserve to enter the

Fire, not forever or for any period of time, so the act of

disobedience does not bring any harm with faith; whether

it is minor or major, as long as it does not reach the level of

Kufr.

+ The Wa’idiyyah, are the opposite of them, exaggerating
on the side of the threat, and they say that any major
sin committed by a person, which he does not repent
from; then he will abide in the Fire forever because of it.
If he stole, then he is from the inhabitants of the Fire,
abiding permanently and forever therein. If he drank
wine, he is then in the Fire, abiding permanently and
forever therein...etc.

The Wa'‘idiyyah includes two groups: Al. Mu‘tazilah and Al-
Khawarij. That is why the author said: “Among the
Qadariyyah and others.” It includes the Mu‘tazilah - and
the Mu‘tnzilah are Qadariyyah because they view that the
person is independent in his action, and they are also
Wa'idiyyah. And it includes the Khawanj.

Thus, the two sects agree that one who commits a major sin
will abide in the Fire, never exiting it; and that whoever
drank wine once, he is like the onc who has been
worshipping idols for a thousand years. All of them shall
abide in the Fire forever. But they differ concerning the
names with which these people shall be addressed, as will
soon be explained in the next section.

* As for the People of the Sunnah and the jamd‘ah, they
say: We do not give preference to the side of the threat
as done by the Mu‘tazilah and Khawarij, nor the side of
the promise (of mercy) as done by the Murji‘ah. We say
that the one who does the major sin deserves punish-
ment, and if he is punished, he would not remain
forever in the Fire.

The Status of the People of the Sunnah... 103

commils highway robbery, we say to him: “You are a
believer with perfect faith!! Just like the man who does the
obligations and the acts that are recommended and stays
away from the unlawful!! You and he are of the same in
faithhman!t”

These people and those people are on opposite sides
concerning the name and the judgment.

As for the Mu ‘tazilah, they say that the one who commits a
major sin has exited faith, but he docs not enter into
disbelief; so he is in a position between two positions. We
will not be so bold as te say he that he is a disbeliever, nor
is it for us to say that he is a believer while is doing a major
sin; fornicating, stealing, and drinking wine! And they say:
“We are the closest group to the truth.”

The reality is that when they say that this is one is not the
same as the worshipping believer, then they have spoken
the truth.

But they have removed him from faith, then they innovated
a status between two statuses making an innovation with
something that is not in the Book of Allah nor in the
Sunnah of His Messenger!!

All of the texts prove that a status between two statuses
does not exist. As in His, Exaled is He, saying:

And Verily (either) we, or you, are rightly guided, or
in plain error. (Saba‘ 34:24)

And, His saving:
4So after te trith, what else can there be, save error?}
(Yainus 10:32)

102 Commentary on Ab‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyal

@ The Fourth Foundation: The Name of Faith and
Religion

Lig ‏الْحَرُورِية‎ SB oth |
ily al 3g
And on the topic of the names of faith and religion;
between the Hartriyyah and the Mu‘taziluh, and between.
the Murji'ah and the Jahmiyyah....

Wan ee

The author said: “And on the topic of the names of faith and
religion; between the Uartriyyah and the Mut‘tazilaht, and
between the Murji‘alt and the Jahmiyyah.”

The Commentary

This is on the topic of the names and the religion, and it is
other than the topic of the judgments which are the
promise and the threat. So the one who does the major sin,
what do we call him? Is he a believer or a disbeliever?

‘The People of tbe Sunnah are Wasat in this case, between the
two sects: the Harurviyyah and the Mu’tazilah from one view,
and the Mirji‘alt and the Jaltmiyyah from the another view.

— ‘The Haririyyah and the Mu‘tazilah expelled him from
faith, rather, the Hartriyyalt say that he is a disbeliever
whose blood and wealth are lawful. And because of this
they revolted against the Jmams (leaders) and they called
the people disbelievers.

— As for the Murji’ah among the Jahmniyyah, they oppose
these people and say that he is a believer with perfect faith!
If he steals, commits fornication, drinks wine, murders and

The Status of the People of the Sunnah... 105

As for the People of the Sunnah and the fami‘ah, they are
Wasat between these sects. They say: We call one who
commits a major sin a believer with deficient faith. Or we
say a believer according to the degree of faith and a Fasiq
(rebellious sinner) according to the degree of his major sins.

This is the just position. He is not to be given the absolute
name nor is the name absolutely negated from him.

Based on this, it is not permissible for us hate the Fasiq
absolutely, nor to love him absolutely. Rather, we love
according in the degree of his faith, and we hate according
to the degree of his disobedience.

104 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

And His statement:
Seok 5-57 ‏سول‎ hte 00-7

He it is Who created you, then some of you arc

disbelievers and some of you are believers.» (At-
Taghabun 64:2)

And in the Hadith: "The Qux’4n is either a proof for you or
against you”!!!

Then, where is the (proof for a) status between two
statuses?

Concerning the threat of punishment, they execute upon
him the punishment. They agree with the Khawérij that the
one who commits a major sin will abide forever in the Fire.
But here in this world, they say that the rules of Islam
continue upon him, because this is the basis. To them, in
this world, he is of the status of a rebellious disobedient
person.

© Subhana Alla! How do we pray (funeral prayer) for him
and say: “O Allah, forgive him’’ while he will abide in the
Fire forever?!

So it became necessary for theni to say - concerning the
rules of this world: His case is indecisive, we do not say
that he a Muslim or a disbeliever. We neither give him the
rights of Islam nor the ruling of disbelief! If he dies, we will
not pray for him, shroud him and wash him. He would
neither be buried with the Muslims nor with the
unbelievers. Therefore, we will find him a graveyard
between the two graveyards:!

"Part of a Hadith reported by Muslim in his Salis (223) from
Abi Malik Al-Ast’ari.

‘The Status of the People of the Sunnah... 107

to whom the Zaydiyyah are naw attributed - they
disavowed themselves from him because they asked him:
“What do you say about Abi Bakr and “Umar?” They
wanted him to curse and degrade them! But he, may Allah
be pleased with him, answered them: “What hlessed
ministers were they; they were the two ministers of my
grandfather.” Referring by that to the Messenger of Allah
‏فين‎ Then, he said statements in praise of them, So because
of this, they disavowed themselves from him, became
angry with him, and abandoned him. ‘hey were therefore
called Rafidal ‏الل‎

These Rawéfid - and we seek refuge from Allah - have well
known fundamentals according to them. Among their most
vile fundamentals is the Imamah (imamate), which dictates
the infallibility of the ‏,قم‎ and that he cannot utter an
error, and that the station of ‏لمهم‎ is superior to the
station of Prophethood, hecause they (the so-called
infallible bnams) receive news from Allah directly {without
any intermediary) while the Prophet via a Messenger, who
is Jibril. To them, the Jmdi never commits an error. Rather,
the extreme among them claim that the Indm creates,
saying to something: “Be” and it will belt

And they say that the Companions were dishelievers, all of
them became apostates after the Prophet 3% such that — in
the view of some of them — Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, were
always disbelievers, dying upon hypocrisy, and we seek
refuge from Allah. And they do not exempt any of the
Companions except Al Al-Bait (the members of the House-
hold) and very few others about whom they call the allies
of Ai Al-Bait.

1) See the book Mihaj As-Sunnalr by Shaikh ALIsidm (1:34) (or
more on the reason they were called Ar-Kafidah.

106 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitivyah

@ The Fifth Foundation: Regarding the Companions,
May Allah be pleased with them

And regarding the Companions of the Messenger of Allah
#4; between the Rafidah and the Khawari

a eo

The author said: “And regarding the Companions of the
Messenger of Allah ii ; between the Rafidah and the Khawirij.”

The Commentary
@ Ashgh is plural of Sahib.

Also, As-Sahabi is he who met the Prophet ##, believing in
him and died upon that.

This is specific to the Companions, and is from the
distinguishing traits of the Prophet #, that a person
would be considered his Companion even if he never met
with him except for one moment, but with the condition
that he believed in him."

* The People of the Sunnah and the Jamd’ah, are Wasat

between the Rafidah and the Khawarij.

— The Réfideh are those who are today called Shiah
(Shiites); and they were named Rafidah because they
rejected (and disavowed) Zaid bin ‘Al bin Al-Husain bin
“Ali bin Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with him - it is he

1) See Fath ALBari (7:4) by Ibn Hajar.

The Status of the People of the Sunnah.

not exaggerate in that.

Regarding the rest of the Companions of the Messenger i,
they say: They have the right to reverence and esteem from
us, and to seck the pleasure of Allah for them, and that we
say, as said by Allah, Exalted is He:

4Our Lord! Forgive us and our brethren who have
preceded us in Faith, and put net in our hearts any
hatred against those who have believed. Our Lord! You
ave indeed full of kindness, Most Merciful.» (AlL-Hashtr
59:10)

We will never have enmity for anyone among them; neither
from Al Al-Bait nor from the others. Thus, we give cach of
them his due right, and by that, they (People of the Sunnah
and the Jamd‘ah) become Wasat between the negligent and
the extremists.

108 Commentary on AF‘Aqrdah ALWasitiyyan

The author of the book Al-Fasi has said: “The extreme
among them declared ‘Ali bin Abi Talib a disbeliever, they
said: Because ‘Ali approved of oppression and falsehood
by giving the pledge of allegiance to Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.
While it was required that he reject their pledge - so when
he did not adhere to the truth and justice, and he agreed
with the oppression, he became an oppressive disbelie-

ver..

As for the Khawarij, they are the opposite of the Rafidah;
while they considered ‘Ali bin Abi Talib a disbeliever, they
also considered Mu‘awiyyah bin Abi Sufyan to be a
disbeliever. Moreover, they considered whoever fails to
tread their path as a disbeliever, and nade it lawful to shed
the blood of the Muslims. They were as the Prophet #§
described them: “They will pass through the religion just as
the arrow passes through the target.” And their faith
does not go beyond their throats.

The Shi‘ah Shiites) exaggerated with Al Al-Bait and their
allies. And they went to extremes regarding that, such that
some of them even claimed the godhood for ‘Alit! And
some of them claimed that he (‘Ali) had more right to
Prophethood than Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah #8.
Meanwhile, the Khawanj maintain the opposite.

But as for the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah, they are
Wasnt between these two sects. They said: We recognize the
status of Al Al-Bait, and agree that they have two rights
upon us: The rights of Islam and faith, and the right of
kinship of the Messenger of Allah 3, And they say: The
kinship of the Messenger of Alléh # demands a right from
us, and its right upon us is to recognize their status and to

(1 Reported by Al-Bukhari (6930) and Muslim (1066) from ‘Al,
may Allah be pleased with him.

SECTION:
Concerning the Ma‘iyyah, and the
Clarification, Harmonizing Between
it and the ‘Ula of Allah, and His
Istiwa’ over His Throne

Section: Inclided in what we mentioned about faith in
Allah is: The faith in what Allah informs about in His
Book, and what is Tawatir from His Messenger 23, and
agreed upon by the Salaf of the ‏الما‎ that He, Glorious
is He, is above His Iteavens, over His Throne, High above
His creation. He, Glorious is He, is with thent wherever
they are, He knows what they do....

The Commentary

It has preceded"! that part of what is included in faith in
Allah is the belief in His Names and Attributes. And part of

(See the Shaikh’s explanation the author's statement: “And
Concerning the Ma‘iyyah, and the Clarification. .. 113

. And the Sunnah has established it in statement, actions
and approvals. The mention of this preceded.

“As for the Ijma’ (consensus), the Salafhave agreed upon
that, The means of knowing of their consensus is the
absence of any contradictory report from them to what
is contained in the Book and the Sunnah. This is
because they recited the Qur'an and conveyed the
(Prophetic) reports and had adequate understanding of
their meanings. And since there has not been anything
reported from them that contradicts the apparent
meaning of these reports, then it is known that they
did not believe in other than it, and that they agreed
upon that. This is a good way of affirming their
consensus (on a matter); so hold firm to it, for it will
benehit you in many instances.

“ As for the intellect, it is from two perspectives:

— The first perspective: Is that ‘Ula is an description of
pertection. Allah, Exalted is He, affirmed all of the perfect
Altributes for Himself. So it is obligatory to affirm ‘Ua for
llim, Glorious is He.

— The second perspective: If He is not Exalted, then either
He is below or beside, and this is an imperfect description,
because it necessitates that things are above Him, or similar
to Him. So it is required to affirm ‘Ul for Him.

@ As for the Fitrah, then no one can disprove il, except out
the deviation of his Fifah. Every person who says: “O
Allah,” his heart is directed to the heavens. He does not
turn to his right nor his left, because Allah, Fxalted is
He, is above the Heavens.

His statement: “He, Glorious is He, is with them wherever
they are. He knows what they are doing.”

Commentary on Al-'Agiilah Al-Wasitiyyah

that is the belief in Allah's ‘Ula and His Istiwa’ over His
Throne, and the belief in His Ma‘iyyah.

in this section, the author, may Allah have mercy upon
him, explains the way to harmonize between “ula and
Ma‘iyyah. So, he said:

% “Included in what we mentioned abvut faitit in Allah is : The
(faith in what Allah informs about in His Book, and what is
Tawatir from His Messenger x, and agreed upon by the
Salaf of the Ummual ; that He. Glorious is He, is above His
heavens, over His Throne, High above His creation. He,
Glorious is He, is with thet wherever they are, He knows
what they do.”

These are three proofs for the ‘Lila of Allah, Exalted is He:
The Book, the Surmalt and the Ima’ (consensus).

The fourth and fifth proofs have preceded: The intellect,
and the Fitrah,

% “That He, Glorious is He, is above His heavens, over
His Throne, High above His creation:” We mentioned
earlier that the ‘Liu of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
is of two types: the Fxaltedness of the Attribute and the
Exaltedness of the Self, and that the Quran, Sranah,
Hima’, intellect, and the Fitrah prove the Exaltedness of
the Self, and similarly, the Exaltedness of the Attribute.

© The Book is full of that; sometimes by directly
mentioning Al-Fawgiyyah (being above), other times
by directly mentioning the “Uli, sometimes by directly
stating that He is above the heavens, sometimes by
mentioning things descending from Him, and other
tines, mentioning things ascending to Him, and the
like.

His saying: “O ‘Isa! Twill take you and raise you ta Myself." (Al
“Imari 955)."

Conceming the Ma‘iyyah, and the Clarification... 115

knowledge, hearing and secing, power, control and other
Attributes of His Lordship, while the dictates of the specific
kind is aid and support.

pee ee

em by La

Just as He combined between that, in His statement: 4He
it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days
and then rose over (Istawd) the Throne. He knows what
goes into He earth and what comes forth from it, and
what descenis from the heaven, and what ascends
thereto. And He is with you (in knowledge) wherever
you may be. And Allah Sees what you do.¥ (Al-Hadia

His statement: “Just as He combines between that, in His
statement

He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six
Days and then rose over (Ista) the Throne. He knows

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

This is part of faith in Allah, and it is the belief in His
Ma‘iyyah with His creation.

Tt has preceded") that Allah’s Ma‘iyyah is divided into:
General, specific, and the special among the specific.

— So, the general: Is that which includes everybody: A
believer, a disbeliever, a righteous person and a wicked
person. Its example is His statement, Exalted is He:

4And He is with you (in knowledge) wherever you may
be. And Allah Sees what you do.} (Al-Hadid 57:4)

— The specific, such as His statement, Exalted is He:

4Truly, Allah is with those who have Taqua, and those
who are Muhsinsin (good-doers).» (An-Nahl 16:128)

— The special among the specific, such as His statement,
Exalted is He, to Misa and Harun:

He (Allah) said: “Fear not, verily, T am with you
both, hearing and seeing.’"> (Tal 20:46)

And His statement, on behalf of His Messenger, Muham-
mad #2:
Surely, Alldh is with us.> (At-Tawbalt 9:40)

It has preceded that His Ma’iyyah with His creatures is real,
and that the dictates of the general Ma‘iyyah is His

El See the discussion following the previous reference.

Concerning the Ma‘iyyah, and the Clarification... 117

the same in the case of the Creator, because nothing is like
unto Allah.

SS ust gus abs pith es

The meaning of His statement: €And He is with you} is
not that He mixes with the Creation. Because the
(Arabic) language does not necessitate this. And it is
contrary to what is agreed upon by the Salaf of the
Ummah, and contrary to the Fitrah that Allah created
the creation upon. Rather, the moon is an Ayah among
the Ayat of Allah, among the smallest of His creatures ;
it is stationed in the heaven, yet it is with the traveler
and the non traveler wherever he is....

4 His statement: “The mearting of His statement: 4And He
is with you >is not that He mixes with the Creation.”
Because this meaning indicates imperfection. It has
preceded, that if this was the meaning, it would
require one of the two Lhings: a number of creators,
or that He is of different parts. In addition, it would
imply that things surrounded Him, while He, Glor-
ious is He, is the One Who encompasses al] things.

116 Commentary on Al‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

what goes into ihe earth and what comes forth from it,
and what descends from the heaven, and what ascends
thereto. And He is with you (in knowledge) wherever
you may be. And Allah Sees what you do.} (Al-Hadid
574)"

His statement: “Between that:’’ That is betveen the ‘Ubi
and the Ma’iyyah.

In His statement: 4And ther rose over the Throne> is
affirmation of the ‘Utd.

In His statement: ¢And He is with you (in knowledge)
wherever you may be) is affirmation of the Ma‘iyyah

So He combined between the two of them in one Aysh.
Moreover, there is no contradiction between them, as
earlier proven, and as shall be mentioned.

The angle of harmonization is from three perspectives:

Firstly: That He mentioned His Istiwa’ over the Throne, and
said: €And He is with you wherever you may be.» When
Allah combines between two Attributes for Himself, then
we know with certainty that they are not contradictory,
because if they were contradictory, it would be impossi-
ble to combine them, since two contradictory things can
not be united nor exalted. One of them will inevitably
exist while the other will vanish. If there was any
contradiction, it will necessitate that the first part of the
Ayah belies the latter part of the Ayal, or vice-versa.
Secondly: It is possible that ‘Uhi and Ma ‘iyyah be combined
in the creatures, as the author shall mention conceming
people’s statement: “We are traveling while the moon is
with ‏“.كنا‎

Thirdly: If it is supposed that the two of them can not be
combined in the case of creatures, that does not necessitate

Conceming the Ma‘iyyah, and the Clarification... 119

correctness that a thing can be with a person in reality and
that there also be a great distance between the two of them.
And this is because the moon, which is one of the smallest
of creatures, which is in the heaven, is with the traveler and
non traveler, wherever he is.

When this is the case with a creature, and it is among the
smallest of the creatures, that we say it is with us, while it is
in the heavens, and that is not considered a contradiction,
and also does not indicale mixing together, then why
would it not be correct to view the Ayat proving (Allah's)
Ma’‘iyyah upon their apparentness? And say: He is with us
in reality, even though He is above the heavens, above
everything?

As we have said earlier, even if assumed that this is
impossible for the creature, then in the case of the Creator it
is not impossible. For the Lord, the Mighty and Sublime, is

above the heavens in reality, and with us in reality; there is
no contradiction in that, even though He, the Mighty and
Sublime, is far above in His Exaltedness, He is yet indeed
near in His Exaltedness.

This is what Shaikh Al-Islam established in his books. He
said: “We do not need to subject the Ayah to any
interpretation. Rather, the Ayah should be understood
upon its apparentness, but with our belief that Allah,
Exalted is He, is above the heavens, above His Throne. So
116 is with us in reality; He is also above His Throne in
reality. Just as we shall say that He descends to the lowest
heaven, in reality, while He is Exalted. There was no one
among the People of the Suttnalt who would ever reject this.
All of the People of the Sunnah say: He descends in reality,
while agreeing that He in His ‘Uw; because the Attrihutes
of the Creator are not like the attributes of the creatures.”

I have found a statement of Shaikh Muhammad bin

118 Commentary on AL-‘Agidak Al-Wasitiyyak

% His statement: “Because tie (Arabic) language does not
necessitate this” meaning, when the language does not
necessitate that, it does not specify that meaning. And
this is one of the evidences of the falsehood of the
Madhhab of the Al-Huldliyyah!'| among the Jalumiyyah
and others; those who say that Allah is with His
creation, mixing with them.

He (the author) did not say: “The language does not indicate
that” because it could possibly indicate that. And there is a
difference between when the language indicates that, and
when it necessitates that.

Thus, Al-Ma‘iyyah in the language can indicate mixing; for
example: water and milk. You say about water with milk,
that it is mixed.

@ Concerning his statement: “And it is contrary to what is
agreed upon by the Salaf of the Ummah, and contrary fo the
Fitrah that Allah created the creation upon” This is because
a person has the Fitrah to know that the Creator is
separate from the creation. Nobody says; “O Allah!”
Except that he believes that Allah, Exalted is He, is
sepatate from Elis crealion. He does not believe that He
dwells in His creation. So the claim that He is mixed
with His creation is contrary to the’ Shar‘ (textual
proofs), the intellect, and Fitrah.

Concerning his Statement: “Rather, the moon is an Ayah
among the Ayat of Allah, among the smallest of His
creatures; it is stationed in the heaven, yet it is with the
fraveler and the non traveler wherever he is.’
The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, brought this
example, in order to clarify the meaning and verify the
"I Translation note: Those who believe that the Creator dwells
in creation.

Concerning the Ma‘iyyah, and the Clarification... 121

the end of the quote from Al-Fatiwd, endorsing (what is
said in) Al-Hamawiyyah.”)

Question: Is it correct to say: “He is with us in His Self’?

Response: It is necessary lo stay away from such a
statement, because it can suggest an invalid meaning such
as that said by those who believe in Al-Huli, and there is
no need for it, and because the basis is that everything that
Allah attributes to Himself, it is then for Himself. Do you
not you see His statement, Exalted is He: 4And Your Lord
Shall Come; do we need to say: He, in His Self?

And his statement #4: “Our Lord descends to the lowest
heaven,” is there need that we say: He descends in His
Self? We do not need that, by Allah no! Except in debating
one who claims that His command comes, or His command
descends, in order to refute such distortion.

at tyes ae Sek fee ‏يد‎
‎Opal ‏إلى تخريي. وَلكِنْ يُصَانُ عَنِ‎ cla ‏لا‎ ٠
AEA ‏قَوْلِه: هف‎ pl
Sb ‏وَالْايمَانِ؛‎ pba Jal ‏ع‎
‎WW "Fatmoa we Rasi’il Ash-Shaikh Muhammad bin Ibrahim Al Ash-

Shaikh (1:212-213).
Ft ts reference preceded, and it is reported m the Two Saftihs

120 Commentary on Al“ Agidah ALWasitiyyah

Ibrahim, may Allah have mercy upon him, which
completely clarifies this meaning, that is, that the Ma‘iyyah
is real according 10 its reality, and that it does not
necessitate that Fle mixes with creation, or that He is on
the carth. In reply to the statement of some of the Salaf. “He
is with them with His knowledge” he said:

“When this statement is related, then it is an interpretation
of Al-Ma‘iyyah by implication, not the interpretation of the
reality of the word. What led to and encouraged this
interpretation is that the innovators disputed about this,
saying that He mixes with them. Hence, some of the Salaf
explained what is intended by that statement, and that is
that He is Perfect in His Knowledge. But, they never
intended that the meaning expressed by the word Ma‘a
(with) is merely that ‘He knows about everything’ Rather,
it includes knowledge and in addition, means Al-Ma’iyyah;
meaning - Ilis being with them, Therefore, interpreting it in
accordance with what it implies does not prove that its
meaning is ‘false. Hence, both of them are true...”

Until he said: “For this, Shaikh Al-Islam in another blessed
treatise of his ‘Agidah (creed) explained that His statement
that ‘He is with them’ is true in its reality. So, whoever
among the Salaf interpreted it based upon what it implies, it
was because the need called for that. It being a rehuttal
against the people of Al-Hubil, the Jahmiyyah who reject the
‘Uli, as preceded.

The Qur’an can be interpreted by Al-Mutabagah (what is in
agreement), Al-Mafhiim (what is understood), ALIstilzam
{necessarily deduced), Al-Mugtadd (what is implied) and
other than that from types of evidence.

These scholars from whom it was reported that they
inlerpreted the Ayalt based on is implied, never rejected the
Maiyah, Rather, it is to them (as clear) as the sun.” This is

123
“Observing His ‏ا‎ meaning - looking over and
preserving their sayings, their actions, their every
movement, and every period in which they are still.

“Muhaiminin over them” meaning, He is the Ruler and
Controller of His slaves; His is judgment, and to Him
every affair is referred, His command, when He intends
a thing, is only that He says to it “Bel” - and it is.

His statement: “And other thar that of meanings of
Rububiyyal:” What is meant by that, is whatever is
included in the meaning of Rubibiyyah such as control,
authority, arrangement of affairs, and other than that;
for indeed the meanings of Rubiibiyyal: are many. This
is because Ar-Rabb is the Creator, the Onwer, and the
Arranger of affairs. These include a great number of
meanings.

His statement: “Fach of these statements which Allah
mentions — that He is above Lis Throne, and that He is
with us — is true in its reality. It docs not need any
distortion .””

This sentence stresses what preceded; he only repealed
the meaning of what preceded because of the im-
portance of the subject. Therefore, he, may Allah have
mercy upon him, clarified that what Allah mentioned
of Him being over the Throne is true according to its
reality, and like that, what He mentioned of Him being
with us is true according to its reality. So there is no
need for any distortion.

Meaning: there is no need for us to change the meaning
of Faogiyyah (being above) into the claim that the
ability is above, as the people of Tarif and Tatil claim,
rather, it is a Fawgiyyalt of Self and ability. Just as there
is no need for us to change the meaning of the Ma‘iyyah

Concerning the Ma‘iyyah, and the Clarification...

Commentary on AlAgidah Al-Wisitiyyuh

NG S ‏#وسع‎ Ba
RST ‏إن‎ WG ‏طولين‎ 45 J ANG ‏لسوت‎
‎iG GI Tal ayy de

fee agen ‏عم‎

NG TN ay ‏أن‎

He, Glorious is He, is above His Throne, observing His
creation, Muhaiminun ever them, watching over them,
and other than that of meanings of Rubibiyyah. Each of
these statements which Allah mentions that He is above
His Throne, and that He is with us - is true in its reality.
It does not need any distortion. But it is guarded against
belying thoughts, such us thinking that the apparent
meaning of His statement: In the heavens. (Al-Mulk
67:17) Is that the heaven carries Him, or over shadows
Him. ‘This is false according to the consensus of the
people of knowledge and faith. For indeed, Allah: 4His
Kursi extends over the heavens and the earth.» (Al-
Bagarah 2:255) He is the One Who: ¢Grasps the
heavens and the earth lest they move away from their
places.» (Fatir 35:41) ¢He withholds the heaven from
falling on the earth, except by His Leave.) (Al-Hajj
22:65) ¢And among His Signs is that the heaven and
the earth stand by His Command.» (Ar-Ritit 30:25)

® His statement: “He, Glorious is He, is above His Throne,
observing His creation, protecting them, watching over
them.”

The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, said:
“He, Glorious is He, is above His Throne” while He is
with the creation, yet He is above His Throne.

Concerning the Ma‘iyyah, and the Clarification... 125

& The author said: “This is false according to the consensus
of the people of knowledge and faith.”

An Important Note

Somebody can say: The author should have said: ” And for
example, thinking that the apparentness of His saying:

45a ‏نر‎
‎4And He is with you.» (Al-Hadid 57:4)

Is that He mixes with the creation, because this is a false
conjecture.”

Its reply is to say that the author, may Allah have mercy
upon him, has earlier mentioned that while saying: ‘The
meaning of His statement 4And He ts with you> is not that
He mixes with the creation .””

Conceming his statement:
For indeed, Allah :

His Kursi extends over the heavens and the earth }
(Al-Bagarah: 2:255)"
% Al-Kursi As reported from Ibn ‘Abbas, is the place of
the two Feet]

His Kurst extends over the heavens and the earth»:
Meaning it encompasses the heavens and the earth;
the seven heayens and the seven earths.

How can someone think that the heavens over shadow
Allah or carry Him?!
If His Kurs? extends over the heavens and the earth, no one

(Its reference preceded.

Commentary on AM‘Agidah AL-Wasitiyyah

from its apparentness, rather we say: “It is true,
according to its apparentness, and whoever explains
it by other than its reality; then he has committed Tahrif
(distortion).””

However, whatever is reported regarding its interpretation
based on what it necessitates and implies, it was reported
from the Salaf due to a need that called for that, and it does
not negate the reality; because whatever the truth dictates,
it is also true.

“ Then, the author, may Allah have mercy upon him,
clarified that, and said: “But it is guarded against belying
thoughts, such as thinking that the apparent meaning of His
statement:

<i ap
In the heavens.» (Al-Mulk 67:17)
Is that the heaven carries Him, or over shadows Him. ‘this

is false according to the consensus of the people of
knowledge and faith.”

4» The belying thoughts are merely assumptions which
have no correct foundation, so it is necessary to guard
against them in reference to the Speech of Allah and
His Messenger 3.

“An example of that is the assumption that the apparent
meaning of His statement: 41: the heaven} is that the
heaven carries Him; that is - it holds Him, such as
the roof of the house holds up whoever is on top of
it. “Or ever shudews ‏“قط‎ meaning that it (the
heaven) is above Him, like the roof upon a person.

When someone thinks this, then it is false conjecture, it is

compulsory that the proofs establishing that Allah is above
the heaven be guarded from that.

Conceming the Ma‘iyyah, and the Clarification... 12

not withheld it, it would have fallen on the earth; because it
consists of massive bodies. As Allah, Exalted is He, says:
Wg de hee neat opeee
ibe ae cat es
4And We have made the heaven a roof, safe and well
guarded.» (ALAnbiya’ 21:32)
He also says:
With Power did We construct the heaven. Verily, We
ave Able to extend the vasiness of space thereof. (Adh-
Dhedriyat 51:47)
Had Allah not withheld it, it would fall on the earth, and if
it were to fall on the earth, it would destroy it.
So the One Who withholds the heavens and the earth from
moving away from their places, and withholds the heaven
from falling upon the earth, except by His leave; should
one imagine that the heavens could carry Him or over
shadow Him? No one would imagine that.
% Concerning his statement, (the saying of Allah, Exalted
is He):
“¢And among His Signs is that the heavert and the
earth stand by His Command.} (ArRam 30:25).”
And among His signs: Meaning: from the signs that
indicate His Perfection, the Mighty and Sublime, from
every angle:
dis that the heaven and the earth stand by His

Contnand}: Both universal and legislative, because
His Command is founded in wisdom, mercy, justice

126 ___ Commentary on Al‘Agidah AL-Wasitiyyah

should ever think such false conjecture, that is that the
heavens carry Him or over shadow Him.

Concerning his statement: “He is the One Who:
4Grasps the heavens and the earth lest they move away
from their places.» (Patir 35:41).

He holds them lest they move away from their places;
had Allah not held them, they could have shaken,
moved and fallen. But Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
with His Might and Power holds the heavens and the
earth from moving away. Rather, He, Exalted is He,
says!

4And if they were to move away from their places, there

is not one that could grasp them after Him.> (Eatir
35:41)

None could ever hold them back after Allah. Even if just a
star should move away from its place, no one would be
capable of holding it back, so how about if the heavens and
the earth moved from their places?! None can stop them
except Allah, the One Who created them. He who says to
something: “Be’ and it will be, Glorious and Exalted is He.

+ Concerning his statement, (the saying of Allah, Exalted
is He):

"He withholds the heaven from falling on the earth,
excep! by His Leave. » (Al-Hajj 22:65).”

The heaven is above the earth, and by Allah, if Allah had

SECTION:

Concerning the Nearness of Allah,
Exalted is He, and His Response
(to the Calls), and that this Does Not
Negate His ‘Uli and Fawgqiyyah

Section : Included in thai is the belief that Ie is Near His

creation, and responds...

The Commentary

*% Conceming his statement: “Included in that :’’ That is, in
what He describes Himself with:

> “The belief that He is Near His creation, and responds:
The belief that He, Himself, is Near and He responds;
that is to His slaves.

The proof of this is His statement, Exalted is He:

‎git oo 2A ES‏ إن

‎And when my slaves ask you concerning Me, then

‎128 Commentary on AL-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎and beneficence,

‎4And if the truth had been in accordance with their
desires, verily, the heavens and the earth, and whoso-
ever is therein would have been corrupted!» (AL

‎Mu’miniin 23:71)

‎And the desires cause corruption in the heavens and the
earths; they oppose the legislative command.

‎‘Therefore, the heavens and the earth stand by the
commands of Allah, both universal and legislative. If the
truth followed the desires of the creation, then all of the
heavens and the earth, and whoever is in them, would have
been corrupted. That is why the scholars about His
statement, Fxalted is He:

‎Chal ‏بَند‎ BT ‏في‎ WLS ip
€And do not do mischief on the earth, after it has been
set in order.» (AL-A‘raf 7:56)

‎It means: “Do not do mischief on il by committing acts of
disobedience.”

Concerning the Neamess of Allah, Exalted is He... 131

And among them are those who say: “The Neamess is

only the specific type which implies the response to the

supplicant, and the slave's reward. It is not divided.”
And these, use His saying, Exalted is He, as evidence:

4365
4And when my slaves ask you concerning Me, then
(answer them), 1 am indeed near I respond fo the

invocations of the supplicant when he calls Me.> (Al-
Bagarah 2:186(

And also the saying of the Prophet #: “The slave is nearest
to His Lord when he is prostrating.”")

And that it is not possible that Allah, Exalted is He, is near
the wicked and the disbelievers.

This is the position supported by Shaik: Alislim Ibn
Taymiyyah and his student, Ibn Al-Qayyim, may Allah
have mercy upon them both,

— However, an argument was brought refuting this
position, which is His statement, Exalted is He:

EF HS ‏بهد هلم‎

éAnd indeed We have created man, and We know what
his self whispers to him. And We are nearer to him than
his jugular vein > (Qaf 50:16)

What is intended by ¢Man} is every human being. That is
why He says at the end of the Ayn:

UL Reported by Muslim (482) from Aba Hurairah, may Allah be
pleased with hin.

130 ١ Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wiasitiyyah
{answer them), I am indeed near. I respond to the
invocations of the supplicant when [16 calls Me.» (AL
Baqarah 2:186)

There are six pronouns in this Ayah that are referring to
Allah. Based on this, the Nearness (mentioned here) refers
to His Nearness, the Mighty and Sublime. But, we say
concerning ¢Nearp, what we said concerning AL Ma‘iyyah;
and that is, this does not suggest that He is in the place
where the person is.

4 When the Messenger ‏وغ‎ was saying that He: “is closer
to one of you than the neck of his riding camel,” it
dees not imply that Allah, the Might and Sublime, is
Himself on the earth between the man and the neck of
his riding camel.

When the Messenger 3 said: “Indeed, Allah is in front of
the one praying," it does not imply that Allah is between
him and the wall, if he is praying towards the wall; nor that
He is between him and the ground, if he is looking at the
ground.

Therefore, in the same manner, His Nearness does not

imply that He is on the earth, because there is nothing like

Allah, Exalted is He, in all His Attributes, and He

encompasses everything,

> You should know, that among the scholars are those
who divide the nearness of Allah, Exalted is He, into
two categories like Al-Ma’iyyah, and said: “The near-
ness which implies thal encompassing everything, that
is general nearness; while the nearness which implies
response and reward, this is the specific nearness.”

Its reference preceded.
Its reference preceded, and it ts reported in the Two Salzifis.

Concerning the Nearness of Allah, Exalted is He.. 133

(Remember!) That the two receivers (recording Angels)
receive .» (Qaf 50:17)

Since 4Idh (when)> is an adverbial particle connected to
énearcr than»: Meaning “We are nearer to him when the
two receivers (recording Angels) receive.” This proves
that what is being referred to by His nearness, Exalted is
He, is actually the nearness of Ilis Angels.

Similarly, His saying regarding the one dying:

£44) 2427S

tad] Sl Lb
But We are nearer to hint.» (Al-Wagi’ah 56:85)
Meaning the nearness of the Angels. That is why He says:
But you see not.> (Al-Wagi’ah 56:85)

This indicates that this nearness exists with us, but we do
not see it. This, makes it absolutely impossible that what is
intended is Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, because Allah
is above the heavens.

The view of Shaikh Al-Islam, in my view, is closer (to what is
correct), but absolutely.

Commentary on Ab Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

€(1t will be said to the sinners): “Indeed you were
heedless of this, now We have removed your covering,
and sharp is your sight this Day!"’>

until He says:
hb ben & a
4(And if will be said): “Both of you throw into Hell,
every stubborn disbeliever.» (Qaf 50:22-24)
It includes everybody.
— Also, refuting it is His statement, Exalted is He:

oases

2 OF oo Gt ake EG o pall oat

then why do you not (intervene) when (the soul of a
dying person) reaches the throat? And you at the
moment are looking on, but We are nearer to him than
you, but you see not.» (Al-Wagi'alt 56:83-85)

Then, those people whose souls reach the throat, are
divided into three categories; among -whom is the
disbeliever.

~ A reply was give to this, that His saying:
dy)

4And We are nearer to him than his jugular vein.>
(Qif 50:26)

Means “Our Angels (are nearer to him than his jugular
vein).” They derive this based on His statement:

Concerning the Nearness of Allah, Exalted is He... 135

And his statement #2: “The One you are calling upon is
closer to one of you than the neck of his riding camel.’

His statement: “As He combines between that: The
indication is His Nearness and response (to the
suppleation).

The author said: “And what is mentioned i the Book and
the Sunnah regarding His Nearness and His Ma‘iyyah, is
not negated by what is mentioned about His “Ula and His
Fawgiyyalt, for He, Glorious is He, nothing is like unto Hint
in all of His descriptions. He is Exalted in His Nearness ; He
is Near in 1115 Cxaltedness.””

“His descriptions :’’ meaning; His Attributes. He is
Exalted while He is Near, and Near while He is
Exalted, There is no contradiction in this, The clarifica-
tion of this has preceded in the discussion of the
Ma‘iyaah.

4 ts reference preceded

134

at ahd 66 ay gat 365

As He combined between that in His statement: €And
when my slaves ask you concerning me, then (answer
ther) 1 am indeed Near. I respond to the invocations of
the supplicant when he calls on Me.» (Al-Bagarah
2:186(

And his statement #8: The One you are calling upon is
closer tv one of you than the neck of his riding camel.”

And what is mentioned in the Book and the Sunnah
regarding His Nearness and His Ma’iyyah, is not negated
by what is mentioned about His “Uli and His Fawqiyyah,
for He, Glorious is He, nothing is like unto Him in all of
His descriptions. He is Exalted in His Nearness; He ts
Near in His Exaltedness....

لل © اه © ل

Concerning his statement: “As He combined hetween that
in His statement:

Sit Ges eh 3.53 38 Bote GE 15

And when my slaves ask you concerning me, then
(answer them) I am indeed Near. 1 respond to the
invocations of the supplicant when he calls on me.p (Al-
Bagarah 2:186)

SECTION:
Concerning the Belief that the Qur’4n
is the Speech of Allah in Reality

و5

Fe
AK ‏مَحَلوقٍء مِنْهُ‎ Se »

Section: From faith in Allah and His Books is the belief
that the Qur'an is the Speech of Allah, sent down, and not
a creation, From Him it started, and fo Him it returns.
And that Allah Spoke with it in reality...

a ‏ع‎

The Commentary

“% His statement: “Section: ““Hrom faith in Allah and His
Books is the belief thal the Quran is the Speech of Allah,
sent doum, and not a creation . Prom Him it started, and to
Him it returns”

His statement: “The belief that the Qur‘ar is the Speech of
Allah: The basis upon which the belief in the Qur'an
in this way is inchided in faith in Allah is that the
Quran is from the Speech of Allah, and the Speech of
Allah is from His Attributes, And also, Allah has
described the Quran as His Speech, and that it is sent
down; so, attesting to that is part of faith in Allah.

Concerning the Belief that the Qur'an... 139

And thus We have sent to you Rihan (an Inspiration
and a Mercy) of Our Command .} (Ash-Sluird 42:52)

And because the speech is an attribute of the speaker, while
creation is the action of the Creator, separate from Him,
such as a product is different, separate from the producer.

% His statement: “From Hit it started: Meaning; the
commencement of its revelation is from Allah, not from
Jibril nor any other being. Thus, Jibril only descended
with it from Allah, Exalted is He, as He, Exalted is He,

4And truly, this (the Qur'an) is a revelation from the

Lord of the ‘Alanin (mankind, jinns and all that exists)

“Which the truskoorthy Ruh (Jibril) has brought
down.» (Ash-Shiu‘ara’ 26:192-193)

He also says:

Say: “Rak ul-Qudus (fibril) has brought it (the

Qur'an) down from your Lord.”’» (An-Nuahl 16 :102)

He, Exalted is He, also says:

<The revelation of this Book (the Qur’an) is from Allah,
the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.» (Az-Zumar:1)

“> His statement: “To Him if shall return: The discussion
preceded about its meaning, and the evidences for it,

See volume one.

138 Commentary on AL‘Agidal AlWasitiyyah

* Concerning his statement: ‘The Speech of Allah: The
evidence for that is His statement, Glorious and Exalted
is He:

‎gS EN GN agp‏ النتجزة ‎Ge Uh‏ نمع كم نوه
‎qAnd if anyone of the idolators seeks your protection,‏

‎then grant them protection, so that he may hear the
Word of Allah (the Qur’dn).} (At-Tawbah 9:6)

‎& The author's saying: “Sent down :” That is from Allah,
Exalted is He, according to His statement, Exalted is

‎He:
‎Verily We: It is We Who have sent down the Dhikr

‎fie. the Qur’an) and surely, We will guard it (fom
corruption).» (ALHijr 15:9)

‎And His statement:
& it

‎Verily! We have sent it (this Qur'an) down in the
night of Al-Qadr (Decree).} (Al-Qaidr 97:1).

‎+ His statement: “Not @ creation :’ Meaning, that it is not
among the creatures of Allah which He created. The
proof for that is His statement, Exalted is He:

‎1 ‏له‎ ip
Surely, His is the Creation and Commandment.> (Al-
A’raf 7:54)

‎And the Qur'an is from the commandment (of Allah)
according to His statement, Exalted is He:

Concerning the Belief that the Qur'an...

Qur'an, then it is not created,
These are the details of the view regarding this matter.

However, Imam Ahmad, may Allah have mercy upon him,
said: “Whoever says: ‘Lafzi (My uttering) of the Qur'an is
created,’ then he is a Jalmm;” he said thal for one of these
two reasons:

— Either because this saying was a hallmark of the
Jahmiyyah, as if Imam Ahmad was saying: “If you hear
somebody saying: ‘My uttering of the Qur’dn is created,’
then know that he is a Jalen.”

— Or when by utterance, the speaker means that which is
uttered, and this is appears to be closer (to what is correct).
Because Imam Ahmad himself explained it. He said:
“Whoever says: ‘My uttering of the Qur’dn is created” -
he means by that, the Qur’an - “then he is a Jahn.”

With this, the meaning of his saying: “Whoever says: ‘My
utterance of the Qur’an is created,’ then he is a Juhmi”
becomes clear; because he was referring to what is uttered.
There is no doubt that the one who, by utterance, here he
means that which is uttered, then he is a Jahini, as for who
says “Not created” then Imim Ahmad said he is an
innovator. Because this was not done by the Salaf, and they
would not say the likes of this saying. They said: “The
Qur’dn is Allah’s Speech” only.

oo

Commentary on AL

in the explanation of the Aya! under the topic about
Allah's Speech.

The author said: “And that Allah Spoke with it in reality.”
Building upon the basis that all the Attributes are real.
And when it is Allah’s Speech in reality, it is not then
passible that it be created, because it is His Attribute;
and the Creator’s Attribute is not created; just as the
creature's attribute is created.

Imam Ahmad said: “Whoever says: ‘Al-Lafz (the utterance)
of the Qur'an is created,’ then he is a ‏,مز‎ and whoever
says: ‘not created,’ then he is an innovator."

So we say: Al-Lafg (Utterance) is used for mean two
meanings: For the verbal noun, which is the action of the
doer, and for that which is uttered.

— As for the first meaning, which is the verbal noun, then
there is no doubt that our utterance of the Qur'an and other
than the Qur'an is created. Because when we say that the
utterance: is the articulation, then this voice which is
produced with the movement of the mouth, tongue and
two lips, is a creature.

So when what is meant by utterance is the articulation, then
it is created, whether what was uttered by'it was Qur'an, or
a Hadith, or speech you uttered yourself.

— As for when the objective of the ulterance is whai was
uttered, then for this, from it is what is created, and from it
is what is not created.

And based upon that, when that which is uttered is the

"1 Reported by ‘Abdullah bin Imam Ahmad in the book As-
Sunnah (1:165), and Al-Khallal also in Kitéb As-Sunnah as
cited in the book Dar’ Ta'@rud ‏اوم لم‎ wan-Nagl by ‏مطل‎
‎‘Taymiyyah (1:261).

Concerning the Belief that the Qur'an...

Verily, this is the Word (Hus Qur'an brought by} a
most honorable messenger. Owner of power, and high
rank with (Allah) the Lord of the ‘Arsh.y (At-Takwir
81:19-20)

The first (Ayal) is (referring to) Muhammad 3% while the
second (Ayah) is (referring to) Jibril?!

The response to that is to say that it is not possible that we
consider that the two Messengers (Muhammad and Jibril)
spoke it in reality, and that it (the Qur'an) came from them,
because just one word cannot have originated from two
speakers (at the same time)!!

And it is not permissible to say unrestrictively that it is a
Hikayah from Allah's Speech or an ‘Tbaraht....

His statement: “And it is not permissible to say unrest-
victively that it is a Hikayah from Allah's Speech or an
‘Tbarah,”

He said: “And it is not permissible to say wnrestrictively”
He did not say: “It is not permissible to say.” Meaning; it
is not permissible for us to say that this Quran is an

142 Commentary on AL‘Aqidal Al-Wasifiyyah

aes

أنزل على ‎ee‏ كه - هر ‎NAS‏

And that this Qur’én, which was revealed to Muhammad
28, is the Speech of Allah in reality ; not the speech of other
than Him...

% His statement: “And that this Qur'an, which was revealed
to Muhammad 3%, is the Speech of Allah in reality ; not the
speech of other than Him.”

‘The author repeated this, because of its tremendous status.
For indeed this issue is such that it resulted in the trial for
the Muslim scholars which is well-known, and it ruined
many communities. But, Allah preserved the truth with
Imim Ahmad and his like, those who refused to say except
that the Qur'an is the Speech of Allah, not created.

© His statement: “Not the speech of other than Him ;”
contrary to the one who says that the Qur'an is Jibril’s
speech, which Allah inspired in him,.or that it
Muhamunad’s speech...or the like.

Tf you say: The author's statement here: “Not the word of

other than Him,” contradicts Allah’s saying, Exalted is He:

€That this is verily the word of an honored messenger.

It is not the word of a poet, little is that you belicve.¥
(Al-Hagqah 69:40-41)

And also His statement:

Conceming the Belief that the Qur’an... 445

ie

6g Gk Wes WY ae de ‏مَنْ‎ Jae

Rather, when people recite it or write it down in the
Masahif that does not remove it from being the Speech of
Allah, ‘Exalted is He, in reality; because speech is only in
reality attributed to whoever initiated saying tt, not to
whoever said if by transmitting, (and) conveying...

® His statement: “Rather, when people recite it or wrile it
down in ihe Masihif that does not remove it from being the
Speech of Allah, Exalted is He, in reality; because speech is
only in reality attributed to whoever said it first, not to
whoever said it by transmitting, (and) conveying.

Meaning: No matter how people write it in the Mushafs,
memorize it in their chests, or recite it with their
tongues, that will not remove it from being Allah’s
Speech.

Then, he justified that, saying: “Because speech is only in
reality allributed to whoever said it first.”

This reason is clear. Hor speech is attributed, in reality, to

whoever said it first. As for attributing it one who

transmits, or conveys it, (such attribution) it is by means

of generalization.

For example, if we read this now:

“The rule of love affirms the pillars

144 Commentary on Al-‘Agidiah Al-Wasitiyyah

‘Tbarah of Allah's Speech, without any restriction. It is
also not permissible for us to say it is a Ilikayah of
Allah’s specch, in an unrestricted manner.

Those who say that it is a Hikiyah, they are the Kullabiyyah;
while those who say that it is an ‘Iharah, they are the
Ash'ariyyah.

Both agree that this Quran which is in the Mushaf is not
Allah’s Speech, but either a Hikayah, or an ‘Ibirah. The
difference between them is:

The Hikayak is a parallel. That is, as if this meaning - which
is the Speech according to them - is reflected by a mirror;
such as the echo reverberates the speech of the speaker.

As for its being ‘Ibdrah, then, what is meant by that is that
the one who talks, uses created letters and sounds to
express his speech in himself.

So it is not allowed for us to use the terms Hikdyah or ‘Ibdrah
in an absolute sense, but with details; it would be allowed
for us to say: ‘The one who is reciting now, is expressing
something from Allah’s Speech” or “reflecting Allah's
Speech;” since his utterance is of the Qur‘aén, but not
Allah’s Speech.

There is no harm in such saying with this restriction, but to
unvestrictively say that the Qur'an is an ‘Ibdrah or a Hikdyah
from the Allah’s Speech is not permissible.

The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, was very
careful in the choice of the words while he said: “It is not
permissible fo say unrestrictively,”” rather, it must be
restricted, and specified.

ana OY

Concerning the Belief that the Qur‘an... 147

> His statement: “Allah's Speech is not letters without
meanings.” This is the Madhhab of the Mu‘tazilah and
the Jalmiyyal; they say: The Speech is not meaning
from Allah’s Self. Rather it is something from the
created, like the heaven, the earth, the she camel, the
House and the like of that! It is not a meaning that is
sustained by itself. So, Allah’s Speech consists of Ictters
which Allah, the Majestic and Sublime, created and He
called them His Speech, such as He created the she
camel and called it the she-camel of Allah, and as [1
created the House and called it the House of Allah.

That is why, to the Mu’tazilah and the Jalrmtyyah, the Speech

is just letters; because to them, Allah’s Speech is a mere

representation of letters and sounds created by Allah, the

Mighty and Sublime, and attributed to Himself as a means

of honoring and exaltation.

% His saying: “nor meanings withuut letters.” This is the
Madhhab the Kullabiyyah and the Ash’ariyyah. Allah’s
Speech, according to them, is a meaning in Himself,
then He created sounds and letters that demonstrate
this meaning; either as an ‘Tharah or a Hikayah.

You should know; Ibn Al-Qayyim, may Allah have mercy
upon him, mentioned that if we deny that Allah speaks,
then we have declared both the Shar’ (the Legislation) and
the Qadar (the Divine Decree) to be false:

— As for the Shar‘ (the Legislation); since the Messages
came by way of revelation, and revelation is speech
conveyed to the one it is sent to, if we negate the speech,
the revelation would be negated; and when the revelation
is negated, the the Legislation is negated.

— As for the Qadar (the Divine Decree), since the creation
came to be by His order; with His saying: “Be” so it will be

146 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Separation cannot invalidate its control’
This verse, is in reality attributed to Ibn Al-Qayyim."
Also, if you say:

“Our statement is a meaningful utterance; such as ‘Stand
right’
And noun, and verb, then the particles of a statement.”
So, this is attributed to Ibn Malik”)
Therefore, speech is in reality attributed to the first speaker.
So, the Qur'an is the Speech of Who first Spoke it, and He is
Allah, Exalted is He, it is not the speech of whoever
conveyed it to others.

sat

Syl ‏الله‎ ps gD ‏ومَعَانيه؛‎ Gy eal ES os

7

It is the Allah's Speech, its letters, and meanings. Allah's
Speech is not letters without meanings, nor meanings
without letters...

% His statement: “It is the Allah's Speech, its letters, and
meanings.” This is the Madhhab of the People of the
Sunnah and the Jamd’ah. They say: Allah, Exalted is He,
uttered the Qur'an with its letters and meanings.

{Sharh Qasidafe Al-Imam ibn AL-Qayyim by Ibn ‘Isa (1:37).
©] Sharh Ibn ‘Aqil Ald AL-Alfiyyah (1-13)

148 Commentary on Al’ Agidah AL Wast
— just as He, Exalted is He, says:
«Verily, His Command, when He intends a thing, is

SECTION:
Concerning the Belief that the Believers

only that He says to it, “Be!” and it isl» (Yasin 36:82) shall See Their Lord on the Day of
Resurrection, and the Places of Seeing

Section : Also included in what we mentioned about faith in
Him, His Books, His Angels and His Messengers, is the
helief that the believers shall see Him on the Day of
Resurrection, viewing with their vision, just as they see the
sun clearly without any cloud . And just as they see the moon
ona night that it is fill, without harming each other to seit.

ا

The author's statement: “Section : Also included in what
we mentioned about faith in Him, His Books, His Angels
and His Messengers, is the belief that the believers shall see
Him on the Day of Resurrection.”

The Commentary

4 Conceming his statement: “The belief that the believers
shall see Him on the Day of Resurrection.”

Concerning the Belief that the Believers...

They shall see Him, Glorious is He, while they are on the
plains of the Day of Resurrection. Then, they shall see
Him after having entered Paradise, as willed by Allah,
Exalted is He....

لل و2« و ‎a‏

His statement: “They shall see Him, Glorious is He, while
they are on the plains of the Day of Resurrection a“

““ Arasat (the plains)” is plural for “Arasah (plain), which
is a large and vast space of land that does not have any
structure on it. This is because (on that day) the earth
shall be spread like leather, as in the Messenger #4 said;
meaning: “Spread like leather."

So, the believers shall see Allah on the plains of the Day
of Judgment, before they enter Paradise. Just as Allah,
Exalted is He, said regarding those who deny the Day
of Recompense:

Based on the report of Al-Hakim (4:575) from ‘Abdullah bin
Amnr, in Mawgiif form, he said: “On the Day of Judgment the
earth shall spread like leather and the creatures shall be
gathered.” And from the Hadith of Jabir (4:470), in Marfiz’
form: "The earth shall be spread like leather, and then there
shall be no space for the son of Adam except that for his two
feet.” And in Al-Fath (11:376), Al-Hafiz Tbu Hajar said “Its
narrators are trustworthy,” And Tani graded the
Maveqiif chain Saluh (authentic) in As-Sahifal (4:607)

150 Commentary on AL’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

— The basis by which the belief in the believers seeing their
Lord on the Day of Resurrection is a part of faith in Allah is
clear; because this is part of what Allah informed about.
Thus, if we believe in it, it is then part of faith in Allah.

~ The basis by which it is from the belief in His Books, is
that the Books informed that Allah shall be seen, so
attesting to that is attesting to the Books.

— The basis by which it is from the belief in the Angels is
that the transmission of the revelation was through the
Angels. For indeed, Jibril descends with the revelation from
Allah, Exalted is He. As such, it is as if the belief that Allah
shall be seen is part of belief in the Angels.

— In the like manner, we say that it is also part of the belief
in the Messengers, because the Messengers were the ones
who conveyed that to the creation. Hence, the belief in that
is from belief in the Messengers.

% His statement: “Viewing with their vision.” ‘Ayanan

Meaning: “Mu‘iyanah (viewing) while viewing is
seeing with the eyes,
His statement: “Just as they see the sun clearly without any
cloud.” The proof for that is the statement of the
Prophet #: “You shall see Him just as you see the sun
clearly without any ‏”.ليمك‎

What is intended by the seeing is with the eye, as proven

by comparison of seeing the Sun clearly without any cloud.

His statement, may Allah have mercy upon him: “And
just as they see the moon on a night that if is full, without
harming each other to see it.” The discussion regarding
that preceded.

Reported by Al-Bukhan (4739) and Muslim (183) from Aba
‏لثمك‎ Al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him

Concerning the Belief that the Believers... 153

veiled from them, and they will not sce Him afterwards.

% His statement: “Ther, they shall see Him after having
entered Paradise, as willed by Allah, Exalted is He.

> His statement: “As willed” meaning that they shall see
Allah in the manner which He, Glorious be He, wills
them to see Him, and for as long as He wills them to
see Him, and in all circumstances; meaning, in
whatever way Allah, the Majestic and Sublime, wishes
concerning this seeing.
Hence, we do not know the how of this seeing. Meaning, a
person does not know how he will ‏عمد‎ His Lord, But, the
meaning of seeing is known; they shall see Allah as they see
the moon; but, in what manner? We do not know this;
rather, it is as Allah wills. And the details preceded
regarding the seeing.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

oa 2 + el ED

Nay! Surely, they (evil-doers) will be veiled from
seeing their Lord that Day.» (Al-Mutaffifin 83:15)

<That Day}: Meaning, the Day of Recompense.

€the Day when (all) mankind will stand before the Lord

of the ‘Alamin (mankind, jinns and all that exists). »
(AL-Mutaffifin 83:6)

They shal] also sce Him after having entered Paradise.

4 On the plains of the Day of Resurrection, the people
shall be of three kinds:

The true believers, openly and secretly.

The true disbelievers openly and secretly.

Those who are believers openly but disbelievers
secretly. They are the hypocrites,

— As for the believers, they shall see Allah, Fxalted is He,

on the plains of the Resurrection and after having entered
Paradise.

— As for the disbelievers, they absolutely will not see their
Lord; and it is alse said that they shall see Him, but with a
seeing of wrath and punishment, but the apparent proof
indicates that they will not see Allah; as Allah, Exalted is
He, says:

€Nay! Surely, they (evil-doers) will be veiled from
seeing their Lord that Day.) (Al-Mutaffifin 83:15)

— As for the hypocrites, they shall see Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, on the plains of Resurrection; then He will be

SECTION:
Concerning the Belief in the Last Day

Section: And from belief in the Last Day is the belief in
everything that the Prophet wg informed (us) concerning
what will happen right after the moment of death...

The Commentary

The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, began the
discourse about the Last Day and the creed of the People of
the Sunnah and the Jamda’ah concerning it by saying:
“Section: And from belief in the Last Day is the belief in
everything that the Prophet 3 informed (us) concerning what
will happen right after the moment of death.”

4% The ruling concerning the belief in the Last Day is that
it is compulsory to have belicf in it, and its status in the
religion is that it is one of the six pillars of faith.

Many times, Allah, Exalted is He, combines between the

belief in Him, Exalted is He, and the belief in the Last Day:

the belief in the beginning and the belief in the return of the

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day

4O mankind! if you are in doubt about the
Resurrection, then verily! We have creaied you from
dust, then from a Nutfah (mixed drops of male and
female sexual discharge i.e. offspring of Adam), then
from a clot (a piece of thick coagulated blood) then from
a little lump of flesh, some formed and some unformed
(miscarriage), that We may make (if) clear to you (i.e.
fo show you Our Power and Ability to do what We
will). And We cause whomt We will to remain in the
wombs for in appointed term, then We bring you out as
infants, then (give you growth) that you may reach your
age of full strength. And among you there is he who
dies (young), and among you there is he who is brought
back to the miserable old age, so that he knows nothing
after having known. And you see the earth barren, but
when We send down water (rain) on it, it is stirred (to
life), it swells and puts forth every lovely kind (of
growth)» (Al-Hajj 22:5)
— Concerning the stage of pregnancy, Allah, Exalted is He,
says about it:

pa

He creates you in the wombs of your mothers, creation
after creation in three veils of darkness.) (Az-Zumar
39:6)
— Regarding the stage of this world, Allah, Exalted is He,
says about it:

156 Commentary on AL’Agidah ALWisitiyyah

Hereafter. This is because whoever fails to believe in the
Last Day, it is not possible for him to believe in Allah, since
the one who does not believe in the Last Day will not work
for it, because one does not work except for what he hopes
for of honor in the Last Day and what is feared of the
chastisement and punishment, ‘Then, if he does not believe
in it, he becomes like those about whom Allah says:

4And they say: “there is nothing but our life of this

world, we die and we live and nothing destroys us
except Ad-Dahr (the time).""p (Ak-Jathiyah 45:24)

And the Last Day is named the Last Day, because it is a
day after which there is no other day; for it is his final
stage.

‘ Man passes through five stages: the stage of nonexis-
tence, then, the stage of pregnancy, then, the stage of
this world, then the stage of Al-Barzakh (state in-
between the world and the Hereafter), then the Here-
after.

- As for the stage of nonexistence, it is proven by His,
Exalted is He, statement: 1

Has there not been over a man period of time, when he
was nothing to be mentioned?} (Al-Insan 76 :1)

He, Exalted is He, says:

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day

included in the belief in the Last Day.

This is because once man dies, he enters (the phase of) the
Last Day; that is why it is usually said: “Whoever dies, his
resurrection has come.” Hence, whatever happens after
death, it is part of the Last Day.

Therefore, how close is the Day to us?! There is nothing
between us and it except the death of a man. Then, he
enters into the Last Day, wherein there is nothing except
recompense for the deeds.

And due to this, it is compulsory upon us to pay close
attention to this important point.

O man! Think well and ponder attentively, you will
discover that you are at tisk, for the titne of death is not
known to us. A person can go out of his house without
retuming to it. A person can sit down on his office chair
without standing from it. A person can sleep on his bed,
however, he might be carried from his bed to his washing,
bed, (where he will be washed in preparation to be buried).

This matter requires us to seize upon the opportunity of life
to repent to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and that a
person constantly be aware of repenting to Allah, returning
to Him and seeking His forgiveness, until his lifespan ends,
and he is in a good desireable state.

ne OE

158 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

seer ot ah

And Allalt has brought you out from the wombs of
your mothers while you know nothing. And He gave
you hearing, sight, and hearts that you might give
thanks (to Allalt).> (An-Nah 16:78)

It is around these stages that success and misery revolve;

they are the abodes of test and trial, as He, Exalted is He,
says:

Gal gl ists SSH SE sd
Who has creaied death and life, that He may test you

which of you is best in deed. And He is the All-Mighty,
the Oft-Forgiving.» (Al-Mulk 67:2)

— As for the stage of Al-Harzakh, Allah says about it:
pas gg hep | ‏عست‎
‎Stee ‏إك بعد‎ OD ety we
And behind them is Barzakh (a barrier) until the Day
when they will be resurrected.} (Al-Mu’miniin 23:100)

~ Concerning the stage of the Hercafter, which is the apex
of the stages, and the end of journey, Allah, Exalted is He,
says after having mentioned the other stages:
After that, surely, you will die. Then (again), surely,
you will be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection.»
(AL-Mu 'miniin 23:15-16)

+} His statement, may Allah have mercy upon him, “The
belief in all that the Prophet #8 informed us regarding what
will happen after the moment of death,” All of this is

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day 161

- As for the Sunnah, it has been oeverwhelmingly reported
that the person will be subjected to trial in his grave. That is
the trial about which the Prophet ‏عله‎ said: “Tt has been
revealed to me, that you shall be tried in you graves, with
what is like (or close to) the trial of Ad-Dagal/’4

Furthermore, the trial of Ad-Dajjal is the worst of all trials
since the day Allah created Adam until the Hour is
established, as contained in Salih Muslim from ‘Imran bin.
Husain, may Allah be pleased with him, who said: “I heard
the Messenger of Allah ‏يف‎ saying: ‘There is no affair
between the time Adam was created until the advent of the
Hour worse than the Ad-Dajjal.’"7!

But, the Prophet 33 said to his Companions, rather he said
to his Ubumah: “If he appears out while I am among you; 1
will contend with him on your behalf, But, if he appears
while I am not in among you, everyone will have to
contend for himself; Allah is my Khaliah! upon every
Muslim.”

Despite this, our Prophet, Muhammad #% has taught us
how to contend with him. He has informed us of his
attributes and fealures, such that it is as if we are looking at
him directly. It is with these attributes and features that we
will be able to contend with him.

That is why we are saying: The trial of Ad-Dajal is the
greatest and the worst of all trials, The Messenger 2% said:

{0 Reported by Al-Bukhari (184) and Muslim (905), from
Asma’, may Allah be pleased with her.
Reported by Muslim (2946) from ‘Imran bin Husain, may
Allah be pleased with him.
Translation note: Meaning: “Who will look after matters
when 1 am gone.”
Reported by Muslim (2937) from An-Nawwas bin Sam/an,
may Allah be pleased with him

Commentary on Al-Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

They also believe in the trial of te grave, the punishment
of the grave and its pleasure...

His statement: “They. also believe in the trial of the grave,
the punishment of the grave and its pleasure.”

¢ The trial here means test, and what is intended by the
trial of the grave is the interrogation of the deceased
when buried, concerning his Lord, his religion and his
Prophet.

% ‘The pronoun in “they believe” refers to the People of the
Sunnah. That is, the People of the Sunnah and the
Jama’ah believe in the trial of the grave. That is based on
the evidences of the Book and the Sunnah concerning
this,

— As for the Book; it is contained in His statement, Exalted

Allah will keep firm those who believe, with the word
that stands firm in this world, and in the Hereafler >
(Ibrahim 14:27)

This is conceming the trial of the grave as established in the
Two Sahihs"! and others, in the Hadith of Al-Bara’ bin
‘Azib from the Prophet #4.

a

Reported by Al-Bukhari (4699) and Muslim (2871).

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day 163

and they will not be questioned. That is for two reasons:

The first: Is that the Prophets are better than the martyrs,
and the Prophet # has informed (us) that the martyrs will
be protected from from the trial of the grave. He said: “The
flash of the swords over his head is enough of a tial.” It
was reported by An-Nasa’t.!"I

The second: Is that the Prophets will be enquired about,
while saying to the dead: “Who is your Prophet?” They are
the ones about whom people will be asked; they are not the
ones to be questioned. That is why the Prophet # said: “It
was revealed to me that you shall be tried in your
grave." The address is to the Ummah whom he was
sent to; hence, the Messenger is not included among them.

Secondly: As for the Siddigm, they are not going to be
questioned, because the rank of the Siddigin is a higher rank
than that of the martyrs. If the martyrs will be exempt from
being questioned, then the Siddigin are more worthy of that.
And because the Siddig, according to the interpretation of
the word, his truthfulness and sincerity has been known
and confirmed, then, he needs not be subjected to any test,
because the test is meant for those about whom there is
doubt; is he truthful or a liar? But, as for the truthful one,
there is no need calling for him being questioned. Some of
the scholars held the view that they shall also be
questioned, based on the generality of the proof. And
Allah knows best.

Thirdly: As for the martyrs, who are killed in the Cause of
Allah, they shall not be questioned; due to the clarity of the

1) Reported by An-Nasa‘i (4:99), and fram him, Al-Qasim As-
Saraqusti in Gharth Al-Hadith (2:165:1) as in Abkam AbJand‘iz
(36) by Al-Albani, and he said: “Its chain is Sabih.”

Its reference preceded.

By

162 Commentary on AL‘Agidah AL-Wasitiyyah

“You shall be tested in your graves, with what is like (or
close to) the trial of Ad-Dajjal.”")

What a great trial! This is because man will be subjected to

the questioning, which is not easy to answer except for he
who has strong foundations of creed and righteous actions.

As for the trial, then indeed the people shall be tried in
their graves, So it is said to the man: Who is your Lord?
And what is your religion? And who is your Prophet?”

3 oo

Hig statement: “As for the trial, then indeed the people
shall be tried in their graves.”

This is the beginning of the explanation of how the
deceased is tried in his grave.

The word “the people’’ proves generality. The apparent
meaning of the author's statement is that everybody,
even the Prophets, the Siddigit, the martyrs, the
Murabifiin (those who guard the frontiers), those who
are not legally responsible among the young, and the
insane, will be subjected to trials in their graves. And
there are some details related to this, hence, we say:

Firstly: As for the Prophets, the trial does not include them,

(1) Its reference preceded.

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day 165

(guarding the frontier) for a day and a night is better than
fasting a month, and its standing (in the night for prayer). If
he dies, (the reward of) the deed he was doing will be
continue for him, and his provision will continue; and he
would be safe from the trials.”""!

Fifthly: The young and the insane. Will they be subjected to
trials or not?

Some of the scholars say that they will be tried, for they are
included in the general meaning; and if they are exempted
from being legally-responsible in this life, the situation after
death is different from the situation of this worldly life.

Some of the scholars say that the insane and the young will
not be questioned because they are not legally-responsible.
And when they are not legally-responsible, then there is no
reckoning for them, and there is no reckoning except for the
legally-responsible who is punishable for sins; and these
people are not punished. There is nothing but reward for
them; if they do a good deed, they shall be rewarded for it.

@ Therefore, five categories of people are exempt from
the statement of the author: “Because for the people :”
The Prophets, the Siddiqin, the martyrs, the Murabitan
(those who guard the frontier) and those who do not
have any sense, such as the insane and the immature.

Important Note

People are of three categories: Absolute believers, and
(absolute) hypocrites, these two categories will be tried in
the grave. The third (category) is absolute disbelievers.
There is a difference of opinion concerning their trial. In the

"| Reported by Muslim (1913) from Salman, may Allah be
pleased with him.

164 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah ALWasitiyyah

truthfulness of their faith by their engaging in Jihad. Allah,
Exalted is He, says:

BS ‏بنج‎ A ut cad ‏د يك‎
Verily, Allah has purchased of the believers their lives
and their properties; for the price that theirs shall be
Paradise. They fight in Allah’s Cause, so they kill
(others) and are killed.» (At-Tatwbah 9:111)

He also says:

Think not of those who are killed in the Way of Allah
as dead, Nay, they are alive, with their Lord, and they
have provision.» (AL ‘Imran 3:169)

And the Prophet # also said: “The flash of the swords over
his head is enough of a trial.)

And when the Murabit (one guarding frontier) dies, he will
be saved from the trials, due to the clarity of his
truthfulness. Thus, the one who is killed in the battleficld
should share the same status with him, or even having a
better status, because he offered and surrendered his neck
for the enemy of Allah, so thal the word of Allah would
reign supreme, and to aid and support Elis religion. This is
of the greatest manifestations of the veracity of his faith.

Fourthly: As for Al-Murébitiin (those who guard the

frontiers), they shall not be tried. For, in Sahih Mustin (it
is reported) that the Messenger of Allah #§ said: “Ribat

1 Tt just preceded.

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day 167

And it is reported in some narrations that their names
(the Angels questioning) are Munkar and Naki."

And some of the scholars have rejected these two names,
saying: “How can the Angels be named these two
objectionable names, while Allah, Exalted is He, has
described them with lofty attributes?” They also declared
the Hadith mentioning them to be weak.

Some others held the view that the indith is a proof, and
that the fact that they are being called such does not mean
they are detestable in their natures; they are only that
because the dead person does not know them, and has no
previous knowledge of them.) Ibrahim said to his vistors,
who were Angels:

4You are 2 people Munkarin (unknown to me.Jp (Adh-
Dhariydt 51:25)

Because he did not know them. So, they are Munkar and
Nakir because they are not known to the deceased,

and An-Nawawi said the chain is good in Al-Majmii‘ (3:292).
See Ahkim Al-Jand’iz by Al-Albant (156),

Based on the reporl of At-Tirmidhi (1083), Ibn Abi “Asim in
As-Sunnalt (864), and Al-Ajurti in Ash-Shuri at (365), from
Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him, who said:
“The Messenget of Allah 4 said: ‘When the dead is buried’ -
or he said: ‘anyone among vou’ - ‘two black and blue Angels
approach him; one of them is called Munkar, and the other
Nakir ‘” The Hadith was graded Saltift by Al-Albani in As
Sabtthalt (1391).

Translation nole: Meaning, because botb of these names are
derived from Nakira, and among its meanings is: “lo not
known or recognize.”

166 Commentary on Al-‘Agidal: Al-Wasitiyyuh

book Ar-Rih, Ibn Al-Qayyim gave preference to the view
that they shall be tried in their grave.

% Will the carlier nations (the followers of other Prophets)
also be tried?

Some of the scholars held the view that they shall be tried -
which is the correct position - because if this Ummah -
which is the most honorable Lindh - will be tried, those
that are less honorable are more worthy of that.

“% Concerning his statement: “In their graves: The grave
tefers to the place where a dead person is buried; what
is intended is wider in sense; it includes the Barzakh -
that is, the life between death, and the advent of the
Hour, whether the dead person is buried or devoured
by predatory animals on the land, or by fish in the sea,
or he is destroyed by violent wind.

What is apparent is that the trial will not occur except after
the termination of all worldly conditions, and passage into
the world of the Hereafter. If his burial is delayed for a day
or more, the quesetioning will not commence until he is
buried.

% His statement: ‘So if is said to Hie man: The ones that

will be talking are two Angels, who will come to the
person in his grave, they will sit him up and question
him, such thal he will hear the footsteps of those
leaving him (after the burial) while the two Angels are
questioning him. That is why it is from the guidance of
the Prophet ##, that whenever the deceased was
buried; he would stand at the grave and said: “Seek
forgiveness for your brother, and ask for fortitude for
him, because he is now being questioned.”"]

Reported by Abi Dawad (3221), Al-Baihagi (4:56), and Al-
flakim graded it ‏تمك‎ (1:370}, and Adh-Dhahabi agreed,

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day 169

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, making two Angels for
every buried dead person. Allah is capable of doing all
things.

His statement: “Who is your Lord?” Meaning, who is
your Lord who created you and whom you worship,
and singled out for the purpose of worship? In order
that this statement comprises Tawhih Ar-Rubiibiyyah
and Tawhih Al-Uldahiyyah.

1115 statement: “What is your religion?” Meaning, what
are your deeds, by which you worshipped Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, and drew nearer to Him?

The third one (question): “Who is your Prophet?”
Meaning, who is the Prophet whom you believed in
and followed?

word that stands firm in this world, and in the
Hereafter.» (Ibrahim 14:27). The believer will say:
“My Lord is Allah, Islam is my religion and Mulam-
mad x is my Prophet.” As for skeptic, he will say:
“Ah, Ah! 1 don't know, I heard people saying some-

Commentary on Ab’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Then, these two Angels, are they two new Angels
entrusted with the residents of the graves, or are they
the two recording Angels who are at the right and left
hand of man?

Among them (the scholars) are those who said that they are
the two Angels who accompany man; for every man is
entrusted with two Angels who record his deeds; and at
the grave, they will be asking him these three questions.

And among them are those who said that they are two
different Angels, And Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, says:

CL GR Bop

éAnd none can know the hosts of your Lord but He.»
(Al-Muddaththir 74:31)

The Angels are creatures who are many in number. The
Prophet #¢ said: “The heaven groans, yes, it ought to groan.
(Groan here refers to the squeak of the camel). There is no
place of a hand span’s length (or he said: four fingers)
except therein is an Angel, standing, bowing or prostrating,
to ‏“طقال‎

And theheavensate very wide, as said by Allah, Exalted is He:

@With power did We construct the heaven. Verily, We
are Able to extend the vastness of space thereof.» (Adh-
Dhariyat 51:47)

So what is important, is that there is nothing strange about

1 Reported by Ahmad (5:173), At-Tirmidhi (2312), Ton Majah
(4190) and Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak (2:510) from Aba
Dharr, may Allah be pleased with him, and AL-Albani
graded it Hasan (good) in As-Sahihah (1722)

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day 17

word stands firm in this world, and in the Hereafter.

But the first meaning is better and more correct, for AJlah
says:

تنوه
‎you who believe! When you meet (ax enemy) foree,‏ 40
‎take a firmn stand against them 3 (AL-Anfil 7:45)‏

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, also says:
S(Remember) when your Lord inspired the Angels:

“Verily, Tam with you, so keep firm those who have
believed "> (Al-Anfal 7:12)

So, they (the believers) will be made firm in the world and
the Hereafter, with the firm statement.

~ Concerning his statement: “The believer will say: My
Lord is Allah, Islam is my religion and Muhammad 3% is my
Prophet.”
So, the believer will say: “My Lord is Allah” when he is
asked: “Who is your Lord?” And when he is he is asked:
“What is your religion?” He will reply: “Islam is my
religion.” In the like manner, he will say Muhammad 2 ‏كذ‎
‎my Prophet, when he is asked: “Who is your Prophet?”
With this, the answers are correct. Then, a caller from the
heaven will call: “My servant spoke the truth; so spread out
bedding for him from Paradise, clothe him from Paradise,
and open a door to Paradise for him.”
+ Concerning his statement: “As for skeptic, he will say:
Ah, Aht I don’t know. Uheard people saying something, so!
said it.”

The skeptic refers to the doubter, the hypocrite and

170 Commentary on AL-‘Aqidah Al Wasitiyyah

thing, so I said it.” So he will be struck with an iron
hammer, so he screams with a scream that will be heard
by everything except man. If man were to hear it, he
would die.

nr « ‏جع‎

% His statement: ‘Thus,
€Allah will keep firm those who believe, with the word

that stands firm in this world, and in the Hereafter.)
(lorahim 14:27).”

Meaning, He will make them among those who are firm,
not wavering or stuttering at response.

The word that stands firm is At-Tawhid; such as said by
Him, Exalted is He:

€See you not how Allah sets forth a parable? - A goodly
word as a goodly tree, whose root is firmly fixed, and

its branches (reach) to the sky (i.e. very high).>
(Ibrahim 14:24)

% His statement: ‏بط‎ this world and in the Hereafter. It is
possible that it is linked to the statement: Will keep
firm.» Meaning: That Allah will keep the believers
firm in this world and in ihe Hereafter. It is also
possible that it is linked to the standing firm. Thus, it
will be a description to the statement. Meaning: This

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day 173

4 Concerning his statement: “Fie will be struck, so he will

scream.” That is an audible scream; everything will
hear it. Those things that will hear his terrifying scream
are those around him; and not everything in every
place in the world hears him. And sometimes the one
hearing it will be affected by it, Such as when the
Messenger #% passed by the graves of some idolators,
while he was on his mule, and it became agitated,
nearly kicking him off, for it heard the sounds of
their.

% Concerning his statement: “except man :"’ Meaning that
he will not hear this terrifying scream. This is due to
tremendous wisdoms. Some of them are:

Firstly: What the Prophet ‏يعد‎ indicated in his statement,

while saying: “If were not that you would not bury one

another, | would have supplicated to Allah to make you
hear the punishment of the grave.”7!

Secondly: That by it being hidden, it acts as a cover for the
dead.

Thirdly: That will prevent his family members from fear
and anxiety, because if his family members could hear their
deceased relative being punished and screaming, they will
be psychologically disturbed.

Fourthly: That will save the family from shame and
embarrassment, for people would say: “This is your son,”
“this is your father,” and “this is your brother” and the
like.

Fifthly: We could die from it, because the scream is not

“4 Reported by Muslim (2867) from 7.aid bin Thabit, may Allah
be pleased with him.
21 A part of the preceding Hadith.

172 Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

their like.

“ Thus, he will say: “Ak, Ah! I don’t know, I heard people
saying something and I followed (them) saying so.”
Meaning - faith had not penetrated his heart, he only
used to say as the people said, without faith reaching
his heart.

‘Think about his saying: “Ah! Ah!” As if he forgot
something which he wants to recall, and this is from the
greatest of sorrow; that he imagines that he knows this
response, but a barrier has been placed between him and it.
And he will say: “Ah! Ak!” And then, he will say: “I heard
the people saying something, so I said it” He will not say:
“Allah is my Lord,” not “Islam is my religion’ nor
“Muhammad is my Trophet,” because he was a skeptic
and a doubter in the world!

This is when he is being questioned in his grave, and he is
most in need of knowing the correct answer, but he will be
incapable, and say instead: “I don’t know, I heard the
people saying something, so I said it.”

So, his faith was only a saying!

@ Concerning his statement: “Afterwards, he will be struck

with an iron hammer, so he will scream with a scream that
will be heard by everything except man.”

“He will be struck:” That is, the one who does not
answer (correctly), whether he was a disbeliever or a
hypocrite. Moreover, those who strike him are the two
Angels who will be asking him the questions.

> Also, Al-Mirzabbah: That is the iron-hammer. It is
reported in some narrations that if all of the people of
Mina gathered to lift it, they would not be able to do so.

When he is hit, he will cry out a terrible scream that will be
heard by everything except for mankind.

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day

intended by “the two species” is man and the fins.

Then, after this trial, comes either reward or punish-

“Concerning his statement: “Then, after this trial, comes
either reward or punishment.’

“Then:” is used here only to express the sequence. It is
not used to express a delay; since man will begin being
punished or rewarded immediately; as has been
mentioned earlier, that once he says: “I don’t know”
he will be hit with an iron hammer, and the one who
answers correctly will have a door of Paradise opened
for him, and his grave will be made wide and spacious.

And this reward or punishment, will it affect only the
physical body, or the soul, or both the physical body
and the soul together?

We say: That which is well known among The People of the
Sunnah and the Jama’ah is that it will primarily affect the
soul, and the body is a subsidiary to it, just as the
punishment in the worldly life primarily affects the body,
and the soul is a subsidiary to it. And just as the Shart‘ah
rulings in the worldly life deal with what is apparent; it is
vice-versa in the hereafter. Based on this, the punishment
or reward in the grave affects the soul, but the body will be
affected by this as a subsidiary, and not independently. It is
possible for the punishment to be primarily received by the

Commentary on Al-'Agidah Ai-Wasitiyyah

bearable; it is rather a scream that can cut off the hearts
thereby leading to man’s death or losing consciousness.

Sixthly: If people wer able to hear the screams these people
being punished, the belief in the punishment of grave will
therefore come under the belief in the witnessed, not under
the belicf in the unseen. With this, the benefit of being tested
would be defeated, since people will definitely believe in
what they witness. Bul, if il is hidden from them, and is not
known except by means of (Divine) information or con-
veyance, then it rightly falls under the belief in the unseen.

An Important Point

The statement of the author, may Allah have mercy upon
him: “So he screams with ‏م‎ scream that will be heard by
everything except man. If man were to hear it, he would die”
His statement: “that will be heard by everything except
man...” was only mentioned") in reference to the Jandzah
when it is being carried by men on their shoulders, as the
Prophet said 2: “If it is righteous, it will say: ‘Bring me
ahead(’ If it is not righteous, it will say: ‘Woe is me! Where
are they carrying me to” Everything except man, will hear
its voice. If he were to hear it, he would die.”

As for the terrifying screaming in the grave; the Prophet #
said: “He will make a trembling cry that will be heard by
all others except the two species.”

It is reported by Al-Bukhari with this wording.!*! What is

{ Translation note: Meaning, this wording was only

mentioned in the Hadith about that.

Reported by Al-Bukhari (1316, 1380) from Aba Sa’id Al-
Khudrt, may Allah be pleased with him.

Reported by Al-Bukhari (1374) from the JJadith of Anas bin
Malik, may Allah be pleased with him.

‎the Belief in the Last Day 17‏ عمتمععممك

‎Hand. But if he be of the denying, the erring, then for
him is entertainment with boiling water. And burning
in Helt-fire» |AL-Waqi‘ah 56:83-94]

‎This is a witnessable matter; the dying person will hear his
hosts among the Angels"! welcoming him saying: “Wel-
come!” Sometimes, they will say: “Welcome, sit here” as
mentioned by Ibn Al-Qayyim in the Book Ar-Rak, And
sometimes, it will appear as if the man is being afflicted
with something dreadful; thereby his face changes at the
moment of death when the Angels of punishment descend
upon him, and we seek refuge in Allah.

‎Among the proofs contained in the Quz’an, is His statement
concerning the people of Fir'awn:
4655 BSS ‏بتزيثرت عَلِها‎ 1p
4The Fire; they are exposed to it, morning and
afternoon .» (Ghafir 40:46)

‎This will happen before the advent of the Hour with the
Proof of His statement:

‎And on the Day when the Hour will be established (it

‎Based on the report of Al-Bara’ bin ‘Azib, in the story of his
accompanying the Prophet $4 to attend the funeral of a man
from among the Ansdr. Reported by Imam Almad (4:287, 288,
295, 296), Abii Dawid (4753), Al-Ajurri in Ash-Sharfaht (367),
and Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak (1:37), and he said: “Salih
according to the conditions of the Two Shaikis (Al-Bukhari
and Muslim);’ and Adh-Dhahabi agreed, and Al-Albani
agreed with them both in Aitkam Al-Jand’iz (159). AL-Hafiz Al-
Mandhiri said in AtTarghib wat-Tarhib (4369): “This Hadith
is Hasan.”

‎176 Commentary on ‏«أماتتوة “لف‎ Al-Wasitiyyah

‎body, and for the soul to be a subsidiary of it, but this is

‎rare. The basis is that the saul is the primary recipient of the

‎punishment while the body is a subsidiary recipient. The
reward is also for the soul and the body is a subsidiary
recipient.

‎“ And his statement: “Fither retoard or punishment :” In it
is an affirmation af the reward and punishment in the
grave. This has been proven by the Book of Allah and
the Sunnalt of His Messenger #3. Rather, we can even
say by an Ijmd‘ (consensus) of the Muslims:

‎— As for the Book of Allah, the three categories of people at
the end of Siirat Al-Wagqi’alt obviously affirms the punish-
ment and reward of the grave.

‎Allah, Exalted is He, says:
Ae
ol Ga 0 ov ‏إن‎ Goudy SX

‎yal ‏بن‎ DG o BS ‏إن & ين أضكب‎ Hho

‎Then why do you not (intervene) when (the soul of a
dying person) reaches the throat? And you at the
moment are looking on. Hut We ave nearer to him than
you, but you see not. Then why do you not, if you are
exempt from the reckoning and recompense. Bring back
the soul, if you are truthful? Then, if he be of the
Mugarrabin (those brought near to Allah), (There is for
him) rest and provision, and a Garden of delights
(Paradise). And if he be of those on the Right Hand.
‘then there is safety and peace for those on the Right

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day

grave.
Also, among the proofs contained in the Qur’an is His
statement, Exalted is He:

>
Those whose lives the Angels take while they are in a
pious state saying (to them): “Salansut ‘Alaikua (peace
be on you) enter you ‏”.معت لويد"‎ [An-Naltl 16:32]

This is at the moment of death.

Due to this, it is reported in an authentic Haditfr: “It will be
said to the soul of a believer, come out, © pure soul, to the
forgiveness and pleasure of Allah.”

It will become joyous for this glad tiding, and depart easily,
even if the body is experiencing agonies, since the soul is
cheerful and happy (to depart).

— As for the Sunnah, concerning the punishment and
reward of the grave, it is Mutawétir,?] and among them is
affirmed in the Two Sahihs, from the Hadith of Ibn ‘Abbas,
may Allih be pleased with him, that the Prophet #8 passed
by two graves and said: “Indeed, they are being punished,
and what they are being punished for was not major (for
them to avoid)...”"")_ the Hadith.

— As for the {md (consensus), during their Saldh, all the
Muslims say: “I seek refuge in Allah from the punishment

0) 45 reference has preceded, from the Hadith of Al-Bard’ bin
‘Azib.

] Translation note: A narration reported by a large number of
narrators at every level in the chain of narration.

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (1378) and Muslim (1980), from Ton‏ لذ

‎“Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him.

‎178 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyul

‎will be said to the Angels): “Cause Fir'awn’s people to
enter the severest torment!’> (Ghafir 40:46)

‎Also, among, the proofs contained in the Qur’an is His
statement, Exalted is He:

‎“as vA of‏ عو
‎€And if you could but see when the wrongdoers are in‏
‎the agonies of death, while the Angels are stretching‏
‎forth their hands (saying): “Deliver your souls!’ (AL‏
‎An’am 6:93)‏
‎Then, they shall be very reluctant with their souls, not‏
‎wanting them to leave, because they have been given the‏
‎bad news of punishment and torment; hence, you find the‏
‎soul reluctant to depart the body. Due to this, He said:‏
‎Deliver your souls! This day, you shall be recompensed‏
‎with the torment of degradation!» (AI-An‘am 6:93)‏

‎This day is meant here to refer to the present tense
such as His staternent, Exalted is He:

‎4This day, } have perfected your religion for you.» [Al-
Maida 5:3]

‎Meaning, this present day.

‎Similarly is: ¢This day, you shall be recompensedy; The Alif
and Lam expresses the present tense. The intent by it is
the day the Angels will be present to seize their souls.
This implies that they start being punished as soon as the
souls depart their bodies. This is the punishment of the

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day 181

— As for the sinners among the believers whom Allah,
Fxalted is He, has decreed that they be punished, their
punishment may be constant, and it may not be constant. It
may be prolonged, and it may not be prolonged, depend-
ing on the magnitude of the sins committed, and the degree
of Allah’s pardon, the Mighty and Sublime. The punish-
ment of the grave is Jess severe than the punishment of the
Day of Resurrection, because the punishment of the grave
is not accompanied with disgrace and dishonor. Bul in the
Hereafter, there will be disgrace and dishonor because
there will be witnesses:

Verily, We will indeed make victorious Our
Messengers and those who believe in this world’s life
and on the Day when the witnesses will stand forth.>
(Ghafir 40:51)
> I£someone says: “If the dead person has been torn into
shreds, or devoured by a predatory animal or scattered
by a violent wimd, how will his punishment take place,
how will he be questioned?”
The answer: Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is capable of
all things. This is a matter of the unseen. Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, is capable of gathering these things in the
world of the unseen; and if we witness that it is scattered
and dispersed in world, but in the world of the unseen,
Allah could be gathering it together.
Look at the Angels, descending to seize the soul of man in
the exact location, as He, Exalted is He, said:

Sand ‏لا‎ 5 Ku oll A ocd

180 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wiasitiyyah

of Hell, and from the punishment of the grave.” If the
punishment of the grave was not affirmed by them, then it
would not be correct for them to seek refuge from it; since
refuge is not sought from an matter that does not exist. This
proves that they believe in it.

If someone were to say: Is the punishment and reward of
the grave constant, or will it discontinue?

The answer is, that it should be said:

As for the disbelievers, their punishment is constant. It is
not possible that their punishment ceases, because they are
deserving of it, and because if their punishment ceases, this
will be a respile for them, while they are not deserving of it.
Hence, they shall remain being punished until the Day of
Resurrection, even if it is for a prolonged period. The
people of Nuh, who were drowned, have continued to be
punished in the fire that they were put in, and their
punishment will continue until the Day of Judgznent.
Likewise, the people of Fir‘awn will be exposed to the fire,
moring and evening.

Some of the scholars have mentioned that it (the punish-
ment} will be lightened for the disbelievers during the
period between the two blasts (of the Trampet that will
herald the day of Resurrection). As evidence, they used His
statement, Exalted is He:
CLE ‏ين‎ SS OS Hey
They will say: “Woe to us! Who has raised us up from
our place of sleep.’% (Yasin 36:52)

But this does not necessarily prove that, because their
graves are their places of sleep even if they are being
punished therein.

Concerning the Belief in the Last Day

being dug).

® If someone says: “We saw the dead body of a
disbeliever when we excavated his grave a day or
two days after his burial, and we discovered that his
tibs were not altered, nor had they collapsed due to
being crushed?!"

The response to this is as said earlier. This is the world of

the unseen. It is possible that they were contorted, but

when the grave is opened, Allah has already restored them

and put everything back in its place, doing this as a test for

the slaves. This is because if they remained contorted while

we had previously buried him intact, the belief in that will

therefore become belief in the seen.

If someone were to say, as the philosophers have said: “We
placed mercury on the dead person and itis the fastest thing
to move and change.” Then after we went to check back, we
found the mercury on the dead person as we had placed it.
And you are saying that the Angels will come and make
him sit up. ‘This individual who has sat up, how would the
inercury remain on him?! We say as we have previously
said: This is a matter of the unseen; it is upon us to believe in
and attest to it. It is also possible that Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, returns the mercury to its place after it had moved
when the dead person was made to sit up

We also say: Fxamine a person while in a state of sleep. He
sees many things (in his dream). If he were seen while
having these dreams, he would still be on his bed. And,
sometimes, the dreams are realitics from Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, and will occur as he has seen them in his
dream. In spite of afl this, we still believe in it.

If man sees what he dislikes in his dream, he awakens

irritated. And if he sees what gladdens him, he awakens
full of joy. All this proves that the matters concerning the

182 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

<But, We are nearer to him than you, but you see
not.» (Al-Wagi‘ah 56:85)

Despite that, we do not see them.

The Angel of Death will talk to the soul, but we do not hear
it. Jibril would sometimes appear to the Messenger ss,
bringing revelation to him in the place where there were
people, yet they could not see nor hear him.

Therefore, it is never possible to compare the world of the
unseen to the world of the seen. This is from the wisdom of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. The soul which is caged in
your body, do you know how it became attached to your
body? How it is kept in your body? How it exits from you
while you are asleep? Do you ever feel it returning while
you are waking up? Where does it enter into your body?

Hence, as regards the world of the unseen, there is only
submission. It is absolutely impossible to engage it in any
comparison. Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is capable of
collecting all these separate pieces of the body that have
been scattered by a violent wind; after which it will
undergo the interrogation, then punishment or reward; for
Allah, Clorious be He, is capable of all things.

4 If someone says: "The deceased will be buried in a
narrow grave, how will it be widened for him as far as
the eye can see?!”

The answer: The world of the unseen can not be compared

to the world of the seen. Lel us assume that someone digs a

pit as far as the eye can see, buries a dead person therein,

and covers it up with soil; the one who is not aware of the
width of this hole, will he be able to see it or not?! There is
no doubt that he will not be able to see it, despite that this is
the world of the scen. Yet, he cannot see its width, None
will know of it except the one who saw it (while it was

SECTION:
Concerning the Major Resurrection

Until the major reswrrection is established...

% Concerning his statement: “Until the major resurrection
is established.”

The Commentary

The major resurrection is when the people will stand
from the graves before the Lord of the Worlds. The
author, may Allah have mercy upon him, indicated to
us with his statement “the major resurrection” that there
is a minor resurrection. This is the resurrection of every
person individually, because every person has his own
resurrection. So whoever dies will be resnrrected,

The author, may Allah have mercy upon him,
remained silent about the signs of the Hour. He did
not mention them, because he only wanted to discuss
the Last Day. The signs of the Hour are only but signs
and warnings concerning the neamess of the Hour, so
that whoever wants to be prepared for it will be able to
do so. Some of the people of knowledge who have
written books on the matters of creed have mentioned
the signs of the Last Hour here. The reality is that it
does not have a connection to faith in the Last Day,

Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah ALWe

soul are not matters that can be seen, Therefore, matters of
the unseen should not be compared to matters of the seen.
So the authentic texts should not be rejected because it
seems perplexing to us based on what is seen.

Conceming the Major Resurrection 187

‎the‏ ها ‎his statement: “The souls will be returned back‏ صل ي
‎bodies” is evidence that the resurrection is a restoration.‏
‎(of the bodies) and not a renewal; it is restoration of‏
‎what had disappeared and changed. ‘This is because the‏
‎body will transform into soil, and the bones will decay.‏
‎Then Allah, Exalted is He, will gather these separated‏
‎pieces, until it forms into a body; then the souls will be‏
‎returned to their bodies. But as for those who think that‏
‎the bodics will be created anew, this opinion is false,‏
‎and refuted by the Qur’an, Sunnah, and the intellect.‏

‎- As for the Book, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, says:
4And He it is Who originates the creation, then will

‎repeal it (after it has been perished), and this is easter
for Him} (Ar-Riim 30:27)

‎Meaning: Ie will repeat the creation which He originated.

‎And in the Al-Qudsi Hadith: “ Allah says: ‘The First creation
is not easier for me than its repetition.”"

‎And everything is easy for Allah.
He, Exalted is He, says:

‎4As We began the first creation, We shall repeat it.»
(AL-Anbiya’ 217104)

‎And He, Exalted is He, says:

‎MM Reported by Al-Bukhari (4974) from Aba Hurairah, may
Allah be pleased with him.

‎Commentary on Ab‘Agidah ALWasitiyyal

‎even if it is among the matters of the unseen that Allah
has indicated in the Qur‘an and has been explained by
the Prophet # in the Sianali.

‎oo

‎Then, the souls will be returned back to the bodies...

‎% The First Event to occur during the Resurrection

‎‘This is what the author indicated in his statement: “Then,

‎the souls will be returned back to the budies”; this is the first
event.

‎© This will occur after the second blow into the Trumpet.
This will be after it (the soul) has separated from it (the
body) due to death. This is not the return of the soul
that will take place in the Barzakh, when the dead
person will be questioned regarding his Lord, his
religion and his Prophet. Alldh will order, Israfil to blow
into the Trumpet, and everyone in the heavens and on
the earth will perish, except for whom Allah has willed.
Then, he will blow it for a second lime. The souls will
fly from the Trumpet to their bodies and enter into
them.

‎In the author's statement: "15 the bodies” there is an
indication that the souls will not leave the Trumpet
until the bodies have been completely formed. When
their formation is complete, he will blow into the
Trumpet, and the souls will return to their bodies.

Concerning the Major Resurrection 189

resurrected, will be separated from all these things which it
was mixed with. The capability of Allah is greater than
what we can imagine. Allah is able to do all things.

And the Resurrection that Allah informed of in His Book,
on the tongue of His Messenger, and as agreed upon by the
Muslims will be established...

* His statement: “And the Resurrection that Allah informed
of in His Book, on He tongue of His Messenger, and as
agreed upon by the Muslims will be established.”

These are three types of evdience: ‘Ihe Book of Allah,

Exalted is He, the Sunnah of His Messenger #%, and the

lima’ (consensus) of the Muslims. As for the Book of Allah,

Exalted is He - Allah, Exalted is He, has emphasized this

Resurrection in His Book. Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,

mentions it with terrifying descriptions necessitating fear

and preparation for it.

He, Exalted is He, says:

1 ‏ري‎ 5 4 Att pecere oe
Je. Ai Gna Te cea Jee J a ‏َم‎

188 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

After that, surely, you will die. Then (again), surely,
you will be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection.»
(Al-Muriniin 23-15-16)

And He, Exalted is He, says:

the ge Ko
Who will give life to these bones when they have rotted
away and became dust? Say: “He will give life to them
Who created them for the first time! And He is the All
Knower of every creation!" (Yasin 36:78-79)

— As for the Sunnah, there are many narrations concerning
this. The Prophet # explained that: “The people will be
raised bare-foot, naked and uncircumcised,”!!)

This shows that the same people will be raised, not other
than them.

What is important is thal, the resurrection is the resurrec-
tion of the previous bodies.

‎If you say: Perhaps a person was devoured by a‏ ف
‎predatory animal, after which the body of this person‏
‎will become nourishment for this predator, mix with its‏
‎blood, flesh, and bones, and later be released in the‏
‎form of its dung and urine, what is the response to this?‏

‎The answer: The matter is easy for Allah, He will just say
“Be” and it will be. Thereafter, this body, that will be

‎©] Based on the report of Al-Bukhari (3349, 3447) and Muslim
(2860) from Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased him, who said:
“The Messenger of Allah # stood among us giving a sermon.
and he said: ’O People! You shall be raised unto Allah bare-
footed, naked and uncircumcised.”

ee

190 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyoh Concerning the Major Resurrection

won we ee Resurrection are many. The Messenger ‏د‎ explained it and

CG gah Ste what will transpire concerning, it, as it will - Allah willing -

40 mankind! Have Taqwa of you Lord! Verily, the soon be mentioned relating to Hawd, the Sirat, the Book,

earthquake of the Hour is a terrible thing. The Day you and the other than that which te Messenger 3 explained.

shall see it, every nursing mother will forget her — As for the Ind’ (consensus) - and it is the third category -

nursling, and every pregnant one will drop her load, the Muslims unanimously agree on the belief in the Last

and you shall see mankind as in a drunken state, yet Day. Thal is why, whoever rejects it, then he is a

they will not be drunken, but severe will be the Torment 1 disbeliever, except if he is new to Islam or he is ignorant;

of Allah.» (Al-Hajj 22:1-2) 1 then he is fo be educated. If he persists in rejection, after
And He, Exalted is He, says: this, he is a disbeliever.

- There is a fourth category of evidence here; they are the

Heavenly Revealed Books, since they all agree on the Last

<the Reality! What is the Reality? And what will make Day. That is why the Jews and the Christians believe in it

you knew what the Reality is?» (Al-Haggah 69:1-3) Even until now, they believe in it. That is why you hear

them saying; “So-and-so, upon whom is mercy” or “May
Allah have mercy on hinv” or the like, which shows that
they believe in the Last Day until this very day.

- Then, there is the fifth category, and it is the intellect.
The basis of that, is if this Day is not to be established,
bringing, the creation into existence would be mere play,
and Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is absolutely free from
frivolity. Then, what is the wisdom behind the creation of

And He, Exalted is He, says:

4AL-Qari‘al. (the striking Hour). Whal is Al-Qari‘ah?
And what will make you know what Al-Qari‘ah is? It is

a Day whereon mankind will be like moths scattered people, commanding them and prohibiting them; they are

about. And the mowntains will be like carded tvool.> compelled to do some things, and highly encouraged. to do

(Al-Qari‘ah 101:1-5) others, then when they die, there will be no reckoning or
punishment?!

Its descriptions in the Qur’an are many; all of them are

dreadful and frightening because they are tremendous. If That is why Allah, Exalted is He, says:

we do not believe in it, we will never work towards it, EGS 0 ‏لا معن‎ Sy ons

because it is not possible for man to prepare for this Day oe Tt Beek

antil he believes in it, and until he is reminded of its Kyte ‏إلا هر ب السرش‎

descriptions, which will lead hii to prepare for it "Did you think that We had created you in play

— As for the Sunnah, the Hadiths mentioning the Day of (without any purpose), and that you would not be

* م م مسب سسسيسوس تسو سسؤي ؤس ؤس ةس اةاساسادل

Concerning the Major Resurrection 193

© The Second Event to occur on the Day of Resurrection

... NIE ALE Te ‏الْعَالِمِينَ‎ Ol wast ‏الثّامن من‎ et
Then people will stand front their graves before the Lord of
the worlds, bare-footed, naked and uncircumcised...

‘That is what he indicated in his statement; “Then people will
stand from their graves before the Lord of the worlds, bare-
footed, naked and uncircumcised.”

& His statement: “From their graves:" This is based on
what is the majority, since a person may have not been
buried.

@ His statement: “Before the Lord of the worlds.” That is
because Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, will call them.
Allah, Exalted is He, says:

jal BIN G5 © ‏قرب‎ y

And listen on the Day when the caller will call frow a
near place. The Day when they will hear As-Saihalt
(shout, etc.) in truth, that will be the Day of coming
out (from the graves ie. the Day of Resurrection). »

(Qaf 50:41-42)
Then, they will stand up from their graves before their
Lord, the Mighty and Sublime, due to this tremendous call.
Allah, Blessed and Exalted is He, says:

he

7
oh ‏لناس‎

192 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wiasitiyyah
brought back to Us?” So Exalted be Allah, the True
King, La Haha Ila Huwa (none deserves to be wor-

shipped but He), the Lord of the Supreme Throne! (Al-
Mu’mintin 23 :115-116)

He, Exalted is He, also says:
‏لسع‎ a
‏ماو‎ Sy SSS ON Ot ‏الى فَرْضَ‎ >
4Verily, He who has given you the Qur'an, will surely

bring you back to the place of return.» -
‏يد‎ place of return} [AI-Qasas

How will the Qur'an be given and acting upon it be
commanded, then, there will not be any where to return to,
where we will be reckoned for how we obeyed this Qur’an
which was obligated upon us? With this, the types of proof
that affirm the Last Day are five.

Concerning the Major Resurrection 195

gyi Bi 0 185 aes © adi ath 0

k ‏أ‎ si ‏من‎ tell Fi
That Day shall a man flee from his brother. And from
his mother and his father. And from his wife and his
children. Everyman, that Day, will have enough to
make him careless of others.» (‘Abasa 80:34-37)

No man will look at a woman, nor will any woman look at
a man; so much that his son or his father shall flee from
him, from the fear of his demanding some of his rights
{from them). If this will be the case, then it is not possible
that a woman will look at a man, nor a man look at a
woman. The matter shall be too critical and worrisome.

However, after all of this, they will be clothed. The first
person to be clothed is Ibrahim, may the Salah and Salam be

gM

upon him, as has been established from the Prophet i.

@ The Third Event that will occur on the Day of
Resurrection

And then, the Sun will draw close to them...

wan PD nnncere

That is what is referred to in his statement: “And then, the
Sun will draw close to them.”

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (3349) and Muslim (2860) from Tbn
‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him.

194 Commentary on Al‘Aqidah ALWasitiyyah

Think they not that they will be resurrected, On a@
Great Day. The Day when mankind will stand before
the Lord of the ‘Alamin (mankind, Jinus and all that
exists)? (Al-Mutaffifin 83:4-6)

‘? His statement: “Bare-footed, naked and uncircumcised”;
“Bare-footed :” Without shoes, or leather socks; meaning
that they do not have any foot wear,

“Naked :” They will not have any clothing of the body
upon them.

© “Uncircumcised’’ (Ghurlan): Nothing will reduce from
their creation. Al-Ghurl is the plural of Aghral, and he is
the one who is uncircumcised. That is, the foreskin cut
off in the life of this world will be returned to them on
the Day of Resurrection, for Allah says:

5 ut Wi ‏ددس‎ re
4 GES GES
4As We began the first creation, We shall repeat it.>
{AL Anbiya’ 21:104)

So he will be retumed completely intact. Nothing will be
missing from his creation, They will be returned in this
fashion, congregating together, men and women.

When the Prophet ‏عه‎ was narrating this, ‘Aishah (out of
amazement) said: “O the Messenger of Allah! Will the men
and women be looking at one another?!" Ile answered
(saving): “The matter will be too terrible for anybody to be
concerned about that (in a narration: looking at one
another)."1]

Every person will have enough worries to concern himself
with:

Al Reported by Al-Bukhari (6527), and lhe second report is in
Mustim (2859), from ‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her.

ظ
|

Concerning the Major Resurrection 197

people (as they are) now were to stand in the Sun, for fifty
days, without shade, food, and drink, they will not be able
to do that. Rather, they will perish! But on the Day of
Resurrection, they will remain under the Sun for fifty
thousand years; no food, no drink, and no shade except the
one which Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, provides shade
for. Yet in addition to this, they will experience other
horrible situations; yet, they will still be able to withstand
all of this.

Look at the residents of the Fire, how they will be able to
absorb such great punishments:

COG IG whe ‏(غا تنبت‎
4As often as their skins are roasted through, We shall
change them for other skins.) (An-Nisa’ 4:56)

And concerning the residents of Paradise, a person will
look at his dominion, which is the distance of a thousand
years to its end, and likewise will he look at its beginning
as it has been reported from the Prophet 3.7"

* If it is said: Will anyone be safe from the Sun?

% The answer: Yes! There are some people whom Allah
will provide shade for under His shade on the Day
when there will be no shade except His shade, as the
Prophet ‏قله‎ informed: “A just leader, a young person
who grows up in the obedience of Allah, a man whose
heart is attached to the Masjids, two people who love
each other for Allah’s sake; they gather on this basis
and part on the same, and a man who, when he is

"Reported by Ahmad (2:64), At-Tirmidhi (2553) and Al-
Hakim (2:509) and graded weak by Al-Albani in Ad-Da‘yfah
(1985),

196 Commentary on AlAgidah Al-Wasitiyyah

% “Draw close: meaning, the sun will move close to
them, and will draw near to them the distance of a Mil
(mile).

This Mii (mile), whether m terms of the distance or in terms
of the length of a koh stick, il is near." As scorching as it
is in this world, and between it and us there is such an
unimaginable distance; then what will happen when it
draws close over our heads the distance of a mile?!)

“ Someone may say: What is well known is that if the
Sun should draw closer to the earth the distance of a
hair from its course, the entire earth would be
incinerated. Then, how will it be possible that it draws
close to this extent, and the people will not be
incinerated?

In response to that, (we say): People will not be raised on
the Day of Resurrection with the strength which they have
now. Then, they will be stronger and more durable. If

© ‘Translation note: That is, Sulaim bin ‘Amit, who narrated the
Hadith from Al-Miqdad, whose reference follows, said: “By
Allah! I do not know what he meant by the word Mit - was it
a measure of distance or the stick which is used to apply
kohl to the eyes,” because that stick was also called Mi,
As is reported in Muslim (2864) from the Hadith of Al-
Miqdad bin Al-Aswad who said: "I heard the Messenger of
Allah 3% saying: ‘The sun shall be brought close to the
creation on the Day of Judgment, until it will be like the
distance of a Mil, and the people shall sweat to the degree of
their deeds; among them are those who it will reach their
ankles, and among them are those who it will reach their
knees, and among them those who it will reach their groin
area, and among them are those who will be bridied by the
sweat’ And the Messenger of Allah #% pointed with his
hand to his mouth.”

Concerning the Major Resurrection 199

@ The Fourth Event that will occur on the Day of
Resurrection

Aeaek pad Tee
And they will be bridled with sweat...

a

‘This is what is referred to by the author, may Allah have
mercy upon him, in his statement: “And they will be bridled
with sweat.”

«+ “Bridle: meaning, to the place of the rein of a horse,
and il is the mouth.

© However, this is the peak of where the sweat will
reach, For some of them, the sweat will reach their
ankles, some to their knees, some to their groin, are and
some will be bridled by it. They ate different in the
degree at which they will be immersed in sweat. They
will sweat due to the severity of the heat, because then
the situation will be one of absolute congestion, and the
Sun will be near. As a result, a man will sweat because
of what will happen that day; but each according to his
deeds.!"]

Lf you ask: How will that be, vet they are in one place?

The response: We have previously established a principle

that is necessary to retum to, and that is that in the case of
matters of the unseen, it is obligatory for us to believe in

them, and attest to them without saying: “How?! Why?!”

Because it is something we cannot fathom, and it is not
possible for us to grasp it or encompass it.

17 Sce earlier.

Commentary on Al-‘Ayidal: Al-Wisitiyyah

called by a woman of social dignity and who possesses
wealth (to adultery) says: ‘I fear Allah; and a man who
gives charity, and hides it so much that the left hand
does not know what the right hand spends, and a man
who while alone, remembers Allah, and his eyes are
flooded with tears,”

There are some other categories of people whom Allah will
provide shade for on the Day when there will be no shade
except His shade.

*% His statement: “No shade except his shade” That is the
shade which He will create, not as has been wrongly
assumed by some people that it refers to the shadow of
the essence of the Lord, the Mighty and Sublime,
because this is false. This is because that will suggest
that the Sun will then be above Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.

In this world’s life, we have our shadows, but on the Day of

Resurrection, there will not be any shade except the shade

which He, Glorious and Exalted is He, will create to shade

those whom He wills among His slaves.

1 Reported by Al-Bukhari (660) and Muslim (1031) from Abu
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Major Resurrection 201
© = The Fifth Event from what will happen on the Day of
Resurrection

Then, the Scales will be raised, and with them. the deeds of
the slaves will be weighed...

This is indicated by his saying: “Then, the Scales will be
raised, and with them, the deeds of the slaves will be weighed.””

‎The one to raise the Scales is Allah, the Mighty and‏ جه
‎Sublime, to weigh the deeds of the slaves.‏

‎© The author said: “The Seales’; in plural form. The texts
have related it both in plural and singular forms. An
example of when it is mentioned in the plural form, is
the statement of Allah, Exalted is He:

‎And We shall set up Scales of justice on the Day of
Resurrection.» (Al-Anbiyi’ 21:47)

‎He, Exalted is He, says:

‎will be the true (weighing). So as for those whose Scale
(of good deeds) will be heavy, they will be the successful
(by entering Paradise), And as for those whose Scale
will be light, they are those who will lose their
ownselves (by entering Hell).» (ALA ‘rif 7:8-9)

‎200 Commentary on Al-'Agitah Al-Wisitiyyah

‎Tell me! If two men are buried in a grave, one of them is a
believer while the other is a disbeliever. Then, the believer
will enjoy the delights that he is entitled to, while the
disbeliever will experience the punishment which he is
entitled to, yet they are in the same grave. ‘the same thing
happens regarding the different degrees at which people
will be immersed in sweat on the Day of Judgment.

‎If you ask: Are you saying that Allah, Glorious and
Exalted is He, will gather those that will be bridled in
sweat in one place, those submerged to the ankles in
another place, those submerged to the knees in another
place and those submerged to the groin area also in a
different place?

‎The answer: We cannot say this with certainty. Allah
knows best. We will rather say: It is possible that those
soaked to the ankles are besides those completely
submerged; Allah is capable of all things. This is just like
the example of the light which the believers will possess; it
(the light) will shine before them due to their faith while the
disbelievers will be in darkness.

‎Regarding the Day of Resurrection, it is obligatory upon us
to believe in it, and whatever will happen then. But as for
asking: “How?!” “Why?!” This is not for us.

Concerning the Major Resurrection 203

# His statement: “the Scales will be raised: The apparent
meaning is that they are real Scales and that the Scale
will be according to a well-known, conventional scale
with two hanging pans. That is because the basis of
every word mentioned in the Book and the Sunnah is to
be understood according to the well-known conven-
tional usage, except if there is a proof to establish
otherwise. Based on this, what is well-known and
conventional to those addressed since the time the
Qur'an was revealed, until this time, is that the Scales
are real, and that there are two hanging pans for it.

Some groups disagree on this:

— The Mu‘tazilali said: There is not going to be a scale that

can be sensed; there is no need for that, because Allah,

Exalted is He, is All-Aware of the deeds of His slaves, and

has taken record of them. But what is intended by the Scale

is the figurative scale, and that is justice and fairness.

There is no doubt that the position of the Mu‘tnzilah is
baseless, because it opposes the apparent meaning of the
word and the ‏“قدا‎ (consensus) of the Salaf. And if we say
what is intended by the Scale is justice and fairness, then
there is no need to use the term “Scale” to express that; we
should have rather said “justice and fairness” because it is
mote beloved to the soul than the word Scale. ‘hat is why
Allah, Exalted is He, says:

Verily, Allah enjoins Al-‘Adi (justice) and Al-Ihsau
(beneficence}. s(An-Nahl 16:90)

— Some of the scholars say that the weighticr pan is the one
that raises the higher of the two, because loftiness is exhibited
by it. But what is correct is that we understand the Scale in its

202 Commentary on AL'Agidah ALWiasitiyyal

As for when it is mentioned in the singular, its example is
as follows:

The Prophet # said: “Two statements are beloved to the
Merciful Lord, light on the longue, heavy on the Scale:
‘Subhan Alldhi wa Bihamdihi, Subhdna Allahil-'Azim (Glor-
ious is Allah and to Him be praise; Glorious is Allah, the
Great).""1!

So, he said: “On the Scale” in the singular form.

How do we then reconcile between the Aydf of the Qur’an
and this Hadith?!

In response, we say: It is plural regarding what is weighed
(deeds) since they are more than one, and it is singular
relating to the fact that the Scale is just one, or (it refers to)
the Scale of every Ummah.

Or what is intended by the “Scale” mentioned in his saying
2%. “Heavy on the Scale” is concerning the weight. But
what is more apparent — Allah knows best - is that the
Scale is just one, it is just plural in reference to what is
weighed, and the proof for that is His statement:

450 as for those whose Scales (of good ‘deeds) will be
heavy.» (AL-Arif 7:8)

However, one may pause and ask: Will there be just one
Scale for ail the nations, or will each nation have its own
Scale, because the nations as indicated to and established
by textual facts, are different in the relation ‏ها‎ their
rewards?!

™ Reported by Al-Bukhari (6406) and Muslim (2694) from Aba
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Major Resurrection 205

He, says:
‏يضدر‎ bY 0 ‏لها‎ 5H

عي ‎ek tees‏ ملم

‎Day mankind will proceed in scattered groups‏ لفك
‎that they may be shown their deeds. So whosoever does‏
‎good equal to the weight of an atom {or a small ant),‏
‎shall see it, And whosoever does evil equal ta the weight‏
‎of an atom (or a small ant), shall sce it.» (Az-Zalzalah‏
)99:6-8

‎This is clear, that what will be weighed is the deeds,
whether righteous or evil,

‎And the Prophet i said: “Two statements are beloved to
the Merciful Lord, light on the tongue, heavy on the
Scale’)

‎This is apparent as well; rather it is clear, that what will be
weighed is the deed. The texts regarding this are many.

‎However, there are some other texts whose apparentness
appear contradictory to this Hadith.

‎— Among them is the Hadith of man of the card. It is the
story of a man which shall be brought forward before all
creation, when his deeds will be presented to him in scrolls
that are up to ninety-nine; each of the scrolls will extend as
far as the eye can see. And he would acknowledge that.
‘Lhen it will be said to him; “Do you have an excuse or any
Hasanah (good merit)?” He would reply: “No, my Lord?”
Allah will then say: “Indeed, you do have a Hasanah with
us.” Then a very small card will be brought, in it is: “T
testify that none deserves to be worship except Allah, and I

‎101 Ts reference preceded, and it is in the Two Sahiis.

‎204 Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎apparent implication, and as such, we say the weightier pan
is the one that drops the lower of the two. This is indicated by
the Hadith about the man of the card, because it in it, the
records are light while the card is heavy; so it is is clear that
the weightier pan is the one.that drops lower,

‎% His saying: “Then, the deeds of the slaves will be weighed
with i: Uhe author's saying is clear, that what will be
weighed is the deeds.

‎There are two subjects here:

‎The first subject: How will the deeds be weighed while the
deed is just a description maintained for the doer, it is not a
physical body that can be weighed?!

‎The response of that is to say that Allah, Glorious and
Exalted is He, will transform these deeds into physical
bodies. This does not sound odd or impossible giving
consideration to the power and ability of Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime. It has a similitude, and that is death; it shall
be transformed into a ram and slaughtered between
Paradise and Hell," while death is abstract, and not a
physical being. What will be slaughtered is not the Malak
Al-Mawt (the Angel of Death), but it is death itself, since
Allah will convert it to a body to be seen, and witnessed,
the same thing goes for the deeds, Allah will convert them
into physical beings that will be weighed on this Scale that
inay be sensed,

‎The second subject: What is clear from the author's
statement is that what will be weighed is the deeds,
whether righteous or evil.

‎This is what is apparent in the Qur'an, as Allah, Exalted is

‎o

‎Asit came in Sulttr Al-Bukhrt (4730) and Muslim (2849) from
Abu Sa’id Al-Khudn, may Allah be please with him.

Concerning the Major Resurrection 207

other Companions, may Allah be pleased with them all,
began to laugh. And then, the Prophet 4% said: “Why are
you laughing.” They answered: “Because of the thinness of
his shins.” Ele said: “I swear by the One in Whose Hand
my soul is, they (the two shins) are weightier on the scale
than (mount) Uhud.”"]

With this, we have three things: The deed, the doer, and the
scrolls.

— Some of the scholars said that the way to harmonize
them is to say that there are some people whose deeds will
be weighed, some will have their scrolls weighed, and
others will be weighed themselves.

— Some others reconciled between them by saying it
should be said that what is intended by weighing the deeds
is that the deeds will be weighed, and they are m the
scrolls; by this, it only weighing the doers remains, and that
will be for some people.

— But with examination, we discover that most of the texts
prove that what will be weighed is the deed, while some
people are specified in the sense that the records of their
deeds will be weighed, or them themselves. So as for what
is related in the Hadith of Ibn Mas‘ad and the Hadith of the
man with the card, it could be a matter which Allah
specified for whom He wills among His

849

Reported by Ahmad (1:421) and in Majma’ Az-Zawd’id (9:289),
Al-Haithami said: “Reported by Ahmad, Aba Ya‘la, Al-
Bazzar, and At-Jabarani from different routes, and the best of
it is that with ‘Asim bin Abi An-Najud and his reports are
Hasan despite his weakness, and the rest of the narrators of
Ahmad and Aba Ya‘ala are narrators of the ‏“لمي‎

206 Commentary on Ab‘Agidal Al-Wasifiuyah

also testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.” He
would say: “O my Lord, what benefit is this card before
these scrolls?!” It will be said to hiny “You shall not be
wrongs

He said: “Then the scrolls will be placed on a pan, and the
card will also be placed on the other pan. The scrolls will be
lighter while the card will be heavier." What is apparent
from this, is that the scrolls of the deeds are weighed.

— There are some other texts that prove what will be
weighed is the doer. An example of this is His statement,
Fxalted is He:

‎lt dp‏ كأ يت تزيم يايد لبك ‎A‏ كن
‎ol 5‏ 4

‎They are those who deny the Aydt of their Lord and
the Meeting with Him (in the Hereafter). So their works
are in vain, and on the Day of Resurrection, We shall
not give them any weight.» [Al-Kahf 18.105]

‎Even though an argument can be made against using this
Ayah for such proof, by saying that the meaning of His
statement: «We shall not give then weight) is: “We shall
not give them any worth or value.”

‎And an example is affirmed in the Hadith of Ibn Mas‘id,
may Allah be pleased with him, that he was searching for a
Situak of Arak, and he, may Allah be pleased with him, had
thin shins, then the wind started blowing him aside. The

‎™ Reported by Ahmad (2:213), At-Tirmidhi (2639) and he
graded it Hasan, Ibn Majah (4300), and AlHakim in Al
Mustadrak (1:529), and he said: “It is Salih according to the
conditions of Muslim,” and Adh-Dhahabi agreed, and Al-
Albani graded it Saluk in As-Sahitah (135). And AL-Hafic
Hamzah Al-Kannani has a book called juz’ Al-Bifigah.

Concerning the Major Kesurrection 209

and the description.

% ‘Ihe successful one is he who succeeds in his goals and
escapes from his fears. He attains safety from what he
abhors and achieves what he adores.

% What is intended by the weight of the Scales is the
dominance of righteous good deeds over the evil
deeds.

* Concerning his statement: “(He, Exalted is He, says:)
Then, he whose Scales are heavy, they are those who are
the successful.>” Therein is a complexity from the
perspective of Arabic linguistic analysis. This is
because ¢He whose scales» contains a third person
singular and ¢They are those who are the successful>
contains a third person ‏السام‎

The response conceming this is Man (the ‘Arabic word
meaning ‘who’) which is a conditional element, can be used
for both singular and plural. Hence, with the consideration
of the wording, the pronoun refers to it as singular, but
with the consideration of the meaning, the pronoun refers
to it as plural.

Anytime, Man (who) is used, it is possible that the pronoun
that comes after it is singular or plural. Examples of this are
many in the Qur'an. Allah, Fxalted is He, says:

CW Ge ‏من‎ of oS LD ‏وَل‎
‎48) ‏أله لم‎ AS ‏دا‎ 1 Ci Sue

And Mai (whosoever) believes in Allah and performs
righteous good deeds, He will admit him infu Gardens
under which rivers flow (Paradise), to dwell therein
forever. Allah has indeed granted for him an excellent
provision .» (At-Talaq 65:11)

6 م 0

Commentary on Ab‘Aqidah ALWasitiyyalr

Then, those whose Scales ave heavy, these, they are the
successful. And those whose Scales are light, they are
those who lose their own selves, in Hell will they
abide.» (ALMu’minin 23:102-103)...

ال ‎Se‏ الس

* Concerning his statement: “(He, Exalted is He, says:)
ean pe ete

##قمن القلت ‎Kase‏ رليك هم لْمْفيحُونَ 4

4Then, those whose ‘ens are heavy, these, they are the
successful.) (Al-Mu‘mintin 23 :102).””

& Whose} is a conditional element.

% The reply to the conditional element is the sentence:
They are those who are the successful.»

The main clause is related in the form of a nominal clause,
while specifying that clause, ¢They are those who are the
successfitl, and meanwhile, the nominal clause expresses
emphasis and continuity.

There is also a demonstrative pronoun, which indicates
distance: <Those.» He did not only say: “They are the
successful.” He used it in this form to indicate their
exalted status.

Tt also expresses specificity, by the use of <They} which is
a demonstrative pronoun that is used to express specifi-
city and emphasis, and separation between the predicate

Concerning the Major Resurrection 211

even what they gave to people to detive benefit by it - it
does not benefit them - as Ee, Exalted is Ile, says:

os fy ues

¢And nothing prevents their contributions from being
accepted from them except that they disbelieved in Allah
and in His Messenger.» (At-Tawhah 9:54)

They lost their families because they shall enter the Tire,
and a dweller in the Fire cannot socialize with his family.
Rather, he will be caged in a box, and will not think anyone
is experiencing a punishment worse than him.

*% What is intended by the lightness of the Scale is the
dominance of evil deeds over the righteous good
deeds, or the lack of righteous good deeds entirely. If
we say that the disbelievers’ deeds shall be weighed, as
is the apparent implication. of this noble Ayal and its
like, then it is one of the two sayings of the people of
knowledge.

The second saying is that the disbelievers will not have
their deeds weighed, according to His statement, Exalted is

Say: “Shall We tell you the greatest | losers int respect
of (their) deeds? Those whose efforts have been wasted in
this life while they thought that they were acquiring
good by their deeds! They are those who deny the Ayat
of their Lord and the Meeting with Him (in the
Hereafter). So their works are in vain, and on the Day

20 Commentary on Al‘Agidah Al-Wasttiyyah

So you find that in this noble Ayah, the first part of it relates
to what is said (which is the apparent inference contained
in the use of the grammatical particle Man (wha)), then to
the meaning (which is expressed from the use of the
grammatical particle, Man (who)) then to what is said, once
again.

 Conceming his statement: “(He, Exalted is He, says:)

AG tent ‏سم مع صم‎
SaaS oh agh ay cae ‏وك‎
‎rae

os:

And those whose Scales are light, they are those who
lose their own selues, in Hell will they abide.» (Al-
Mu’mindn 23:103).”

The demonstrative pronoun expressing distance is used
here to express the inferiority of their status; not the
loftiness of their status.

His statement: They lose their own selves.» The
disbeliever has lost his own self, his family and his
wealth.

Loge
ti
Say: “The losers are those who will lose themselves
and their families on the Day of Resurrection. (Az-

Zumar 39:15)

In contrast, the believer who performs good deeds has
profited for himself, his family and his wealth and
benefited from that.

These disbelievers lose their selves because they did not
benefit from anything during their existence in this worldly
life; rather they gained nothing but distress and hardship.
They lost their wealth because they did not benefit from it,

22 Commentary on AL-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah . Concerning the Major Resurrection 213

of Resurrection, We shall not give them seight.’”
(AL-Kaif 18:103-105) 8 any weighty & The Dawawin (records) is the plural of Diwan

5 3 (record). This refers to the records where the deeds
And Allah knows best. are recorded. From the examples of these records are

Bait AlL-Mal and its like.

He said: “They are the pages containing the deeds.” That
is, in which the Angels, who are entrusted with taking
records of man’s deeds, recorded. Allah, Exalted is He,
١ says:
‏قال‎ US ‏ظَيْر؛‎ 5 be Gl 1 45h ‏علو ما‎
Nay! But you deny the Recompense (reward for good
deeds and punishment for evil deeds), But verily, over
‏سم فى‎ ae you to watch you; are Kirdtnan (honorable) Katibin
DET ‏الاسراء:‎ ins de ' Qoriting den) (your deeds). They know all Hat you
And the Dawiwin (records) will be spread, They are the 4 do. (Al-Infitar 82:9-12)
Pages containing the deeds. So one takes his book with his
right hand, and one takes his book with left hand, or from
behind his back. As He, Glorious and Exalted is He, says:
«And We have fastened every man’s deeds (Tiirahu) to
his neck, and on the Day of Resurrection, We shall
bring out for him a book which he will find wide open. 9 vet Ks
(lt will be said to him): “Read your book. You arc te BLE SS
sufficient as 6 reckoner against yourself this ‏يوط‎ 4And We have fastened every man's deeds (Ta'irahu) to
(AHsra’ 17:13-140..,, his neck, and on the Day of Resurrection, We shall
bring out for him a book which he will find wide open.
(It will be said to him): “Read your book, You are
sufficient as a reckoner against yourself this Day.”
That is, what the author mentioned, in his statement: “And ‏سور‎ 17:13-14) 0 1 J “
the records will be spread.”

a oe ee

© = The Sixth Event that will occur on the Day of Judgment

This deed is written down and recorded and will be hung
on man’s neck on the Day of Resurrection, so All4h will
bring out this record. He, Exalted is He, says:

5 2 8 508 Some of the Salaf said: “He who makes you a reckoner of
> “Spread :” Meaning; distributed to, and opened for, the your own self, ifs indeed been fair to you”

one to read it,
‘* What will be written in the scrolls are deeds is either

Concerning the Major Resurrection 218

you have attained what they achieved with their deeds.”
And this is justice, and faimess; the one whe performed the
action is not like the one who did not, but he is just like him
in terms of the intention.

— But as for Al-Hammia (the concern to do), it is divided
into two categories:

The first one; that he wants to do something, and does
what he is able of it, then a barrier comes belween it and
him, preventing him from completing it.

This individual will have the complete reward written
down for him. ‘This is according to His statement, Exalted is

And whosoever leaves his home as an Emigrant to
Allah and His Messenger, and death overtakes him, his
reward is then surely incumbent upon Allah.» (An-
Nisa’ 4:100)

This is glad tidings for the students of knowledge. If
someone has the intention of acquiring knowledge in order
to benefit people with it, to defend the Sunnuh of the
Messenger a and spread the religion of Allah on the earth,
but it is not decreed for him, because he dies, for example,
while he is still searching for the knowledge; definitely the
reward of what he intended and worked towards will be
written down for him.

Even, if one usually performs an act of worship, and then
could not perform it for a time due to some reason, the
reward of it will still be recorded for him. The Prophet #4
said: “If a slave becomes ill or travels, the like of what he
usually does (of good deeds) while a resident and healthy

Coramentary on Ale‘Agulah Al-Wasitiyynh

the Hasandt (good merits) or the Say’at (evil records).
The Hasanat to be written are what the person did,
what he intended to do, and what he wanted to do.
These are three things:

— As for what he does (of good deeds), it is clear that this
will be recorded,

-~ But as for what he intended to do, it will also be written
down for him, but only the complete reward of the
intention will be written down for him, as in the Sahih
Hadith concerning the story of a man who possesses wealth
and spends it in the path of good, and a poor man says: “If
I had money, 1 would spend it the way such-and-such has
spent it.” The Prophet # said: “This is his intention, so
both of them have the same reward.’!"

What proves that they are not equal in having the same
rewards for the deed, is that the poor among the Muhajiriin
(Emigrants) came to meet with the Prophet 3% and said: “O
the Messenger of Allah! The wealthy ones have surpassed
us.” He said to them: “Say: ‘Subhana Allah and Al-Hamudu
Hilldh and Allahu Akbar, thirty-three times cach, after every
Salitt’

Wher the wealthy ones learned of this, they also started
doing the same thing. Then, the poor went back to lodge
their complaint to the Messenger ‏,فيه‎ He said to them: “That
is the favor of Allah; He bestows it upon whom He
wills" He did not say: “Indeed you, with your intention,

"A part of the Hadith reported by Ahmad (4:320), At-Tirmidha
(2325), and Ibn Majah (4228) from Aba Kabshah Al-Aumari
And At-Tirmidhi said: “This is a Hasan Salih Hadtth."” And
AL-Albant graded it Sabir in Salih Al-Jami’ 3024).

121 Reported by Al-Bukhari (843) and Muslim (595) from the
narration uf Abi Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Major Resurrection 217

So he has his same intention, so their sin, is the same."

If he wants to perform an act of evil, but later forsakes it,
then this is divided into three categories:

1. If he forsakes it out of incapability, his case is like one
who has performed it, provided he has striven to
perform it.

If he forsakes it for the sake of Allah, he will be
rewarded for that.

If he forsakes it because his soul turns away from it, or
because it does not cross his mind again; he will neither
incur any sin nor earn any reward.

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, awards more IJasandt than
the deeds performed, But He will only recompense an evil
deed with its like, Allah says:

9. ok gt

<Whoever brings a good, he shall have ten times the like
thereof to his credit, and whoever brings un evil, he
shall have only the recompense of the like thereof, and
they will not be wronged.> (Al-An’an 6:160)

This is out of His generosity, the Mighty and Sublime, and

because His mercy has preceded His anger.

Concerning his statement: “So one takes his book with his
right hand: “One takes his book” is a subject; its
predicate is deliberately omitted. The implication is:
Among them is he who takes.

It is allowed to begin a sentence with an indefinite noun.

because it is used in a case that calls for elaboration.

Ul Tits reference preceded.

26 Commentary on AL’Agidah ALWasitiyyah

will be recorded for him.”!]

The second type: He wants to do something but leaves it
despite the fact that he has the ability to do it. He will earn
the complete reward of good intention.

But as for the Say’dt (evil records), what he does will be
written down against him. What he wants to do but could
not due to an inability on his part will also be writlen down
against him, and what he intends to do and hopes for will
also be recorded against him.

The first one: That is clear.

The second one: It will be recorded against him comple-
tely, according to the saying of the Prophet 2% “If two
Muslims face each other with their swords, the slaying and
the slain are in the Fire”

They said: “O the Messenger of Allah, we understand the
case of the slayer, but what about the state of the slain?” He
said: “Because he was determined to slay his opponent,”?1

Its example is someone who wants to drink wine, but
something disrupts his plan. He will have a complete sin
tecorded against him because he strove to do it.

Thirdly: The one who intends and hopes to do it will have
the sin recorded against him, only for his intention.
Explaining this is the Hadith of the Prophet #5 when he
mentioned a man whom Allih grants wealth, but he is
stingy with it. Then, a poor person says: “If 1 had wealth, 1
would do as has done by so and so.” The Prophet sg said

1) Reported by Al-Bukhari (2996) from Abt. Musa Al-Ash’ari,

,, may Allah be pleased with him.

Reported by Al-Bukhart G1) and Mustim (2888) from Abi
Bakrah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Major Resurrection 219

(it will be said to him); “Read your book. You yourself
are sufficient as a reckoner against you this Day.” (AE
Isra’ 17:13-14).”

‎4Ti'irahuy: meaning; his deeds, because man is either‏ يه
‎pessimistic or optimistic by way of it, and because‏
‎man flies by way of it ascending or flies by way of it‏
‎descending,”‏
‎€To his neck meaning his Ragabal (neck). This is the‏
‎strongest link that it can have with man; that is by‏
‎fastening it to his neck, because it is not possible to‏
‎separate from it, except if he is destroyed, meaning‏
‎that he will constantly be accompanied by his deeds.‏

‎And on the Day of Resurrection, it will happen as
Allah, Exalted is He, says:
We shall bring out for him a book which he will find
wide open. » (Al-Isra’ 17:13-14)

‎That is, wide-open; he does not need to tire himself out, nor

‎will he find difficulty in opening it.

‎> It will be said to him: «Read your book} and look at
what is recorded in it against you.

‎€You are sufficient as a reckoner against yourself this‏ ات
‎Day.} This is absolute justice and. fairness: to entrust‏
‎this reckoning to man hirnself.‏

‎So a person with intellect must consider what will be

‎written in this book, soon to be found on the Day of

‎Resurrection already recorded. However, there is a door

‎before us with which we can bye-pass all the evil deeds,

‎ال١‎ Translation note: That is, because “Ta’irahu’’ can means: “His
omen” or something, that flew from him.

‎218 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎Meaning, people will be divided; among them are those
who will take his beok with his right hand, and they are the
believers. This indicates the fact that the right symbolizes
honor and dignity, and that is why the believers will collect
their books with it. But the disbeliever will take his book
with his left hand, or from behind his back, as said by the
author: “So one takes Iris book with left hand.””

‎* His statement: “Or from behind his back.” “Or” is used
to express variation, and not to express doubt. So, what
is apparently understood from the statement of the
author, is that people will collect their books (on the
Day of Judgment) in three manners: With the right
hand, with the left hand, and from behind one’s back.

‎However, what is clear is that this variation is only a
variation in the descriptions. The one who will collect his
book from behind his back is also the one to collect it with
his left hand, He will collect it with the left hand while his
hand is stretched from the back. He is collecting his book
with his left hand is because he is of the people of the left.
He collects his book from behind his back because in this
worldly life, he turned away from the Book of Allah,
turning his back to it, then it becomes fair and impartial
that the Book of his deeds on the Day of Resurrection is
given to hirn from behind him. Based on this, the left hand
will be stretched out from the back. And Allah knows best.

‎@ Concerning his statement: “As He, Glorious and
Exalted is He, says:

‎And We have fastened every man's deeds (Ta’irahu) to
his neck, and on the Day of Resurrection, We shall
bring out for him a book which he will find wide open.

Concerning the Major Resurrection 221

Bul whosoever is given his Record behind his back, he
will invoke (his) destruction, and shall enter a blazing
Fire, and made to taste its burning.» (Al-Inshiqag
$4:10-12)

— As for the Suunah, a number of Hadiths are affirmed
from the Prophet #% that Allah, Exalted is He, shall take a
reckoning of the creation.

— As for the Ijma‘ (consensus); there is an agreed in the
Ummah that Allah, Exalted is He, shall take reckoning of
the creation.

— As for the intellect; it is obvious, because we are
responsible for deeds, actions, leaving some matters, and
believing in others. Intellect and wisdom demand that
whoever is responsible for deeds, then he will be taken to
account for that, and questioned about it.

“ The author's statement: “The created beings” is the
plural of creation, and it includes every creation.

But the exception is that will enter Paradise without
reckoning and punishment; as affirmed in the Two Sahihs,
that the Prophet #: saw his Ummah, and there were seventy
thousand among them that will enter Paradise without a
reckoning or punishment. They are those that do not ask
for Rugyalt to be performed on them, they do not practice
cauterization, they do not believe in omens, and they rely
upon their Lord.”

Imdm Almad reported with a good chain of transmission:
That with every one thousand (of these seventy thousand)
there is an additional increase of the seventy-thousand_?}

111 Reported by Al-Bukhari (6541) and Muslim (220) from Ibn
‘Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him.
Reported by Imam Ahmad (1:5 and 196) from Aba Bakr and
his son ‘Abdur-Rahman and in Majma’ Az-Zawaid (10:410~

220 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wiasitiyyah

and that is repentance. Once man repents to Allah, no
matter how grievous is his sin, Allah will accept his
repentance, Even if he commits the sin repeatedly and
seeks repentance from it, Allah will accept his repentance.
Therefore, the matter continues to be before us, now; so it is
incumbent upon us to be determined that nothing be
written in this book (for us) except the good deeds.

سج ع 9

© The Seventh Fvent among what will happen on the
Day of Resurrection

And Allah will take reckoning of the created beings...

That is, what the author mentioned in his statement: “And
Allah will take reckoning of the created beings.”

>» “Reckoning: The slaves’ inspection of their deeds on
the Day of Resurrection,

This is proven by the Book, the Sunnah, the Ijma*
(consensus) and the intellect:

— As for the Book, He, Exalted is He, says:

‎cee 53‏ عرس و

‎465 ‏يَاسَبْ سه‎ So de a ‏أو‎ oop

‎Then, as for him who will be given his Record in his
right hand, he surely will receive an easy reckoning.>
(Al-Inshigag 84:7-8)

‎fin $55 © GEE ‏سرك‎ 0 LEG WS a) ‏ورلا نت‎

Concerning the Major Resurrection

4Whom no man or finn Yatmithhunna thas entered by
intercourse) before them > (Ar-Raliman 55:46-56)

“Will the Reckoning involve the animals?!

As for Qisds (retaliation), then the animals are included in
that, that is because it is affirmed that the Prophet 2% that:
“Retaliation will be taken for the hornless ram against the
horned ram.) This is a form of retribution, but reckoning
will not be taken in their regard as a matter of compulsion
and responsibility, because animals do not have teward
nor punishment.

BY Reported by Muslim (2582) from the Hadith of Aba
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasit

Multiply seventy thousand by seventy thousand, and add
another seventy thousand, all of these will enter Paradise
without reckoning or punishment.

+ Ilis statement: “created beings’ includes the finns,
because they are legally responsible, and as such, the
disbelievers among them will enter the Fire according
to the texts, and the consensus, as He, Exalted is He,
says:

4

(Allah) will say: “Enter you in the company of nations
who passed away before you, of men and finns, into the
Fire."> (AL-A raf 7:38)

And the believers among them will enter Paradise according
to the majority of the people of knowledge, and that is
correct, as proven by His statement, Exalted is He:

But for him who fears the standing before his Lord,
there will be two Gardens.>...

Up to His statement:

411), Al-Haithami said: “Reported by Ahmad and Al-Bazzar
similarly, and At-Tabarant similarly, and in their chains is
*A}-Qasim bin Mihran from Misa bin ‘Ubaid,’ and this Misa
bin ‘Ubaid is the freed-slave of Khalid bin ‘Abdullah bin
Usaid. Ibn Hibban mentioned him in Ath-Thiqat. And Al-
Qasim bin Mihran; Adh-Dhahabi mentioned him in Al
Mizan, and that no one reported from him except Sulaim bin
‘Amr An-Nakha’t, and the matter is not like that, for Hisham
bin Hassan reported this [Jadith from him, and the rest of the
narrators in the chain are those used as proof in the Saltit.””

Concerning the Major Resurrection

& “That:” What is referred to here is the act of reckoning.
Meaning: As the reckoning is described in the Book and
the Sunnah. Because this is of the matters of the unseen
that could only be known through divine information;
hence, it is incumbent to resort to the Book and the
Sunnah tor ils description

. ‏بها‎ Og ‏يهَا‎ 5K.
As for the disbelievers, they will not be reckoned by an
account of weighing their Hasanat (good merits) and
Say’at (evil records}, because ther is no Hasanat for them,
but their deeds will be calculated, then they will be made to
acknowledge them, and be disgraced by them...

Concerning his statement: “As for the disbelievers, they
will not be reckoned by an account of weighing their Hasandt
(good merits) and Say‘at {evil records), because ther is no
Hasanat for them, but their deeds will be calculated, ther
they will be made to acknowledge them, and be disgraced by
them.”

The meaning of this is related in the Hadith of Ton ‘Umar,
may Allah be pleased with him, from the Prophet #%, when
he mentioned Allah’s reckoning of His believing slave, that

224 Commentary on Ab‘Agidalr Al-Wasitiyyah

قم 7

He will be alone with His believing slave, and make him
acknowledge his sins. As that is described in the Book and
the Sunnah...

> Conceming his statement: “He will be alone with His
believing slave, and make him acknowledge his sins,”

* This is the description of the reckoning of a believer.

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, will be alone with him,
without anybody looking at him, and then he will make
him acknowledge his sins. He will say to him; “You did so-
and-so, you did such-and-such...” so that he can confirm
and admit them. Then, He would say: “I covered them up
for you in the world; I am pardoning you for them
today")

With this, Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, places a cover
before him, such that none will see or hear him. This is
Allah's favor, the Mighty and Sublime, upon the believer,
for when someone makes you acknowledge your offences
before people; even if he pardons you for them, you will
still fecl some embarrassment and shame. But if you are
alone (with Him), that is a complete shield from Him for
you.

Concerning his statement: “As that is described in the
Book and the Sunnah.”

I Its reference preceded.

Concerning the Major Resurrection

An Important Point

In the author's statement: “an account of weighing their
Hasandt (good merits) and Say’at (evil records) ...” etc.,
indicates that what is intended by the reckoning negated
for them, is the weighing between the Husanat and the
Say’at. But as for the reckoning which involves acknowl-
edgment and reproach, that is affirmed, as proven by the
Hadith of Aba Hurairah.

A Beneficial Point

The first of deeds for which the slave will be called to
account for is the Salah, while the first thing to be settleled
among people are matters concerning blood. This is
because the $aléh is the most virtuous bodily act of
worship, while blood is the worst of all rights of man that
can be violated.

‎a‏ لات

‎© The Eighth Fyent that will happen on the Day of
Resurrection.

‎And on the ‘Arasat (plains) of the resurrection, there is the
Hawd prepared for the Prophet 2%, Us water is whiter than
milk and sweeter than honey. Its vessels are as numerous
as the stars in the heavens. Its length is a month (in

‎226 Commentary on Al-’Aqidal: Al-Wasitiyyah

‎He will be alone with him, and make him acknowledge his
sins. He said: “But as for the disbelievers and the
hypocrites, He will call them before all creation (saying):
‘These, they are those who denied their Lord. Certainly the
wrath of Allah is upon the wrongdoers.’”"

‎And in Saki Muslim,®! in the Hadith of Abi. Hurairah,
may Allah be pleased with him, in a lengthy Hadith from
the Prophet #%, saying: “Allah shall meet the slave,
(meaning the hypocrite) and say: ‘O so-and-so! Have I
not honored you, inade you prosper, allowed you to marry,
made subservient for you the horse and the camel, and feft
you to lead people and be obeyed?!’ He would say:
‘Certainly’ He would ask: ‘Did you think you were going
to meet Me?’ He would say: ‘No.’ Then He would say: ‘I
am forgetting you, as you forgot Me.”

‎Afterwards, He would meet with the second person, and
he would answer as the first one does. Then, Allah will say:
“Tam forgetting you as you forgot Me.” Afterwards, He
will meet with the third one and say to him similarly. He
would reply: “O my Lord! I believed in You, in your Book,
and in Your Messengers. I observed the prayers, I fasted
and gave charity” and mention good deeds as he is able to.
Then he would say: “Here then.” He said: “Then, it will be
said to him: ‘Now, we shall bring out our witness against
you. He (the slave) will be thinking within himself: ‘Who
would witness against me?’ Then, his mouth wil! be sealed
up. It would then be said to his thighs, his flesh and his
bones: ‘Speak!’ Promptly, they would begin to mention
his deeds. He would say all that he would say in order to
find excuses for himself. That is a hypocrite, the one upon
whom Allah will rain His wrath.

‎0. Its reference preceded in the first volume.
‏ذا‎ Sahih Muslin (2968).

Concerning the Major Resurrection 229

Secondly: Two water spouts from the Kawthar will pour
into this Hard, It (the Kawthar) is a magnificent river which
Allah will give to the Prophet # in Paradise. The two of
them (the waterspouts) will cascade into this ‏اوموق‎

Thirdly : The period of (when people will attend) the Hawd
is before crossing the Siraf, because the situation dictates
that; since people shall be in direct need of drinking while
at on the plains Resurrection, before crossing the $irdt.?!

Fourthly: The believers who helieve in Allah and His
Messenger # and followed His Sharé‘ah will arrive at this
pool; as for those who rejected it, and behaved arrogantly
towards following the Sharia, they will be driven away
from it!

Fifthly ; Concerning the nature of its water. ‘he author, may
Allah have mercy upon him, says: “Its water is whiter than
milk.“ This is concerning the color. But as for the taste, he
said “Sweeter than honey.” And its fragrance is better than
the scent of musk, as has been affirmed in the Hadith of the

‎Based on the report of Muslim (2300 and 2301) from the‏ الآ
‎Hadith of Aba Dharr and Thawban, may Allah be pleased‏
‎with them.‏
‎Based on the report of ‘Abdullah bin Af-ttidn: Abumad in his‏
‎additions tn the Musnad (4:13) in the lengthy Hadith: from‏
‎Aba Ruzain. In Al-Faff (11:468), alter ascribing it to Ibn Abi‏
‎‘Asim in As-Sunnah, At-Tabarani, and Al-Hakim, Al-Hafiz‏
‎said: “It is clear, in thal the Hawd is betore the Sirat.””‏
‎That is affirmed in Sahih AL-Bukldri (6376) and Muslim‏
‎from ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ad, from the Prophet ,‏ ,)2297(
‎who said: “I am your predecessor at the Hawd, Some men‏
‎among you will be brought forward, and then taken away‏
‎from me, and I will say: ‘O Lord! My followers;’ and it will‏
‎be said: ‘You do nol know what they innovated after you.”‏

‎228 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyak

‎journey) und its width is a month (in journey). Whoever
drinks a sip from it, he will never be thirsty afterwards
ever...

‎$e

‎It is what the author mentioned in his statement: “And on
the ‘Arasft (plains) of the resurrection, there is the Hawd
prepared for the Prophet #3.”

‎The ‘Arasat (plains):” is plural of ‘Arasah (plain). It
refers to a wide space between buildings; and what is
intended by it here are the standing places of the
resurrection.

‎Primarily, Hawd means a place where the water
gathers, and what is intended by it here is the Hawd
of the Prophet 38.

‎The discussion regarding the Hawd is from a number of

‎perspectives:

‎Firstly: This Hatwd cxists now, because it is affirmed that

‎the Prophet #% addressed the Companions one day, saying;

‎“By Allah, | am indeed looking at ny Hated now,”

‎Also, it is also affirmed that the Prophet #z said: “And my

‎Minbar is upon my Hew,”

‎It is possible that the Haved is in the place (mentioned) but

‎we do not ‏عمد‎ it because it is unseen. It is also possible that

‎the Minbar will be placed upon the Hawd on the Day of

‎Resurrection.

‎111 Reported by Al-Bukhart (6590) and Muslim (2296) from
“Ugbah bin ‘Amir, may Allah be pleased with him.

‎©) Reported by Al-Bukhari (6589) and Muslim (1391) from Aba
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Conceming the Major Resurrection 231

At-Tirmidhi - even if there is a criticized narrator in its
chain: “Every Prophet has a Hawd."")

Moreover, this supports the meaning, and that is, just as
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, through His wisdom and
justice, has given the Prophet Muhammad s a Hawd which
the believers in his Ummah will visit, He gives every
Prophet a Hawd, so that the believers wil! benefit from the
previous Prophets. However, the greatest H awd is The Hawd
of the Prophet 3.

wane Me -

© The Ninth Event that will happen on the Day of
Resurrection: The Sirat (Bridge)

The 51184 (Bridge) is erected upow the back of Hell ; it is the
bridge between Paradise and the Fire....

له نج جل

The author has mentioned that in his statement: “The

(Reported by At-Jirmidhi (2443), Ibn Abi ‘Asim in As-Sunnah
(734) and the Hadith was mentioned by Al-Haithame in Al
‘Maja’ (10:363) with another wording, and he said: “In it
(ie. its chain of transmission) is Marwan bin Jafar As-
Sumairi, he was graded trustworthy by Ibn Abi Hatim, and
Al-Azadi said: ‘He was criticized, and the rest of its
reporters are trustworthy.” And in As Salifiah (1589), Al-
Albani said: “And the summary is that the Hadith, is Hasait
(good) or Sali) (authentic), with the combination of all of its
routes, and Allah knows best.” See: Fath Al-Bart (11-467).

230 Commentary on AL-’Agidah AL-Wasitiyyah

Prophet gg!"

Sixthly: Regarding its vessels, the author says: “Its vessels
are 05 numerous as the stars in the heavens.”

This is as reported in some wordings of the Haditl. In some
of them, it reads: “Its vessels are as stars of the heavens.”
This wording is more encompassing, because it implies that
they (the containers) are like the stars in terms of the
number and description, with light and radiance. So, its
vessels are like the stars of the heaven in terms of number
and illumination.

Seventhly: Concerning, the effects of the pool. The author
said: “Whoever drinks a sip from it, he will never be thirsty
afterwards ever” even on the Sirat and after it. This is from
the wisdom of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, for whoever
drinks from the Shart‘ah in this life, he will never be
doomed.

Eighthly: Concerning the size of the space covered by the
Hawd, the author, may Allah have mercy upon him, says:
“Tts length is a month (in journey), and its width is a month (in
journey)."” This, therefore, indicales that it is square,
because it cannot be of this nature except that it is squre.
This distance is according to what was known during the
time of the Prophet # in terms of normal travel distance
with the camel.

Ninthly: Two spouts from the Kaothar will pour into the
Hawd that Allah, Exalted is He, has given to Muhammad
Tenthly: Do the other Prophets have a Hawd?

The response: Yes, for it is stated in a Hadith reported by

‎Reported by Al-Bukhati (6579) and Muslim (2292), from‏ لا
‎‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr, may Allah be pleased with him.‏

Concerning the Major Resurrection 233

5s bia ‏عَلَى‎

People will pass over it according to the extent of their
deeds. Among them, some will pass over within the blink
of an eye; some will pass over like lightning ; some will
pass over like the wind ; some will pass over like a very fast
horse; some like a riding camel; some of them will race
through ; some of then: will walk : some of them will crave! ;
some of them will be snatched and cast into Hell, because
upon the bridge are hooks, that will snatch the people with
their deeds. Whoever passes over the Sirdl will enter
Paradise...

His statement: “People will pass over it according to the extent
of their deeds. Among themt, some will pass over within the blink
of an eye ; some twill pass aver like lightning ; some will pass over
like the wind ; some will pass over like a very fast horse ; some like
a riding camel; some of themt will race through; some of them
will walk; some of them will crawl; some of them will be
snatched and cast ittto Hell, because upon the bridge are hooks,
that will snatch the people with their deeds “"')

C1 Based on the report of Al-Bukhari (7439) and Muslim (183),
from Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri, may Alléh be pleased with him.

232 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Bridge is erected upon the back of Hell; il is the bridge
between Paradise and the Fire.”

The scholars have differed concerning its description.

— Some of them say that it is a wide path which people
will pass over according lo their deeds; because this is the
linguislic implication of the word Sirat, and also because
the Messenger of Allah # informed that it is precarious
and slippery": and precarious and slippery will not be
except upon a wide path; if were a narrow path, it could
oot be precarious and slippery.

— There are among the scholars who said that it is very
thin, as narrated in the Hadith of Aba Sa‘td Al-Khudni,
which Muslim! reported; that it is thinner than a strand
of hair and sharper than the sword.

From this, a question will come up, and that is: How
will crossing over a path such this be possible?
The answer is that matters of the Hereafter should not be
compared to matters of this world. Allah, Exalted is He, is
capable of all things; we do not know how they would
cross over, Are they going to cross over all together at once
on this path, or one after the other? One is not able to
ically say which of the two will happen, because

“ Concerning his statement: ‘Erected on the back of Hell:””
That is upon the Fire itself.

UL Reported by Al-Bukhari (7439) and Muslim (183), from Abi
Sa‘id Al-Khudn, may ‏طفللم‎ be pleased with him.
Pl Reported by Muslim (183).

Concerning the Major Resurrection 235

some of the scholars said it will be cool and peaceful for
them, as the fire was cool and peaceful for Ibrahim. But
what is apparent is that it is contrary to that, and that it
will be hot and painful, but not like its heat in the case
of the disbelievers.

Then, the limbs used for prostration (in prayer) will not be
touched by Fire, as affirmed from the Prophet ‏وله‎ in the
Two Sakis!" They are the forehead, the nose, the two
hands, the two knees, and the ends of the feet.

“ Concerning his statement: “Whoever passes over it the
Sirat, will enter Paradise”; that is because he is saved.

When they pass over it, they will be halted on a Qantarah
(small bridge) bekvcen Paradise and the Fire. So, some of
them will be avenged for the others. Then, after they will
have been cleansed and purified ; it will be permitted for
them to enter Paradise...

4 Concerning his slalement: “When they pass over it, they
will be halted on a Qanttaraht (small bridge) between Paradise
and Hell.”

ML Reported by Al-Bukhari (7437) and Muslim (182), from the
Hadith of Abo Tlurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary on Ab’Agidalt Al-Wasitiyyah

% lis statement: “People will pass over’’ what is intended
by people here is the believers, because the disbelievers
will have already been driven to the Fire. So, the people
will pass over it according to their deeds. Among them
are those that will pass over in the blink of an eye; and
among them are those that will pass over like lightning.
‘The twinkling of an eye is faster than lightning. Among
them are those that will pass over like wind, that is the
air. There is no doubt that the air is quick, particularly
before people knew of airplanes. It is well known that
the wind can reach speeds of one hundred and forty
miles per hour. Some of them will pass over like a very
fast horse, and some of them a riding camel; it is no
where near as fast as the horse. Some of them will race,
meaning that they will run; while some of them will
walk; some of them will crawl; that is walking on their
buttocks, All of them are trying ta cross over.

This is without a person having a choice, if it were up to his
choice, he would love to pass quickly; but he will traverse
according to the extent of his acceptance of the Shari‘ah in
this world. So whoever was quick in accepting what the
Messenger came with, he will be quick in passing over the
Sirdt, and whoever was sluggish in that, he will be sluggish
in passing over the Sirat; an exact recompense; the
recompense is according to the deeds.

% His statement: “Some of ther will be snatched”; meaning
he will be taken swiitly. This will be by way of the
hooks present upon the bridge. The people will be
snatched according to their deeds.

© “He would be cast into Hell’; what is understood is that
the Fire which the sinners will be thrown into is the
same Fire where the disbelievers are, but the degree of
punishment is not as severe as the disbelievers. Rather,

Concerning the Major Resurrection 237

When they are cleansed and purified from any enmity and
hatred that was in their hearts, then, it will be allowed for
them to enter Paradise. When they are permitted entrance
into Paradise, they will not find the door open; so the
Prophet $f will intercede (for them) with Allah so that the
door of Paradise can be opened for thei; as shall soon be
discussed - if Allah wills -regarding the types of interces-
sion.

© The Tenth Event that will occur on the Day of
Resurrection: Entering Paradise

The first to seek to have the gate of Paradise opened, is
Muhaminad 38...

The author indicated that, in his statement: “The first to seek
to have the gale of Paradise is opened, is Muhammad 3.”

Its evidence, is what was affirmed in Sahih Muslint that the
Prophet 3% said: “I am the first intercessor regarding
Paradise.” In a version: ”1 ain the first to knock on the gate
of Paradise.”"""! In another version: “I will arrive at the gate
of Paradise on the Day of Resurrection, and seek its
openning. The gatekeeper (of Paradise) will say: ‘Who are

121 Reported by Muslim (196) from Anas bin Malik, may Allah
be pleased with him.

236 Commentary on A‘Agidah Al-Wsifiyyah

? “Al-Qantarah” is a bridge but it is a small bridge. A
bridge is primarily stretched over the water of a river,
and its like.

The scholars express different opirions regarding whether
this Quntarah is a part of the bridge that is stretched over
Hell, or it is an entirely different bridge; and the correct
Position in this matter is to say that Allah knows best, its
nature does not ccncern us, but what concerns us is that
people shall be made to wait there.

% Conceming his statement: “Some of them will he avenged
for the others.” This retribution is not the first one that
will occur at the stations of Resurrection, because this
retribution is special. Its purpose is to remove rancor,
malice and hatred for the people's hearts. This has the
status of cleaning and purification, because what is in
the heart does not disappear due to mere retribution.

On this small bridge between Paradise and the Fire; its
purpose is to purify what is in the hearts, so that people can
enter Paradise while having no rancor in their hearts; ‏كه‎
‎Allah, Exalted is He, says:

oe oS ‏ِل‎

AA ae
2 ‏ما في صدُورهم‎
4And We shall remove from their breasts any sense of
injury (that they may have), (So they will be like)
brothers facing each other on thrones.» (Al-Hijr 15:47)

% Conceming his statement: “Then, ufter they will have
been cleansed and purified ; it will be permitted for them to
enter Paratlise.””

This is as it was reported by Al-Bukhari from the Hadith of
Abé Sa‘id Al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him"!

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (7430).‏ اذا

Concerning the Major Resurrection 239

and it will catch them by surprise, and we seek refuge in
Allah from that.

ait ‏من يَدْخُلُ‎ dst
The first among all the nations to enter Paradise is his
nation...

“The first among all the
$ nation .””

¢ Concerning his statement:
nations fo enter Paradise is

This is an affirmed truth. Its evidence is what is affirmed in
Sahih Muslim, from Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased
with him, who said: “The Messenger of Allah 2 said: ‘We
are the last, and the first on the Day of Resurrection, and
We are the first to enter Paradise.) He ‏عد‎ also said: “We
are the last, but the forerunners on the Day of Resurrec-
tion 7/21

This includes all the stations of Resurrection. Refer to [iad
Al-Arwaht by Ibn Al-Qayyim.

Completion

The author did not mention the gates of Paradise, but it is

known that they are eight in number. Allah, Exalted be He,

1 Reported by Muslim (855).

1 Reported by Al-Bukhati (6624) and Muslim (855), from Abu
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

238 Commentary on Al’Agidah Al-Wiasitiyyah
you?’ | will say: ‘Muhammad’, He will say: ‘I have been
commanded not to open for any person before you.)

His statement 34: “I will seek its opening” meaning: | will
seek opening of the gate.

» This is from Alléh’s favor upon Muhammad 4,

because he will perform the first intercession on the
Plains of the Resurrection, to remove and drive away
the distress, difficulties, and worries, and the second
intercession to bring about joy and happiness; he ‏وله‎ is
therefore an intercessor for the creation in order to save
them from what causes them harm, or to bring about
what benefits them.

® None will enter Paradise until after the intercession of
the Messenger #%, because that is affirmed in the
Sunnah, as preceded, and it is indicated by the saying of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

4Until, when they reach it, and its gates will be
openedy (Az-Zumar 39:73)

He did not say: “Until when they reach it, opened!” There
is an indication that there is something before the opening
of Paradise; and that is the intercession.

As for the inhabitants of the Fire, it is said in their regard:

4Until, when they reach it; its gates openedp (Az-
Zumar 39:71)
Because they shall arrive while it is prepared and ready,

‎Reported by Muslim (197) from Anas bin Malik, may Allah‏ للا

‎be pleased with him.

‎the Major Resurrection‏ عمتمععممك

‎said: ‘Yes and I hope that you are among them.’”

‎“If you say: “Since the gates are in accordance with the
deeds, that implies that everyone will be called from all
the gates if he performs their deeds; so what is the
response to this?”

‎The response is that it be said; whoever often performs that

‎specific act, he will be called from that particular gate. For

‎example, if this man ofter peforms Saldh, he will be called
from the gate of Salah; if he often fasts, he will be called
from Ar-Rayyan. Not everyone will often perform each of
the righteous deeds, because you find yourself more
engaged in some particular deeds than others, and also
that you are more active in some deeds than the others.

‎However, Allah may favor some people such that they will

‎be strongly active in all the deeds, as previously mentioned

‎in the story of Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him.

‎a a

‎@ ‘the Eleventh Event that will occur on the Day of
Resurrection: Intercession
‏شَفَاعَاتِ‎ Lot gual ‏في‎  هَّلْسَو‎ cle ai ‏وَل صَلَى‎
There are for him 3%, three forms of intercession during the
Resurrection...

‎The author mentioned it in his stalement: “There are for him
288, three forms of intercession during the Resurrection.”

‎“Tor him: The pronoun is referring to the Prophet

‎> “Ash-Shaft’at (Intercessions)“; is the plural of Ash-
Shafa’ah (intercession) it linguistically means to make

‎240 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎says;

‎Until, when they reach it, and its gates mill be
opened» (Az-Zumar 39:73)

‎The Prophet ‏يه‎ said — regarding the one who performs
Wud’ and docs so completely, and says the AtTashhhud:
“except that the eight gates of Paradise are opened for him
to enter from whichever one of them he wishes.”""!

‎There are eight of these gates, in accordance with the deeds,
because each of the gates is designated for a particular
deed. The people of Salah will be called from the gate of
Salah; the people of charity, from the gate of charity; the
people of Jiftad, from the gate of fitéd, and the people of
fasting, from the gate of Ar-Rayyan.”!

‎Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, may facilitate that some
people perform all the good deeds; then, they will be called
from all the gates, according to what is affirmed in the Two
Sahite™ ; from Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with
him, thal the Prophet #6 said: “Whoever spends two pairs
(of things) in the Cause of Allah, he shall be called from the
gates of Paradise: ‘O the slave of Allah. This is goodness...”
he mentioned the Hadith, and in it, that Abu Bakr, may
Allah be pleased with him, said: ‘May my father and
mother be ransomed for you O, the Messenger of Allah!
Whoever is called from these gates, he will have no other
needs. But will anybody be called froin all of the gates? He

‎"Reported by Muslim (234) from ‘Ugbah bin ‘Amir, may

‎Allah be pleased with him.

‎Translation note: It is stated im the Hadith cited in the
following reference.

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (3666) and Muslim (1027).

Concerning the Major Resurrection 243

Secondly: He is pleased with the one being interceded for.
However, the Grand Intercession at the place of standing is
general, for all people, those whom Allah is pleased with,
and those whom He is not pleased with.

Thirdly: His permission for the intercession.

And the permission will not be granted except after being
pleased with the intercessor and the one interceded for.

The evidence for that, is His, Exalted is He, statement:

And there are many Angels in the heavens, whose
intercession will avail nothing, except after Allah has
given leave for whom He wills, and pleases.» (An-Najm
53:26)
He did not say: “with the intercessor” nor “with the one
interceded for” so that it would be inclusive (of both).
He, Exalted is He, says:
4On that day, no intercession shall avail, except the one
for whom the Most Beneficent (Allah) has given permis-
sion, and whose word is acceptable to Him.> (fa Ha
20:109)

He, Glorious be He, says:

And they cannot intercede except for him with whont
He is pleased .> (Al-Anbiya’ 21:28)

The first Ayah includes all the three conditions; the second

242 Commentary on Al ‘Agidal: Al-Wasitiyyah

the thing double, but as a religious term, it means
intercession for another person in order to bring about
a benefit for him or to prevent a harm from him. The
relation of the derivation is clear, because if you
intercede for him, you will become, with him, a pair,
doubling as him.

® Intercession is divided into two categories: False
intercession, and correct intercession.

— The false intercession is the intercession the idolators

attributed to their idols, for which reason they worshipped

them, and claimed that they would intercede for them

before Allah. This is, as said by He, Exalted is He:

And they worship besides Allah things that hann them
not, nor benefit them, and they say: “These are our
intercessors with Allah’’> (Ytinus 10:18)

They also say:

We worship them only that they may bring us near to
Allah } (Az-Zumar 39:3)

But this intercession is false; having no benefit, as Allah,
Exalted is He, says:

So no intercession of intercessors will be of any use to
them > (ALMuddaththir 74:48)

The correct intercession is what fulfills three conditions:
Firstly: Allah is pleased with the intercessor.

Conceming the Major Resurrection 245

the Messenger #% will be directed to him before the
people are judged. For when he intercedes, Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, will descend to judge among His
slaves and decide in their cases.

A similar case, is His statement, Exalted is He:

we A es Lee ‏عل عن‎ iat

They are the ones who say: “Spend not on those who

are willt Allah's Messenger. until they desert him."
(AL-Munafigtin 63:7)

For, His saying: ¢Until they desert him> expresses the
reason, thal is; “so that they will desert him,” not “until
such time” because meaning (of the Ayah) would be
invalid in that case.

% Concerning his statement: “After the Prophets, Adam,
Nuh, Ibrahim, Musa, ‘Ist bin Maryam, have declined the
intercession." That is; every one of them will decline,
referring the one requesting to go tu the next one.

This sentence was explained as reported by Al-Bukhari and
Muslim," from Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with
him, that the Prophet #8 said: “I am the leader of the people
on the Day of Resurrection. Do you know why that is?
Allah will gather the people, the first of them and the last of
them, on one plane, they will hear the caller, and the sight
will be able to see them (all); and the sun will draw close to
them, such that the people will suffer such grief and
distress which they are not able to bear. Then, people will
begin to say: ‘Do you not see to what state you have
reached? Will you not look for someone who will intercede

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (4712) and Muslim (194).

244 Commentary on A-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

includes two of the three conditions, while the third Ayah
includes only one of the conditions.

The Prophet % will have three forms of intercession:

1. The Grand Intercession.

2. The intercession for the inhabitants of Paradise, so that
they may enter it.

3. The intercession for whoever deserves the Fire, that he
not enter it, and for the one who has already entered it,
to be removed from it.

As for the first intercession, he will intercede for the people
at the place of standing, until judgement be made between
them, after the Prophets, Adam, Nuh, Ibrahim, Musa,
‘Ist bin Maryam, have declined the intercession, until it
reaches him...

¢ The author said, explaining these three (forms): “As for
the first intercession, he will intercede for the people at the
place of standing, until judgement be made between them,
afier the Prophets, Adam, Nal, Tbrahim, Musa, ‘Isa bin
Maryam, have declined the intercession, until it reaches
hin.”

Concerning his statement: “Until judgement he made
between them.” The word “until” here is used to express
the reason, not a time limit, because the intercession of

Concerning the Major Resurrection 207

see not what we are experiencing?’ He would say as said
by Adam conceming the anger of Allah; he would not
mention any sins, and will say: “Go to Muhammad!’ All of
them will say as Adam said: ‘Myself! Myself! Myselft’

‘Then, they will come to Muhammad ‏أ‎ and say: ‘O
Muhammad! You are the Messenger of Allah, the Seal
(Last) of the Prophets. Allah has forgiven you your
previous and future sins! Intercede for us with your Lord!
Do you not see what we arc experiencing”

L will then I will go, and I will arrive under the Throne, and
fall down in prostration to my Lord, the Mighty and
Sublime. Afterwards, Allah will reveal praises and com-
mendations of Him to me the like of which He has never
revealed to anyone before me to. Then it will be said: 0
Muhammad! Raise your head! Ask and you shall be given!
Intercede and your intercession shall be accepted, ’” and
he mentioned the remainder of the Hadith,

The three lies mentioned by Ibrahim, may the Salat and
Salim be upon him, are explained in what was reported
by Aba Iurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.
He said: “Ibrahim, may the Salah and Salam be upon
him, never spoke expect three lies. Two of them
concerning the essence of Allah. His statement: 4! am
ily and His statement: éNay, the biggest of then did
itp,” and he mentioned his statement concerning his
wite Sarah: “She is indeed my sister.”

In Sahih Muslim, in the Hadith of intercession mentioned

earlier, it is stated that the third one (lie) is his slatement

concerning the stars ¢This is my Lord} he did not mention
the story of Sarah. But, Ibn Hajar mentioned in Al-

11 Translation note: See number 3358, and also number 2217 in
Sahih Al-Bukhirt.

246 Commentary on Al‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

for you with your Lord?’ So some of the people will say to
others: ‘Go to Adam’ So they will go at Adam, and say to
him ‘You are the father of mankind, Allah created you with
His Hand and breathed into you from His Spirit, and
commanded the Angels to prostrate for you, do you see not
what we are experiencing?”

He would say: ‘Today my Lord has become angry, the likes
of which He has never become angry before, and the likes
of which He shall never become angry afterwards. He
prohibited ine from the tree, but | disobeyed him. Myself!
Myself! Myself! Go to Nith.’

Then, they will go to Nah and say: ‘O Nah! You are the
first Messenger sent to the inhabitants of the earth. Allah
has named you a grateful slave. Intercede for us with your
Lord! Do you see not what we are experiencing?’ He would
say as has been said by Adam concerning the anger of
Allah, and: ‘There was a supplication I made against my
people. Go to Ibrahim!’ Then, they will go to ibrahim,
saying: ‘O Ibrahim! You are the Prophet of Allah, and I lis
Khalil among the inhabitants on the earth! Intercede for us
with your Lord! Do you not see what we are experiencing?”
He would also say as said by Adam concerning the anger
of Allah, and: ‘I uttered three lies. Go to Masal”

Then, they will go to Musaa and say: ‘O Musa! You are the
Messenger of Allah. Allah favored you over people with His
Message, and His speaking to you. Intercede for us with your
Lord! Do you not see what we experiencing?’ He will say as
said by Adam concerning the anger of Allah, and: ‘I have
killed a soul which I was not ordered to kill. Go to ‘Isa!’

They will go to ‘Isa and say: “Isa! You are the Messenger of
Allah and His Word, which He cast into Maryam, and a
spirit from I im. You spoke to people while you were im the
cradle as a baby. Intercede for us with your Lord! Do you

Concerning the Major Resurrection

tis st
He has ordained for you the same religion which He
ordained for Nik, and that which We have inspired in
you, and that which We ordained for Ibrahim, Musa
and ‘Isd.} (Ash-Shiira 42:13)

Important point:
His statement: “The Prophets ; Adam, Nah...” until the end of
the quote; the author, may Allah have mercy upon him,
categorically stated that Adam is a Prophet. And this is the
case because Allah, Exalted is He, revealed legislation to
him; Le gave him commandments and prohibitions. In his
Sahih, Yon Hibban!) reported: “Aba Dharr (may Allah be
pleased with him) asked the Prophet #: ‘Was Adam a
Prophet?’ He said: ‘Yes.’”

Hence, Adam was the first of Prophets that revelation was
revealed to. But as for the first Messenger, it is Nuh, as it is
categorically stated in the Hadith of intercession, and the
apparent meaning in the Qur'an, as it is in His statement,
Exalted is Ile:

Verily, We have inspired you as We inspired Nut and
the Prophets afler him.» (An-Nisa’ 4:163)

And His statement:

1] Sabth Ibn Hibban (2:77). The Hadith is reported by Imam
Ahmad in Al-Musnad (5:978), and in ALMajma’, Al-
Haythami said: “Reported by Abmad, Al-Bazzér and At-

Tabarani in Al-Awsat similarly.”

248 Commentary on AL‘Aqidalt AL-Wasifiyyal

Fath:"] “What is obvious is that it is a mistake from
some of the narrators” and he gave evidences for that.

Ibrahim, may the Saldh and Salam be upon him, called these
lies, out of humility, because according to his intent he was
being truthful, in that it coincided to the reality. They (his
statements) were only forms of indirect expressions. And
Allah knows best,

% His expression: “Until it reaches him,” That is; the
Messenger #8. The Hadith that preceded includes what
hat occurs after that.

This is the Grand Intercession, that will not be for anyone
except the Messenger #. It is the greatest of all forms of
intercession, because it brings about respite for the people
from this tremendous standing, and distress and grief.

All of these Messengers mentioned in the Hadith of
intercession are among Liwlil-’Azim (the Messengers of
strong resolve). Allah, Exalted is He, has mentioned them
in two places in the Qur’an: in Sarat Al-Ahzab and Surat
Ash-Shara.

As for Strat Al-Ahzdb, it is contained in His statement,
Exalted is He:

And (remember) when We took from the Prophets their
covenants, and from you, and from Nuh, Ibrahinr,
Masi, ‘Isi son of Maryam. (ALAbzah 33:7)

As for the one in Strat Ash-Shura; that is contained in His
statement, Exalted is He:

"Fath Al-Bari (6:391).

Concerning the Major Resurrection 251

enter through the gate of the deed which the undertook the

most struggle to fulfill most often. And other than that, it is

possible that the Muslim may be called from each of the

gates.

& ‘This intercession is indicated in the Qur'an, because
Allah says concerning the inhabitants of Paradise:

€Until, when they reach it, and its gates will be
opened} (Az-Zumar 39:73)

This indicates that there is something between their
entering Paradise, and the opening of the gates.

And it is clearly mentioned in the narration of Mustim,"!
from Hudhaifah and Aba Hurairah, may AlJah be pleased
with both of them, they said: “The Messenger of Allah 2
said: ‘Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, will gather people;
the believers will stand up until Paradise is brought close to
them. They will go to Adam and say: ‘O our father! Ask for
Paradise to be opened for us’” He mentioned the Hadith,
and in it is: “Then, they will come to Muhammad, he
would stand up and permission will be granted for him.”
the Hadith.

11 Reported by Muslim (195).

Commentary on Al-’Agidalt Al-Wasitiyyah

425 ‏جز‎ :
4And indeed, We sent Nak and Ibrahim, and placed in
their offspring Prophethood and Scripture.y (Al-Hadid

nn --

As for the second intercession, he will intercede for the
inhabitants of Paradise that they be admitted to Para-

His statement: “As for the second intercession, he will
intercede for the inhabitants of Paradise that they be
admitted to Paradise.”

That is, when the inhabitants of Paradise would have
crossed over the Sirat, they will be made to stand on the
Qantarah (small bridge), and then, retribution for one
will be taken from the other. This retribution is not the
same retribution that will occur at the plains of
Resurrection; it is rather a more specific retribution.
Allah purifies the hearts with it, and removes malice
and rancor from them. Once they have been cleansed
and purified, they will be permitted to enter Paradise.
But when they get to Paradise, they will not find it opened,
as the inhabitants of the Fire will. So the gates will not be
opened until the Prophet 3 intercedes for the inhabitants
of Paradise to be admitted to it. Then, every person will

Concerning the Major Resurrection 253

Allah, Exalled is Ie, revealed about him and his wife, who
used to carry fire-wood, to condemn and censure them,
and threaten them with severe punishment.

The second is Aba Talib. He was extremely kind to the
Messenger #2: and this is well known. From the wisdom of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is that he remained in his
disbelief, If not for his being a disbeliever, the Messenger ‏قله‎
‎would not have had this protection. In fact, he (Abu Talib)
could have been harmed as the Messenger 33 was harmed.
But due to his overwhelming honor before the Quraish,
and because he remained in their religion, they honored
him, and it resulted in the Prophet #§ having protection as
a result of that.

The two who accepted Islam are Al-‘Abbas and Hamzah,
and he is more virtuous than Al-’Abbas, such that the
Messenger # nicknamed him: “Allah's Lion.” He was
killed as a martyr in the battle of Uhud, may Allah be
pleased with him, and make him pleased. The Prophet ‏كيد‎
‎also named him: “The chief of the martyrs.”""!

As for Aba Talib, Allah permitted His Messenger 3% to
intercede for him despite him being a disbeliever. There-
fore, this case is exempt from the generality of His
statement:

4So no intercession of intercessors will be of any use to
them >» (Al-Mudraththir 74:48)

"Reported by Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak (3:195) from Jabir,
and in Al-Majma’ (9:368), Al-Haithami ascribed it to At
Tabarani in Al-Awsut, and the Lindith was mentioned by Al-
Albani in As-Silsilah Ag Saltihah (374).

Commentary on AL‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

. AGS OFLU ‏وَعَادَنٍ‎

These two forms of intercession are specifically for himt....

* Concerning his statement: “These two forms of interces-
sion are specifically for him :” That is the intercession for
the people at the place of standing in order that
judgement take place with them, and the intercession
for admittance to Paradise.

“Specifically for him :’’ That is for the Prophet Muham-
mad #%. That is why Adam and the Messengers of
strong resolve will excuse themselves from them (the
two intercessions).

There is also a third intercession which is specifically
for the Prophet #§ and not one aside from him; and that
is the intercession for his uncle, Aba Talib.

Aba Talib - as is in the Two Sahihis!! and others - died
as a disbeliever.

* The uncles of the Messenger #8 are len in number. Four
of lived to see Islam, two of which remained
disbelievers, while two of them accepted Islam.

— The two of them who were disbelievers are Aba Lahb;
he caused tremendous harm to the Prophet 2%, such that

1 Based on the report of Al-Bukhan (4772) and Muslim (24)
from the story of Ibn Al-Musayyab, from his father, when
death overcame Abu Talib. And he mentioned the Hadith.
Uniil the last of Abii Talib’s saying to them was that is upon
he Millah (religion) of ‘Abdul-Muttlib, and he refused to say:
“La Nahe Na Allah.”

Concerning the Major Resurrection 255

Concerning his statement: “As for the third intercession,
he shall intercede for those who deserve the Tire. This
intercession is for hint, and for the rest of the Prophets, the
Siddigm (the truthful ones), and others than them. He shail
intercede for whoever deserves the fire; that he not be
admitted into it; and he shall intercede for whoever has been
admitted to it, that he be removed from it. And Allah shall
remuve people from the Fire without intercession ; rather,
from His Grace and Mercy”

% His statement: “As for the third intercession, he shall
intercede for those who deserve the Fire." That is among
the believers who are disobedient.

There are two forms of this; he shall intercede for one who
deserves to enter the Fire, that he not be admitted to it, and
for the one who has been admitted, to be removed from it.

— As for the one who was admitted being removed from it;
there are many, many [adiths in its regard; they are even
Mutawatir ‏ل‎

— As for the one who deserves it, that he not enter it; this
can be inferred from the supplication of the Messenger for
forgiveness and mercy for the believers during their
funerals, because what that implies is that he {ie. the
deceased) is safe from entering the Fire; as the Prophet #
said: “O Allah, Forgive Aba Salamah, and raise his status
among the guided...””!

But this is an intercession in the world, as has come in
his statement #: “There is no Muslim who dies, and

Translation note: A narration reported by large number of
reporters in every level of its chain of transmission.
Reported by Muslim (920) from Umm Salamah, may Allah
be pleased with her.

254 ___ Commentary on Al“Agidah Al-Wasitivyah

However, the intercession will not bring him out of the
Fire, he will remain in a shallow part of the Fire, it will
reach his ankles, causing his brain to boil. The Messenger
#8 said: “If not for me, he would have been in lowest level
of the Fire." This (intercession) is not because of the
personality of Abu Talib, but it is because of the his
defending the Prophet # and his Companions.

As for the third intercession, he shall intercede for those
who deserve the Fire. This intercession is for him, and for
the rest of the Prophels, the Siddigin (the truthful ones),
and others than them, He shall inlercede for whoever
deserves the fire; that he not be admitted into it; and he
shall intercede for whoever has been admitted to it, that he
be removed from it. And Allah shall remove people from
the Fire without intercession ; rather, from His Grace and
Mercy...

Ml Based on the report of Al-Bukhart (3883) and Muslim (209),
from AlAbbas bin Abdul-Muttalib, may Allah be pleased
with him,

Conceming the Major Resurrection. 257

Meaning that Allah, Exalted is He, shall remove whichever
disobedient believers He wills, without any intercession.
This is from His Grace, because His Mercy precedes His ١
wrath, The Prophets, the righteous, the Angels, and others, 1
will intercede for people, until only the Mercy of the Most |
Merciful of the merciful will remain. He will remove from
the Fire whomever He removes, without any intercession,
until no one remains in the Fire except its inhabitants, those |
who are most worthy of the Fire.
The two Shwikhs, Al-Bukhart and Muslim, have reported |
from the Hadith of Abu Sa’td Al-Khudri, from the Prophet

“Allah, Exalted is He, shall say: ‘The Angels have
interceded, the Prophets have interceded, and the believers
have interceded. There remains only the Most Merciful of
all the merciful” Then, Ile would remove a Handful of
people from it, who never did any good at all, after they
will have become charcoal..."

© The Twelfth Event that will occur on the Day of
Resurrection

And there will remain in Paradise, vacant places not
occupied by the people of the world. And Allah shall raise |
some people for it and He shall make them enter |
Paradise...

1 Reported by Al-Bukhart (7439) and Muslim (183), from Aba
Said AL Khudri, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary on Al-’Agidah AL-Wasitiyyah

forty men - who do not commit Shirk with Allah with
anything - stand for his funeral, except that Allah
grants their intercession for him.”"

Two groups of people among the people of innovation
reject this mtercession; they are the Mu‘tazilah and the
Khdwarij; because the position of the Mu‘tazilah and the
Khaedrij rgarding the one who commits a major sin, is
that such a person is going to abide forever in the Fire
of Hell. They are of the opinion that the one who
commits Zind is just like the one who conumits Shirk
with Allah; intercession will be of no benefit to him,
and Allah will neyer grant anyone to intercede on his
behalf.

Their view is refuted by the many Hadfths that are narrated
concerning that.

“% Concerning his statement: “This intercession is for him,
and for the rest of the Prophets, the Siddigin (the truthful
ones), and others than them. He shall intercede for whoever
deserves the fire ; that he not be admitted into it; and he shall
intercede for whoever has been admitted to it, that he be
removed from it :"' Meaning, that this is not specific to the
Prophet 3, rather it is for the Prophets, such that they
intercede for the disobedient among their people. And
the Siddiqin intercede for the disobedient among their
relatives and others among the believers. The same for
others among the righteous, such that a man will
intercede for his household, his neighbor, and the like.

“And Allah shall remove
people from the Fire without intercession ; rather, from His
Grace and Mercy.”

{Reported by Muslim (948) from Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah be
pleased with him.

i
|
© Concerning his statemer

Conceming the Major Resurrection

people for it and He shall make them enter Paradise.”

مِنّ الْجئاب ‎Pb‏

And types that are not included in the reckoning, the
reward and the punishment of the Abode of the Hereafter.
And Paradise and the Fire...

a ‏اج‎

Conceming his statement: “And types that are not
included in the reckoning, the reward and the punishment
of the Abode of the Herenfter.””

“Types :” various categories.
‘The meaning of the reckoning has preceded.

“The reward: The recompense for the Llasanat (good
merits}; and a Hasanaft will be multiplied by ten of its
like, up to seven hundred, to many more.

“The punishment: the requital for evil. Whoever
performs an evil deed, he will not be recompensed
except its like; they shall not be wronged.

His statement: “Paradise and the Fire.”
“Paradise:” is the abode prepared by Allah, Exalted is He, for
His Awtiya’. In it, is what the souls desire, and what the eye

will enjoy. In it, is what has never been seen by the eycs, nor
heard by the ears nor imagined by the heart of a human.

Commentary on Al-'Agidah ALWiasitiyyah

That is what the author mentioned, in his statement: “And
there will remain in Paradise, vacant places not occupied by the
people of the world.”

The width Paradise is that of the heavens and the earth,
This Paradise, whose width is as wide as the heavens
and the earth, its inhabitants will have entered it,
without filling it. And Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
has guaranteed that Paradise and the Fire will be full.

— “As for the Fire, people will continue to be cast into it,
while it is saying: ‘Is there any more?’ It will not be full,
then Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, will put His Foot on it,
and some it will contract over other parts of it, and it says:
“Enough! ‏!”كع دمص‎

— As for Paradise, He will raise people for it, they will
enter Paradise by the grace of Allah, and His mercy:

— That is affirmed in the Two Sahihs,”! from the Hadith of
Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him, from the
Prophet #. This is also implied in His statement, Exalted is
He

Your Lord has written 8 for “Hse (ALAn‘ém
6:54)

And the saying of the Prophet ‏رعق‎ concerning what he
related from his J.ord, Glorious and Exalted is He: “Indeed,
My Mercy precedes My Wrath,“

That is why the author said: “And Allah shall raise some

{Its reference preceded.

I Reported by Al-Bukhari (4850) and Muslim (2848).

®1 Reported by Al-Bukhari (7554) and Muslim (2751), from Aba
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him

Concerning the Major Resurrection 261

And the Hadiths with this meaning, are many and well
known.

[ts inhabitants shall remain therein forever, according to
His statement, Exalted is He:

Verily, Allah has cursed the disbelievers, and has
prepared for them a flaming Fire (Hell). Wherein they
will abide forever.» (Al-Aluzdb 33:64-65)

Allah has mentioned their remaining in it forever in three
Ayat in the Qur‘an. This is one of them, the second is in the
last part of Siirat An-Nisd’, and the third is in Stirat Al-Jinn.
They are obvious, in that the Fire will remain, without end,
forever.

The details concerning that are mentioned in the Books
revealed from the heaven, and in the narrations from the
knowledge reported about the Prophets, and in the
Knowledge inherited from Muhammad #@ concerning
that, what satisfies and suffices. So whoever searches for
it, will find it.

a BSS

260 Commentary on Al’Agidal AL-Wasitiyyah

hs BE GE gst Gc ‏لم‎ gS HES fs sap
No person knows what is kept hidden for them of joy as a
reward for what they used to do. (As-Sajdah 32:17)
That is, its reality and nature is not known.

Paradise exists now, according to His statement, Exalted is
He:

1 Shp

4Prepared for Al-Muttagan (the pious).» (Al ‘Imran
3:133)

And the Hadiths with this meaning are Mutawatir.

And it will remain forever, according to His statement,
Exalted is He:

cee

fit ost Ch
4And those who are blessed, they will be in Paradise,
abiding therein for all the time that the heavens and the
earth endure, except as your Lord will, a gift without
an end.» (Hid 11 :108)

And His statement: Abiding therein for all the time} occurs
in many Ayat.
As for “the Fire,” il is lhe abode which Allah, Exalted is He,

prepared for His enemies. Therein are various categories of
punishment and torment that are unbearable.

It exisls now, according to His statement, Exalted is He:

Prepared for the disbelievers.» (Al ‘Imran 3:131)

Concerning the Major Resurrection 263

is false, and if you belic it, you might have belied what is
true; so do not believe it, nor belie il, but say: “If this is from
Allah, I believe in it.”

4 The scholars have categorized what is reported from
earlier nations into three:

Firstly: What our Shar7‘ah attests to its truthfulness.
Secondly: Whal our Shariah attests to its falsehood.
And the ruling concerning these two is clear

Third: What is neither judged to be true or false.

So it is obligatory to halt with this type, without believing
or denying it.

* Concerning his statement: “And in the knowledge
inherited from Muhammad concerning that, what
satisfies and suffices.”

The inherited knowledge from Muhammad 2, whether in
the Book of Allah or in the Sunnah of the Messenger of
Allah 2%, is satisfying and sufficient. There is no need to
search for exhortations to soften the hearts from other than
the Book and the Sunnah, Rather, we have no need for any
of this. For in the knowledge inherited from Muhammad is
xz what satisfies and suffices in all the topics of knowledge
and faith.

+ Then, whatever is attributed to [he Messenger of Allah
x@ in the topic of exhortation, virtues, in
encouragement or discouragement, is of three cate-
gories: Sahii: (authentic) and acceptable, Da‘if (weak),
and Mawda’ (fabricated). So not all of it is authentic and
acceptable. We do not have any need for the weak and
fabricated reports.

— As for the fabricated reports, the scholars, may Allah
have mercy upon them, have agreed, that it is not

262 Commentary on Al-’Aqidah AL-Wisitiyyah

% Concerning his statement: “The details concerning that
are mentioned in the Books revented from the heaven."”

Meaning: Such as the Tawrah, the Injil, the Suhuf of
Ibrahim and Masa, and others among the revealed Books.
That has been mentioned in them, clarifying, and explain-
ing, due to the people’s need, rather, because of their
necessity for its clarification and explanation; since they arc
not able to be steadfast except with belief in the Last Day
when everyone will be recompensed for every good and
evil he has done.

% Concerning his statement: “‘And in the narrations from
the knowledge reported about the Prophets.”

Know, that the knowledge reported about the Prophets is

of two kinds:

1. The kind affirmed by revelation, and it what is
mentioned in the Qur’dn and the authentic Sunnah,
and there is no doubt in accepting this, and believing
what it proves.

2. The other kind comes from routes of transmission other
than revelation. Lies, distortion, alteration, and mod-
ification may be included in this category.

That is why a person should be very careful of what is
related in these routes from the previous Prophets, such
that the Prophet x said: “When the people of Book narrate
to you, then do not believe then, nor belie them, Say: ‘We
believe in what was revealed to us, and what was revealed
to you.”()

Because if you believe it, you might have believed in what
1 Reported by Indu Ahmad (4:135) from Abd Namlah Al-

Ansari, may Allah be pleased with him, and AlBukhari
(4485) from Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Major Resurrection 265

said,” then do not mention it at all, because the average
person will have the impression that the Messenger 2%
really said it. Whatever is said in the Milirab, to him, is
correct!

An Important Point

In this topic - that is, the topic concerning the Last Day and
the Signs of the Hour - many weak and fabricated adiths
aye mentioned. These are found mostly in the books of
Raga’ig (heart-soltening, matters) and exhortations. That is
why il is necessary that one be very cautious concerning
them, and that we warn the general people who usually
have these sost of books in their hands.

% Concerning his statement: “Whoever searches for it”
meaning he seeks it “will find it.”

This is correct, the Qur'an is with us. The books of Hadith
are with us; but they need to be verified and that the
authentic be clarified from the weak, so that people will be
able to base what they believe in on this topic, upon strong
and spotless foundations.

264 Commentary on Al-Agidalt Al-Wasitiyyah
permissible to mention and spread them among the people,
not in the topic of virtues, nor in the the topic of
encouragement and discouragement; nor any other topic,
except for one who mentions it to clarify its condition.

— The scholars differed concerning the weak reports.
Those said that it is allowed to spread it and report it, made
three conditions for that:!”!

The first condition: The weakness must not be severe.

The second condition: That the basis of the deed that the
reward or the punishment is menlioned for, should be
established with an authentic evidence.

The third condition: That it not be believed that the
Prophet # really said it, He should rather be hesitant, not
convinced, but hoping in the topic of encouragement, and
fearing in the topic of discouragement

As for the form used to present it; then he does not say:
“The Messenger of Allah 3% said,” rather, he should say: “It
has been related from the Messenger of Allah’ or
“:nentioned from him,” it and the like.

If you are among average people, who do not differentiate
between “mentioned” and “it has beon said” and “he

{] Af-Hajiz Ion Elajar mentioned that, in what As-Sakhawi cited
from him in Al-Qawl Al-Badi (p. 364), and it has been
reported that Imam Ahmad said: “When something about
the lawful and the unlawful comes, then we are stern with its
chains, and when something about exortations and threats
(At-Targhib wat-Tarhib) comes, we are lenient with its
chains.” (Majma' Al-Fatdwa 18:65). And see the
introduction of Shaikh Muhammad Nasir Ad-Din Al-Albani
to the book: AtTarghit wat-Tarhib; for he mentioned the
sayings of the scholars regarding the ruling for acting on
weak IJadifhs in the case of the virtues of deeds.

SECTION:
Concerning the Belief in Al-Qadar
(The Divine Wil!)

The saved Sect, the People of the Sunmah and the Jamd’ah,
believe in Al-Qadar, its good and its evil...

Concerning, his statement: “The saved Sect, the People of the
Sunnah and the Jamd’ah, belicve in Al Qadar, ifs good and its
evil.”

The Commentary

His statement: “The saved Sect, the People of the Sunnah
and the Jamd’ah:’’ Its definition and discussion pre-
ceded in the beginning of the book.

*% [kis statement: “in A-Qadar, ifs good and its evil.”

— Al-Qadar linguistically means measurement. He, Exalted
is He, says:

fh go ¥ OD
Verily, We have crented all things with Qadar.> (AE
Qamar 54:49)

Concerning the Delief in Al-Qadar

(measurement) was after the creation?

The response to that is from one of two perspectives.

1. Either, that we say that this from the style of stating
sequence of what is mentioned, not sequence of
meaning, He only stated the creating before the
measuring that the portions of the Ayat be in accord.

Do you you see that Musa is more virtuous than Hardin?
Yet, Harn was mentioned before him in Sirah Ta Ha in
‏وز‎ statement, Exalted is He, concerning the magicians:
hag SS ‏انوأ امنا رب‎ Ce AS Bue
4Se, the magicians fell down prostrate. They said: “We
believe in the Lord of Haran and Miisa."> (Ta Ha
20:70)

So that the protions of the Aydt be in accord. And this does
not prove that what is mentioned last, is also last in order.

— Or, we say that the measurement intended here is its
proportion; that is to say: He created it in a particular
measurement such as His statement, Exalted is He:
Who has created (everything), and then proportioned
it.» (AL-A‘Ia 87:2)

So the meaning of Tagdir here is its proportion.

And this meaning is closer than the first one, because it
conforms to His saying, Exalted is He:
4Who has created (everything), and then proportioned
it.) (AL-A‘la 87:2)

268 Commentary on AL‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

And He, Exalted is He, also says:

4So. We did measure, and We are the Best to measure
(the things)» (Al-Mursalaat 77:23)

— But as for Al-Qada’, linguistically it means judgment.
Based upon this, we say, Al-Qadd’ and Al-Qadar are
different when used together, but synonymous when used
separately. According to the usage of the scholars: “They
are two words: When they are together, they differ Gm
meaning), and when they are separate, they are together
(having the same meaning).”

If it is said: “This is Allah’s Qadar,” then it includes the
Qnda’. But if they are mentioned together, then each of
them possesses its own meaning,

— So At-Taqdir (measurement) is what Allah, Exalted is He,
has willed from the beginning to be in His creation.

— As for Al-Qada’ (decree); then it is what Allah, Glorious
and Exalted is He, has decreed to be in His creation, from
bringing to existence or not, or alteration. Based on this, the
Tagdir preceded it.

If somebody says: When we say that Al-Qada’ is what
Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, decreed in His creation,
from bringing to existence or not, or alteration, and that Al-
Qadar preceded it, when they are used together, then this
contradicts His statement, Exalted is He:

Le has created everything, and has measured it exactly
according to its due measurements.» (Al-Furgan 25:2)

Then what is apparent from this Ayah is that the Tagdir

Concerning the Belief in Al-Qadar

‘Alqamah, may Allah have mercy upon him, said: “He is
the man who is stricken with an affliction, so he knows that
it is from Allah, so he is pleased and submits."

Sixthly: Attributing favors to the One who caused them.
Because if you do not believe in Al-Qadar, you will attribute
favors to the one who brings the favors. This is often found
among people who frequently enter upon the kings, Amtirs,
and ministers. When they get what they want, they
consider the the favor to be from them, and they forget
the favors of the Creator, Glorious be He.

Yes, it is correct that it is obligatory for the person to be
grateful to people, based on the saying of the Prophet #$:
“Whoever does something good for you, the recipro-
cate." But it is to be known that absolute basis of the
favor is from Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. He only
brought if forth at the hand of this man.

Seventhly: With it, a person will recognize the wisdom of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. Because if he looks at this
universe, and the amazing events that occur in it, he
recognizes, with this, the wisdom of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime; unlike the one who forgets Al-Qada’ and Al-Qadar;
for he does not derive this benefit.

His statement: “Its good und evil.”

') Reported by At-Tabari (28:80), and As-Suyati ascribed it lo

‘Abd bin Humaid, Ibn Al-Mundhir, and Al-Baihaqi in ‏ماك‎
‎Altman (6:227), and Iba Kathir ascribed it to Ibn Abi Hati
(8:163), See Nuskhatu Waki ‘An AL-A'mash (6).
Reported by Almad (2:68), Abu Dawad (1672) and the
wording is his, Tbn Hibban (8:199), An-Nasa‘i (5:82) and AL
Hakim (1:412), and AbElakim said: “Salt: based on the
conditions of the Two Shaikhs” and Adh-Dhahatn agreed,
and AL-Albant graded it Salt in Ag-Sahihah (254) and Al
Irwi’ (1617)

270 Commentary on AL‘Aqidah ALWasitiyyah

Hence, there are no problems.

*% And the belief in Al-Qadar obligatory. Its status in the
religion is thal it is one of the six pillars of faith, as the
Prophet #% informed Jibril, when he said to him: “What
is faith?” He replied: “That you believe in Allah, His
Angels, His Books, His Messengers, and the Last Day,
and that you believe in Pre-Decree, its good and its
evi]

And there are certain benefits derived from the belief in Al-

Qadar; among them:

Firstly: It is from the completeness of one’s faith, and faith
can not be complete except with that.

Secondly: It is from the completeness of one’s faith in
Rububiyyah; because Allah’s Qadar is from his actions.

Thirdly: By it, a person surrenders matters to his Lord.
Because when he knows that everything is by His Quda’
and Qadar; he will always resort to Allah to protect against
his problems and remove them, and he will always
attribute all prosperity to Allah, and recognize that it is
from Allah's favor upon him.

Fourthly: That a person recognize his own limits, so he will
not be proud when he does any good.

Fifthly: It lessens the effect of afflictions on the slave,
because when he knows that it is {rom Allah; then the
affliction less significant for him. As He, Exalted is He, says:

4And whosoever believes in Allah, He guides his
heart.» (At-Taghabun 64:11)

(1 Reported by Muslim (8) from ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab, may
Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Belief in Al-Qadar 273

the hands of men have earned, that Alléh may make
them taste a part of that which they have done. (Ar-
Rim 30:41)

So in this Ayah, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, explained
what resulted of turmoil, and its causes and ils objective, so
the turmoil is evil, and its cause is the evil works of man,
and the objective of it is:
That He may moke them taste a part of that which
they have done, in order thal they may return (by
repenting). ¥(Ar-Riim 30-41)

So, there is a wisdom behind the turmoil that appears in the
land and sea; it is by itself evil, but there is a tremendous
wisdom behind it, through which, what He measured is
goodness.

In the same way, disobedience and disbelief are evil, and it

is what Allah has measured, but due to a tremendous

wisdom, and it if were not for that, then the Shari‘ah would
be futile, and if it were not for that, then the creation of
people would be mere folly.

The belief in Al-Qadar, its good and its evil, does not
include belief in all the decreed matters; rather, the
decreed matters are divided into the categories of what
is universal and what is legislative:

— As for the universally decreed matters: If ‏للقللة‎ decrees

something that you dislike, it will occur, whether you like it

or not.

— As for the legislative decreed matters, a person may do

it, or not do it, but with respect to him being pleased with

it, there are details. If it is an acto of obedience to Allah, it is
necessary that he be pleased with it. If it is an act of

272 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wisitiyyal:

— The evil in Al-Qadar is that which does not suit the
nature of man, such that it results in harm or discomfort for
him.

— The good is what suits his nature, such that it results in
goodness or relief and happiness. All of that is from Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime.

* However, if it is said: “I low can it be said that there is
evil in Allah’s Qadar, while the Prophet # said: ‘The
evil is not ascribed to ‏لمجت‎

In response to that is to say that the evil in Al-Qadar is not

evil in relation to what was measured by Allah, but it is evil

to what it was measured for. 1

Because as we see it, Qadar inclues the Tagdir (measure-
iment} and that which manifests as what was decreed, just
as there is creating, and what results as created, and intent
and what results from what was intended. So in reference
to the Tagdir (measurement) of Allah for something, there is
no evil, rather it is good; even if it is not suitable for a
person and causes him discomfort and harm. But in
teference to what manifests as what is decreed, then we
say, that what manifests as what was decreed could be
good, or it could be evil; so the Qadar, both the good and
evil of it, what is intended by that is the manifest decree, its
good and evil.

We can cite an example of this, in His statement, Exalted is

<Turmoil has appeared on land and sea because of what

{Its reference preceded.

SECTION:
Concerning the Levels of Belief
in Al-Qadar

& Concerning his statement: “The belief in Al-Qadar is of
two levels : Each of the two levels includes two things.”

The Commentary

> The author only made this categorization because of
the disagreement; since the disagreement about ‏لق‎
‎Qadar does not cover all of its levels. The topic of Al
Qadar is one of the most problematic topics of knowl-
edge and religion for a person. And there has been
disagreement about it since the time of the Compa-
nions, may Allah be pleased with them. However, it
will not be a problem for the one who longs for the

274 Commentary on AL‘Agidah ALWasitiyyalr

disobedience, hating it, disliking it, and judgeing against it
is obligatory. As Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, said:

Let there arise out of you a group of people inviting to

all that is good, enjoining Al-Ma’rif (goodness) and
forbidding Al-Munkar (evil).} (AI ‘Imran 3104)

Based on this, it is compulsory upon us to believe in all the
decreed matters; from the view of them being what Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime has decreed. But from the view of
the decreed matters themselves, we may be pleased with it,
or not pleased with it; so if what occurs from a person is
disbelief, then we are not pleased with his disbelief, but we
are pleased that it is Allah that made it occur.

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar

end (in the past), knowledgeable of what His creation
will do; contrary to the meaning of AL-Qadim linguis-
tically. It could mean what is relatively old as it is in
His statement, Exalted is He:

€Until it returns like the old dried curved date stalk.
(Yasin 36:39)

What is known is that the dried, curved, date stalk is not

perpetually old. It is only old in relation to what comes

after it

So, Allah, Exalted is He, is described as knowing what
the creation will do with Ilis everlasting and ancient
knowledge which there is no end to its beginning.

He, the Mighty and Sublime, knows that so-and-so will do

such-and-such on such-and-such day in such-and-such

place, with His ancient and prior knowledge. So, it is

obligatory that we believe in that.

& And evidence for that is found in the Book, the Sunnah,
and through the intellect.

‘As for the Book, how many Aydt mention the universality
of Allah’s knowledge. For example:
» ‏لوو عي‎
‏فصحع‎ Allah is the All-Knower of each and everything >
(Al-Bagarah 2:282)
(6 A ‏كات‎ OP
Surely, Allah is Ever All-Knower of everything} (An-
Nisa’ 4:32)

Wie fer, 4 Eb
es 1225 ‏حكن كو‎ Cad ‏رنا‎

Commentary on Al-‘Aqidak Al-Wasitiyyah

© = The first level of the Belief m Pre-Decree

‎es‏ الأولى: الاينَان

‎The first level : The belief that Allah, Exalted is He, knows
what the creation will do, with His ancient knowledge,
that which He is described with, as everlasting and
forever...

‎~% Conceming his statement: “The first level : The belief that
Allah, Exalted is He, knows what the creution will do, with
His ancient knowledge, that which He is described with, as
everlasting and forever.”

‎The Commentary

‎His statement: “The first level : The belief that Allah, Exalted is
He, knows what the creation will do.”

‎The author did not mention that Allah knows what He,
Himself, does because there is no disagreement in this
issue. He only mentioned what there is a disagreement
about, and that is: Does Allah know what the creation will
do, or He does not know it except after it has occurred from
them?

‎The Madhhab of the Salaf of and the Imams is that Allah,
Exalted is He, knows that.

‎@ His statement: “With His ancient knowledge :” Al-Qadin.
(the ancient) in their terminology refers to the one who
has no beginning to His being the first. That is to say
that He has been, ever since time that does not have an

279

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar

© His statement: “that which He is described with, as
everlasting and forever ;’” That He is desctibed with it
eternally; negates ignorance. And that He is described
with it forever; negates forgetfulness.

And based upon this, the knowledge of Allah, the Mighty

and Sublime, was never preceded by ignorance, and will

never be overtaken by forgetfulness, as Musa, may the

Salah and Salam be upon him, said to Fir‘awn:

455% LASS ‏يد رق ب‎ hd
€The knowledge thereof is with my Lord, in a Record.

My Lord is neither unaware nor does He forget.» (Taha
20:52)

— in contrast to the creation’s knowledge, which is
preceded by ignorance, and will surely be overtaken by
forgetfulness.

Tlence, it is obligatory upan us to believe that Allah knows
what the creation shall do with His fore-knowledge that is
described as being eternal and forever.

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

278

| Our Lord! You comprehend all things in mercy and
| knowledge .» (Ghafir 40:7)

wo ‏يكل‎ US ag

That you may know that Allah has power over all
things, and that Allah surrounds (comprehends) all
things in (His) Knowledge.} (At-Taléq 65:12)

— As for the Sunnah, the Messenger 3% informed us that
Allah recorded the decrees of all the creatures fifty
thousand years before the creation of the heavens and the
earth; and that whatever befalls man could not have missed
him, and whatever misses him could not have befallen him;
and that the pens have dried up and the sheets have been
! foided.

There are many Hadiths conceming this matter.

— As for the intellect; then what is well known by the
intellect, is that Allah, Exalted is Ie, is the Creator, and
other than Him is created. So, intellectually, it is compul-

sory that the Creator has absolute knowledge of His
creation.

|

| And many other Ayét that cannot be enumerated.
y y

I

Alluh, Exalted is He, has indicated that in His statement:

BELEN
Should not He Who has created know? And He is the
Most Kind and Courteous (to His slaves) All-Aware (of
everything).» (Al-Mulk 67:14)

So the Book, the Surtnal and the intellect - all of them prove
that Allah, Exalted is He, is knowledgeable of what the
creation will do with His eternal knowledge.

طمن

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar 281

man dies of either a known cause or unknown cause; it is
known to Allah, it is not hidden from Him. Contrary to a
person’s knowledge of his lifespan; for he does not know
his lifespan. He does not know where he will die, nor when
he will die, and he does not what the cause of his death will
be, and he does not know what state he will die in. We ask
Allah, Exalted is He, to grant us a good end.

This is the first thing, in the first level

Concerning his statement: “Then, Allah recorded the
measurements for the creation in Al-Lawh Al-Mahfiz.”

This is the second thing, from the first level, and that is that
Allah recorded the measurements of creation in Al-Lawh
Al-Mahfiiz.

Al-Lawh Al-Mahfiiz (the Guarded Tablet): We are not aware
of its nature, from what it is made, is it from wood or from
metal, or from gold, or from silver, or from emerald? Allah
knows best about that. We are only to believe that there is a
Tablet in which Allah has recorded the measurements of
everything. We do oot any right to search beyond that. But
if there is something from the Book and the Sunnah which
guides us to something regarding it, then itis obligatory for
us to believe it.

It is described as Mahfiz (guarded) because it is guarded
from the hands of creation; so, none can do anything to it,
or change anything from it. Secondly, it is preserved from
alteration; Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, shall not alter
anything from it, because He recorded it from His
knowledge, as the author shall soon mention. That is
why Shaikh Al-Islam, may Allah have mercy upon him,
said: “Indeed what is recorded in Alt awh AL-Mahfiz can never
change.”’ Changes only occur from the books that are under
the custody of the Angels.

Commentary on AlAqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎agg‏ من الطَاعَاتٍِ وَالْمَعَاصِي وا
‎And He knows all their conditions, from obedience,‏
‎disobedience, provisions, and lifespans. Then, Allah‏

‎recorded the measurements for the creation in Al-Lawh
AL-Mahfiiz 1

‎His statement: “And He knows all their conditions, from
obedience, disobedience, provisions, and lifespans.”

‎The evidence of that is what is affirmed in the Two Sahifis,
from ‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ad, may Allah be pleased with
him, who said: “The Messenger of Allah # narrated to us,
and he is the truthful, entrusted, he said: ‘Indeed the
creation of one of you is gathered in the womb of his
mother...” He mentioned the stages of the fetus in the
womb. And he said: “Then, Allah will send an Angel and
he will be commanded to write four things. It will be said
to him: ‘Write down his deeds, his provision, his lifespan,
and whether he shall be a miserable or happy.” And he
mentioned the Hadith until its completion.“

‎So, Allah knew that before the person is created.

‎So our acts of obedience are known to Allah, and our acts
of disobedience are known to Allah, and our provisions are
known to Him, and our lifespans are known to him. If a

‎41 Reported by Al-Bukhari (328) and Muslim (2643), from the
Hadith of Yon Mas‘td, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar 283

«Nay! This is @ Glorious Qur'an, in ALLawh Ab
Mahfizz (the Guraded Tablet). (Al-Burdj 85:21-22)

That is, it is mentioned in this Tablet.

Whal is important is that we believe that the measurements
of creation are recorded in the Al-Lawi: Al-Mahfaz (the
Guraded Tablet), and that what is recorded in this Tablet
does not change, because Allah commanded that whatever
that shall be until the Day of Resurrection be recorded in it.

اكْنْبِ ‎G‏ هُوَ كَائِنٌ إلى يَؤم ‎dB‏ ...

The first thing which Allah created is the Pen. He said to
it: “Write.” It replied : "What should [ write?” He said:
“Write whatever that shall happen until the Day of
Resurrection.”

Conceming his statement: “The first thing which Allah

created is the Pen. He said to it: ‘Write.’ It replied: ‘What

should I write?’ He suid : ‘Write whatever that shall happen until

the Day of Resurrection."

“His statement: “The first thing which Allah created is the
Pen. He said to it: Write!” He commanded it to write,
even though the Pen is an inanimate being!

Its reference preceded,

282 Commentary on Ab’Agidah AlWasitiyyah

@ His statement: “The measurements for the creation.” That
is to say the measurements of all the creatures. The
apparent meaning of the texts is that it includes what
the person does, and what animals do, and it is general
and all-encompassing.

% But, is this recording general or specific?

We could reply saying: We cannot categorically say
whether it is specific or general.

For example: The Noble Qur'an, is it written in Al-Lawh Al-
Mahfiiz, with these Aydt, and the letters, or what is recorded
in Al-Lawk Al-Mahfaz is its mention, and that it shall be
revealed upon Muhammad #&, and that it would be a light
and guidance for people and the like?

So this is plausible. If we consider the apparent meanings
of the texts, we say their apparent meanings are that
Qur'an is recorded generally and specifically. But if we
consider the fact that Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He,
spoke the Qur'an when revealing it, we would say that
what is recorded in Al-Lawh Al-Mahfiiz is the mention of the
Qur’én. And it is not necessary that because it was
mentioned in Al-Lawh AlL-Malfiiz thal it was recorded in
it. Just as Allah, Exalted is He, says concerning the Qur'an:

Ra ‏قى ثر‎ Ee
4And verily, it is (announced) in the Scriptures of
former people.» (Ash-Sliu'ard’ 26:196)

That is in the earlier Books, And what is known is that the
text of the Qur’an is not found in the past Books; only its
mention is found. And it is possible for us to say the same
about His statement, Exalted is He:

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar 285

said: “What should I write?” That is to say: “What thing
should J write?”

‎“He said: that is Allab.‏ ي.

‎Write what shall happen until the Day of Resurrection.”
So, the Pen wrote, with the command of Allah,
everything that will happen until the Day of Resurrec-
tion.

‎Look at how the Pen knew what would be until the Day of

‎Resurrection. So it wrote it because the command of Allah,

‎the Mighty and Sublime, could not be disobeyed.

‎% 115 statement: “What shall happen until the Day of
Resturrection:”” It encompasses the actions of Allah,
Fxalted is He, and the actions of the creation.

‎Whatever happens tu a person could not have missed him
and whatever misses him could not have happened to
him...

‎Concerning his statement: “Whatever happens fo @ person

‎could not have missed him and whatever misses him could not

‎have happened to him.”

‎If you believe in this statement, you will enjoy ease of
mind. Whatever happens to man will never miss him.

‎CO ‏كا‎

‎24 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎How can a speech be directed to an inanimate being?

‎‘The answer to that is the inanimate beings, with respect to
Allah, are sensible beings to which addressing them is
correct.

‎Allah, Exalted is He, says:

‎Then, He Istawd (rose over) towards the heaven
when it was smoke, and said to it and to the earth:
“Come both of you willingly or unwillingly.” They
both said: “We come, willingly.”> (Fussilat 41:11)

‎He was addressing both of them, and also mentioned their
reply, Their reply came with the use of the sensible plural;
“Ta'i'in (willingly) as sensible beings; not “Ta’i‘at (will-
ingly)” as inanimate or insensible things.

‎He, Fxalted is He, say:
4We said: “O fire! Be you coolness and safety for
Ibrahim! (Al-Anbiya’ 21:69)

‎And it was so. And He, Exalted is He, says:

‎vee ge Whe Bote pee

‎40 ‏له‎ Ob AG he aif Sc

‎40 you mountains. Glorify (Allah) with him! And you
birds (ulso)!> (Saba’ 34:10)

‎The mountains were glorifying Allah with him:

‎The end result is that Allah commanded the Pen to write;
the Pen went to implement the order, but it did not know
what to write, because the command was general, so it

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar 287

The author said: “The Pens have dried up and the sheets
have been folded.”
“The Pens : They are the Pens of Al-Qadar, which Allah
wrote the measurements with. They have dried up and
have been exhausted.
“The sheets have been folded: This is a means of
expression to say that the affair has ended.
In Sahif: Muslim) frown Jabir, may Allah be pleased with
him, he said: “Suragah bin Malik bin Ju‘sham came, and

said: ‘O the Messenger of Allah! Explain our religion to us

as if we were just created today. What is the case of the
deeds today? Is it what the pens have dried and what the
measurements have set in motion? Or is it what we shall do
in the future?” He said: ‘No! Rather, it is what the Pens have
dried upon and what the measurements have been set in
motion. He said: ‘Then, what about the deeds?’ He replied:
AWork! Everyone will be facilitated (for what has been
decreed for him).’”
> His statement: “As Allah, Cxalted is He, has stated :'' The
letter Kaf (ie. as) in this expression is to express a
reason.
4De you not know: O you being spoken to!
4That indeed Allah knows what is in the heaven und on
the earth: This is general; He knows whatever is
contained in both of them, in their contents, descrip-
lions, actions and conditions.
Verily, it is in a record }: That is, A-Lawh Al-Mahfaz.
Verily, that is easy for Allah>: Meaning, the matler of
such recording is easy for Allah.

Reported by Muslim (2648).

286 Commentary on AL’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

> The meaning of “whatever happens ‏"ما‎ Tt implies that
the meaning is: “what is decreed to happen to him, it
will never miss him’ and it is also implies the meaning:
“what actions occurred with him, could never ot have
missed him, even if a person wished that.” They are
two correct meanings that are not contradictory.

“And whatever misses him could not have happened to him’
meaning - whatever is decreed to miss him, it could not
have happened to him. Or the meaning is whatever he
missed to do. Because it is known that it would not result
from him, even if a person wishes for that. And they are
both correct meanings which are not contradictory.

The Pens have dried up and the sheets have been folded. As
Altéh, Exalted is He, has stated: 4Know you not that
Allah knows all that is in heaven and on earth? Verily,
if is in ‏م‎ record. Verily, that is easy for Allah.» (Al-
Hajj 22:70) And He says: 4No calamity befalls, on the
earth or in yourselves, but it is in a record, before We
initiated it. Verily, that is easy for Allah.» (Al-Hadid
5722) sau

‎eee‏ سس

Conceming the Levels of Belief in ALQadar

ale ‏في مَوَاضِعٌ‎ ON ‏سُبْحَائهُ‎ ale! CE),

This measurement, which is in accordance with His
knowledge, Glorious is He, is contained in places, in
general and specific...

Concerning his statement: “This measurement, witich is ir

accordance with His knowledge, Glorious is He, is contained in

places, in general and specific.”

4 His saying: “In places :” meaning, in places other than
AL-Lawh Al-Mahfuz

He has written whatever He willed in Al-Lawh Al-
Mahfaiz. When He creates the body of the fetus, before the
soul is breathed into it, He sends an Angel to it, and it is
commanded with four statments. It is said to him : “Write
his provision, his lifespan, his deeds, and whether he will
be miserable or happy” and the like

288 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

% Concerning his statement: “And He said:

4No calamity befalls on the earth or in yourselves but it
is in a record, before We initiated it. Verily, that is easy
for Alla.» (Al-Hadid 57:22)

€On the earthy: such as drought, earthquakes, floods
and other than that.

4Or i yourselves}: such as illness, destructive
epidemics and other than that.

4Bul it is in a record }: That is, m Al-Lawh Al-Mahfaz.

We initiated it}: That is, before We create it. The
pronoun contained in the clause: <We initiated it}
implies that it refers to the calamity; and il implies
that it refers to the souls; and, it implies that it refers
to the earth, All of which is correct. For the calamity
was recorded before Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
cteated it, and before He created the afflicted soul,
and before He created the carth.
It is contained in Sahit Muslim! from ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr,
may Allah be pleased with him, who said: “The Messenger
of Allah #% said: ‘Allah had written the decrees for the
creations, fifty thousand years before He created the
heavens and earth; and His Throne was over the water.”

31 Reported by Muslim (2653)

Conceming the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar 21

4Therein (that night) is decreed eoery matter of
ordainments. Amran (a Command) from Us. Verily.
We are ever sending (the Messengers).» (Ad-Dukhan

This measurement (At-Tagdir), the extreme among the
Qadariyyal of the past rejected it, but those who reject it
today are few....

The author said: “This measurement (Al-Tagdir), the
extreme among the Qadariyyah of the past rejected it,
but those who reject it today are few.”

“This measurement (At-Tagdir):” That is, the knowledge
and the recording were rejected by the extreme among
the Qadariyyah. They would say that Allah does not
know the actions of the slave, except after they exist,
and that they were not recorded. And they say that the
matter resuming; that is renewable. However, the later
generations of them acknowledge the knowledge and
the recording, but they reject the will (Mashi’zh) and the
creation." This is in relation to the actions of the

Translation note: Meaning, they agree Lhal Allah knows of, and
recorded the actions of the creatures before they occurred, but
they reject that Allah willed and created those actions, while the
earlier group rejected Allah's knowledge and recording of the
actions of the creatures as well.

290 Commentary on Al-’Aqiluh AL-Wisitiyyah

‘Then, he explained these places, by his saying: “He has
written whatever He wished in Al-Liawh Al-Mahfiz.”

“When He creates the body of the fetus, before the soul is
breathed into it, He sends an Angel to it, and it is
commanded with four statments. It is said to him: Write
his provision, his lifespan, his deeds, and whether he will
be miserable or happy’ and the like.”

ee ane.

These are two places:

The first: Al-Lawh Al-Mahfiz; the evidence and detailed
discussion about that preceded. 1

The second: The writing of the lifespan of the fetus in the
womb of its mother; and its evidence from the Hadith of Ibn
Mas’ad, may Allah be pleased with him, preceded.!!

The third place: What he indicated by his saying: “And the
like;” and it is the yearly decrees which take place on
Lailatul-Qadar (the Night of Power). On Laifatel-Qadar,
everything thai will occur that year will recorded, as He,
Exalted is He, says:

Cl ts reference preceded, and it is in the Two Sahihs.

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar 293,

% Concerning his statement: “As for the second level.” That
is among the levels of belief in Al-Qadar.

+ 1115 statement: ‘That is Allah’s effective will (Mashi ah)

and His all-encompassing power (Qudrah). That is the
belief that whatever Allah wills, will be, and whatever
He has not willed, will not be. And there is nothing in
the heavens and on the earth that moves or is still,
except by Allah's will, Glorious is He.”
That is, that you believe that Allah’s will effects
everything, whether that has to do with His actions,
or the actions of His creation, and that His power is all-
encompassing.

i ‏كانت‎ oy
bebe ‏كات‎
‎4Allah is not such that anything in the heavens or in

the earth escapes Him. Verily, He is All-Knowing, All-
Omnipotent» (Fatir 35:44)

This level includes of two things: Al-Masli’ah (Will) and
Creation.

adit. te

— As for Al-Mashi‘ah (the will), it is compulsory upon us to
believe that the Will of Allah, Exalted is He, has effects
everything, and that His power encompasses everything,
whether they are His actions or the actions of the creation.
— As for it encompassing His actions, the matter is obvious
concerning this.

— As for it encompassing the actions of the creatures, then
it is because all creation is part of the dominion of Allah,
Exalted is He. Nothing can exist in His dominion except
what He wills.

“ The evidence of this, is His statement, Glorious is He:

292 Commentary on ALAgrdah ALWisitiyyak

creatures.
As for the relation to Allah’s actions; then no one rejects
that Allah was knowledgeable of that before it occurred.
And these people - those who reject Allah's knowledge of
the slave's actions - the ruling for them in the Sharfah is
that they are disbelievers; because they belie Allah's
statement, Exalted is He:

4And Allah is the All-Knower of everything.» (Al-
Bagarah 2:282)

— among other Aydt, and they oppose what is known in
the religion by necessity.

fad

G5 ats ‏الله‎

As for the second level. That is Allah's effective will
(Mashi'ah) and His all-encompassing power (Quidrah)
That is the belief that whatever Allah wills, will be, and
whatever He has not willed, will not be. And there is
nothing in the heavens and on the earth that moves or is
still, except by Allah's will, Glorious is He....

Concerning the Levels of Belief in ALQadar 295

SE GI ty ‏مِنَ‎
‎There shall not be, in His Dominion, what He did not
want, and that He, Glorious is He, has power over all
things, of that which exists, and that which does nat exist.

His statement: “There shall not be, in His Dominion, what
He did not want: This expression needs to be
expounded upon. ‘There shall not be, in His Dominion,
what He did not want, by the universal Irddah. As for
the Shariah type of Irddah, then there will be, in His
Dominion, what He did not want.

Therefore, we have to categorize the Iradah (want, intent,
volition) into two categories: The universal Iradal1, will and
the legislative (Shari‘ah) type of Inadah,

— The universal Indduh, has the meaning of Al-Mashiah (the
will). Its example is the statement of Nah, may lhe Salah
and Salam be upon him, to his people:

4s
‏يريد أن‎

‎my advice will not profit you, even if I wish to‏ فجخو
‎give you good counsel, if Allah wants to keep you‏
‎astray.» (Hud 11:34)‏

‎- The legislative radah, has the meaning of love. Its
example is His statement, Exalted is He:

‎1

‎The Shaiklt, may Allah have mercy upon him, explained the
meaning of universal and Sharfah Iradah carlicr in the first
volume.

‎Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyaht

‎Had He so willed, He would indeed have guided you
all.) (ALAn‘am 6:149)

‎And His statement, Glorious is He:

‎Hes Bl BO SA ‏رَيْكَ‎ aS >
4And if your Lord had so willed, He could surely have
made mankind one Ummahy (Hiid 11:118)

‎And His statement, Exalted is He

‎4 Allah had willed, succeeding generations would not
have fought against each other, after clear Bayyindl
(Verses) of Allah had come to them, but they differed -
some of them believed and others disbelieved. If Allah
had willed, they would not have fought against one
another.» (Al-Bagarah 2:253)

‎These Aydt prove that the actions of the slaves are

‎contingent upon Allah’s will.

‎And He, Exalted is He, says:
€But you cannot will unless Allah wills.) (Al-Insin
76:30)

‎‘This proves that the slave’s will is included under, and in
accord with, Allah’s will.

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar

which does not exist.”

> “All things:” So Allah has power over it, from that
which exits; to make it not exists, or to alter it, and from
that which does not exist; to bring it into existence.

So the Qudrah relates to what is existed, by bringing it into
existence, or making it non-existent, or altering it, and it
relates to what does not exist, by making it non-existent, or
bringing into existence.

For example, everything in existence, Allah is able to make
it non-existent, and He is able to alter it; meaning to change
it from one state to another. And everything that is non-
existent,; then Allah is able to make it exist, whatever it is,
Allah, Exalted is He, says:

Indeed, Allah is nen over all things.» (Ab-Bagarah
2:20)

* Some scholars mention an exception for that, and say:
“Except His Essence.” He cannot overpower it! And
they claim that the intellect supports thal!!

We say; what do you mean by saying that He is not
powerful over Himself?

— If what you mean that He is not able to make Himself
non-existent, or cause any imperfection to befall Himself;
then we agree with you, that neither imperfection nor non-
existence can occur to Allah. But we do nol agree with you
that this has to do with his Qudrah (power), because the
Qudrah only has to do with something that is possible. As
for a thing that is necessary, or impossible, then funda-
menially, the Qudrak does not relate to it; because whatever
is necessary, it is impossible that it not exist, and what is
impossible, it is impossible that it exists.

296 Commentary on Al'Agidah AL Wasitiyyah

een COE ‏أن‎ LY AG}
Allah wants to accept your repentance>. (An-Nisa®
4:27)

The two categories of Iradah differ in what they necessitate
and what they are relative io!

— Concerning their relativity; the universal Irddah relates to
what occurs, whether He likes it or hates it. The legislative
Jradah has to do with what He loves, whether il occurs or
not.

— Concerning what it necessitates; the universal Irddah is
bound to occur as He has willed it, while the legislative
Jradah is not bound to occur as Te has willed.

© Based on this, the statement of the author: “There shall
not be, in His Dominion, what He did not want :” Refers to
the universal Irddah.

* If somebody says: “Are acts of disobedience part of
what Allah wanted?”

The response is that, from the perspective of the legislative
Irédah, they are not what Allah wanted, because He does
not love them. And from the perspective of the universal
Iradah, then it is what He, Glorious is Ile, wanted, because
they occur by His Mashr‘alt (will)

Concerning his statement: “And that He, Gloriaus is He,

has power over all things, of that which exists, and that

{1 Translation note: Meaning, Inidah can carry the meaning of
willing a matter, in the case of which, Allah’s will can not be
altered, or it can carry the meaning of to like or encourage, or
want, or love a matter, in which case the meaning of “ Allah
wants” is that He loves it, or likes that. So Irddah is used both
ways, but its meaning will differ based upon the context.

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar

* This is correct without any doubt.
2 ‏لحف‎ there are both textual and rational proofs for this.
— As for the textual proofs, Allah, Exalted is He, has said:

‎Bs tly‏ كل عه
‎Allah is the Creator of all things.» (Az-Zumar 39:62)‏
‎He, Exalted is He, also says:‏

‎4333 ‏بل لا‎ 3
Were they created by nothing. or were they themselves
the creators? Or did they create the heavens and the
eurth? Nay! But, they have no firm belief.> (AETir
52:35-36)
So it is not possible that anything exist in the heavens or
earth except that Allah Alone is its Creator.

‎Allah posed a challenge to the idol-worshippers and we
were commanded to listen to it. He says:

‎suer ed

‎fo Sasi oA‏ خَلَما أ

‎a 3

‎Ges
‎40 mankind! A similitude has been oo su listen to
it (carefully): Verily! Those on whom you call besides
Allah, cannot create (even) a fly, even though they
combine together for the purpose.» (Al-Hajj 22:73)

‎It is known that those they call on besides Allah are held in
esteem by them, because they chose them as Lords. If thase
held in esteem by them are incapable of creating a fly,
which is the most insignificant and the weakest of things,
then their being unable to create something more, is even

‎298 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎— If what you meant by your statement that He does not
have power over His Essence, is that He does not have the
ability to do whatever He wills, and therefore cannot come
or the like, this is a mistake. Rather, He does have power
over that, and 114 does it. If we say that He does not have
power over such actions; then that will be of the greatest
imperfections which are impossible for Allah, Glorious is
He.

‎With this, it is known that this exception concerning the

‎generality of Alléh’s power is wrong by all standards.

‎The author only mentioned this statement to refute the
Qadariyyah who say that Allah has no power over the
actions of the slave, and that the slave is independent in
his actions!

‎But the proofs in the Book and the Sunnah about the

‎encompassing power of Allah clearly refute them.

‎—-- eS

‎So, there is uo creature on the earth or in the heaven,
except that Allah is its Creator, Glorious is He, there is no
creator other than Him, and there is no lord aside from

‎oe

‎“ Concerning his statement: “So, there is 10 creature on the
earth or in the heaven, except that Allih is its Creator,
Glorious is He, there ts no creator other than Him, and there
is no Lord aside from Him.”

Concerning the Levels of Belief in ‏مهكد م‎ 301

He hus created everything, and has measured it exactly
according fo its due measurements.» (Al-Furgan 25:2)

Avyaét in this regard are many.
There is also a specific Ayah regarding this subject, that is,
the creation of the actions of the worshippers.
Ibrahim said to his people:
While Allah has created you and what works you dol}
(As-Saffat 37:96)

The Ma (what) used here is infinitive; and the meaning of
the statement is thus: “He created you, and your deeds.”
This is a text stating that the person's actions are created by
Allah, Exalted is He.

So if it were said: “Is it not possible that Ma (what) is
considered a relative pronoun here, and with that, the
meaning of the statement will be: ‘He created you, and He
created that which you do?’ Then how is it possible for us
to say that the Ayah is a proof of the creation of the actions
of the slave, if the word Ma (what) here is considered to be
a relative pronoun?”

The answer is that when that which is done, is created by
Allah, if necessitates that the persons act be created.
Because what is done, it was by the act of the person; so
the person is the one who generates the act in whatever is
done; so when that which was done is created by Allah,
and it is the action of the slave; that necessitates that the
action of the slave is created. So the Ayali is evidence that the
actions of the slaves are created in either of the two interpreta-
fions,

— As for the rational evidence that the actions of the slave

300 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

more obvious.

Rather, He says:

be sales G4
And if the fly snatched mvay a thing from them, they

would have no power to release it from the fly.» (Al-
Hajj 22:73) Met

They so incapable, that they cannot even defend them-
selves from a fly and exact their right from it,

If it is asked: How could a fly take away something from
these idols?!

The response: Some scholars say that this is rhetorical. That
is to say: Assuming a fly snatches something away from
them, they would have no power to release if from the fly.

Some of them say that it is a reality. They say that a fly will
land on these idols and suck up the good things on it, and
the idols are not to extract what the fly has sucked up.
And when it is incapable of defending itself, and salvaging
its own right, then it is even more incapable of defending
others and salvaging their rights.

The point is that Allah, Exalted is He, is the Creator of
everything, and that there is no creator except for Allah. So
believing in the encompassing ability of Ailah, the Mighty
and Sublime, to create, and that he is the Creator of

everything, even the actions of the slaves, based upon His
statement, Exalted is He:

PEELS os ae FBS ay
Allah is the Creator of ull things.» (Ar-Ra‘d 13:16)
He, Exalted is He, also says:

‎sete:‏ مهام

Conceming the Levels of Belief in ALQadar

that which you created.”""")

Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, also says:
450 blessed is Allah, the Best of Creators.» (Al-
Mu‘mindn 23:14)

So there is a creator, but Allah, Exalted is He, is the Best of
creators. So what is the response to the saying of the
author?
The response is that the creation that is attributed to Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, is originating and transforming
things from what they are to completely different things. So
none can originate and create things except Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, and none can transform things from
what they were to a completely different thing except
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.
And what was said: “that he creates” in reference to the
creature; then it means that he changes something from a
description to another description. For example, wood is
changed, in that it is taken from a tree and changed,
through carpentry work, into a door. Its transformation to a
door is called a creation, but it is not the creation that is
specific to the Creator, and that is bringing it into existence
from non-existence, or changing a particular thing to
another thing entirely.
% Conceming his statement: “There is no lord aside from
Hin.” That is; that Allah alone is the Lord; the Disposer
of all affairs. ‘This is a restriction in reality.

But perhaps one responds to this with what is narrated

Its reference preceded (1:22) and it is in the Two Sahil from
“Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidal: Al-Wis

are created by Allah; its basis is (hat the actions of man
stem from two things; strong determination and adequate
ability.

For example, if I want to perform an action, this action will

not exist except if it were preceded by two maiters, They
are:

First: A strong determination to perform the action,
because if you are not determined, you will nat do it.

Second: Adequate ability; because if you do not have the
ability to perform the action, you will not do it. Su the One
Who created this ability in you, is Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, He is the One who puts the determination in you.
‘The Creator of this complete eause is also the Creator of
that which enacts this cause.

— The second rational view is that we say that the action is
an attribute of the doer, while the attribute is a subsidiary
of the object described. So, as person himself is a creation of
Allah, then his actions are created, because the attribute is a
subsidiary of the object described.

So, it becomes clear by the evidences, that the actions of the

person are created by Allah, and they are included in the

generality of creating, by texts and rational proofs. And the
textual evidences are of two types: General and specific,

And the rational evidences are also understood from two

perspectives.

“% Concerning his statement: “There is no creator other that
Him.”

+ If you say: This restriction is refuted by the fact that
there is another creator besides Allah. A picture-maker
considers himself a creator. Rather, it is even related in
the ‏:مدخ‎ that he is a creator: “The picture-makers
shall be punished. 1t will be said to them: ‘Give life to

Conceming the Levels of Belief in ‏تقد كف‎

And with that, He has commanded His slaves to obey
Him, and to obey His Messengers and prohibited them
from disobeying Him....

a ‏ا‎

Conceming his statement: “Aid with that, He has com-
manded His slaves to obey Hint, and to obey His Messengers and
prohibited them from disobeying Him.”

* That is, despite His creating, and His Rubibiyyah which
is all-encompassing, He did not leave His slaves in
neglect, and He did not deny them choices. Rather, He
commanded them to obey Him, and to obey His
Messengers, and prohibited them from disobeying
Him.

And His ordering of this, is an order of what is possible; so

the one who is commanded is created by Allah, the Mighty

and Sublime, and his action is created by Allah, yet; he is
still commanded and prohibited.

And if man were forced to do his deeds, then His order

would have been an order that is not possible. Allah, the

Mighty and Sublime, says:

SAllah burdens not ‏ه‎ soul beyond its ability.» (Al-
Bagarah 2:286)

He, Exalted is He, also says:

304 Commentary on Al-‘Aqitlah Al-Wasitiyyah

in some Hadiths that affirm Rubibiyyah to other than
Allah:

Concerning the stray camel, the Prophet 2 said: “Leave it.
It has its water reservoir with it, and its footwear. It will
produce water and eat trees until its Rabb finds it") Its
Rabb is its owner.

And in some of the versions of the Hadith of Jbri, it says
“4When the slave-woman gives birth to her lord (Rabb).

What would be the means reconciling between this, and the
statement of the author that: “there is no lord aside from
Him.”?

We say, that Allah’s Rubiibiyyah is general and perfect;
Allah is the Lord of everything. He is not questioned about
what He does with His creation, because all of His actions
are full of mercy and wisdom. That is why Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, decrees drought, illness, death and
wounds for people and the animals. We say that this is
predicated on absolute perfection and wisdom.

But as for the creatures Rububiyyah over creatures, then it is
an imperfect and inadequate Rubibfyyah. It can not exceed
its limits, and man does not have complete authority with
it. His authority and control is restricted either by
legislation, or by customary habits.

Al-Bukhari (2429) and Muslim (1722) (1), from the Hadith of
Zaid bin Khalid, may Allah be pleased with hin.
Reported by Al-Bukharé (50) and Muslim (9) from the Hadith
of Aba Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar 307

Meaning that Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, loves the
good-doers; this is according to His statement, Exalted
is He:

€And do good. Truly, Allah loves Al-Muhsinin (the
good-doers).} (Al-Bagarah 2:195)
And Al-Muttagin; due to His statement:

So long, as they are true to you, stand you true to
them. Verily, Allah loves Al-Muttagin (those who
have Tagqwa).> (At-Tawbah 9:7)

And Al-Mugsitin, due to His statement:

And be equitable. Verily! Allah loves those who are
equitable. ‏عق بزب ةلماح‎ 49:9)

So He, the mighty and Sublime, loves these people, even
though He is the one who decreed these deeds which He
loves for them. So, their actions are beloved to Allah, and
what He wants, both universally and legislatively. So the
Muiltsin (doer of good) maintains the obligatory and the
recommended acts; and the Mutagi (the person with
Taga}, maintains the obligatory, while the Mugsit (the
just) avoids injustice in his dealings with people.
* Concerning his statement: “And He is pleased with those
who believe and perform righteous decds ; and He does not
love the disbelievers.””

+ “He is pleased with those who believed and perform
righteous deeds.” The proof of that is His statement,

306 Commentary on Ab‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

We burden not any soul, but with what it can bear.»
(AL-An‘dm 6:152)

This proves that they are able to act in obedience to Allah,
and they are able to stay away from disobeying Him, and
that they are not coerced to do that.

And He, Glorious is He, loves Al-Muttagin (those who
have Taqwa}, and ALMuhsinin (those who do good), and
Al-Mugsitin (those who ave just). And He is pleased with
those who believe and perform righteous deeds; and He
does not love the disbelievers. And He is not pleased with
people zoho are Al-Fasiqin (rebellious). And He does not
command Al-Tahsha’ (lewdness and indecency). And He
is not pleased with disbelief for His slaves. And He does
not love Al Fasad (mischief-making)....

Concerning his statement: “‘And He, Glorious is He, loves
Al-Muttagin (those who have Taqwa), and Al-Mulisinin
{those who do good), and Al-Mugsitin (those who are
just).”

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar 309

Concerning his statement: “And He is not pleased with
people who are Al-Fasiqin (rebellious):” the proof of this
is His statement, Exalted is He:

But if you are pleased with them, certainly Allah is
not pleased with the people who are Al-Fasigin
(rebellious) .» (At-Tatwbah 9:96)

A Fasiq is the one who leaves from obedience to Allah. It
can be used to refer to a disbeliever and it can be used to
refer to the disobedient.

In His statement, Exalted is He:

is then he who is a believer like him who is Fasig? Not
equal are they. As for those who believe and do righteous
good deeds, for them are Gardens (Paradise) as an
enterlainment, for what they used fo do, And as for those
who are Fasigin, their abode will be the Tire, every time
they want to leave it, they will be put back into it, and it
will be said to them: “Taste you the torment of the Fire
which you used to deny.” (As-Sajdah 32:18-20)

What is intended by the Fasiq here is the disbeliever.
As for His statement, Exalted is He:

40 you who believe! If a Fasiq comes to you with a

Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah ALWiasitiyyah

Exalted is He:

And ihe first to embrace Islam of the Muhdjirin (those
who emigrated) and the Ansar (the helpers) and also
those who followed them exactly (in faith). Alldh is well-
pleased with them as they are well-pleased with Him.>
(Al-Tmebah 9:100)

And He, Exalted is He, also says:

oe ‏اع‎

a4
i fe A A c

Verily, those who believe and do righteous good deeds,
they are the best of creatures. Their reward with their
Lord is ‘Adn (Eden) Paradise (Gardens of Eternity),
underneath which rivers flow, they will abide therein
forever, Allah Well-Pleased with them, and they with
Lim.» (Al-Bayyinah 98:7-8)

* Concerming his statement: “He docs not love,” that is
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, (does not love) “the
disbelievers.””

The proof of that is His statement, Exalted is He:
* ‏اكير‎ CA Gi OB NS o>

4But if they turn away, then Allah does not like the
dishelievers.» (Al ‘Ineran 3:32)

Even though disbelief accurs by His will, it occurring by
His will does not necessitate that it is beloved to Him,
Glorious and Exalted is He.

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Oadar 311

<We found our fathers doing it.» (ALA raf 7:28)
Because it was the truth, that was undeniable. But:
ah, A Sp
4And Allah has commanded us of it.» (ALA ‘raf 7:28)

was false, that is why He belied them, and commanded His
Prophet to say:

€Nay, Allah never commands of Fahsha’}» (ALA ‘rdf

7:28)
He did not say they did not find their fathers doing that,
because they had indeed found their fathers doing that.

Concerning his statement: “And He is not pleased with
disbelief for His slaves.”

This is according to His statement, Exalted is He:

4if you disbelieve, then verily, Allah is not in need of
you, He likes not disbelief for His slaves.» (Az-4umar
39:7)

But He decrecd that they commit disbelief, yet, His
decreeing that does not necessitate that He, Glorious and
Exalted is He, is pleased with it. Rather, He decrees it, yet
He abhors it and detests it.

Concerning his statement: “And He does not love Al-
Fasid (mischief making) .”
The proof of that is His statement, Exalted is He:

310 Commentary on Al-’Agidah AL-Wasitiyyah

news, verify it.y (Al-Hujurat 49:6)
What is intended by the Fasiq here is a disobedient person.

So, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, is not pleased with the
people who are ‏مومع‎ neither the these people (the
disbelievers) nor these people (the disobedient). But as the
Fasigin who are disbelievers, He is not pleased with them at
all. While in the case of the Fasigi:t who are disobedient, He
is not pleased with them in the matter in which they
committed Fisq (rebelliousness) in, and He is pleased with
them in the matters in which they have obeyed Him.

© Concerning his statement: “And He does not command
Al-Fahsha’”

The proof of this is His statement, Exalted is He:
- 5 tt
Nay, Allah never commands of Fahsha’.} (Al-A‘rif
7:28)

For, whenever they committed a Fihishah:

one

6 SA OG Gan GE aes Bp
4They say: “We found our fathers doing it, and Allah
has commanded us af it.» (ALA ‘raf 7:28)

So, they argued using those two matters. So Allah, Exalted
is He, says:

4Nay, Allah never commands of Fabsha’> (ALA‘raf
7:28)

And He was silent with their saying:

tion Ce by

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar 313

disbelief, then the creation of the Fire would have been
without purpose, because the Fire is the fina] abode of the
disbelievers. If not for the existence of disbelief, then all
people would have been one nation, and they would not
recognize good, nor reject evil. And there is no doubt that
this would be incompatible with human society. If net for
the existence of disbelief, Wiliyat!"! to Allah would not be
recognizable, because haling Allah’s enemies and loving
Allah's Awliyd’ is part of Wildyah to Allah.

The same thing will be said health and sickness. Being
healthy is beloved and agreeable to man, and the mercy of
Allah, Exalled is He, in it is obvious. But, sickness is
detested by man. It can even be a punishment from Allah
for him. Yet, He makes that occur, for the tremendous
benetits in it.

How many are those whom, after AJlah has showered His

favors upon him in his body, wealth, children, house, and
transportation, become full of themselves and consider
themselves independent of what Allah has favored them,
and turn away from the obedience of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, such as He, Exalted is He, says:

465005 AO BS Soy ‏«كة إن‎

€Nay! Verily, mun does transgress all bounds. Because
he considers himself self-sufficient.» (Al-’Alag 96:6-7)

This is a great evil. If Allah wants to send such a person like
this back to his appropriate place, He tries him, so that he
can relurn ‏ما‎ Allah. Testimony for this is m I lis statement,
Exalted is Ele:

{> Translation note: Meaning, allegiance. For details see the
discussion about the Aw/iya’ that appears later.

312 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

And when he turns away, his effort in the land is to
make mischief therein, and to destroy the crops and the
cattle, and Allah likes not mischief.» (Al-Bagarah 2:
208)

The author repeated this kind of expression in order to
clarify that His willing something to be, does not
necessitate that He loves it, and His abhorrence for
something does necessitate that it is not wanted by Him
based upon His universal Irddah. Rather, He, the Mighty
and Sublime, hates something, and will its by the universal
fradah, and He can make something occur although Te is
not pleased with it, and He does not want it, based upon
the legislative Iradaht

% If you ask; “How can what He is not pleased with and
what He does not love, be made to occur? And can
someone compel [im to make something occur that He
is not pleased with and does not love?”

The response is that no one can compel Him to make
something occur which He does not love and He is not
pleased with. What occurs of His action, the Mighty and
Sublime, which is abhorrent to Him is abhorrent in a one
way and beloved to Him in another way, due to
tremendous benetits that come with it.

For example, faith is beloved to Allah, while disbelief is
abhorrent to Him, yet he allows disbelief to occur; though it
is abhorrent to Hiny, due to a tremendous benefit. If not for
the existence of disbelief, faith would not be known. If not
for the existence of disbelief, man would never be able to
recognize the extent of Allah’s favoring him with faith. If
not for the existence of disbelief, there would be no
comunanding good and prohibiting evil, because all of the
people would do what is good. If not for the existence of
disbelief, there would be no Jihad. If not for the existence of

Conceming the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar

The slaves are the real actors, and Allah is the Creator of
their actions. And the slave inchides a believer, a
disbeliever, the righteous (AL-Barr), the wicked (Al-Fajr),
the one who perfornts Salt, and the ane who fasts...

% Conceming his statement: “The slaves are the real actors,
and Allah is the Creator of their actions.”

His statement; “The slaves are the real actors, and Allah is the
Creator of their actions,” is correct. The slave is the one who
carries out his action in reality; and Allah is the Creator of
his action in reality. This is the belief of the People of the
Sunnah, An affirmation of that, with its evidences has

preceded.

Two groups oppose them an this fundamental:

The first group: The Qadariyyah among the Mu‘tazitah and
others. They say: “The slaves are the real performers of
their actions, and Allah never created their actions.”

The second group: The jabriyyah among the Jahmiyyah and
others. They say: “Allah is indeed the Creator of their
actions, and they are not real performers of their actions.
The actions are only attributed to then metaphorically, and
the real doer of the action is Allah.”

This statement lead to saying the belief of Wahdat Al-

314 Commentary on Al-’Agidah AL Wisitiyyah

Evil has appeared on land and sea because of what the
hands of men have earned, that Allah may make them
taste a part of that which they have done, in order that
they may return (in repentance)» (Ar-Riim 30:41)

O man, if you reflect upon this, with proper reflection
about the decrees of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, you
recognize the wisdom with which Allah, Glorious and
Exalted is He, decrees the good and the evil; and that Allah,
Glorious and Exalted is He, creates what He dislikes, and
also decrees what He dislikes, for tremendous benefits; you
may realize them, or you may not realize them, others may
realize them, and it is possible that neither you nor others
realize them.

4 If it were asked: “How can something be disliked to
Allah and also what He wanted?”

The response is that there is no problem in that. Perhaps
there is a very bitter medicine with an offensive odor. Yet
the sick person will take it while in a calm state, because of
the cure which is likely to result from it.

Perhaps there is a father who would hold his sick child still,
so that the doctor can cauterize him. Perhaps, the father
even cauterizes him himself, even though he strongly
detests that his child is burnt with fire.

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar 317

unto the Most Beneficent (Allah) as a slave.» (Maryam
19:93)
- The specific ‘Ubridiyyah is the submission to the
legislative commands of Allah; this is specific to the
believers; such as it is said in His stalement, Exalted is He:
4And the slaves of the Most Beneficent (Allah) are those
who walk on the earth in humility.» (Al-Purgan 25 63)

And His statement:

hose FGM HE sal 4p
4Blessed be He Who sent down the criterion to His
slave.» (Al-Furgdn 25 :1)

This is more specific than the first one.

a HOY

ewe he ote

bra 1A : ‏التكرير‎ GA 5 ‏الله‎
‎The slaves have the ability to perform their deeds ; they also
have Iraduh. And Allah is their Creator, and the Creator of
their ability and their Irddah, As He, Exalted is He, says:
410 whomsoever among you who ‘wills to walk straight.
And you will not, unless (if be) that Allah wills, the
Lord of the ‘Alamin.p (At-Takwir 81:28-29),

316 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyuh

Wajid," then it will lead to saying the falsest of
falsehoods; because among the slaves there is the for-
nicator, the thief, the drunkard and the oppressor; and it
would be an abomination to atlribute these actions to
Allah! And there are other falsehoods that it would lead to.

With this, it becomes clear that the statement of the author:
“The slaves are the real actors, and Allah is the Creator of their
actions” is a refutation of the Jabriyyah and the Qadariyyah.

 Conceming his statement: “The slave includes a believer,
a disbeliever, the righteous (Al-Barr), the wicked (AI-Fij
the one who performs Salah, and the one who fasts.”

4> That is to say the descriptions of faith, disbelief,
righteousness, wickedness, $aléh, and fasting are all
descriptions of the slave and not other than him. He is
the believer, he is the disbeliever, he is the righleous, he
is the wicked, he is the person who performs Salah, and
he is fasting person. Like that, he is also the one who
pays Zakah; he is the one who performs Hajj and
‘Unirah and so on, It is not possible that he be described
with actions that are not his in reality.

* This sentence includes a refutation of the Jabriyyah.

% What is intended by the Al-‘Ubrdiyyah (slavery) here is
the general “Ubidiyyah, because ‘Ubidiyyah is of two
categories: General and specific,

— The general: Is submission to the universal commands

of Allah, such as it is said in His statement, Exalted is He:

‎ke ay‏ من في ‎SN ok ANG ott‏ عبدا»

‎<there is none in the heavens and the earth buf comes

‎"I Tyanslation note: Pantheism, or the belief that only Allah

‎exists and every witnessed thing is a manifestation of Him.

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar

Lord of the ‘Alamin.} (At-Takwir 81:28-29).""

& Therefore, His statement: {To whomsvecer among you

who wills to walk straights is a refutation against the

Jabriyyah.

And in His statement: ¢And you will not, unless (it be)
that Allah wills, the Lord of the ‘Alamin} is a refutation
against the Qadariyyah.

This is the level of Al-Qadar which the majority of the
Qadariyyah - those whom the Prophet 2 named “the
Magis of this Ummalt” - belie it....

BOS

Concerning his statement: “This is the level of Al-Qadar?"
That is: ‘Ihe level concerning, Al-Mashi‘ali (the will) and
the creating.

“Which the majority of the Qadariyyah - those whom the
Prophet ##% named “the Magis of this Ummah" - belie
it.”

“the majority of the Qadariyyal:” That is, most of them
deny this level, and they say that man is independent
in his actions, and Allah neither willed it, nor created it.

“anon the Prophet & named “the Magis of this

318 Commentary on Al'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

% Concerning his statement: “The slaves have the ability to
perform their deeds; they also have Irada. And Allah is
their Creator, and the Creator of their ability and their
Jradah.”

* “The slaves have the ability to perform their deeds;
they also have /ndduh.” as opposed to the Jabriyyah, who
say that they (the slaves} do not have ability nor Irddalt;
they are rather coerced to perform their actions,

@ “And Allah is their Creator, the Creator of their will
and their ability” as opposed to the Qadariyyah, who
say that Allah is neither the Creator of the slave's action
nor his Iradah and ability.

© It appears as if by this expression, the author is
indicating a view by which it is understood that the
slave's actions are created by Allah, Exalted is He; that
his action is issued from ability and Iradah, and the
Creator of the ability and Ivddah is Allah. So whatever is
issued from creation, it is also creation.

He also indicates by it, that the action of the slave is by
choice not by cvercion, because it is issued from ability and
Irddah. If there was no ability or Iradah, the action would
not have resulted from him, and if there was no Irédah, the
action would not have resulted from him, and if the action
was coerced, then it was not conditioned by ability and
Iradah.

Then, the author gave proof for thal, sa he said: “As He,
Exalted is He, says:

65 HAS IN OSE Oo TE up

tone
4To whomsvever among you who wills to walk straight.
And you will not, unless (it be) that Allah wills, the

Concerning the Levels of Belief in AL-Qadar 321

* Concerning his statement: “A group of people among

Ahlil-Tthbat (the People of Affirmation) exaggerated in that,
until they denied the slave's ability and choice, removing the
wisdom and benefits from Allah's actions and His judg-
ments.”

“exaggerated in that:” That is in this level,

“A group of people among Abhlil-[thbat (the People of
Affirmation): That is; affirmation of Al-Qadar.

And these people are the Jabriyyatt; since it is they thal
denied the slave ability and choice, and they say that he
is coerced to do his actions; because it has been written
for him,

Concerning his statement: “removing the wisdom and
benefits from Allah’s actions and His judgments:
“removing” reters back to his saying: “exaggerated.”

The meaning of them removing the wisdom and
benefits from Allah’s actions and judgments is that
they do not affirm a wisdom and benefit for Allah; so
He does, and judges merely out of will. And with this,
He rewards the obedient, even though he was coerced
upon his action, and He punishes the disobedient, even
though he was coerced upon his action.

And what is known, is that the one who is coerced does not
deserve praise for what he does that is praiseworthy, nor
censure for what he does that is blameworthy, because he
did it without having a choice.

* And here is an issue that many disobedient people use
as an argument; when you reprimand him for doing an
evil; he says that this is what Allah decreed, are you
objecting to Allah’s Decree? So he argues, suing the
Qadar as proof, for disobeying Allah, and he say: “I am

Commentary on AL‘Agdah Al-Wasitiyyah

Ummal’’" Because the Majis (Zoroastrians) believe
that there are two creators for events: A creator of
good, and a creator of evil! So the creator of good is the
light, and the creator of evil is the darkness, The
Qadariyyah resemble these Mujiis in a way, because they
say that events are of two types: Events from Allah’s
doing; so this is Allah’s creation, and events from the
slaves’ doing; and the slaves are independent in this,
and Allah, Exalled is He, had no part in creating that.

A group of people among Ablil-Ithbat (the People of
Affirmation) exaggerated in that, until they denied the
slave's ubility and choice, removing the wisdom and
benefits from Allah's actions and His judgments...

53 OO 5

Based on the report of fmanm Abmad (2:86) from Ibn ‘Umas,
and Aba Dawid (4691) and Al-Lalaka’i in Sharh Usui 'tigad
Abilus-Sunnah (2:641) and Ton Abi ‘Asim in As-Sumah (145)
from Hudhaifah who said: “The Messenger of Allah (6) said:
‘Every Unenah has Magis and the Magis in my Uknmah are
those who say there is no Qadar.”” And Al-Ajurei referenced
it in Ash-ShorPah (190) and At-Tabarani in Al-Awsat as is in
Majma’ ‏قامس مم‎ (7:207). And the Hadith was graded Hasun
by Al-Aibani based on gathering all of its routes, in As
Sunnah (148) by Tbn Abi ‘Asim,

01

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar 323

— As for the People of the Sunnah, they say that Adam,
may the Salai and Salam: be upon him, committed a sin, and
this sin led to his expulsion from Paradise; but he later
repented from the sin. After his repentance, Allah chose
him, accepted his repentance and guided him; and the one
who repented from a sin is like one who has no sin upon
him. And it is also impossible that Masa, may the Sala and
Salam be upon him — and he is one of the Messengers of
strong resolve — would censure his father for something
which he had repented from, after which Allah chose him,
forgave him for his sin, and guided him. The blame was
only for the affliction which resulted from what he did; and
that is the expulsion of people, and himself, from Paradise.
The cause of this expulsion was Adam’s disobedience; even
though there is no doubt that Adam never did this in order
to expelled from Paradise, such that he would be blamed;
so how could Musa blame him?!

And this point is clear. Musa, may the Salah and Salam be
upon him, was not censuring Adam for his doing the act of
disobedience, but only for the affliction, which was from
Allah's Qadar, So with this, it becomes clear that there is no
proof in this Hadith for the Jabriyyah.

So weaccept it, and we do not reject it as is done by the
Qadariyyah. But we do not use il as an argument for doing
disobedience as is done by the Jabriyyah.

And there is another response indicated by Ibn Al-Qayyim,
may Allah have inercy upon him, when he said: "When a
person commits an act of disobedience, and the person
argues using the Qadar as a proof about that, after
repenting from it, then there is no harm in that.”

Meaning, that if somebody censures you for doing an act of

disobedience, after you repented fram it, and you say:
“This was according to Allah’s Decree and Will, and I

322 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

a coerced slave.”

Then he will also argue, using as proof, the Hadith: “Adam
and Masa argued, Masa said to him: “You are our father,
you let us down and caused our expulsion from Paradise?!’
Adam replied him saying: "You are Musa, Allah favored
you by talking to you (directly), He wrote Tawrah for you
with His Hand. Are you censuring me for a matter which
Allah had decreed upon me forty years before He created
me?! The Prophet 3 said: ‘With this, Adam confounded
Masa.”” He said this three times.!! In the wording of
Ahmad: “So Adam overcame him.”"?! This makes it clear
that Adam had a stronger proof than Masa.

He would say: “This is Adam, when Masa was objected to
his action; he used the Qadar as a proof; whereas Adam is a
Prophet, while Musa is a Messenger, then Masa kept quiet.
So then why are you censuring me?”

The response concerning the Hadith of Adam:

— As for the view of the Qadariyyah, according to their
methodology, the Ahad Hadiths!"| do not necessitate
certainty; they say: “When it is opposed by the intellect,
then it is necessary to reject it.’ Based on this they say that
this is not authentic, so we do not accept it, and we do not
submit to it.

— As for the Jahriyyah, they say: “This is the evidence, what
it proves is true, so the slave should not be censured for
what has been decreed upon him.”

C1 Reported by Al-Bukhari (6614) and Muslim (2652) from Aba
Ilurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

©] Reported by Almad in Al-Musnad (268),

©) Translation note: A narration that is narrated by only one

narrator anywhere in its chain of transmission.

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Oadar 325

He attributed the act of turning over to Himself, even

though they were the ones who were turning, but, since it

was not done of their own volition (Iradah), He did not

attribute it to thern.

The first view concerning the response regarding the Hadith

of Adam was the view held by Shaikh Al-islam Ibn

‘Taymiyyah, and it is correct.

> Hence, there is no proof for the Jabriyyah in this Hadith,
nor for the disobedient who argue using this Hadith to
claim their excuse is the Quilar.

So we say to him: “Your claim to an excuse for disobeying,

because of Al-Qadar is proven false by revealed texts, the

intellect, the reality:

— As for revealed texts, Allah, Exalted is He, has said:

Those who took partners (in worship) with Allah will
say: “If Allah had willed, we would not have taken
partners (in worship) with Him, nor would our fathers,
and we would not have forbidden anything (against His
Will.” Likewise belied those who were before them,
(they argued falsely with Allah’s Messengers), until they
tasted of Our Wrath. (ALAn ‘am 6:148)

They said that, using the Qadur as their excuse for
disobeying. So Allah, Exalted is He, says:

4g ‏ين‎ Sol DT >
Likewise belied those who were before them

meaning, they belied the Messengers and argued using the

Commentary on Al-’Agidah ALWasity

sought forgiveness from Allah, and repented to Him,” and
the like; then there is no harm in you saying this.

So Adam used the Qadar as a proof after having repented
from the act of disobedience. And there is no doubt that
this view is good; but what makes it not completely
acceptable, is that Misa could not have blamed Adam for
an act of disobedience that he repented from.

And Ibn Al-Qayyim preferred this saying based on what
happened when the Prophet #% entered upon ‘Ali and
Fatimah one night, may Allah be please with them both,
and he said: “Will you not both perform Salah?” ‘Ali, may
Allah be pleased with him, said: “O the Messenger of
Allah, our souls are in the Hand of Allah; whenever He
wills to wake us, we will wake.” Then the Prophet tumed,
striking his thigh, while he was reciting:
‏دلا‎ gh ASN Beall o>

But, man is ever more quarrelsome than anything.>

(Al-Kahf 18:54),
There is a problem in such application of the Hadilk to me,
because ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, used the
Qadar as an argument for his sleeping, and a sleeping
person can use the Qader as an excuse, because his act is
strictly attributed to him, that is why Allah, Exalted is He,
says regarding the Companions of the Cave:

And We turned them on their right and on their left
sides.» (Al-Kahf 18:18)

1 Reported by Al-Bukhari (1127) and Muslim (775) from ‘Ali
bin Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar

none has the right to be worshipped but He, and turn
away from the idolators. Had Allah willed, they would
not have commitied Shirk. And We have not made you
a watcher over them, nur are you responsible for them.»
(ALAn ‘mt 6:106-107)
Here, Allah says:
RSI te hy

4Had Allah willed, they would nat have committed
Shirk.€

So we say that if a (believing) person says about the
disbelievers:

@Had Allah willed, they would not have committed
Shirk.€
— then this is a correct, and allowed, but if an idolator says:
0
If Allah had willed, we would not have committed
Shirk. (Al-An‘am 6:148)
— by which he intends to use the Qadur as an excuse for
disobedience, then this is a false statement.
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, only said that to His
Messenger in order to console him and clarify that
whatever occurs, it is by Allah’s Will (Masiiiah).
— As for the intellectual evidence for the falsehood of the
disobedient person using the Qadar as an excuse for
disobeying Allah, then we say to him: “Who gave you

the knowledge that Allah decreed that you would disobey
Him before you disobeyed Him?” For all of us, altogether,

Commentary on Al-‘Agiilah Al-Wisitiyyat

Qadar as an excuse;

tae ‏دع‎

eek
‏باستنا‎ Ip G
éuntil they tasted of Our Wrath.¢

This proves that their proof is baseless because if it was an

acceptable proof, they could not have tasted of Allah's

wrath.

— Another textual evidence: Allah, Exalted is He, says:
oh ‏وج‎ MCA ‏لك كا‎ tat OD

<Verily, We have inspired you as We inspired Nal,

and the Prophets after him...» (An-Nisa’ 4:163)

— up to His statement:

ane Bey

7
‏سل‎
‎<Messengers us bearers of good news, as well as of

warning, in order that mankind should have no plea
against Allah after the Messengers. (An-Nisd’ 4:165)

The angle of proof from this Ayah, is that if the Qadar was
an excuse, then the excuse would not be falsified by the
sending of the Messengers, because the Qadur is not
falsified by the sending of the Messengers, rather, it
remains.

If somebody says that the first evidence is refuted by the
saying of Allah, Exalted is He, in Siirat Al-An‘am:

من تيك له له ‎i‏

» ‏صن زان‎ what has been inspired to you from your Lord,

Concerning the Levels of Belief in Al-Qadar 329

the other is a low position, which of them would you want?
You would, without doubt, want for the higher position.
This proves that you will acquire the best in the matters of
your worldly life. Why do you not then take for the best in
the matters of you Hereafter?! Is this anything other than
sclf-contradiction?!

With this, it becomes clear that there is no way for the
disobedient person to use the Qadar as an excuse for
disobeying Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

328 Commentary on Ab'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

do not know what Allah decreed until after it occurred. But
before it occurs, we do not know what was intended for us.
So, we say to the disobedient person: “Did you know,
before the time you were committing the act of disobe-
dience, that Allah had decreed that act of disobedience for
you?”

He will say: “No.” “Therefore, why do you not assume
that Allah decreed obedience for you, and therefore obey
Him. The door is wide open before you, so why did you
not enter through the door that you saw would benefit you,
since you did not know what Allah had decreed for you.”

A person arguing for a matter he did, using a proof, before
the proof is applicable to what he did, is making a false
argument. There is no doubt that a person should be able to
utilize proof, since the evidence comes before what it
indicates.

We also say to him: “If your were told that there are two
roads leading to Makkah, one of them is paved and safe
while the other is rough and dangerous, will you not take
the safe road?” He would say: “Yes, of course.”

We then say: If that is the case, then why deo you tread the
rough, dangerous, and risky path in your worship and
discard the safe and secure path for which Allah, Exalted is
He, has guaranteed security to those who tread it, He says:

411 is those who believe and confuse not their belief with

Zulm (wrongdoing), for them (only) there is security
and they are the guided. (Al-An‘ar 6:82)

This is a clear proof,

We also say, supposing the government advertises
vacancies for two occupations, one is a high position while

SECTION:
Concerning Al-iman (Belief, Creed)

SUNG ‏الدّينَ‎ Sf ‏وَالْجَمَاعَةٍ‎ dy High e
ouby sii ‏وَعَمَلُ‎ eoteliy Cid og

Section : And of the fundamentals of the People of Sunnah
and the Jamd’ah is that Ad-Din (religion) and Al-Iman
(faith) are statements and actions. The statentent of the
heart, and the tongue, and the action of the heart, the
tongue and the limbs...,

Concerning his statement: “Section : And of the fundamentals
of the People of Sunnah and the Jama‘ah is that Ad-Din (religion)
and Al-Iman (faith) are statements and actions.”

‎“Ad-Din (religion) it is what one professes or adheres‏ ؟
‎to. It is used generally to mean the actions and it is used‏
‎generally to mean the recompense.‏

‎In His slatement, Exalted is He:

‎ce fo ue
48 gh ANG
Again, what will make you know what the Day of Ad-
Din (Recompense) is? (If will be) the Day when no

‎pee hae ae

‎ES SE aS ‏يم لا‎ 0 wal

Concerning Al-iman (Belief, Creed) 333

So, based on this, if the word /man is taken to mean Al Iqrar
(affirmation), it would be better. We therefore say, Iman
means Al-lyrar. There cannot be Igrdr (affirmation) except
with At-lasdig (trast). You can say: Aqarra Bibi (He
affirmed in him), as you can say: Amuna Bihi (He believed
in him), and you can’also say: Ayarra Lahu (Ife affirmed for
him), as you can say: Amana Lal (tle believed (im) Him).

‘This is regarding the linguistic meaning.
“As for the Shari'ah meaning, the author said: “stale-
ments and actions.”

@ This definition is summarized, the author explained it
with his statement: “The statement of the heart, and the
tongue, and the action of the heart, the tongue and the
limbs.”

The author, therefore, attributed statements and actions
to the heart, and also attributed statements and actions
to the tongue.

— As for statements of the tongue, that case is clear; it is
speech. As for its action, it is its movements, not speech.
Rather speech is generated from it if it is free from being,
mute.

— As for the statements of the heart, that refers to its
acknowledgement and affirmation. As for its action, that is
represented by its movement and intentions, such as 11165
(Gincerity) of the deed. ‘This is an action of the heart.
Likewise is Travakkul (reliance), Ar-Raja’ (having hope), AL
Khavwf (fear). The action (of the heart) is not mere tranquility
of the heart. There is also movement in the heart.

— As forthe actions of the limbs, that is clear: bowing (Ruki),
prostration (Sujiid), standing (Qiym), and sitting (Qu’iid). So
the actions of the limbs will be considered Iman, legislatively,
because what actually prompts this action is the faith.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasi

person shall have power (to do) anything for another,
and the Decision, that Day, will be (wholly) with
Allah } (Al-Infitdr 82:18-19)

What is meant by Ad-Din in this Ayah is recompense.
And also in His statement, Exalted is Le:

And have chosen for you Ishim as your Din
(religion) .» (ALMa’idah 5:3)

Meaning an action by which you draw nearer to Allah.

It is said; “Kam tadainu tudan”’ that is; “As you do, so to
shall you be recompensed.”

What is meant by the ‏بق‎ in the statement of the author is
the deeds.

+ As for “Al-iman” most of the scholars say that the word
Inin linguistically means At-Tasdfq (trust) but this calls
for careful study because if a word is a synonym of
another word, it should share the same means of taking
objects. What is known is that the word Al-Tasdiq can
take an object directly without the help of a preposi-
tion, whereas the word ‏قمر‎ cannot take an object
directly on its own. You can say for example: Sadagiuhu
(I believed him) but you cannot say: Amuntulu (1
believed him), you rather say: Amantu Bili or Amantu
Lalu (I believed (in) him). So, it is not possible to
explain an intransitive verb that cannot take an object,
except with a preposition with a transitive verb that
can take an object itself.

Then, the statement: Suddagle cannot convey the meaning,
of Amantu, because the statement Amantu establishes more
peace of mind than the statement Saddaqtu.

Concerning, Al-Iman (Belief, Creed) 335

the direction of Batt Al-Magdis, in Jerusalem. Allah refers to
Saldh as Iman although il is an action of the limbs, the heart,
and statements on the tongue.

This is the Madhhab of the People of the Sunnah and the
Jama’ah.

~ Its inclusion of these four matters does not mean that it
(man) will not be complete except with them. Rather, a
person could be a believer without some of these
actions, but his fran will diminish to the degree that his
actions have diminished.

Two extreme groups of innovators oppose the People of the
Sunnah in this matter.

The first group: The Murji‘ah, They say that Al-fman is only
affirmation with the heart, and what is beyond that is not
considered Al-Jman!!

That is why to them, imén neither increases nor decreases,
because it is affirmation with the heart, and people are
equal in that. So the one person that worships Allah late in
the night and during the day is just like the one who
disobeys Allah late in the night and during the day, as long
as his sin does not take him out of the religion!

So, if we find a man committing Zind, stealing, drinking
Khar, and transgressing against people; and another man,
who fears Allah, and stays away from all of these things;
then to the Murji‘ah, both of ther will share the equal
status in the fnan and Ar-Raja’ (hope). Each of them would
not be punished, because the actions are not included in the
term ALImdan.

The second group: The Khawérij and the Mu’tazilah. They
say that actions are included in the term Al-iman, and that
they are a condition for it to abide. Therefore, whoever
commits an act of disobedience from the major sins, he

334 Commentary on Al-‘Agidat Al-Wasittyyah
If somebody says: “Where is the evidence that [man
consists of all these?

We say that the Prophet # said: “Al-imdn is that you
believe in Allah, His Angels, His Books, His Messengers,
the Last Day, and Al-Qadar, its good and its evil,

This refers to statements of the heart.

As for actions of the heart, the tongue, and the limbs, its
evidence is the saying of the Prophet #%: “ALman is
seventy-some branches; its highest part is the statement: ‘La
Naha ila Allah {none deserves to be worshipped except
Allah),’ and its lowest part is to remove something harmful
from the way, and Al-Hayd’ (modesty, bashfulness,
shyness) is a branch of iman.”! This refers to statements
of the tongue, and its action, and actions of the limbs. ‏للم‎
‎Haya’ is an action of the heart; it refers to the feeling of
disturbance which strikes a person in the Presence of an
event or an occasion which calls for shyness.

With this, it is clear that the mn includes all these things in
the Shari‘ah sense.

Further proof is in His statement, Exalted is He:

GR isd) ‏وما كن لله‎
4And Allah would never make your faith to be lost.»
(Al-Bagurah 2:143)

The scholars of Tafsir! say this means: Your Salah facing

1)

9 Its reference preceded, and it is in Muslim (8).

Reported by Muslim (35) from the Hadith of Aba Hurairah
with this wording, and Al-Bukhari (9) has reported it with
the wording: “Fin is sixty-some branches and Al-Haya’ is a
branch of the fran.”

‎See Tafsir Ibn Kathir (1:167) and Ad-Durr Al-Manthur (1:268)‏ آذا

Conceming Al-Iman (Belief, Creed)

And also His statement, Exalted is He:
% end coe tthe
Coy ‏“اموا‎ Salt SU) ‏الكنب‎ Mal Gul
in order that the people of the Scripture (Jews and
Christians) may arrive at a certainty, and the believers
imay increase in Iman (faith).» (Al-Muddaththir 74:31)

This is a clear affirmation of the increase.

— As for the decrease, that is affirmed in the Two Sabihs"'!
that the Prophet # once admonished the women, saying:
“| have not seen one who is deficient in intelligence and
Din (religion) who more able to make a resolute man lose
his reason, than one of you.”

So he affirmed a decrease in the Din.

If it was assumed there is no text affirming the decrease of
faith, then affirming its increase necessitates its decrease. So
we say: Every text that proves an increase of Al-Iman,; then
it includes, in its proof, its decreasc.

The Causes of Increase in Jian (Faith) Are Four

First: Knowing about Allah, Exalted is He, by His Names
and Attributes; because the more familiar a person is of
Allah, and [is Names and Attributes, the more his faith
will increase.

Second: Pondering over Allah’s universal and legislative
Aydt. Allah, Exalted is He, says:
45 GF AT ‏ه وَل‎ Be S sO by
€Do they not look at the camels, how they are created?

1 Reported by Al-Bukhéri (304) and Muslim (79) from Ibn
‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him

336 Commentary on AL’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

exits from Al-Iman. But the Khawarij say: “He is a
disbeliever” while the Mu’‘tazilah say: “He is in a state
between two states.” We will not say he is a believer and
we will not say that he is a disbeliever. We would rather
say that he has exited from faith, and has not entered
disbelief, and he has reached a state between the two slates.

These are the statements of the people concerning ‏.انا‎

‎Sly‏ الايمَانَ ‎Satis eli, Ly‏ بالْمَعْصِيةٍ

‎And Al-Imén increases with obedience, and decreases
disobedience...

‎aan OY ‏ل‎

‎* Concerning his statement: “And Al-Iman increases with
obedience, and decreases disobedience.”

‎This (statement) is joined to his statement “that Ad-Din” to

‎the end. That is, from the fundamentals of the People of the

‎Sunstah and the Jamd‘ah is that ALlmdén increases and

‎decreases.

‎And they (the People of the Sunnah and the Jamd‘ah)
prove that with evidences irom the Book and the
Sunnah.

‎— From the Book, is His statement, Exalted is He:

‎As for those who believe, it has increased them in
Iman (faith), and they rejoice.» (At-Tawbah 9:124)

Concerning Al-iman (Belief, Creed)
The Causes of Decrease in Iman (Faith)

The causes of decrease in faith are four:

First: Avoidance of knowing about Allah, Exalted is He,
and His Names and His Attributes.

Second: Avoiding contemplation upon the universal and
legislative Aydt. This causes heedlessness and hardness of
the heart.

Third: Lack of righteous deeds. This is indicated by the
saying of the Prophet i to the women: “I have not seen
one who is deficient in intelligence and Din (religion) who
more able to make a resolute man lose his reason, than one
of you.”

They said: “O Messenger of Allah! How is her religion
deficient?” He teplied: “Is it not that when she menstru-

ates, she does not perform Salah nor fast?!)

Fourth: Committing acts of disobedience; based upon His
statement, Exalted is He:

ELS ‏ويم ما‎ & SED
Nay! But on their hearts is the Ran (covering of sins

and evil deeds) which they used to earn.» (Al-Mutaffifin
83:14)

% Two groups oppose the People of the Sunnah and the
Jomé‘ah regarding the increase and decrease of Iman
(faith). The first group is ihe Murji’ah and second group
is the Khawarij and Mu’tazilalt,

The first group: The Murji‘ah; they say that faith neither
increases nor decreases, because deeds are not part of Al-

"Its reference preceded, and it is in the Two Sahihs.

338 Commentary on AL‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

And at the heaven, how it is raised? And ut the
mountains, how they are rooted and fixed firm? And at

the earth, how it is spread out?> (Al-Chashiyah 88:17-
20)

He, Exalted is He, also says:

4 Mae

والنذر عن

Dee & ak 5

توت وَالأرض وما تمي

لش أنظيرا مادا في ل

LEY ‏ود‎

€Say: “Behold all that is in the heavens and the earth,”

but neither Ayat nor warners benefit those who believe
not. (Yiinus 10:01)

The more man is aware of what Allah, Exalted is He, places
in the universe of the wonderful creatures and the utmost
wisdom, the more he increases in faith in Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime. Likewise examining the legislative Aydt
increases a person’s faith in Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.
Because if you examine the legislative Aydt, which are the
rulings the Messengers came with, you will find the utmost
wisdom and magnificent secrets, by which you will realize
that this Shari‘ah was revealed from Allah, and that it is
founded upon justice and mercy, so that will increase you
in faith.

Third: Numerous acts of worship and their proper
observances, since actions are included in faith. So if they
are included in it, this necessitates that it increase with their
increase.

The fourth cause: Avoiding acts of disobedience in order
to draw nearer to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, for by

what, a person increases in faith in Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime.

Concerning Aman (Belief, Creed)

certain truth, Allah, Exz

sad 0 oad

0

So ‏للحم‎

4Nay! Yo you knew with — ‘imal-Yagin (certain
knowledge). Verily, You shall see the blazing Fire
(Hell)! And again, you shall see it with ‘Autal-Yaqun
(certainty of sight)!} (At Takathur 102:5-7)

He, Exalted is He, also says:
tual A a>
And verily, it (this Qur'an) is the certain truth (AL
Uagqut-Yaqin).} (Al-Haqgah 69:51)

The second group opposing the People of the Sunnah is the
Wa'idiyyah sect. They are the Khawérij and the Mu‘tazilah.
They are called “Wa‘idiyyah,” because they speak of the
judgments of threat rather than the judgments of promise;
that is, they give preponderance to threatening texts over
promising texts. So the remove the doer of the major sin
from Al-Imén. But the Khawarij say that he has exited from
Al-iman entering into disbelief. While the Mu‘tazilah say
that he has exited from Al-Iman without entering disbelief,
rather he is in a state between two states.

The discussions and refutations against these two sects, the
Murji‘ah and the Wa'tdiyyah are contained in the more
voluminous books.

340 Commentary on AL‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Intin, such that it would increase with their increase and
decrease with their decrease. So Al-imdn is the heart's
affirmation, and the affirmation neither increases nor
decreases.

We refute them saying:

Firstly: Your removal of actions from faith is not correct; for
indeed actions are included in faith, and the evidence for
that has preceded.

Secondly: Your saying, that the affirmation with the heart
will not differ by an increase and a decrease, is also not
correct, Rather, affirmation with the heart varies by
degrees. It is not possible for anyone to say: “My faith is
like the faith of Abi Bakrit’ Or to transgress further and
say: “My faith is like the faith of the Messenger sy!”

Then we say the affirmation of the heart is susceptible to
variation. So, the affirmation of the heart for the informa-
tion conveyed by one person, is not like its affirmation for
the information provided by two. And the affirmation of
what is heard is not like the affirmation for what is
witnessed. Have you not heard the saying of Ibrahim:

<"My Lord! Show me how You give life to the dead,”
He (Allah) said: “Do you not believe?” He (Ibrahim)
said: “Yes 6 believe), but to bring tranquility to my
heart.» (Al-Bagarah 2:260)

This is an evidence that imdén which exists in the heart is
susceptible to an increase and decrease.

This is why the scholars divide the levels of AL-Yagin
(certainty) into three: Certain knowledge, certain sight, and

Concerning Aliman (Belief, Creed) 343

believer who commits a major sin, he has general faith,

because the basis of faith exists in him, but its completion is

missing.

So, the expression of the author here is very accurate.

4> Concerning his statement: “As the Khawarij do:
Meaning, those who say that the one who commits a
major sin is a disbeliever. That is why they wage wars
against the Muslims and make their blood and wealth
lawful.

Concerning his statement: ‘Rather, the brotherhood of
‏مقطا‎ is affirned, even with the disobedience ‏"ب‎ Meaning,
brotherhood among the believers is affirmed, even with
the disobedience; so the one who commits Zin@ is a
brother to the one who is chaste, and the thief is a
brother to the one he stole from, and the murderer is a
brother to the murdered.

Commentary on Al-‘Agitiah Al-Wisifiyyah

And they, with that, do not call the people of the Qiblah
disbelievers for general acts of disobedience and major sins,
as the Khawanj do. Rather, the brotherhood of Iman is
affirmed, even with the disobedience ...,

we aD A.

Concerning his statement: “And they, with that: that is
with their saying, that Al-iman is statements and
actions.

“Aud they, with that, do not call the people of the Qiblah
disbelievers for general acts of disobedience and major sins.”

The people of the Qiblah are the Muslims, even if they
are disobedient, because they all face one Qiblah, and
that is the Ka‘bah.

To the People of the Sunnah and the Jam#‘ah, a Mustim
is not considered a disbeliever for general disobedience
and major sins.

Take note of the saying of the author: “for general acts of
disobedience .”’ He did not say: “for disobedience and major
sins” because among disobedience is thal which is
disbelief, as for “general disobedience” then that will not
include disbelief.

And the distinction between the thing absolute (Ash-
Shay’ul-Mutlag), and the general thing (Mutlagish-Shay’)) is
that the thing absolute means “complete,” and the general
thing, means “a basis of the thing.” So in the case of the

Concerning Al-Iman (Belief, Creed)
statement, Exalted is He:

40 you who believe! Al-Qisds is preseribed for you in
case of murder.. jp (Al-Bagarah 2:178)

—up to His statement:

But whoever is pardoned for something in the case of
his brother...» (Al-Baqarah 2:178)

‎oer‏ عام عق

‎he Be 5S

‎And the meaning of: (+1) his brother — is the murdered.
The evidence in this Ayah to prove that one who commits a
major sin is not a disbeliever, is that Allah refers to the
murdered as a brother to the murderer, while at the same
time, killing a believer is one of the major sins.

‎% “And He said:

‎5

‎eAnd if two parties among the believers fought, then
make peace between them both, but if one of ther rebels
against the other, then fight you (all) against the one
that which rebels until it complies with the Command of
Allah; then if it complies, then make peace between
them justly, and be equitable. Verily! Allah loves those
who are equitable. The believers are but brethers. So
make peace between your brothers.» (Al-Hujurdt 49:9-
10).”

‎344 _ Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

‎Be ea ee

‎ay

‎nwa‏ وقال:

‎As He, Glorious is He, says in the Ayah of Qisas
(retribution): <But whoever is pardoned for something
in the case of his brother, then adhering to it with
fairness. (Al-Bagarah 2:178), And He said: And if
two parties among ihe believers fight, then make peace
between them both, but if one of them rebels against the
other, then fight you (all) against the one that which
rebels until it complies with the Command of Allah;
then if it complies, then make peace between them
justly, and be equitable. Verily! Allah loves those who
are equitable. The believers are but brothers. So make
peace between your brothers.» {Al-Hujurat 49:9-10)....

‎+ Then the author gave proofs for that saying: “As He,

‎Glorious is He, says in the Ayah of Qisas (retribution)
{But whoever is pardoned for something in the case of
his brother, then adhering to it with fairness.» (Al-
Bagaralt 2:178( 7"

‎The Ayah of Al-Qisds (the Law of Retribution) is His

Concerning Ai-Iman (Belief, Creed) 347

because a Tw'ifah is a community or a group of people. That
is why the pronoun that refers to it is plural. So, the (plural)
pronoun in:

facets

Rap

fought?
Refers back to the meaning, and in is His saying:

between them both

it refers back to the expression.
So these two groups of believers were fighting each other,
one raising weapons against the other, while the believer
fighting a believer is disbclicf. Yet with this, Allah, Exalted
is He, says, after having commanded the third group, who
is not involved in the fighting, to make peace between
them:

vet ce eee rer tae

GAN & phy ce

but if one of them rebels against the other, then fight
you (all) against the one tint which rebels until it
complies with the Command of Allah; then if it
complies, then make peace between them justly, and be
equitable. Verily! Allah loves those who are equitable.
The believers are but brothers.» (Al-Hujurat 49:9-10)

So, Allah called the reconciling party brothers to the two
warring parties.
Based on this, there is evidence in the Ayah to prove that

major sins remove one from Al-fiian.

346 Commentary on Al-‘Agldah Al-Wasitiyyal

This is another evidence for the saying of the People of the
Sunnah, that the one who commits a major sin has not
exited from Al-lman.

cnc

(fqtatalit) is plural; and;

between them both is in the dual form, and;

{Two parties} is also in the dual form. So how can it be
dual, and plural, and dual at the end, and all refer to the
same thing?

We say that is because His saying:

€Two parties

— is used to represent a large number of people, and thus it
is correct to say:

ffought>
— {Igiatala) and testimony to this is in His, Exalted is He,
saying:
gas Met het fect fart
eae ‏طَايِقَةٌ خرف لم يصلوا فَلِضَلوا‎
4And let the other Ta'ifah (party) come, those who have
not yet prayed, mul let them pray with you.» (An-Nisa’
4:102)

And He did not say: Lam fusall (which did not yet prayed),

Concerning Al-iman (Belief, Creed) 349

وَلَا ‎gull ols‏ الْملَىَ الاشلام ‎AY‏ وَلَا ‎HS‏ في

QO ‏في اشم‎ By
sO Ld) 42,8

bgp lee

EH ‏وهو‎

V3 bE ‏يَشْرَيُهَا‎

They do not negate Al-Fasig Al-Milli from Islam entirely.
And they do not consider him a permanent inhabitant of
the Fire, as is said by the Mu'tazilalt, Rather, the Fasig is
included in the absolute term Al-Iman. As in His saying:
<So he must set free a believing slave.p (An-Nisa®
4:92). And he has not been included in the absolute
name Al-Imin; as in His saying, Exalted is He: 4The
believers are only those who, when Alléh is mentioned,
their hearts shudder (with fear) and when His Ayat are
recited to them, they increase them in faith.» (AL-Anfal
8:2) And his saying @%: ‘The fornicator is not a
believer at the time he is fornicating; and the thief is not
a beltever as at the time he is stealing; and a drinker is
not a believer as at the time he is drinking Khamr ; and
the plunderer is not a believer, at the time he plunders
property of esteemed status concerning which people
raise their eyes at him.”...

toe

348

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyuah
| * In accordance with this, if I pass by a person who does
a major sin, I will give Salams to him, because the
| Prophet # mentioned among the rights of a Muslim
1 over another Muslim; “When he meets him, he gives
i Salims to him.” And this has not ceased being a
| Muslim, so I give Salams to him, except when there is a
benefit in shunning him, as occurred with Ka‘b and his
two compatuons, those who stayed behind during the
Battle of Tabak. The Muslims shunned them for a

period of fifty nights, until Allsh accepted their
repentance. I

© Are we to love him (the disobedient) absolutely, or hate
him absolutely?

We say neither this nor that; we will love him according to
i the extent of his faith, and hate him according to the extent
of his disobedience. This is the balanced position.

- & &

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (1240) and Muslim (2162) from Aba

Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him, and with the
| wording of Muslim
The story of Ka’b bin Malik is reported by Al-Bukhari (4418)
and Muslim (2769).

ا مسلط

Concerning Al-Iman (Belief, Creed) 351

they do not deny.” Based on this, his statement: “as is
said by the Mu‘tazilah” refers to both matters; in that the
Miu‘tazilah deny his Islam, and, they consider him a
permanent inhabitant of the Fire; even though they do
not call him a disbeliever.

“ His saying “Rather, the Tdsiq is included in the absolute
term Al-Iman:” What the author means by Al-Muflag
{absolute} here; is when it the term faith is used in a
general way, then the description refers to the term, not
to the faith, as is to be clarified by the author, may
Allah have mercy upon him. So the meaning, of it is
general Iman which includes the Fasiq and the just.

% His statement: “As in His saying:

450 he must set free a believing slave.> (An-Nisa’
4:92),”

This is because the believing slave intended here also
includes the Fasiq. So, if somebody buys a Fasiq slave and
sets him free as a ransom, it actually suffices him despite
that what Allah says is: ¢He must set free a believing slaved
so, “believing” includes the Fisiy and others.

So if a person purchased a slave that was a Fasiq, then freed
him as a means of atonement, he is acceptable from him,
while Allah said:

450 he must set free a believing slave.» (An Nisa’ 4:92)

So the word:

Bas
believing»

Commentary on Al-’Agrdah AL-Wasitiyyah

* His saying: “They do not negate Al-Fasiqg ALMilli from
Islam entirely.”

% = “AL-Fisiq:” He is the one exits from obedience.

+ Fisq — as we have indicated earlier — is categorized
into major Fisq; which removes one trom Islam; and it
is referred to in His saying;

‎ete pero‏ عع مي
‎ets (ES a‏ اذذ»ه

‎sy

‎$And as for those who commit Fisq, their abode will be
the Fire jp (As-Sajdaht 32:20)

‎— and the minor Fisg; that which does remove one from
Islam; as in Ilis statement, Exalted is He:

‎toe ny ‏م‎ 20038 breve oF

‎OF as JTS GG ‏َليِق‎ Se ‏إن‎ Gee

‎40 you who believe! If a Fasig (rebellious person) contes
to you with news, verify it, lest you harm peuple in
ignorance. (Al-Hujurat 49:6)

‎* The Fasig who has not exited Islam is AL Fasig ALMilli,
he is one who does a major sin, or persists in minor sin.
That is why the author said; “Al-Muilln”’ meaning, ascribed.

‎to the Millat (creed, religion) the one that has not exited
from it.

‎So, the People of the Sunnaft and the Jamda’ah do not deny
Islam completely from Al-Fasiq ALMIUIIF so it is not possible
that they would say that this person is not a Muslim,
rather, it is possible that they would say that this person's
Islam is deficient, or his faith is deficient.

‎* His saying: “And they do not consider him a permanent
inhabitant of the Fire’” is connected to his saying: “And

‏ال 1525222110

Concerning, Al-imén (Belief, Creed) 353

352 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

believer as at the time hte is drinking Khamr ; and the plunderer is
not a belicver, at the fime he plunders property of esteented status
concerning which people mise their eyes at him.”

— includes the Fasiq other than him.

His saying: “And he has not been included in the absolute name
Al-Iman.” Meaning, under the absolute usage of the name
AL-iman,

“As in His ie saying, Exalted is He:

This is the second example for the usage of Allman
meaning by it, faith absolute; that is: complete.

© His saying : “The fornicator is not a believer at the time
he is fornicating:’’ Here, the complete faith is being
negated from him at the time that he commits Zind. As
for after he has finished the Zind, he could be a believer.
The fear of Allah can effect him after he has completed
the Zing, and he could repent. But when he proceeds to
commit the Zing, if he had cornplete faith; he would not
proceed to it, rather his faith was very weak when he
proceeded to it.

Soph

ah ye ‏تخ مم‎ 2 ate

ES Oy eli chs OS ‏إذا‎

C0) MEG on
The believers ure only those who, when Allah is
mentioned, their hearts shudder (with fear) and when

‎His Ayat are recited to them, they increase them in‏ ا
‎faith » (AL-Anfal 8:2)"‏ |

‎Innama expresses restriction; none are believers except
these people, and the meaning of believers here, is those
who possess absolute, complete faith. So the Fasiq is not
included in “the believers” here, because if the Aydt of
i Allah are recited to the Fasig, it will not increase him in
faith; and when you mention Allah to him, his heart will
not tremble out of fear (of Allah).

‎* Consider his saying carefully: “Al the fime he is
fornicating :“ since his state differs before the Zina and
after it; because as long as a person does not commit a
Fahishah, even if he thinks of doing it, then he is still
considering not proceeding to it.

‎% His saying: “And the thief is not a believer as at the time he
is stealing :’’ Meaning, the complete faith; because his
faith will indeed deter him from the stealing.

‎So the author clarified that Al-Iman could be used to mean
general faith, and il could be used to mean faith, absolute.

‎1
‎i
‎| So when we see a man; when Allah is mentioned, his heart

‎& His saying: “And a drinker is not a believer at the time he is

‎does not trembie with fear, and when His Aydt are recited drinking Khamr’’ Meaning, the complete faith.

‎to him, that does not increase him in faith; then it is correct
that we say that he is a believer, and it is correct that we say
be is not a believer. So we say, “believer,”” that is; he has
general faith, meaning, its basis, and; “he is not a believer,”
that is, he does not have complete faith.

‎His statement: “And his saying wg: ‘The fornicalor is not ‏ه‎
‎believer at the time he is fornicating; and the thief is not a
believer us at the time he is stealing; and a drinker is not a

‎“and the plunderer is not a believer, at the time he plunders
property of esteemed status concerning which people raise
their cyes at him.’ “Of esteemed status; possessing
value to people, that is why they raise their eyes at him.
So he is not a believer at the time he plunders it,

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (2475) and Muslim (57) from Aba
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him

‎2111

354 6 1 ‏لماق وه سل‎ Al-Wasiti
ommentay on ee Concerning Al-Iman (Belief, Creed) 388

meaning: complete faith.
And the distinction between the general thing (Mutiaq-
ish-Shay’) and the thing absolute (Ash-Shay’1i-Mutlag),
is that the thing absolute means “complete,” and the
general thing, means “a basis of the thing” even if it is
deficient.

These four things: Zind (that is sexual intercourse with
unlawful partner), theft (that is secretly taking unla
wealth from where he has stored it or the like) and dri

Khamr (that is using it, by eating it or drinking it.

everything that intoxicates for enjoyment or leisure) a
plunder of what is honored and valuable to people (it So, Al-Fasiq ALMilli is not given the absolute name of Al-
said that plunder refers to taking, wealth from the spoils © iman, and that is the completeness of the name, and he is
war); none will commit these four things, and be a believes not denied the general name, so we do not say he is not a
in Allah, at the time he is committing them. And what is: believer, rather we say that he is a believer with deficient
meant by the negation of faith here, is the negation of faith, or, that he is a believer with his according to his faith,
complete faith. q and a Fasig according to his major sin.

This is the Madiihab of the People of the Sunnak and the

mon BBG mem Jama‘ah; and it is the just and balanced Madhhab.
eo: ean af ‏ويد‎ at ‏ع ل‎ ok LH Be *Some groups oppose them in this; they are:
‏أذ مؤمن بإيمانه فاق‎ ley call Gok ‏وتقول: هو‎ The Murji‘ah, they say he possesses complete faith.
. ‏الاشم‎ Gls ‏يُسْلبُ‎ yy Ghd ‏الاسم‎ wad ‏بكبيرته» قَلَا‎ i The Khawanj, they say he is a disbeliever.

The Mu’tazilah, they say he that he is in state between the

We say, he is a believer with deficient faith, or a believer
two states.

according to his faith, and a Fasig according to his major
sin; so he is not given the absolute name, and he is not
denied the name in general...

% His statement: “We say, he is a believer with deficient
faith, or a believer according to his faith, and a Fasig
according to his major sin; so he is not given the absolute
name, and he is nut denied the name in general.”

This is a clarification of the description deserved by Al-
Pasig Al-Millt according to the People of the Sunnah and
the Jama‘ah.

SECTION:
Concerning the Position of the People
of the Sunnah and the Jamda‘ah
Regarding the Companions of
the Messenger of Allah ‏ييه‎

BN ‏رَسُولٍ‎ WEY ‏م‎
‎Section: Among the fundamentals of the People of the

Sunnah and the Jama’ah, is that the Companions of the
Messenger #8 are safe from their hearts and their tongues.

: هج

© His statement: “Among the fundamentals of the People of
the Sunnah and the Jama’ch:’’ Meaning, from the
foundation of their creed.

@ His statement: “is that the Companions of the Messenger
384 are safe fromt their hearts and their tongues: He did not
say: “And their actions’’ because such actions arc
impossible after the death of the Companions, even if it
were assumed that someone could excavate their
graves and bring out their bodies; this would not
cause them any harm nor any inconvenience. But that
which is possible after the death of the Companions,

with respect to their personalities, is what is in the

Concerning Lhe Position of the People of the Sunnah.. 359

Thirdly: Because of the great and expansive conquests that
occurred at their hands.

Fourthly: Because they spread virtues among the Usual
such as truthfulness, advice, noble characteristics, and
manners, the like of which are not found among other than
them. The one who reads about them from behind the wall
will not realize this. Indeed, none will realize this except the
one who engrosses himself in the study of their biogra-
phies, recognizing their merits, their virtues, their influ-
ence, and their prompt responses to the calls of Allah and
His Messenger.

So we call upon Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, to be a
witness for our love of these Companions; we praise
them with our tongues as they deserve; and we are
disassociate ourselves from the two straying paths: The
path of the Rawdfid, those who revile them and go to
extremes with the members of the Household of the
Messenger ##, and from the path of the Nawasib, those
who hate the members of the household of the
Messenger #8.

We believe that the members of the Household, who
were Companions, have three rights: The rights of being
a Companion, the rights of being a believer, and the
rights of being a relative to the Messenger of Allah 2.

His statement: “the Conpartions of the Messenger of Allah #.”
It has previously been explained that the Companions of
the Messenger of Allah ¥ are those gathered with him,
believed in him, and died upon that. (A Safibi)} is said to be
sihiban;"! because when he gathered with the Messenger
a, while believing in him, this would necessitate his

"I Translation note; Meaning, why these terms are used for

them; Swhhah, Sabih, Sahabi, Sabbah

Commentary on Al ‘Aqgidah AHWasitiyyah

heart, and what is uttered by the tongue.

Therefore, among the fundamentals of the People of the
Sunnah and the jamd‘ah is that the Companions of the
Messenger of Allah 3% are safe trom their hearts and
their tongues; safe from any hatred, rancor, spite and
aversion of the heart, and safe from any saying that
they do not deserve.

So, their hearts ate free of that, filled with love, esteem and.
reverence for the Companions of the Messenger of Allah #
in the manner which befits them (the Companions).

* So, they love the Companions of the Prophet 2%, and
recognize their virtue over all of mankind, because to
love them is to love the Messenger of Allah #, and to
love the Messenger of Allah #¢ is to love Allah. Their
tongues are also free from any abuse, revilement,
cursing, accusations of disobedience, or disbelief, and
the like of that which the people of innovation do. So
when their tongucs are free from all this, they are full of
praise for them, seeking Allah’s pleasure for them,
seeking His mercy for them, and secking His forgive-
ness, and other than that. And this is duc to the
following:

Firstly: They are the best of generation of all the nations, as

the Messenger of Allah #% made clear when he said: “The

best people are my generation, then Lhose that follow them,
then those that follow them”!

Secondly: They are the link between the Messenger of
Allah 3% and his ‏تمستا‎ it is through them that the entire
Ununaht received the Shariah from him,

Reported by Al-Bukhari (3651) Muslim (2533) from
‘Abdullah bin Mas’tid, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 361
Faith, and put not in our hearts any hatred against
those who have believed. Our Lord! You are indeed fuil
of kindness, Most Merciful.” (Al-Hashr 59:10).”

“ This Ayah follows the two preceding Ayahs; they are
His saying, Exalted is He:

ee cde gyrate eg

يهم وأموزهر يعون طلا

4(And there is also a share in these spoils) for the poor
Emigrants, who were expelled from their homes and
their property, seeking bounties from Allah and to please
Him. Aud helping Allah (i.e. helping His Religion) and
His Messenger. Such are indeed As-Sndigin (the
truthful) > (Al-Hashr 59:8)

The foremost among these Muhdjirin (Emigrants) were Abu
Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman and ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (may Allah be
pleased with them all).

His statement:

— establishes the sincerity of intention (of the Compa-
nions}. And His statement:

dAnd helping Allah (i.e. helping His Religion) and His
Messenger>

— verifies their works, And His statement:

4Such ure indeed As-Sadignn (the truthful)»

360 Commentary on Al-’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

following him. This is particular to the Suhbah (companion-
ship) of the Messenger 34. As for other than the Messenger
‏ركيد‎ none will be regarded as his companion until he stays
with him for a very long time, such that he deserves to be

called his companion.

As Allah describes them in His saying, Exalted is He:
4And those who came after them say: “Our Lord!
Forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in
faith, and put not in our hearts any hatred against those
who have believed. Our Lord! You are indeed full of
s, Most Merciful.» (Al-Hashr 59:10)...

Then, the author, may Allah have mercy upon him,
cited proof for the position of the People of the Sunnah,
by his statement: “As Allait describes them in His Word,

Exalted is He:

4And those who came after them say: “Our Lord!
Forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in

Concerning the Position of the People af the Sunnah... 363

» . . ‏بالإبكن.‎ AS ll

And those who came after them say: “Our Lord!
Forgioe us and our brethren who have preceded us in
faith....°% (Al-Haskr 59:10)

They are those who follow after them in excellence, and
their followers until the Day of Resurrection. They extol
them on the grounds of brotherhood, and because they
preceded them in faith; and they ask Allah not to put any
hatred in their hearts against them. Hence, whoever
opposes that by reviling them, and not giving them their
rights, such is not among those about whom Allah says:

Chay CO pal OSE ‏ين بَنَيِيْ‎ oe ay
dct GL Sl

¢And those who came after them say: “Our Lord!
Forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in
Jaith.”y (Al-Hashr 59:10)

When ‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her, was asked
some people who were verbally abusing the Companions,
she said: “Do not bother yourselves! These (the Compa-
nions) are a people whose deeds ceased with their death,
but Allah loves to continue rewarding them after their
death]

Cl Based on what is reported from Jabir bin ‘Abdullah, may
Allah be pleased with him, who said: “It was said to ‘Aigshah:
“Some people are abusing the Companions of the Prophet 3
even including Abu Bakr and ‘Umar’ and she said {in
response): ‘Are you disturbed about this? Their deeds have
been cut aff from them, but Allah loves that their rewards

persist.” Ibn Athir mentions it in jamiu Al-Usal. (8:554) and

ascribes it to Razin!

362 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

That is; they did not do that to been seen nor to be heard of,

but from the sincerity of intention.
Then, He says regarding the Ansar (Helpers):
NG 81 55 oop
34a pe ‏فى صُد‎ jhe
* Cass 3 BEN ‏له‎ ‘sti te, OE
4And those who, before them, had homes (in Al-
Madinah) and had adopted the faith, love those who
emigrate to them, and have no jealousy in their breasts
for that which they have been given, and give them
(emigrants) preference over themselves, even though they
were in need of that. And whosoever is saved from his

own covetousness, such are they who will be the
successfitl. (Al-Hashr 59:9)

So Allah described them with three traits:
tod AG ‏مب من‎
They love those who emigrate to them;

wade de Fey

‎Sse Vy‏ فى صُدُررهم ‎EG AO‏ أونوا»
‎And have no jealousy in their breasts for that which‏
‎they have been given};‏

‎And:

‎Cas ‏يخ‎ eG ‏شيع‎ td
€And give them (emigrants) preference over themselves,
even though they were in need of that.»

‎+ Then, He, Exalted is He, says after that:

‎Gs CS ONE oe ‏ين‎ HE ap

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 365

His statement: “And in obedience to the Prophet #
who said: “Do not verbally abuse my Companions. By the
One in Whose Hind my soul is, ifanyone of you spends gold
as much as Ubud, it will not be equal to a Mudd of one of
them nor even its Nasif (hal.

“In obedience” is joined with his word: “safe,” that is to
say: Among the fundamentals of the People of the
Sunnah and the Jama’ah is the obedience of the Prophet

2 “Verbally abuse: As-Sabb; means to revile and find
faults. If it is done in absence of the person, it will be
considered backbiting.

® His statement: “My Companions: That is, those who
accompanied him. There is no doubt that Companion-
ship of the Prophet # was of various degrees: The
Companionship of those who accepted Islam before the
conquest (of Makkah), and the Companionship of those
who accepted Islam after the conquest.

The Messenger #% said this while he was addressing to
Khalid bin Al-Walid, when a dispute occurred between
him and ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Awf regarding the tribe of
Judhaimah, he said: “Do not verbally abuse my Companions”
and the general usage its wording is applicable.!

There is no doubt that ‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Aw and his
like are more virtuous than Khalid bin Al-Walid and his

1] Reported by Al-Bukhari (3673) and Musfim (2541) from the
Hadith of Abo Sa‘id and Aba Hurairah.

© Translation note: They Shaikh, may Allah have mercy upon

him, is indicating a popular rule, that while this is the

occasion of the text being stated, our later usage of the text is

not restricted to those circumstances, rather it is generally

applicable to any case that its wording addresses.

364 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasifiyyaht
% And His statement:
G30 Oe ‏فُلْوبا‎ le He

And put not in our hearts any hatred against those
who have believed .»

— He did not say: “Against those who preceded us in
faith’ to include those people who preceded, as well as
other than them, until the Day of Resurrection.

‎Bats Hy Toy‏ نيز

‎€Onr Lord! You are indeed full of kindness, Most
Mercifuly

‎And due to Your kindness and mercy, we are seeking
forgiveness from You for ourselves and for our brethren
who have preceded us in faith.

‎And in obedience to the Prophet #4 who said: “Do not
verbally abuse my Companions. By the One in Whose
Hand my soul is, if anyone of you spends gold as much as
Uhud, it will not be equal to a Mudd of one of them nor
even its Nasif thalf).””...

‎OS

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 367

not its Nasif. This one spends, and that one spends,
while the one upon whom it is spent is also another.
Each of them is a human being, but human beings are
not equal to one another. ‘These Companions, may
Allah be pleased with him, have virtues, merits,
sincerity and following such that others do not possess.
So their sincereity was tremendous, and their following
was firm, they ‘were more virtuous than other than
them in whatever they spent.

This prohibition implies Af-Tabrim (that it is unlawful);
so it is not lawful for anyone to verbally abuse the
Companions in general, or to verbally abuse one of
them specifically. If he verbally abuses them in general,
he is a disbeliever. Rather, there is no doubt in the
disbelief of the one who is skeptical about his disbelief,
‘As for the case of one who verbally abuses one of them

specifically, then we look at what prompted that. He
may have verbally abuse them due to a physical
feature, a characteristic, or religious matters. Each of
them has its own ruling.

366 Commentary on AL‘Agidah ALWasitiyyal

like, may Allah be pleased with him, due to their
precedence of accepting of Islam. That is why he said:
“Do not verbally abuse my Companions” addressing Khalid
bin Al-Walid and those like him.

If this is the case with regard to Khalid bin Al-Walid and
those like him, what do you think the case will be with
those that came after them?

% His statement: “By the One in Whose my soul is, if anyone
of you spends gold as much as Uhud...”

The Prophet # swore, and he is truthful and faithful even if

he did not swear: “If any one of you spends gold as much as

Uhtud, it will not be equal ‏مغ‎ a Mudd of one of them nor even its

Nasif (halp.””

& “Uhud:” A very large mountain, well-known in Al-
Madinah.

& “Mudd;” One-quarter of the 3“

& “Nor its. Nasif (haif).”” ‘Uhat is: Half of it. Some of them
(the scholars) say it refers to food; because that which is
measured by the Mudd and the Nasif is foad. As for
gold, it is weighed. Some of them said it refers to the
gold, according to the context, because he said: “If
anyone of you spends such as Uhud of gold, it will not
be equal to the Mudd spent by one of them nor even
half of it.” That is, “of gold.”

Whatever it is, if we say that it refers to food, then it is “of
food.” Lf we say it refers to the gold, then it is “of gold.” A
Mudd or half a Mudd of gold is nothing compared to a
Mount Uhud in gold.

“ So, with respect to the Companions, may Allah be
please with them, if anyone of us spends such as Uhud
of gold, it will not be equal to the Mudd of one of them

eer |

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 369

charity, he — Abu Bakr — came afterwards with all his
wealth.) This is a virtue.

They also accept what is reported in the Book and the
Sunnah, that Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him,
was the only Companion of the Messenger of Allah 2% who
accompanied him while he was in the cave during his
emigration from Makkah to Al-Madinah.

— They also accept what is reported in the text from the
saying of the Messenger #4 about Abt Bakr: “Indeed, the
most failhful of all people to me, in his wealth and
Companionship is Abi Bakr.”""!

In the sarne manner, is what is reported concerning ‘Umar,
“Uthman, and ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with them all; and
what is reported about the virtues of the other Compa-
nions; they accept all of this.

— In the same way regarding the ranks, they accepl
whatever is related of their ranks, The four Rightly Guided
Khalijats ave the highest rank of this Ummah. The best of
them is Aba Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Uthinan, then ‘Ali as
the author shal] mention.

"1 Reported by Aba Dawa (1678), At-Tirmidhi (3675) and he
said: “This Hadith is Hasart Salut.” And Al-Albani graded it
Hasan in Al-Mishkat (3:1700).

Reporied by Al-Bukhari (3904) and Muslim (2382) from Aba
50/10 Al-Khudii, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

به ‎Ling Lust‏ وَالِإِجْمَاعٌ مِنْ فَضَائلِهِمْ

Ani they accept whatever is reported in the Book, the
Sunnah, and the Tjma‘ (consensus) concerning their
virtues and their ranks...

Concerning his saying: “And they accept.” That is, the
People of the Surah.

Concerning his statement: “whatever is reported in the
Book, the Sunnah, and the lima‘ (consensus) concerning
their virtues and their ranks,”

Fada’il (virtues) is the plural of Fadilah (virtue), and it is
something for which a person is considered superior to
another, and it is regarded as one of his outstanding
traits.

“Ranks :” That is, levels; because the Companions ate of
levels and ranks as the author, may Allah have mercy
upon him, shall soon mention.

Therefore, whatever is reported conccming the virtues
and the levels of the Companions, the People of the
Sunnah and the fama‘ah accept that.
— For example, they accept whatever is reported of their
abundant observance of prayer or charity or fasting or Hajj
or Jihad, or other than that among virtuous.

— They accept, for example, what is reported concerning
Abu Bakr, that once when the Prophet i stressed giving

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah...

+ If somebody asks; “How do we know that?”

The response is that it is known through the dates of their
acceptance of Islam; (for example) by reading books like Al-
Isahah fi Tamytz As-Sahabah by Tbn Hajar, or Al-[sti'ab ff Ma'rifat
AL-Ashab by Ibn‘ Abdul-Barr, or any of the books written on the
biographies of the Companions, may Allah be pleased with
them. Through this, it will be known who accepted Islam before
(the Treaty of Al-Hudaybiyyah) or after.

The saying of the author: “That is the Treaty of Al-
Hudaybiyyal.”

— This is one of the two sayings regarding the interpreta-
tion of the Aysh, and it is the what is correct. The evidence
for that is the story of the disagreement that occurred
between Khalid and ‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Awf, and the
saying of Al-Bara’ bin ‘Azib who said: “You consider the
Conquest of Makkah as the Conquest, and the Conquest of
Makkah was a conquest. But to us, we consider the
conquest to be Bai‘at Ar-Rigwin which took place on the
Day of Al-Hudaybiyyah.” Reported by Al-Bukhari!!

— And it is said that that the meaning is the Conquest of
Makkah; and that is the saying of many of the scholars of
Tafsir, rather, most of them.

* Concerning his statement: “And they give preference to
the Muhdjirin (the Emigrants) over the Ansiir (the Help-

ers)”

— The Muhdjirin are those who emigrated to Al-Madinah
during the time of the Prophet 3% before the Conquest of
Makkah.

Tl Reported by Al-Bukhart (4150).
Pl See Ad-Durr Al-Manthtir (6:58)

370 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah
They give preference to those who spent before the
Conquest - and that is the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah - and
fought, over those who spent and fought afterwards, and

they give preference to the Muhdjirin (the Emigrants) over
the Ansdr (the Helpers)...

+ Concerning his statement: “They give preference to those
who spent before the Conquest - and that is the Treaty of AL
Hudnybiyyah - and fought, over those who spent and fought
afterwards.”

The evidence for that is His statement, Exalted is He:
56 VS ‏بد‎ al a os
4Not equal among you are those who spent and fought
before the Conquest. Such are higher in degree than

those who spent and fought afterwards. But to all, Allah
has promised Al-Husna.> (Al-Hadid 57:10)

ot

So those who spent and fought before the Treaty of Al-
Hudaybiyyah are better than those who spent and fought
afterwards. The Treaty of Al-Hudaybiyyah occurred in the
sixth year of Hijrah, during the month of Dhul-Qa’dalt. So,
those who had accepted Islam before that, and who spent
and fought, are better than those who spent and fought
afterwards.

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 373

‘Therefore, He mentions the Muhdjirin before them. And, in
His saying regarding how to share Al-Tar':!")

(And there is also a share in the spoils) for the poor
Emigrants, who were expelled from their homes and
their property.» (Al-Hashr 59:8)
He, after then, says:
» ‏ين مله‎ ONG TI 8
And ftose who, before them, had homes, and hai
adopted the faith.» (Al-Hashr 59:9)

الله قَالَ ‎ds hss BY‏ ما
‎And they believe that Allah said to the people of Badr - they‏
‎were three hundred and ten, and some odd number more :‏
‎“Do whatever you like, I have forgiven you!!"...‏

Concerning his statement: “And they believe that Allah
said to the people of Badr - they were three hundred and ten,
aud some odd number more; ‘Do whatever you like, I have

pre

forgiven you!
The rank of the people of Badr is the highest rank
Translation note: Meaning; spoils of war, and it differs from

Ghanimah in that Fai’ is what is taken without actual fighting;
while it is often used to mean 071417127.

372 Commentary on AL-’Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

— The Ansar are those to whom the Prophet # emigrated
lo in Al-Madinah.

+ The People of the Sunnah give preference to the
Muhajirin over the Ansar because the Muhdjirin also
gave support and aid, in addition to their emigration
whereas the Ansar only gave support.

— So the Muhdjinin left their families, wealth and their
abodes behind, and emigrated to a land where they were
strangers. All of that striving to emigrate to Allah and His
Messenger, and to support Allah and His Messenger.

— As for the Ansar, the Prophet # came to them in their
land, and they supported the Prophet #4. There is no doubt
thal they guarded him against the harm of those who
prevented their sons and women from him.

The proof for giving preference to the Muhdjirin is His
statement, Exalted is He:

Ca 55 BI ‏تنو‎
‎4And the first to embrace Islam of the Muhdjirin and
the Ansdr, and also those who followed them in
beneficence. Allah is well-pleased with them as they are
well-pleased with Him, (At-Tawbah 9:100)

He mentions the Muhdjirin before the Ansar.
Also, His statement:

Allah has forgiven the Prophet, the Muhajirin and the
Ansdr.» (At-Tawbah 9:117)

Conceming the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 375

ness. But all praise is due to Allah; the opposite of what he
said actually occurred. The Arabs heard of their destruction
and they, thereby, became insignificant in the minds of the
Arabs.

They arrived at Badr, and the two parties met face to face.
Allah, Exalted is He, revealed to the Angels:

0 2

0000

ورسولم ف

4’'Verily, Iam with you, so keep firm those who have
believed. I will cast terror into the hearts of those who
have disbelieved, so strike them over the necks, and
smite over all their fingers and foes.” This is because
they defied and disobeyed Allah and His Messenger.
And whoever defies and disobeys Allah and His
Messenger, then verily, Allah is Severe in punishment.
This is the torment, so taste it, and surely for the
disbelievers is the torment of the Fire.» (Al-Anfal 8:12-
14)

The clash between the two parties resulted, and, all praise
is due to Allah, it was a routing of the idolators and a clear
victory for the Muslims. They were victorious, and they
captured seventy men, and they killed seventy men, among
them were twenty-four men that were from their elders
and notables; they were dragged and cast into one of the
wells of Badr, repulsed and disgraced.

% ‘Then, three days after the fighting had ended, the
Prophet 3g mounted his she camel, stood by them, and

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyalt

among, the Companions.

* Badr is a well known place where the famous battle
occurred; and that was during the second year of
Aijrah, in the month of Ramadan. Allah, Exalted is He,
named that day; the Day of the Criterion.

The cause of it, was that the Prophet # heard that Aba
Sufyaan was coming from Ash-Sham (Greater Syria) with a
caravan to Makkah. He alerted his Companions for the
purpose of this caravan alone; so three hundred and ten,
plus some odd number of men were gathered; they had
only seventy carnels and horses with them. They left Al-
Madinah not intending to fight, but out of His wisdom,
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, decreed a battle between
them and their enemies.

When Abé Sufyan heard that, and that the Messenger i
was coming to him to seize the caravan, he headed to the
seashore to dispatch an message alerting the people of
Makkah and demanding their help. The people of Makkah
prepared and headed off with their nobles, their elders and
their chiefs. They left, in the manner described by Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime:

<Boastfully and to be seen of men, and hindering
(others) from the Path of Allah } (Al-Anfal 8:47)

On their way, they heard the news that Abd Sufyan had
passed safcly with the caravan; so they decided fo return
home, but Aba Jahl said: “By Allah, we will never go back
until we get to Badr, stay there, slaughter camels, drink
wine and the songstresses sing for us such that the Arabs
can hear about us and forever dread us.”

This statement exhibits pride, arrogance and selfconceited-

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 377

commit, they had been pardoned for that, because of

this great, tremendous goodness which Allah, Exalted

is He, made occur by their hands.

And in this Hadith there is evidence, that whatever

major sin was to occur from then - no matter how bad -

they would be pardoned for that.

“ And in it is the good news that they would not die in
the state of disbelief, because of this pardoning for
them, and this dicates one of two matters:

— That it is not possible that they would disbelieve after

that.

— Or that if it was ever decreed that any of them

disbelieved, he would be facilitated to repent and retum

to Islam.

Whichever the case, it contains this tremendous good news,

and we do not know that any of them apostated

afterwards

And that no one who pledged under the tree will enter the
Fire; as the Prophet #2 has informed. Rather, Allah is
pleased with them and they were pleased with Him. And
they were more than one thousand and four hundred...

% Concerning his saying: “And that 110 one who pledged

376 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah AI-Wasitiyyuh
called them by their names and the names of their
fathers saying: “O So-and-so, do you (now) wish that
you obeyed Allah and His Messenger? Indeed, we have
found what our Lord promised us to be the truth, have
you also found what your Lord promised you to be the
truth?” They (the Companions) said: “O the Messenger
of Allah, why are you talking to bodies without souls?”
He said: “By the One in Whose Hand my soul is, yon
do not hear what I say better than they do,’!)

The Prophet 3% stood by them and called them to
censuring, rebuking and scolding them. They had dis-
covered that what Allah promised was the truth. Allah,
Exalted is He, says:

EO OS SAK Oh ‏مَدُووُهُ‎ saad
€This is the torment, so taste it, and surely for the
disbelievers is the torment of the Tire. (Al-Anfil 8:14)

They found the torment of the Fire immediately when they
died, and realized for sure that the Messenger was right,
but how could they now benefit being so disgraced.!!

*% The people of Badr, are those by whose hands Allah
granted this clear victory and criterion (between truth
and falsehood), which caused the Arabs to dread the
Messenger of Allah i and his Companions. After this
victory, the held such a magnificent rank, that Allah
looked over them, and said: “Do whatever you like, for
I have forgiven you”) So whatever sin they would

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (3976) and Muslim (2874) from
Anas bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him.

"I Reported by Al-Bukhari (3007) and Muslim (2494) from ‘Ali,
may Allah be pleased with him, in the story of Hatib bin Abi
Balta‘ah, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah...

So, there were negotiations between them.

Allah, Exalted is He, exhibited one of His Ayat during this
expedition, indicating that it was better for the Messenger
and His Companions lo yield because of the goodness and
benefit that would result from that. So the she-camel of the
Messenger 2% knelt down, refusing to advance, such that
they said: “Al-Qaswa’ has become obstinant;” meaning, it
became unruly, refusing to continuing the journey. The
Prophet #3 defended her, saying: “By Allah, Al- Qaswa’
has not become obstinant, and that is not her character;
rather she was restrained by the One who restrained the
Elephant.” Then, he said: “By the One in Whose Hand my
soul is! They will not ask me for anything in their reverence
to Allah’ sanctities, except that 1 will give it to them.”™

So negotiations began between them, and the Prophet #5
sent ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan — because he had relatives in
Makkah who would protect him — to invite them to Islam,
and to inform them that the Prophet ‏و‎ only came for
‘Umrah in reverence for the House. Then, news spread that
Uthman had been killed. That was a grave matter to the
Muslims. So the Prophet #% called his Companions to
pledge that they would fight the inhabitants of Makkah,
who killed the messenger of Allah’s Messenger #3, and
since messengers would not normally be killed, the
Companions, may Allah be pleased with them, pledged

Cl Reported by Al-Bukhdri (2731, 2732) from Al-Miswar bin
Makhramah and Marwan bin Al-Hakam. In Al-Fath (5:33),
Al-Hiafiz said: “And these reports attributed to Marwan are
in Mursal form, because he is not a Companion. As for Al-
Miswar, then in his case it is Mursal as well, because he was
not present for the event and Al-Miswar and Marwan heard
from a group of the Companions who witnesses this story.”

378 Commentary on Al-‘Agidal Al-Wasitiyyah

under the tree will enter the Fire; as the Prophet # has
informed.) Rather, Allah is pleased with them and they
were pleased with Him. And they were more than one
thousand and four hundred”!

* The People of the Tree, they are those who Compa-
nions of Baf‘at Ar-Ridwan.

And the cause of this pledge, was that the Messenger
as left Al-Madinah for Makkah with the intention to
perform ‘Umrah; with him were his Companions and
the sacrifice. They were about one thousand and four
hundred men; they wanted nothing except to perform
‘Limrah. When they reached Al-Hudaybiyyah - and itis
a place close to Makkah on the route to Jeddah
nowadays; part of it is in the 112701 (the Sacred
Precincts) while the other part of it is not - the idolators
learned of that and they prevented the Messenger of
Allah # and his Companions (from entering Makkah);
because, they claimed that {hey were the people of the
House, and the protectors of the House.

oA 5

‎asi Glee USP‏ إلا المتمرن»
‎4And they are not its guardians. None can be its‏

‎guardians except ALMutlagin (the pious)» (Al-Anfil
8:34)

‎&

‎"1 Reported by Muslim (2496) from Jabir bin ‘Abdullah, sainyg:

‎“Umen Mubashir informed me that, in the presence of
Hafsah, she heard the Prophet # saying: ‘In the case of the
people of the tree; not one of those who gave the pledge
under it will enter the Fire, if Allah wills.” And Aba Dawud
,, (4653) and At-Tirmidh (3859) reported similarly.
Pl Reported by AL-Buk (4154) on Jabir, may Allah be
pleased with him,

Conceming the Position of the People of the Sunnah...

"Umar, ‘Uthman and ‘Ali
So Allah, Exalted is He, described them with faith. This is a
testimony from Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, that
whoever partook of the pledge under the tree, then is a
believer that Allah is pleased with. The Prophet 3% said:
“No one who took the pledge under the tree will enter the
Fire." So, the pleasure (of Allah) is affirmed in the
Qur’an, while the negation of them entering the Fire is
affirmed in the Surinah.
% Concerning the Prophet ## saying: “No one who took
the pledge under the tree will enter the Fire;” one may
have said: “How can we reconcile between thal, and

His statement, Exalted is He;
CoE ES EK BL, KG ‏د‎
‎(There is not one of you but will pass over it

(Wariduha); this is with your Lord; a Decree which
must be accomplished .» (Maryan: 19:71)"

So the reconciliation is from one of two angles:

First: That it be said that the scholars of Tafsir differ over
the meaning of Al-Wunid (the passing). Some of them said
it refers to passing over the Sirdt, because this, without a
doubt, is a type of Wurtd (passing), as in His statement,
Exalted is te:

éAnd when Warada (passed) the water of Madyan; he
found there a group of men watering (their flocks)»
(Al-Qasas 28:23)

And it is known that he did not go inside the water; he

21 tts reference has preceded.

380 Commentary on Al-“Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

to the Prophet 4 that they would fight -
‏سيت‎ y would fight - and not flee - to

ie Prophet 00 was under the tree taking the pledge from
People, extending his hand; so they took thi
pledge, about which Allah said: 7 * Piessed

*» ‏يديم‎ Se ‏آله يد أنه‎ OAC OL A all

iWerily, those who gave the Bui‘ah (pledge) to you, they
are giving the Bai‘ah (pledge) to Allah. The Hand of
Allah is over their hands.» (Al-Fath 48:10)

And since ‘Uthman, may Allah be pleased with him, was
absent, the Prophet 3 pledged with his hand on behalf of
‘Uthman’s hand, and said, about his right hand: “This is
‘Uthman’s hand.” Later, it became clear that ‘Uthman had
not been killed. So, ambassadors began to go back and
forth between the Messenger of Allah ‏يله‎ and the Quraish,
until they reached the conclusion of the treaty, which
became a manifest victory for the Messenger 3. | ‘

* Allth said about those who pledged:

Se ne Ol SG WEE tps
Indeed, Allah was pleased with the believers when they
gave their Bai‘ah (pledge) to you under the tree, He
knew what was in their hearts, and He sent dow As-
Sakinah (calmness) upon them, and He rewarded them
weith a ‏دمن‎ Aud abundant spoils that they will
capture. And Alla is Ever All-Mi :
‏مسسييند‎ Ever All- Mighty, All-Wise.> (AL

>» Among those who took the pledge were Aba Bakr,

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 383

Sahih Al-Bukhar#"' it is reported that Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah
be pleased with him, said: “We returned the following year
— that is after the Treaty of Al-Hudaybiyyah — and no
two people among us gathered under the tree under which
we took the pledge. Il was a rnercy from Allah.” And this is
what Al-Mussayab, the father of Sa‘id said: “When we
were retuming the following, vear, we forgot it, and we
could not locate it.”

This does not negate what Ton Hajar mentioned from Ibn
Sa’d because their forgetting, it docs necessitate thal it did
not exist anymore, nor that it would not be found after that.
And Allah knows best.

And this is among the good deeds of ‘Umar bin Al-
Khattab, may Allah be pleased with him, because we think
that if this tree remained until today, it would have been
worshipped aside from Allah.

enger of
Allah % testified it; such as the Ten, Thabit bin Qais bin
Shammds, and others aniong the Companions...

Concerning his saying: “And they testify of Paradise, for
awhoever the Messenger of Alldh wy testified it; such as the

Reported by Al-Bukhari (4162), (4163), (2958) from Ibn
"Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, and also (4162),
(4163) from the father of Sa‘id bin Al-Musayyab.

382 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah AL-Wisitiyyah

rather near it and close to it.

So, based upon this, there is no problem, nor any
contradiction in the first place.

The Second Angle: That some of the scholars of Tafsir said
the meaning of Al-Wunid (passing) is “entrance;” and that
there is no person but he will enter the Fire. Based upon
this sayng, his statement: “No one who took the pledge
under the tree will enter the Fire.” will carry the meaning
of: “he will not enter it to be punished nor disgraced; and
he would only enter it in fulfilment of the oath:

03 4 4 08
635) ‏ارين يسك إلا‎
417:66 is not one of you but will pass over it
(Wiriduha)>

Or, it is it could be said that this should be considered

general, and that the text concerning the people of the

pledge of Ridwan (pleasure) is specific,

* And His saying: “The tree: The tree was a lote tree;
some say if is was an acacia tree. There is no point
lengthy discusssiong about this disagreement. It was
one that provided shade. The Prophet 3% sat down
underneath it to take the pledge from the people. It
existed during the time of the Messenger #, and the
time of Abu Bakr, may Allah be pleased with him, and
the earlier part of the era of ‘Umar. Then it was said to
him: “People have started going there to pray there.”
Then ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, ordered
that it be cut down, so it was cut down.

It was said in AL-Faffr:'") “I found it recorded in the book of
Ton Sa’cl with an authentic chain of transmission.” While in

Ol Fath Al-Bari (7:448)

Concerning the Pesition of the People of the Sunnah...

group of people are in the Paradise.

And this specific testimony is that which we bear witness

to for whomever the Messenger #% has testified such;

weather he testified lo that about one particular person a

parlicular group of people.

* Anexample of that is what the author mentioned in his
saying: “Such as the Ten.”’ Meaning by that; the ten that
were given the glad tidings of Paradise. They were
named with this title, because the Prophet ‏ف‎
‎mentioned all of them in one Hadith.

And they are; the Four Rightly Guided Khalifahs; Aba Bakr,
‘Umar, ‘Uthman, ‘Al, and Sa‘id bin Zaid, Sa’d bin Abr
Wagaas, ‘Abdur-Rahman bin ‘Awf, Talhah bin ‘Ubaidul-
lah, Az-Zubayr bin Al’ Awwam, and Abu ‘Ubaidah ‘Amir
bin ALJarrah. See their biographies for more details about
them.
The six after the Four Rightly Guided Khalifahs have been
collected together in a poem, so, memorize ik

Sa‘id and Sa‘d, and Ibn ‘Awf and Talhah -

And ‘Amir of ‏معطا[‎ and Az-Zubair, the commendable.

These people, the Prophet # gave them the the glad tidings in
one list. He said: “Aba Bakr is in Paradise, ‘Umar is in the
Paradise.’ That is why they are named with this title. Soit
is obligatory upon us to testify that they are in the Paradise
duc to the testimony of the Prophet #% regarding that.

U1 Reported by Ahmad (1:187, 188,189), Abd Dawad (4649), At
Tirmidhi (3748), Ton Majah (134), Ibn Hibban in his Sahih
(10:6996) and Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak (:450) and Al-
Albani graded it Salnh in As-Silsilah Ag Saltihah (875).

384 Commentary on Al’ Agidal Al-Wasitiyyah

Ten, Thabit bin Qais bin Shammas, and others among the
Companions.”

% They testify” That is; the People of the Sunnah and the
Jama‘ah.

% The testimony of Paradise is of two types: A testimony
that relates to a description, and a testimony that
relates to a person.

— As for the one that relates to a description, we testify
that every believer will enter Paradise, and that every
person of Taqza will enter Paradise, without specifying any
particular person or persons.

And this general testimony, it is obligatory for us to bear
witness to it, because Allah, Exalted is He, informed us of
it. He, Exalted is He, says:

يد

Verily, those who believe and do righteous good deeds,
for them are Gurdens of delight (Paradise) to abide

therein. It is a Promise of Allah in truth. And He is the
All the All (Lugman 31:8-9)

Ge if ag;

And He says:

tAnd march forth in the way (which leads to)
forgiveness from your Lord, and for Paradise as wide as
are the heavens and the earth, prepared for Al-Muttagin
(the pious).» (Al ‘Imran 3:133)

— As for the testimony which relates to a specific person,
that our testifying about so-and-so, or that a particular

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 387

the Prophet #% said: “Go to him and tell him: ‘You are not
among the inhabitants of the Fire, rather you are among the
inhabitants of Paradise.’ So, the Prophet # gave him
the glad tidings of Paradise.

% His saying: “And others among the Compantons :”' Such as
the Mothers of the believers, because they are in the
level that the Messenger i¢ is in. And among them are:
Bilal, “Abdullah bin Salam, ‘Ukashah bin Mihsan and
54 bin Mu‘adh, may Allah be pleased with them
all.”

Reported by AL-Bukhan (3613) and Muslim (119) from Anas
bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him.

~ As for Bilal; it is contained in the Hadith of Jabir, reported
by Muslim (2457); that the Messenger of Allah #5 said: “I
was shown Paradise and I saw the wife of Abu Talhah, and
then, I heard a rustling sound in front of me, and it was
Bilal.”

- As for ‘Abdullah bin Salam; in (he Hadith of Sa’d bin Abi
Waqqas, may Allah be pleased with him, reported by Al-
Bukhari (1982) and Muslim (2481); who said: “I did not hear
the Prophet 3% saying about anyone walking on the surface
of the earth, that he is from the people of the Paradise except
“Abdullah bin Salam.”

- As for ‘Ukashah bin Mihsan, the Prophet ‏ييه‎ supplicated for
him, that he would be among the seventy thousand who
would enter Paradise without reckoning, and that is
contained in the Hadith of Ibn ‘Abbas reported by Al-
Bukhart (6541) and Muslim (220)

- As for Sa’d bin Mu'adh, it is contained in the Haditfe of Al-
Bara’ in Al-Bukhari (3802) and Muslim (2468), who said: “A
garment made of silk was presented to the Messenger of
Allah ‏به‎ and his Companions began to touch and admiring

Commentary on AF ’Agidah ALWasitiyyah

His statement: “And Thabit bin Qais bin Shamis :” Thabit
bin Qais, may Allah be pleased with him, he was one of
the Khatibs of Prophet #%. He had a loud voice. So when

His statement, Exalted is He, was revealed:

505-02 peter

40 you who believe! Ruise not your voices above the
voice of the Prophet, nor speak aloud to him in talk as
you speak aloud to one another, lest your deeds may be
rendered fruitless while you perceive not.» (AFHujurat
49-2)

He was afraid that his deeds had become fruitless while he
perceived not; so, he hid himself to his house. The Prophet

noticed he was missing, him and sent a man to find out

%

him to enquire about his hiding, so he said: “Allah revealed

is saying:

Lge ‏وَلَا‎

وأثر لا

40 you who believe! Raise not your voices above the
voice of the Prophet, nor speak aloud to him in talk as
you speak aloud to one another, lest your deeds may be
read fruitless while you perceive not.» (ALHujurat

Hi

And Lam the one that raises Mny voice above the voice of
the Prophet #8, my deeds have been rendered fruitless; so I
am of the inhabitants of the Fire!! So, the man came back to
the Prophet and informed him of what Thabit said. Thus,

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 389

to consider who was the best of the peuple, and we
considered the best as Abu Bakr, then ‘Umar bin Al-
Khattab then ‘Uthman bin ‘Affan.’”
And also in Salt Al-Bukhari"! it is reported that
Muhammad bin Al-Hanfiyyah said: “! said to my
father: ‘Who among people is the best after the
Messenger of Allah 23? He replied: ‘Aba Bakr.’ I
said: ‘Then, who?’ He said: “Umar.’ I was afraid that he
would say: ‘Then ‘Uthman,’ so I said, ‘Then you” He
said: ‘I am no more than a man among the Muslims.’”
Since it was during the period of his Khilafah that ‘Ali
would say that the best of this Ummah after its Prophet is
Aba Bak, then ‘Umar, then he refuted the argument of the
Rafidah who gave him preference over them.
* His statement: “And others” meaning, others than ‘Ali
among the Companions and the Tabi‘in.

% This is agreed upon among the Inmdms.

— Imam Malik said: “I never saw anyone doubting the

preference of the Wo of them (Abi Bakr and ‘Umar).”

— Ash-Shafi’i said: “The Companions and the Tabi‘in did

not differ regarding giving preference to Abi Bakr and

“Unnar.’

Whoever opposes this consensus, then he has indeed

followed other than the path of the believers.

+ Concerning his saying: “They consider ‘Utlundn as the
third, and ‘Alias the fourth, may Allth be pleased with them
both, as is indicated by the narrations.””

“They consider 05 the third" That is, the People of the
Sunnah. Meaning, they allot the third position to

Reported by AJ-Bukhiti (3671).

388 Commentary on AlAgidah Al Wasitiyyah

رَمِيَ ‎It‏ عَنْهُمْ ‎atte 215 US‏ الآثّاز.
‎They acknowledge what is reported in Tawiitur form, from‏
‎the Commander of the Believers, “Ali bin Abi Talib, may‏
‎Allah be pleased with him, and others, that the best of thts‏
‎Ummah after the Prophet is; Abit Bakr, then ‘Umar. They‏
‎consider ‘Uthmdn as the third, and ‘Alias fhe fourth, may‏
‎Allah be pleased with them both, as is indicated by the‏
‎narrations...,‏

Concerning His saying: “They acknowledge what is
reported in Taweatur form, from the Commander of the
Believers, ‘Alt bin Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with
hint, and others, that the best of this Ummah after the
Prophet is: Abit Bakr, then “Umar.”

Tawdtur. A narration that denotes-certain knowledge
which is transmitted by a group of people such that it is
not possible thal they could have agreed on on a lie.

It is reported in Sahih AL-Bukhdr#™ and others from
‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him,
who said: “During the time of the Prophet #8, we used

its delicateness, and he said: ‘Do you marvel at the
delicateness of this? The handkerchiefs of Sa‘d bin Mu’adh
in Paradise is better and more delicate than this.”
Reported by Al-Bukhan (3655).

nm

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 391

that was more virtuous than him. As it is found in the
report: “As you shall be; so shall you be goverened.” So, in
the case of the best of all generations, Allah would not
place but the best among them in authority over them.

Though some of the People of the Sunnah differed
concerning ‘Utuman and ‘Ali - may Allah be pleased with
them both - after they had agreed on the preference of Abu
Bakr and ‘Umar, regarding which of them is more
meritorious. Some gave preference to ‘Utmin and kept
silent, or they considered ‘Ali as the fourth. Some gave
preference to ‘Ali. While a group of people halted. But the
settled matter with the People of the Sunnah is the
preference of Ulhmin, then ‘Ali...

Concerning his saying: “Though some of ihe People of the
Sunnah differed concerning ‘Utiman and ‘Ali - may Allah
be pleased with them both - after they had agreed on the
preference of Abst Bakr and ‘Umar, regarding which of them
is more meritorious. Some gave preference to “Uthman and
kept silent, or they considered ‘Alt as the fourth.”

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wésitiyyah

‘Uthman.

“And they consider ‘Ali as the fourth.” That is, they give
‘Ali the fourth position.

So, based on this, the best of this Ummal: are these four.
Abd Bakr, then ‘Umar, this is by consensus - then
“Uthman, then ‘Ali.

And the Companions had a consensus about giving
preference to ‘Uthman by giving him the pledge...

ل جه وه ووه سس —_

© Then, the author established this ranking with two
kinds of evidence.

Firstly: His saying “as is indicated by the narrations;
something about that just preceded.

Secondly: His statement: “And the Companions had a
consensus nbout giving preference to “Uthman by giving him
the pledge.”

So, this becomes like a narration that is reported for the
preference of ‘Uthman over ‘Ali. There is also an
intellectual proof in it, and that is the consensus of the
Companions to prefer ‘Uthman for the pledge, because
their consensus indicates that ‘Uthinan more virtuous than
“Ali It is like that, because the wisdom of Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, denies thal somebody be made a leader over
the best of the generations, when there was another person

مَنْ طَعْنَ في ‎ele‏ مِنْ مَؤْلاء؛ فَهْرَ ‎be Sai‏
‎je‏ أَهْلو.

Even though this issue - the issue of ‘Uthman and ‘Ali - is
not among the fundamentals about which the one who
disagrees will he considered as straying, according to the
view of the majority of the People of the Sunnah. But the
matter he will have strayed in is the matter of the Khilafah ,
that is because they believe that the Khilafah after the
Messenger of Allah itz is Abu Bakr, then “Umar, then
“Uthman, then ‘Ali, And whoever criticizes the Khilafah of
anyone of these, then he is more astray than the donkey of
his houschold.

Concerning his saying: “Even though this issue - the issue of
‘Uthman and ‘Ali - is not among the fundamentals about which
the ane who disagrees will be considered as straying, according
to the view of the majority of the People of the Sunnah.”
“That is, giving preference between ‘Uthman and ‘Ali -
may Allah be pleased with them both - is not among
the fundamentals of the People of the Sunnah upon
which the one who disagrees will be considered astray.
So, whoever said that ‘Ali is more virtuous than
“Uthman, we would not say that he is astray. Rather,
we say that is one of the opinions held by the People of

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 393,

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

So, they say: Aba Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Uthman, and
| then they are silent, or they would say: “Then ‘Ali.”

‘The author said: “Some gave preference to ‘Ali.’ ‘They
said; “Aba Baks, then ‘Umar, then ‘Ali, then ‘Uthman.”
This is one of the opinions among the People of the
Sunnah

The author said: “While ‏م‎ group of people halted.” They said:
‘Abu Baks, then ‘Umar. So, they would not take a position
on who follows in rank; ‘Uthman or ‘Ali? This is different
from the first view.

* As such, there are four views:

The famous view: Aba Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Uthman,
then ‘Ali.

The second view: Aba Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Uthman,
then silence.

The third view: Abu Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Ali, then
The fourth view: Aba Bakr, then ‘Umar, then halt concern-
ing which of the two comes on the ladder; ‘Uthman or ‘Ah.
They say: we will not say neither ‘Uthman is better ranked
nor ‘Ali is better ranked, but we do nof see any better placed
than ‘Uthméan and ‘Ali except Aba Bakr and ‘Umar.

‘The author said: “But the settled matter with the People of
the Sunnah is the preference of ‘Ufhmdn, then ‏"قله"‎

This is the view that the People of the Sunnah have settled
upon. So they say that the best of this ‏ما‎ after its
Prophet is Ahi Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Cthman, then ‘Alt,
as was their actual sequence in Kiildfah. And this is what is
correct, as its evidences preceded.

395

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah...

after the Messenger of Allah #8 was Abi Bakr, then
“Umar, then ‘Uthman, then ‘Ali, and that they are
entitled, in this sequence, to Khildfai, such that we do
not say there that there was some injustice in the
Khildfah, as the Rawéfid claimed when they claimed that
Abi Bakr, ‘Umar, and ‘Uthman, and all of the
Companions committed injustice, because they
wronged ‘All bin Abi Talib, by usurping the Khilafak
away from him.
> As for those after them, we are not able to say that
every Khalifah which Allah caused to succeed over
people was more entitled to the Khilifek than other than
him. Because those that came after them were not from
the best generation; rather, there occurred among them
injustices, deviations and various acts of disobedience
which may have necessitated that those who were not
the most worthy of Khilafeh be entrusted over them, as
Allah, Exalted is He, says:
LS I ‏با يما‎ oat ‏ول بعل‎ GD
And thus We do make wrong ‏“ترفاس‎ one to another,
because of that which they used to earn} (Al-An‘am 6:129)

2 And you should know, that the sequence of their
preference, as it is earlier mentioned, does not mean
that the one who is more virtuous than another is more
virtuous in everything, Rather, the less virtuous among
them could have a superiority not shared by any of the
others, so distinguishing one of these four, or others,
with a particular virtue above others, does not prove

absolute preference of virtue. So, it is necessary to

differentiate between the absolute and the restricted.

a ‏اج‎

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

the Sunnah, and we do not say anything regarding that.

* Conceming his saying: “But the matter he will have
strayed in is the matter of the Khilafah.”’ So it is obligatory
for us to say that after our Prophet, the Khalifih in his
Linmah was Aba Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Uthman, then
“Ali. Whoever says that the Khilafah was supposed to be
for ‘Ali instead of these three, then he is astray. And
whoever says that it was for ‘Alt after Aba Bakr and
“Umar, then he is also astray, because he contradicted
the consensus of the Companions, may Allah be
pleased with them all.

That is why the author said: “’That is because they believe that
the Khilafah after the Messenger of Allah 38 is Abi Bakr, then
‘Umar, then ‘Ulhman, then ‘Ali.

* This is what the People of the Sunnah have agree upon
in the matter of the Khilafah.

* Concerning his saying: “And whoever criticizes the
Kiuléfah of anyone of these, then he is more astray than
the donkey of kis household.”

The one who criticizes the Khilafah of any one of these,
saying that he was not entitled to the Khildfah, or that
he was more entitled to it than who came before him,
then he is more astray than the donkey of his
household,

?

The author used this expression because it ‏كذ‎ the expression
of Imam Ahmad, may Allah have mercy upon him. There is
no doubt that he is more astray than the donkey of his
houschold. And he only mentioned a donkey, because it is
absolutely the dumbest of animals; for it is has the Icast sense
among them. So, criticizing the Khilafalt of one of these, or
their sequence, is criticizing all of the Companions together,

% So it is obligatory upon us to believe that the Khalifih

5 a

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 397

Sunnah and the Jamd‘uh, is that they love the members
of the Household of the Messenger of Allah. They love
out of to two matters: out of faith, and due to their
kinship to the Messenger of Allah #8. They never have
an aversion for them.

But they do not say as the Rafidaly; that whoever loves Aba
Bakr and ‘Umar he has hates ‘Ali! And, based on this, that
it is not possible for us to love ‘Ali until we hate Aba Bakr
and ‘Umar!! As if Aba Bakr and ‘Umar were enemies of
‘All bin Abi Talibl{ Despite the fact that the reports from
him are Tawétir that he praised the two of them upon the
Minbar.

So we say, that we call upon Allah to witness our love for
the members of the Household of the Messenger # and his
relatives. We love them out of love for Allah and His
Messenger.

And his wives are among the members of his household
according to the text of the Qur'an. Allah, Exalted is Ile,

Commentary on Al‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎٠‏ وَاصْطْفَى مِنْ فُرَيْشٍ بي خَاشِمء وَاضْطَفَانِي

‎And they love the members of the Household of the
Messenger of Allah 2% and ally themselves with them.
And they preserve the instruction of the Messenger of Allah
3 concerning them, when on the Day of Ghadir Khumm :
“Tam reminding you of Allah concerning the members of
my Household, And he also said to Al-’Abbis, tis uncle,
who had complained to him that some Quraish were being
rude with Banu Hashim, He said: “By the One in whose
Hand is my soul, they do not believe until they love you for
Allah's sake and for my kinship. And he said: “Indeed,
Allah selected the progeny of Ismd‘il, and He selected
Kindnah from the progeny of Isma‘il, and He selected
Quraish from Kinanah, and Le selected Bana Hashim from
Quraish, and He selected me from Bantt Hashim.”

‎Concerning his statement: “And they love the members of
the Household of the Messenger of Allah # and ally
themselves with them .”’

‎That is; among the fundamentals of the People of the

Concemting the Position of the People of the Sunna
is not permissible to love him in any way. Rather, it is
required that we abhor him for his disbelief and for
harming the Prophet 8. And the same with Abu Talib, we
must abhore him for his disbeliet, while we love what he
did to protect the Messenger 38 and defend him.

The author said: “and ally thenselves with thent” Mean-
ing, they choose them to be among their allies, The Walt
is used for a number of meanings. It is used for
confidant, one that is close, one that is entrusted with
command, and other types of support and aid. Here, it
includes aid, friendship and love.

Concerning his saying: “And they preserve the instruction
of the Messenger of Alldh is concerning them, when on the
Day of Ghadir Khumm; “I am reminding yer of Allah
concerning the members of my Household mau

“The instruction of the Messenger #;" the covenant
which he entrusted his Ummah with.

"The Day of Ghadir Khumm .”’ It was the eighteenth day
of Dhal-Hijjah. This Ghadir (brook) was named after a
man known as Khumm. It was on the road between
Makkah and Al-Madinah, very close to AlJuhfah. The
Messenger # had stop there tv camp upon his return
from the Farewell Pilgrimage, and he addressed people
there. He said: “T am reminding you of Allah concerning
the members of my Household’ saying it three times.
Meaning: Remember Allah; be mindful tu fear [im and
His punishment if you forsake the right of the members
of the Household, and remember His mercy and His
reward if you uphold their rights.

& Conceming his statement: “And he also said to Al

‎Reported by Muslim (2408) from Zaid bin Argam, may Allah‏ لا
‎be pleased with him.‏

‎398 Commentary on Al-‘Agidalt ALWasitiyyak

‎Che ete 08
1

‏قد أي
‎€O Prophet! Say to your wives: “If you desire the life of‏
‎this world, and its glitter, then come! I will make a‏
‎provision for you and set you free in a handsome manner.‏
‎But if you desire Allah and His Messenger, and the home‏
‎of the Hereafter, then verily, Allah has prepared for the‏
‎among you an enormous reward. © wives of‏ ممع ‎doers of‏
‎the Prophet! Whoever of you commits Fahishah, the‏
‎torment for her will be doubled, and that is ever ensy for‏
‎Allah. And whosoever of you is obedient to Allah and His‏
‎Messenger, and does righteous good deeds, We shall give‏
‎her, her reward twice over, and We have prepared for her‏
‎generous provisions. O wives of the Prophet! You are not‏
‎like any other women. If you have Taqwa, then be not soft‏
‎in speech, lest he in whose heart is a disense should be‏
‎moved with desire, but speak in an honourable manner.‏

‎And stay in your houses, and do not display yourselves

‎like that of the times of ignorance, and perform As-Salah,

‎and give Az-Zakah and obey Allah and His Messenger.

‎Allah wants onily to remove Ar-(evil deeds aud sins, etc.}

‎from you, O members of the Household, and to purify you

‎with a thorough purification.» (AL-Alizab 33:28-33).

‎Here, the wives of the Messengers #% are unequivocally
included in the members of his Household.

‎— Similarly, his close relations are included: Fatimah, ‘Alt,
Hasan, Al-Ilusain, and the others such as Al Abbas bin
‘Abdul-Muttalib and his children. We love them due to
their kinship with the Messenger of Allah #, and due to
their faith in Allah.

‎If any of them dishelieved, then we would not Jove them,
even if they were the nearest relatives of the Messenger #.
So Abu Lahb, who was an uncle to the Messenger #, but it

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 401

part of man’s nature, except whom Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, protects from that. So, they envied the
members of the Household of the Messenger #¢ for the
kinship with the Prophet # that Allah favoured them
with, so they behaved rudely with them and did not
uphold their rights,

+ Concerning his saying: “And he said: ‘Indeed, Allah
selected the progeny of Isma'il, and He selected Kinauah
from the progeny of Ismd‘il, and He selected Quraish from
Kinanah, and He selected Bami Hashim from Quraish, and
He selected me from Bani Hashim,”

This is an evidence that Band Hashim were selected by
Allah, chosen among His creation.

+ So the creed of the People of the Sunnalt and the Jama‘ah
concerning the members of the Household is that they
love them, and chose them as their allies, and preserve
the imstruction of the Messenger # reminding of them.
And they do not raise them above their status; rather,
they declare their innocence from whomever it is that
exaggerates about them such that they covnvey upon
them the status of divinity - as was done by ‘Abdullah
bin Saba’ in the case of ‘Ali bin Abi Talib, when he said
to him: “You are Allah.” And that story is popular.

“ And “Ismail” was the son of Ibrahim the Khalil. He
was the one whom Allah ordered Ibrahim to slaughter.
His story is in Strat As-Sdfat.

‎“Kindnah:” He was the fourteenth father to the‏ م
‎Messenger 2.‏

‎“Qura

‎Reported by Mustim (2276), At-Tirmidhi (3609 and 3612)
from the Hadith of Wathilah bin Al-Asqa’, may Allah be
pleased with him.

‎i: He was the eleventh father to the Messen-

‎Commentary on Al-Agidah ALWasitiyyah

‎‘Abbas, his uncle, whe had complained to him that some
Quraish were being rude with Bani Hashim. He said: ‘By
the One in whose Hand is my soul, they do net believe until
they love you for Allah’s sake and for my kinship "1

‎“being ‏"مقي‎ complaining and showing dislike.

‎“Hashim: We was the great grandfather of the
Messenger 335.

‎He swore that they do not believe; that is their faith
would not be complete until they love you for the sake
of Allah. This kind of love, others among the believers
share it with them, for it is obligatory upon everybody
to love every believer for the sake of Allah.

‎But he said: “And for my kinship.” This kind of love is in
addition to the love for Allah’s sake, and is specifically
for the members of the Household, the relatives of the
Prophet

‎In the statement of Al-‘ Abbas: “Sone of the Quraish were
being rude to Rang Hashim” there is evidence that
rudness with the members of the Household existed
during the life of the Prophet ‏عد‎ That is because envy is

‎Reported by Imam Ahmad in Al-Musnad (1:207) and in
Fada‘il As-Sahabah (1757), from ‏“له‎ Abbas, with the wording:
“By Allah, faith will not enter the heart of any man, until he
loves you for the sake of Allah for my kinship.” - from Yazid
bin Abi Ziyad, and he is weak. Imam Ahmad also reported it
in Fada'i! As-Sahabel (1756) with the wording; “They will
never achieve any good until they loves you for the sake of
Allah and my kinship” and its chain is weak due to its Irsal
(meaning it was reported in) Mursal form). And Tarrad Az-
Zainabi reported it in connected form in his Amdli (B88) as is
quoted by the editor of Fudi'il As-Sahdbah, Wasiyyullah
“Abbas (1756),

‎4

‎34

‎ny

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 403

attribute for “the wives.” So, the wives of the Prophet
are our mothers in terms of honour, respect an
relationship. He, Exalted is He, says:
eck anced 5
‏الجر أت‎ real § & oo GF

4The Prophet is closer to the believers than their ownselves,
and his wives are their mothers.» (Al-Ahzab 33:6)

So we ally with them by aiding and defending them, and
the belief that they are the most virtuous of all wives on the
earth, since they were the Wives of the Messenger 3%.

> Conceming his statement: “And they believe that they are
his wives in the Hereafter.” Due to the Liadiths reported
about that, and according His statement, Exalted is He:

‎ote bee ett ao‏ عند

‎Ae Ope BF 35 GM 6,
i Ske bx 2505 EG ifn 3

‎ete pete tee
‏وأتبعوا سيلك‎ Re

‎eS ‏ون مكل‎ ss fl ot
CASEI Syd ‏أت‎ ab
4Those who bear the Throne, and those around it glorify
the praises of their Lord, and believe in Him, and ask
forgiveness for those who believe (saying): “Our Lord!
You comprehend all things in mercy and knowledge, so
forgive those who repent and follow Your Way, and save
them from the torment of the Blazing Fire! Our Lord!
And make them enter the ‘Adn (Eden) Paradise {ever.
lasting Gardens) which you have promised them, and fo
the righteous among their fathers, and their wives, and
their offspring! Verily, You are the All-Mighty, the All-
Wise > (Ghafir 40:7-8)

‎He said: 4and their wivesp; So He affirms wifehood for

‎402 Commentary on Al“Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎ger of Allah #. He was (his actual name was) Fihr bn
Malik. It is said he was the thirteenth father, and he
was (his actual name was) An-Nadr bn Kinanah.

‎im” was the third father to the Messenger of

‎And they take as allies, the Wives of the Messenger of
Allah 38, the Mothers of the believers, and they believe
that they are his wives in the Hereafter. Specifically.
Khadijah, may Altai ‏مط‎ pleased with her, the mother of
most af his children, and the first one fo believe in him and
support hint in his affair, and she occupies an exalted
status with him, and the Siddigah (the truthful one) the
daughter of As-Siddiq, may Allah be pleased with her,
about whom the Prophet said: "The superiority of ‘Aishah
over women is like the superiority of Tharid over all other
foods."

‎© Concerning his saying: “And they choose as allies, the
Wives of the Messenger of Allah i, the Mothers of the
believers.”

‎% His saying: “The Mothers of the Believers: This is an

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 405

Nawfal and narrated the story (of what he experienced
in the cave of Eira’) to him. He (Waraqah) said to him:
“This is An-Namis which used to descend to
Musa.”""1 “An-Namas:” meaning the custodian of
secrets.

So, Waraqah believed in him.
That is why we say that the first of all women to believe in

him was Khadijah, while the first of men to believe in him
was Waragah bn Nawial

* Concerning his statement: “And supported him in his
affair” that is; giving him absolute support. Whoever
examines the Sirah, he will find that the Mother of the
Believers Khadijah, may Allah be pleased with her,
offered the Prophet 2% such support that was not
rendered by any of his wives.

“ Concerning his statement: “And she occupies an exalted
status with him” such that he # used to mention her
after her death, and send gifts to some of her friends,
and say: “She was, she was; and I had children with
her.”“! So he would praise her, and this proves her
tremendous status with the Messenger #5.

Concerning his statement: “And te Siddiqah (the
truthful one) the daughter of As-Siddiq, may Allah be
pleased with her.”

As for her being a Sidiqah (truthful one), it is because of her
complete trust in the Messenger of Allah 2, and complete
truthfulness in her relationship with him, and for her

') Reported by Al-Bukhari (3) and Muslim (160), from ‘Aishah,
may Allah be pleased with her.

Pl Reported by Al-Bukhari (3818) from ‘Aishah, may Allah be

pleased with her.

404 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah AL Wasitiyyah

them after their entrance to Paradise. This proves that the
person’s wife in this life will be his wife in the Hereafter,
if she is among the inhabitants of the Paradise.

Concerning his statement: “Specifically, Khadijah, may
Allah be pleased with her, the mother uf most of his
children.”

@ “Khadijah” is the daughter of Khuwailid. She was the
first wife that the Prophet 3% married, when he was
twenty-five years old, and she was fourty year's old.
She was an intelligent woman, and he benefited
tremendously from her because she was an extremely
intelligent and brilliant woman. He did not marry
anyone after her (until she had died).

* She is, as said by the author: “fhe mother of most of his
children” ‏عط‎ sons and the daughters. The author did
not say “the mother of all of his children” because
among his his children there was one who was not
from her, that is Ibrahim, for he was born to Mariyah
Al-Qibtiyyah.

His children from Khadijah were two sons and four

daughters. They are: Al-Qasim, then ‘Abdullah, and he

was called At-Tayyib, and At-Tahir. As for the daughters,
they are Zainab, then Umm Kultham, then Fatimah, then

Rugayyah. The eldest of his sons was Al-Qasim while the

eldest of his daughters was Zainab.

Concerning his saying: “And the first one to believe in him
and support him in his affair.” There is no doubt that she
was the first person to believe him, because when the
Prophet ‏وله‎ came to her and informed her of what he
experienced in the cave of Hira’, she said: “Never! By
Allah, Allah will never disgrace you.” And she
believed in him and went with him to Waraqah bn

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah...

unrestrictively.

But, she is not superior to Fatirah with respect to
lineage, because without a doubt, Fatimah is of nobler
lineage than ’Aishah.

As for her rank, then the tremendous virluous of ‘Aishah,

may Allah he pleased with her, are such that none among,

women could ever achieve that.

* What is apparent in the speech of the author, may
Allah have mercy upon him, is that these two wives,
may Allah be pleased with them both, are of the same
rank, because he said: “Specifically, Khadijah,.amd the
Siddigah.” And he did not say: “And then ‘Aishah.”

The scholars differed on this issue.
— Some of the scholars said that Khadijah is the more

virtuous, because she has some lofty traits which ‘Aishah
does share with her.

— Some of the scholars said that rather ‘Aishah is the more
virtuous, based on this Hadith, and because she also has
lofty traits which Khadijah does not share with her.

— And some of the scholars expained by saying that each
of them has lofty traits that the other does not have. Al the
beginning of the Message, there is no doubt that the merits
which Khadijah achieved were not achieved by ‘Aishah,
and it is not possible that she be equal to her in that. And
after that, and after the death of the Messenger ‏قلق‎ the
spread of knowledge, the Sunah and guidance for the
Unmah resulted from ‘Aishah, which did not result trom
Khadijah. So, it is not correct to consider one of them to be
unrestrictively more virtuous than the other. Rather we say
this one was more virtuous in this way, while that one was
more virtuous in another way; and by that we tread upon
the just path. Thus, we do not thwart the merits of this one,

406 Commentary on Al‘Agida Al-Wasitiyyah

patience with the harms that resulted from the ‘Ifk incident.
What will show you her truthfulness and the veracity of
her faith in Allah is that when here innocence was revealed,
she said: “Indeed, I praise none other than Allah.” This
proves her perfect faith and truthfulness.

As for her being the daughter of As-Siddig, it is also like
that, for her father, may Allah be pleased with him, he was
the Siddiq (the truthful one) of this Ummah; rather the Siddig
of ail nations, because this Ummah is the best of all nations;
so if he was the Siddig of this nation, then he is the Siddiq of
other nations.

* Concerning his statement: “About whonr the Prophet

said: “The superiority of ‘Aishah over women is like the
superiority of Tharid over all other foods."

% His saying: “over women” is apparently generally; that
is; above all women. It is said that the meaning of the
virtue of ‘Aishah over women; is among his wives who
were alive (when he said that), so Khadijah would not
be included.

* However, it is apparent that the Hadith is general,
because the Messenger #§ said: “Many achieved
perfection among men, but achieved perfection among
women except Asiyah the wife of Tir’awn, and
Maryam bint ‘Imran, Khadijah bint Khuwailid, and
the superiority of ‘Aishah to women is like the
superiority of Tharid over all other foods.’ It is reported
by the Two Shaikhs"! without the mention of Khadijah.
This proves that she is the most superior of all women,

{0 Reported by Al-Bukhari (3769) and Muslim (2431) from Aba
Misa Al-Ash’arl; the addition mentioning Khadijah is
actibed by Al-Hafiz in Al-Tath (6:447) to At-Tabarani and
Aba Nu‘aim in Al-Hilyah.

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 409

abandoned Zaid bin ‘Ali bin Al-Husain bin ‘Ali bin Abi
Talib when they asked him about Aba Bakr and ‘Umar,
and he praised them, and said: “Both of them are the
ministers of my grandfather.”

— As for the Nawasib, they are those that raise the banner

of enmity against the members of the Household, attacking

them and vilifing them. They are the opposite of the

Rawifid.

@ The Rawéfid attack the Companions both with their
hearts and their tongues.

With their hearts, they hate and abhore the Companions,
except those whom they chose as a means to achieve their
ideas, and about whom they exaggerate, and those are the
members of the Household.

— With their tongues, they abuse them and curse, saying
that they are unjust! And they say that they apostacized
after the death of the Prophet siz, except for few of them,
and other than that of the things that are well known in
their books.

© In reality, abuse of the Companions, may Allah be
pleased with them, is not only an attack against the
Compamions, rather it is an insult against the Comp:
nions, and the Prophet 3%, and the Shari’ah of Allah,
and even Allah Himself.

—As for it being an insult against to the Companions, that
is clear.

— As for its being a an insult against the Messenger of
Allah 3%; that is because by it, his Companions, his trustees,
his successors over his Usmmal: will be seen as the worst of
creations. And it is an insult against the Messenger of Allah
# from another way; and that is by belying what he has
informed about their virtuous and their merits.

408 Commentary on Al Aqudat Al-Wasitiyyaht

nor the merits of that one. And with these details the result
is clear.

And both of them, and the remainder of the Wives of the
Messenger will be in the Paradise with him.

And they disassociate themselves from the path of the
Rawafid, those who hate the Companions and abuse them,
and the path of the Nawidsib ; those who harm the members
of the Household, either with their statements or their
actions...

Concerning his statement: ‘Ard they dissociate them-
selves from the path of the Rawafid,. those who hate the
Companions and abuse them.”

“The Rawafid:” A group who exaggerated in the case of
‘Ali bin Abi Talib and the members of the Household.
They are the most astray of the people of innovation,
and those with the most severe hate for the Compa-
nions, may Allah be pleased with them. Whoever
wants to be acquainted with their deviations, then let
him read about their books and the books of those wha
refuted them.

They were called Rawdfid because they rejected and

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 411

innovaton. When they saw the Rawafid exaggerating with
the members of the Household, they said: “Hence, we hate
the members of the Household, and verbally abuse them,
oppossing these in their exaggcrated love and praise for
them.”

Being balanced is atways better, in all matters; and to face
an innovation with an innovation will result in nothing for
innovation except adding strength.

And they refrain from whatever disputes transpired among
the Companions. And they say: These reports that are
narrated regarding their shortcomings; emong thent are
lies ; and among them is that which there are additions and
deletions, and alterations from their clear state. And what
is anthentic from that, they are excused ; Either they made
Ijtihdd and were correct, or they made Ijtihad and were
mistaken.

~-$Oo-

% Concerning his statement: “And they refrain from
wohatever disputes transpired among the Companions.’
Meaning; from the disagreements that occurred among
them.

410 Commentary on Al-‘Agdah Al-Wasitiyyah

— As for it being an insult against the Shariah of Allah, that
is because the intermediaries between us and the Messen-
ger of Allah #§ in the transmission of the Shari‘ah are the
Companions; so if they were not just, there will be nothing
that is trustworthy in what that they transmitted of the
Shari'ah.

— As for it being an insult against Allah, Glorious is He, it
is because that would mean that He sent His Prophet 2%
among the worst of people, and chose them for his
companionship, and carrying His Sharah and its transmis-
sion to his Ummah,

Look at how many tremendous evils result from verbally
abusing of the Companions, may Allah be pleased with
them.

“? We disassociate ourselves from the path of these
Rawafid, those who abuse the Companions and hate
them. We believe that loving them is obligatory, and
that restraint from mentioning their shortcomings is
obligatory; and our hearts - all praise is due to Allah -
are full of love for them, because of their faith, Taqwa,
spreading knowledge, and the support they rendered
to the Prophet $. .

© Concerning his saying: “And the path of the Natodsi
those whe hart the members of the Household, either with
their statements or their actions.”

© That is; the People of the Sunnal and the Jamd’al
disassociate themselves from the path of the Nawdsib.

These are the opposite of the Rawéfid; those who
exaggerated about the the members of the Household,
until they removed them from the state of being humans
and to the state of infallible guardianship.

As for the Nawzsib; they faced an innovation with an

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 413

and when there is a mistake in Ijtikad, the one who engages
in it is excused and pardoned.

— As regards for our position regarding the doer, it is
obligatory upon us to refrain from entering into the
disputes that occurred among them. Why should we take
the opportunity of their actions to verbally abuse, vilify,
and attack them, and bring hatred among ourselves; when
by doing so we could be sinners, or we could be free of
error, but we would never gain anything by doing so?!

~% So, in the case of these matters, it is obligatory for us to
keep silent about whatever occurred between the
Companions, and that we not look into the stories or
records of these matters, except when referring to them
out of necessity.
Concerning his saying: “And they say: These reports that
are narrated regarding their shortcomings ; among them are
lies; and among them is that which there are additions and
deletions, and alterations from their clear state.”

> ‘The author categorized the reports concerning their
shortcomings into three:

— Among them are pure lies; they never occurred among
them. These are often found in what is related by the Nawdsib
about the members of the Household, and what is related by
the Rawwéfid about other than the members of the Household.

— Some of these have a basis, but they have been added to
ot detracted from, and distorted from their meaning.

And it is obligatory that we reject these two categires.

— The third category is what is authentic; so then what do
we say about that?

The author explained that, in his staternent:
“And what is authentic from that, they are excused : Either they

Commentary on Al‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

After the murder of ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab, may Allah
be pleased with him, disputes arose among the
Companions, and the matter became more severe after
the murder of ‘Uthman; then the events occurred that
lead to fighting.

These events are well-known; they occurred — without
doubt — based on interpretation and Ijtihad, cach of them
thought that he was in the right. It is possible for us to say
that ‘Aishah and Az-Zubair bin Al-'Awwam were fighting
‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with them all, and they believed
that they were in the wrong and that ‘Ali was in the right.

That they thought they were in the right does not
necessitate that had arrived at the truth, But if they were
mistaken, and we know that they did not arrive at this
matter except through Jjtikad; it is established from the
Prophet 3% that: “Whenever a judge makes a judgement
with [jtdiid and he is right, then for him are two rewards.
And when he makes a judgement with Ijtikdd, then he is
mistaken, then for him is a reward.”"") So, we say: They
were Mujtahidiin who were mistaken, so they have one
reward,

% So there are two angles that result from our position
regarding that:

— The first angle: The ruling concerning the doer, and the

second angle: Our position regarding the doer.

— As for the ruling concerning the doer, that has preceded,

and that what we render to Allah as religion is that,

whatever happened among them was prompted by [jtihad,

01 Reported by Al-Bukhari (7352) and Muslim (1716) from
“Amr bin AlAs, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah...

‎Bs‏ مَمَّ ‎OS‏ لا يَعْتقِدُونَ ‎DA! Se gels 8 Si‏ مَعْصُومٌ

‎They, with that, do not believe that each one of the
Companions twas protected from the major of sins and the
minor, rather, it is possible that they had sinned in
general.

‎aa HH ‏ال‎

‎@ “They, with that, do not believe that each one of the
Companions was protected from major sins and the minor
sins.”

‎4 They do not believe that, based upon his saying #:
“Every son of Adam is makes mistakes, and the best of
those who make mistaes are those who repent“!

‎But their protection (from error) is in their consensus, so it
is not possible that they agree on something of the manor
or minor sins, making it lawful or doing it.

‎But the individual among them may have done something
among the major sins, just as occurted in the case of Mistah
bin Uthathah, Hassan bin Thabit, and Hamnah bint Jahsh
in the story of the ‘Ife (slander) against ‘Aishah).7!
However, this resulted in purification for them by the
execution of the legal punishment upon them.
ال١‎ Reported by Imam Ahmad in Al-Musnad (3:198), At-
Tirmidhi (2499), Ad-Darim (2628), Ibn Majah (4251), and
Al-Hakim (4:244), from Anas bin Malik, and Al-Albani
graded it Hasan (good) in Al-Mishkat (2341).
1 The Huiith of the Slander; reporled by Al-Bukhari (4757) and
Muslim (2770) from ‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her.

‎414 Commentary on AL’Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

‎made Tjtihad and were correct, or they made Htihad and were
atistaken

‎When the Mujtahid arrives at what is correct, then he
will have two rewards; and if he is mistaken, then he
will have one reward; hased upon the saying of the
Prophet “Whenever a judge makes a judgement
with [jthdd and he is right, then for him are two
rewards, And when he makes a judgement with. ‏لاز‎
‎then he is mistaken, then for him is a reward.”"

‎So, what happened between Mu’awiyah and ‘Ali, its source
was Jjlihad and inlerpretation, But, there is no doubt thal
“Ali was closer to what was correct than Mu‘awiyah; rather,
we can say that he almost certainly arrived at what was
correct, yet, Mu‘awiyah was a Mujtahid on the matter.

‎4 An indication that ‘Ali was nearer to what is correct, is
that the Prophet ‏يغ‎ said: “May Allah have mercy with
‘Ammar! A rebellious group will kill him.”?) — and
he was killed by the people of Mu’awiyah. Based upon
this, we know that his group was the rebellious group,
who opposed the Imam, but they had their interpreta-
tion; and the correct postion was that of ‘Ali, either
absolutely, or presumably. ١

‎— And here, there is a fourth category, and it is those bad
things that occurred among them that were not the result of
Jjtihad nor interpretation:

‎So the author explained that in by his statement:

‎bee ‏ل‎

‎"Its reference preceded, and it is in the Twa Sahiis.
21 Reported by Al-Bukhari (447) and Muslim (2915} from Aba
Said Al-Khudt, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 417

Prophet's plan to attack them; until Allah exposed that
to His Prophet; so Lhal the message did not reach them.
Then ’Umar sought permission to behead iiatib, but
the Prophet # said: “Indeed, he participated in Badr;
what do you know? Perhaps Allah has looked upon the
people of Badr and said: ‘Do whatever you like, for I

have pardoned you!"

Such that He pardon from them shortcomings that Ue would
not pardon for those after them. Because they have such
Hasanat that wipe out shortcomings, such that are not
possessed by those after them . 1Ehas been established from the
saying of the Messenger of Allah 38, that they are the best of
generations, and that the Mudd ofone of them, when he gives
it in charity, it is more virtuous than gold the likes of
mountain Uhud given by whoever comes after them.

* Conceming his statement: “Such that He pardon from
them shortcomings that He would not pardon for those after
them. Because they have such Hasanat that wipe out
shortcomings, such that are not possessed by those after
them. It has been established from the saying of the

‘1 Tts reference preceded, and it is in the Two Sahihs from Anas

bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him.

416 Commentary on Al-Aqidah Al-Wasitivyat

> Conceming his statement: “Rather, it is possible that they
had sinned in general” meaning, like other than them
among human beings.

However, they are distinguished from others, as said by the
author, may Allah have mercy upon him:

And they possessed precedence and virtues warranting
pardon for whatever occurred from them - if it ‏لفك‎

Sl i i ree

% “And they possessed precedence and virtues warranting
pardon for whatever occurred from them, if it did.”

* This is among the reasons that Allah wiped away
whatever they committed of major or minor sins; and
that is what they possessed of precedence and virtues
which no one else shares with them. For they
supported the Prophet #; and they made Jikdd with
their wealth and their selves, and they hu:bled their
necks for the exaltation of the Word of Allah; all these
warrant pardon for whatever occurred from thern,
even if it was among the worst of sins, as long as it did
not reach the level of disbelief.

From that, is the story of Hatib bin Abi Balt‘ah, when
he sent a message to the Quraish, informing them of the

Then, if anyone of them committed any sin, he could have
repented from it, or, he could have earned some Hasanat
that erased it, or, been pardoned for it, by virtue of his
precedence, or, by the intercession of Muhamuuad 4 for
which they are the most entitled to his intercession, or, he
could suffered a trial in the world that was an altonement
{for that for him. So when this is the case with verified sins,
then how about matters for which they were Mujtahids : If
they were right, they will have two rewards, but if they
were mistaken, they have one reward, and the mistake is
pardoned. Then, the degree of objection for the deeds of
some of thent is small, insignificant. and obscure in
comparison to the virtues of such people, and their merits ;
from faith in Allah, His Messenger, and jihad in His
cause, Hijrak, rendering support, beneficial knowledge
and righteous deeds .

OOO ‏لس‎

*% Concerning his saying: “Then, if anyone of them
committed any sin, he could have repented from it.”

4+ Meaning, when he repents from it, it is lifted from him,

as well as its significance and its disgrace, according to

His statement, Exalted is He:

4And those who invoke not any other Hah (god) along
with Allah, nor Kill such life as Allah has forbidden,
except for just cause, nor commit illegal sexuat inter-
course and whoever does this shull receive the

Commentary on AlAgidah ALWasitiyyah

Messenger of Allah ia, that they are the best of generations,
and tat the Mudd of one of them, when he gives it in
charity, it is more virtuous than gold the likes of mountain
Uhud given by whoever comes after them.”

That is contained in his statement #%: “The best people
are my generation”) and also in his saying: “Do not
abuse my Companions, by the one in whose Hand is
my soul! If any one of you spends gold as much as
Uhud, it will not be equal to the Mudd of anyone of
them, or even its half”!

: ‏هم‎ gh AB be 5

Its reference preceded, and it is in the Two Salis from Ibn
Mas‘ud, may Allah be pleased with him.

Its reference preceded (2:251) and it is in the Two Safrits trom
Abu Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him,

ay

12

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 421

committed; just as the Prophet # informed about that,
in his saying: “No Muslim will be afflicted with a harm
from sickness, or other than that, except that by it,
Allah removes his sins, just as the tree sheds its
leaves.” The Hadiths concerning this are many and
well-known.

% Concerning his saying: “So when this is the case with
verified sins, then how about matters for which they were
Mujtahids : If they were right, they will have two rewards,
but if they were mistaken, they have one reward, and the
mistake is pardoned.” Its evidence preceded . So, this is more

punishment...>

— up to His saying:

يتاه ‎GEE SG GS‏ يسما

Except those who repent and believe, and do righteous
deeds, for those, Allah will change their sins into good
decils, and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Mercifil.p
(Al-Furgan 25:68-70)

EE eOoOoreree

420 Commentary on AL‘Agiduh ALWisitiyyah

Whoever repents from a sin, then he is like one who does

١ not have any sin, so it will have no effect upon him. worthy in their case, that there not be ‏م‎ reason fo insult and

fault them.
 Conceming his saying: “Or, he could have earned some

2 These reasons, which the author has mentioned,
remove any aspersions in the case of the Companions.
And they are of the following categories:

First: Specific to them, that is, the precedence and virtues
that are specific to them.

Second: General, and that is repentance, the Husuwndt that
obliterate errors, the intercession of the Prophel ‏يق‎ and
trials.

Concerning his saying: “Then, the degree of objection for
the deeds of some of them is small, insignificant, and obscure
in the comparison to the virtues of such people, and their
merits.”

> ‘The degree of objection for the deeds of some of them is
extremely small, insignificant, the smallest of the small,
and because of this he said: “obscure in comparison to the
virtues of such people, artd their merits.”

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (5660) and Muslim (2571) from Ibn
Mas‘id, may Allah be pleased with him.

Hasanft that erased ‏“كز‎ based upon His saying:
Verily, the good deeds remove the evil deeds» (Had
11:114)

+ Concerning his statement: “Or been pardoned for it, by

virtue of his precedence.” Based upon His, Exxalted is
He, saying in the Quads? Hadith, concerning the People
of Badr; “Do whatever you like, for I have pardoned

you.

% Concerning his statement: “Or, by the intercession of

Muhammad 2 for which they are the most entitled to his
intercession .””

It preceded, that the Prophet 3% shall intercede for his

Ummah, and the Companions (may Allah be pleased with

them) are those most entitled to that.

* Concerning his saying: “Or he could suffered a trial in the
world that was an attonement for that for him: For indeed
by the trials in the world, Allah removes the evils

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 423

ations, and the most honourable to Alléh, the Mighty
and Sublime.

Concerning his statement: “Whoever looks into the Sirah
of these people, with knowledge and insight, and what Allah
favored them with of virtues, he will know with certainty,
that they are the best of the creation after the Prophets.”

This is in reference to what is affirmed from the Prophet ‏رقف‎
‎in his saying: “The best people are my generation, then
those that follow them, then those that that follow them.”
Reported by Al-Bukhari and Muslim from the Hadith of
‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him.!]

Based on this, the fact that they are better than the
followers of other Prophets is affirmed by a text, as well as
looking into their biographies.

So, if you look knowledge, discernment, and fairness at the
merits of these people, and what Allah bestowed upon
them of virtues, you know with certainty that they are the
best of all creations after the Prophcts. They are better than.
the Hawariyin among the companions of ‘Isa; they are
better than the (Nuqabd’) (tribal representatives) among the
companions of Misa. They are better than those who
believed in Nuh, 1154 and others. None can be found
among the followers of the Prophets who are superior to
the Companions, may Allah be pleased with them. This
matter is clear and well-known, based on His, Exalted is
He, statement:

1) {fs reference preceded.

Commentary on Ak’Agidah Al-Wiasitiyyah

> And there is no doubt that sorne of them committed
theft, drank wine, wrongly accused the chaste, com-
mitted fornication and adultery. However, all these
obscure in comparison to the virtues of such people
and their merits. And for some of them, they received
the legal punishments, so that was a means of
attonement for them.

* Then the author, may Allah have mercy upon him,
clarified some of their virtues and merits, in his saying:

© “From faith in Allah, His Messenger, and jihad in His
cause, Hijrah, rendering support, beneficial knowledge
and righteous deeds.”

So all of these merits and virtues are well-known; they

surmount all the verified shortcomings of these people;

then what of the shortcomings that are not verified, or

those for which they had made Jjthad or had some

interpretation.

Bee te ‏د[ رن‎ pereghe Ay see

خَيْرُ الأمم وَأكْرَمَهَا عَلى الله ‎oS FF‏

Whoever looks into the Sirah of these people, with
knowledge and insight, and what Allah favored them with
of virtues, he will know with certainty, that they are the
best of the creation after the Prophets; there has not been,
nor shall there be any like thent, and that they are the elite
amoug generations of this Ummah, which is the best

Concerning the Position of the People of the Sunnah... 425
thus We have made you, a Wasat (balanced) nation,
that you be witnesses over mankind.» (Al-Bagarah
2:14)

And because the Prophet #% is the best of all the
Messengers, so there is no doubt that his nation is the best
among the nations.

— As for the Companions being the elite of generations of
this Ummah, that is according to his saying 3: “The best
people are my generation’! And in one version: “The
best of my Ummah is my generation"! And the meaning
of his generation is the Companions. Those that followed
them are the Tabi’it, while those that followed them are the
followers of the Tabi‘in.

Shaikh Al-lslam Ibn Taymiyyah said: “The meaning of the
three generations refers to the majority of the people of that
generation, and they are those in the middle of it. And the
majority of the Companions had passed away with the
passing of the the period of the Khilafah of the four rightly
guided Khalifahs, such that very few of the people of Badr
remained. And the majority of the Tabi’in who followed
them in goodness had passed away during the end of the
period of the younger Companions, during the reign of Ibn
‘Az-Zutbait and ‘Abdul-Malik; and the majority of the
followers of the Tabi’in (had passed away) during the end
of Ummayad Empire, and the beginning period of
“Abbasid Empire.”

The last of the Companions to pass away was Abn Tufail;
’Amir bin Wathilah Al-Laithi in the year 100 A.H, and it

‎Ts reference preceded, and it is in the Two Sahiks from Ibn‏ لكا
‎Mas'tid, may Allah be pleased with him‏

‎Fl Reported by Al-Bukhari (3650) from ‘Imran bin Husain, may

‎Allah be pleased with him.

‎Commentary on AL‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎4¢You are the best of nations ever raised up for
mankind .» (Al ‘Imran 3: 110)

‎And the best of us are the Companions, and because the
Prophet # is the best of creation, so his Companions are
the best of all categories of companions, without a doubt.

‎This is the view of the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah,
but according to the Rafida, they (the Companions) are the
worst of all creation, except those they exempted among
them.

‎% Concerning his statement: “There has not been, nor shall
there be any like them.” Meaning, il never was nor shail
there ever be found the likes of them, based on his
statement 3%: “The best people are my generation’ so,
there is absolutely none to be found like them, neither
before them nor following them.

‎ Conceming his saying: “And they are the elite among
generations of this Ummah, which is the best nations, and
the most honourable to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.”

‎— As for this Ummah being the best of-all nations, that is
according lo His, Exalted is He, statement:

‎it

‎2

‎€You are the best Umanah ever raised up for mankind ;
you enjoin Al-Ma‘rif (goodness) ard forbid Al-Munkar
(evil), and you believe in Allahy. (AL ‘Imrin 3.110)

‎And His statement:

‎48

426 Commentary on AL’Agidah Al-Wasifiyyah

was said that it was in the year 110 A.H.
| In Al-Fath" Al-Hafiz bin Hajar said: “They all agreed,
1 that the last of the followers of the Tabi‘in from those whose
saying is accepted, is he who lived up to the year 220 A.H.”

SECTION:
Concerning the Karaméat
Performed by the Awliya™!!

AOSV ‏بكْرَامَاتٍ‎ Gana
Among the fundamentals of the People of the Sunnah is the
belief in the Karamat of the Awliya’,

a

The Kardmdt of the Awliya’ is an important matter requiring
that the the truth about it be recognized from the falsehood;
is it an affirmed reality, or mere fantasy?

The author, may Allah have mercy upon him, clairifed the
saying of the People of the Sunnah about it, in his saying:

© “Among the fundamentals of the People of the Sunnah is the

belief in the Karima (amazing events) of the Awliya’,
® Then, who are the Aroliya’?

The answer is that Allah has defined them in His saying:
0 ‏يروت‎ OY yk Sev af cal ‏«الآ بك‎

"1 Translation note: In this context the basic literal meaning is
“friends” and more specifically; “friends of Allah,” and the

following discussion explains it

Bl ALFath (6:7)

A

Conceming the Karamat performed by the Awliya’ 429

with him, who walked over the water of the sea, and the
case of Sa’d bn Abi Waqqas, may Allah be pleased with
him, who walked over the Tigris River. Their stories are
famous in the books of history.

So, the Karamah is an unusual event. But as for an event that
is common, that is not a Kardmah.

“ Allah only causes this matter to occur at the hands of
the Wali, in contrast to witchcraft and magic, for these
are also unusual occurrences; but they occur at the
hands of those who are not Awliya’ of Allah, rather they
occur at the hands of the enemies of Allah, so this
should not be deemed a form of Kardmah.

© There have been numerous forms of amazing feats
which are claimed to be Kardmat by magicians who
tum others away from the way of Allah. Sa it is
obligatory to warn against them and from their trickery
with people's intellect and their intelligence.

‎So Karamdt are affirmed in the Qur'an, the Sunnah and‏ <ه
‎by factual occurences, in the past, and the present.‏

‎— Among the Kardmat of the past, affirmed in the Qur'an
and the Sunnah, is the story of the Companions of the Cave,
those who lived among an the idol worshipping people,
while they themselves had believed in Allah; and they
feared that they would overcome them, so they left the
town, emigrating to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. So
Allah facilitated a cave for them in a mountain; and this
cave faced the north; so the sun would not enter upon them
to spoil their bodies while at the same time, they were not
prevented from it. So, whenever it rose, it declined to the
right of their cave, and when it set, it would pass them on
the left side, while they were in the midst of the cave. They
remained in this cave for a period of three hundred years,

‎428 Commentary on Al-Agidah ALWasitiyyah

‎4No doutti Verily, the Awliya’ of Allah, no fear shall
come upon them nor shall they grieve. ‘those who
believed, and they had Taqwa} (Yiinus 10:62-63)

‎Shaikh Al-istém [bn Taymiyyah said: “Whoever is a believer
with Taqwa, he is a Wali of Allah.”

‎ALWildyah!™ is not by mere claim and wish; Al Wildyah is
only by faith and Taqwa. So if we see a man saying that he
is a Wali, but he does not fear Allah, the Exalled is He, his
claim will be rejected.

‎“ As for AL-Karamat; it is the plural of Kardmah; an
unusual event which Allah causes to occur at the hands
of a Walt, supporting him, or helping him, or making
him firmer, or aiding the religion.

‎— So, the man - Silah bin Ashim - whose horse Allah,
Exalted is He, hrought back to life, after it had died, until he
reached his family. So when he reached his family, he said
he said to his son: “Remove the saddle from the horse for it
is on loan.’”! So, when the saddle was removed from it, it
fell down and died,”! this is a form of Kardmal: for this to
assist him.

‎— As for that which aids Islam; an example is what
happened to Al-Ala’ bin Al-Hadrmi, may Allah be pleased

‎01 Translation note: Meaning the traits making one worthy of
the title Walt, which is the singular form of Awliya’.

‎1 Tyanslation note; See Maju’ Al-Fattiva 11:280 for this
version, and in the story, Silah had supplicated to Allah
and so Allah brought the horse back to life, hence he said it
was on loan.

‎Gl Sifat As-Sufwah (8:217), Az-7uhd by Ton Al-Mubarak (295);
except that they both mentioned Lhat his mule had gone
away, and not that it died.

Concerning the Karémat performed by the Awtiya’ 431

Mu'‘jazilah and those who follow them, wherein they
reject the Kardmat. They say: “If you affirm the Karamat,
you are likening sorcerers to the Wali, and the Wali to
the Prophet, because each of these categories of people
performs extraordinary feats.”

So it is said: There is no room for confusion, because the
Kardmah occurs at the hands of the Walf, and the Wali could
not possibly claim Prophethood. And if he claimed that, he
would not be considered a Wali. And the sign of
Prophethood occurs at the hands of a Prophet, and magic
and witchcraft at the hands of an enemy who is far from
being a Wali of Allah; and his action by seeking aid with it
from the Shaydfin is do help him in his earnings, contrary to
the Kardmah; for it is from Allah, Exalted is He, the Walt
does not seek his earnings by it.

% The scholars say: “Every Karamah from a Walfis a sign
of the Prophet which he is following, because Karamah
is a testimony from Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
that the path of the Wali is a correct straight.

Based on this, whatever Kardmat occur from the Awliya’ in

this Ummah, it is a sign for the Messenger of Allah #-

That is why some scholars said that there is no sign
given to any of the earlier Prophets except that its like is
given to the Messenger of Allah 38

— It reply to them, it has been said that the Messenger 3

was never cast into fire to come out alive, as it happened to

Ibrahim.

But the reply to this is that it happened to some of the

followers of the Messenger #%, as the historians reported

about Abd Muslim Al-Khawlanil’! So, when Allah

‎sifat Ag-Safweah (4:208) by Ibn Jawzi, and he said that Al-‏ ل

‎430 Commentary on Al-Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎and an additional nine; while they were asleep. Allah
turned them on their right and their left sides, in the
summer and in the winter, Heat did not disturb them while
cold did not harm them. They were neither thirsty nor
hungry; they never grew bored of sleep. Su this was a
Karamah without any doubt. They remained like that until
Allah raised them at the time when Shirk had disappeared
from their town; so they were safe and free from it.

‎— Of such examples is the story Maryam, may Allah be
pleased with her, Allah honoured her when the pains of
childbirth drove her to the trunk of a date-palm and Allah
commanded her to strike the trunk of date-palm, so that the
fresh ripe-dates would upon her.

‎— Similarly is also the story of a man whom Allah killed
and was made to remain dead for a period of hundred
years after which Allah resurrected him, as a Kardmah for
him, and so that the might of Allah could be manifest to
him, and so that he could be much firmer and more
steadfast in his faith.
— As for the Suimah, many Kardmit are found mentioned
in it. Refer to the Book of the Prophets, the Chapter: “What
Has Been Mentioned Regarding the Children of ‏“لتقمو‎ in
Sahih Al-Bukhari, and also the book; the Criterion between
the Allies of the Merciful and the Allies of Shaifan by Shaikh,
Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah.
— As for witnessing the occurance of affirmed Karémat,
then obviously a man knows of them in his time either by
witnessing them, or by truthful information.
So, the position of the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah
is to believe in the Karamat of the Aliya’.
> Here, there is a Madhhab that opposes the Madhhab of
the People of the Sunnali, which is the position of the

Concerning the Karamat performed by the Awliya’ 433

The response is that in occurred with the followers of the
Messenger #%, as it is reported in the story of the man
whose donkey died while he was on the way, and he called
on Allah, Exalted is He, to give it back life, and Allah,
Exalted is He, brought it back to life.)

— And healing the blind and the leper was also mentioned
against them,

So the reply is that this occurred with the Prophet # when
Qatadah bn An-Nu’man, was wounded at the battle of
Uhud, his eye bulged out so much that it reached his cheek,
so, the Prophet #% came and held it (the eye) with his hand
and placed it back in its place. Afterwards, it became the
better of his two eyes.”!

This is among the greatest of signs.

So, the same signs which the earlier Prophets were given,
were given to the Prophet #§ or his Ummah, Whoever
wants to read more of that, then let him refer to the baok:
Al-Biddyah wan-Nihayah ft Tarikh by Ton Kathir.

Note:

Regarding the Karamat, we said that they will be support,
fortification, or help for a person, or aid for the truth. That
there were more Karimit among the Tabi‘in than the

Ul Translation note: This is the story of Salt bin Ashim that
preceded with different wording.

Pl Tp Al Igabak (3:217), Al-Hafiz Ibn Lajar ascribed it to Al-
Baghawi, Abi Ya‘la, Ad-Darqutnl, and Al-Baihag] in Dala’il
An-Nubutweah, In Al-Majma’ (8:298), Al-Haithami ascribed it
to AtTabarani and Aba Ya‘la, And he said: “There is
someone in the chain of At-l'abarani that I do not recognize,
and the chain of Abd Ya‘la contains Yahya bin ‘Abdul-
Hammid Al-Hammani, and he is weak.”

432 Commentary on ‏ةوف لق‎ AL-Wasitiyya

honoured one of the followers of the Messenger #% with
this sort of unusual occurance, it proves that the religion of
the Prophet s# is the truth because it is supported and this
particular sign which occurred in the case of Ibrahim.

— It was also mentioned that the sea was notparted as it
happened with Musa.

So the reply is that what happened to this Ummah with
respect to the sea is greater and than what happened to
Masa, and that is walking on the water, as occurred in the
story of Al-’Ala’ bin Al-Hadrami( when they walked on
top of the sea. And this is greater than what happened to
Misa, for Misa only walked on the dry land.

— It has also been said against them, that one of the signs
brought by ‘Isa was the resurrection of the deceased, but
this did not happen with the Messenger of Allah ‏كله‎

Aswad Al-‘Ansi Al-Mutanabbi (one who made a false claim
of Prohpethood) threw Abu Muslim Al-Khawlani into a fire,
‘but it did not harm hirn, so in that he resembled Al-Khalil
(Ibrahim), peace be upon him

Based on what is reported by Aba Nu‘aim in Al-Hilyah (1:7)
from Sahm bin Minjab who said: “Who were in a battle
together with ‏“قلق “لخ‎ bin Al-Hadrami, and we lraveled
until we reached Darm, and the sea was between us and
them. So he said: ‘© All-Knower, O Forebearer, 0 Exalted, O
Great, we are Your slaves, and in Your Cause we are fighting
Your enemies. O Allah! Make a way for us lo them,’ So he
led us headlong into the sea, so we went through as the
water reached our Libdahs, then we came out lo them (on
their side). Translation note: Here, Libdah refers to felt
patches worn on the chest, and the meaning is that while
they were submerged up to that point, yct their fect were not
touching the ground; rather they were walking through the
water, on the water.

fl

Concerning the Karamat performed by the Awliya’ 435

naiural changes, that proves that the universe has a
Controller and a Creator.

Thirdly: That it is a sign for the Prophet that is being
followed, as preceded.

Fourthly: That it is means of fortification and honour for

this Wali.

* Concerning his statement: “In types of knowledges (Al-
“Uliim) and unveiling (Al-Mukashafat), and types of ability
(AL Qudral) and effects (At-Ta'thivat):”” meaning, that
Karamah is divided into two categories: A category that
has to do with knowledges and unveiling, and another
category that has to do with ability and etfects.

— As for Af’Ulum, one may possess some kinds of
knowledge which others do not have.

— As for Al Mukashafét, that is what becomes apparent to
him from things which are are unveiled for him, in a way
that does not occur for others.

An example of the first Ai-’Ulum (knowledges) is what was
mentioned about Abu Bakr, that Allah let him look at what
was in the womh of his wife, the pregnancy, Allah made
him know that it was a girl.)

An exainple of the second category, Al-Mukashafat (unveil-
ing) is that which happened to the Commander of the
Believers, ‘Umar bin Al-Khattab, may Allah be pleased
with him, when he was giving a sermon to the people on
the Minbar one Friday. They heard him saying: ”0 Sariyah!
‘Ihe mountain” They surprised at this statement. Then,
they asked him about that. He replied that it had been
shown to him that Sariyah bin Zanim — one of his leaders

“I Reported by Al-Lalka’t in Karamat Al Aliya’ (63) and Ibn
Hajar mentioned it in Al-lsabah (4:261).

434 Commentary on AL‘Aqidah Al Wasitiyyah

Companions. Because the fortification, support, and aid
among the Companions left them without need for
Karamat, because the Messenger # was in their midst.
But for the Tabi‘in; they were not like that, which is why
there were many Kardmat in their time supporting them,
and fortitying, and aiding the truth which they followed.

وَمَا يُجْرِي الله عَلَى 1

By adh ‏وََنْوَاعَ‎ ERK; ‏الْعلُوم‎

And what Allah caused to occur at their hands of unusual
occurances, regarding types of knowledges (Al-Ulitm)
and unveiling (Al-Mukashafat), and types of ability (Al-
Qudrah) and effects (Al-Ta'thiral)...

Concerning his statement: “And what Allah caused to
occur at their hands of unusual events.”

What is intended by the Khawériq Al-’Adat (unusual
occurances) is what occurs against the universal norms.

There are four kinds of evidence in these Karémat:

Firstly: Clarifying the complete ability of Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime, since this unusual occurrence resulted by the
command of Allah.

Secondly: The refutation of those who attribute everything
that is done to nature, since if nature is behind whatever is
done, then nature is supposed to be a uniform system that
does not change. So, when something that is regular and

Concerning the Karamat performed by the Awliya’ 437

<2 Concerning his statement: “And what is reported from the
preceding nations generations in Surah Al-Kahf, and other
than that, and from the predecessors of this Ummah among
the Companions, the Tabi‘in and the rest of the generations
of this Unimali’

Karamat existed in the earlier nations; of their examples is
the story of the Companions of Cave, those who were
sealed in by the boulder." And they existed during the
time of the Messenger 3%, like the story of Usaid bin
Hudair”! and the story of the increase of the food that
happened to some of the Companions."! They also existed
during at the time of the ‘fabi'in; such as the story of Silah
bin Ashaim whose horse Allah restored back life to.!#!

In the book Al-Furgdn (the Criterion), Shaikh Al-Islam said:
“This is a very wide topic. A detailed discourse concerning
the Karémat of the Awliya’ has been done in another
location. But as for what we ourselves are aware of by eye-
witness and what we know of at this time, they are many.”

“ Concerning his statement: “And they shall exist in it,
until the Day of Resurrection.”

The story of the people of the Cave is reported by Al-Bukhari
(3465) and Muslim (2734) from Ibn ‘Umar, may Allah be
pleased with him.

‘The Story of Usaid bin Hudair is reported by Al-Bukhari
(6018) and Muslim (796), from the Hadéth of Aba Sa'id Al-
Khudri, from Usaid bin Hudair, may Allah be pleased with
him.

Reported by Al-Bukhari (602) and Muslim (2057), from the
Hadith of ‘Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr, may Allah be
pleased with him.

It preceded.

436 Commentary on Al’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

in Al-‘Traq — was being surrounded by his enemies (in the
war front). So, he (Umar) was directing him to go towards
the mountain, and he said to him: “O Sdriyah! The
mountain.” Sariyah heard the voice of “Umar; so, he went
up the mountain and sought fortification therein.”

This is among the matters of unveiling, because it was a
real occurrence, but it was far away.

— As for ability and effect, an example is what happened
to Maryam when she shook the trunk of date-palm tree and
fresh dates started falling down upon her. And like the case
of what happened to the one who possessed the knowledge
of the book, when he said to Sulaiman: “I will bring it to
you within the blink of an eye.”

Es BE ‏الأمم في شررة‎
VEN oF ‏وَسَائْرٍ‎ Gaby MASI ‏نّ‎

And what is reported from the preceding nations
generations in Sirah Al-Kahf, and other than that, and
from the predecessors of this Ummah among the
Companions, the Tabi‘in and the rest of the generations
of this Ummah, and they shall exist in it, until the Day of
Resurrection, until the Day of Resurrection...

"1 Reported by Al-Baihaqi in 241311 An-Nubuwwak and Ibn
Kathir in Al-Bidayalt (7:131), and said: “Its chain
Jayyid.” And Al-Albani graded it Hasan (good) in As
‘As-Sahihah (1110).

SECTION:
Concerning The Practical Methodology
Of the People of the Sunnah
and the Jama‘ah

Section : Then, from the way of the People of tte Sunnah
and the Jina‘ah is following the narrations from the
Messenger of Allah, internally and externally...

- © >-

* Concerning his statement: “Then, from the way of the
People of the Sunnah and the Jami’ah is following the
narrations from the Messenger of Allah, internally and
externally”

When the author concluded the discussion of what he

wanted to explain conceming the methodology of the

People of the Sunnah regarding creed, he began to discuss

their practical methodology:

% His saying: “Following te narrations”; there is no
following except with knowledge, therefore, they arc
eager to seek knowledge so that they can know the
narrations of the Messenger ‏يك‎ then follow them.

438 Commentary on AL-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah
The evidences that they will exist until the Day of
Resurrection are both textually revealed, and intellec-
tual.

—As for the textually revealed; in the story of the Dajjal, the
Messenger # informed that he would call a young man.
among the people, and the man will come and tel] him:
“You are a liar! You are only Al-Masihid-Dajjal about whom
the Messenger of Allah # informed us.” The Dajjal will
come, kill him, cutting him in two, placing one part here,
and the other part there, each far from the other. He will
walk between them, then he will call him; he (the man) will
arrise looking cheerful. Then, he would call the man to
affirm his right to worship, but the man will say to him: “]
have not been more clearly convinced about you than
today.” Then, the Dajjal will want to kill him, but he will
not have any control over him,!!!

This (the inability of Dajjal to kill the young man) is a sort
of Karamdt without doubt.

- As for the intellectual, then it is said: Wilayah will always
be the means of the Kardmah, and Wildyah shall not cease
existing until establishment of the Hour.

1 Reported by Al-Bukhari (7132) and Muslim (2938), from Aba

Sa'td Al-Khudrt, may Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning The Practical Methodology ... 441

apparent deeds, and internally in deeds of the hearts.

For example, reliance, fear, hope, surrender, love and the
like; these are among the deeds of the hearts, they observe
them in the manner that is due. And the Salih; in it is
standing, sitting, bowing, and prostration. And charity,
Hajj, and fasting, and these are among the deeds of the
limbs; they are apparent.

~ Then, you should know, that the narrations trom the
Messenger #4 are three or more categories.

Firstly: What he did as a form of worship. There is no
doubt that we are commanded to follow him in this,
according to His, Exalted is He, saying:
at vse ka ry tf
nee GS Sg ‏كن كي‎ lp

dIndeed, in the Messenger of Allah you have good
example to follawy (Al-Ahadb 33: 21)

Hence, everything about which is not clear whether he did
it as a result of custom, or having a natural disposition or
incidentally, then it was as a means for worship, and which
we are commanded to follow him in it.

Secondly: What he did incidentally; for this it is not
legislated that we emulate in it, because he did not do it
purposefully; such as if somebody says that we ought to
enter Makkah during Hajj on the fourth day of Dhil-Hijjah,
because the Messenger #5 entered Makkah on the fourth
day of Dhal-Hijjah"! we will say to such a person; this is
not legislated, because his arrival in Makkah on the day

{As is reported by Imam Ahmad in Al-Musrad (3:366) froin
the Hadith of Jabir who said: “And we arrived the Ka’bah
when four days or nights had passed in Dhul-Hijjah” And it
was reported by At-Tabarani in Al-Kabir (7:123), and it is a
Sahih Hadith and its basis is in Sahil: Mustim.

Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

* They follow the narrations of the Messenger # in
creed, worship, manners and Da‘wah (calling) to Allah,
Exalted is He. ‘they invite the servants of Allah to the
Shart‘ah of Allah on every appropriate occasion.
Whenever wisdom demands they invite to Allah, they
invite to Allah, but they do not do so haphazardly; they
only invite with wisdom, following the narrations of
lhe Messenger #% in praiseworthy manners, dealing
with the people with kindess and leniency, and
according each person his appropriate status. They
also fotlow him im his manners of relating with his
family, so you find them being the most eager to be the
best of people to their wives, for the Prophet 4% said:
“The best of you is the best of you to his wives; and I
am the best of you to my wives,"

We cannot list all the narrations of the Messenger #2, but we
say, in summary, in the matlers of the creed, worship,
manners and Da’wah. In Lhe matter of worship, they neither
too stern nor too laxed, they rather follow that which is best.

Sometimes, they are distracted from performing some acts of
worship because of their dealing with people forsome benefit,
such as what happened to the Messenger when some
delegations that came to him, engaging him such that he
could not perform the prayer, and he had to make it up later.

@ Concerning his statement: “Internally and externally.”
Internal and external are relative matters. Externally
with regard to what is apparent to the people, and
internally in he conceals within himself; externally in

Reported by At-Tirmidhi (3895), Ad-Darimi_ (2177), Ibn
Majah (1977), and Ibn Hibban (4177), from ‘Aishah, may
Allah be pleased with her. And the Hadith was graded Sahih
by Al-Albani in As-Sahiah (285).

Conceming The Practical Methodology ... 443

Name of Allah) when starting, and to say: Al-Hamdulillah
(AU praise is due to Allah) at the end.

Here, we ask: Is growing hair a custom or an act of
worship?

Some scholars view it as an act of worship, and that it is a
Sunnah that one grows his hair, while others saw that this is
one of the matters of custom; based upon the evidence in
the saymg of the Messenger ie; to the one whom he saw
with part of his head shaved and part of it left alone, so he
forbade them from that, and he said: “Shave it all, or leave
it all’21 And this is evidence that having hair is not
worship, otherwise, he would say: “Leave it, and do not
shave any of it.”

This issue demands affirmation, and that one not judge a
thing to be worship except with evidence, because the rule
in worship is that it is not allowed, except for what the
evidence establishes to be legislated.

Reported by Muslim (2120) from Ibn ‘Umar through the
route of Ma’mar, from Ayyib, from Nafi’, and did not state
its wording. And it is reported by ‘Abdur-Razzay in his
Musannaf (19564), Abi: Dawad (4195) An-Nasai’ (6:130), and
Ahmad (2:88); with the wording: “Shave it all or leave it all.”
And Al-Humaidi said: “Aba Mas‘id Ad-Dimashqi
mentioned that in a natration of Muslim, the Prophet 2
saw a boy that had shaved part of his head, and left part of
it, so he prohihited them from that, and he said: ‘Shave all of
it, or leave all of it.” See fami” ALLisa? (4:753)

442 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

was incidental.

If somebody says it is necessary that when we depart from
the ‘Arafah, and reach the mountain pass where he 4
descended and urinated, we should also descend there to
urinate, and perform a light Widw’ as the Prophet 4 did;
we will say to him that this is not legislated.

And like that are other issues that happened incidentally,
for it is not legislated to emulate him im that, since he did
not do it as a means of worship; and he is to be emulated in
worship.

Thirdly: What he did duc to custom, is it legislated to
emulate him in this or not?

The answer: Yes, we should emulate him in it, however in
this category not in its type.

Concerning this issue, very few people have a cogent
understanding of it; they think that emulating him in
custom will be in its type, so they negate emulating him in
that. We are saying that we emulate him, but with in this
category; meaning, we do what the people's custom
demands, unless the Shari‘at prohibits that.

Fourthly: What he did due to a natural disposition for it,
this is not among the absolute formis of worship, but it
could be a form of worship from one view, which is by
doing it in a particular way as an act of worship, For
example like sleep, for it is a natural demand, but it is
Sunnah that it be done on right side. And eating and
drinking are natural matters; but it could be a form of
worship from another view, if a man intends by his eating
and drinking to adhere to the commands of Allah and
enjoy His favours, and to gain strength for his worship and
to preserve the body. Then, its manner is also worship, like
ealing with the right hand, and saying Bismillah (In the

Concerning The Practical Methodology...

he is to the truth.

That is why you see that the disagreement in the Ummah
after the time of the Companions and the 16618: is more
and covers all matters, while the differences during their
time was minimal.

So, part of the methodology of the People of the Sunnah
and the Jamé‘al is to look at the way of the earlier
predecessors among the Emigrants and the Helpers to
follow that, because following it leads to loving them,
along with the fact that they are closer to what is right and
the truth. Contrary to the one who ‏كاتعفعل‎ this path, and
starts saying that they are men and we are also ment And
so he is not bothered to contradict them. As if the saying of
Aba Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman and ‘Alt holds the same status
as the saying of so-and-so in the later part of this Ummah!
This is an error and a form of misguidance. The
Companions are closer to what is correct; their sayings
are preferred over the sayings of others aside from them,
due to what they possessed of faith and knowledge, and
the safe understanding they had, and Taqwa, and Amanah
(trust), and because of their Companionship with the

Messenger 3%.

Commentary on Al-’Agidah AL-Wisitiyyah

athye : 000 ‏م اكه‎ eye 00
MASS Se ll ‏مِنَ‎ SINT ‏السَابقِينَ‎ ee EE,

And following the way of the As-Sabigin Al-Awwalin (the
earlier ones who predceeded) among the Muhajirin
(Emigrants) and the Ansar (Helpers)...

Conceming his statement: “And following the way of the
As-Sabigin ALAwwalin (the earlier unes who predeeded)
among the Muhajirin (Emigrants) and the Ansar (Help-
ers) :”” Meaning, from the methodology of the People of
the Sunnah is following... and so on. It is connected to
the statement about following the narrations.

His saying: “As-Sabigin.”” That is, (they preceeded those
who came after them) in doing the righteous deeds.

His saying: “Al-Awwalin (the earlier ones)’ meaning, of
this Linmah.

The “Muhajitin (Emigrants) :” Those who emigrated to
Al-Madinah. 1

“Ansar (Helpers): The inhabitants of Al-Madinah
during the time of the Prophet #.

Following their path is only part of the Manhaj
{nethodology) of the People of the Sunnah and the
Jamda‘ah because they are closer to what is correct and
the truth, than those that came after them, The farther
people are from the period of Prophethood, the farther
they are from the truth; and the nearer they are to the
period of Prophethood, the nearer they are to the truth;
and the more eager one is to know the history of the
Prophet i and his Rightly Guided Khalifas, the nearer

Conceming The Practical Methodology

another, to execute a very important task.

“ The meaning of: “Adhere ta my Sunnah...” and so on, is
an exhortation to cling to it. He emphasized it with his
saying: “And bite it with your molars (An-Nawdjid).”
Which are last of the molars. The command to cling to
it with the hand and then the bite on it with the fast of
the molars is an emphatic exhortation to cling to it.

The Sunnah refers to a path, what is apparent, and what
is internal,

“The Rightly Guided Khalifahs:” They are those who
succeded the Prophet ‏علق‎ in his Ummah in knowledge,
actions and Da‘wah.

The first to be included in this description, and the
most worthy of being included, are the Four Khalifahs:
Abia Bakr, ‘Umar, “Uthman and ‘Ali.

Then, someone without knowledge now comes at this
time, and says: “The first Adhan for the Friday prayer is
an innovation, because it was not known during the
time of the Messenger #, and it is obligatory that we
curlail it to the second Adhan only!”

So we say to him that the Sunnah of ‘Uthman, may Allah be
pleased with him, is to be followed when it does not
contradict the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah #z. None of
the Companions, who are more knowledgeable than you,
and have more jealousy for the religion of Allah than you,
opposed it. And he is among the Rightly Guided Khalifaks,
those who the Messenger of Allah ## ordered us to follow.
Then, ‘Uthman, may Allah be pleased with him, depended
on the basis, which is that Bilal usually called the Adhan
before Fajr during the time of the Prophet #% not for the
Fajr prayer, but to inform the one standing (in voluntary
night prayer) return, and to awaken the one sleeping, as the

Commentary on AL’Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

Hs £4 BOG ‏الأمُورِ؛‎ oats ay ey

And following the instruction (Wasiyyah) of the Messen-
ger of Allah i, when he said : “Adhere to my Surah and
the Sunnah of the Rightly Guided Khalifahs after me. Hold
on fo tt, and bite it with your molars (An-Nawajid). And
beware of the newly invented matters, for every Bid‘ah
(innovation) is a misguidance.”

2 OD

Concerning his saying: “And following the instructian
(Wasiyyah) of the Messenger of Allah #8, when he said:
‘Adhere to my Sunnat and the Sunnah of the Rightly
Guided Khalifahs after me. Hold on to it, and bite it with
your molars (An-Nawdjid). And beware of the newly
invented matters, for every Bid‘ah (innovation) is a
misguidance "1

“Tollowing :” It is connected to the statement about
following the narrations. 1

“Instruction (Wasiyyah):” That is a covenant given to

Reported by Ahmad (4:126), Aba Dawid (4607), ‏عم‎
‎Ticmidhi (2676), Ibn Majah (43,44), Al-Hakim (1:95-96), and
Ton Hibban (1:187), from the Hadith of AlIrbad bin Sariyah,
may Allah be pleased with him, and At-Tirmidhi said: "A
Hasan Sahih Hadith.” And Al-lakim said: "Sabih, any
without defect” and Adh-Dhahabi agreed. In Ira’ Al-ghalit
(8:107), Al-Albant cited that a group of the people of
knowledge said it was Sahih.

Concerning The Practical Methodology...

Book and the Surah proving its legality.

“ The Prophet #8 said: “For every Bid‘ah (innovation) is a
misguidance.”” This is a branch clause following a
warning clause, the intended meaning of it here is the
emphasis of the warning and the explanation of the
ruling of innovation.

% “Every Bid'ah (imovation) is misguidance:’” This is a
general statement enclosed by the strongest expression
proving its general application, and that is the
expression: “‘Fuery;”’ so it is a decisive generalization,
from the Messenger 3%, and the Messenger #z is the
most knowledgeable creature regarding the Shari‘ah of
Allah, the best creature advising the slaves of Allah, the
most eloquent creature in clarification, and the most
truthful of them in information. So, four qualities are
combined in his case: knowledge, advice, eloquency
and truthfulness, And he uttered his saying: “Every
Bid’ah (innovation) is a misguidance.”

Based on this, whoever worships Allah with a creed,

saying, or action, that is not from the Shari‘ah of Allah, then

he is an innovator.

— So the fahmiyyah worship with their creed, and they

believe that they are declaring Allah free of imperfections.

And the Mu‘tazilah are like that. And the Ash‘ariyyah

worship based upon their false creed.

— And like that are those who invented specific forms of

Adkhar with which they worship Allah, and believe that

they will be rewarded for that.

— And like that are those who invented some actions by

which they worship Allah, and believe that they will be

rewarded for that.

These three types of people who innovated in creed, or

448 Commentary on Al'Agidah AlWasitiyyalt

Messenger of Allah #é said that. So, ‘Uthman ordered the
first Adhdn on Friday,"! not because of the arrival of the
imam, but so the people would gather, because Al-Madinah
had become larger and more vast, so people needed to
know that the time for the Friday prayer was approaching
before the presence of ‏عط‎ 7

* So, the People of the Sunnah and the jamd’ah follow
what the Prophet #% instructed in exhortation te hold to
his Sunnah and the Sunnah of the Rightly Guided
Khalifahs after him. And the head of these were the four
Rightly Guided Khalifahs: Aba Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman
and ‘Ali. Unless it (their Suinah) clearly contradicted
the saying of the Messenger of Allah 4, Then what is
obligatory upon us is to follow the saying of the
Messenger of Allah and make an excuse for this
Companion, and we say: "This is a form of Itihad
regarding which he is excused.”

The statement of the Prophet #§: “And beware of the
newly invented matters.” ‘Beware’ (Iyyakum) is a word
used to express caution, meaning: “Tam warming you.”

& “Matters :” meaning; affairs. What is intended by it here
are the religious matters. As for worldy matters, they
are nt included in this Hadith, because the basic rule
regarding worldly matters is permissibility, so what-
ever is invented in it, it is lawful, unless an evidence
proves that it is unlawful. But matters of the religion,
the basic rule is impermissibility; so whatever is
innovated concerning it is prohibited and it is an an
unlawful innovation, except with an evidence from the

‎Based on what is reported by As-Saib bin Yazid: “The one‏ للا
‎who added the third Adhan on Friday was ‘Uthman bin‏
‎‘Affan, may Allah be pleased with him.” Reported by Al‏
‎Buksari (912), (913).‏

Conceming The Practical Methodology... 451
All of these grave evils result from an innovation because it
is an innovation, in addition to the fact that this innovation
is accompanied by foolishness in one’s reason, and an
imbalance in religion.

% With this, we know that whoever categorizes innova-
tions to three, five or six categories, then he is mistaken.
And his mistake is from one of two angles:

— Either that the what he has called an innovation does not
fit the description of innovation in the Shari‘ah; - or that it is
not good, as he thinks.

The Prophet # said: “Every Bid’ah (innovation) is
misguidance.”’ He said: “Every” what removes us from this
tremendous generalization, such that we categorize in-
novations into types?

> 164 you say: “What do you say concerning the saying of
the Commander of the Belicvers, ‘Umar, may Allah be
pleased with him, when he came out during one of the
nights of Ramadan, and he saw people praying behind
an Imdm, and he said: ‘Whal a favorable Bid‘ah this
is 116 commended it, and called it a 814012!

The response, is that we say: We look at this Bid’ah which
he referred to, does the Shari'ah description of innovation
apply to it or not. So when we look at it, we find that the
description of innovation in the Shari'a: does not apply to
it. This is because it has been affirmed that the Prophet #¢
prayed with his Companions during Ramadan for three
nights, then he left it, for fear of it becoming obligatory
upon them. So, its legality is eslablished, and as such that it
could be an innovation according to the Shari'ah is
negated So it is not possible that we say it is an innovation,
while the Messenger # had prayed itl!

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (2010).

450 Commentary on AL‘Agidah Al-Wasittyyah

statements, or actions; every innovation from their innova-
tions, then it is misguidance. And the Messenger as
described it as misguidance, because it is made up, and
because it is a deviation from the truth.

4 81000: (innovation) indicates evil dangers:

Firstly: It mdicates a belying, of the saying of Allah, Exalted
is He:

€This day I have perfected your religion for you >(Al-
Ma‘idah 5:3)
Because when somebody comes with an innovation and
considers it as a form of religion; its implication is that the
relgion is not perfect.
Secondly: It indicates a defamation of the Shari‘ah, and that
it is imperfect, so this innovator is the one who makes it
perfect with his act of innovation.
Thirdly: It indicates a defamation of the Muslims, who do
not practice this innovation; so, so those people who lived
before the invention of the innovation; their religion is
incomplete! This is a grave danger!
Fourthly: Among the implications of this innovation is that
what prevails is that whoever is occupied with an
innovation, he would be distracte from a Sunnah, as some
of the Salaf said: “People will not innovate an innovation,
except that they demolish its like fromm the Sunnah.”
Fifthly: These innovations lead to separations in the
Ummah, because these innovators believe that they are
the upholders of the truth, and that the others are
misguided! And people of the truth say: “You are the ones
upon misguidance.” So, their hearts separate.

453

Concerning The Practical Methodology...

This is known through the clarification of the cause of the
Hadith; and it is that the Prophet 3% said it when one of the
Ansar came to him with a bag (of Dirhams) and put it
before the Prophet #, when he ‏عله‎ had called his his
Companions to donate for a group of people who arrived
from Mudar wearing worn out Namirahs,"! and they were
from the major ‘Aral tribes. The face of the Prophet #
grew pale when he saw their condition; so, he called out for
donations for them. So, this man came, the first to come,
with this bag; hence, he said: “Whoever institutes a good
practice (Sunnah) in Islam; then for him is the reward for it,
and the reward of whoever acts upon it until the Day of
Resurrection.”"2! 1
Or, it could be said, that the meaning of the good Susnali
(practice), is whatever is introduced to serve as a means to
achieving what is affirmed in Shari'ah, such as writing
books and building schools, and the like.

With this, we know that the sayings of the Messenger #4 do
not contradict one another; rather they are in accord; for he
8 never spoke out of his desire.

Oe

‎Tyanslation mote: It was explained in An-Nihdyah: “Every‏ لثا
‎wrap wilh stripes wom as an Izar by the ‘Arabs is a Namtirah,‏
‎and its plural is Nimnér, it is as if it is derived from the color of‏
‎the leopard because of the black and the white that is in it.‏
‎And it is a description of what was dominant, meaning that‏
‎a people came to him wearing Izdre made of wool, with‏
‎stripes.”‏

‎"I Reported by Muslim (1017) from Jarir bin ‘Abdullah Al-
Bajali, may Allah be pleased with him.

‎452 Commentary on Al-’Aqidah ALWasitiyyah

‎‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, only called it a
Bid’alt because, the people had left it; it became such that
they did not praying it in congregation behind one Imam,
rather in groups; a man on his own, and another with two
or three, and a group larger than that. So, when he
gathered them behind one Jmém; their gathering became an
innovation with respect to their initial practice of observing
it in different groups.

‎So one night, he, may Allah be pleased with him, cane out
and said: “If 1 gather the people people behind one Imam,
then that would be better.” So, he ordered Ubayy bin Ka‘b,
and Tamum Ad-Dari to lead people in eleven Rak‘ahs of
prayer. So they led the people in eleven Rak‘ahs, So one
night, he came out and the people were praying with their
Imam, so he said: “What a favorable innovation this is.”
Therefore, it is an innovation relative to the meaning that it
had been left, then spread another time.

‎This is angle by which it was called an innovation. But as
for it being an innovation in the Sharia, and ‘Umar
commending it, then not with this, we recognize that the
saying of ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, does not
contradict the saying of the Messenger of Allah #4.

‎* If you ask: “How can we reconcile between this, and
the saying of the Messenger ##: ‘Whoever institutes a
good practice (Sunnah) in Islam; then for him is the
reward for it, and the reward of whoever acts upon it
until the Day of Resurrection.’ So he affirmed that a
person can introduce a good practice in Islam?”

‎We say that each of the sayings of the Messenger 2%, testify

‎to each other; they do not contradict each other. So the

‎meaning of good Sunnah (practice) is a Suniah (practice)
that is legitimate. So, what is intended by its institution, is
the initiation of acting upon it.

Concerning The Practical Methodology ...

And at the earth, how it is spread out» (AL-Ghashiyal
88:20)

And we can witness that the earth is round; so how is it
that His information contradicts the reality?

So the reply is that the Ayah does not contradict reality, but
his understanding is mistaken, either due to a defect of his
or his negligence. The earth is spread out, round; that is
because it is circular; but due of its vastness, its roundness
will not be obvious except in a wide space where it is
spread out. And here is the mistake in his understanding,
since he thinks it being spread out contradicls it being
round,

So when we believe that the most truthful speech is the

Speech of Allah; that necessitates that it is obligatory upon
us to trust all of what Allah informed about in His Book,
whether that is about Himself or about His creatarcs.

* Concerning his statement: “And the best guidance is the

guidance of Muhammad

% “Guidance” is the path which the traveler is upon.

There are many paths, but the best of them is the path of
the Prophet 2%. We know that and believe in it We know
that the best of guidance is the guidance of Muhammad #5
in creed, acts of worship, manners and dealings with
people, and that the guidance of Mohammad ‏وي‎ is not
deficient; neither in its goodness, completeness, organisa~
tion not its facilitation for the benefits of creation, nor in the
sulings regarding events that have not ceases, nor shall
cease until the Day of Resurrection, because the guidance
of Muhammad 34 is perfect, complete, so it is the best
guidance. It is a better guide than the Tawrah, the Injil, the

454 Commentary on Al'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyal

And they know that the most truthful of all speech is the
Speech of Allah, and the best guidance is the guidance of
Muhammad #8. And they give preference to the Speech of
Allah over the speech of any other than Him, among the
speech of various types of people, and they give precedence
to guidance of Muhammad #& over the guidance of
everyone

“Concerning his statement: “And they know that the most
incthful of all speech is the Speech of Allah.”

> This is what we know and what we believe, and that
there is no falsehood in the Speech of Allah; rather it is
the most truthful of speech. So whenever Allah informs
that something is, then it is. And when He informs
about something that shall be, then it shall be. And
when He informs about something, describing it as
such and such, then its description is such and such.

“ It is not possible thal the matter be altered from what
Allah informed about it. Whoever thinks it can change,
then his thinking is mistaken, duc to a defect of his, or
negligence.

An example of that is if someone says: Allah, the Mighty

and Sublime, has said that the earth is spread oul. He says:

Concerning ‘lhe Practical Methodology... 457

% “The word of Allah over the words of any other than Him”;
among the various categories of people, in terms of
information and judgement. So to them, the informa-
tion given by Allah is advanced over the information of
any other.

* So when some information comes about nations of the
past, and the Qur'an belies that, then we belie it.

An example of that is that it is popular arnong many of the

historians that Idris came before Nuh. But this is false,
because the Qur'an belies it, as He, Exalted is He, Says:

Verily, we have inspired you as We inspired Nuh and
the Prophets after him >(An-Nisa’ 4:163)

And Idris is one of the Prophets, as Allah, Exalted is He, says:

And mention in the Book (the Qur'an) Idvist Verily he
was a man of truth, (and) a Prophet...» ( Maryant
19:56)

- up till His statement:

3

Those were they unto whom Allah bestowed His Grace
among the Prophets, of the offspring of Adam and of
those whom We carried with Nah» (Maryam 19:58)

Tie, Exalted is He, said:

456 Commentary on Ai-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Zabur and the Suhuf of Ibrahim, and all forms of guidance.

So when we believe this, by Allah, we will not seek a

replacement for it.

Based on this creed, we will not oppose the sayings of
the Messenger of Allah #€ with the saying of anyone
among the people, whoever he may be, such that even
if a saying of Abu Bakr came to us - and he is the best of
this Ummah - and the saying of the Messenger of Allah
#8, we take the saying of the Messenger of Allah 28.

% The People of the Sanna and the famnd’ch derive this
creed from the Book and the Sunnah:

Allah, Exalted is He, says:

‎Sia) &5‏ من

‎tie 8
Who is truer in speech than Allah} (An-Nisa’ 4:87)

‎One day while the Prophet # was giving a Khutbah to the
people on the Minbar, he said: “The best narration is the
Book’ of Allah, and the best guidance is the guidance of
Muhammad 3.04)
That is why you find those who have strayed away from
the guidance and oppose it, either they are negligent of the
Shari‘ah of the Messenger #, or exaggerate im it, between
the extreme and the negligent; between the laxed and
excessive, and the guidance of Muhammad % is between
this and that.
Concerning his saying: “And they give preference to the
Speech of Allah over the speech of any other than Him.
among the speech of various types of people.”

‎% “They give preference” meaning they advance il.

‎>

‎Reported by Muslim (867) from Jabir bin ‘Abdullah, may

‎Allah be pleased with him.

Concerning The Practical Methodology...

And for this they are named the Peopte of the Book and the
Sunnah, and they are named the People of the Jama‘ah,
because the Jamd’ah ia the gathering, and its opposile is
separation, even though the word Juma’ah has come to be
used as a name for the people that congregate.

Concerning his saying: “And for ‏“رفك‎ the Lam in his
saying: “And for this” (Lihadlid) is explanative, that is;
because of their giving preference to the Allah’ Speech, and
their giving precedence to the guidance of the Messenger of
Allah #&.

& They are named the People of the Book and the Sunnat.”
because of their believing in them, adhering to them,
and giving, them preference over other than them. And
whoever contradicts the Book and the Susmah, and
claims that he belongs to the People of the Book and
Sunnah, then he is a liar, because whoever belongs to a
particular class of thing, there is no way except thal he
obey such a thing, and adhere to it.

Concerning his statement: “And they are named the
People of the ‏,تلم ميج[‎ because the Jama'ah is the gathering,
and its opposite is separation,” The word Jamda’ah is a
verbal noun. So the Jand’at is the Ijtima’ (gathering). So
the meaning of the People of the jama‘ah, is the people

458 Commentary on AF’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

dAnd indeed, We sent Nith and Ibrahim and placed in
their offspring Prophethood and the Scriptured (Al-
Hadid 57:26)

Whereas there was no Prophet before Nah, except for

Adam alone.

Concerning his statement: “And they give preeedence to
guidance of Muhammad 3% over the guidance of everyone.”

% “They give precedence fo the guidance of Muhammad 22:
That is, his way and his Surah which he was upon.
“Over the guidance of everyone: in creed, worship,
manners, dealing with people, and circumstances
relating to everything; according to His statement,
Exalted is He:

‎E>‏ هد

‏عن

‎4And verily, this is my straight path, sv follow it, and
follow not (other) paths, for they will separate you away
‘from His pathy (AL-An‘am 6:153)

‎And, His saying:
tee BeAh fog ater Bs secede thet
BG ‏لكر مويق‎ As at ) ‏تيبو‎ 2S ‏إن‎ BP
ye veg

‎a ‏عفور‎
‎Say: “If you indeed love Allth, then follow me, Allah
will love you and forgive your sins. And Allah is Oft-
Forgiving ; Most Merciful (Al ‘Imran 3:31)

Concerning The Practical Methodology... 461

“ Conceming his saying: “And the ‏قهز[‎ (consensus) is the
third source which is depended upon in knowledge and the
religion .””

4 Meaning by thal, the third evidence; because the
evidences are the foundations for the rulings, since
they are built upon them.

The first foundation is the Book, the second is the Sunnah,

and the ja’ (consensus) is the third foundation. That is

why they are named: The People of the Book, and the

Sunnah, and the Jaméd’ah.

“> These three foundations, they are depended upon in
knowledge and in the religion. They are: The Book, the
Sunnah and the [jma‘ (consensus).

As for the Book and the Sunnah, they are two independent
sources; but the ‏“قب‎ (consensus) is built upon another
than it, because there cannot be {jma’ (consensus) except
with the Book and the Sunnah.

“ As for the Book and Sunnah being the foundations
referred to, then the evidences for that are many.
Among them:

His, Exalted is He, statement:

ae gt 4 2 bas

40t55 BOS, 35 ‏فى كو‎ FES Bd
(And) if you differ in anything amongst yourselves,
refer it to Allah and His Messenger »(An-Nisd’ 4:59)

And His, Exalted is He, statement:
4And obey Alla and the Messenger p(Al-Ma’idah 5:92)
And His, Exalted is He, statement:

rasa eae

460 Commentary on AL’Aqudah ALWasifiyyah

of the gathering. Because they gather upon the Sunnah,
uniting in it; not considering each other astray, nor
considering each other to be innovators, contrary to the
people of innovation.

% Concerning his statement: “Even though the word
Jama’ah has come to me used as a name for the people that
congregate.” This is the second usage where the word
Joma‘ah has become customarily used as a name for the
people who congregate.

Based on what the author established, in our saying:
“The People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah," the word
Jamd’oh is connected to “the Sunnah.” That is why the
author said in his statement: “they are named the People
of the Jama‘ah,”” he did not say: “they are named a Jamé’alt
(community). How can they be the People of the
Jama‘ah, while they are a community while they
constitute a ‏“الم امم[‎

We say that the word Jama’al primarily means a gathering;

so the People of the jJamd’ah, means the people of the

gathering; but the word jama’ah has been customarily used
to refer to the people who congregate.

١ ‏الت‎ joy fk pues
pill

And the lima’ (consensus) is the third source which is
depended upon in knowledge and the religion .

oO > ‏للد‎

Concerning The Practical Methodology .. 463

it is unlawful to marry the Mabarim;" and this is correct,
but it being unlawful is affirmed by the text.

That is why Imam Ahmad said: “Whoever claims an 118“
(consensus), he is a liar. [low does he know? Perhaps they
differed?’?!

What is known according to the majority of the scholars, is
that the Ijma’ (consensus) does exist, and that it is an
evidence which is affirmed by the Qur’an and the Sunnah.

From this, is His, Exalted is He, saying:

45255 MSS ‏ف كه‎ Ae of
4(And) if you differ in anything amongst yourselves,
refer it to Allah and His Messenger (An-Nisd’ 4:59)

Because, His saying: ¢/f you differ among yourselves in
anything refer it to» proves that whatever we have agreed
upon, then il is not necessary to refer it to the Book and
the Sunnah, sufficing with the Ijma’ (consensus). But there
is some problem with such inference.

Among that, is His, Exalted is He, saying:

te 3

‎pie esas Got AD‏ وس

‎And whoever contradicts and opposes the Messenger
after the right path has been shown clearly to him, and
follaw other than the heliever’s way, We shall keep hint

‎31 Translation note: Mali@rim is plural of Mahram; the one that is
unlawful, meaning, any of the relatives listed by texts as
being unlawful for a person to marry.

‎SI Reported by ‘Abdullah, the son of Imam Ahmad in his
Masail from his father (38), see [dm Al-Muwayi'in of Ibn At
Qayyim (1:30).

‎462 Commentary on AL-’Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

‎Pape 8 ae Ke ‏هما‎ dS ae Yh Kae © 5

‎4And whatsoever the Messenger gives you, take it, and
whatsvever he forbids, abstain (from it)} (Al-Hashr
59:7)

‎And His, Exalted is He, statement:
CS HTS Ut 9 ay

‎has indeed obeyed

‎¢He who obeys the Messenger,
Alldhip (An-Nisd’ 4:80)

‎Whoever rejects the Sunnah being a foundation for
evidence; then he has indeed rejected the Qur'an as a
foundation.

‎And there is no doubt for us, that whoever says that the
Sunnalt is not to be referred to for Sharé‘ah rulings, then he is
an disbeliever, apostatizing from Islam, because he is one
who belies and rejects the Qur'an, since, in more than one
location, the Qur’an mentions the Sunnah as being a source
to be referred to.

‎But as for the evidence of the [jmda’ (consensus) being a
source, it will be said:

‎Firstly: Can the Ima‘ (consensus) exist, or can in not be
found?

‎Some scholars say that consensus can not be found, except
based upon what there is a text for, therefore, with the text,
there is no need for the Ifa’ (consensus).

‎For example, if somebody says: “The scholars all agree
that the daily obligatory prayers are five.” This is correct,
but them being obligatory is affirmed by the text. And that
they agreed that Zina is unlawful; and this is correct, but it
being unlawful is affirmed by the text. And they agree that

Concerning The Practical Methodology...

They weigh - with these three foundations - all that people
are upon, of sayings and actions, internal, and external ;
in whatever relates to the religion. And the regulated Ijma’
(consensus), is whut the righteous Salaf were upon ; since
after them, disagreement increased, and the Ummah
spread out.

Concerning his saying: “They weigh - with these three
foundations - all that people are upon, of sayings and
actions, internal, and external; in whatever relates to the
religion.”

The three foundations are the Book, the Sunnah and the
Ijma‘ (consensus).

Meaning that, the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah
use these three foundations to weigh all that the people
are upon of sayings and actions, internal or external.
They do not not know whether it is true, until they
weigh it with the Book, the Swnal and the Ijmda‘
(consensus). So, when an evidence for that is found in
them, then it is true, and if it is to the contrary, then it is
false.

Conceming his statement’ “And the regulated lima’

464 Commentary on Al-‘Agilah ALWasitiyyah

to the path he has chosen, and burn him in the Hell -
what an evil destination! (An-Nisa’ 4:115)

He says: ¢And follows other than the believers’ way}

They also use the following Hadith as evidence: “My
Ummah will not agree on error.”

Concerning this Hadith some graded it Hasan (good) while
some graded it weak, but we can say that even if the chain
is weak, the text of the Qur'an earlier cited supports its text.

So the majority of the Ummah hold the view that the Ijmd’
(consensus) is an independent evidence, and that when we
find an issue upon which there is an Jja’ (consensus), then
we affirm it based upon this [jmd’ (consensus).

It appears, based upon this sentence, that the author, may
Allah have mercy upon him, intends to affirm that the Jjmna’
(consensus) of the People of the Sunnah is a proof.

81 Reported by At-Tirmidht (3:207), Ibn Majah

Hakim in Al-Mustadrak (1:15). As-‘Sakhawi mentioned it in
Al-Magasid (460) and said about it: “In summary, it is a
Hadith whose text is popular, having many chains of
narration, and a number of witnesses, in the Marfa’ form
and other than that.” In Al-Majina’ (5:129), AlHaithami
mentioned it, and said: “It was reported by Af-Tabarani with
two chains, the narrators in one of them are trustworthy
narrators of the Sahih, except for Marziq, the freed slave of
the family of Talhah, and he is trustworthy.” And Al-Albani
graded it Hasan (good) in Zila! Al-Jannah (80)

SECTION:

Regarding The Manhaj (Method) of the
People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah
Regarding Commanding Good And
Prohibiting Evil, and Other Qualities

One ATRL ‏ل يَامْرُونَ‎

Section: Then, with these fundamentais, they command
AL-Ma‘rif and prohihit Al-Munkar, according to what the
Shari‘ah requires.

Conceming his saying, may Allah have inercy upon
him: “Then, with these fundamentals, they order Al-Ma‘nif
and prohibit Al-Murtkar”

“They: That is, the People of the Surmah and the
Jani’ah,

“With these fundamentals :” which were mentioned
before this; they are; following the narrations of the
Messenger ss, following the Rightly Guided Khalifalis,
and giving preference to the Speech of Allah, and the
speech of His Messenger over other than that, and
following the Ijma’ (consensus) of the Muslims; so with

466 Commentary on AL‘Agiiah Al-Wisitiyyah

(consensus), is what the righteous Salaf were upon; since
after them, disagreement increased, and the Ummah spread
out.”

Meaning, the Jjma’ (consensus) which it is possible to
regulate by, and be inclusive with, is what the
tighteous Salaf were upon, and they are the first three
generations; the Companions, the Tabi’in and their
followers.

Then, the author gave the reason for that, in his saying:
“since after them, disagreement increased, and the Ummah
spread out.” Meaning that, the differences became as
numerous as the desires; because the people separated
into groups, and not all. of them intended the truth. So,
the opinions differed, and there were diverse categories
of sayings.

% “And the Ummah spread out:” So, including them all
became among the most difficult of matters.

So it is as if Shaikh Al-Islam, may Allah have mercy upon
him, was saying: “Whoever claims Ijma‘ (consensus) after
the righteous Salaf, who are the first three generations, then
his claim to a consensus is not correct, because the
consensus that can be a guidline is that of the righteous
Salaf.”

Is it possible to find a consensus after the differing? We say:
There is no Ijma’ (consensus) with the existence of
preceding differences, and there is no use for differences
after the Ij’ (consensus) has been verified.

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 469

Munkar is with conditional upon il being according to what
the Sharf'ah requires and dictates.

* So there are conditions for that:

The first condition: That he is knowledgeable of the
Sharrah ruling regarding what he is commanding and
prohibiting from. So he does not command except what he
knows the Shariah commands, and he does not prohibit
except for what he knows the Shari‘alt prohibits. And for
this, he does not depend upon personal preference or
custom.

This is based upon His, Fxalted is He, saying to His
Messenger 3

450 judge between them by what Allah has revealed,
and follow not their vain desires, diverging away from
the truth that has come to you.» (Al-Ma'idah 5:48)

And, His statement:

‎sah sai es‏ كي

‎Se mo & Sah
4And follow not that of which you have no knowledge.
Verily! The hearing, and the sight, and the heart, of
each of those you will be questioned. (AL-Isra’ 17:36)

‎And, His statement:

‎nee Bee

‎8 ‏وهنا‎ 0 aS

‎468 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitivyah

‎these fundamentals:
% “They command Al-Ma'rif and prohibit Al-Munkar”

‎- “Al-Ma’rif” Everything which the Sharfali commands;
then they command it,

‎— “Al-Munkar:" Everything which the Shari‘ah prohibites;
then they prohibit it.

‎Because this is what Allah, Exalted is He, commanded, in
His statement:

‎Let there arise out of you a group of people inviting to
all that is good, enjoining Al-Ma‘rif and forbidding Al-
Munkarp (Al ‘Intran 3:104)

‎Similarly, the Prophet #¢ said: “You should enjoin Al-
Ma’riif and forbid Al-Munkar, and you should take the
hand of the wrongdoer, and incline him to the truth.”!"!

‎So they command Al-Mu‘rif and prohibit Al-Munkar and
they do not delay in doing that.

‎However, commanding Al-Ma‘réf_and prohibiting ‏لف‎

‎FI Reported by Aba Dawad (4336), Ibn Majah (4006), At-
‘Yirmidhi (3047, 3048) and he said: A Hasan Charib Hadith,”
and he said: “This Hadith has been related from Aba
‘Ubaidah, from ‘Abdullah, from the Prophet 3, similarly.
And some of them say: From Aba ‘Ubaidah, from the
Prophet s/ in Mursal form.” And in ALMujma’ (7:269), Al-
Haithami ascribed it to At-Tabarani, from Aba Masa ‏حلت‎
‎Ash’ari, and said: “Its narrators are narrators of the Sahih.”
See Ad-Durr Al-Manihiir regarding the Tafsir of His, Exalted

‎is Ve, saying €Those among the children of 157811 who

‎dishelicved were cursed (Al-Mitidah 5:78-79)

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 47

Rak'‘ahs and make them brief.’""!

— I was told that someone among the people was saying
that recording the Qur’an on audio cassette is unlawful,
because (in his view) that is an indiginity with respect to
the Qur’an. Hence, he was prohibiting the people from
recording the Qur'an on these cassettes, because he thought
that it was a Munkar!!

We say to him: What is Munkar is that you prohibit them
from something that you do not know to be a Munkar!! So
you know, that this is a Murker in the religion of Allah.
This is regarding matters that are not worship. As for acts
of worship, if we sce a man performing an act of worship,
and it is not known to be among that which Allah has
ordered, then we prohibit him from that; because basic
ruling concerning acts of worship is that they are to be
prevented, 7]

The fourth condition: That he is able to perform such
commanding of the Ma’rif and prohibiting the Munkar
without a harm associated with doing so. If there is a harm
associated with doing so, then it is not obligatory upon
him. However, if he is patient, and he performs it, then that
is more virtuous. Because all the obligatory acts are based
on the condition of having the ability or being capable.
Based upon His, Exalted is He, saying:

4So keep your duty to Allah and fear Him as ‏مسار‎ as

1١ Reported by Al-Bukhari (931) and Muslim (875), and the
wording is his, from Jabir bin ‘Abdullah, may Allah be
pleased with him

21 Translation note: Meaning, until there is evidence to allow
them, as the Shuikh has explained previously.

470 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wiasitiyyah

4And say not concerning that which your tongues put
forth falsely: “This is lawful and this is forbidden,” so
as to invent lies against Allah. Verily, those who invent
lies against Allah will never prosperp (An-Nahl
16:116)

— So, if he sees a person doing something, whose primary
tuling is permissibility, it is not permissible for him to
prohibit him from doing it, until he knows that it is
unlawful, or prohibited.

— And if he sees a person leaving off of something, which
the observer thinks is an act of worship, then it is not
allowed for himto command him to do such worship, until
he knows that the Shariah commands it.

‘The second condition: That he know the state of the one
being ordered; is he among those that the command or the
prohibition are directed to, or not?

So, if he sees a person about whom he doubts whether he is
a Mukallaf (legally responsible) or not, he does not
command him with what one like him is not commanded
with, until he acquires the details about that.

The third condition: That he be aware of the state of the
responsibility for the one being commanded, has as he
done this thing or not?

— So, if he sees a person entering the Masjid, and then he
sits down, and he doubts whether or not he has prayed two
Rak‘ahs, then he does not rebuke him for that, and he does
not command him to pray them, until he acquires the
details regarding that.

The evidence for that, is that one Friday, the Prophet #
was day delivering a Khutbah, when a man entered, and sat
down. The Prophet # said to him: “Have you prayed?” He
replied: “No.” He ‏ييه‎ said: “Stand up and perform two

Regarding The Manhaj (Methud)... 473

That is why the scholars say that rebuking a Muskar leads
to one of four cases: Either, the Munkar ceases, or it changes
to what is less than it, or to what is like it, or to what is
greater than it.

— As for the first and second case, then rebuking it is
obligatory.

— As for the third case; it will depend upon the
circumstances.

— As for the fourth; then it is not allowed to rebuke it;
because the objective of rebuking the Murkar is to remove it
or to diminish it.

An example of that is when he wants to command a person
to do some act of Ihsan, but doing this Thsda necessitates
him not performing Salah in congregation; here, it is not
permissible to command this Ma‘rif, because it leads to
forsaking an obligatory act for the sake of a recommended
act.

The same with Muntkar, if the case is that by prohibiting this
Munkar, the doer of that act will turn to doing a Mutikar
that is worse; then in this case, it is not allowed to prohibit
this Munkay, preventing the greater of the two harms rather
than the lesser.

His, Exalted is He, saying, proves this:

53 عر ‎ee‏ اعم

ma eae Se Bee wie

fy So AS at ods ‏من‎ OFF Dal DA >
te

4And insult not those whom they call upon besides

Alldli, fest they insult Allah wrongfully, without
knowledge (Al-An’am: 6:108)

For indeed, insulting the gods of the idofators, is without
doubt, a desireable matter. But since that leads to an

472 Commentary on AL‘Agidah Al-Wisitiyyah

you can.» (At-Taghabun 64:16)

And also His statement:

Allah does not hold a soul accountable for what it can
not bear (Al-Bagarah 2:286)

Se, when he fears that if he commands a person with
Ma‘raf, that he will kill him; then he is not required to
command hin; because he is not capable of doing thal.
Rather, it could even he prohibited for him then. Some of
the scholars said: “Rather, it is obligatory for him to
command, and to be patient, even if there is a harm in that,
as long as that does not reach the level of fighting.” But the
first saying is more worthy; because when this one’s
commanding results in the harm of being imprisoned or the
like, then others will Jeave commanding the Ma’ri and
prohibiting the Munkar fearing that result, until the case is
such that they are not afraid of that harin.

This is for the commanding of Ma‘raf whose level has not
reached the category of Jikdd; such as when one commands
a Sunnah and prohibits an innovation, and if he were silent,
it would empower the people of innovation over the People
of the Sunnah. So in this situation, it is obligatory to make
the Sunnah apparent, and clarify the innovation, because
this is part of jihad in the Cause of Allah; so, there is no
excuse in fearing far oneself in the case of the one upon
whom it is required.

The fifth condition: That by commanding the Ma‘ruf and
prohibiting the Munkar, a greater harm will not result that
if he was silent. If that would result, then it is not reuired
for him, rather, it is not allowed for him to command that
Ma‘raf or prohibit the Murnkar.

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 475

view. They say that it is obligatory to command the Ma‘nif,
even if he does not practice it, and to prohibit the Murkar,
even if he commits it. Allah only reprimanded Children of
Isra’il — not for their commanding Ma’raf - but for their
combination of ordering righteousness and forgetting it
themselves,

And this saying is what is correct. So we say you are not
commanded with two matters: The first is doing the
righteous act, and the second is commanding the righteous
act. And you are prohibited from two matters; the first is
doing the Munkar, and the second is abandoning the
prohibition from doing it. So do not combine leaving what
is ordered and doing what is prohibited, for if you leave
one of them, that does not necessitate that the obligation for
the other is dropped.

So these are six conditions, four of them regarding what is
allowed, and they are the first, the second, the third and the
fifth - with the details about it. And two of them regarding
what is obligatory, and they are the fourth and the sixth,
with the difference of opinions in their regard.

“ There is no that one can not command or prohibit his
older blood relatives, like his father, mother, grand-
father or grandmother. Ralher, we can even say the
matter concerning them is more emphatic, because part
of doing good to one’s parents is to forbid them trom
doing acls of disobedience, and commanding them to
do acts of obedience.

Jt has been said: “Whenever I forbid my father irom
anything, he becomes angry with me, annoyed and he
avoids me, what should I do?”

We say: Be patient with whatever occurs to you of father’s
anger and avoiding you; the end is indeed for those who
have Taqwa. Follow the path of your father, Ibrahim, peace

474 Commentary on Ai-‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

unlawful matter that is worse than any benefit in insulting
the gods of the idolators - and that is their insults to Allah,
Exalted is He, wrongfully without knowledge - then Allah
prohibited insulting the gods of the idolators in this case.

And if we find a man drinking wine — and drinking wine
is a Munkar — and were we to prohibit him from his
drinking, then he would goe about stealing people's wealth
and violating their honor, then here, we do not prohibit
him from drinking wine, because that would result in a
greater harm.

The sixth condition: That this person who is commanding
or prohibiting, himself abides by what he is commanding
and prohibiting. And this is according to the view of some
of the scholars. For if he does not abide by that, then he is
not to command the Ma‘ruf and prohibit the Munkar.
Because Allah, Exalted is He said to the Children of Isra’t:

€Do you enjoin ALBirr (piety and righteousness) on the
peuple and you forget (to practice it) yourselves, while
you recite the Scriplure! Have you then no sense? >(Al-
Bagarah 2:44) 1

So, when this man does pray, he should not comunand
someone else regarding the prayer; and if he drinks wine,
he should not prohibit someone else from it. That is why
the poet said: 1

Forbid not an act, and then commit the same
What a great shame upon you, if you dare do that.

So they prove this with textual proofs, and rational proofs.
However, the majority of the scholars have a contrary

‎el A‏ وَالْجْمَع وَالأغياهٍ @ الأمراءٍ

‎og‏ كَانُوا أ

‎They uphold Hajj, Jihdd, jrumu’ah, and the ‘Ids with the
Amirs (leaders), whether they be righteous or wicked. And
they maintain the congregations...

‎ooo

‎% Concerning his saying: “They uphold Hajj, Jihad,
Junu’at, and the ‘Ids with the leaders, whether they be
righteous or wicked.”

‎* The righteous :” Al-Abrar is plural of Bar, and he is the
one who frequently performs acts of cbedience.
“Wicked: Al-Fujjar is plural of Fajir and he is the one
who often commits acts of disobedience.

‎The People of the Sunnah oppose the people of‏ ات
‎innovation completely. They uphold the view of‏
‎performing Hajj with the Amir, even if he is the most‏
‎disobedient of the slaves of Allah.‏

‎In the past, people would have an Amir while‏ اي
‎performing Hajj; just as the Prophet # made Aba‏
‎Bakr the Amir of the Hajj in the ninth year of Hijrah.‏
‎People have not ceased doing this; making someone‏
‎the Amir whom they follow in their rites of Llajj. This is‏
‎legislated, because the Muslims need an Imam to‏
‎follow. As for everyone being on his own, that will‏
‎cause chaos and differing.‏

‎So, they hold the view of performing Hajj with the Amirs

‎even if they are disobedient; even if they drink Khamr

‎Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 47

‎476 Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎be upon him, who, while reprimanding his father for
committing Shirk, he said:

‎€O my father! Why do you worship that which hears
not, sees not, and carmot avail you in anything?...>
Until he said: 40 my father! Worship not Shaitén.
Verily! Shaitan has been a rebel against the Most
Beneficent (Allah). O my father! Verily! I fear lest a
torment from the Most Beneficent (Allah) overtake you,
so that you become a companion of Shaitin (Satan) (in
the Hellfire). He said :>

‎That is, his father said:

‎€Do you reject my gods, O Ibrahim? If you stop not
(this), I will indeed stone you. Sp get away from me
sufely (before I punish you.)} (Maryan 19-42-46)

‎Ibrahim also said to his father, Azar:

‎€"Do you take idols as gods? Verily, 1 see you and
your people in manifest error} (ALAn‘am 6:74)

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 479

The People of the Sumah and the Jama‘ah use insight,
because opposition in these matters is an act of disobe-
dience to Allah and His Messenger, and leads to
tremendous trials.

What is it that opened the door of trials and fighting among
the Muslims, and conflicting opinions, other than rebellion
against the Jmdms?!

So the People of the Sunnah and the fama’ah hold the view
that it is obligatory lo maintain the Hajj, and jihad with the
Amirs even if they are wicked.

% However, this does not mean that the People of the
Sunnah and the Jamd‘alt do not see that the Amirs acts
are evil, rather they see that it is evil, and that the Amir
doing an evil could be worse than the general people
doing that evil; because when the Amir does that evil,
two horribly dangerous matiers lead to his sin
increasing:

First The people will follow his lead, and they will

consider this evil insignificant.

Second: When the Amir does this evil, changing it among
his subjects, or changing what is like it, or what comes
along with it, will become insignificant to him.

But the People of the Sunnal: and the jamd‘al say that
even with this matter, which leads to these two
dangerous situations, or other than them; it is still
obligatory for us to obey those in authority even if they
are disobedient. So we establish the Hajj and Jilad with
them. And the same with furtu‘ah; we perform it with
the Antirs even if they are wicked.

So, for example, if the Anur drinks Khamr, and oppresses
people in their wealth, we observe the Friday prayer
behind him, and the prayer is valid; such that the People of

478 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah ALWasitiyyah

during Hajj. They will not say: “This Iindm is a Fajir, we will
not accept him being an fmdm.” Because they hold the view
obeying the leader is obligatory, even if he is a Fasiq; with
the condition that his Fisq does not reach the state of clear
and undeniable disbelief, for which we have an evidence
from Allah; in which case, he is not to be obeyed, and il is
necessary that he cease from being in charge of the Muslims
affairs. But, as for the acts of evil that are less than disbelief,
whatever degree they are; his authority does not cease by
them, rather, il remains affirmed. Thus, obedience to the
one in authority is obligatory as long as it is not in
disobedience to Allah.

— This is contrary to the Khawarij, who hold the view that
there is no obedience to the Imdm and Amir when he is
disobedient. Because one of their principles is that a major
sin takes one out of Islam.

— And it is also contrary to the Rawdafid, those who say
that there is no Imam except the infallible leader. The
Ummah: of Iskim (to them) dues not have a leader, since the
time that the Awaited fmam - as they claim - has been
absent from us, and the Linmah of Islam does not have to
follow any Imam. Moreover, it has died the death of
ignorance since that time until today. They claim that there
is no ‏قبط‎ except the Infallible Imam. So, there is no Hajj
nor Jihdd with any Amir, because the Imam has not come
yet.

* But the People of the Sunnah and the Jamia’zh say that
we see that there is Hajj with the Amirs, wither they are
rightesous or wicked, and the same with establishing
Jihad with the Amir, even if he is a Fisiq, and they
participale in Jitad with the Amir that docs not perform
the congregational prayer with them; even if he,
instead, performs it in his house.

Regarding The Manhaj (Method) ..-

And also, from Wa’il bin Huje, he said
AlJu’fi asked the Messenger of Allah 3%, saying: ‘O
Prophet of Allah, tell me, if the ‏موسيم‎ start demanding
their rights from us, while they are denying us our rights,
what do you command us?” He replied: “Listen and obey,
for whatever they do, it is only upon them, and whatever
you do, it is upon you.” Tt was reported by Mustim.!

‘And in the Hadith of ‘Ubadah bin As-Samit, may Allah be
pleased with him, he said: “We pledged to the Messenger
of Allah # to hear and obey, in difficulty and in ease, in
what we like and what we hate, and that we will not
contend for authority with its people. He said: “Except if
you see him committing a clear and undeniable disbelief,
for which you have an evidence from Allah”!

Consequently, if we oppose obeying them, we will have
broken the rule of obedience, for which would lead to
horrible events and devastating, calamities.

Concerning the matters that those m authority may
commit, for which there are some interpretational
variations and disagreement among the scholars, we
it is not lawful for us to stand against them nor oppose
them, Rather, it is obligatory for us to counsel them as
much as we are able in whatever they have done that ts
wrong; in matters that do not involve Ijthad. But as for
matters involving [jtihad, then we discuss them with
them, with proper respect, so that we can explain the
truth to them; not in the manner of just following
behind them and personal support. As for taking a
stance against them and opposing, them, this is not the
way of the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah.

‎Reported by Muslim (1846)‏ آنا
‎PL Reported by Al-Bukhari (7056) and Muslin (1709).‏

‎480 Commentary on AL'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎the Sunnah and the Jamd’ah consider it valid to observe the

‎Friday Prayer behind the Imm who is an innovator, as long

‎as his innovation does not reach level of disbelief. This is

‎because they believe that to oppose him in these matters is
evil. However, it does not befit the Amir who acts as an

‎Imam for people in the Friday Prayer to commit such evils.

‎Similarly, they perform the ‘Id prayers with the Amirs who

‎jead them im the prayer, whether they are righteous or

‎wicked.

‎* With this peaceful methodology, it becomes clear that
the religion of Islam is balanced, between exaggeration
and negligence.

‎4 Someone might ask: “Why do we have to pray behind
these people and follow them in the Fiajj rites, Jihad, the
Friday Prayer, and the ‘Id prayer?”

‎So we say that is because they are our 17714715, we worship

‎Allah by listening to them and obeying them, following the

‎command of Allah in His statement:

‎€O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the

‎Messenger, and those of you (Muslirits) who are in
authority.» (An-Nisa’ 4:59)

‎And the command of the Prophet #; in his saying: “You will
see preference, and matiers that you ohject to atter me” They
said: “What do you order us, O Messenger of Allah?” He
replied: “Give them their right, and ask Allah for your right.”
It was reported by Muslim. 11 Their right is to obey them, so
long as it is not an act of disobedience to Allah.

‎“Reported by A-Bukhiri (7052) and Muslim (1843), from
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ud, may Allah be pleased with him.

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)...

And they worship (Allah) through counseling the
Ummah...

A 4-

> Conceming his statement: “And they worship (Allah)
through counseling the Uminah.””

» “They worslip” meaning, they worship Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, by counseling the Ummah and
believe that to be part of the religion.

* Counseling the Ummah; can be from other than
worshipping Allah. It can be out of Ghairah (a sense of
honor), or the fear of punishment, or it can be done out of
an mterest attaining virtuous characteristics that will
benefit the Muslims... or other than that among reasons.

@ But these people the Ummah in obedience to Allah,
Exalted is He, and to worship I lim, in accordance with
the saying of the Messenger of Allah #4 in the Hadith of
Tamim bin Aws Ad-Dari: “The religion is Nasiliah
(sincere advice). The religion is Nasihah (sincere
advice).” They said: “To whom, 0 the Messenger of
Allah?” He said: “To Allah, to His Book, to His
Messenger, to the Imims of the Muslims, and Lhe
Muslims in general.""!

— Nasihah to Allah is by sincerely seeking to draw nearer to

Him.

— Nasitiah to the Messenger #4 is by sincerely following

11 Reported by Muslim (55).

482 Commentary on Al-'Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

* Concerning his statement: “And they maintain the
congregations.”

له قعل ‎That is, the People of the Sunnah and the‏ ؟
‎maintain the congregations, meaning, they observe the‏
‎congregational prayers during the five daily prayers‏
‎They maintain them completely, such that when they‏
‎hear the call; they rsepond, and they pray with the‏
‎Muslims. So whoever docs not maintain the five daily‏
‎prayers, this quality of the People of the Sunnah is‏
‎missing from him, to the extent that he is missing from‏
‎these congregations.‏

It is possible to include a consensus of opinion, without
disagreement, in the meaning of Al-Jamd’é!, Because
this is what the Prophel 3% instructed Muadh bin Jabal
and AbG Musa with when he sent them to Yemen. He
said: “Make things easy and do not make things
difficult; give people glad tidings, do not cause them to
flee; and agree between yourselves and do not

disagree.” Reported by Al-Bukhari.!"]

1) Reported by Al-Bukhari (4341, 4342) and Muslim (1733)
from Abu Masa Al-Ash‘ari, may Allah be pleased with him.

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 485

~The saying of the author: “To the Urmalh’’ includes the
Imams and the peuple in general. So the People of the
Sunnah and the Jamd‘ah worship Allah with giving
sincere advice to the Ummialt, the Irntams and the people
in general.

And among the things which the Messenger # took the

pledge from the Companions for, is: “And to give counsel

to every Muslim."

+ If someone says: “What is the scale by which giving
sincere advice to the Ummah is weighed?”

Then the scale is what the Prophet #§ indicated in his

saying: “None of you believes until he loves for his brother

what he loves for himself”) If you deal with people in

this way, this will be the perfect Nasihah.

Sa before you deal with your companion in a particular
manner, think to yourself, would you be pleased if
someone were to deal with you in that manner? If you
will not be pleased, then do not deal with him in that
manner!

111 Reported by Al-Bukhari (57) and Muslim (56), from Jarir bin
‘Abdullah, may Allah be pleased with him.

2) Reported by Al-Bukhari (13) and Muslim (45), from Anas bin
Malik, may Allah be pleased with him

484 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah ALWasitiyyalt

and obeying him. That demands defending, the religion of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, which His Messenger #%
came with. That is why he said: “and to His Book’

— Nasihah to the Qur’4n is by clarifying that it is the speech
of Allah; that it is revelation from Allah, and not created,
and that it is obligatory to believe in it and adhere to its
rulings. This is what one must believe in his soul.

— The fmams of the Muslims refers to anyone who Allah
has given authority over any of the affairs of the Muslims;
so he is the Imam the leader in that affair. So there is an
general Imam, like the head of the country, and there is a
specific Imam such as a governor, a minister, a director, a
president, and the 170075 of the Masjids, and others.

— The Muslims in general, meaning the masses of the
Muslims, they are the followers of the Jams.

— The greatest of the fdms of the Muslims are the
scholars. The sincere advice to the scholars is to spread the
good they do, refrain from mentioning their shortcomings,
and to have sincere concern that they are correct, such that
they are directed with they are mistaken, and mistakes are
clarified to them in a way that will not disgrace their
nobilily nor erode their importance. This is because if the
errors of the scholars are corrected in a way that will
discredit their honor, Islam in general will be hanned. This
is because if the masses of people see the scholars accusing
one another of having strayed, their (position) will be
lowered before them. They will say: “All of these people
are either refuting or being refuted; we do not know who is
Tight!” So they will not accept any of their views. But if the
scholars respect one another each guiding his brother in
secret when he errs, while publicly explaining the correct
view to the people, this is one of the greatest means of
sincerely counseling the scholars of the Muslims.

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 487

are interlaced, one strengthens the other. So, a believer to
another believer is like a building, one supporting the
other. A building supports and strengthens itself. The same
for the believer with his brother; when there is some
weakness in him, he completes him. He is the mirror of his
brother; whenever he finds an error in him, he mends him.
If he is in need, he aids him. When his brother becomes ill,
he pays him a visit... and it like that in all situations.

The People of the Suna and the Jama’ah believe this
meaning, and put it into practice in their actions.

* Conceming his statement: “And his saying a: “The

similitude of the belicuers in their love, mercy, and their

empathy, is as the similitude of the body. If one of its limbs

suffers, the rest of the body will show its support with fever and

sleeplessness!”

& “And his saying” here is joined to his saying in the
earlier Hadith.

> “The similitude of the believers in their love :*' That is, they
have love for one another.

“mercy.” That is, they are merciful to one another.

> “empathy: That is, they have an understanding
towards and feelings for one another.

“ “Ts as the similitude of a single body: Meaning that, they
share feelings and pains. They are merciful to one
another. When he is in need, he alleviates his need. One
treats the other with leniency, kindness and the like.
One shows love to the other, so much that if anyone of
them feels some hatred against any of his brethren in
Islam, he tries to efface it and mention his merits and

Al-Bukhari )6011( and Muslim (2587), from Nu‘man bin
Bastur, may Allah be pleased with him.

Commentary on AL‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyal

They believe the meaning of his saying #: ‘The believer to
another believer is like a firmly constructed building, part
of it supports the other.” And he inierlaced his fingers.
And his saying #8: ‘The similitude of the believers in their
love, mercy another, and their empathy, is as the
similitude of the body. If one of its limbs suffers, the rest
of the body will show its support with fever and
sleeplessness .””

% Concerning his saying: “They believe the meaning of
his saying 3: “The believer to another believer is like a
firmly constructed building, part of it supports the

other.” And he interlaced his fingers.)

The Prophet likened the relationship of a believer to
his believing brother to a building in which one part
supports the other part, such that it becomes a cohesive
and solid struclure, each part strengthening the other.
Then, to make it much clearer and to emphasize it, he
interlaced his fingers.

The separated fingers are weak on their own, but once they

{1 AlBukhari (6026) and Muslin (2585), from Aba Masa Al-
Ash‘an, may Allah be pleased with him.

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 489

éAnd 1 free not myself (from the blame). Verily, the
(iuman) self is inclined to evil» (Yasuf 12:53)

So they even command themselves.

“patience during the trial :” Patience is to bear the trial,
and to restrain the soul from anger, with the heart, the
tongue or with the limbs.

The trial refers to the affliction. Allah, Exalted is He, says:

¢And certainly, We shall test you with something of
fear, hunger, loss of wealth, lives and fruits, but give
glad tidings to Ag-Sabirin (the patient ones. etc.). Who,
when afficted with calamity, say: Truly! To Allah we
belong and truly, to Him we shall return.» (AL
Bagaralt 2:155-156)

Patience is at the time of the trial, and the highest and best
patience is at the first stroke of the calamity. This is the real
patience, as the Prophet ‏وه‎ said to a woman he passed
while she was wailing besides a grave, he said to her:
“Have Tava of Allah, and be patient.” She said: “Go away
from me! You have not suffered the affliction [ suffered,
and you do not understand it.” So she was told that it that
was the Prophet #4. So, she went to the house of the
Prophet #%. When she got there, she did not find any gate-
keeper by the door (so she entered), and said (to the
Prophet 38): “I did not know it was you.” He said:
“Patience is only at the first stroke (of the calamity).

111 Reported by Al-Bukhari (1283) and Muslim (926), from Anas
bin Malik, may Allah be pleased with him.

i

488 Commentary on Al-Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

vistues with which these feelings of hatred can be
removed.
So one limb of the body complains, even if it be the smallest
of the limbs, the others show their concern for it. If your
little finger - which is the smallest limb - brings you some
discomfort, all parts of the body will feel pain. If your ear
suffers some pain, the whole body experiences discomfort.
If your eye is ailing, the entire body wil! share the ‏...كلهم‎
‎and other such examples.
This similitude which the Prophet ‏ويه‎ drew is a similitude
that will enable one to have a good grasp of the meaning,
and it makes the meaning clearer in the best manner.

They command patience during the trial, and gratitude
during the time of comfort, and pleasure with the
bitterness of Al-Qada’ (the Decree)... 7

% Concerning his statement: “They command patience
during the trial, and gratitude during the time of comfort,
and pleasure with the bitterness of the Decree.”

“They command: It could be said that statement
includes ordering oneself, based on His statement,
Exalted be He:

د

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 491

Scholars have differed about that, Some of them say that
patience with the trial is more difficult, while the others
said that gratitude during comfort is more difficult.

What is correct position is that each of them has its own
danger and difficulty, for Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
says:

And if We give man a taste of mercy from Us, and
then withdraw it from him, verily! He is despairing,
ungrateful. But if We let him taste good (favor) after
evil (poverty and harm) has touched him, he is sure to
say; “Hls have departed from me.” Surely, he is
exultant, and boastful (ungrateful to Allah)» (Had
11:9-10)

However, each of the two can be lightened by some
reflection. For example, if the one afflicted with a trial
reflects and says: “My worries cannot prevent the affliction
nor take remove it. So I should either be honorably patient
or forget about it like a beast.” With this, patience will
become easy for him; similar is the one in the state of
comfort and ease.

In any case, the People of the Sunnah and the Jamd‘ah
command both this and. that: patience during the trial and
gratitude during the time of comfort.

@ “They command ;” That is, the People of the Sunnah and
the Jama‘ah,

% “and pleasure with the bitterness of Al-Qaida’ (the Decree) “”
Pleasure is a higher level than patience. And the

490 Commentary on Ab’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

Bul as for the first stroke has passed, patience is easy;
perfect patience cannot be achieved at this point.

So, the People of the Sunnalt and the Jama‘alt command
patience during the trial, And there is no person, except
that he will be tried, whether in himself, his household,
his wealth, his companions, his town, or concerning the
Muslims in general, And that will either be in worldly
affairs or in the religion. The afflictions in religion arc
much worse than afflictions in worldly matters.

So the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah command
patience during the trial in two matters.

— As for patience with worldly trials, then it is to bear with
the affliction, as was explained earlier.

— As for patience with trials in religion, it is by his being
steadfast on his religion and that he should not allow
himself to be shaken from it, not being like those about
whom Allah says:

Of mankind are some who say: “We believe in Alldh,"”
but if they are made to suffer for the sake of Allah, they
consider the trial of mankind as Alldk’s punishment.»
(Al‘Ankabat 29:10)
And they command, that is, the People of the Simmah and
the Jami‘ah;

© “Gratitude during the time of comfort :” Comfort, that is,
ease of livelihood and security in their living area; so
they encourage gratitude with that.

Which of these two is more difficult: Patience with the
‏لقتعا‎ or gratitude with comfort?

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 493
me!” or he supplicates for destruction for himself, and
other such acts which indicate displeasure. The Prophet ‏يل‎
‎said: “He is not of us he who tears the clothes, slaps his
thighs and cries the cries of Al-Jaitiliyyah.”")

Second; patience, in that he restrains himself, with the
heart, tongue and limbs, from showing anger. This is
obligatory.

Third; pleasure, the difference between it and patience is
that the one who is patient feels the bitterness, but he is
prevented from showing any anger. However, this afflic-
tion is difficult and bitter upon his soul, so he abides by the
saying of the poet:

Patience, like its name, is bitter lo laste

But sweeter than honey are its consequences.
But the one who is pleased, he does not taste this bitterness,
rather he is in a state of tranquility, He is rather calm, and it
is as if this thing that struck him is nothing.
The majority of the scholars support the opinion that to
show pleasure with what is decreed recommended. It is the
position supported by Shaikh Al-Isldm, Ton Taymiyyah and
thal is the correct position.
Fourth; gratitude, il is to express the statement: Al
Hamdulillah (All praise is due to Allah) with his tongue
and his behavior. He considers this calamity as a blessing,

+ But someone might as about this state: “How can this
be?” We say: This occurs for whomever Allah, Exalted
is He, grants success.

Firstly: Because when he knows that this affliction is
expiation for sins, and that the punishment for a sin in this

11 Reported by Al-Bukhari (1298) and Muslim (103), from
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ad, may Allah be pleased with him.

492 Commentary on Ab’Agiduh AL-Wasitiyyalt

pitterness of Al-Qada’ (the Decree) refers to the event
that does not suit the nature of man. That is why he
called it: “Bitterness.”

+ So, whenever ‏طقال‎ decrees an event that does not suit
the nature of man, making him suffer, that is termed
called the bitterness of Al-Qada’. It is neither sweet nor
gratifying: it is rather bitter. So they command being
pleased with the bitterness of Al-Qada’.

“% And you should know that we have two ways to look
at the bitterness of A-Qada’:

The first consideration: is regarding it being an action that
cecurs from Allah.

The second consideration: is regarding what it is done for.

In reference to it being an action from Allah then it is
obligatory for us to be pleased with it, and not raise
objection against our Lord for it, because this is part of the
completeness of being pleased with Allah as one’s Lord.

In reference to whom it is done to, it is Sunnah to be pleased
with it, and its obligatory to be patient with it.

‎So from the view that illness is was decreed by Allah,‏ د
‎then being pleased with it is obligatory. But with the‏
‎ailment itself, being pleased is Sunuah. As for being‏
‎patient with it, il is obligatory, while to show gratitude‏
‎for it is recommended.‏

‎That is why we say that those who suffer can
experience four conditions with respect to the affliction.
The first condition: Anger; the second: Patience; the
third: Pleasure, and the fourth: Gratitude.

‎As for anger; that is prohibited; rather, it is one of the major

‎sins. Examples of this are when he begins to slap his thighs,

‎or pull out his hair, or tear his clothes, or says; “Woe is

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 495°

be pleased with this in all situations; whether it is religious
decree or the universal decree, because it is the judgment of
Allah, Exalted is He, and it (being pleased with it) is part of
the completeness of being pleased with His Rububiyyah.

An example of a religious decree is His judgment that
something is obligatory, unlawful, and Jawful. From that, is
His statement, Exalted be He:

And your Lord has decreed that you worship none but
Him. (ALIsra’ 17:23)

— An example of the universal decree is His decree for
ease, hardship, being wealthy, poverty, righteousness and
corruption, and life and death. From that is His statement
in His saying, Exalted be He:

له الموت»4
‎Then when We decreed death for him (Sulaiman) .>‏
‎(Saba’ 34:14)‏
‎And another example of this is His saying, Exalted be He:‏
‎éAnd We decreed for the Children of Israel in the‏
‎Scripture, that indeed you would do mischief on the‏

earth twice and you will become tyrants and extremely
arrogant!» (Al-Isra’ 17:4)

The second meaning: The decreed actions and occur-
rences; which includes two categories:

First: The legislative decree. It is obligatory to be pleased
with it, accept if, do what is commanded, forsake what is

494 Commentary on Al‘Agidah ALWasitiyyah

worldly life is less severe than having, the punishment
delayed until the Hereafter; then this trial will become a
blessing for him for which he is grateful to Allah.
Secondly: That when he is patient with this affliction he
will be rewarded, according to His statement, Exalted be
He:

4Only those who are patient shall receive their rewards
in full, without reckoning.» (Az-Zumar 39:10)

So, he is grateful to Allah for this trial which earns him the
reward.

Thirdly: Patience is among the prestigious ranks in view of
those well familiar with good manners, it never results
except with its causes, so he is grateful to Allah for making
possible for him to achieve this rank.

It has been mentioned that a devout female worshiper
suffered some injury im one of her fingers, so she
expressed her gratitude to Allah. She was asked why
she did so; to which she said: “The sweetness of its
reward has caused me to forget the bitterness of its
patience.”

So, the People of the Sunnah and the famd‘ah, may Allah

have mercy upon them, command patience with the trial,

gratilude at the time of comfort, and pleasure with the
pitterness of Al-Qada’.

Completion:

AlQada’ ia generally used for two meanings:

‘The first of them: The judgment of Allah, Exalted is He,
which is His Decree and His Attribute. So it is obligatory to

Regarding The Manhaj (Method) 1 497

their wealth"! while he was commanding him to
collect the Zakah from the people of Yemen.

Akdlag is plural of Khulg (character) it is the intrinsic
nature of man, that is, his attributes and instincts. So
they invite man to make his hidden manners into the
most noble. So he loves generosity, courage, forbear-
ance and patience with the people and meeting people
with a cheerful face, an open heart, and a tranquil soul.
All of these ave among noble manners.

But as for Mahdsin Al-A‘mdl (good deeds), that has to
do with the limbs, and it includes acts done for worship
and acts done for other than worship. For example
buying, selling, and renting. They invite the people to
honesty and truthfulness in all actions. They also call
them fo stay away from lying and deception. If they
invite people to that, then them doing that themselves
is even more worthy.

Concerning his statement: “They believe the meaning
of his statement 2: ‘The most perfect of the believers in
faith is the best of them in character.’"7]

It is necessary that this Hadith is always planted right
before the believers eyes; for the most complete of the
believers in faith is the best of them in his character
with Allah and with the slaves of Allah.

As for the good character with Allah, that is to receive

Reported by Al-Bukhari (4347) and Muslim (19), from Ibn
“Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him.

Reported by Ahmad (2:250), At-Tirmidhi (2612), Abu
Dawud (4682) Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak (1:53), and Ibn
Hibban (2:227), from Abo Hurairah, may Allah be pleased
with him. The Hadith was graded Hasan by Al-Albani in As-
Sabihal (284).

496 Commentary on Al ‘Agidah Al-Wasifiyyal

prohibited, and enjoy the permissible.
The second type: The universal decree.

— Jf it is among the actions of Allah, such as poverty,
illness, drought, destruction and the like, it has been.
mentioned earlier that it is Sunnah, not obligatory, to be
pleased with it according to the correct view.

— If it is of man’s actions for which the five rulings are
applicable, then being pleased with what is obligatory, is
obligatory; and with what is desirable, is desirable, and
with what is allowed, is allowed, and with what is disliked
js disliked, and with what is unlawful, is unlawful.

They invite to Makarim Al-Akhlag (noble character) and
Mahdsin Al-A’mal (good deeds). They believe the meaning
of his statement ig: “The most perfect of the believers tn
faith is the best of them in charncter.”...

‎OO Se‏ لل

‎% Conceming his stalement: “They invite to Makarim Al
Akhlay (noble character} a

‎& “Makarim ALAkhlig’ That is, the purest of them. The
Karim of everything is its best, with respect to that
thing. An example of that is the saying of the
Messenger # to Muadh: “Beware of the Kard‘im of

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 499

those whose kinship you must maintain. When they
cut you off, you try to mend matters with them. Do not
say: “Whoever connects with me, I connect with him”
because this is a way of bonding, as the Prophet 2
said: “The one who connects the ties is not the one
reciprocates, but the one connects the ties is only the
one who when his tics of kinship are severed, he
connects them.’!"! So the one who connects ties, is the
one who connects them when his ties of kinship have
been severed.

A man asked the Prophet 3% and said: “O the Messenger of
Allah! 1 have some relatives that I maintain ties with, but
they sever ties with me; I do good to them but they do evil
to me; ‏ل‎ am lenient with them but they are harsh with me?”
The Prophet 3 said: “If you are as you say, it is like you are
feeding them hot ashes in their mouths. Allah will continue
to make you manifest over them as long as you are upon.
that.”

“Feeding them hot ashes in their mouths,” thal is, as if you
put hot sand or hot ashes into their mouth.

So, the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah recom-
mend that you connect the ties of the one who severed
you, and that you connect ties with the one who
connects ties with you is even more preferred; because
the one who connects ties with you and is also a
relative, has two rights upon you: The right of kinship,
and the right of reciprocation, according to the saying
of the Prophet #4: “Whoever does any good for you,

"Reported by Al-Bukhari (5991) from ‘Abdullah bin ‘Amr,
may Allah be pleased with him.

121 Reported by Muslim (2588) from Aba Hurairah, may Allah

be pleased with him

498 Commentary on AL-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyat

the commands of Allah with acceptance, submission, and
openness, without any boredom and annoyance, and to
receive His universal judgments with patience, pleasure
and the like.

— As for the excellence of character with the creatures, it is
said that it is generosity, refraining from harming others,
and having a cheerful face.

The act of showing generosity is not specific to wealth; it is
rather done with wealth, honor and one’s self. Generosity
can be shown with all these.

The opposite of having a cheerful face is frowning.

Similarly, refraining from harming others is that he should
not harm anyone, neither in word nor in action.

And they encourage that you connect (ties) with the one
whe severed (from) you, and that you give to the one who
deprived you, and that you pardon the one who wronged
you...

Concerning his statement: “And they encourage that you
connect (lies) with the one who severed (front) you, and that
you give to the one who deprived you, and that you pardon
the one who wronged you.”

% “And they encourage that you connect (fies) with the one
who severed (from) you :” Among the near relatives are

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)...

ek
4The good deed aud the evil deed cannot be equal. Repel
(the evil) with one which is better, then verily! He,
between whom and you there was enmity, (will become)
as though he was a close friend.» (Fussilat 41:34)

So pardoning, when one has the ability to punish the
offender, is one of the qualities of the People of the Sunnah
and the fama‘ah. However, this is with the condition that
the pardon be a means of reconciliation, for if the pardon
involves evil, they do not surely encourage that, for Allah
made a condition for pardon, He says:

4But whoever forgives and makes reconciliation.» (Ash-
Shira 42:40)

Meaning, that in pardoning him there is reconciliation. As
for the case where pardoning him involves evil, or it isa
cause for evil, then here we say do not pardon. For
example; pardoning the criminal, and his pardon will be a
means this criminal’s persistence in his crime. Here, to not
pardon is better. In a situation like this, to not pardon can.
be obligatory.

500 Comunentary on Al-‘Aqidah ALWasitiyyaht

reciprocate for him.”"

“And that you give to the one who deprived you.” That is,
the one who withheld from you, so you do not say: “He
withheld from me, so I will not give to him.”

“And that you pardon the one who wronged you :” That is;
one who encroached upon your right, cither by treating
you with aggression or by not giving you something
due to you.

& Zulm (wrong) revolves around two matters: Offence
and denial. Maybe he wrongs you by beating you.
unlawfully seizing your belongings or tarnishing your
reputation, or by denying you so he prevents you from
one of your rights.

Part of the perfection of a person is that he pardon the one
who wrongs him.

However, pardon is only in the case where one has the
power to avenge, so you pardon even though you have
the power to avenge yourself;

Firstly, in hope of eaming the forgiveness of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, and His mercy, because whoever
pardons and does good, his reward is due from Allah.
Secondly; to establish love between you and the one who
wronged you, because if you meet his wrong witha wrong,
wrong will persist between the two of you, but if you meet
his wrong with good in tum, he will also pay you back
with good, and he will be ashamed.

Allah, Exalted is He, sa

‎reference preceded.‏ وال لكا

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)...

¢And We have enjoined on man to be dutiful and kind
tn his parents. His mother bears him with hardship and
she brings him forth with hardship.» (Al-Ahgaf 46:15)

And in another Ayah:

4

4And We have enjoined on man to be good to his
parents. His mother bore hint in weakness and hardship,
upon weakness and hardship.» (Luqmnan 31:14)

The mother toils during pregnancy, and when she delivers,
and after the delivery. She shows the baby more mercy
than what his father shows him. That is why she is the most
entitled of all people to kindness and good company even
more than the father.

A man said: “O Messenger of Allah, who is the most
entitled of people to my good company?” He said: “Your
mother” He asked further: “Then who?” He replied: “Your
mother’ He further asked: “Then who?” He said: “Your
mother” Then, he said for the fourth time: “hen, your
father."

The father also toils for his children. He feels upset when
they are dissatisfied. He is happy when they are happy,
and he hurries to sustain that which will grant them
comfort, tranquility and a good life. He goes around the
desert and the wildemess in order to seek a livelihood for
himself and his children.

The father and nother both have a right. Whatever you do,

1) Reported by Al-Bukhari (5971) and Muslim (2548), from Abii
Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.

502 Commentary on AL’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

ماقف 2

‎Oya‏ يبر الوا

‎They command Birr (kindness) towards the parents...

‏سس م اج © ## ‎a‏

‎% Conceming his saying: “They command Birr (kindness)
towards the parents :” That is in reverence of their rights.

‎© Allah does not give anyone a right, following His right,
and the right of His Messenger, except the two parents.
He says:

‎Worship Allah and join none with Him in worship,
and do good to parents. (An-Nisa’ 4:36)

‎The right of the Messenger is included in the command to
worship ‘Allah, because worship will not be rightly
performed, until the rights of the Messenger 2 are
maintained; by loving him, and following his way. That
is why it falls under His saying:

‎Worship Allah and join none with Him in worship>.

‎How will Allah be worshipped, without following the path
of the Messenger #7!

‎When Allah is worshipped according to the way of the
Messenger, then His rights have been fulfilled.

‎Then, following that, is the right of the parents; the parents,
particularly the mother, toil for their children. Allah,
Exalted is He, says:

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 505

ALBirr is to bring about good according to your ability, and
to restrain any evil.

It is to bring about good though wealth, to bring about
good by service, to bring about good by making them
happy with a cheerful face and polite speech and manners,
and with everything that will lead to their comfort.

4 Based upon this, the preferred view is that it is
obligatory for children to render services to the father
and mother so long as that does not cause the child any
detriment. If that will cause any detriment, it is not
obligatory upon him to serve them, except in out of
necessity.

And based upon this we say that obeying them is
obligatory in whatever benefits them and does not cause
the children any harm, as for what causes a harm to them,
whether it is a religious harm, like ordering him to leave an
obligation, or to do what is unlawful, then there is no
obedience to them in that, Or in the case of a worldly harm,
then it is not obligatory for him to obey them in that. As for
wealth, then it is obligatory for him to help them with that,
even if it is a lot, when that does not cause harm for him,
and needs do not depend on it. The father, specifically, has
the right to take whatever he wants from the money of his
child, as long as that does not cause him any harm.

“If we consider the case of people today, we find that
many of them are not kind to their parents; they are,
rather, disobedient to them. You find that he is to with
his friends, and will not be fed up with sitting with
them. But if he sits with either his father or mother just
for a while daring the day, you see him being fed up, as
if he is sitting on hot coals. This is not a kind child. The
one who is kind to his parents is he who opens his
heart to his father and mother, serves them dutifully,

504 Commentary on AL“Agidah ALWasitiyyalt

you cannot pay back their rights, which is why, Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime, sa’

And say: “My Lord! Bestow on them Your Mercy as
they did bring me up when 1 was small. (Al-lsra’
17:24)

Their right has abided since they lovingly raised you when
you were small, when you could not benefit nor harm
yourself; so being kind to them is obligatory.

% According to the Ijma’ (consensus) Al-Birr is Fard ‘Ain
upon every single person. ‘That is why the Prophet i
gave il preference over jihad in the Cause of Allah, as in
the Hadith of Ibn Mas‘ud. He said: “I said: ‘O the
Messenger of Allah, which deed is the most beloved to
Allah?’ He said: ‘Saidh at its time.’ I said: ‘Then, what?’
He said: ‘Birr with the parents.’ Then, I said: ‘Then,
what?’ He said: ‘Jihad in the Cause of Allah.’”"

The parents are the father and the mother, As for the
grandfather and the grandmother, they deserve Bitr
(good treatment), but not equal to that of the Birr for
the mother and the father. Because the grandfather and
grandmother do not endure the toil, rearing and special
care, like the father and the mother. So Birr (kindness)
to them is obligatory as a kind of connecting the ties of
kinship, but they are the most entitled to rights of
kinship among other relatives. But as for the Birr, it is
for the mother and the father.

% But, what is the meaning of Al-Birr?

ال١‎ Reported by Al-Bukhari (5970) and Muslim (85), from
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ad, may Allah be pleased with him.

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 507

kinship is that it not be severed. That is why it is said

concerning the one who forsakes Birr, that he is a ‘Ag (a

hinderer), while it is said about the one who does not

maintain the tie of kinship that he is a Qati’ (a severer).

% So to connecting the ties of kinship is obligatory, while
its severance is a cause of a curse, and a barrier from
entering Paradise. Allah, Exalted is He, says:

<Would you then, if you were given the authority, do
mischief in the land, and sever your lies of kinship?
Such are they whom Allah has cursed, so that He has
made them deaf and blinded their sight.» (Muhammad
47-22-23)

And the Prophet # said: “The severer will not enter the

Paradise.”"]

That is; the severer of the tie of kinship.

Maintaining the ties of kinship is mentioned in a
general manner in the Qur’dn, and the Sunnah.

And everything that is related without any restriction,

In the legislation such as what is protected, it is to be

defined by the custom.”!

Based on this, the matter returns to the custom regarding it.
So what people regard as connecting the ties of kinship,

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (6984) and Muslim (2556), from‏ أن
‎Jubair bin Mut‘im, may Allah be pleased with him.‏
‎mah (poem) of the Shaikt, may Allah have‏
‎mercy upon him, on Usi! Al-Figh, see AL-Hikmalt magazine,‏
‎nol.‏

‎506 Commentary on Al'Agiiah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎and has the utmost determination to pleased them as
muuch as he is able.

‎As the average people say: “Al-Birr is a loan” because, even
though, the one who is kind to his parents will ear
tremendous reward in the Hereafter, he will be recom-
pensed for it in this world. Both kindness to the parents
and their disobedience, as the average people say, are loans
to be paid back. If you invest kindness, your children will
treat you with kindness and care, and if you invest
disobedience, your child will disobey you.

‎There are numerous stories here concerning people who
enjoy the kind treatment of their children because they also
treated their parents with kindness; likewise regarding
disobedience, there are stories indicating that a person’s
children disobey him just as he disobeyed his parents.

‎So, the People of the Sinah and the Jama’ah command Birr
(kindness) to the parents.

‎And in the like manner they command: “Cannecting ties
of kinship.”

‎He differentiated between the two parents and other
relations; the other relatives have the right of bond while
the parents have the right of Birr, because Birr is more
involves more goodness and kindness, while the bond of

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 509

neighbor with the neighbors. The neighbors are those
who live near one’s home; the closest of them are those
deserving of the most honor:

Allah, Exalted is He, says:

And do good to parents, kinsfolk, orphans, AL

Masakin (the poor). the neighbor who is near of kin, the
neighbor who is a stranger.» (An-Nisa’ 4:36)

Allah instructs doing good to the neighbor who is near and
the neighbor who is far.

And the Prophet #i§ said: “Whoever believes in Allah and the
Last Day; then let him honor his neighbor “0!

116 also said: “Whenever you cook broth, increase its water,
and provide some of it to your neighbors.”

He also said: “Jibril persisted instructing me conceming the
neighbor, such that I thought he would give him a right of
inheritance.”7!

He also said: “By Allah, he does not believe! By Allah, he
does not believe! By Allah, he does not believe!” It was
said: “Who, O Messenger of Allah?” He said: “The one
whose neighbor is not safe from his harm.”"!

‘And there are other texts proving the need to take care of
the neighbor, treating him well, and honoring him

11 Reported by Al Bukhari (6135) and Muslim (48), from Aba
Shuraih Al-Khuza‘i, may Allah be pleased with him.
Reported by Al-Bukhati (6014) and Muslim (2624), fram
*Aishah, may Allah be pleased with her.

Reported by Al-Bukhari (6016) from Aba Shuraih Al
Khuza‘i, may Allah be pleased with him

508 Commentary on AL’Agidah ALWasifiyyah

then it is connecting the ties of kinship; and whatever they
consider severing the ties of kinship, then it is severing the
ties of kinship. This will differ based upon the different
situations, times, places and nations.

— If people are ina state of poverty, while you are affluent,
and your relatives are poor, then connecting the ties of
kinship will mean that you give to them according to your
ability. 1

— But if people are all wealthy, all of them are in a good
state, the perhaps visiting your relatives in the moming
and evening counts as connecting the Hes of kinship.

+ In this time of ours, people do not properly respect the
practice of maintaining the ties of kinship for the reason
of people being engrossed in taking care of their needs
and the commitments people have with one another.
And the complete bond is that you enquire about their
conditions, how are their children, and what problems
they have. But unfortunately, these practices are
missing in society just as complete Birr is missing
among many people.

And being good to the neighbors...

Concerning his statement: “And being good to the
neighbors.””

+ That is, they command; meaning, the People of the
Sunnah and the Jama‘ah command being a good

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)...

And to do good fo the orphans, the poor mut the wayfarers
And kindness to the slazes.
— +

Concerning his statement: “And fo do good to the
orphans, the poor and the wayfarers

Likewise, they command, that is - the People of the
Sunnah and the Jama‘ai - doing good to these three
groups of people.
“ The orphan is the one whose father dies before he
enters puberty.
‘Allah has commanded us to do good to the orphans, and
likewise the Prophet # as he encouraged that in many of
his Hadsths.
The reason for that is that the orphan is disturbed with the
loss of his father, so he is in need of support and kindness.

Doing well ‏ما‎ the orphans is based upon on the situation.

‎Al-Macakin: they are the poor. Here, it includes the poor‏ ات
‎and the needy. To do good to them is an act which the‏
‎legislation has commanded in many Ayat of the‏

‎‘And from it is what is reported by Al-Bukhari (6005) (rom
Sahl bin Sa’d, may Allah be pleased wilh him, who said:
“The sponsor of the orphan and J will be in Paradise like
this” and he said: “like the first finger and the middle
finger.”

‎510 Comunentary on Al-‘Agidal Al-Wasit

‎If the neighbor is a Muslim relative, he has three rights:
The right of Islam, the right of kinship, and the right of
the neighbor.

‎If he is a relative and a neighbor, he has two rights: The
right of kinship, and the right of the neighbor.

‎If he is a Muslim non-relative and is a neighbor, he has two
rights: The right of Islam and the tight of the neighbor.

‎If he is a neighbor, a disbeliever, and a non-relative, he has
only one right, and that is the right of the neighbor.

‎~ The People of the Sunnah and the Jamd‘ah command
being good to the neighbors in general, whatever kind
of neighbor he may have; but the one who is the closest
has more right.

‎Unfortunately today, some people cause harm to their
neighbors and treat them worse than other than them.
You may find him infringing on the rights of his
neighbor, and inconveniencing him.

‎‘The scholars of Figh — may Allah have mercy on them —

‎have mentioned some rulings related to neighbors in the
latter part of the topic of “Reconciliation,” so refer to it

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 513

But we are saying it is compulsory whether in villages or in
cities, except if there is a reason (making that impossible);
such as having a small home, or any other reasons making
it impossible for you to accommodate this man. However,
whatever the case may be, if that is difficult, you should
politely respond to his request.
+ Concerning his statement: “And kindness tu the slaves.””
That is, the People of the Sunnah and the Jamd’ah
command kindness to the slaves.

+ This includes the people and animals that are owned.

— Kindness to slaves among humans is feeding him when
you eat, clothmg him when you clothe yourself, and that
you should not charge him to do any task except what he
can do.

— Kindness to the owned animals, whether that which you
Tide, or what milk, or what you possess, depends on what
they need. During the winter, they should be kept in warm
places if they cannot withstand the cold weather, and
during the summer, in the cool places if they cannot
withstand the hot weather. They should be given food and
drink if they cannot obtain it themselves by grazing. If they
are the pack animals, they should not be burdened with
more than what they can carry.

This shows the perfection of the Shart‘ah, for it docs not
forget anything, even the animals, It also shows the
perfection of the methodology of the People of the Sunnah
and the Jamd’ah.

512 Commentary on Al-Agidah Al-Wisitiyyalt

Qur'an, and it gives them special rights in the Fai!
and the like.

The reason why there is a need to do well to them is
because poverty might have weakened them and broken
their hearts. So from the good manners of Islam is that we
do good to them in order to support them against what
happens to them of the loss and breakdown.

Doing good to poor Muslims is in accord with the situation:
If he needs food, to give hi food will be regarded as doing
good to him. If he needs to be clothed, clothing him will be
regarded as doing good for him. By giving him recognition,
you respect him and give him regards. If he enters a
gathering, you should warmly welcome him and accord
him respect, so that you can remove his shyness.

So with this deficiency, which Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, has decreed upon them based on His wisdom, He,
the Mighty and Sublime, commands us to do good to them.

‎And like that, the wayfarer; he is the traveler. Here, he‏ ؟
‎is the traveler who becomes stranded or is not‏
‎stranded, unlike the matter concerning Zakah. This is‏
‎because a traveler is a stranger and a stranger is usually‏
‎lonely (without anybody), so if you interact with him‏
‎by honoring him and doing good to him, this is what‏
‎the Shari‘ah commands.‏

‎So if a wayfarer comes to you as a guest, to treat him well
as a guest is considered honoring him. However, some
scholars say that to honor him by treating him as a guest is
not obligatory except in villages rather than cities!

‎111 Translation note: Meaning; spoils of war, and it differs from
Ghanimah in that Far’ is what is taken without actual fighting:
while it is often used to mean Ghunimah.

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 515

The People of the Swiah and the Jama‘ah forbid this and
say: Be humble in your speech and your actions, such that
in your sayings; you will not praise yourself by mentioning
your commendable qualities unless the situation demands
that; such as Ibn Mas‘id, may Allah be pleased with him,
said: “If I knew of anyone who is more knowledgeable than
me concerning the Book of Allah, and who can be reached
by a riding camel, I would ride to him.) He, may Allah
be pleased with him, intended two things with that:

Firstly: To encourage people to leam the Book of Allah,
Exalted be He.

Secondly: His invitation to them to take knowledge from
him.

‘The one who possesses praiseworthy characters should not
think these praiseworthy manners are ever hidden from
people, whether he mentions them or not. On the other
hand, if somebody begins to mention his praiseworthy
manners before people, he becomes less in their eyes. So,
beware of this practice!

% ‘Tyranny: That is transgressing against another, and it
can occur in three things which the Messenger ‏كه‎
‎explained in his saying: “Your blood, wealth, and
honor are unlawful to one another.”@! So, tyranny
against the creation can occur with respect to wealth,
blood and honor.

— In wealth; for example claiming what does not belong to
him, or to deny what is due from him, or to take what does
not belong to him. This is tyranny with regard to wealth.

1 Reported by Muslim (2463)
Pl Reported by Al-Bukhar! (1739) from the Hadith of Ibn
‘abbas, and Muslim (1679) from the Hadith of Aba Bakrah.

Commentary on Al-’Agidalt Al-Wasitiyyah

% Concerning his saying: “They prohibit boasting, arro-
gance, tyranny and disdain against people, whether justly
or unjustly.”

+ Boasting by words, arrogance by actions, and tyranny
by transgression, and disdain is exalting oneself over
another, and a showing a sense of superiority.

‘They prohibit boasting; that a person boast over another,
saying: “I am the scholar! I am the rich person! [ am brave
person!” If he adds to that, and begins to show disdain to
the others, saying: “Who are you compared to me?” This
will be considered an act of disdain against the creation.

Arrogance is done with actions, he walks arrogantly,
exhibits arrogance with his face, in the manner he raises his
head and his neck while he walks, as if he is reaching the
sky. Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, teprehends this
practice. He said:

ne

re
And walk not on the earth with conceit and arrogance.
Verily, you can neither rend nor penetrate the earth,
nor can you attain a stature like the mountains in
height.» (Al-Isra’ 17:37)

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 517

have mercy upon them, prohibit disdain and behaving as if
one is superior over people, whether that is done rightfully
or wrongfully.

a, een

They command Ma‘dli Al-Akhlag (lofty characteristics),
and they prohibit the base among them. Everything that
they say or do, from this, and other than tt, they are in it,
indeed following the Book and the Sunnah ; and their path
is the religion of Islam, with which Allah sent Muhammad

* Concerning his statement: “They command Ma‘ali Al-
Akhidg (lofty characteristics).”

That refers to those (characteristics) that are the lofty

among them, such as being truthful, virtuousness, fulfilling

trusts, and the like.

& “And they also prohibit the base among them.” That is, the
appalling among them, such as the act lying, deception,
lewd behavior, and the like.

Concerning his statement: “Everything that they say or
do, from this, and other than if, they are in it, indeed
following the Book and the Sunnalt; and their path is the

516 Commentary on Al’Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

— In cases of bload, by killing and what is less than it. He
transgresses against another person by injuring him or
killing him.

— Inhonor, it implies that what is the meaning of honor is
the reputation; it is transgressed against by backbiting,
which tarnishes his reputation. It is also possible that what
is intended by it is Zind or the like. Whatever it is of them, it
is prohibited. So the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah
forbid transgression concerning their wealth, blood and,
honor.

~ Likewise, disdain with creatures; that is behaving as if
one is superior to them, rightfully or not.

‘the People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ch prohibit treating
people as if one is superior to them; whether rightfully or
wrongfully, and that is when a person behave as if he is
better than another.

The reality is that part of you being grateful for the favors
that Allah has given you, when Allah has favored you with
virtues over others, from wealth, or position, or rank, or
knowledge, or other than that; then it is necessary that you
become more humble, adding goodness to goodness;
because the one who humbles himself with an exalted
subject, he is the truly humble person.

* The meaning of his word “Rightfully”’ that is; even if he
has a right to show that he is exalted and important: yet
with this, the People of the Suinalt and the Jamd‘ak
forbid him from showing disdain and superiority.

Or it could be said that the meaning of his saying: “Disdairt

tightfilly’ is that his disdain is based upon a right; such as

when somebody transgresses against him, so he trans-
presses against in more.

So, the People of the Sunvah and the Jamd’ah, may Allah

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)...

But, hecause of what the Prophet i said, that his Linmah
will divide into seventy-three sects, all of them in the Fire
except one; and that is the Jamd’ah. And ina Hadith from
him, that he said: “They are those who are upon the like of
what I and my Companions are upon today." Ht,
therefore, becomes such that those whe cling to the pure
Islam, free from any distortion, they are the People of the
Sunnah and the Jama‘ah.

a OY

Concerning his saying; “But, because of what the Prophet
3% said, that his Ummah will divide info seventy-three sects.
all of them in the Fire except one; and that is the
‏ل" بزو تقيوجو[‎

111 Its reference preceded in the first volume.
(21

Reported by Ahmad (4:102), Abu Dawid (1597), Ibn Majah
(2:479), Ibn Abi ‘Asim in As-Surmah (1:33), Al-Ajurri in Ash-
Shariah (18), Al-Lalaka’i in Sharh As-Sunnah (150), Al-Hakirn
in Al-Mustadrak (1:128) from the Hadith of Mu‘awiyah bin
Abi Sufyan, may Allah be pleased with him. After stating the
Hadith of Mu’awiyah, Shaikh AL-tslém Ibn Taymiyyah said:
“This is a Malifiiz (preserved) Hadith, from the narration of
Safwan bin ‘Amr, and from Al-Azhar bin ‘Abdullah Al-
Hazazi, and from Abi ‘Amir ‘Abdullah bin Luhay, from

Commentary on Al-’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

religion of Islam, with which Allah sent Muhammad 28.”

“Everything that they say:” Meaning, the People of the
Synnah and the Jama‘ah.

“And do” trom this and other than this.

“they are in it, indeed following the Book and the Sunnah:
This is a situation which should be noted carefully and
that is, whatever we say or whatever we do, at the time
we say or do it, we should bear it in mind that we are
following the Messenger #%, accompanied with the
sincerity for Allah, so that all of our actions and
statements can be regarded as acts of worship for
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. That is why it is
usually said: “The acts or worship of the heedless ones
are customs, while the customs of the heedful ones are
acts of worship.”

So, it is possible that a fortunate Muslim converts
customary practices into acts of worship, while a heedless
person makes his acts of worship mere customary
practices.

As such, every believer should be cager to make it such that
all of his statements and actions are in following the Book
of Allah and the Stinmah of His Messenger 3; so that he can
earn the reward of that, altain perfection of faith, and
repent to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 521

And what is more worthy is that it be said that these
groups are not known to us, but we say that without doubt,
they are the groups that left the straight path. Some of them
stray far away while some of them moderately stray away;
while some others are just some inches behind the bounds
of the straight path. We do not try to restrict their number,
because some straying groups that will associate them-
selves to the Ummah of Islam, other than those that have
been mentioned by the scholars, could still surface after-
wards, as is occurring. Sects attributing themselves to
Islam, other than those mentioned by the earlier scholars
during their times, have indeed been surfacing.

Whatever the case is, the Messenger % has said that his
Unminah - the Uninah of response - will divide into seventy-
three, all of them are astray and in the Fire except one.

% He said: “And that is the Jama‘ah:’ Meaning, the one

which gathers on the truth and does not separate
concerning it.
Concerning His saying: “And in a Hadith from hint, Hat
he said: ‘They are those who are upon the like of what I and
my Companions are upon today.) It, therefore, becomes
such that those who cling to the pure Islam, free from
any distortion, they are the People of the Sunnah and
the Jurdah,”

He said: “And in a Hadith from him, that he said: ‘They
are those who are upon the like of what I and my
Companions are upon today; Those who are upon
what the Messenger # and his Companions were
upon, they are the Jama‘ah (community), those who
gather on his Sharf‘ah. They are those who obey whal
Allah instructs, while saying:

11 Its reference preceded in the first volume.

520 Commentary on Al-‘Agidiah Al-Wisitiyyah

© “That his Ummah’’ Meaning, the Ummah of the
response, not eh Ummah of the call; because the Ummah
of the call includes the Jews and the Christians, and they
separated; so the Jews are seventy-one, and the Christians
are seventy-two sects. This Unmimah will divide into
seventy-three sects; all of them will be ascribe
themselves to Islam, and following of the Messenger
of Allah £2.

Concerning his statement: “All of them are in the Fire
except one: That does not necessarily mean perma-
nently in the Fire. It only means that the actions of these
straying sects are the actions that deserve entrance into
the Fire.

Do these seventy-three sects exist now, and is that
number complete, or are there more to be anticipated?

Most of those who have discussed this Hadith say that they
(the sects) exist and the number has been completed. They
divided ‘the people of innovation into five basic groups,
and these five basic groups separated into the sects until
they reached seventy-two, and left behind a group and that
is the People of the Sunnal and the famd‘ah,

Some other scholars say that the Messenger # did not
disclose these straying sects to us, so we do not have a need
to talk about this categorization of the various existing
innovating groups into five basic groups, then dividing
these basic groups into branches until the number is
complete. Such that we sometimes consider a branch an
independent sect, because of its opposition in one branch;
in which case this should not be considered a separate
group.

Mu’awiyah, more than one reported il from him’ See Iqtida
Ag-Sirdt (1:18) and Ay-Silsilak As-Sahihah by Al-Albant (204).

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)... 523

them. So when the truth is in the Madhhab of the Salaf, and
these people oppose them, it means that they are not the
People of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah in that.

Among them are the Siddiqun (the truthful), the Shuhada’
and the Sulitiin (the righteous)...

Concerning his statement: “‘Asiong them :” That is, among

the People of the Sunnah.

} The Siddiqi (the truthful)” It is plural of Siddig,
derived from As-Sidq (truthfulness), and this form
(Siddiq) expresses emphasis. He is the one who brought
truth and is believed, as He, Fxalted is He, says:

4S
And he who has brought the truth and believed in it;
those are Al-Muttagtin (the pious and righteous
persons). (Az-Zumar 39:33)

He is truthful in his intent, truthful in his statement, and
truthful in his action.

— As for him being truthful in his intention, he has
complete sincerity towards Allah, the Mighty and Sublime,
full obedience to the Messenger 4%. He has pure sincerity
and obedience; he does not associate any partner to Allah,
Exalted is He, in his actions and does not follow other than

522 Commentary on Al-‘Agidah Al-Wasitlyyah

Establish the religion, and make no divisions in it.»
(Ash-Shura 42:13)

They do not divide, they are rather one fama‘al:

% He said: “It, therefore, becomes such that those who cling to
the pure Islam, free from any distortion, they are the People
of the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah."

The sentence “‘It becomes...” is the response to what was
stipulated in his statement “But because of what.”

% So, if we are asked: “Who are the People of the Sunnah
and the Jamda‘ah?’’

We will answer saying: They are those who cling to the
pure Islam that is free from any distortion.

» This definition of Shaikh AL-Isiam Ibn Taymiyyah shows
that the Ash’ariyyali, the Maturidiyyah, and their like are
not among the People of the Sunah and the fama‘ah,
because they cling to distortions which they have
entered in it by innovation.

And this is correct; that the Ash’ariyyah and the Matur-
idiyyah are not counted among the People of the Sunnah
and the famda’ah because of their views concerning the
Names of Allah and His Attribules.

How could they be considered from the People of the
Sunnah and the Jumi‘al while they oppose the People of the
Sunnah and the Jamd‘ah?!

Because it is said: Either the truth is found ts the Madhhab
of these Ash‘ariyyah and the Mituridiyyah, or the truth is in
the Madhinb of the Salaf, And it is known that the truth is in
the Madhhab of the Salaf; because the Salaf here, they are the
Companions, the Tabi‘in, and the Imdms of guidance after

Regarding The Mans) Method).
he had indeed spoken the truth.’""! From that day on,
he was named As-Siddig (the truthful one). He is the
best of all the Siddigiti of this Unmah and the nations of
the other Messengers.

Conceming his statement: “And among them are the
Shuhada’.”

So, who are the Shuhada’?

_- It is said that they are the scholars because the scholar
bears witness to the Shari’ali of Aliah, and he bears witness
against the slaves of Allah that the truth was established for
them. That is why a scholar is considered a conveyor from
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, and His Messenger, of His
Shariah, which His Messenger, Muhammad 2 came with.
So, he will be a witness with the truth upon the creation.

— It is also said: The witnesses are the ones martyred in the
Cause of Allah. And what is correct is that the Ayah
includes this and that."!

+ Concerning his statement: “And among them are the
Salihiin (the righteous ones)’; the righteous is the
opposite of the corrupt. He is the one who fulfills the
rights of Allah and the rights of the creation. He is other
than the Muslik (the reformer, rectifier}. Reformation is
2 position that is higher than the position of right-
eousness. So, not every Silit (righteous) is a Musli (a

1 Reported by ALHakim in Al-Mustadrak (3:62) and he said it
was Ssahit, and Adh-Dhahabi agreed with him. In the
beginning ef the explanation of Sarat ‏,لام‎ Tbn Kathir
ascribed it to Al-Baihaqi. Sce As-Silsitah As-Sahihah by AY
Albani (306).

Translation note: It is apparent that the Shaikh means to
indicate An-Nisd’ 4:69) in which Allah mentions the
categories of people stated here by the author.

524 Commentary on AL‘Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

the Sunnah of the Messenger ‏قي‎ in his actions. He commits
neither Shirk nor innovation.

— He is truthful in his statement; not speaking except the
truth. It has been affirmed from the Prophet #%, that he
said: “Hold fast to truth, for the truth leads to goodness
and goodness leads to the Paradise. A man will not cease
speaking the truth, being concerned to with the truth, such
that he will be recorded with Allah as a Siddig””)

— He is truthful in his actions; meaning his actions do not
contradict his speech. He does what he says. With this, he is
far from resembling the hypocrites who say what they do
not do.

— Moreover, he is truthful with whatever is proven true by
the proof. He does not have the habit of refuting the truth,
nor belittling the creation.

* ‘That is why Aba Bakr was the first person to be called
As-Siddiq in this Ununah. That is because when the
Prophet #5 was taken on the night journey, and he
began to tell people that he was taken to the Bait Al-
Magdis, from where he ascended to the heavens, the
disbelievers began to laugh at him, belie him, and say:
“O Muhammad, how could you go'during one night,
and reach where you said you went in the heavens
within just a period of a night, while if we were going
to Ash-Sham (Greater Syria), it would take us a month
to go, and another month to return?!’ So they
continued belying the Messenger i. When they
reached Abi Bakr, they said: “Your friend is saying
so and sol” 116 (Aba Bakr) replied: “If he has said that,

11 Reported by Al-Bukhari (6094) and Muslim (2607) from
‘Abdullah bin Mas‘ad, may Allah be pleased with him.

526 Commentary on ‏اتمفتوة لف‎ Al-Wasitiyyah Regarding The Manhaj (Method). __ 52

reformer, rectifier) because there are among the Salihiin
those who are only concerned about themselves; they 7 0 ‏لاوط‎ eanin
are not concerned about others. The perfection of Salah Ad-Duja (Darkness); is plural ‏يد اه‎ m 5 3
(righteousness) is attained with ‏لقاو‎ (rectification, darkness. That is, they are the Jamps in the darkness,
reformation). people use them as lamps to see through the darkness,
and they tread their way under the beams of their
lights.
Concerning his statement: “yossessors of transmitted
merits and often-mentioned virtues . 1
“merits” Al-Mandgib ‏ها‎ plural of Maigibah, and it is a
yank, that is; that a person has reached, of honor and
Among them are the distinguished men of guidance, and nobility.
the lamps in darkness; possessors of transmitted ments, ‘As for “Virtues;” Al-Hada'tl is plural of Fagital it refers
and offen-mentioned vires... to a virtuous quality that a person possesses, such as
knowledge, worship, asceticism, generosity, and the
like. The virtues are steps leading up to being of good

‘The lamps; that is, what is used to generate light.

a

* Concerning his statement: “Among them are the distin-
guished men of guidance, and the lamps in darkness”

‎Al’Alam: (distinguished man) in the Arabic language,‏ ي

‎primarily means mountain. Allah, Exalted is He, says:

‎4And among His Signs are the ships, in the sea, like And among thent are ALAbdal, and among them are the
mountains.» (Ash-Shiiré 42:32) Imams of the religion, those whom the Musliins agreed
= ref upon their guidance and knowledge...

‎The mountain is referred to as ‘Alam (flag, banner,
distinguished mark, or personality) because it is used to
identify the path and know the way.

‎% And “The distinguished men of guidance :”’ Those whose Concerning his statement: “And among theme are AL-Abddl:”
direction the people follow, and by whom they are i Al-Abdal is plural of Badal, and they are those who
guided. They are the nurturing scholars, for they are distinguish themselves from others based on their knowl
the guides; they are also the Jamps in darkness. edge and worship. They are named called Abdal (sub-

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)...

Yo:

‘They are the aided group. Those about whom the Prophet
38 said: “There shall not cease to be group of my Ummah
upor the truth, being aided. They will not be harmed by
those who oppose them, nor those who forsake them, until
the Hour is established.”

Concerning his statement: “They are the aided group.”

Meaning, that the People of the Sunnah and the ‏تلم يمل‎
ate the aided group, which Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime, aids because they are included in His
statement, Exalted be He:
eg
4Verily, We will indeed make victorious Our
Messengers and those who believe in this world's life
and on the Day when the witnesses will stand forth.»
(Ghafir 40:51)
So they are the aided ones, and the end will be for them.
However, before the aid becomes manifest, there must be
aching experiences of sufferings, trials and Jihid, because
aid dictates that there are those aided, and those aided
against, therefore; there must be struggles and strife. There
must be trials. But as said by Ibn Al-Qayyim, may Allah
have mercy upon him:

528 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasiliyyah

stitutes) either because whenever any one of them dies, his
substitute will succeed him, or because their evil deeds are
replaced with righteous deeds, or because they are
examples for others, so they change people’s wrong deeds
to righteous deeds, or for these reasons all together.

® Concerning his saying: “and among them are the Inuims of
the religion, those whom the Muslims agreed upon their
guidance and knowledge.”

The imam is the model.

* There are among the People of the Sunnah and the
Joma‘ah, Imams of the religion, whom people agree
upon their guidance; such as Imams Ahmad, Ash-
Shafi‘, Malik, Abu Hanifah, Sufyan Ath-Thawri, ‏حلت‎
‎Awza‘i, and others among the famous and well known
Imams of the religion, like as Shaikh Al-dslan Tbn
Taymiyyah and Shaikh Al-tslam Mubammad bin ‘Ab-
dul-Wahhab.

% His saying: “Imims of the religion” excludes the Imams
of misguidance among the people of innovation. These
are not among the People of the Suxnah and the
Jama’ah; they are rather the adversaries to the People of
the Sunnah and the Jamd‘ah. Even if they are referred to
as Imams, they ate among Imams who invite people to
the Fire, such as He, Exalted is He, says concerning the
people of ‏تمده سدع‎

€And We made them Tmdms (leaders) inviting to the
Fire, and on the Day of Resurrection, they will not be
helped.» (AL-Qassus 28:41)

Regarding The Manhaj (Method)...

Concerning his statement: “There shall not cease fo be a
group of ny Ummah on fhe truth >” meaning, continuing
upon the truth.

‘This group cannot be restricted to a particular number,
neither to a place nor to a time. It is possible that there
be an group in one lace that is aided in one thing from
the matters of the religion, and in another place another
group that is aided, and with these two groups, the
religion will remain, aided, and triumphant.

Conceming his statement: “They will not be harmed by “
He did not say: “They will not be annoyed by,’
because they may suffer some annoyance. So, he
differentiated between harm and annoyance. That is
why Allah, Exalted is He, says in the Qudsi Hadfiht 0
my” slaves! You can never attain a degree of harming
Me by which you harm Me.” [e, Glorious and
Exalted is He, says:

Verily, those who annoy Allah and His Messenger #3,

Allah has cursed them in this world, and in the
Hereafter.» (Al-Ahzab 33:57)

And also in the Qudst Hadith, He said: “The son of Adam
annoys me, he curses Time, and I am the Time.“?! So, He
affirmed annoyance and negates harm, and this is possible,
don’t you see that a person can be annoyed by the odor of
the onion, and its like, but not harmed by it?

SI Reported by Muslim (2577) from the Haditit of Abu Dharr,
may Allah be pleased with hie.

‎Reported by Al-Bukhari (7491) and Muslim (2246) from Aba‏ اما
‎Hurairah, may Allah be pleased with him.‏

‎530 Commentary on Al-‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎“The truth is always aided and tried -

‎Then, do not be surprised, for this is the Surah of the Most
Merciful.”

‎So do not be weighed down with incapability and laziness
whenever you see that you cannot achieve your target at
the first try. Be patient and try once again. Be patient with
the mockery and jest of people against you, because the
enemies of the religion are many.

‎Do not be disturbed by your being alone in the field (of
calling to the truth); you are indeed a community, even if
you are just one, as long as you are on the truth. With this,
rest assured that you will be aided, cither in this world, or
in the Hereafter.

‎© ‘Then, aid may not come in the form of supporting the
person, but the real aid is that Allah, Exalted is He, aids
what you are inviting to of the truth, As for when a
person suffers san inconvenience in this life, that is
never ‘a negation of aid. The Prophet #% was subjected
to crude and ruthless harms; in the end, he was aided
against those who harmed him, and he entered the City
of Makkah, aided and triumphant after he had
departed it in fear. 1

‎Concerning his saying: “Those about whom the Prophet #8
said : There shall not cease to be a group of my Unumah upon
the truth, being aided. They will not be harmed by those who
oppose them, nor those who forsake them, until the Hour is
established ,’””

‎AlBukhari and Muslim,") reported a Haditi similar to
what the author quoted, from a number of Companions
from the Prophet

‎51 Reported by Al-Bukhéari (7311) and Muslim (1920).

The Concluding Speech

tee

‎ab bd Ce OG‏ رَحْمَة ‎ay Sap BA‏ أغلم.
َصَلَى الله غلى ‎at‏ وآ و
‎So, we ask Allah to make us among them, amd trot to let‏
‎our hearts deviate after He has guided us, and that He‏
‎grant us mercy from Flim. Truly, He is the Bestower. And‏
‎‘Allah knows best. May Allah seid Salah Mulanunad, his‏
‎Household and his Companions, and many greetings of‏

‎peace.

‏ل شي وإ جل 3

‎Conceming his statement: “Se, we ask Alldli to make us
among them, and not to lef our hearts deviate after He has
guided us, and Hat He grant us mercy from Him, Truly,
He is the Bestower. And Allah knows best. May Allah send
Sabih upon Muhammad, his Household and his Conipa~
nions, and many greetings of peace.”

‎With this lofty supplication, the author, may Allah
have mercy upon him, concluded this treatise of few
words, replete with meaning. {t is considered the
summary of the Madhhab of the People of the Sunnah
and the Jamé‘al, and in it are tremendous benefits,
which it is necessary for the student of knowledge to
memorize.

‎532 Commentary on AL’Agidah Al-Wasitiyyah

‎In his saying: “Until the Hour is established’ is problematic,
because it has been affirmed in Sahih Muslim that: “The
Hour will no be established until there is none on the
surface of the earth saying: ‘Aah, Alah!’’"! Meaning,
until Islam is completely effaced, and there will not remain
any one worshipping Allah forever. So how did he say
here: “Until the Hour is established’?!

‎The scholars respond to it with one of these two answers:

‎— Either that the meaning is until the establishment of the
Hour draws near, and a think can be included in a
reference of that which is near it, when it is very close. And
it is as if these aided people, when they die, then the Hour
will be very close.

‎— Or, it is said that the meaning of “the Hour" is “their
hour” (that is; their death).

‎But the first view is more correct, because when he said:
“Until the Hour is established” it is possible their hour is
established, by a lengthy time before the general Hour.
And what is apparent from the Hadith is that the aid (of
Allah) shall continue till the end of the world. So, what is
correct is that the meaning of that is close to the time the
Hour will be established. And Allah knows best.

‏لج ا ل

‎01 Reported by Muslim (148) from Anas bin Malik, may Allah
be pleased with him.

Commentary on AL‘Aqidah Al-Wasitiyyah

All praise is due to Allah, the Lard of the worlds, upon
the completion. We ask Allah to complete that with
acceptance and reward. May Allah send Salah and
Salim upon our Prophet, Muhammad, and upon his
Household and his Companions, all together.

I reviewed the book, added necessary additions, and
omitted what was necessary to omit on the day of Friday,
the 17™ of Sha‘ban in the year 1414H.

I reviewed it again, with the additions, during the evening
of Thursday, the 27" of Safar in the year 141511.

