COMMENTARY
ON THE

CREED OF AT-TAHAWI
BY
IBN ABI AL -IZZ

SHARH AL -‘AQIDAH AT - TAHAWIYYAH

TRANSLATED BY
MUHAMMAD ‘ABDUL-HAQQ ANSARI
KINGDOM OF SAUDI ARABIA
Ministry of Higher Education
Al-Imam Muhammad ibn Saud Islamic
University
Deanery of Academic Research

COMMENTARY
ON THE

CREED OF AT-TAHAWI
BY
IBN ABI AL -’IZZ

SHARH AL -’AQIDAH AT - TAHAWIYYAH

TRANSLATED BY
MUHAMMAD *ABDUL-HAQQO ANSARI

AL-IMAM MUHAMMAD IBN SA’UD ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY
2 IMADAT AL-BAHTH AL-’ILMI
RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA
INSTITUTE OF ISLAMIC AND ARABIC SCIENCES IN AMERICA
1421 A.H.-2000 CE.
IN THE NAME OF ALLAH
THE COMPASSIONATE THE MERCIFUL
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
1421 A.H.-2000 A.D.
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction XVii
Translator’s Preface xix
Commentator’s Preface xIvii
The Creed of At-Tahawi Ivii
The Creed and its Commentary 1
Tawhid: Affirming God’s Unity 1

Two aspects of tawhid:
tawhid al-ilahiyyah, and tawhid al-rubitbiyyah
Tawhid 15 inherent in man
The Qur’an expounds on and argues for God’s unity
Tawhid in faith and in action
The prophets’ tawhid was the most perfect
Criticism of the mystical view of tawhid

God is unlike anything 23
To affirm attributes of God 1s not to liken Him

with His creatures (tashbih)
Words common between the Creator and the created

denote nothing real

Nothing is impossible for God 31

The Qur’an mentions God’s positive attributes in detail,
and negative attributes in brief
Mutukallimiin do just the reverse

God is Eternal and Everlasting 35
The Qur’an uses the words: the First and the Last
Mutakallimiin use the word Al-Qadim,

which is not a happy choice
38

41

45

49

66

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Nothing comes into existence except what
God wills

Two kinds of Divine will: creative and prescriptive

Creative will does not necessarily imply that God
approves of the object He creates

Prescriptive will implies that God approves of
the object He commands men to do

Both the wills have some purpose which may concern
man, God or both

It is not necessary that God should help one to do
what He asks him to do

God is beyond understanding and imagination
The Jahmiyyah are wrong 12 saying that to affirm
attributes of God is to anthropomorphize Him
Theological discussion does not admit of syllogistic
or analogical argument; it admits only the
argument of priority

God is Living and All-Sustaining
He is the Creator and the Provident
He causes death and shall raise again

All the attributes of God are eternal

This is true of essential attributes, such as
knowledge and power,

Of active attributes such as creation, and

Of voluntary attributes such as coming, descending,
mounting, anger and pleasure

The meaning of coming, mounting, anger etc.,
is known to us; what is not known is their modality

Do things happen to God?

Essence and attributes, whether one or different?

Name and the Named

Events as a class have no beginning and God
is active from eternity

God is Creator, Originator, Lord, Reviver, etc.,
from eternity

God has power over all things; the impossible in
itself is nothing

God has created things with knowledge

He Ordained them in due measures, and fixed their terms

V1
Commentary on the Creed of 41-1 01 ‏آنه‎

He knew what people would do even before
He created them

Things happen as He ordains and wills

This does not mean that He approves of everything
people do

Nor does pre-ordination offer any Justification
for doing evil

His guidance and protection 15 a favor from him

Refutation of the view that God must do
what is best for man

His decision is not reversed, resisted or frustrated

Prophecy of Muhammad (pbuh) 76
Muhammad is a servant of God, and the most perfect
man is the most perfect servant of God
Miracle is a proof among other proofs of prophecy
Other proofs are: the message, teachings, life
and conduct, works and achievements of the prophet
It is on these grounds that Negus of Abyssinia and
Heraclius of Syria testified to Muhammad’s prophecy
The difference between nabi and rasil
Muhammad 1s the seal of the prophets
ahddith on the subject
He is the leader of the pious
He is the chief of the apostles
He is the best of all the prophets, but this should not
be said to degrade other prophets
He is very dear to God
Grades of love
Every claim to prophecy after him 15 false
He is sent to men as well as to jinns

The Qur’an | 96
The Qur’an 15 the word of God
It has proceeded from Him in an unknown manner
as articulated speech
To say that it is spoken by God is not to
anthropomorphize him
Verses and ahddith saying that God speaks;
the meaning of His speech
The Qur’an is an attribute of God, not something created

Vil
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

It has been brought down to Muhammad by Gabriel,
acting simply as a messenger

It is not the word of a human being, one who says
that is a kafir

Speech 15 an attribute of God, and He has been speaking
from eternity as and when He has willed

His speech as a class 1s eternal

Refuting the objection that God shall then be
the locus of contigent events

The Qur’an is the word of God whether recited,
written or remembered; and it 1s uncreated

However, our reciting, writing, or remembering 5
our act, and is contigent, as is the voice or the ink
involved in the process

This is the view of Abu Hanifah and the ‏أطخ‎ al-Sunnah

The view of later Hanafis on the subject 15 not correct

The view that God’s speech 1s a simple inaudible idea,
and what is recited 15 its interpretation 1s wrong

Beatific Vision 119
People will see God in Paradise in an unknown manner
and without encompassing Him
Verses referring to it must not be interpreted allegorically
Refutation of the arguments advanced by the Mu‘tazilah
Ahddith on the subject are very clear
However, no one has seen or can see God in this life
Did the Prophet see God in his life?
Mu‘tazili interpretation of texts is not correct
Tawhid is to believe in what has come down from
the Prophet authentically

Islam is to believe, submit, and refrain
from misinterpreting texts 136
Three kinds of people destroy religion:
Rulers pursuing policies opposed to the Shar‘
511115 following kashf and experience
Mutakallimin arguing from reason alone
Al-Ghazali on the inadequacy of kalam
The reason the Salaf condemned kalam
The root cause of error is lack of reflection on
the Qur’an and the Sunnah

VIil
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

Philosophers and theologians speak about the
limitation of philosophy and kalam
Meaning of ta’wil
Ta’wil in the Qur’an and Sunnah
Ta’wil in early commentaries
Ta’wil in the works of later jurists and mutakallimin
Interpreting divine names:
Avoid both negation and anthropomorphization
God’s hands, face, eyes

God and space (jihah)
Ascension of the Prophet | 162
His Fountain 167
His Intercession 170

Intercession by other prophets, ‘u/amda’ and martyrs
Praying in the name of someone
Tawassul

God’s Covenant with Mankind 182
Tawhid is inherent in man
Shirk is alien to human nature

Fore-ordainment 191]

God knows from eternity who will go to Paradise and
who will go to Hell, as well as their deeds leading
them to their destination

Everyone gets the opportunity to do what he or she
has been created for

Fore-ordainment is a secret of God;
one should not delve into it

Everything good and bad is brought out by God’s
creative will, which does not necessarily imply
His approval

However, God does not will pure evil

God may not help one do what He approves of

Fore-ordainment and repentence

Fore-ordainment and resignation (rida@’)

We are not required to resign to everything decreed
210

223

242
246

261

266

Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

The Pen and the Tablet

What shall come into existence till the Last Day
has been written down

No one can change what has been written

Earning is not opposed to trust

There is no change in God’s fore-knowledge

Faith in fore-ordainment is necessary

What gadr implies

Questioning gadr is a disease —

The Throne and the Footstool

The Throne and the Footstool are real

But God does not need the Throne

He encompasses all and is above all

Verses and ahddith that speak of His being above
the world (fawgiyyah)

Twenty reasons for His fawqiyyah

Sayings of Abu Hanifah on the subject

‘Uli and fawgiyyah

The knowledge that God 15 above the world is inherent
in human nature

God took Abraham as friend

Angels, Prophets and Heavenly Books

Angels, their grades and functions

We must believe in all the prophets of God and in
all His books

As for Muhammad (pbuh), we must believe in him
as well as follow his teachings

One is muslim and mu’min so long as one

witnesses to what the Prophet has brought

The Qur’an may be read in all the seven established ways

The Faithful Spirit has brought down the Qur’an and
conveyed it to Muhammad (pbuh)

Sin, Faith and Salvation |

No Muslim becomes kGfir by committing a sin unless
he or she thinks it to be lawful

To deny what the Prophet has affirmed, affirm what
he has denied, legalize what he has prohibited, or
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

prohibit what he has legalized 15 kufr; and whoever
does so is a kafir

However, one should refrain from calling a particular
person kafir, for he may be mistaken or may not be
aware of relevant texts

The Ahi al-Sunnah do not excommunicate on
grounds of bid ‘ah

Kufr as used in the Qur’an and Sunnah is of varying
degrees: one justifies excommunication (takfir),
another does not

Sin exposes one to God’s punishment

We hope that God will forgive nghteous Muslims and
put them in Paradise, but we cannot be sure

Similarly, we fear about the sinners, but they should not
lose hope

Punishment for sins 1s waved for ten reasons

Complacence and disappointment both are wrong;
the right course is in between

One goes out of imdn only by repudiating what has
brought him into it

Iman and Islam 283
Does imdn include works or not?
Many scholars of hadith and jurists say that it does.
Abu Hanifah and his followers say that it does not;
however, the difference is not important.
Does imdn increase or decrease?
Arguments of the ahi al-hadith
Arguments of the Hanafi School,
and comments on them
Ahdadith telling that works are parts of 701
Verses and ahddith that imdn increases and decreases
Sayings of the Companions on the subject
Iman and islam mean the same when mentioned singly,
but mentioned together they mean different things
All that has authentically come down from
the Prophet is true
The Ahl as-Sunnah do not ignore texts or oppose
to it their reason or the word of any person.
A one-man hadith which is accepted by the ummah
provides knowledge

XI
313

317

326

330

336

349

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

All Believers are friends (awliya’) of God
Meaning of waldyah

Waldyah and taqwa

Grades of awliya’

The most perfect awliya’ are those who are most
obedient to God

Articles of Faith

God, Angels, Heavenly Books, Prophets, Last Day,
Fore-ordainment

Every hasanah and sayyiyyah is from God

God does not create pure evil

Supplication 15 worship

Faith in all the prophets without discrimination

Those who commit grave sins (kaba’ir)

God may forgive them,

Or punish them in Hell for a time

However, they will not stay there for ever,
even if they do not repent

What is kabirah?

Salah may be offered behind a sinner
and behind one guilty of bid ‘ah

Salah should be offered at the funeral of every Muslim,

except an open hypocrite

We do not send anyone to Paradise or Hell
Nor do we charge anyone with kufr or shirk
or 21/60 unless he 15 guilty of it openly
We do not take up sword against anyone
unless it is necessary
We do not revolt against our leaders and rulers
even if they are unjust, nor defy their orders
unless they order something sinful

We follow the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah,
and avoid dissension
We love the just and the honest
When something is unclear, we say God knows better
Wiping on leather socks (in wud’) 1s right
Hajj and Jihdd shall continue under all Muslim

01
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

authorities, 210115 or impious

Akhirah: Life after Death 348

Angels that note down our deeds

Angels of Death

Spirit (ar-riih) 15 created

An-nafs and ar-rith

Is spirit mortal?

Angels that visit in the grave

Reward and punishment in the grave

Resurrection, Judgement, reward and punishment,

Bridge and Balance

Paradise and Hell exist at the present

Most Salaf and khalaf believe that Paradise shall last

forever, but Hell will disappear in the end

God has created some people for each; whom He has
allotted for Paradise He has allotted as a favor,
and whom He has allotted for Hell He has done so
because His justice demanded it

Power and Responsibility 392
Power is of two kinds: before and at the time of action
The former 15 the basis of obligation,
but it is not sufficient to produce action
Thus, the power concomitant to action is created
Human actions are created by God and acquired by men
Criticism of the Mu‘tazili view
How 1s it that God should punish man for actions
He has created?
God does not charge man except what he can do
Everything happens as He wills, knows and decrees
However, God does no injustice; in fact He has
prescribed mercy on Himself

Benefits to the Dead 414
Funeral prayer

Prayer at the grave

Charity

Fasting, hajj, reciting the Qur’an

God responds to prayer and grants it

God’s Anger and Pleasure | 426
God gets angry and is pleased as and when He likes

011
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

To interpret God’s anger and pleasure allegorically
is incorrect

Companions of the Prophet and Khulafa’ 430
We love all the companions, but not anyone to excess
Nor do we disown anyone
Love for them is part of imdn, and hatred for them 1s
kufr and nifag
After the Prophet the first rightful Ahalifah was
Abu Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Uthman, then ‘Ali
The order of their khiladfah 15 the order of their honor
Besides these four, there are six more to whom
the Prophet gave the good tidings of entering Paradise
Whoever speaks well of the Prophet’s companions and
his wives is free from hypocrisy

‘Ulama’ and Awliya’ 458
‘Ulama’ of the Ummah should be honored

No friend (wali) of God should be exalted over a prophet

One prophet is better than all the awliya’ combined

Criticism of Ibn ‘Arabi

Miracles are true, and when ascertained should be believed

Kinds of miracles: effective and cognitive

Miracles are an honor only when they serve religion

Insight (firdsah) and its kinds

Signs of the Hour 468

Diviners, Fortune Tellers 470
We do not believe in them

Nor in the astrologers

Magic and its kinds

Sifis

Rijal al-Ghayb

Mystical experience

The Malamatiyyah

Sima‘ and spiritual excercises

The story of Moses and Khidr

Unity of the Jama‘ah, differences and sects 479
Preservation of the unity of the jamd ‘ah

X1V
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

Differences should be referred to the Qur’4n and Sunnah
Differences are of two kinds:
Difference of variation
Difference of contradiction
God’s religion is one, and it is Islam
Islam is between excess and negligence
between tashbth and negation,
between coercionism and libertarianism,
between complacency and pessimism
Review of heretical sects
Mushabbihah, Mu‘tuzilah, Jahmiyyah,
Jabariyyah, Qadariyyah
Heretical sects treat revelation in two ways:
Some alter the meaning of text,
Others charge the prophets with ignorance

Biographical Sketches 499
Bibliography 521

XV
370 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

in sleep for three hundred solar years, or three hundred nine lunar
years, He said, “Thus did We make their case known to the people,
that they might know that the promise of Allah is true and that there
can be no doubt about the Hour of Judgment” [18:21].

Those who believe that bodies are formed of atoms find it
difficult to account for the resurrection. They are of two views.
Some say that these atoms are first destroyed and then retrieved;
others say that they are first scattered and then collected. The
objection that has been raised against them is that, suppose a man 5
eaten by an animal, and that animal is eaten by another man, it
means that if the atomic particles of the latter are retrieved those of
the former cannot be. Another objection is that since man dissipates
and re-forms continuously, which atoms of his will be retrieved,
those that constituted him when he died? If the answer is in the
affirmative, it will mean that the resurrected person will be a weak
person, which conflicts with the texts. But if they are some other
atoms, then which others? For every conglomeration of theirs can be
a candidate and there is no way to choose one and reject the other.
Some people say that in every human being there 1s a part which
does not decompose, and in case he is eaten up by an animal that
part does not pass on into it. But this is wrong. Everybody knows
that the whole of a man decomposes and nothing survives. Since the
efforts to explain resurrection on the hypothesis that bodies are
formed of atoms miserably fails, some philosophers deny the
resurrection of the body altogether.

The view which the Elders and all reasonable beings have held
on this issue is that bodies constantly change from one state to
another, and in the end mix into the earth. It is out of this earth that
Allah will create man again. As in the first creation, he passed
through various stages — from sperm to a leech-like clot, then a lump
of meat, then bones and flesh, and finally complete man — in the
same way he will be created the second time. When all his body
disintegrates and nothing remains, except the coccyx of the tailbone,
Allah will create him out of it again. In the Sahih collections it is
confirmed that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Every part of
man disintegrates except the coccyx of the tailbone. From it he was
created first, and from it he will be reconstructed.’”*° He (peace be
on him) is also reported to have said, “The sky will pour down

*20 A1-Bukhari, 4814, 4935; Muslim 2955, 142; Abi Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4743; An-
Nasa’i, 4:11 1-112; Ahmad, 2:322, 428, 499; Ibn Mayjah, Az-Zuhd, 4226.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 371

water like human semen, and people will grow from the graves like
vegetables.”

This means that the first and the second creations are two tokens
of a type similar in some respects and different in others.
Resurrection is like the first creation, except that its requisites are
different. Man will be recreated from the material into which every
part of his being except the coccyx of his tail disintegrates. This will
not, however, affect his identity, just as it does not affect the identity
of a person when he 15 a child and then an old man changing in the
process all the while, or the identity of a plant if it 15 a sapling and
then a full-blown tree. However, the second life will be different
from the first. In Paradise particularly, men will be as tall as their
first father, Adam, sixty cubits tall, as is recorded in the two
Sahihs.°’* Some narrations mention their girth as seven spans. They
will be living there forever, safe, without any suffering, unlike their
lives here which are filled with displeasures.

As for the recompensing of deeds, Allah has said, “He is the
Master of the Day of Judgment (Yawm ad-Din)” [1:3], and, “On that
Day Allah will pay them back all their just deeds, and they will
realize that Allah is the (very) Truth that makes all things manifest’
[24:25]. Din means recompense or retribution. People say, “kama
tadin tudan,” (as you judge others so are you judged). Allah has
also said, “as a recompense for their deeds” [32:17, 46:14, 56:24];
“as a fitting recompense” [78:26]; “Those who do good will have
ten times as much to their credit; those who do evil will only be
recompensed according to their evil. No wrong will be done unto
them” [6:160]; “If any do good, good will accrue to them therefrom;
and they will be secure from terror that Day. And if any do evil,
their faces will be thrown headlong into the Fire. Do you receive a
reward other than what you have earned by your deeds?” [27:89-
90]; “If someone does good, the reward to him is better than his
deed; but if someone does evil the evildoers are only punished (to
the extent) of their deeds” [28:84], and so on.

Abi Dharr reported that the Prophet (peace be on him) narrated
from Allah, “My servants! These are only your deeds that I count
for you and will recompense in full. If you find it good you should
be grateful to Allah; but 11 you find it otherwise, you should blame

**'Part of a long hadith, At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 9761; Al-Hakim, A/-Mustadrak,
4:598-600. But the chain of the hadith is broken. See Al-Haythami, Majmi‘ az-
Zawa’id, vol. 10, pp. 329-330. Al-Albani has declared it weak.

2? Al-Bukhari, 3326, 6227; Muslim, 2841.

372 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

none but yourselves.”°? We will return, God willing, to this point
shortly.

The author states, “We believe in resurrection after death and in
recompense of deeds on the Day of Judgment, the reading of the
books and the reward and punishment for deeds.” (These have all
been mentioned by Allah in the Qur’an.) Allah says, “On that Day
will the (great) Event come to pass, and the sky will be rent asunder,
for it will that Day be flimsy, and the angels will be on its sides, and
eight will that Day bear the Throne of your Lord above them. That
Day will you be brought to Judgment: not an act of yours that you
hide will be hidden” [69:15-18]. “Mankind! Verily you are toiling
on towards your Lord — painfully toiling — but you will meet Him.

Then, whoever is given his record in his nght hand, soon will
his account be taken by an easy reckoning, and he will turn to his
people rejoicing. But whoever is given his record behind his back,
soon will he cry for perdition, but he will enter a blazing Fire.
Truly, did he go about among his people rejoicing! Truly did he
think that he would not have to return to us! Nay, nay, for his Lord
was ever watchful of him” [84:6-15]. “And they will be marshaled
before your Lord in ranks (with the announcement), ‘Now have you
come to Us (bare) as We created you first.” And the book (of deeds)
will be placed before you; and you will see the sinful in great terror
because of what is (recorded) therein. They will say: ‘Ah! woe to
us! What a book is this! It leaves out nothing small or great, but
takes account thereof!’ They will find all that they did placed before
them. And not one will your Lord treat with injustice” [18:48-49].
“One day the earth will be changed to a different earth, and so will
be the heavens, and (men) will be marshalled forth before Allah, the
One, the Irresistible.

And you will see the sinners that day bound together in fetters,
their garments of liquid pitch and their faces covered with Fire, that
Allah may requite each soul according to its deserts, and verily Allah
is swift in calling to account” [14:48-50]. “Raised high above ranks,
He is the Lord of the Throne. By His command does He send the
spirit (of inspiration) to any of His servants He pleases, that it may
warn (men) of the Day whereon they will (all) come forth. Not a
single thing concerning them is hidden from Allah. Whose will be
the dominion that Day? That of Allah, the One, the Irresistible! That
Day will every soul be requited for what it earned; no injustice will
there be that Day, for Allah is swift in taking account” [40:15-19].
“And fear the Day when you will be brought back to Allah. Then

Muslim, Al-Birr wa as-Salah, 2577, mentioned earlier.

Commentary on the Creed of At- 1 ‏آنا 1ه‎ 373

will every soul be paid what it earned, and none will be dealt with
unjustly” [2:281].

_ Al-Bukhari has recorded in his Sahih a hadith reported by
‘A’ishah that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “On the Day of
Judgment, whoever is called to account is doomed.” She said,
“Messenger of Allah, has Allah not said, ‘Then whoever is given his
record in his right hand, soon will his account be taken by an easy
reckoning (84:7-8]?” the Prophet said, “This will be only a
presentation of the deeds ( ‘ard). But whoever is questioned in detail
on the Day of Judgment will be punished.”””* That is, if anyone’s
account is scrutinized he will be punished, and rightly so. However,
Allah may forgive and pardon. We will return to this point later,
God willing.

There is another hadith in the Sahih in which the Prophet (peace
be on him) said, “People will be stupefied on the Day of
Resurrection. I will be the first to regain consciousness. Lo and
behold! Moses will be there, holding the leg of the Throne. I will
not know whether he regained consciousness before me or whether
he was not stunned because he had already suffered that experience
at Mount Sinai.”°?’ This will happen when Allah comes for
judgment. The earth will be illuminated with His light and people
will be stunned. |

Someone might ask, “What then do you say about the hadith
that “the people will be stupefied on the Day of Resurrection. I will
be the first one to come out of the earth. I will find Moses holding
on to the legs of the Throne?’””*°

It is said that this is definitely how the hadith has been narrated,
and that is the source of the problem. But what happened 15 that the
narrator combined together the wordings of two ahddith. One hadith
is, “People will be in a stupor on the day of Resurrection and I will
be the first to regain my consciousness,” as was stated earlier, and
the second states, “I will be the first one to be brought out of the
earth on the Day of Resurrection.” the narrator combined these two
ahddith. This was pointed out by Abt Al-Hajaj Al-Mizzi, followed
by Sheikh Shams ad-Din Ibn Al-Qayyim and our Sheikh ‘Imad ad-
Din Ibn Kathir, may Allah have mercy on them.

Similarly some of the narrators were confused. It states, “I will
not know if he regained consciousness before me or if he was from

°?4 Al-Bukhari, 103, 4939, 6536, 6537; Muslim, Al-Jannah, 2876; Abi Dawid, A/-
Jana’iz, 3093; At-Tirmidhi, Tafsir, 3334; Ahmad, 6:47, 91, 108, 127.

52517150115560 earlier; it is authentic.

°26A1-Bukhari, 2412, 3298, 4638, 6916, 7427; Muslim, 2374.

374 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

those exempted by Allah.” the correct version that the narrators
report is the first one mentioned earlier. It has the correct meaning
because the stupefying will occur when Allah comes to His servants
for Judgment. If Moses does not fall into a stupor with them, it will
be because he had already done so when Allah exposed His
grandeur to the mountain and caused it to be crushed. That stupor
when Allah displayed His grandeur was in lieu of the stupor that
people fall into at Allah’s grandeur on the Day of Judgment.
Consider that very important meaning and do not neglect it.°*’

Imam Ahmad, At-Tirmidhi and Abi Bakr Ibn Abi Ad-Dunya
have reported from Al-Hassan that Abt Mtsa Al-Ash‘ari heard the
Prophet (peace be on him) say, “On the Day of Judgment there will
be three presentations. In two of them, people will offer arguments
and excuses, and in the third they will go through their records.
Whoever is given his record in his right hand, his account will be
taken in an easy reckoning, and he will be sent to Paradise. But

whoever is given his record in his left hand will be sent to the
Fire.”

Ibn Abi Ad-Dunya records the following lines of poetry from
Ibn Al-Mubarak on this point:

When the open records fly to the hands,

they have the secrets and are looked at.

How can you be heedless when the news 15 happening, and
very soon; you do not know what will happen.

Whether in Paradise and victory without end,

Or Hell, and it will leave nothing (without burning it).

It will take them down sometimes and raise them.

Seeking to leave its sadness, they will be struck down.
Their crying will be endless, their petition not treated kindly.
Polite speech and their fear will never help.

The knowing must benefit from his knowledge ere he dies.
Some in the Fire have asked to return (to do good deeds)
but they will not be returned.

**7Al-Albani points out that there is no need for the explanation given by the
commentator. The second stupor refers to the stupor that occurs at resurrection, which
is mentioned in the verse, and it is not the stupor that occurs when Allah appears for
judgment. Therefore, there is actually nothing wrong with the way the hadith appears
in Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

525 At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Jannah, 2427; Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd, 4277, Ahmad, 4:414. At-
Tirmidhi has observed that Al-Hassan Al-Basri, who narrated the hadith from Abi
Miisa Al-Ash‘ari, did not meet Abi Miisa. The hadith is weak.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 375

We believe in the Sirat. The Sirat is a bridge over Hell. When
people leave the place where they are to be assembled, they will
come to.a dark region beside the Bridge. ‘A’ishah said that the
Messenger (peace be on him) was asked where people will be when
the earth and the heavens are changed into different earth and
heavens. He said, “They will be in darkness beside the Bridge.’””’
At that time the hypocrites will be separated from the Believers, who
will go ahead and leave them behind. A wall will be placed between
them that will stop them from reaching them.

Al-Bayhaqi has recorded a hadith reported by Masriq from
‘Abdullah that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Allah will gather
people on the Day of Judgment... Their light will shine more or less
brilliantly according to their deeds, some lights will expand like a
mountain, and some even more. Some people will have their lights
in their right hands as big as a date palm, and some will have a
comparatively small light. The smallest light will be a light on the
big toe of someone’s foot that will be flickering on and off. When it
shines he will walk, but when it goes off he will stop. He will pass
along with others across the Bridge, which will be as sharp as a
sword and very slippery. They will be asked to walk across
according to their light. Some of them will pass over it like a
shooting star and some like a wind; some will cross it in the
twinkling of an eye, and some will run across it, each according to
his deeds.

“When one that has a light on the big toe of his foot crosses the
Bridge, sometimes one of his hands will quiver and he will try to
balance with the other, and sometimes one of his feet will stagger
and he will try to hold himself up with the other. He will not be able
to save his sides from the flames of the Fire. In the end, however,
they will all be saved, and loudly they will shout, ‘Praise be to Allah
Who has saved us from you (the Fire) after it was shown to us.
Indeed, He has done for us a favor that He had done for none
else.’”’

The scholars differ as to the meaning of the verse, “There is not
one of you but will approach it” [19:71]. The strongest and most
transparent opinion 1s that it refers to passing over the Bridge. Allah
then says, “Then We will rescue those who kept from evil, and
leave the evildoers crouching there” [19:72]. In the Sahih, it is
recorded that the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) said, “By

Part of a long hadith, Muslim, Al-Hayd, 315.
°° Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 2:376-377, and its chain is good. See also At-Tabarani,
Al-Kabir, 9763.

376 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

the One in Whose hand is my soul, the Fire will not touch any of the
people who gave the pledge of allegiance under the tree.” Hafsah
asked him, “Messenger of Allah, didn’t Allah say, ‘There is not one
of you but will approach it’?” He said, “But didn’t you hear Him
say, ‘Then We will rescue those who kept from evil, and leave the
evildoers crouching there’?!

The Prophet (peace be on him), therefore, is saying that
approaching the Fire does not mean entering it. Being saved from
evil does not imply that one is touched by it. It does, though, imply
meeting its causes. For example, if someone seeks his enemy to kill
him but 1s not able to do so, one says, “Allah saved him from him.”
In that fashion, Allah says, “And when Our commandment came to
pass We saved Hid” [11:58]; “So when Our commandment came to
pass, We saved Salih” [11:66]; and, “And when Our commandment
came to pass, We saved Shu‘ayb” [11:94]. The punishment did not
touch any of them but it afflicted others. If it were not for Allah
bestowing on them the means of being saved, they would have been
afflicted with what the others were afflicted with.

The same is true for passing over the Hell-fire. They will pass
over it on the Bridge and Allah will then save those who were pious
and will leave the evildoers there crouching. In the hadith just
mentioned, the Prophet (peace be on him) explained that the
“approaching” refers to passing over the Hell-fire on the Bridge.

Al-Hafiz Abii Nasr Al-Wa‘ili recorded on the authority of Abi
Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) said,
“Teach the people my Sunnah even if they dislike it. If you wish not
to stay on the Bridge even for the blinking of an eye, do not invent
anything in the religion according to your opinion.” Al-Qurtubi
mentioned this hadith in At-Tadhkirah.>*?

Abi Bakr Ahmad Ibn Salman Al-Najjad recorded from Ya‘la Ibn
Muniyyah that the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) said, “The
Fire will say to a Believer on the Day of Resurrection, ‘Pass over,
Believer; your light extinguishes my flames.””*?

As for the Balance (Mizdn), we believe in the Balance. Allah has
referred to it in various verses of the Qur’an, for example, “We will
set up scales (mawdzin) of justice for the Day of Judgment, so that
not a soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least. And if there be (no
more than) the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it (to

*3'Muslim, 2496, Ahmad, 6:285, 326.
*3?A]-Albani has stated that this hadith is a fabrication.
*? Aba Nu‘aym, Al-Hilya, 9:329; At-Tabarani, A/-Kabir, 22:668. It is a weak hadith.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 377

account). And enough are We to take account” [21:47]; and, “Then
those whose balance (of good deeds) is heavy will attain salvation,
but those whose balance is light will be those who have lost their
souls; in Hell will they abide” [23:102-103].

Al-Qurtubi has said that scholars think that when the reckoning
is finished, deeds will be put in the Balance. Since weighing 1s
meant for determining reward or punishment, it will take place after
the reckoning.°** The reckoning will be for determining deeds, and
the weighing will be for determining the value of the deeds so that
the reward or penalty may be fixed. The word mawéazin in verse
21:47 quoted above is plural, meaning that there will be a number of
balances there. It may also mean that there will be different kinds of
balances for weighing different kinds of deeds. True knowledge,
however, 15 with Allah.

There are many ahddith on the subject that make it quite clear
that the Balance will have two scales visible to the eyes. Imam
Ahmad has recorded a hadith transmitted by Abii ‘Abdur-Rahman
Al-Hubulli, from ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr, that the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “Allah will pick out a person from my ummah from all
the creation, ask him to step forward, place before him ninety-nine
registers recording his deeds, each register as long as his eyes can
see, and ask him, ‘Do you deny any item mentioned in these
registers? Have my scribes wronged you in any way?’ He will say,
‘No, my Lord.’ Allah will then ask, ‘Have you any excuse to offer
or any good deed to mention which is not here?’ He will say, ‘I
have nothing to say, my Lord.’ Allah will say, ‘No, you have a
good thing to mention. There will be no injustice to you this day.’ A
card will then be produced which will have, ‘I witness that there is
no god except Allah, and that Muhammad 15 his servant and
messenger.” It will be handed to him, but he will wonder and say,
“What can this do in the presence of so many evil records?’ Allah
will say, ‘You will not be wronged.’ Then all the registers will be
placed on one scale and that card will be placed on the other scale
and it will outweigh them. Nothing can outweigh the name of Allah,
the Merciful, the Compassionate.”’’? This is recorded by At-

Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah and Ibn Abi Ad-Dunya from Al-Layth. In At-

**4A1-Qurtubi, At-Tadhkirah, p. 309.

*35 At-Tirmidhi, 2639; Ibn Majah, 4300; Ahmad, 2:213; Ibn Hibban, 2524; Al-
Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 1:6, 529. The last sentence of this hadith is incorrect and is
only recorded by Ahmad. It should be, “Nothing can outweigh the name of Allah.”

378 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Tirmidhi’s version the last words are, “Nothing can outweigh the
name of Allah.’”*®

The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Balances will be set up on
the Day of Judgment, and men will be brought and put on the
scale.””’’ This means that men will also be weighed along with their
deeds. Al-Bukhari has recorded a hadith from Abt Hurayrah in
support of this hadith. The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “On the
Day of Judgment, a very large and heavy man will be brought, but
in Allah’s sight his weight will be less than that of the wing of a
mosquito. If you like you may recall the verse, ‘We will not give
them any weight on the Day of Judgment’ [18:105].”°°> Imam
Ahmad has recorded a hadith wherein it states that one day Ibn
Mas‘id was trying to pluck a twig of an arak tree in order to brush
his teeth. His shanks, which were very thin, were exposed by the
wind, and some people burst into laughter at them. The Messenger
of Allah (peace be on him) asked, “Why are you laughing?” They
said, “Prophet of Allah, we are laughing at how thin Ibn Mas‘id’s
shanks are.” He retorted, “By Allah, they will be heavier than
Mount Uhud in the Balance.’”*”

Actions themselves will be weighed in the Balance. Muslim has
recorded a hadith reported by Abt Malik Al-Ash‘ari that the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “Cleanliness is half of faith, and the words,
al-hamdu li Allah (all praise is for Allah) will fill the Balance.’”*° the
last hadith in Al-Bukhari’s Sahih is, “Two sentences are light on the
tongue, but they are very dear to Allah and heavy on the scales:
Subhana Allah wa bi-hamdihi (glory to Allah and praise to Him) and
Subhana Allah Al-‘Azim (Glory be to Allah, the Majestic).””*'

Al-Bayhaqi has recorded a hadith reported by Anas Ibn Malik
that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “On the Day of Judgment
men will be brought before the Balance, and an angel will weigh
them. Whenever a man tilts the scale the angel will shout, ‘Happy 5
this man. Never will he be unhappy ever after,’ and all the people

*°°These words occur in the hadith of At-Tirmidhi and Al-Hakim. |

517 Ahmad, 2:221-222. But the hadith is not authentic; for one of its transmitters is
Ibn Lahi‘ah, who has a weak memory.

8 Al-Bukhari, Tafsir, 4729; Muslim, Sifat al-Munafigin, 2785.

>? Ahmad, 1:420-421; At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 8452. See also Ibn Abi Shaybah, A/-
Musannaf, 12:113; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 3:317. |
“Muslim, At-Taharah, 223; At-Tirmidhi, Ad-Da ‘wat, 3512; An-Nasa’i, 5:5-6; Ibn
Majah, 270; Ahmad, 5:342, 343, 334.

‎Al-Bukhari, 6404; 6687, 7563; Muslim, Adh-Dhikr wa ad-Du‘a’, 2694; At-‏ كذ
‎Tirmidhi, Ad-Da ‘wat, 3463; Ibn Majah, Al-Adab, 3806; Ahmad, 2:232.‏

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 379

around will hear it. But when a man’s scales goes up, the angel will
shout, ‘Doomed is this man! Never will he be happy ever after,’ and
everyone will hear it.””*?

In view of these ahddith, the objection of an obstinate rejector
Carries no weight that actions are incidents not bodies, and therefore
cannot be objects to be weighed. Allah, though, can change the
incidents into bodies and put them on the scale, as was shown
earlier. This is also suggested in a hadith which Imam Ahmad has
recorded from Abt Hurayrah, in which the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “Death will be brought in the form of a ram covered with
dust and placed between Paradise and Hell. A call will be given to
the people of Paradise, who will raise their heads and look. A call
will also be given to the people of Hell, who will raise their heads
and look. They will think that perhaps the time for relief has arrived.
The ram will be killed and the announcement will be made: ‘Life
forever. There is no more death.””°*? Al-Bukhari has also recorded
this hadith with some difference in wording.’™ All this proves that
the deeds, the doers and the records of the deeds all will be
weighed, and that the Balance will have two scales. Further details
of how these things will happen are known only to Allah.

Our duty is to believe in what the Prophet (peace be on him) has
said about the Unseen without adding or subtracting anything. Woe
to those who deny the setting of the balances on the Day of
Judgment, of which the Prophet has spoken. They fail to see the
reason behind it and therefore deny it. They say that balances are
required for weighing groceries. I am afraid that these people will be
given no weight on the Day of Judgment. Balances will be set up in
order to demonstrate Allah’s justice to all the people, although no
one more readily accepts excuses than Allah. This is also the reason
He sends messengers to give good tidings and to issue warnings to
the people. There may be other reasons, too, that we do not know.
You may see the point if you reflect upon what transpired between
the angels and Allah when He told them, “I will create on earth a
viceregent. They (the angels) said, ‘Would you place therein one
who will make mischief therein and shed blood, while we celebrate
Your prayers and glorify Your holy name?’ Allah said, ‘I know
what you know not’” [2:30]. At another place He has said, “Of
knowledge there is only a little that 15 communicated to you”
[17:85].

142 Aba Nu‘aym, A/-Hilya, vol. 4, ‏.م‎ 174. Al-Albani has called it a fabrication.
43 Ahmad, 2:423; Ad-Darimi, Sunan, 2:329.
°4* Al-Bukhari, 4730; Muslim, 2949; At-Tirmidhi, 3156.

380 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahdwiyyah

In the earlier discussion on the Fountain (Hawd), we have
quoted Al-Qurtubi as saying that the Fountain will come before the
Balance and the Balance will come before the Bridge. In the two
Sahihs, it states, “When the Believers cross the Sirat they will be
detained at an arched bridge (gantarah) between Paradise and Hell.
Every wrongdoer will pay for the wrong he has done. When they
are purged of all evils and cleansed, they will be allowed into
Paradise.””’*? As Al-Qurtubi has said, this gantarah will be the

second bridge which the Believers will have to cross. However, no
one will fall off this bridge.°*° Allah knows best.

(91) Paradise and Hell have been created and will never
perish or pass away. Allah created them before the
world. He allotted some people for each. Those whom
He allotted for Paradise, He did so out of His bounty
for them. And those whom He allotted for Hell, He
allotted because it was required by His justice. Everyone
will do what has been chosen for him, and will go to the
place for which he has been created. Good and evil both
have been determined for each and every person.

The Ahl as-Sunnah are agreed that Paradise and Hell have been
created and are in existence at this moment. This is what they have
always believed.’*” The Mu‘tazilah and the Qadariyyah were the first
to deny this; they instead said that Allah will create them on the Day
of Resurrection. What led them to this view was their false
assumption that Allah was subject to a code of law which they had
laid down, that He must do certain things and avoid others. They
conceived of Him on the pattern of His creatures and compared His
actions with theirs. Following the line of Jahm, they also negated
Allah’s attributes. Every text that conflicted with the code they had
formulated for Allah, they rejected or interpreted against its intent.
Furthermore, they denounced as innovators anyone who objected to
their beliefs. |

The Qur’an has referred to Paradise many times, such as, “It has
been prepared for the God-fearing” [3:33], and “It has been
prepared for those who believe in Allah and His messengers”
[57:21]. The Qur’an has also referred to Hell, such as “It has been

°° Al-Bukhari, 2440, 6535; Ahmad, 3:13, 63, 74. It was not recorded by Muslim.

346 Al-Qurtubi, At-Tadhkirah, 339. .
*“"Ibn Al-Qayyim, Hadi al-Arwah ila Bildd al-Afrah (Beirut: Dar Al-Kutub ‏اث‎
‎‘IImiyyah), pp. 11-18.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 381

prepared for the infidels” [3:13], and “Truly, Hell is a place of
ambush or a place of destination for the transgressors” [78:21-2].

The Messenger (peace be on him) has seen them and Allah has
referred to his seeing Paradise in these words, “And indeed he saw
him (Gabriel) at a second descent near the lote-tree beyond which
none may pass. Near it is the Garden of Abode” [53:13-5]. The
Prophet (peace be on him) did see the lote-tree beyond which none
could pass and did see the Garden of Abode. Describing his night
journey, as it is recorded in the two Sahihs, the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “Then Gabriel took me to the lote-tree which no one can
pass. It was draped in too many colors to be described. Then I
entered Paradise and, lo and behold, it was covered with high-rising
domes studded with pearls and its floor was of musk.’”** The two
Sahihs have another hadith, reported by ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar in
which the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “When any one of you
dies his seat in Paradise or in Hell is shown to him morning and
evening. If he is a man of Paradise, he is shown a seat in Paradise,
but if he is a man of Hell he is shown a seat in Hell, and he will be
told, ‘This is your place,’ until Allah raises him on the Day of
Resurrection.”””’

We have previously mentioned the hadith which has_ been
reported by Al-Bara’ Ibn ‘Azib. It says, “A call will be given from
the heaven. If My servant tells the truth, make for him a bed from
Paradise and open for him a door towards it, so that he may have the
air and the scent of Paradise.”°°” the same point is made in the
hadith reported by Anas which we have quoted earlier.

Muslim has recorded a hadith in which ‘A’ishah first spoke of
an eclipse of the sun that took place at the time of the Prophet (peace
be on him) and said that the Prophet said, “I see from this place
where I am standing everything which you have been promised. |
even see that I plucked a fruit of Paradise when you saw me
stepping forward. I also saw the Hell-fire, burning itself, when you
saw me step back.””?' The Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim also
contain a hadith which ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas reported, and the
following is Al-Bukhari’s wording. He mentioned that once, when

*“SPart of the hadith on ascension reported by Anas that was mentioned earlier.

*49 Al-Bukhari, 1379, 3240, 6515; Muslim, Al-Jannah, 2866; At-Tirmidhi, A/-
Jan@’iz, 1072; An-Nasa’i, 4:106-7; Ahmad, 2:16, 51, 113, 123; Malik, Al-Jand@’iz,
1:239.

Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

°°'Part of a long hadith, Muslim, As-Salah, 901; Al-Bukhari, As-Salah, 1212; An-
Nasa’i, 3:130-132.

F15 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI

382 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

there was an eclipse of the sun, the Prophet (peace be on him)
stepped forward, stretched his hand to grasp something and then
retraced his steps. When he was asked about it he said, “I saw
Paradise and intended to pluck a bunch of its grapes. If I had
succeeded, you would be eating from it until the end of the world. I
then saw the Fire. Never did I see a scene more horrible than what I
saw today. I saw that most of its inhabitants are women.” Someone
asked, “Why, Messenger of Allah?” He replied, “It is because they
are ungrateful.” “To whom are they ungrateful?” he was further
asked. “They are ungrateful to their husbands. They do not
recognize the kindness you show them. You may go on doing good
to them all the time, but if once they experience something
unpleasant from you, they will say that they never had any good
from you.””””

Muslim recorded from the hadith of Anas that the Prophet (peace
be on him) said, “By the One in Whose hand 15 my life, if you had
seen what I saw you would laugh less and weep more.” He was
asked what had he seen. He said, “I saw Paradise and the Fire.’””°°

In the Sunan collections and the Muwatta there is the hadith
reported by Ka‘b Ibn Malik in which the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “The soul of a Believer is like a bird that perches on a tree of
Paradise until Allah returns it to its body on the Day of
Resurrection.”’’* This is a clear statement that the souls enter
Paradise before the Day of Judgment.

In Sahih Muslim, the Sunan and Musnad collections, there is the
hadith reported by Abi Hurayrah in which the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “When Allah created Paradise and Hell, He sent Gabriel
to Paradise and commanded him to see what was provided therein
for its people. He went and saw it and what Allah had provided
therein for its people. He returned and said, ‘By Your Majesty, no
one will hear about it without entering it.” Then Allah commanded
that Paradise be surrounded by difficulties. He then told Gabriel to
look at it and what had been prepared for its people. He look at it
and returned, saying, ‘By Your Majesty, I am afraid no one will
ever enter it.” Then he was commanded to visit Hell and see what
was cast into it for its people. He visited it and saw that it was
boiling up fiercely, one part smashing into another. He returned and
said, ‘By Your Majesty, no one who comes to hear about it will ever
enter it.” Thereupon Allah commanded and it was covered with

*5? A)-Bukhari, 1052; Muslim, 907.
*>>Muslim, As-Salah, 426; An-Nasa’i, 3:83.
*4Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 383

pleasurable things. He then told Gabriel to visit it again. He visited
and returned and said, ‘By Your Majesty, I am afraid no one will be
able to be saved from it, but all will enter it.”°°> There are many
ahadith on the subject.

Some people say that the Paradise which has been promised is
the same Paradise in which Adam was kept before he was sent
down to earth. If this is correct, it clearly means that Paradise is in
existence. The difference of opinion over that question is well
known.

Others say that Paradise does not exist at this moment, for if it
existed, it would be destroyed on the Last Day on which everything
will perish, as the Qur’an says, “Everything (that exists) will perish
except His own countenance” [28:88]; and, “Every soul will taste
death” [3:185]. At-Tirmidhi has recorded a hadith reported by Ibn
Mas‘id that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “I saw Abraham the
nuent I was taken on a journey. He said, ‘Muhammad, speak my
greetings to your ummah, and tell them that the ground of Paradise
is good and its water is sweet, but it has no plants. If you want to
have plants there, say “Glory to Allah’, “Praise be to Allah’’, “There
is no god but Allah”, and “Allah is great” 6

This hadith, At-Tirmidhi says, is fair (hasan) but isolated
(gharib). He has recorded another hadith reported by Abia Az-
Zubayr, through Jabir, that the Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“Whoever says ‘Glory to Allah and praise to Him,’ a date tree is
planted for him in Paradise.”’’’ At-Tirmidhi’s evaluation of this
hadith is that it is hasan sahih. Some say that had Paradise already
been created it would not have been barren and lacking in plants, as
otherwise this hadith would have no meaning. As a further
argument they quote the verse mentioning Pharaoh’s 5
supplication, “My Lord, build for me in nearness to You a house in
Paradise” [66:11].

In reply, we will say that if they mean that Paradise does not
exist at the present in the same way the Trumpet has not been

°°? Abu-Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4744; At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Jannah, 2563; An-Nasa’i, Al-
Iman wa an-Nudhar, 7:3; Ahmad, 2:332, 354, 373. Its chain is hasan. Muslim did not
record it in its entirety.

°° At-Tirmidhi, Ad-Da ‘wat, 3456. But the hadith is weak, as one of its transmitters,
‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Ishaq Ibn Harith Al-Wasiti, is weak. See Al-Haythami, Majmi‘
az-Zawa ‘id, 10:98.

°°’ At-Tirmidhi, 3460, 3461. The transmitters of this hadith are reliable; however, one
of them, Abi Az-Zubayr, has committed tadlis. At-Tirmidhi has rated it hasan sahih
gharib. Ibn Hibban has recorded it in his Sahih, 2335.

304 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

sounded and the people have not been raised from the graves at the
moment, they are wrong. The texts that we have quoted, and others
that we did not mention, contradict their view. But if they mean to
say that not all that Allah has promised to the people of Paradise is
yet created, and that He will be creating many more things there,
even after the faithful will have entered it, this is true and cannot be
refuted. The texts they have produced support it.

But their inference from the verse, “Everything will perish
except His countenance” [28:88], that Paradise and Hell are non-
existent is not correct. It is as incorrect as to infer from it that
Paradise and Hell will terminate and their people will perish some
time in the future. It 15 misinterpreting the verse. The correct
interpretation which scholars make is that the words, “everything
will perish” means that everything that Allah has deemed to perish
will perish. Paradise and Hell are not included in this category; they
have been created to abide and last forever. The same is true of
Allah’s Throne, which is above Paradise. Some say that it refers to
His dominion, which will not be destroyed. Others say it means,
“except what His countenance wills.” Some say that when Allah
revealed, “Every thing that is thereon will pass away” [55:26], the
angels said, “The people of the earth will be destroyed,” and they
desired them to stay. Then Allah informed them that all the
inhabitants of the heavens and the earth will die. He said,
“Everything will perish except His countenance” [28:88], as He is
the Living, Who does not die. The angels were then assured of
death. The people who say so make such an interpretation in order
to reconcile the different texts that definitively point to the
everlasting nature of Paradise and Hell, as we will discuss shortly,
God willing.

As for the statement that Paradise and Hell “will never perish or
disappear,” this is the belief of the majority of scholars of all times,
early as well as later. Some of them, however, say that Paradise will
abide forever but Hell will terminate. Both these views have been
mentioned in commentaries on the Qur’4n and other works.°*®

The person who first said that both Paradise and Hell will perish
was Jahm Ibn Safwan, the leader of the negators of Allah’s
attributes. No Companion, Successor or leading scholar of the Ahl
as-Sunnah has ever said that. As one body they denounce Jahm and
call him infidel for holding this view. This is known all over the

**In his footnotes to this work, Al-Albani points out that it has never been

authentically narrated from any of the Elders that they believed that the Hell-fire will
come to an end.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 385

world. What led Jahm to this stance was his assumption that a
contingent thing is not everlasting. This is the principle on which
misguided theologians build up their argument for the contingency
of the world.

Jahm believes that what is not without a beginning in the past
cannot go on without an end in the future. On these grounds he rules
out the eternity of divine action in the future as well as in the past.
Abt Al-Hudhayl] Al-‘Allaf, the leader of the Mu‘tazilah, agreed with
him on this point, but he drew the implication that the people of
Paradise and Hell will cease to move one day and will enter into a
state of perpetual rest where none of them will be able to move. We
have already referred to the controversy over the regress of events in
past and in future, and related it to the eternity of divine action. We
have said that Allah is the Lord from eternity, that He has been
doing from eternity what He has willed. He is Everlasting, Ever-
Knowing and Ever-Powerful. It is not possible to think that at first
He could not act and then began to act without anything happening
there, or that His inactivity ended at a particular time and He became
active at that time and not before. This is plainly false and its
falseness can hardly be over-emphasized.

That Paradise will last forever is something known of necessity.
The Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) clearly enunciated it.
Allah has said, “And those who are blessed will be in Paradise.
They will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth
endure except as your Lord wills: a gift without break” [11:108].
That is, it will not end. This is not contradicted by the exception
clause, “except as your Lord wills.” There are different explanations
from the Elders concerning this exception. Some say it is in
reference to their stay in the Hell-fire, for those who spend some
time there and then come out of it. Hence, it is not in reference to all
the inhabitants of Paradise. Some say it is in reference to the period
they will stay for judgment, or, others say, the duration they will
remain in their graves. Some Elders have also said that the exception
only holds up a theoretical possibility which will not be realized, as
in the statement, “I will strike you unless I see fit otherwise,” but |
you do not see fit otherwise and you have determined to strike.

Others say that the word 11125” here means ‘and’. This is
according to the statement of some grammarians but it is a weak
opinion. Sibawayh says i/la@ means ‘but’, in which case the
exception clause would be disjunctive. Ibn Jarir endorses this
opinion. He said, “Allah will never break His promise. So the

*°°Usually translated as ‘except’.

386 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

exception is related to ‘a gift without break’. A similar phrase would
be, ‘You may live in my house for a year except for what you
wish,’ which means, ‘except for what you wish to add to it.’”

Others have said that the exception emphasizes that though
people will live in Paradise forever this will entirely depend on the
will of Allah. It is not the case that they are no longer under the
command of His will. This does not at all contradict the idea of
infinite stay in Paradise. Examples of such hypothetical exceptions
are many in the Qur’an, for example, Allah says, “If it were Our will
We could take away what We have sent you by inspiration. Then
would you find none to plead your affair in that matter as against
Us” [17:86]; “But if He willed, He could seal up your heart’
[42:24]; “Say: If Allah had so willed I should not have rehearsed it
to you, nor would He have made it known to you” [10:16]. What
Allah wants to underline is that things are entirely at His will, that
what He wills happens and what He does not will does not happen.

Some say that the md (what) in the verse means man (who).
That is, except for whomever Allah wishes to enter into the Fire
because of his sins. Others offer even other opinions.

In any case, the exact meaning of the exception in that verse 15
from the equivocal verses of the Qur’an. But the words, “a gift
without break” are unequivocal. The following verses are also
unequivocal: “Lo! this is in truth Our provision, which will never
waste away” [38:43]; “Its food is everlasting, and its shade”
[13:35]; and, “Nor will they be expelled from there” [15:48].

That life in Paradise will last forever has been stated in many
verses of the Qur’an. Allah states that the people of Paradise “taste
not death therein, except the first death” [44:56]. That exception
clause is disjunctive. It is accompanied with the exception in Allah’s
words, “except what your Lord wills.” These two verses are meant
to exclude the time that they are not in Paradise from their
everlasting life, like excluding the first death from the general
mention of death, which death takes place before their everlasting
life. Similarly, the above exception, where they are outside of
Paradise, takes place before they enter Paradise.

There are also many ahddith that underscore the perpetuity of life
in Paradise. For example, the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “One
who enters Paradise will be always happy and never unhappy, will
always live and never die;?”®’ or, “A voice will call: People of
Paradise! You will always ‘be well and never sick, always young

Muslim, Al-Jannah, 2836; Ad-Darimi, 47-1160, 2822; Ahmad, 2:370, 407, 416,
462.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 387

and never old, and you will ever live and never die.’’°' I have
already mentioned the hadith which says that Death will be brought
and killed between Paradise and Hell, and then the announcement
will be, “People of Paradise! You will live for ever and never die.
People of Hell! You will live for ever and never die.””®

Is Hell everlasting and eternal? There are eight different views
on the subject. First, once any person enters Hell he will never come
out. This is the view of the Mu‘tazilah and the Khawary. Second,
people will first suffer the torments of Hell then they will be comple-
tely transformed and will begin to enjoy the torments as it will be in
accord with their new nature. This is the belief of Ibn ‘Arabi At-
Ta‘i, the leader of the monists. Third, people will be sent to Hell for
a limited period, after which they will be taken out; then another
group will be sent in their place. This is the view which the Jews
held at the time of the Prophet (peace be on him) and which he
denounced. Allah depicts it in these words, “They say: the Fire will
not touch us but for a few numbered days. Say: Have you taken a
promise from Allah, for He never breaks His promise. Or 15 it that
you say of Allah what you do not know? Nay, those who seek gain
in evil, and are girt round by their sins, are companions of the Fire.
Therein will they abide (for ever)” [2: 80- 81].

Fourth, everyone will come out of Hell in the end but Hell will
continue to exist though there will be no one there. Fifth, it will
perish by itself, for it 1s a contingent thing and nothing that is
contingent abides forever. This is the view of Jahm and his
followers. They say the same thing about Paradise, as we have
mentioned before. Sixth, in Hell people will cease to move in the
end and turn unconscious and lifeless. They will not feel any pain.
This is the view of Abt Al-Hudhayl Al-‘Allaf, as mentioned earlier.
Seventh, Allah will take out of Hell whom He will, as the ahddith
say, then He will keep it for a while and then destroy it because He
has fixed a term for it. Eighth, Allah will take out from it whom He
will, as the ahddith state, and leave the infidels there to suffer
forever and ever. This 1s the view of the author. All these views are
clearly wrong except the last two, which are held by different
groups of the Ahl as-Sunnah. »

In support of the first of the two views the following verses
have been cited: “He will say: the Fire be your dwelling place. You
will dwell therein forever, except as Allah wills, for your Lord is

°°'Muslim, Sifat al-Jannah, 2837; At-Tirmidhi, At-Tafsir, 3246; Ad-Darimi, 2:334;
Ahmad, 2:319, 3:38, 95.
°°? Mentioned earlier; it is authentic.

388 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Full of wisdom and knowledge” [6:138]; ““Those who are wretched
will be in the Fire: there will be for them therein (nothing but) the
heaving of sighs and sobs. They will dwell therein for all the time
that the heavens and the earth endure except as your Lord wills; for
your Lord is the Accomplisher of what He plans” [11:106-107]. It
may be noted that following the exception clauses in these two
verses there is no statement comparable to the one that follows the
exception clause in verse 11:108 about the people of Paradise,
namely “this a gift that will never end.” A third verse that supports
the non-eternity of Hell is, “They will dwell therein for ages”
[78:23].

Among those who say that Hell, as opposed to Paradise, will
terminate one day are Companions like ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, Ibn
Mas‘iid, Abi Hurayrah, Abu Sa‘id, and others.°°? Commenting on
these verses in his famous commentary on the Qur’an, ‘Abd Ibn
Humayd has mentioned the words of ‘Umar: “People may remain in
the Fire as many days as the particles in a heap of sand, but then
there will be a time when they will come out of 11.54 He mentioned
that in his commentary on “They will abide therein for ages”
[78:23]. The proponents of this view also point out that Hell
manifests Allah’s wrath, while Paradise manifests His mercy, and
the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “When Allah intended to create
_ the world He wrote in the Book which is with Him above the
Throne: “My mercy outdoes My wrath,” or, as we have in another
version, “overcomes My wrath.’””®’ This hadith has been recorded
by Al-Bukhari in his Sahih on the authority of Aba Hurayrah.

They also draw attention to the fact that when Allah refers to the
future penalty, He says, “the penalty of a Mighty Day” [6:15] or “of -
a Grievous Day” [11:26] or “of a Day of Disaster” [22:55]. But
when he refers to the future bliss He does not mention even once
that it is the bliss of a Day. Furthermore, Allah has said, “With My
punishment I visit whom I will; but My mercy extends to all things”
[7:156]. Addressing Allah, the angels said, “Our Lord! Your reach
is over all things, in mercy and knowledge” [40:7]. This means that
His mercy will also extend to the people in Hell, for if they remained
there forever they would not get His mercy. According to a hadith in
the Sahih, the Day of Recompense will be equal to fifty thousand

363 Again, according to Al-Albani none of these reports are authentic. Al-Arnawit and
At-Turki point out that such reports clearly contradict the proofs from the Qur’an and
Sunnah. They discuss each report in detail.

°**This narration is weak.

°*>Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 389

years.°° People will undergo punishment for different periods
depending upon the nature of their crimes. However, it does not
behoove the One Who is Most Just and Most Merciful to create
people and condemn them to eternal suffering without end. On the
other hand, it does behoove Him to create people and bestow upon
them everlasting happiness. Suffering is not an end in itself:
happiness is. The texts that say that people will suffer forever, that
they will have no relief at all, and that they will not ever be taken out
of Hell, are true and indisputable, but they only mean that people
will suffer in the House of Suffering so long as it lasts. Those who
believe in one God will be taken out in the course of its life, and
others when it expires. To take one out of a prison is one thing, and
to demolish the prison and set people free is another.

Those who believe that the Fire will blaze forever and will never
stop quote the following verses: “Their penalty will be one that
endures” [5:37]; “It will not be lightened for them, and in despair
will they be there overwhelmed” [43:75]; “No increase will We
grant you except in punishment” [78:30]; “They will abide therein
forever” [98:8]; “Nor will they be expelled from there” [15:48];
“Nor will there be a way for them out of Fire” [2:167]; “They will
not enter the Garden until a camel can pass through the eye of a
needle” [7:40]; “No term will be determined for them, so they
should die, nor its penalty be lightened for them’ [35:36]; and,
“Indeed its torture will abide” [35:65]. They also point out that a
number of ahddith tell us that those who believe that there is no god
except Allah will be taken out of Fire; this is also the meaning of the
hadith on intercession. That ruling is especially for them. Now the
question is, if the infidels are also to be taken out of the Fire, there
will be no difference between them and the Believers in one God,
and the relief from the Fire will not be linked with faith. Finally,
Paradise or Hell will not abide of themselves forever, they will abide
because Allah will make them everlasting.

The author has said, “He has created people for each.” This is
referred to in the verse, “Many are the jinns and men We have made
for Hell” [7:179]. ‘A’ishah said that once when the Prophet (peace
be on him) was called to the funeral of a child from the Ansar, she
said, “Messenger of Allah, how blessed is this bird of Paradise! He
neither did any evil, nor will he see it.” the Prophet said, “‘A’ishah,
it might be different. Allah created some people for Paradise, and He
created them for it even before they were born. Likewise, He created

°°°Muslim, Az-Zakah, 987; Abii Dawid, 1658; An-Nasa’i, 5:12-14; Ahmad, 2:262,

_ 383, 490.
390 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

some people for Hell, and He created them for it even before they
were born.””°’ This hadith has been recorded by Muslim, Abi
Dawid and Al-Nasa’i. Allah has said, “Verily We created man from
a drop of mingled sperm in order to try him. So We gave him (the
gift) of hearing and sight. We showed him the way: whether he be
grateful or ungrateful (rests on his will)” [76:2-3]. The word “way”
in the verse means guidance, complete and comprehensive, not
simply natural guidance which 15 referred to in the verse, “He Who
gave to each being its form and then guided it...” [20:50].

There are two kinds of beings in the world, those that are
governed by natural laws and those that act of their own will. The
former Allah guides through natural inspiration, and the latter He
guides by revealing what 15 good or evil for them. The latter He has
further divided into three kinds. First are those that always do good
and never do evil; they are the angels. The second are those that
always do evil and never do good; they are the devils. The third are
those who may do both good and evil; they are the human beings.
He has also divided human beings into three categories. First are
those who subject their desires and passions to the behest of their
faith, reason and knowledge, and elevate themselves to the level of
the angels. The people of the second category act in the opposite
manner and degrade themselves to the level of the devils. In the third
category we have people whose animal desires often prevail over
their reason; they descend to the level of beasts. In short, Allah is
the creator of both forms of beings, ideal as well as real. Just as
nothing exists except what He creates, similarly no one is on the
right path except one whom He guides. The whole of existence
demonstrates His complete power, absolute oneness and perfect
lordship.

The author has said, “Those whom He allotted for Paradise, He
allotted just as a favor, and those whom He allotted for Hell He did
so because His justice demanded it.”’ Let us bear in mind that Allah
does not withhold a reward without withholding its cause, which is
good action. He has said, “Whoever works deeds of righteousness
and has faith, will have no fear of harm, nor of any curtailment (of
what is his due)” [20:112]. Similarly, He does not punish anyone
unless there 15 a cause for it. He has said, “Whatever misfortune
happens to you 15 because of the things your hands have wrought;
and for many (of you) He grants forgiveness” [42:30]. He is the
One Who gives and the One Who withholds. None can give what

°°’Muslim, Al-Qadr, 2662; Aba Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4713; Ibn Majah, ‏لكل‎
‎Muqaddamah, 82; An-Nasa’i, 4:57; Ahmad, 6:41, 208; Ibn Hibban, 138.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 391

He withholds or withhold what He gives. When He guides someone
to faith and inspires him with good deeds He does not withhold his
rewards. He will bestow upon him such favors and rewards as no
eye has ever seen, no ear has ever heard, and no mind has ever
imagined. On the other hand, when He does not bestow upon
someone His blessings that is because his cause is not forthcoming,
namely, righteous action.

To be sure, He guides whom He will and leaves astray whom
He will. This is, however, according to His wisdom and demand of
justice. When the cause is present He does not stop its effect from
taking place; He only stops the effect when the cause is insufficient,
either because there is something wrong in one’s deeds or because
there are obstacles there. He deprives a person of His favor or
inflicts upon him a penalty because he does not have faith or is
lacking in good deeds. He did not inspire that person with faith or
good deeds because He wants to try him or because that is the
demand of His wisdom and justice; in both cases He deserves our
praise. Every reward is a favor from Him and every punishment is
an act of justice. He is Wise and places things in their proper places,
as He has said, “When there comes to them a sign (from Allah) they
say: ‘We will not believe until we receive one exactly like those
received by Allah’s messengers.’ Allah knows best whom to charge
with His message” [6:124]; “Thus did We try some of them by
comparison with others that they should say: ‘Is it these then that
Allah has favored from among us?’ Does not Allah know best those
who are grateful?” [6:53]. We will return to this point later, God
willing.

(92) The power needed to perform a duty is a gift from
Allah, not an attribute possessed by man, and exists
only with the action. However, power in the sense of
health, potential, ability and fitness of the organs is
prior to action and is the basis of obligation. “Allah
does not place on any person a burden greater than he
can bear” [2:286].

The words ability (istita ‘ah), might (tagah), power (qudrah) and
capability (wus ‘) are almost synonymous. That power 15 of two
kinds,°®® as the author has stated, is the view of the Ahl as-Sunnah

in general. That is the balanced view. For the Qadariyyah and the

**8For this point see also Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmi‘ al-Fatawa, 8:129-131, 371-376,
479-480 and Dar’ Ta ‘adrud al-‘Agql wa an-Nagql, 1:60-63.

392 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

Mu‘tazilah, however, power must always exist prior to action. In
order to counter them, a group of the Ahl as-Sunnah came out with
the view that power always co-exists with action. However, the
majority of the Ahl as-Sunnah stick to the belief that power is of two
kinds. One, which is the basis of obligation and the condition for
Allah’s command, exists prior to action and does not necessarily co-
exist with it. The other, with which the action 15 actually performed,
co-exists with the action; there is no action without power.

Power in the sense of health, potential, ability and fitness of
organs, which exists prior to action has been referred to in various
verses of the Qur’an, for example, “Pilgrimage (hajj) to the House is
a duty men owe to Allah — those who can afford the journey thereto”
[3:97]. This clearly shows that Allah enjoins hajj on those who are
able to perform it. But if none can afford hajj except those who
actually make it, 1t will be enjoined only on those who make it. This
means that Allah would punish no one for not making hajj, which
goes against the established tenets of Islam.

Take another verse, “Fear Allah and obey Him as much as you
can” [64:16]. This also emphasizes that Allah enjoins fear and
obedience according to one’s ability. But, if one who does not obey
Allah could not obey Him, it would mean that Allah does not enjoin
obedience except on one who actually obeys Him. It also follows
that he will not punish those who do not fear and obey Him, which
is obviously false.

Here is a third verse: “One who is unable to do it should feed
sixty indigents” [58:4]. This means those who have the means and
tools to perform the act. In a fourth verse, Allah quotes the
hypocrites, “If only we could, we would certainly have come out
with you” [9:42]. Allah declares their statement to be a lie.

The ability referred to in all these verses is ability of means,
which 15 prior to action. The last verse quotes the words of the
hypocrites, concerning which Allah says, “They only ruin
themselves; for Allah knows that they are certainly lying.”
Obviously, if by inability they had meant their failure to go out,
Allah would not have called them liars when they did not go out.
But since He has charged them with lying, it means that by their
inability they meant either their illness or lack of provision for the
campaign. And had they been really sick or lacking the means, Allah
would have excused them, as He says, “There is no blame on those
who are infirm, or ill or who find no resources to spend... The
ground (of complaint) is against such as claim exemption while they
are rich” [9:91-93]. The same is the meaning of ability in the verse,
“If anyone of you have not the ability (istita‘ah) wherewith to wed
free (and) believing women they may wed believing girls from
Commentary on the Creed of At- 1 ‏آنه 1ه‎ 393

among those whom your right hands possess” [4:25]; and in the
hadith when the Prophet (peace be upon him) told ‘Imran Ibn
Hussayn, “Pray standing, but if you cannot, then sitting, and if you
cannot do even that, then lying on the side.”””’

Ability in the sense of actually performing an action has been
referred to in many verses, for example, “They could not hear and
could not see” [11:20]. Obviously, what is negated here are the acts
of hearing and seeing, not the means to hear and see, which they
had. We will discuss this point in detail later when we comment on
the author’s words, “They do not have power to do things except
those which He has commanded them.” Another verse is that in
which Moses is told by his companion, “Did 1 not tell you that you
cannot have patience with me” [18:75]. Here, too, what 15 meant is
patience itself and not the means of patience, which were not
lacking. The reproof that Moses’ friend administered to him was on
his failure to observe patience, not for his lack of means for
patience. We do not blame a person for not having means; we blame
him for not using them even though he has them, or for not using
his means for what they have been commanded to be used for, or
for using them against what they should be used for.

Those who believe that power exists only at the time of action
believe that power cannot be employed for doing a thing as well as
its opposite. Power is for doing a particular action and for doing that
only; for it exists with that action and not without it.

The free-willers (Qadarityyah), on the other hand, base their
view upon the wrong proposition that Allah gives equal powers to
every person, Believer and non-believer, righteous and wicked.
They deny that Allah helps the Believer in his faith and obedience,
and say that if he chooses faith he does it all by himself; on the other
hand, 11 the non-believer denies faith he does that all by himself. It is
just like a father who gives each of his sons a sword, but one uses it
to fight for the cause of Allah and another to rob people.

The scholars of the Ahl as-Sunnah, who believe in gadr, are
agreed that this view is wrong. They believe that Allah bestows
upon His faithful servants favors that He does not bestow upon the
unfaithful. He helps the faithful carry out His commands, but not
the unfaithful. He has said, “But Allah has endeared the faith to you,
and has made it beautiful in your hearts, and He has made hateful to
you unbelief, wickedness and rebellion. Such indeed are those who
are on the right track” [49:7]. The free-willers say that this endearing

°°? Al-Bukhari, 1117; Aba Dawid, As-Saldh, 952; At-Tirmidhi, As-Salah, 372; Ibn
Majah, /qgdmat as-Salah, 1223; Ahmad 4:426.

3924 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

of faith and making it beautiful is not only for the faithful but for
everyone, for it is simple to explain the faith and establish it with
arguments. But the verse demands that it should be limited to the
faithful, for it concludes with the words, “Such indeed are those
who are on the right track.” Obviously, the non-believers are not on
the right track. Elsewhere, Allah has said, “Those whom Allah (in
His plan) wills to guide, He opens their breast to Islam; and those
whom He wills to leave astray He makes their breast closed and
constricted, as if they had to climb up to the skies. Thus does Allah
(heap) the penalty on those who refuse to believe” [6:125]. There
are many verses of this nature in the Qur’an that declare that Allah
guides some and leaves others to stray, for example, “He whom
Allah guides is rightly guided, but he whom He leaves to stray, you
will not find for him any guardian to lead him to the right way”
[18:17]. This point’’® will be elaborated upon later, God willing.
Some people say that Allah prefers one over another arbitrarily
without any reason. If preference means something more than
simply selecting someone, that is the reason for preference; but if it
does not mean that, and the state of the preferrer before and after the
selection is the same without any change, and if selection can
equally occur in either state, that will flagrantly contradict all laws of
reason. Since the free-willers build on the proposition that the
obedient and the disobedient receive equal power and help from
Allah, they have to deny that the former might have some special
power to do Allah’s will, for the power which is for doing Allah’s
will is not available to one who does not do His will; only the doer
will have it, and, obviously, it will come from Allah. Again, since
they say that power has to exist prior to action, they deny that it
exists with action, for power, they say, means the ability to do and
not do, and when one does an action one cannot not do it. This leads
them to say that there is no power except what is prior to the action.
But this is wrong, for a thing cannot exist if some of the conditions
for its existence are lacking. In order for a thing to exist it is
necessary that all the conditions for its existence must be there. This
means that the view opposite to theirs is true, namely that for an act
to take place there must be some power there that co-exists with it.
However, those who believe in the necessity of a co-existing
power are divided into two groups. One group says that power
cannot exist except with the action. They think that there is only one
kind of power there, and that it cannot be employed both for doing

37780 discussion on the point see Ibn Taymiyyah, Dar’ Ta‘arud al-‘Agl wa an-Nagql,
1:26-31.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 395

something and for not doing it. For some of this group, however,
there is a different reason. They think that power is an incident
which cannot exist for two instants; hence it must exist with the
action.

The truth is that power is of two kinds, as we have said before.
One power forms the grounds for action and constitutes the ability to
do it and not do it. This power is the basis for the obligations of the
Shari‘ah. It precedes action and continues throughout the action,
_ either by itself, as is asserted by those who uphold the persistence of
an incident to the next instant, or through the recurrence of its
replicas. This power may be employed both for doing something
and for not doing it, and forms the basis of Allah’s obligation, for
He never obliges anyone to do something over which he has no
power or is not competent to do.

The ability that 1s required by the Shari‘ah is different and more
specific than the ability that, without its presence, an action cannot
be performed. The ability that the Shari‘ah perceives is one where an
action does not have to be performed if it is missing, even though it
is not impossible to be performed. Allah makes things easy on His
servants. He desires ease for them and does not want hardship for
them. No hardship has been put upon you from the religion. An ill
person can perform the prayer standing although that will hurt him
more and delay his recovery. From the Shari‘ah point of view, he is |
considered a person who does not have the ability to pray standing
due to the harm that it will cause him. Although he can be called
“capable”, the Lawgiver, from the view of legal capacity, has not
looked at the possiblity of an action but looks at its consequences. If
an action is actually possible but leads to greater harm, from the
Shari‘ah perspective it is not a “possible action”. An example is a
person having the physical ability to perform the pilgrimage but in
doing so he would do harm to his body and/or wealth, or one who
prays standing, making his illness worse, or if one fasts two months
and is cut off from his livelihood. If the Lawgiver takes into
consideration whether a specific act leads to "greater harm, how can
He hold one responsible for acts beyond one’s capability?

Although this power continues to exist until the action is
performed, it is not sufficient to bring about the action. Had it been
sufficient, one who did not do the action would be on the same level
with one who did it. It is, therefore, necessary that another force
concomitant with the action exist. For example, one should be made
to will the action, without which a voluntary action is inconceivable.
A firm will is part of the power that co-exists with the action, and
not of the power which precedes it, and is grounds for obligation.
Obviously, will is not part of the latter, for surely Allah does
396 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

command one who does not will the act. But He does not command
one who cannot do it even if he wills to do so. We do ask our
servants to do something which they did not intend to do, but we do
not ask them to do what they cannot do. When there is a firm will
along with sufficient power, the action must necessarily follow.

The issue of obligation for what one cannot do may be viewed in
the light of what has been said here. Those who believe that power
does not exist except at the time of action, say that every one of the
non-believers and the disobedient is asked to do what he cannot do.
But what one cannot do may mean what is completely beyond one’s
power. It is obvious that Allah does not oblige anyone to do what is
completely beyond his power. However, what one cannot do may
also mean what one is unable to do because he is engaged in doing
something other than or opposite to what he is asked to do. It is the
acts that one cannot do in this second sense that are commanded by
Islamic law. And it is also the acts of this category that we ask each
other to do. We do differentiate between the two meanings of “what
one cannot do”. Certainly we do not ask a blind man to put
diacritical marks on a passage of the Qur’an, but we do ask one who
is sitting to stand up. This is something quite plain.

(93) Human actions are created by Allah, although they
are acquired by man.

There are different opinions about our voluntary actions. The
determinists (Jahmiyyah), led by Al-Jahm Ibn Safwan As-
Samarqandi, say that human actions are completely determined by
Allah and are involuntary and unavoidable, just like the movement
of a shivering person, the beating of a pulse, or the swaying of trees
in the wind. Calling them human acts is using a metaphor; it is only
to attribute them to their locus, not to their doer.

The Mu‘tazilah hold the diametrically opposite view. They say
that voluntary actions, no matter what living being they proceed
from, are not at all created by Allah. On this point the Mu‘tazilis are
all agreed. They only differ on the question of whether Allah can
have any control over human actions.

The People of Truth say that human actions are human actions.
That it is why men are called obedient or sinful. On the other hand,
they are created by Allah, the only Creator Who creates everything
by Himself without the participation of anyone else. The
determinists exaggerate fore-ordainment and negate human
contribution just as the anthropomorphists exceed the limit in
affirming divine attributes. The free-willers, on the opposite side,
negate fore-ordainment and extol man as a creator of his actions in
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 397

place of Allah. This is the reason they are the Magians of this
ummah. But they are worse than the Magians. The Magians posit
only two creators, but they posit innumerable creators.

Allah has guided the Ahl as-Sunnah to the truth amid conflicting
views. He alone guides whomever He wills to the right path. All the
texts which the determinists quote prove only that Allah is the
Creator of all things, that He has power over all, that human actions
are part of His creation, that what He wills happens, and what He
does not will does not happen. But they do not prove that men do
not perform their actions in reality, or choose and will them, or that
their voluntary actions are like the shivering of a body, the blowing
of a wind or the swaying of a tree. On the other hand, the texts that
the free-willers cite only prove that men really do their acts, choose
and will them, and that to attribute actions to them is not
metaphorical; but they do not prove that human actions are not
determined by Allah, or that they happen without His will and
power.

If we combine what is true in one view with what is true in the
other, we get at the correct view, which the Qur’an and all the
revealed books teach, namely that Allah’s will and power
encompass all that is in the world, things as well as actions, and that
human beings are nevertheless the real doers of their actions, and
therefore deserve praise or blame for those acts. |

This is the truth. There is no contradiction between one text and
the other; each one supports the other. The limitations of this book
do not allow me to examine at length the arguments which each
group has advanced. I will only mention a few of them and show
that they do not prove that what the opposite group asserts is wrong.

The determinists, for example, cite the verse, “When you threw
(a handful of dust) you did not throw, but Allah threw it” [8:17],
and say that Allah denies that the throwing was the Prophet’s act and
infer that 1t was He Who did it. This, they claim, proves that man
does nothing. As for recompense, it is not the consequence, they
say, of human actions, and quote in support the hadith in which the
Prophet (peace be on him) said, “None of you will go to Paradise on
account of his deeds.” When someone asked, “Not even you,
Messenger of Allah?” he replied, “Not even I, except that Allah
cover me with His mercy.””’

The free-willers, on the other hand, cite the verse, “So blessed
be Allah, the Best of the creators” [23:14]. And with regard to

37! Ahmad, 2:256. See also Al-Bukhari, 5673, 6363, 6464; Muslim, 2816, 2817,
2818; Ahmad, 2:235, 256, 264, 326, 344.

398 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

recompense, they claim that it is the consequence of human actions
and a reward, as Allah has said, “a reward for their deeds” [32:17,
46:14, 56:24] and “Behold the Garden before you! You have been
made its inheritors, for your (good) deeds” [43:72].

In fact, the verse which the determinists have cited goes against
them. Allah attributes the throwing to the Prophet (peace be on him)
when He says, “When you threw...” This means that what He
affirms in these words should be different from what He denies
later, and this is not difficult to understand. Throwing is an act
which has a beginning and an end. The beginning 15 slinging and the
end is hitting; both are part of throwing. What the verse means to
say 1s, and Allah knows better, that the Prophet (peace be on him)
did not hit when he slung, it was Allah Who hit. If the determinists
do not accept this explanation they should be prepared to extend
their explanation to every other thing. They should say, for
example, that when a person prays or fasts, it is not he but Allah
Who prays and fasts, or when he fornicates or steals it is not he who
fornicates or steals (but it was Allah Who did so). This is obviously
false.

On the issue of recompense, the determinists and the free-willers
are equally wrong — and Allah has guided the Ahl as-Sunnah and to
Allah is the praise. They both fail to understand the preposition bi in
the two statements, “No one will go to Paradise bi ‘amalihi (on
account of his deeds),” and “This is the recompense bi ma 141
ya ‘malin (for what they have been doing).” the bi used in negation
is different from the bi used in an affirmation. In the former, bi is
the bi of ‘iwad (price). What the hadith denies is that human deeds
are a price for entry into Paradise, as the Mu‘tazilah think; for them
one has the right to enter Paradise when one has paid the price in the
form of deeds. But this is not true; entry into Paradise is a blessing
from Allah and a favor. In the latter statement, on the other hand, bi
is the bi of sabab (cause). That is, people will enter Paradise because
they have been doing good deeds. And since Allah is the Creator of
all reasons and causes, as well as their consequences or effects,
entry into Paradise will also be only a favor from Allah and His
blessing.” |

As for the argument of the Mu‘tazilah from the verse, “Blessed
be Allah, the Best of the creators (khaligin)”, khaliq here means
‘designer’ (musawwir) and ‘planner’ (mugaddir). Khalq often

°”See the discussion of this point in Ibn Taymiyyah, Jami‘ ar-Rasd’il (ed. Dr. M.
Rashad Salim; Jiddah: Dar Al-Madani, 2nd ed., 1405/1984), vol. I, pp. 146-152; Ibn
Al-Qayyim, Hadi al-Arwah, p. 61.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 399

means to plan and ordain, and this is what is meant in this verse, for
Allah has said elsewhere in the Qur’an, “Allah is the Creator
(Khaliq) of all things” [13:18, 39:62]. He is the Creator of every
created thing in the world, which includes human actions. However,
the Mu‘tazilah wrongly try to extend this verse to Allah’s speech.
They say that “all things” should also include Allah’s speech, and,
therefore, the Qur’an should be believed to be created. It 15 strange
that they consider Allah’s speech, which is His attribute and which,
therefore, 15 not a created thing, to be included in the phrase “all
things”, while they exclude human actions from it. Obviously, only
those things should be included in it which are created, not the
Essence of Allah or His attributes. The words, “wa Allah
khalaqakum wa mda ta‘malin (Allah has created you and 2
ta‘malin)” [37:96], as part of Allah’s speech are certainly not
created. But we do not understand the phrase md ta ‘maliin to mean
**vour action’ or *‘your carving’ (the idols). To be sure, this
interpretation does not fit in the context, for Abraham is objecting to
the worship of the idols which his people have carved (not to their
act of carving). However, the verse does say that the idols are
Allah’s creation. And since they are idols just because they have
been carved by people, it means that the product of human action is
a creation of Allah. But were the act of carving not Allah’s creation,
the objects carved would not have been Allah’s creation; they would
have been merely wood or stone, and nothing else.

Abi Al-Hussayn Al-Basri, the leader of the later Mu‘tazilah, has
said that the fact that man produces (yuhdith) his action is a piece of
necessary knowledge. On the other hand, Ar-R4zi has claimed that
we know a priori that in order for a possible contingent being to
exist 1t needs one who wills to bring it into existence, and it will not
exist if He does not will its existence. Both these propositions are
correct, and the claim which some people have made that they
contradict each other 15 wrong. Both parties are correct in what they |
assert, but they are wrong in what they deny, for there is no
contradiction between saying that man produces his actions and
saying that it is produced just because Allah wills it. Allah has said,
“By the soul and what He molded, and then inspired it with (the
knowledge of) its sins and its piety” [91:7-8]. This is an affirmation
of fore-ordainment; but on the other hand, the fact that sin and piety
are attributed to the soul also affirms that they are human acts, and
that it is man who is the sinner and who is pious. The following
verse, “Successful is the one who keeps it pure and ruined is the one
who corrupts it” [91:9-10], further affirms human action. We can
cite many more verses of this nature.
400 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Another misconception that arises from those groups that have |
been completely splintered is whether Allah should chastise people
for their sins which He has created in them. Will it be justice on His
part to punish for what He himself has created and done in them?
This question has been asked again and again by men throughout the
world, and people have given different answers according to their
knowledge. Different extremes have thereby developed. Some have
placed human actions outside the orbit of divine power; some have
denied that Allah’s actions have purpose and wisdom and that they
are subject to our judgments, and have thus closed all the doors to
this question; some have preferred the idea of acquisition (kasb),
which is hardly intelligible, and have tned to justify, on its basis,
reward and punishment; some have put forth the concept of double
causes and twin actors; and some have asserted determinism and
have not shied away from saying that Allah punishes people for
what is not their doing. That question is what led to all of these
divisions and differences.

The correct answer is that when one commits a sin, even though
Allah creates it, it is a punishment for another sin which one
committed earlier. One sin leads to another sin, the succeeding one
is punishment for the preceding one, just as one disease leads to
another disease.

One might ask, what about the first sin which led to subsequent
sins? What has led to it? the answer is that it is punishment for not
doing what one has been created for and what is ingrained in man.
Allah has created man to worship and serve Him alone without
associating anyone with Him, and He has endowed man with love
and devotion to Him. He has said, “So set your face steadily and
truly to the Faith that Allah has prescribed, (and) upon which He has
formed mankind” [30:30]. So when a man does not do what he was
created for and does not devote himself to Allah, and love Him and
serve Him, he is punished for the omission in that Satan makes the
shirk and sin that he indulges in alluring and pleasing to him. He
finds an empty heart which can welcome good as well as evil. If it
had good in it, he would not have filled it with evil. Allah has said,
“Thus (did We command) so that We might turn away from him evil
and shameful deeds, for he (Joseph) was one of Our sincere and
purified (mukhlas) servants” [12:24]. Allah has quoted Iblis as
saying, “Then by Your power, I will put them all in the wrong,
except your servants among them, sincere and purified (by your
grace)” [38:82-83], and Allah responded, “This is indeed a way that
leads straight to Me, for over My servants no authority will you
have, except such as put themselves in the wrong and follow you”
[15:41-42]. Ikhlas is to purify the heart from love and devotion to all
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 401

else other than Allah and to devote oneself to Him and serve Him
sincerely. When this happens Satan cannot lure man; but when it
does not happen, he lures man. Thus to put him in this condition of
committing a sin is a kind of punishment for the absence of ikhlds,
and this is fair and just.

One may ask about the absence of ikhids, as to who has created
it in man? the answer is that the question is invalid, for non-
existence, as the term says, is not an object to be created or
produced. The absence of an action is not something positive that
requires an actor for it to happen. It is evil pure and simple, and no
evil comes from Allah, as the Prophet (peace be on him) said in
opening his prayer, “Lord! Here I am. Glory to you. All good is in
Your hands, and evil does not come from You.’”’? These words
also form part of the prayer he will address to Allah when
interceding on behalf of the sinners on the Day of Judgment.

Allah has made it clear that He lets Satan have control only over
those people who take him as their friend and supporter, and
associate him with Allah. So when they follow him and associate
him with Allah he is given control over them by way of punishment.
Their association of Satan with Allah and their devotion to him
besides Allah is, therefore, a punishment for them for their lack of
ikhlds to Allah. Hence, when one 15 inspired with the right and the
good, it is the result of one’s ikh/ds; and when one is inspired with
evil and sin it is the result of the absence of ikh/as.

One may ask: if the absence of ikh/ids is something existing, the
objection remains; but if it is something negative, or non-existing
then would it be fair for Allah to punish anybody for something
non-existing? We point out that the absence of ikh/as does not mean
that one has restrained the soul from indulging in desires. Were it
so, it would be taken as something existing. But what we have here
is the absence of all the means to goodness. This non-existence 1s
simply the deprivation of everything useful to the soul, and the
punishment of this deprivation is indulgence in evil, which is
different from the punishment that follows when one denies a
prophet after his veracity has been established.

In fact, Allah’s punishment 15 of two kinds. One is that He lets a
man do wrong and commit sin. This is a chastisement for his lack of
ikhlds, indifference and non-submission, a chastisement which 15
often not felt and does not hurt as one continues to indulge in one’s
desires, but nonetheless it is a great punishment. The second
punishment, that which follows the commission of sin is painful.

5731015015560 earlier; it is authentic.

402 7 7 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Allah has referred to the first punishment in these words, “When
they forgot the warning they had received, We opened to them the
gates of all (good) things” [7:44]; and He has referred to the second
in the following words, “Until, in the midst of their enjoyment of
our gifts, on a sudden, We called them to account, when lo! they
were plunged in despair” [6:44].

One may ask: if it is possible for them to have turned to Allah in
repentance and to have submitted to Him without Him creating
contrition in their heart and acquiescence and submission to Him,
would it have sufficed if He had only put in their hearts the thought
of ikhlas? The answer is in the negative, for this depends entirely on
Allah’s favor and grace. All good is in His hands; no one can do
anything good except what He bestows. Similarly, no one can
refrain from any evil except what He saves one from.

One may ask again: if it is not created in people’s hearts, and
they are not inspired to it, and on the other hand they cannot do it by
themselves, the question still remains: if Allah deprives them of it,
will He not be being unfair to them? Will you then fall back on the
answer that there is nothing wrong in appropriating one’s property
as one likes, and Allah will not be asked for what He does? We say
that Allah does not do anything wrong if He withholds His grace.
One is wrong when one does not render what is due to someone
else. Injustice in this sense, Allah has forbidden for Himself, and
has prescribed for Himself just the opposite. He withholds ‘from
someone what is not his due, which is simply His own favor and
grace; hence, He will not be doing anything wrong. Injustice is to
withhold what is someone’s due. To withhold a favor, on the other
hand, is simply fair. Allah is fair when He withholds His favor, and
beneficent when He bestows it.

One may still ask: when Allah gives something and inspires to
some good, it is only a favor and grace from Him; why should He
then not make one do good and prevail over him, just as He has said
that His mercy prevails over His wrath? We first point out that what
we wanted to demonstrate was that if Allah punished somebody
from whom He had withheld the inspiration to do good, He did not
do injustice to him, nor was it injustice if He withheld the
inspiration. The question raised now is different. It concerns divine
wisdom in making His justice prevail over His grace. In fact, it is a
question of why He does not bless and favor all his servants
equally, or why He favors one and does not favor another. Allah
has answered this question when He says, “This is the grace of
Allah, which He bestows on whom He pleases, and Allah is the
Lord of grace abounding” [57:21]. Referring to the blessings that
He has bestowed on the ummah of Muhammad, He says, “Let the
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 403

people of the Book know that they have no power whatsoever over
the grace of Allah, (and) that His grace is entirely in His hands to
bestow on whomsoever He wills, for Allah is the Lord of grace
abounding” [57:29-30].

When the Jews and Christians questioned the Prophet (peace be
on him) about why Allah gave his ummah two rewards and gave
them only one reward, he told them Allah’s answer in these words:
“Did I withhold from you your due and do you injustice?” They
replied, “No.” Thereupon Allah said, “This is My favor which I
bestow upon those whom I will.”°”* It is not wise that He should
foretell every one of His decisions as to whom He will favor and
whom not. When He revealed to a servant of His a part of His
wisdom in dealing with his people, in prescribing for them rules,
and in requiting them reward or punishment, and in favoring one
and not favoring another, he thought it over and exclaimed that what
he knew was very, very small in comparison to what he did not
know.

While not knowing the wisdom of Allah about the recipient of
His guidance, the polytheists of Makkah asked, “Is it these then that
Allah has favored from among us?” Allah retorted, “Does Allah not
know best those who are grateful?” [7:53]. If you ponder this
answer you will realize that Allah knows best the soil wherein He
should plant the tree of his favor which will bear the fruit of
gratefulness, just as He knows the soil wherein He should not plant.
the tree because it is not fruit-bearing; and had He tried that, His
efforts would have gone to waste, which would be against His
wisdom. That is why He has said, “Allah knows best whom to
charge with His mission” [6:124].

One may say that if 1 deny any creation on the part of man I, in
fact, am denying that man is the doer of his actions. This is not true.
Man really does his actions and he really has the power to do it.
Allah has said, “Whatever good you do Allah knows it” [2:197];
and, “Do grieve no longer over what they have been doing” [11:36].
Many more verses of this kind can be quoted.

Now, when it is established that man is the doer of his actions,
know that his actions are of two kinds. One proceeds from him
without his power and his will coming into play. They are attributed
to him but they are not his acts; an example is the movement of a
person shivering with cold. The second kind of acts is those which
proceed from man following the use of his power and will. They are

°74 Al-Bukhari, 557, 2268, 2269, 3459, 5021, 7467, 7533; At-Tirmidhi, 2871;
Ahmad, 2:6, 111, 121, 129; At-Taydalisi, 1820.

404 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

attributed to him, and they are his acts and his acquisition (kasb).
They are his voluntary acts,, but it is Allah Who has made man the
actor and the willer, and it is absolutely His making, without the
participation of anyone else. This is why the Elders have denounced
determinism (jabr). Determinism denotes that the agent does not
have power, that he is forced to do the act. In our language we say
that the father has power to force (ijbar) his young daughter to
marry, but he cannot force (ijbar) an adult or widowed daughter and
give her in marriage against her will.

Coercion (ijbar) in this sense is not attributed to Allah, for He is
the Creator of human will and what it wills; He causes man to
choose freely as against the other beings. That is why the Islamic
texts use the word jabal rather than jabr. The Prophet (peace be on
him) said to Ashajj ‘Abdul-Qays, “You have two qualities which
Allah likes very much: forbearance and patience.” Ashajj asked,
“Have I acquired them or have I been endowed with them (jubiltu
‘alayhima)?” the Prophet said, “You have been endowed with
them.” Ashajj said, “Praise and thanks to Allah, Who has endowed
me with qualities which He and His Prophet love.”’? Allah
punishes man for his voluntary acts, and the distinction between
punishment for voluntary acts and non-voluntary acts is inherent in
human nature and part of natural reason.

Lastly, one might say that to create an act and then to punish for
it is injustice. I will say that it is just like swallowing poison and
then producing death as a result, which is obviously not unjust. As
the poison is the cause of death, sin is the cause of punishment. So
if there is no injustice in the former, there is no injustice in the latter.

To sum up: Human actions are really done by people, but they
are created by Allah. Human acts are objects of His creation
(makhliq), as well as objects of His action (maf‘a/), though not His
action (fi 7). One must distinguish between action (fi ‘1) and an object
of action (maf‘al), creation (khdlq) and an object of creation
(makhliiq). This is what the author had in mind when he said,
“Human actions are Allah’s creation (khdlq), and human
acquisition.” He says “human actions” and “human acquisition
(kasb)” and, on the other hand, “Allah’s creation”, for kasb refers to
those actions whose good or bad consequences are suffered by the
doers. Allah has said, “It (the soul) gets every good that it earns
(kasabat), and it suffers every ill that it earns (iktasabat) “ [2:286].

3754610 Dawiid, 5255; At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 5313. See also Muslim, 17, 25, 18; At-
Tirmidhi, 2011; Ahmad, 3:23.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 405

(94) Allah does not impose actions upon human beings
except what they can do, and they are only able to do
what He has imposed upon them. This is the meaning of
the Prophet’s words, “There is no power and no
strength save in Allah.” We believe that no one can do
anything or move anything, or abstain from any sin
except with the help of Allah, nor can anyone obey His
command and persevere in obedience except by His
grace. Everything happens according to His will,
knowledge, decree and planning. His will rules over all
wills and His decree prevails over all planning. He does
what He pleases and He never commits injustice. “He is
not to be questioned for His acts, but they will be
questioned (for theirs)” [21:23].

The statement, “Allah does not impose actions upon human
beings except what they can do,” is based upon the Qur’anic verses,
“Allah does not place on any soul a burden greater than it can bear’
[2:286], and “No burden do We place on any soul but what it can
bear” [6:152, 7:42, 23:62].

However, Abt: Al-Hassan Al-Ash‘ari tries to justify, on rational
grounds, obligations that are beyond one’s power.””° His followers
are not sure if there is any text to support his view. Some who think
that there is support, cite the case of Aba Lahab. He was called
upon, they say, to believe, but Allah said that he would not believe
and “will be burned soon in a Fire of blazing flame” [111:3]. This
means that he was asked to believe what he would not believe. This
is asking a person to do two contradictory things simultaneously,
which is impossible. However, this contention is not correct. It is
not true that Abt Lahab was asked to believe what he would not
believe. He had the power to believe, and was not incapable of
believing. He was, therefore, charged only with what he had power
over, power in the sense we have explained earlier.

There is also no support for this view in the words Allah
addressed to the angels: “Tell Me the names of these, if you are
correct” [2:31], while they did not have such knowledge, or in the
words that will be addressed to the sculptors on the Day of

*7See Aba Al-Hassan Al-Ash‘ari, Kitab al-Lumd (ed. and trans. by Richard J.
McCarthy, S.J.; Beirut: Al-Matba‘ah Al-Kathulikiyyah, 1953), p. 68. See also Ibn
Taymiyyah, Dar’ Ta‘arud al-‘Aql wa an-Nagql, 1:60-65; Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmi‘ al-
Fatadwa, 3:318-326.

406 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Judgment, “Put life into the things you have carved,””’’ and other,
similar ahddith. Actually, the words addressed to the angels or to the
sculptors do not command anything for which they will be rewarded
or punished; it is only a way to state that they are not able to do
those things.

Similarly, the supplication of the Believers, “Our Lord! Put not
on us a burden greater than we have strength to bear’ [2:286], does
not imply that Allah may charge them with such a duty, for to charge
one with what he cannot do is not to charge him with a duty. It
would be like asking him to move a mountain, which would surely
prove fatal. Ibn Al-Anbari said that what the verse means 15 that
Allah should not charge them with something which 15 difficult for
them to do, even though they could do it if they greatly exerted
themselves and bore all troubles. Allah has addressed the Arabs in
their own language and in their own style. When they said to a
person they hated that they could not see him, they simply meant
that it was difficult for them to look at him, even though they could
physically see him. It is not wise that Allah should command
someone to remove a mountain and say that one will be rewarded if
he does and punished if he does not. This 1s made clear by Allah
himself when He says, “He does not put on any soul a burden
greater than it can bear” [2:286]. |

Some people say that it is justified to charge one with what is
usually impossible, as against what 15 in itself impossible. The latter
is inconceivable and hence cannot be commanded; on the other
hand, the former is conceivable. A third group of people say that
what cannot be done cannot be a duty except what cannot be done
just because one is busy with something else. These people in
essence agree with the Elders and the leading scholars. They use,
however, innovative language when they say “except what cannot
be done because one is busy with something else,” for it boils down
to saying that one cannot do what one does not do. They resort to
such language because of their assumption that power (tdqah),
whether you call it ability (istita‘ah) or capability (qudrah), exists
only with the action. This leads them to say that what one does not
do, one cannot do, and this goes against the Qur’an, the Sunnah and
the consensus of the Elders, as well as against common sense, as
we have said previously in the discussion on power (istita ‘ah).

The power which co-exists with action is not a pre-condition for
obligation, even though the intention for the action is there. The
exponents of this view argue from the verse, “They lost the power

*™ Part of ahadith, Al-Bukhari, 5951, 7558; Muslim, 2108; An-Nasa’i, 8:215.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 407

to hear” [11:20], and “Verily, you (Moses) will not be able to have
patience with me” [18:67, 72, 75]. But what they call power
(istitd ‘ah) and which co-exists with action is not intended at all here.
Allah has condemned them for losing the power to hear. If the
power referred to here meant the power that exists with action, no
human being would be able to hear before he actually hears. Nor
would there be any sense in marking out some people for
condemnation. The people who have been condemned have been
condemned because they disliked the truth or they found it difficult
to practice, or they hated the people who preached it, or they did not
want to give up their lusts.

Moses, on the other hand, did not have patience with his
companion because the latter, in his view, was violating the Law; he
did not have the knowledge that his companion had. What I am
saying here is completely in agreement with the common usage of
Arabs as well as non-Arabs. When people hate a person they say,
“We cannot do any good for him.” Obviously, they utter that out of
hatred for him and not because they are incapable of doing it. To
say, “We cannot harm him” is a form of exaggeration. Similarly, for
someone they love, they say, “We cannot punish him.” They cannot
punish him because they love him too much, not because they do
not have the ability to do so. Again, when you say, “I will beat to
death,” you simply mean that you will beat him severely. When
Allah says that they lost the power to hear, He is not excusing them.
If Allah were to command only what people like, there would be
chaos everywhere in the world. Allah has said, “If the Truth had
been in accord with their desires, truly the heavens and the earth and
all beings therein would have been in confusion and corruption”
[23:71].

The author has then said, “They cannot do except what Allah
imposes upon them (yukallifuhum) to do.” What he means 1s that
people cannot do except what Allah empowers them to do, a gift
which is different from the gifts of health, power and fitness of the
organs that He has bestowed upon them. And, “There is no power
and no might except in Allah” is evidence that proves fore-
ordainment. The author comments on it later; however, the language
He has used is confusing. We do not use the word “impose upon”
(taklif) for “empowering” (igdar); it is used only for command and
prohibition. He has said, “He does not impose upon them except
what they can do, and they do not do except what He has imposed
upon them.” Apparently, this implies that they both have the same
meaning. In any case, it is not true, for people sometimes do more
than what Allah commands them to do. When He commands them,
He does consider their facility and their ease. He has said, “Allah
408 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

intends every facility for you; He does not want to put you to
difficulties” [2:185]; “Allah wishes to lighten your (burden)” [4:28];
and, “He has imposed no difficulties on you in religion” [22:78].
Hence, if He had increased our obligations, we must have been able
to do them. But He has not increased them; in fact, He has charged
us with less than what we can do. He has been merciful to us and
has not put us into difficulty in religion. In any case, the author’s
language is confusing.

“Everything happens as He wills, knows and decrees.” By
decree (gadda) the author means the creative/cosmic/positive decree
(al-gada al-kawni) not the religious/normative decree (al-gadda ash-
shar '1(. Decree is of two kinds: cosmic and religious. Similarly will
(irddah), command (amr), leave (or permission) (idhn), writing
(kitab), injunction (hukm), prohibition (tahrim) and word (kalimah)
are all of two kinds, cosmic or creative, and religious or
legislative.”’* The verse, “So He ordained them (gadd hunna) as
seven firmaments in two days” [41:12], for example, uses gadd in
the sense of creative decree; and the verse, “Your Lord has decreed
(qada) that you worship none but Him” [17:23], uses it in the
religious/prescriptive sense.

We have already cited verses referring to the cosmic and the
religious wills (al-iraddah al-kawniyyah wa ad-diniyyah) while
commenting on the author’s words, “Nothing happens except what
He wilis.”

As for existential command (al-amr al-kawni), it is referred to in
the verse, “But His command, when He intends a thing, is only that
He says unto it, ‘Be,’ and it is” [36:82]. It is also referred to in the
following verse, according to the stronger opinion on this question,
“When We decide to destroy a population We command (amarna)
the affluent among them, and they transgress, so that the word is
proved against them, then He destroys them utterly” [17:16].

The legislative command (al-amr ash-shar‘i) 1s referred to in
verses like, “Verily, Allah commands justice and kindness” [16:90];
and, “Verily, Allah commands you to render back your. trusts to
those to whom they are due” [4:58].

The existential leave (al-idhn al-kawni) is meant in the verse,
“They could not harm with it anybody except by Allah’s leave”
[2:102], and the legal permission (al-idhn ash-shar 1) is meant in the

Pod

°”®For a detailed discussion of this point, see Ibn Al-Qayyim, Shifa‘ al-‘Alil, 270-
283.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi | 409

verse, “Whether you cut down the tender palm trees or left them
standing on their roots, it was by leave of Allah” [59:5].

As for cosmic prescription (al-kitab al-kawni), it is referred to in
the verses, “Nor is a man long-lived granted length of days, nor is a
part cut off from his life, but it is in a Book. All this is easy to
Allah” [35:11]; and, “Before this We wrote in the Psalms after the
message (given to Moses): ‘My servants, the righteous will inherit
the earth’” [21:105]. The religious or legislative writing (al-kitab
ash-shar 7 ad-dini) is referred in such verses as, “We commanded
(katabna) therein for them: life for life, eye for eye...” [5:48], and
“Believers, fasting is prescribed (kutiba) for you...” [2:183].

Reference to the existential command (al-hukm al-kawni) 5
found in verses like, “Therefore, I will not leave this land until my
father permits me, or Allah commands me, and He 1s the best to
command” [12:80]; and, “Say: My Lord! Judge you in truth! Our
Lord Most gracious is the One Whose assistance should be sought
against the blasphemies you utter” [21:112]. Reference to religious
injunction (al-hukm ash-shar 1) is found in verses like, “Lawful unto
you (for food) are all four-footed animals with the exception named.
But animals of the chase are forbidden while you are in the Sacred
Precincts or in pilgrim’s garb, for Allah commands according to His
will and plan” [5:2]; and, “Such is the command of Allah: He judges
(with justice) between you” [60:10].

The existential prohibition (at-tahrim al-kawni) is referred to in
such verses as, “Allah said: Therefore the land will be forbidden to
them for forty years, and in distraction will they wander through the
land” [5:29]; and, “But forbidden it is for any population which We
have destroyed that they return” [21:95]. The religious prohibition
(at-tahrim ash-shar 7) is meant in such verses as, “Forbidden to you
(for food) are dead meat, blood, the flesh of swine...” [5:3], and
“Prohibited to you (for marriage) are your mothers, daughters...”
[4:23].

As for the existential word (al-kalimah al-kawniyyah), it 1s
referred to in the verse, “The fair word of your Lord was fulfilled
for the children of Israel, because they had patience and constancy”
[7:137]; and in the hadith of the Prophet (peace be on him), “I take
shelter in the perfect words of Allah, which neither the good nor the
wicked can violate.”’’” Word in the religious or legal sense (al-
kalimah ash-shar ‘tyyah ad-diniyyah) is referred to in the verse,

‘Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

410 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

“And remember that Abraham was tried by his Lord with certain
words which he fulfilled” [2:124].

The author has said, “Allah does what He wills and He is never
unjust.” the Qur’an has also stressed that Allah does not do any
injustice to His people. However, in this regard we should take a
course between the free-willers and the determinists.°°° Whatever is
wrong and unjust for man is not necessarily wrong and unjust for
Allah, as the free-willers and the Mu‘tazilah believe. They liken
Allah to His creatures and conceive of Him on their pattern. Far
exalted is He above that. He is Self-Sufficient and Powerful. Men,
on the other hand, are poor, dependent upon Allah, and completely
under His control. Some theologians entertain the wrong view that
injustice means what Allah cannot do, and say that whatever He
does cannot be unjust. Everything possible is just if He does it. The
only actions which are unjust are those which violate the command
of an authority, and Allah is not subject to any authority. This view
is contradicted by many verses of the Qur’an, such as, “But
whoever works deeds of righteousness, and has faith will have no
fear of imjustice nor of any curtailment” [20:112]; “The word
changes not before Me, and I do not the least injustice to My
servants” [50:29]; “Nowise will We be unjust to them. It is they
who have been unjust to themselves” [43:76]; “They will find all
that they did placed before them, and not one will your Lord treat
with injustice” [18:49]; “That Day will every soul be requited for
what it earned; no injustice will there be that Day, for Allah is swift
in taking account” [40:17].

That opinion is also contradicted by the hadith in which the
Prophet (peace be on him) quotes Allah as saying, “My servants, [
have banned injustice for Me and have banned injustice for you.
You must not, therefore, wrong each other.’”*' Two things are clear
from this hadith. One, Allah has banned injustice for Himself, and
obviously it is not the impossible which is banned. Second, His
statement that He has banned injustice for Himself is just like His
statement that He has imposed mercy on Himself. This contradicts
the view that the application of injustice to Allah’s action is ruled out
because He cannot be imagined to violate the command of any
authority over Him, as there is no such authority. Allah clearly says

**°For an elaboration of this point see Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmia‘ al-Fatawa, 18:137-
145; Ibn Taymiyyah, Jdmi‘ ar-Rasa@’il, vol. I, pp. 119-142; Ibn Al-Qayyim,
~Mukhtasar as-Sawa’iq al-Mursalah, vol. 1, pp. 311-319.

*’'Muslim, Al-Birr wa as-Salah, 2577; At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Oiydmah, 2497; Ibn
Majah, Az-Zuhd, 4257; Ahmad, 5:154, 160, 177.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 4117

that He has imposed mercy on Himself and banned injustice.
Obviously He will impose on Himself or ban for Himself only such
things as He can do, not what is inconceivable.

The Elders have said that the verse, “He does not have to fear
injustice or any curtailment” [20:112], means that one should not
fear that the evil deeds of others will be charged to his account, or
his own good deeds will be dropped from it. At another place, Allah
has said, “No soul will bear the burden of another’ [17:15].
Obviously, no one fears what is impossible, and no one needs to be
assured against it; one needs assurance only against what is
possible. Since the verse assures against injustice, it means that
injustice is possible and Allah can cause it. Similarly, when Allah
says, “Do not quarrel in My presence... I do not the least injustice to
My servants” [50:28-29], He does not forswear what is impossible
or what He cannot do; He only forswears what He can do, namely
punishing for not doing anything wrong.

Again, if they are correct, Allah need not be exalted over
anything, for He can do anything, and whatever He does must be
good, as evil has no meaning in His context. This is plainly in
conflict with the Qur’an. Allah has said more than once that He does
not do what does not behoove him, and that He is exalted far above
what is evil, undesirable or meaningless, for example, “Do you then
think that We had created you in jest, and that you will not be
brought back to us (for account)?” [23:115]. Here He exalts Himself
above creating something that has no purpose, and condemns those
who attribute such an act to Him. “Will We then treat the people of
faith like the people of sin?” [68:35]; or, “Will We treat those who
believe and work deeds of righteousness the same as those who do
mischief on earth? Will We treat those who guard against evil the
same as those who turn aside from the right?” [38:28]. These verses
clearly refute the view that Allah may treat the righteous and the
wicked alike, and shows that Allah will not do that because it is an
evil practice. Also, “What! Do those who seek after evil ways think
that We will hold them equal with those who believe and do
righteous deeds - that equal will be their life and their death? What
an evil judgment they make!” [45:21].

Abt Dawid in his Sunan and Al-Hakim in his Al-Mustadrak
have recorded a hadith reported by many Companions, such as Ibn
‘Abbas, ‘Ubadah Ibn Samit and Zayd Ibn Thabit, that the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “If Allah were to punish the inhabitants of
the heavens and the earth, He would punish them without doing any
injustice to them; and 11 He were to have mercy on them, His mercy
412 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

would be better than their deeds.”’*’ The determinists believe that
this hadith supports their view. The free-willers, on the other hand,
think that it conflicts with their views; consequently they either deny
it or misinterpret it.

Only the Ahl as-Sunnah accept this hadith without any
reservation. They say that it praises Allah’s greatness and majesty,
extols His blessings on His creatures, and underscores their failure
to render what 1s His due, whether because of weakness, ignorance,
defiance or ungratefulness; for it is His right that one should obey
and not defy Him, remember and not forget Him, be thankful and
not thankless to Him, strongly love Him, completely trust Him,
submit to Him, fear Him and put his hopes in Him. It 15 our duty ©
that we love Him, remember Him and obey Him with all our heart
and all our might. This is certainly possible, but we fail in varying
degrees. Some of us succeed in one respect but fail in another.
There is nobody that does not defy Allah’s will, and does not do,
for a period long or short, what he is not created for. If Allah were
to carry out His justice, He would punish the people of the heavens
and the earth without doing any injustice to them. The best that
people can do is repent for their sins. If Allah accepts that, it will
only be a favor from Him; but if He decides to punish them for their
sins, He will not be doing injustice to them, even if they repent. He
has, however, decided out of mercy not to punish anyone who
repents, and has imposed on Himself mercy. Hence, what saves
people is His mercy and forgiveness.

Their own deeds will not save them from Hell or take them to
Paradise. As the most pious man on earth, the most obedient and the
most humble to Allah has said, “Nobody will be saved on account
of his deeds.” They said, “Not even you, Messenger of Allah?’ He
replied, “Not even I, except if Allah covers me with His mercy and
grace.””** His best friend asked him how to supplicate in prayer. He
said, “Say, ‘Lord, I have done great wrong to myself. None can
pardon wrongs and forgive except You. Forgive me just as a favor
from you, and have mercy on me. You are indeed Forgiving,
Merciful.’”** If this was the condition of the person who was the
best man on earth after the prophets and the messengers, you can

152 ‏روم‎ of a long hadith, Abii Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4699; Ibn Majah, Al-Mugaddamah,
77; Ahmad, 5:182-183, 185, 189; Ibn Hibban, 1877; Al-Lalka’i, 1093, 1232. This
hadith is authentic. |

*83Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

°84 Al-Bukhari, 834, 6326, 7388; Muslim, Adh-Dhikr wa ad-Du ‘a’, 2705; At-Tirmidhi,
Ad-Da‘wat, 3521, 3835; An-Nasa’i, 3:53; Ibn Majah, Ad-Du ‘a’, 3835; Ahmad, 1:4,
p. 7.

20101011010101 01100 413

think of others. In fact, he became the most righteous (as-Siddiq)
just because of Allah’s grace, and he attained that position by
knowing Allah, by knowing His greatness and majesty, by
recognizing His rights on His creature on the one hand, and
recognizng his own shortcomings on the other.

Wretched is he who thinks that men do not need Allah’s
forgiveness and mercy. Such a person is completely ignorant of
Allah and His rights. One who cannot appreciate this should think of
Allah’s great blessings on him, and what he ought to do for them.
He should weigh his thankfulness and ingratitude. If he thinks over
all this, I am sure he will realize that were Allah to punish people in
the heavens and on the earth He would punish them without doing
any injustice at all.

(95) We believe that the dead benefit from the prayers
and charities offered by the living on their behalf.

The Ahl as-Sunnah are agreed that the dead benefit from the acts
of the living in two ways.°*’ They benefit, first, from the things to
which they had contributed in their lives, and second, from the
prayers of Muslims for their forgiveness, as well as from their
charity and hajj. There is, however, some difference with respect to
hajj. In the opinion of Muhammad Ibn Al-Hassan, the deceased gets
the benefits of charity, but not of hajj, which reaches only its doer.
For the rest of the scholars, however, the benefit of hajj may reach
anyone on whose behalf it is performed, and this is correct. As for
the other acts of worship associated with one’s person, like fasting,
prayer, reading the Qur’4n and remembering Allah (dhikr), Abi
Hanifah, Ahmad and the majority of the Elders believe that their
benefits reach the dead. However, in the opinions of Ash-Shafi‘I
and Malik, as they are known to people, their benefits do not reach
the dead.

Some mistaken heretics claim that no benefits reach the dead
from anything the living do, even supplications (du ‘a’). They argue
from the verses, “Man can have nothing but what he strives for”
[33:59]; “You will be repaid the rewards of your past deeds”
[36:54]; and, “It (the soul) gets what good it earns and suffers what
evil it earns” [2:286]. They also cite the hadith of the Prophet (peace
be on him), “When a man dies his deeds come to an end. However,

3550 a fuller discussion, see Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmii‘ al-Fatawa, 24:306-313; Ibn
Al-Qayyim, Ar-Riah, 159-193.

F16 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI

414 _ Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahawiyyah

he continues to benefit from three things: a lasting charity, a good
son who prays for him, and knowledge from which people benefit
after him.’’*° This hadith mentions, they say, only those things to
which one contributed to while alive, and does not say anything
about those to which one did not contribute.

Some people say that the only acts of worship that can benefit
are those which one is allowed to perform on behalf of others. But
acts which cannot be performed on another’s behalf, such as
embracing the faith (Islam), praying, fasting, and reciting the
Qur’dn, do not benefit the dead. They cite the hadith which Al-
Nasa’i recorded on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘in which the
Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Nobody can perform prayer or fast
on behalf of another. However, one can give half a handful (mudd)
of wheat for every day of fasting to the poor for his meals.’””*

Arguments in support of the view that the dead may benefit from
things to which they have not contributed come from the Qur’an, the
Sunnah, Consensus (of the scholars) and valid analogy (giydas).

The Qur’an states, “Those who came after them say: ‘Our Lord!
Forgive us and our brethren who came before us into Faith’”
[59:10]. This verse praises the people who pray for the forgiveness
of their brethren who came before them. The implicaton is clear that
the dead benefit from the prayers of their successors. The ummah is
agreed that the dead benefit from the prayer of the living which they
say at the deceased’s funeral. The prayers that are mentioned in the
ahddith for that occasion are well known; similarly well known are
the prayers that are said after putting the dead in the grave. For
example, Abi Dawud has reported from ‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan that
the Prophet (peace be on him) stood by a grave when a dead body
was placed in it and said to people around him, “Pray that Allah
forgives your brother and that he does not waver when he is
questioned. This is going to take place now.’”**

Visitors to the grave should also say some prayers. In his Sahih,
Muslim has recorded from Buraydah Ibn Al-Husayb that the
Prophet (peace be on him) used to teach them that at the time of

*®Muslim, Al-Wasi‘ah, 1631; Aba Dawid, Al-Wasayd, 2880; At-Tirmidhi, Al-
Ahkam, 1376; An-Nasa’i, 6:251; Ahmad, 2:382.

°87 At-Tahawi, Mushkil al-Athar, 3:141. The chain of the tradition does not go back
to the Prophet (peace be on him), but stops at the Companion, Ibn ‘Abbas; however,
the chain is authentic. See Ibn Al-Qayyim, Ar-Rih, p. 239.

3515 Aba Dawid, A/-Jana’iz, 3221, Al-Bayhaqi, Sunan, 4:56; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-
Sunnah, 1523; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 1:370, and Adh-Dhahabi has agreed with the
Al-Hakim’s evaluation that the hadith is authentic.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 415

visiting graves one should say, “Peace be upon you, people of imdn
and Islam who are in these graves. We will also be joining you
when Allah wills. We pray for peace and rest for you and for us.”°®’
Muslim has also recorded the hadith wherein ‘A’ishah asked the
Prophet (peace be on him) about how to pray for people in the
graves. He said, “Say: Peace be upon you, people of these houses,
people of imdn and islam! May Allah have mercy on those who go
before us and those who will come after. We will also join you,
when ‏1135م‎ |

As for the question whether the benefits of charity reach the
dead, there is a hadith in the Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim on
the authority of ‘A’ishah that a man came to the Prophet (peace be
on him) and said, “My mother died suddenly and could not leave a
will. If she could have, she would have bequeathed, I believe, some
charity. Will she benefit if I give something in charity on her
behalf?” The Prophet said, “Yes.”°?' Al-Bukhari has another hadith
in his Sahih reported by ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas that the mother of
Sa‘d Ibn ‘Ubadah died while he was not present. Sa‘d came to the
Prophet (peace be on him) and said, “Messenger of Allah! My
mother died while I was not present. If I give something in charity
on her behalf, will it benefit her?’ the Prophet said, “Yes,”
whereupon Sa‘d said, “Bear witness that I give my garden attached
to our house in charity for her.”’’* There are other ahddith that
express the same notion.

Regarding fasting, there is a hadith in the two Sahihs reported
by ‘A’ishah that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Whoever dies
and failed to fast for any days, his heir (wali) may fast on his
behalf.”°?? There are other ahddith in the Sahih collections to the
same effect. However, Abi Hanifah believes that instead of fasting
one should feed the poor for those days. He argues from the hadith
reported by Ibn ‘Abbas which we have mentioned above. For a

Muslim, Al-Jand’iz, 975; Ibn Majah, Al-Jand’iz, 1547; An-Nasa’i, 4:94; Ahmad,
5:353, 360.

Muslim, Al-Jand’iz, 974; An-Nasa’i, 4:93-94; Ibn Majah, 1546; Ahmad, 6:180,
221.

**! Al-Bukhari, 1388, 2760; Muslim, 1004; Abi Dawid, A/- Wasayd, 2881; An-
Nasa’i, 6:250; Ibn Majah, Al-Wasayd, 2717; Malik, Al-Muwatta, 2:760.

592 Al-Bukhari, 2756, 2762, 2870; Abi Dawid, A/-Wasayd, 2882; At-Tirmidhi, Az-
Zakah, 669; An-Nasa’l, 6:252-253.

*3 Al-Bukhari, 1952, Muslim, As-Sawm, 1147; Abii Dawiid, As-Sawm, 2400; Ahmad,
6:69.

416 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

detailed discussion on the subject, the reader may consult the books
of figh.

As for hajj, Al-Bukhari has a hadith in his Sahih, reported by
Ibn ‘Abbas, that a woman from the tribe of Juhaynah came to the
Prophet (peace be on him) and said, “My mother vowed to make
hajj but could not do so and died. May I make the hajj for her?” the
Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Yes, you may do it for her.
Suppose she had a debt to pay, would you not pay it for her? So the
debt to Allah should be paid before every other debt.’”’”* On this
subject also there are many more ahddith.

The ummah are agreed that the debts of the dead can be paid
even by a stranger and from any money, even if not from his legacy.
This 15 supported by the hadith that when Abt Qatadah paid two
dinars which he had promised to pay on behalf a dead person, the
Prophet, (peace be on him) said, “Now his body is safe from the
Fire.”

This is consistent with the principles of the Shari‘ah, and can be
derived from them through analogy (qiyds). The benefit of an act is
the right of its doer; if he wants to transfer it to his brother, why
should he be forbidden when he 15 not forbidden from giving a gift
to someone from his money or paying off someone’s debt after his
death. When the Law-giver (Ash-Shari‘) has said that the benefits of
fasting may reach the dead, he has, in fact, indicated that the benefits
of reading the Qur’an and other acts of worship may also reach him.
Fasting is abstaining intentionally from food, drink and the like. The
Shari‘ has clearly stated that its benefits can be passed on to the
dead. There is then no reason why the benefits of reading the Qur’an
and other intentional acts of worship may not be passed on.

The argument from the verse, “Man can have nothing but what
he strives for,” has been answered in different ways.” Two of
these answers are the best. One says that through a person’s efforts
and good behavior he gains friends, marries women and produces
children, helps people and loves them. Only then do people feel for
him or pray for him and offer him the benefits of their deeds. In a
sense, therefore, these benefits are the results of his own efforts. In
fact, simply joining the Muslim community in faith entitles one in
life and after death to the benefit of prayer and other acts of the

°* Al-Bukhari, 1852, 6699, 7315; An-Nasa’i, 5:116; Ahmad, 1:27Y.

315 Part of a hadith, Ahmad, 3:330; At-Tayalisi, 1673; Al-Bayhaqi, As-Sunan Al-Rubra,
6:75; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 2:58. It is hasan.

See also Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmii‘ al-Fatdwa, 24;312; Ibn Al-Qayyim, Ar-Rah,
p. 169.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 417

members of the community. Faith is a condition, as Allah has said,
for benefitting by prayer and the acts of their co-religionists. Hence,
if one benefits from them, one has in fact contributed towards such
benefits. The second and more convincing answer is that the Qur’an
does not deny the idea of benefitting from the efforts of others.
What it does deny is that one has a nght over what one does not
work for. This is a completely different matter. Obviously one has a
right only over one’s own deeds, not over the deeds of others. But it
is entirely up to a person to pass on the benefits of his deeds to
another or to keep them to himself.

Certainly the verses, “No bearer of burdens will bear the burden
of another, and no person will have anything but what he strives
for” [53:38-39], are clear. The first means that Allah does not
punish anyone for the sin of another, as the kings of the world do.
The second says that no one will be saved except on account of
one’s own deeds, so that people may give up the false expectation
that they will be saved on account of the deeds of their fathers,
ancestors and saints. But those verses do not say that no one can
benefit from the deeds of any other.

The same is true about the verses, “For it is what it earns”
[2:286], and “You will not be repaid except the rewards of your past
deeds” [36:54]. Their contexts show that what they mean is that one
cannot be punished for the deeds of another. The second verse, for
example, continues like this, “Then, on that Day not a soul will be
wronged in the least, and you will not be repaid except the rewards
of your past deeds” [36:54].

Similarly, the argument from the hadith, ““When a person dies
his deeds comes to an end,” is not correct. It does not say that one
will not benefit from the deeds of another; it only says that one’s
deeds will come to an end. The deeds of a person are his own; when
he offers its benefits to another person what reaches the latter is the
benefit of his own acts not those of the latter. And this is like paying
off some one else’s debt and relieving him of his responsibility
which he himself cannot discharge.

As for the distinction between monetary acts and bodily acts, we
have already quoted the hadith which says that one can fast on
behalf of his ward or legator, even though fasting is an act in which
one cannot represent another. Further, we have the hadith that Jabir
once offered the ‘Id al-Adha prayer with the Prophet (peace be on
him). After the prayer, the Prophet (peace be on him) took a lamb
and sacrificed it, saying, “In the name of Allah, and Allah is great.
Lord, this is from me and from those who belong to my community
418 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

but did not sacrifice.””’’ This hadith has been recorded by Ahmad,
Abt’ Dawid and At-Tirmidhi. On another occasion, the Prophet
(peace be on him) sacrificed two lambs. On one he said, “Lord, this
is from my whole community,” and on the other he said, “Lord, this
is from Muhammad and Muhammad’s family.””’* Ahmad has
recorded this hadith also. Obviously sacrifice is an act of shedding
blood, and the Prophet (peace be on him) did it on behalf of others.

Hajj provides another instance. It is primarily an act of the body.
It does involve money, but money is only a means to it. Everyone
knows that those who live in Makkah have also to make hajj,
provided they can walk to ‘Arafah. Obviously there is no money
involved in their case. It is not made up of bodily and monetary acts;
it is purely bodily. Scholars of the Hanafi school have clearly stated
that hajj is bodily worship.

Another instance 1s provided by the collective duties (furiid
kifayah) in which some people discharge a duty on behalf of a
whole group. These duties illustrate the principle that one can offer
benefits to another. They are like making a gift of one’s wages to
anyone one wishes.

However, to hire people to recite the Qur’an and offer the
benefits to the deceased is an unjustified innovation (bid ‘ah). None
of the Elders did it, nor has any imdm justified 1t. They are one in
forbidding people to hire someone to recite the Qur’an on their
behalf. The most they have differed on is the question of hiring
someone to teach the Qur’an or other things of common benefit.

The case of thawab (merits) is different. It does not reach the
deceased unless the action 1s performed for the sake of Allah. When |
a hired person reads the Qur’an, he is not acting exclusively for
Allah, hence its benefits cannot be offered to the deceased. This is
the reason no one has allowed the hiring of somebody to fast or pray
and offer the benefits to the deceased. However, if money is offered
as help to those who are engaged in reading, learning, or teaching
the Qur’&n, it will be considered to be charity, and its benefits may
be offered to the deceased. It has been written in Al-Ikhtiyar’”’ that
if someone wills that somebody should read the Qur’an over his

597 Abii Dawid, Al-Adahi, 2810; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Addhi, 1521; Ahmad, 3:356, 362;
Al-Hakim, A/-Mustadrak, 4:299. It is an authentic hadith.

595 Ahmad, 6:391-392; Al-Bayhaqi, As-Sunan al-Kubra, 9:259-260, 268. The hadith is
hasan; see Al-Haythami, Majmi‘ az-Zawd’id, 4:22.

*°9Aba Al-Fadl Al-Misali, Al-Jkhtiya@r li Ta‘lil al-Mukhtar (ed. Mahmud Abi
Dagqiqah; Beirut: Dar Al-Ma‘rifah, 1395/1975), vol. 5, ‏.م‎ 84.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 419

grave and is to be paid from the money he has left, it is wrong, for it
is a kind of hiring. Az-Zahidi has also mentioned in A/-Qunyah that
if anyone makes a wagf for a person to read the Qur’an over his
grave it is wrong. However, if one reads the Qur’an for another, of
his own will and not for any wages, its benefits may reach the latter,
as do the benefits of fasting and hajj.

One might object and say, how can you allow it when neither
did the Elders practice it nor did the Prophet (peace be on him)
recommend it? The answer is that there is no difference between it
and hajj, fasting and supplications. If the benefits of these actions
reach the dead, the benefits of reading the Qur’an may also reach
him. If the Elders did not do it, it does not mean that its benefits will
not reach the dead. There is no principle that contradicts this
practice.

One might say that in the case of hajj and fasting we have the
word of the Prophet (peace be on him), but we do not have anything
from him about reading the Qur’an. The answer 1s that the Prophet
(peace be on him) did not himself expound these practices; he only
responded to the questions of the people. When he was asked about
hajj, he said that its benefits would reach the deceased, and when he
was asked about fasting he said the same about it. He did not rule
out other things, and there is no difference between fasting, which is
an act of intentional abstinence from food and drink, and reading the
Qur’an as far as the transfer of benefits is concerned.

On the question of offering the benefits to the Prophet (peace be
on him), some scholars of later times are of the view that it is
commendable. Others say that it is an unjustified innovation (bid ‘ah)
because, first, the Companions of the Prophet (peace be on him) did
not do it, and second, because it is superfluous, as the Prophet
(peace be on him) receives benefits equal to what anyone of his
ummah receives for any good act he does, since it 1s he who has
shown the way to everyone.

Some people have said that the deceased sets the benefit of
hearing the Qur’4n when it is read at his grave. This is not the view
of any recognized imam. It is true that the deceased hears,°”’ but he
does not benefit from such hearing. The benefit of hearing the
Qur’an accrues only in life. It is a voluntary act, and like all other

600

Qur’anic verses 35:22 and 27:88 should not be interpreted to mean that the dead do
not hear at all. There are ahddith that allude to their hearing, such as, for example, the
hadith that the angels Munkar and Nakir will question the dead in the grave and they
will answer them. But that does not mean that they will hear everything.

420 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

voluntary acts it ends with death. J am afraid that, on the contrary, |
the deceased may feel unhappy on hearing the Qur’an if he
remembers that he did not follow the commands of the Qur’an in his
life and did not get its benefits.

As for reciting the Qur’an over graves there are three views. Abi
Hanifah and Malik disapprove of it; Ahmad also agrees with them,
according to one report. Their argument is that this is an innovation;
there is no hadith to support it. Reading the Qur’an resembles
prayer, which has been prohibited on graves. However,
Muhammad Ibn Al-Hassan allows it and, according to one report,
Ahmad has also allowed it.°°' Their argument is that Ibn ‘Umar
advised his descendants to read the first and the last few verses of
Strat Al-Baqarah over his grave when his body was to be buried. It
has also been reported that some of the Muhajiriin recited Strat Al-
Baqarah over graves.°’* Some people say that there is no harm in
reciting the Qur’an at the time of putting the deceased into the grave.
Ahmad agrees with this opinion in view of what has been just
mentioned of Ibn ‘Umar and some other Companions. He does not,
however, like people to go to the graves afterwards and read the
Qur’an there, because there is no hadith to that effect, nor has it
been reported by the Elders. This is probably the best view on the
subject since it takes into consideration all the points, for and
against.°°

(96) Allah answers prayers and fulfills needs.

In the Qur’an, it states, “Your Lord says: Call on Me. I will
answer your (prayer),” [40:60], and “When My servants ask you
concerning Me, I am indeed close (to them). I listen to the prayer of
every supplicant when he calls on Me” [2:186]. The majority of
mankind, Muslims and non-Muslims alike, believe that prayer is one
of the most powerful means to secure good and avoid evil.°** The

Qur’an says that when the unbelievers are in trouble at sea they call

*°'See Ibn Qudamah, Al-Mughni, vol. 2, ‏.م‎ 567; Ibn Al-Qayyim, Ar-Riah, ‏.م‎ 17.

°°? Al-Albani points out that these narrations are probably not authentic.

‎Qudamah, Al-Mughni, vol. 2, pp. 566-567; An-Nawawi, Al-Majmi‘ Sharh al-‏ ه0315
‎Muhadhdhab, (Madinah: Al-Maktabah As-Salafiyyah, n.d.), vol. 5, p. 311; Ibn‏
‎‘Abidin, Radd al-Muhtar (Cairo: Dar Al-Kutub Al-‘Arabiyyah, 1330/1911), vol. 2,‏
‎pp. 242-243.‏

‎*“Ibn Al-Qayyim has discussed this point at length, see his Madarij as-Sdalikin,
3:102-105, and Ad-Da’wa ad-Dawad (ed. Muhammad Muhiy ad-Din Abdul-Hamid;
Cairo: Matba‘at Al-Madani, 1377/1958), pp. 7-21.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi | 421

on Allah and pledge their exclusive fealty to Him, and that when
men are afflicted they call on Him, lying on their sides, sitting, or
standing, and He answers their call whether they are believers in
Him or not. Granting people’s prayers is like providing for their
sustenance and helping them. It is part of Allah’s universal
providence (rubibiyyah). However, if one denies Allah and defies
His commands, this favor turns into an ordeal for him, and is no
longer a blessing. Ibn Majah has recorded a hadith reported by Abi
Hurayrah that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “One who does
not pray to Allah courts His anger.” A poet has put it this way:

“The Lord is angry when you do not beseech Him.
But the son of Adam is angry when you ask of him.”

Ibn ‘Aqil has discussed various implications of Allah liking
people to call on him. First, He 15 not a non-existent that cannot be
beseeched. Second, He is Rich and Bountiful; only the poor and
indigent are not approached. Third, He hears; only the deaf are not
called upon. Fourth, He is Generous; only the miserly are not
begged. Fifth, He is Merciful; only the malevolent are not asked.
Sixth, He is Powerful; only the weak are not implored.

Those who believe only in nature know that a fire is not asked to
stop, and a star is not prayed to to grant fortunes. Their effects are
produced naturally and not caused by their will. Hence, supplication
and prayer have been ordained in order to demonstrate that the
naturists are absolutely mistaken.

Some philosophers and a few mistaken Stfis have said that
supplication (du ‘a’) is of no avail. If Allah decrees something, they
say, there is no need for prayer; but 11 He does not, prayer is also of
no use. Some even say that the perfect knowers of Allah refrain
from supplicaton and consider it to be a sign of imperfection. This
comes from the mistakes of some Sifi sheikhs. It 15 repudiated and
falsified by Islam as well as by common sense. It is a fact that
prayer avails; all human communities have believed in it, even
philosophers have said that prayers that are offered in different
languages at various places of worship often remove the obstacles

605150 Majah, Ad-Du ‘a’, 3827; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 1389; Ahmad, 2:442,
447. One of the transmitters of thehadith, Abii Salih Al-Khawzi, has been considered
a weak transmitter by Ibn Mu‘in, though Abii Zar‘ah does not find fault with him. Al-
Hakim has considered the hadith authentic. See Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bdri, 11:79.
According to Al-Albani, it is authentic.

422 | Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahadwiyyah

that are caused by the astrological heavens. They are, of course,
guilty of shirk; but this is the common belief.

To refute the argument of those who say that prayer is of no
avail, it is sufficient to point out that there are not just two
alternatives here. Either Allah wills something or He does not will it.
There is a third alternative, namely that He wills a thing if a
condition is met.°°° Prayer could be an example of that condition. It
is like the case where He rewards one for doing a good deed, and
does not reward if one does not do such a deed. He removes hunger
or thirst when one eats or drinks, but does not remove them when
one does not do those acts. He creates a child when there 1s
intercourse, and produces a plant when a seed is sown. The same 5
the case with prayer; Allah produces the object when it is prayed for.
It is not at all correct to say that prayer is of no use, just as it is not
correct to say that eating, drinking, sowing or other acts are of no
use. What these people say goes not only against the Shar‘ but also
against experience and reason.

Some scholars have said that to look to causes is to commit a
kind of shirk and a breach of tawhid; however, to negate their
efficacy is to fail in understanding, and to ignore them altogether is
to defy the Shar‘. One practices real trust and hope when one
observes all three: tawhid, understanding, and the Shar‘. I will
explain. To look to causes means to turn one’s heart to them, have
hope in them, depend upon them and trust them; but the objects of
the world do not deserve that trust. None of them is self-sufficient;
for every cause there are other causes that work with it and that
work against it. Further, if the Cause of causes does not put these
causes to work, they cannot produce anything by themselves.

The statement, “If Allah wills the object desired there is no need
for prayer,” is not correct, for prayer may be needed for other things
- to secure some other good, or remove some other evil in this life or
the next. The second statement, “If Allah does not will the object,
prayer is of no avail,” is also not correct, for it may bring in some
other good or guard against some other evil, as the Prophet (peace
be on him) has said. Besides, prayer promotes God-consciousness
and strengthens faith in Him. It intensifies the feeling that He is
close by, that He hears us and knows us, that He is Powerful and
Benevolent, and that one depends upon Him and needs Him. This
leads to great knowledge and purification, which are the greatest
needs.

*°°See the discussion on this point in Ibn Al-Qayyim, Madarij as-Sdlikin, 2:118-
120, and Ad-Da’wa ad-Dawa, pp. 18-22.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 423

It may be said that if one’s prayer prompts Allah’s blessing just
as a beggar’s request prompts our favor, this will mean that people
participate in producing divine blessings. We will point out that
really it is Allah Who moves man to prayer, hence the blessing 1s
from Him. He initiates the process and He brings it to completion.
‘Umar said, “I do not bother about the acceptance of my prayer; |
bother only about praying. Once I am inspired to pray, acceptance
follows.” Allah has said, “He rules all affairs from the heavens to
the earth. Then they go up to Him on a Day which is equal to a
thousand years of your reckoning” [32:5]. Thus He makes it clear
that first He plans and moves things and then they rise up to Him.
He moves the hearts of His creatures to prayer and makes it the
cause of the favor He grants. The same 15 the case with deeds and
their rewards. He inspires people with repentence and then accepts
their repentence. He inspires them to do good deeds and then
rewards them for those same good deeds. He inspires them to pray
and then grants their prayers. His creatures cause nothing. He
makes one act of His the cause of His other act. Mutarnf Ibn
‘Abdullah Ibn Ash-Shikhkhir, an outstanding Successor, said, “T
have pondered the issue, and have come to realize that things are
initiated by Allah as well as completed by Him. I have also realized
that all depends upon prayer (du ‘@’).”

The question has been raised that sometimes people pray to
Allah but He does not grant their prayer, or He grants what they did
not pray for. Many answers have been given. I will state three of the
best. First, verse 40:60 or 2:186, quoted above, does not mean that
the petition is necessarily granted; it only means that Allah responds
to the supplicant, and responding has a wider connotation than
granting the supplicant. The Prophet said, “Our Lord comes down
to the lowest heaven every night and says: Is there any one to call on
(yad ‘ii) Me that I may respond to him? Is there anyone to ask of
(yas’alu) Me that I may give him? Is there anyone to seek My
forgiveness (yastaghfiru) that I may forgive him?”°’ He has thus
differentiated between a caller (da@‘t) and a supplicant (sd@’i/),
between response and granting. Call (du‘d’) includes supplication
(sual), but it means more than that; similarly supplication (su ’a/)
includes seeking forgiveness (istighfar), but it also means more than
that. The Prophet (peace be on him) began with the widest term,
du‘a’, then came to the narrower term, su’d/, and then to the
narrowest term, istighfar. Once Allah has told His servants that He

*"’Discussed earlier; it is an authentic hadith.

424 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

is close to them and responds to their call, they know that He is with
them and they can ask Him. They know His knowledge, mercy and
power, and can call (du ‘a4’) on Him — call by way of worship (du ‘a’
al-‘ibadah) and call by way of supplication (du‘a’ al-mas’alah).
Du ‘a’ is du‘a’ of worship and du‘a’ of supplication and sometimes
it is both. Both these calls are meant in the verse, “Your Lord says:
Call on Me (ud ‘ia’ni), I will answer you.” the words that follow
support the first sense for they say, “But those who are too arrogant
to serve Me will surely find themselves in Hell, in humiliation”
[40:60].

The second answer is that responding to the prayer of a
supplicant is more general than granting the object he prays for. It
may mean to grant something else. Muslim has recorded a hadith in
which the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Whenever someone
prays to Allah for something which is not unlawful, or which is not
harmful to his kin, He does one of the following three things: either
He immediately grants him the thing he prayed for, or He reserves
for him something equally good, or He removes from him an equal
evil.” Hearing this, someone from the audience said, “Then we
should pray more.’ The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Allah will
give you even more.”°”* He thus made it clear that a prayer that does
not seek any evil or injustice does not go unanswered. Either it is
granted immediately, or something else is kept in store instead, or
the supplicant is saved from an impending evil.

The third answer runs like this. Prayer is one of the means to
securing an objective. But there also may be some conditions to be
fulfilled and some obstacles to be removed before the objective is
achieved. When the conditions are fulfilled and the obstacles are
removed, either the objective itself is secured or something else in its
place is. This is true of all the prayers and supplications that have
been made to bring one good or another, or remove one evil or
another. Supplications are like a tool which is useful in varying
degrees according to the hands using it and whether the obstacles
involved are weak or strong. It often happens that a person uses a
particular supplication and prays, and his prayer is granted, because
along with praying, he also stresses his needs, or beseeches Allah
earnestly, or does something good which Allah appreciates, or prays

‎hadith is not recorded by Muslim; it is recorded by Ahmad, 3:18; At-Tahawi,‏ ع ةن
‎Mushkil al-Athar, 1:375; Abu Ya‘la, Musnad (ed. Hussayn Salim Asad; Damascus: Dar‏
‎Al-Ma’miin, Ist ed. 1406/1986), 1019; Al-Hakim, A/-Mustadrak, 1:493. Adh-‏
‎Dhahabi has endorsed Al-Hakim’s evaluation that the hadith is suhih. See Al-‏
‎Haythami, Majmiai‘ az-Zawd’id, 10:148-149.‏

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 425

at a time when prayers are granted. He may, however, think that his
prayer has been granted just because of the particular supplication he
has made, and he neglects other factors. Suppose there 1s a sick man
who takes good medicine and takes it at the proper times and is
cured. If someone thinks that he was cured just because of that
medicine he is wrong, for he does not consider other factors. Or
suppose that a person in affliction goes to a grave and prays there
and his prayer is granted. If he thinks that his prayer was granted
because of the person in the grave, he is wrong, for that may have
happened because of his affliction, or because of his earnest
praying. Had he prayed in one of the houses of Allah it would
certainly have pleased Allah more.

Prayers, invocations and incantations are like a sword which
cuts not only because it is sharp but also because it 15 used with
force. The effect intended is produced only when the sword is
sharp, the hand that uses it is strong, the object against which it is
used is something that can be cut, and there are no obstacles there. If
any of these factors is lacking the desired effect will not be
produced. Similarly, if the object prayed for is not correct, or the
proper supplication is not chosen, or the supplicant does not pray
earnestly, or there is some obstruction there, the thing besought will
not be forthcoming. |

(97) He controls everything, and nothing controls Him.
Without Him nothing can survive for an _ instant.
Whoever turns away from Him, even for the blinking of

an eye, is ungrateful and courts His doom (hayn).

These words are quite clear and need no comment. Hayn means
death and destruction.

(98) Allah becomes angry and pleased, but not like any
created being.

Allah has spoken of His anger and pleasure at various places in
the Qur’an, for example, Allah says, “Allah is pleased with them”
[5:122, 9:100, 98:8]; “Allah’s good pleasure was on the Believers
when they swore fealty to you under the tree” [48:18]; “Those who
incurred the curse of Allah and His wrath...” [5:63]; “The wrath and
the curse of Allah are upon him.... (4:93]; “They drew on
themselves the wrath of Allah” [2:61], and so on.

The Elders and the imams are agreed in predicating of Allah
wrath, pleasure, enmity, friendship, love, hate and other similar
things that have been mentioned in the Qur’4n and the Sunnah, just
426 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

as they agree on rejecting every interpretation that robs them of their
meanings as they behoove Him.°” They think about them the same
as they think about His other attributes, like hearing, seeing and
speech.

The author has written earlier that 12 order to properly
understand the Beatific Vision or any other thing relating to Allah,
one must submit to the texts and abstain from interpreting them.
This 15 the religion of Islam. Let us recall what Imam Malik said
when he was asked about istiwd (Allah’s mounting on the Throne).
“[stiwa,” he said “is something known, only its modality is
unknown.” the same words were spoken, according to one report,
by Umm Salamah and, according to another, by the Prophet (peace
be on him) himself.°'°

The author has said earlier, “Whoever does not refrain from
negating (Allah’s attributes) or anthropomorphizing them goes
astray and fails to uphold His transcendence.” We will return to this
point when we comment on his words, “Islam is neither to
exaggerate nor to understate, neither to believe’ in
anthropomorphisms nor to negate (Divine attributes).”

When he says that Allah’s wrath or pleasure is not like that of
any created being he is negating anthropomorphism. It 15 not correct
to say that pleasure (rida@) means nothing more than the will to bless,
or that wrath (ghadab) means nothing but the will to avenge. That
would be simply negating these attributes. The Ahl as-Sunnah agree
that Allah commands what He loves and approves of, even though
He does not will it. Also, He forbids what He dislikes and
disapproves of, even though He hates its doer, though He wills it
and allows it to happen. Thus, He likes something even though He
does not will it, and dislikes something else even though He wills it.

Those who interpret Allah’s pleasure and anger in terms of the
will to do some favor or inflict some pain say that they resort to this
interpretation because anger implies a rise in blood temperature and
pleasure is an emotional state, neither of which behooves Allah.
This is not true, for the rise in blood temperature in humans is an
effect of anger, not anger itself. On the other hand, will in human
beings 15 a kind of inclination towards something or towards what 5
good or useful. We do not will except what brings us some good or
wards off some evil. We do need what we will, benefit from it when
we get it, and suffer when we do not. If this 15 what will means,
then those who interpret Allah’s anger and pleasure in this manner

°?See Ibn Taymiyyah, Dar’ Ta ‘arud al-‘Aql wa an-Nagl, 3:380-385.
6101+ is not established that the Prophet said these words, as was discussed earlier.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 427

do not gain anything, for what they affirm is no better than what
they deny; their implications are equally undesirable. Now, if you
allow the one, you can allow the other, but if you rule out the one
you should rule out the other, too.

One might say that Allah’s will is different from human will,
even though both are real. We accept that but point out that this 5
also the case with Allah’s anger and pleasure. They, too, are
different from human anger and pleasure, even though both are real.
What you say about will can also be said about these attributes, and
there is no need to interpret them; you must avoid that if you want to
be consistent. It will save you not only from inconsistency but also
from negating Allah’s names and attributes without any justification.
You must know that to interpret the Qur’an in a sense different from
what it plainly means without a compelling reason is forbidden. And
that reason cannot be something which your or my reason demands,
for reason varies, and what one demands may not be what the other
demands.

This is the argument we advance against anyone who denies the
attributes of Allah on the grounds that it behooves man but not
Allah. We say to him that he cannot help predicating something of
Allah in a sense different from what he is aware of. At least he must
say that Allah exists in a sense different from the existence of man,
for while man is mortal, Allah is not. The same is true of all the
names that Allah has given to Himself and to His creatures such as
living, knowing, powerful. It is also true of the attributes He has
predicated of Himself and of His creatures, such as anger and
pleasure. We know in our hearts what these names mean in the
divine context, and know that they are real and true. We also know
what they mean in the human context. We further know that there is
something common between the two meanings; however, this
common meaning does not exist as such out there, for as a rule,
universal ideas do not exist as universals except in the mind; out
there in reality they exist only in particularized and specified form.

Hence these attributes exist in Allah and in His creatures in
forms behooving each. Even the anger of Malik, the angel who 15
the overseer of Hell, or that of the other angels, differs from the
anger of human beings, for the angels are not formed of the four
elements of which humans are formed, and their blood does not boil
in anger like human blood. If this is the case with angels, what do
you think about Allah?

Al-Jahm and many others like him negate the attributes of ©
speech, pleasure, anger, love, hate, grief and so on which Allah has
predicated of Himself. They say that these things are created by
Allah’s will, so they do not exist in Him and are not His attributes.
428 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

On the other hand, Ibn Kullab and other attributionists (sifatiyyah)
say that none of His attributes are objects of His will and power; all
of them are His essential attributes, inseparable from His Essence,
eternal and everlasting. He is not, therefore, pleased at one time and
displeased at another, angry on one occasion and not angry on
another. This also goes against the hadith. For example, the famous
hadith on intercession states, “My Lord is so angry today as He
never was before, nor will He ever be afterwards.’”"'

Another hadith, which is reported by Abt Sa‘id Al-Khudri and
recorded in the Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim, says, “Allah will
give a call (on the Day of Judgment): ‘People of Paradise!’ They
will say, ‘Here we are, Lord! You are blessed. All good is in your
hands.’ He will inquire, ‘Are you happy?’ ‘Why not, Lord?’ they
will say, ‘You gave us what you did not give to any other of Your
creatures.’ He will say, ‘Should I not give something better than
what you have!’ They will say, ‘Lord, what can be better than what
we have?’ He will say, ‘I will give you My pleasure, and never will
I ever be angry with you afterwards.””'”

These ahddith prove that Allah is sometimes pleased and
sometimes not, that He is pleased at one time and gets angry at
another, that He is angered and then pleased, and that on the people
of Paradise He will bestow His pleasure forever. But those people
of the opposite opinion deny that Allah speaks, smiles, is angered or
pleased as He will. Either they identify His pleasure, love, anger
and hate with His will, or they reduce them to some other attributes.
In either case they avoid making them the object of His will and
power, for otherwise Allah would be, in their opinion, infected by
contingent things. In this way they negate all the active attributes of
Allah. The Jahmiyyah, on the other hand, deny the whole gamut of
divine attributes on the plea that they make Allah the locus of
incidents. They fail to see that these things are actions, not events,
attributes not incidents.

We have discussed this point before. It is unfortunate that the
author did not put all the statements regarding divine attributes in
one place; he also did not discuss predestination (gadr) in one place,
nor did he follow any order. In a work on the fundamentals of
Islam, the best order that a writer can follow is the one which the
Prophet (peace be on him) followed in his answer to the questions
of Gabriel about imdn. He said, “Faith is that you believe in Allah,

°' Discussed earlier; it is an authentic hadith.
°!? Al-Bukhari, 6549, 7518; Muslim, Sifat al-Jannah, 2829; At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-
Jannah, 2558; Ahmad, 3:88. |

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 429

His angels, His books, His prophets, the Last Day, and that the
fore-ordainment of everything, good and bad, is from Allah.”°’’
One should begin with tawhid, the divine attributes and related
matters, and then discuss the angels and other things in that order.

(99) We love all the Companions of the Prophet (peace
be on him), but we do not love any one of them to
excess, nor do we disown any of them. We hate those
who hate them or speak ill of them. We always mention
them in positive terms, and believe that to love them is
part of the religion, part of iman and ihsdan; and that to
hate them is infidelity, hypocrisy and transgression.

This is directed against the Rawafid and the Nawasib. Allah and
His Prophet have praised the Companions time and again. Allah has
also said that He is well-pleased with them and will amply reward
them.°'* Allah’s words are, “The vanguard (of Islam), the first of
those who forsook (their homes) and of those who gave them aid,
and (also) those who follow them in (all) good deeds — well-pleased
is Allah with them, as are they with Him. He has prepared for them
gardens under which rivers flow to dwell therein forever. That is the
supreme felicity” [9:100]. Elsewhere He has said, “Muhammad is
the Messenger of Allah, and those who are with him are strong
against unbelievers, but compassionate among one another. You
will see them bow and prostrate themselves (in prayer), seeking
grace from Allah and His good pleasure. On their faces are their
marks, being the traces of their prostration. This is their similitude in
the Torah; and their similitude in the Gospel is a seed which sends
forth its blade, then makes it strong, then becomes thick and stands
on its own stem (filling) the sowers with wonder and delight. As a
result, it fills the unbelievers with rage at them.

Allah has promised to those among them who believe and do
righteous deeds forgiveness and a great reward” [48:29]; “Allah’s
good pleasure was on the Believers when they swore fealty to you
under the Tree. He knew what was in their hearts, and He sent
down tranquility to them, and He rewarded them with a speedy
victory” [48:18]; “Those who believed and adopted exile, and
fought for the Faith with their property and their persons in the
cause of Allah, as well as those who gave them asylum and aid —

6١3 Discussed earlier; it is an authentic hadith.

°'“Ibn Taymiyyah has discussed the point at various places; see Majmia‘ al-Fatawa,
3:152-153, 405-409; 4:398-465; 35:58-64.

430 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

these are all friends and protectors, one of another... These are (all)
in very truth the Believers; for them is the forgiveness of sins and a
provision most gracious” [8:72-73]; “Not equal among you are
those who spent (freely) and fought before the victory (with those
who did so later). Those are higher in rank than those who spent
(freely) and fought afterwards. But to all has Allah promised a
goodly (reward). And Allah 15 well acquainted with all that you do”
[57:10]; “(Some part is due) to the indigent Muhajirtin, those who
were expelled from their homes and their property while seeking
grace from Allah and (His) good pleasure and aiding Allah and His
Messenger. Such are indeed the sincere ones. But those who before
them had homes (in Madinah) and had adopted the Faith, show their
affection to such as came to them for refuge, and entertain no desire
in their hearts for things given to the (latter), but give them
preference over themselves, even though poverty was their own lot,
and those saved from the covetousness of their own souls, they are
the ones that achieve prosperity. And those who came after them
say: ‘Our Lord, forgive us, and our brethren who came before us
unto the Faith, and leave not in our hearts rancor or (sense of injury)
against those who have believed. Our Lord, You are indeed Full of
Kindness, Most Merciful’” [59:8-10].

These verses praise the Muhajirin and the Ansar and those who
came after them, who sought Allah’s forgiveness for them and
prayed that He leave no ill-feeling in their hearts for them. They
underline the fact that these people deserve the grace Allah has
bestowed upon them, and that those who have any ill-feeling against
them or do not pray for their forgiveness, do not deserve any favor
from Allah. This is clearly stated in the Qur’an.

The Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim contain a hadith reported
by Aba Sa‘id Al-Khudri that something happened between Khalid
Ibn Al-Walid and ‘Abdur-Rahméan Ibn ‘Awf, whereupon the former
said some unpleasant words to the latter. The Prophet (peace be on
him) took exception to it and said, “Do not abuse any of my
Companions. Were any one of you to spend heaps of gold
equivalent to Mount Uhud, you would not attain even the virtue of a
mudd or half thereof of one of them.’®'? The incident concerning
Khalid’s abusing ‘Abdur-Rahm§an is mentioned only by Muslim and
not Al-Bukhari.

ت١5‎ Al-Bukhari, Fada’il as-Sahadbah, 3673; Muslim, Fadd’il as-Sahabah, 2541; Abi
Dawud, As-Sunnah, 4658; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Mandgqib, 3860; Ahmad, 3:11, 54.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 431

By his Companions the Prophet (peace be on him) meant
‘Abdur-Rahman and others like him who had embraced Islam in the
early years before Makkah was captured and who had fought for
Islam. They were the people who swore their fealty to the Prophet
(peace be on him) under the tree. They were better and more
honored than those who entered into the faith afterwards, that is,
after the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah, which the Prophet (peace be on
him) concluded with the Makkans. Khalid Ibn Al-Walid embraced
Islam along with others in this later period. To be sure, they were
better than those who embraced Islam after Makkah was conquered
and those are known as tulaqa, that is, those who were forgiven and
set free. This group included Abi Sufyan and his sons, Yazid and
Mu‘awiyah.

The burden of the hadith is that those who joined the Prophet’s
company later should not speak ill of those who had joined his
company earlier since they had honor no other Companions had and
could not have, even if they spent gold equal to Mount Uhud. If this
is about those who embraced Islam after the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah
and before the conquest of Makkah, what of those who never joined
the Prophet’s company? May Allah be pleased with all his
Companions!

The vanguard of the Companions, the Muhajirin and the Ansar,
were the ones who spent their money in the cause of Allah before
the Conquest of Makkah and fought for Allah’s sake. They include
those who swore fealty to the Prophet (peace be on him) under the
tree. They were more than one thousand four hundred. Some say
that they were the ones who prayed first towards Al-Quds
(Jerusalem) and then towards the Ka‘bah when the giblah was
changed. This is a weak opinion. To offer prayer towards a giblah
which was changed later is not an honor as it was not of their own
doing. There is no text to support this view. On the other hand, we
have the verses of the Qur’an that laud those who embraced Islam
before the conquest of Makkah, spent and fought in the way of
Allah and swore fealty under the tree.

However, the hadith ascribed to the Prophet (peace be on him),
“My Companions are like stars, whomsoever you follow you will
be on the right path,’”°'° is a weak hadith. Al-Bazzar has said that it

*°Tbn ‘Abdul-Barr, | wa Fadlihi, 2:91; Ibn Hazm, Al-Ihkam, 6:82;
Al-Khatib Al-Baghdadi, Al-Kifayah fi ‘Ilm ar-Riwdyah (Hyderabad; reprint, Beirut:
Al-Maktabah Al-‘IImiyyah, n.d.), ‏.م‎ 48. The hadith is very weak.

432 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

should not be ascribed to the Prophet (peace be on him), for it has
not been mentioned in any reliable collection of hadith.

Muslim has recorded a tradition reported by Jabir that ‘A’ishah
was told that some people found fault with the Companions of the
Prophet, even with Abii Bakr and ‘Umar. She said, “Why should
you wonder! The actions (of these Companions) have ended, but
Allah has willed that their rewards should not.’”"’

Ibn Battah has recorded, with an authentic chain, the narration
that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Do not abuse the Companions of Muhammad
(peace be on him). An hour of their life with the Prophet (peace be
on him) was better than forty years of your deeds now.”'® In a
variant of this narration reported through Waki, the words are,
“Better than your life-long worship.”

The Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim record a hadith reported
by ‘Imran Ibn Hussayn and others that the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “The best people are the people of my period; next are
those that will come after them; and then those who will come after
them.” ‘Imran said that he was not sure whether the Prophet
mentioned two or three periods after his own.°'? Muslim has
recorded in his Sahih a hadith reported by Jabir in which the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “None of those who swore fealty under the
tree will enter Hell.’°*°

Allah has said, “Allah turned with favor to the Prophet, the
Muhajirtin and the Ansar who followed him in a time of distress,
after the hearts of part of them had nearly swerved (from duty); but
He turned to them (also), for He is Most Kind and Most Merciful
unto them” [9:117].

‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘id was correct when he said in their praise,
“Allah looked at the hearts of men and found that the best heart was
the heart of Muhammad (peace be on him). So He chose him for
Himself, and made him His messenger. He looked for a second time
at the hearts of the people other than Muhammad (peace be on him),
and found that the best hearts were those of his Companions. So He
selected them to assist his Prophet and fight for His religion. Hence,

°!’This statement is not in Muslim, nor in any other book of Hadith.

‎Majah, Al-Mugaddamah, 162; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, As-Sunan (ed. Nasir Ad-Din Al-‏ م5[ ةا
‎Albani; Beirut: Al-Maktab Al-Islami, 15) ed. 1400/1980; henceforth referred only 5‏
‎Ibn Abi ‘Asim), hadith 1006. The chain of the hadith is sahih.‏

‎°!9 Al-Bukhari, 2561, 3650, 6428, 6695; Muslim, 2535; At-Tirmidhi, 679, 2221,
2222, 2303; Abii Dawitid, 4657; An-Nasa’1, 7:17-18; Ahmad, 4:426, 427, 436, 440.
*°Muslim, 2496; At-Tirmidhi, 3859; Abi Dawtid, 4653; Ahmad, 6:362, 420.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 433 |

what the Muslims consider to be good is good in the eyes of Allah,
and what they consider to be bad is bad in His eyes.”””’ In a variant
of this narration, Ibn Mas‘td 1s also reported to have added, “And
the Companions of Muhammad (peace be on him) unanimously
selected Abi Bakr as his successor.” Commenting on the author’s
words, “We follow the Sunnah and the jamda‘ah” we have already
mentioned Ibn Mas‘iid’s words, “Whoever of you wants an
example to follow should follow the example of those who have
died.”

Who could be more astray than those who have rancor in their
hearts against the people who are the cream of the Muslim
community and the most honored of Allah’s friends after the
prophets? They are, in a sense, worse than the Jews and Christians,
for if the Jews are asked who the best of their community were,
their answer is the companions of Moses. Similarly, if the
Christians are asked about the best of their community, they say
they were the companions of Jesus. But when these Rawafid are
questioned as to who are the worst of their community, they say the
Companions of Muhammad (peace be on him). They make
exception only for a few. But if you compare them, you will find
that many of those whom they malign are many times better than
those they do not.

The author said, “We do not love any one of them to excess.”
What he means is that we do not exceed the limits in our love as the
Shi‘is do, nor do we violate Allah’s word, “People of the Book!
Commit no excess in your religion” [4:171].

The author has further said, “Nor do we disown any of them.”
That is, we are not guilty of the mistake the Rawafid commit. They
believe that to be loyal to the family of the Prophet (ah/ al-bayt) one
has to disown Abt Bakr and ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with
them. The Ahl as-Sunnah are loyal to all the Companions and give
every one his due, justly and properly. They know that injustice in
this regard is a transgression which Allah has condemned. He has
said, “They differed not until after the knowledge came unto them
through transgression one against the other” [45:17]. This 15 the
meaning of the words, “To testify is an innovation, and to disown 5
an innovation.”- This has been said by a number of Elders,

62! Ahmad, 1:379; At-Tabarani, Al/-Kabir, 8582, 8583, 8593; At-Tayalisi, 246; Al-
Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 105. The chain of the hadith is good (hasan); Al-Hakim
has evaluated it as sahih (see Al-Mustadrak, 3:78) and Adh-Dhahabi has endorsed his
judgment (see Al-Haythami, Majmia‘ az-Zawa’id, 1:177-178).

434 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Companions and Successors, such as Abu Sa‘id Al-Khudri, Al-
Hassan Al-Basri, Ibrahim Al-Nakha’1, Ad-Duhhak, and others. To
testify here means to testify about any Muslim that he will go to Hell
or that he is an infidel, without knowing on what faith he died.

As for the statement, “To love them is part of imdn and ihsdn,”
it follows from the verses and the ahddith we have quoted above.
Besides, At-Tirmidhi has recorded a hadith reported by ‘Abdullah
Ibn Mughaffal that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “O Allah, O
Allah, my companions. Do not malign them after me. Whoever
loves them, loves them as a part of his love for me; and whoever
hates them, hates them as a part of his hatred for me. Whoever
displeases them displeases me, and whoever displeases me
displeases Allah, and whoever displeases Allah exposes himself to
His punishment.’”

The author has made love for the Companions a part of faith
(Iman). But this is difficult to justify with respect to his view of
iman. Love 1s an act of the heart, not simply conviction. This means
that action is a part of imdn. But for At-Tahawi, imdn is a
confession with the tongue and conviction of the heart and does not
include action, which is the well-known view of Abt Hanifah.
Maybe he has called love a part of faith in a metaphorical sense.

The word kufr in the sentence, “to hate them is ku/fr...”’ does not
mean disbelief. We have already discussed the author’s views on
excommunication (takfir). What he means by ku/fr here is same as in
the verse, “If any do fail to judge by the light of what Allah has
revealed, they are the disbelievers” [5:47]. We have discussed this
point earlier.

(100) We affirm that, after the Prophet (peace be on
him), the first rightful heir to the khilafah was Abu
Bakr, on the grounds that he was the best and the most
eminent of all the ummah. 7

There are different opinions among the Ahi as-Sunnah
concerning the question of what the basis was for the khilafah of

6? At-Tirmidhi, Al-Mandqib, 3862; Ahmad, 4:87, 5:54, 57; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 992; Abi
Nu‘aym, A/-Hilya, 8:287. But one of the transmitters of this hadith, ‘Abdur-Rahman
Ibn Zayad, is not accepted by many scholars. Ibn Mu‘in says that he does not know
him, Adh-Dhahabi says that he is not known. Only Ibn Hibban regards him to be
reliable (see his Sahih, 2284), but Ibn Hibban is known for accepting unknown
narrators. However, in the opinion of At-Tirmidhi, the hadith is hasan gharib.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 435

Abu Bakr As-Siddig, may Allah be pleased with him. Was it by
textual evidence or by selection? Al-Hassan Al-Basri and a group of
hadith scholars say that it is implied and suggested by various texts.
Others say that it is clearly established by the texts. A third group,
consisting of some hadith scholars and some Mut‘tazilah and
Ashfaris, says that he was made caliph through selection.

The proponents of the first view quote many ahddith. One which
is recorded by Al-Bukhari from Jubayr Ibn Mut‘im says that a
woman came to the Prophet (peace be on him) asking for
something, but he sent her back and asked her to come again. She
said, “If I come back and do not find you what should I do?” as if
she thought he might die. The Prophet (peace be on him) replied, If
you do not find me, go to Abt Bakr.’®** These words have also
been narrated in a different context in other ahddith. This clearly
proves the khilafah of Abt Bakr. Hudhayfah Ibn Al-Yaman narrated
that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Follow the examples of
those who will come after me, Abi Bakr and ‘Umar.’*”* This hadith
has been recorded in the Sunan collections. The Sahihs of Al-
Bukhari and Muslim have a hadith narrated by ‘A’ishah, as well as
her father Abt Bakr, that the Prophet (peace be on him) came to her
the day he fell ill, and asked her to call her father and brother so that
he could dictate a will to the former. Then he said, “Allah and the
Muslims will never accept anyone other than Abu Bakr.” A variant
of the hadith also has the sentence, “So that no one else may aspire
to this thing.” In another variant the words are, “Call ‘Abdur-
Rahman Ibn Abi Bakr. I will dictate a will for Abt Bakr so that there
will not be any differences about him.” He then said, “Allah forbid
that the Believers should disagree on Abii Bakr.’°”°

As for Abt Bakr’s preeminence, it is enough to say that the
Prophet (peace be on him) asked him to lead the prayers when he
fell ill. He said, “Tell Abii Bakr to lead the prayers.’®’° He said that

°°3 Al-Bukhari, 3659, 7220, 7360; Muslim, 2386; Ahmad, 4:82, 83; At-Tayalisi,
944; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 1151; Al-Baghawi, 3868.

°°4 At-Tirmidhi, A/l-Mandqib, 3663, 3664; Ibn Majah, Al-Mugaddamah, 97; Ahmad,
5:382, 385, 399, 402. At-Tirmidhi has rated the hadith hasan, and Al-Hakim has held
it to be sahih (Al-Mustadrak, 3:75). According to Al-Albani, it is sahih.

°°Muslim, Fada’il as-Sahdbah, 2387; Ahmad, 6:47, 106, 144; At-Tayalisi, 1508;
Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 1156; Al-Baghawi, 1411. Al-Bukhari has recorded the hadith with a
different wording; see hadith 5666, 7217.

°°Part of ahadith, Al-Bukhari, 664, 679, 712, 713, 716, 3383, 7303; Ad-Darimi,
Sunan, 1:39; Ahmad, 6:96, 159, 202, 224; At-Tirmidhi, 3672; An-Nasa’i, 2:99-100;

436 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

and for all the days that he was ill Abt Bakr led the prayer. The two

Sahihs also have a hadith reported by Abt Hurayrah that the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “I saw in a dream that I was at a well and
there was a bucket there. I took it and drew as much water from the

well as Allah wanted me to draw. Then Abii Bakr took the bucket
from me and drew once or twice. He was a little weak in drawing,
but Allah will forgive him. Then the bucket grew larger and Ibn Al-
Khattab took it from him. I never saw a man gigantic like him. He
drew so well that everyone drank his 111.52“ There is also another
hadith in the Sahih: the Prophet (peace be on him) said at the pulpit,
“If I were to take someone for an intimate friend (khalil), I would
take Abi Bakr. Let all the windows to the mosque be closed except
the window of Abi Bakr.”

In Sunan Abi Dawid and other works there is the hadith
reported by Ash‘ath, from Al-Hassan, on the authority of Abi
Bakrah, that one day the Prophet (peace be on him) asked the
people, “Who has seen a dream?’ One man said, “I have. I saw that

a balance came down from the sky. You and Abt Bakr were
weighed and you outweighed Abu Bakr. Then Abt Bakr and ‘Umar
were weighed, and Abt Bakr outweighed ‘Umar. Then ‘Umar and
‘Uthman were weighed and ‘Umar outweighed ‘Uthman. Then the

balance was lifted.” Abt: Bakrah says that at that moment he looked
at the Prophet’s face and he was unhappy. He said, “This was the

khilafah on the pattern of prophetic rule (khilafatu nubiwwah).
Allah will then hand over the government to whom he pleases.’”®”’
This means that according to the Prophet (peace be on him) the

Ibn Mayjah, 1232. See also Al-Bukhari, 678, 3380, 682; Muslim, 420; Ahmad,
4:412-413, 1:209; Ibn Hibban, 2174.

°°” Al-Bukhari, 3664, 7021, 7022, 7475 and 3663, 3676, 3682, 7019, 7020;
Mushim, 2392, 2393; At-Tirmidhi, 2289; Ahmad, 2:368, 450, and 2:27, 28, 39, 89,
104, 107.

°8Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

°° Aba’ Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4634; At-Tirmidhi, Ar-Ru ‘ya, 2288; Ahmad, 5:44, 50; Ibn
Abi ‘Asim, 1135; Ibn Abi Shaybah, A/-Musannaf fi al-ahddith wa al-Athar, (ed.
Muhammad ‘Abdul-Khaliq and others; Bombay: Dar As-Salafiyyah, 1399/1402),
12:18; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 3:70-71; Al-Bayhaqi, Dala’il an-Nubuwwah (ed.
‘Abdul-Mu‘it Qala‘ji; Beirut: Dar Al-Kutub Al-‘IImtyyah, 1405/1985), 6:348. All
these ahddith have been recorded from Abi Bakrah and are sahih except their last
words, “the khilafah of prophethood, then Allah will give His kingdom to whom He
will.” One of the transmitters of this part, ‘Ali Ibn Zayd Ibn Jad‘an, is a poor
transmitter. However, the weakness of this part of the hadith is made up for by the
hadith reported by Safinah that will follow.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 437

khilafah of these three caliphs was on the pattern of prophetic
government. Then came the monarchy. ‘Ali is not mentioned in this
hadith because people did not agree on one ruler during his time and
were divided. There was neither a khiladfah on the prophetic pattern
nor a monarchy.

Abt Dawid has also recorded that Jabir used to narrate that one
morning the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “A pious man was
shown in dream tonight that Abt Bakr came following the
Messenger of Allah, and ‘Umar came following Abt Bakr, and
‘Uthman came following Umar.” Jabir says that when people got up
and went away from the Prophet (peace be on him) they said that the
“pious man”’ was none other than the Prophet himself (peace be on
him), and the coming of one following the other meant that they
would take charge of things, one after the other, which Allah had
entrusted to his Prophet.®°

Abu Dawid has recorded a third hadith from Samurah Ibn
Jundab that a man came to the Prophet (peace be on him) and said,
“Messenger of Allah, I saw that a bucket was suspended from the
sky. Abt Bakr came and took it by the brim and drank from it, but
he did not drink much. Then ‘Umar came and took it by its brim,
and drank from it a lot, until he was satisfied. Then ‘Uthman came
and took it by its brim, he also drank from it to his fill. Then ‘Ali
came and took it by its brim, but the rope snapped and part of the
water spilled over him.’”’' It has been reported by Sa‘id Ibn
Jumhan, from Safinah, that the Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“The khilafah of prophethood will last for thirty years, then Allah
will give (His) Kingdom to whom ‏ج11‎ 2

030 Aba Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4636; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 1134; Ahmad, 3:355. Al-Hakim has
called this hadith sahih (see Al-Mustadrak, 3:71-72), and Adh-Dhahabi has endorsed
his view, even though ‘Amr Ibn Hibban, who has reported the hadith from Jabir, has
not been considered reliable (thigah) by anyone except Ibn Hibban (see his Sahih,
7:216). Al-Albani considers it a weak hadith.

‎Aba Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4637; Ahmad, 5:21; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 1141; At-Tabarani,‏ اذه
‎Al-Kabir, 6965. One of the transmitters of the hadith, ‘Abdur-Rahman Al-Jarmi, has‏
‎not been considered reliable by anyone except Ibn Hibban. Al-Albani considers it a‏
‎weak hadith.‏

‎617 Aba Dawid, 4646, 4647; At-Tahawi, Mushkil al-Athar, 4:313; Ahmad, 5:220-
221; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 2:562; At-Tabarani, A/-Kabir, 13, 136, 6442; At-Tayalisi,
1107; Al-Bayhaqi, Dala’il an-Nubuwwah, 6:341; At-Tirmidhi, 2226 with the remark
that the hadith is hasan. Al-Hakim has evaluated it as sahih (see Al-Mustadrak, 3:71,
p. 145).

438 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Those who say that the Prophet did not appoint Abi Bakr his

caliph (successor) argue from the tradition which ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Umar has reported. When the question arose who would succeed
him, ‘Umar said if he appointed a caliph there would be no harm,
for one who was better than he had appointed his caliph. He was
referring to Abt Bakr. But if he did not appoint a caliph, he said,
there was no harm in that either, for one who was far, far better than
he had not appointed his caliph. He was referring, of course, to the
Prophet (peace be on him). ‘Abdullah says that when ‘Umar
mentioned the Prophet (peace be on him), he knew he would not
appoint anybody as his caliph.°’? They also argue from the report
that says that ‘A’ishah was asked whom the Prophet (peace be on
him) would have appointed caliph if he had intended to appoint
one.
This report implies that the Prophet (peace be on him) did not
have a written will on the khilafah for anyone, and had he intended
to will it, he would have willed it to Abi Bakr. In fact he intended to
dictate a will but then abstained from doing so, saying, “Allah and
the Muslims will not accept anyone except Abt 821.535” This was
more than a will. The Prophet (peace be on him) did indicate that he
wanted Abt Bakr to be the caliph. He indicated it in many ways, in
words as well as deeds. He also said that he would be happy with
his khilafah, and that it would be a good khiladfah. He even intended
to dictate a will in his favor, but seeing that Muslims would certainly
agree on him, he gave up the idea. On the Thursday during his
illness, he once again intended to write a will. But when some
people doubted whether that was the result of illness or whether he
really wanted to dictate a will,°°° he dropped the idea. He was
confident that Allah and the Muslim community would surely chose
Abit Bakr.

Had he thought that his preference for Abi Bakr was not clear to
the ummah, he would have declared it clearly and explicitly. Since
he had made his preference very clear and people had got it, the
purpose was served. This is why at the gathering of the Muhajirin

33 Aj-Bukhari, 7218; Muslim, 1823; At-Tirmidhi, 2225; Abi Dawid, 2939; Ahmad,
1:47.

°4Part of a hadith, Muslim, 2385; the other part is: “She said, ‘Abi Bakr.’ She was
further asked, ‘After Abii Bakr, who?’ She said, ‘‘Umar.’ She was then asked again,
‘After ‘Umar, who?’ She said, ‘Abii ‘Ubaydah Ibn Al-Jarrah.’” See also Ahmad, 6:63.
35Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

See Al-Bukhari, 7366, and 114, 3053, 3168, 4431, 4432, 5669, 7366; Muslim,
1637, 2387. See Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, 1:208-209.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 439

and the Ansar, ‘Umar addressed Abi Bakr and said, “You are the
best among us, you are our leader, and you are most dear to the
Prophet,’”?”’ and no one refuted him or said that someone else from
the Muhajirin deserved the khildfah better. Only some Ansar
disagreed and suggested that there should be two emirs, one from
the Muhajirin and one from the Ansar — a suggestion that conflicts
with many a hadith reported with tawatur. At the end of the meeting,
however, all the Ansar pledged fealty to Abt Bakr, except Sa‘d Ibn
‘Ubadah, who put in his own claim to the khilafah. Contrary to
what some misguided people say, no Companion ever claimed that
the Prophet (peace be on him) willed anyone other than Abt Bakr to
be his caliph. Neither ‘Ali nor ‘Abbas, nor anyone else claimed it, as
some heretics claim.

Ibn Battah has recorded a hadith with a proper chain of
transmitters that ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abdul-‘Aziz sent Muhammad Ibn Az-
Zubayr Al-Hanzali®*** to Al-Hassan to ask him whether the Prophet
(peace be on him) had appointed Abi Bakr to be his caliph. Al-
Hassan said, “Does your commander have any doubt about it? By
the One besides Whom there is no god, the Prophet (peace be on
him) did appoint him. He was the most God-fearing of all, and none
would have ever thought of competing with him.”

To sum up, those who say that the Prophet (peace be on him)
wanted to appoint as caliph someone other than Abt Bakr cannot
produce any text to support their view or even to prove that anyone
was better than he and deserved the khilafah more. They have been
prejudiced by love of their tribe or people. They are not unaware of |
the position of Abi Bakr and of the love which the Prophet (peace
be on him) had for him. The two Sahihs have a hadith reported by
‘Amr Ibn Al-‘As that at the time the Prophet (peace be on him)
appointed him commander of the campaign of Dhat As-Salasil, he
came to him and asked, “Who is most dear to you?” the Prophet
replied, “‘A’ishah.” He said, “I mean from among the men.” He
said, “Her father.” He asked, ‘““Who next?” He answered, ‘“““Umar,”
and then named some others.*°”

*7Recorded by Al-Bukhari.

°?8Hadith scholars are critical of Muhammad Ibn Az-Zubayr Al-Hanzali. Ibn Mu‘in and
An-Nasa’i consider him to be a weak (dd’if) narrator of hadith; Abi Hatim, -Al-
Bukhari and Sht‘bah do not accept his ahddith; and Ibn ‘Adiy says that he narrates
Strange ahddith that are not narrated by anyone else. See Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib at-
Tahdhib (Hyderabad, India, 1326 A. H.), vol. 9, p. 16.

Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

440 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Two Sahihs also have the hadith reported by Abt Ad-Darda’ that
he was sitting with the Prophet (peace be on him) when Abii Bakr
came, lifting a corner of his gown so that his knees were exposed.
Seeing him, the Prophet (peace be on him) said to the people
around, “It seems that your friend has had a dispute.” Abt Bakr
greeted them and said, “Messenger of Allah, something happened
between me and ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab. I rushed to him, expressed
my regrets and begged his pardon, but he refused to pardon me.
That is why I have come to you.” the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “May Allah forgive you, Abi Bakr,” and repeated the words
three times. ‘Umar then felt very sorry and went to Abt Bakr’s
house to inquire about him. He was told that Abii Bakr was not at
home. Then he went to the Prophet (peace be on him) and greeted
him. The Prophet’s face turned grave. Abi Bakr saw it and got up
on his knees, and said, “Messenger of Allah, by Allah, I was the
one who was in the wrong.” He said it twice, whereupon,
addressing the people around him, the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “Allah sent me as a messenger to you and you denied me. But
Abt Bakr bore witness that I was truthful. He also helped me with
his money and his person. Will you not leave my friend for me?
Will you not leave my friend for me?” Thereafter Abt Bakr was
never harmed anymore.” It is not possible to discuss the merits of
Abt Bakr in detail in this short work.

The two Sahihs record that ‘A’ishah said that when the
Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) died, Abu Bakr was at As- ©
Sunh. She then narrated what happened and said, “The Ansar
gathered around Sa‘d Ibn ‘Ubadah in the Hall of Banti Sa‘idah and
said, “There should be one emir from us, and one from you.’ Abti
Bakr, ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab and Abt ‘Ubaydah Ibn Al-Jarrah were
with them. ‘Umar wanted to speak, but Abt Bakr asked him to keep
silent. Later, ‘Umar said that he had prepared a very impressive
speech for the occasion and was not sure whether Abt Bakr would
deliver a speech as good as his. However, Abii Bakr spoke and
spoke better than anyone could have. At the end of the speech he
said, “The emirs will be from us and the viziers from you.’
Thereupon Hubab Ibn Al-Mundhir said, ‘No, we will not accept
that. There will be one emir from us, and one emir from you.’ Abi
Bakr said, ‘No, we will be the emirs and you will be the viziers.

°° Al-Bukhari, 3661, 4640; At-Tahawi, Mushkil al-Athar, 2:288; Ibn Abi ‘Asim,
1223. But Muslim has not recorded the hadith.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 44]

And you know that they (the Quraysh) are the best and the most
noble of all the Arabs. Pledge your fealty to either ‘Umar or Abi
‘Ubaydah Ibn Al-Jarrah. ‘Umar said, ‘No, we will pledge fealty to
you. You are our leader, the best among us, and the most dear to the
Messenger of Allah. Then he took the hand of Abi Bakr and
pledged his fealty to him. Thereafter people pledged him their fealty.
Someone said, ‘You have destroyed Sa‘d.’ ‘Umar said, ‘No, Allah
destroyed him.””°*'’ As-Sunh was a place in the suburbs of Madinah
that was famous for its gardens.

(101) The second heir to the khilafah was ‘Umar, may
Allah be pleased with him.

We affirm that, after Abii Bakr, the next heir to the khi/@fah was
‘Umar.. Abi’ Bakr handed over the khildfah to him and the ummah
rallied round him after Abt Bakr. As for the merits of ‘Umar, they
are too well known to be denied and too many to be counted.
Muhammad Ibn Al-Hanafiyyah says that he asked his father, “Ali,
' who was the best man after the Prophet (peace be on him). ‘Ali said,
“Son, don’t you know who?” He said, “No.” ‘Ali said, “It is Abia
Bakr.” He asked, “Then who?” ‘Ali said, “‘Umar.” Ibn AI-
Hanafiyyah says that he feared that if he asked again, his father
would say ‘Uthman, so he said, “Then you?” ‘Ali said, “I am only a
Muslim among other Muslims.’°*”

I have already mentioned the hadith in which the Prophet (peace
be on him) said, “Follow those who will come after me, Abi: Bakr
and ‘Umar.” Muslim has recorded in his Sahih that Ibn ‘Abbas said, |
“When ‘Umar was placed in his coffin, people gathered round him,
prayed for him and eulogized him. I was also there. Someone
caught hold of my shoulder from behind. I turned around and it was
‘Ali. He addressed the body of ‘Umar and said, ‘You did not leave
behind anyone, the like of whose good deeds I would rather see
Allah with, than yours. I swear that Allah will put you with your
two friends who have gone before you. Many times I heard the
Prophet say, “I and Abu Bakr and ‘Umar came,” “I and Abii Bakr
and ‘Umar went out.” I do hope and believe that Allah will place
you with those two.””°*?

**' Al-Bukhari, 3668; but, again, it was not recorded by Muslim.

°*? Al-Bukhari, 3671; Abii Dawid, 4629; Ibn Abi Shaybah, 12:12; Ibn Abi ‘Asim,
1204, 1206; Al-Baghawi, 3871.

**3 Al-Bukhari, 3677, 3685; Muslim, 2389; Ibn Majah, 98; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 1210; Al-

442 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

1 have already mentioned the hadith reported by Abi Hurayrah
that the Prophet (peace be on him) saw in a dream that he drew
water from a well, and then Abt Bakr drew, and then ‘Umar drew,
until people had drunk to their fill.°** In the two Sahihs, we have
another hadith reported by Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqias that ‘Umar Ibn ‏لذ‎
‎Khattab sought permission and went to the Prophet (peace be on
him). There were some women from the Quraysh talking to him
quite loudly. At the end of the hadith, .it states that the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “Leave them, Ibn Al-Khattab! By the One
Who has my life in His hands, if Satan finds you walking on one
side of the road, he will walk on the other side.’”*° It is also in the
two Sahihs that the Prophet (peace be on him) used to say, “There
were people in earlier communities who were muhaddathiin. Were
there such a man in our community it would be ‘Umar.’ Ibn
Wahab says that muhaddath means one who receives inspiration

(mulham).

(102) The third heir to the khiladfah was ‘Uthman, may
Allah be pleased with him.

This means that after ‘Umar, the next heir to the khilafah was
“Uthman, may Allah be pleased with them both. In his Sahih Al-
Bukhari has mentioned, on the authority of ‘Amr Ibn Maymin, the
story of the murder of ‘Umar, the meeting of the electoral council
(shirda) and the pledge of fealty to ‘Uthman. I will quote it in full.

‘Amr said, “I saw ‘Umar (Ibn Al-Khattab), may Allah be
pleased with him, a few days before he was assaulted. He had gone
to Hudhayfah Ibn Al-Yaman and ‘Uthman Ibn Hunayf and asked,
‘How did you do? Did you levy on the land more than it could
bear?’ They said, ‘We levied on it what it could bear. There is not
much revenue (to get from) there.’ He said, ‘You must refrain from
levying on the land more than it can bear.” They assured him that
they had not done that. ‘Umar said, ‘If Allah gives me life, I will
leave for the widows of Iraq so much that they will not need anyone
after me.’

Baghawi, 3891; Ahmad, 1:112.

*“*Discussed earlier; it is an authentic Aadith.

°° Al-Bukhari, 3294, 3683, 6085; Muslim, 2396; Ahmad, 1:171, 182, 187; Al-
Baghawi, 3874; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 1253, 1254; Ibn Abi Shaybah, 14:30.

66 Al-Bukhari, 3469, 3689; Muslim, 2398, 2399; At-Tirmidhi, 3693; Ahmad, 2:339,
6:55; Ibn Abi Shaybah, 12:22; Al-Humaydi, 1253; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 3:86.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 443

“From that time, hardly four months had passed before ‘Umar
was assassinated. On the morning he was assaulted, I was standing
behind him (in prayer). There was only ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas
between me and him. His practice was that when he passed by the
people arrayed in rows he would ask them to straighten the rows
and fill the gaps if there were any. When he was satisfied that people
were lined up properly, he would step forward and begin the prayer
saying, ‘Allah is Great.’ Often he would recite Strat Yusuf or An-
Nahal in the first rak‘ah so that more and more people could join the
prayer before he said the takbir for bowing. But that day I heard him
say instead, ‘Someone has killed me,’ or ‘some dog has bitten me.’
An infidel had stabbed him. He had a double-edged knife in his
hand and stabbed people night and left, some thirteen men, of whom
seven died.

“A Believer who saw all this threw his cloak over the murderer.
When he saw that he was caught, he killed himself. ‘Umar took the
hand of ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf and asked him to lead the prayer.
Those who were close to him, like me, saw what I saw, but the
people at a distance did not know anything except that they did not
hear ‘Umar’s voice. They were saying, ‘Subhana Allah, Subhana
Allah.” ‘Abdur-Rahman made the prayer short. When it was
finished ‘Umar asked Ibn ‘Abbas to see who had stabbed him. Ibn
‘Abbas went round and returned after a while and said, ‘It was a
slave of Al-Mughirah’s.’ ‘Umar asked, ‘Was it an artisan?’ Ibn
“Abbas said, ‘Yes.’ ‘Umar said, ‘May Allah destroy him. I had
sanctioned him for something. Praise be to Allah that He did not
decree my death at the hand of a Muslim. You and your father loved
to have many infidels in Madinah.’ In fact, ‘Abbas had the greatest
number of slaves in the city. Ibn ‘Abbas said, ‘If you like I will do
away with them.’ He meant that he might kill them. ‘Umar said,
“You are wrong. Would you kill them after they have learned your
language, prayed towards your giblah and made your hajj’?’

“Umar was then taken to his house, and we went with him.
People looked as if they had never been struck by a calamity before.
Some said, ‘Maybe he’ll recover.’ Others said, ‘He might not
survive.” Some palm tree juice (nabidh) was given to him but it
came out his entrails. Then some milk was given, but it also came
out. People were now convinced that he would not survive. We
went in to see him. Others also went in, and eulogized and praised
him. A young man came and said, ‘Commander of the Faithful, you
should be happy. Allah has bestowed upon you many a blessing.
You were a close friend of the Prophet. You have a glorious record
444 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

in Islam that you know. Then you were appointed emir and ruled
with justice. And finally you are dying as a martyr.’

‘Umar said, ‘I wish my good deeds were equal to my evil
ones, nothing against me or in my favor.’ When the young man was
going out, his gown rubbed the ground. ‘Umar asked to have him
called back. When he returned, ‘Umar said, ‘Nephew, raise your
gown. It will stay clean, and it is better for obeying your Lord.’
“Umar then asked his son ‘Abdullah how much money he had to
pay debts. It was counted and came to be about 86,000. ‘Umar said,
‘If the property of the family suffices let the debts be paid off from
it. But if it does not, then ask the Band ‘Adiy Ibn Ka‘b. If even that
does not suffice, ask the Quraysh, but do not go beyond them. Pay
off these debts. Go to ‘A’ishah, Mother of the Believers, and give
her the greetings of ‘Umar. Don’t say, “Greetings from the
Commander of the Faithful,’ for I am no more the Commander of
the Faithful today. Say that ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaéb seeks her
permission to be buried along with his two friends.’

“Abdullah went, sent his greetings to her, and sought her
permission (to enter). When she assented, he went to her. She was
sitting and weeping. He said, ‘Umar gives you his greetings and
seeks your permission to be buried along with his two friends. She
said, ‘I was keeping that place for myself, but I would prefer him
over me and give it to him.” When ‘Abdullah returned, ‘Umar was
told that he had come back. He asked the people around him to raise
him up, and asked ‘Abdullah, ‘What have you to say? ‘Abdullah
said, ‘She has given the permission the Commander of the Faithful
wanted. He said, ‘Praise be to Allah. There was nothing more
important to me than this. When I am dead, take me there, give my
greetings to her and say that ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaéb seeks her
permission. If she assents, put me in the grave there. But if she does
not, put me in the graveyard of the Believers.’

“Then Umm al-Mi’minin Hafsah and other women came in.
Seeing them we got up. She went in to ‘Umar and wept there for
some time. People began to seek permission to see him, so she went
into an inner chamber. We heard her weeping from there. People
said to ‘Umar, ‘Commander of the Faithful, make a will; appoint
someone caliph. He said, ‘I see none better for the position than this
group of people with whom the Prophet (peace be on him) was well
pleased.’ Then he named ‘Ali, ‘Uthman, Az-Zubayr, Talhah, Sa‘d
and “Abdur-Rahman, and said, ‘‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar will join their
meeting without being a candidate for the khilafah.’ He said that to
console ‘Abdullah. ‘If Sa‘d is elected leader,’ he continued, ‘that
will be correct; otherwise, whoever is elected leader should seek his
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 445

assistance. I did not remove him from his office because he was
incompetent or because he embezzled any wealth.’

“He then said, ‘My advice to the caliph after me is that he should
recognize the rights of the Muhajiriin and safeguard their honor. He
should be kind to the Ansar, who had homes (in Madinah) and
adopted the faith before them, and appreciate their good deeds, and
ignore their evils. He should treat with kindness the people of all the
countries who defend Islam, fill its treasury and fight against its
enemies; he should take nothing from them except what is more than
their needs, and that, too, with their consent. He should be good to
_ the desert Arabs, who are the real Arabs and the fountainhead of
Islam; he should take from them what is not dear to them and spend
it on the poor among them. And he should take care of those who
have sought the shelter of Allah and his Prophet, keep the pledge
that has been given them, protect their lives and property, and tax
them only to the extent they can afford.’

“When ‘Umar died we took him out and brought him to
‘A’ishah’s place. ‘Abdullah sent her his greetings and said that
‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab was seeking her permission. She permitted
them to enter and he was taken in and put in the grave beside his two
friends.

“After the burial, the men whom ‘Umar had named gathered
together. ‘Abdur-Rahman said, ‘Let us limit the matter to three of
us.” Az-Zubayr said, ‘I give my right to ‘Ali.’ Talhah said, ‘I give
my right to ‘Uthm4n,’ and Sa‘d said, ‘I give my right to ‘Abdur-
Rahman Ibn ‘Awf.’ ‘Abdur-Rahman said to ‘Ali and ‘Uthman,
“Whichever of you withdraws from this thing, we will entrust it to
him. Let Allah and Islam be our witness.’ However, both of them
kept silent. ‘Abdur-Rahman said, ‘Would you leave the matter to
me? Allah will punish me if I do not make every effort to select the
better of you.’ They agreed. Then ‘Abdur-Rahman took the hand of
one of them and said, “You are related to the Prophet and you have a
position of honor in Islam which is rightly yours. With Allah as
witness, I ask you to promise that if I make you the leader you will
do justice, and if I make ‘Uthman the leader you will listen to him
and obey him.’

‘‘He then turned to the other and said to him what he had said to
the first. When he had taken the pledge from both of them, he told
‘Uthman to extend his hand and he pledged his fealty to him. Then

F17 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI
446 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

‘Ali pledged his fealty to him, and the people present in the hall
pledged their fealty to him.’°*’

Humayd Ibn ‘Abdur-Rahmén narrated that Al-Miswar Ibn
Makhramah said, “When the group to whom ‘Umar had entrusted
the matter gathered, ‘Abdur-Rahman said to them, ‘I do not want to
be a candidate for this office. If you like I can select one of you.’
Thereupon they entrusted the matter to him. When ‘Abdur-Rahman
was given the authority, the people began to look to him; no one
looked to anyone else. People would come to him and apprise him
of their opinion. He consulted with them for a number of nights.
During the night before the morning we pledged our fealty to
‘Uthman, ‘Abdur-Rahman came to my house late at night and
knocked at the door. I came out. He said, ‘Strange! You are
sleeping! By Allah, I have not slept much these three nights. Go to
Az-Zubayr and Sa‘d and bring them to me.’ I went and brought
them to him. He talked with them and then asked me to call ‘Ali. I
called him. ‘Abdur-Rahman talked with him until it was past
midnight. ‘Ali got up and went. He was expecting to be elected.
‘Abdur-Rahman had some fears about ‘Ali. He asked me to call
‘Uthman. I called him and he talked with him until the call for the
dawn prayer was made.

““Abdur-Rahman led the prayer. The people of the group
gathered around the pulpit. He sent me to call all the Muhajirin and
Ansar who were available. He also called the regiment commanders
who had come to make the hajj under ‘Umar. When all had
assembled, ‘Abdur-Rahméan said, ‘I witness that there 15 no god
except Allah, and I witness that Muhammad is His Messenger and
servant. He then said, ‘‘Ali, I have discussed the matter with the
people. They are with ‘Uthman, so please do not have ill-feeling in
your heart.’ He then turned to ‘Uthm4n and said, ‘I pledge fealty to
you on the condition that you will follow the command of Allah, the
Sunnah of the Prophet (peace be on him) and the precedents of the
two caliphs after him.’ He then pledged fealty to ‘Uthm@n, and then
all the Muhajirin and Ansar, and the regiment commanders and the
Muslims pledged fealty to him.”**®

°*7 Al-Bukhari, Fada’il Ashab an-Nabi, 3700, and a shorter account in hadith 1392,
3052, 4888. See also Ibn Sa‘d, At-Tabaqgat Al-Kubra (Beirut: Dar Sadir, 1388/1968),
vol. 3, pp. 337-342; Ibn Abi Shaybah, 14:574-578; Muslim, 567; Ahmad, 1:15, 27-
28; An-Nasa’l, 2:43.

°*8 Al-Bukhari, 2707; ‘Abdur-Razzaq As-San‘ani, A/-Musannaf, 5:477.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 447

Among the merits of ‘Uthm4n, one is that he was a son-in-law
of the Prophet (peace be on him). He married two of his daughters,
one after the death of the other. | 1

In his Sahih, Muslim has recorded a hadith reported by ‘A’ishah
that the Prophet (peace be on him) was lying on his bed and his legs
were not covered. Abi Bakr took permission to enter and came in.
The Prophet (peace be on him) continued lying in the same condition
and talked with him. After a while ‘Umar took permission to enter
and came in. The Prophet (peace be on him) was still lying in the
same condition and talked with him. Then ‘Uthman sought
permission to enter. The Prophet (peace be on him) sat up and
covered his legs. ‘Uthman entered and talked to him.

When he went out, ‘A’ishah asked the Prophet (peace be on
him), “How is it that Abt: Bakr came in and you did not cover your
legs, nor did you get ready to receive him. Then ‘Umar entered and
you did not move. But ‘Uthm&an came in and you sat up and put
your clothes in order?” the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Should
I not be bashful in front of one before whom the angels are
bashful?’ It is also in the Sahih that the Prophet (peace be on him):
sent ‘Uthman to the people of Makkah (for negotiations). When he
was delayed and the Prophet (peace be on him) feared for him, he
took a pledge from his Companions under the tree. He extended his
right hand and said, “This is the hand of ‘Uthman.” Then he put it
on the other hand and said, “This is the pledge for ‘Uthman.”°”°

(103) The fourth heir to the khilafah was ‘Ali, may Allah
be pleased with him.

We hold that after ‘Uthm4an, the next heir to the khilafah was
‘Ali. When ‘Uthman was killed and people pledged fealty to “Ali, he
became the rightful imadm who must be obeyed. His government
was a khildfah on the pattern of a prophetic government, as the
hadith transmitted by Safinah shows, which was mentioned earlier.
Its words are, “The khilafah of the prophetic model will last for
thirty years, then Allah will give his kingdom to whom He will.” the
khilafah of Abi Bakr was for two years and three months; the
khilafah of ‘Umar was for ten years and a half; the khilafah of

“°Muslim, 2402; Ahmad, 6:15, 62, 155, and 6:228; Al-Baghawi, 4899; Ibn Abi
‘Asim, 1284.
65° Aj-Bukhari, 3698, 4066; At-Tirmidhi, A/-Manaqib, 3709; Ahmad, 2:101. .

448 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

‘Uthman was for twelve years; the khildfah of ‘Ali was for four
years and nine months; and the khildfah of Al-Hassan was for six
months. The first king among the Muslims was Mu‘awiyah, and he
was the best of all the Muslim kings. Moreover, he became the
rightful imam when Al-Hassan handed over the khildfah to him.
After the death of ‘Ali, the people of Iraq pledged fealty to his son,
Al-Hassan. But after six months Al-Hassan handed over the
khilafah to Mu‘awiyah, and the words of the Prophet (peace be on
him) were fulfilled: “This (grand)son of mine is a leader. Allah will
make peace through him between two large Muslim factions.”°*!
The story is fully narrated in various books and 15 well known.

“Ali became the caliph after ‘Uthman, when the Companions
pledged fealty to him. Only the people of Syria sided with
Mu‘awiyah. ‘Ali was on the truth. When ‘Uthm4n was killed, many
rumors and false allegations went round against ‘Uthman and
against some prominent Companions, like ‘Ali, Talhah and Az-
Zubayr. People in Syria, who were far from Madinah and had little
knowledge of the events were confused, and the interested and
ambitious among them tried to fish in troubled waters. On the other
hand, those who loved ‘Uthman began to doubt the sincerity of
some prominent people, against whom ‘Uthman constantly received
news of various kinds - some pure lies, some distorted reports, and
some that made no sense. There were also people who wanted ©
power. Some of them were in the camp of ‘Ali — they included the
Kharijis. They had rebelled against ‘Uthman and killed him, but
they could not be identified. Some of them enjoyed the protection of
their tribes; some could not be proved guilty; some had evil designs
in their minds but did not get the opportunity to implement them.
Talhah and Az-Zubayr thought that if the blood of the mnocent
caliph was not avenged and the mischief-mongers were not
punished, they would invite upon themselves Allah’s wrath. This
led to the Battle of the Camel. Although neither ‘Ali nor Talhah and
Az-Zubayr wanted it, it was brought about by the mischief-mongers
against the will of the Companions.

Then came the Battle of Siffin. The people of Syria thought that
even though they were great in number they did not or could not
have justice that would have united the ummah. They feared that the

°°! Al-Bukhari, 2704, 3746, 7109; At-Tirmidhi, A/-Mandqgib, 3775; Aba Dawid, As-
Sunnah, 4662; An-Nasa’i, Al-Jumu‘ah, 3:107; Ahmad, 5:49; Al-Hakim, Al/-
Mustadrak, 3:174; Al-Bayhaqi, Dald’il an-Nubuwwah, 6:442, 443; Abii Nu‘aym, AI/-
Hilya, 2:35.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 449

people in the army (of ‘Ali) might act against them just as they had
acted against ‘Uthm4n. ‘Ali was the rightful and the rightly-guided
caliph whose command had to be carried out and around whom all
the community had to rally. He thought that the Syrians would not
submit to him, which they were supposed to do, unless he battled
against them and forced them into submission. He felt that that was
the only way open, and did not think that he should placate them as
the Prophet (peace be on him) had done with some people in his
time, and the two caliphs had done in their times. In his view, the
law demanded that they be punished and prevented from causing
further troubles rather than winning them over. Consequently he
resorted to war.

But most of the elder Companions refrained from the war. They
had those ahddith in mind which say that in times of trouble, one
should stay at home. For them, the evils of war outweighed its
good. We, on our part, have a good word for every group. We say,
“Our Lord, forgive us and our brethren who came before us into the
faith, and leave not in our hearts rancor against those who have
believed. Our Lord, You are indeed Full of Kindness, Most
Merciful” [59:10]. Allah has saved our hands from taking part in
these troubles; may He also save our tongues from saying anything
wrong regarding it, out of His mercy.°””

There are many ahddith that state the merits of ‘Ali. The two
Sahihs have recorded from Sa‘d Ibn Abi 11730035 that the Prophet
(peace be on him) said to ‘Ali, “You are to me like Aaron was to
Moses, except that there is no prophet after me.’”°’ At the battle of
Khaybar, the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Tomorrow I will
give the banner to one who loves Allah and His Prophet and whom
Allah and His Prophet love.” Everyone began hoping for that honor.
When the time came, the Prophet (peace be on him) called ‘Ali, who
had a pain in his eyes. The Prophet (peace be on him) put his saliva
on his eyes and gave him the banner, and Allah gave them victory at
515

‎this point see Ibn Taymiyyah, Majma‘ al-Fatawa, 35:70-74; Ibn Taymiyyah,‏ م6520
‎Minhaj as-Sunnah (Beirut: Dar Al-Kutub Al-Islamiyyah, n.d.), vol. 2, pp. 202-203,‏
.224 ,219

‎°°3 Al-Bukhari, 3706, 4416; Muslim, Fadda’il as-Sahabah, 2404; At-Tirmidhi, 3764,
3731, 3732: Ibn Majah, 115, 121; ‘Abdur-Razzaq, Al-Musannaf, 20390; Al-
Humaydi, 71; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 1331, 1332, 1333, 1334, 1335, 1341; Ahmad, 1:170,
174-175, 177, 179, 182; Al-Hakim, A/l-Mustadrak, 3:108.

‎°°4A1-Bukhari, 3009, 3701, 4210; Muslim, 2406; Ahmad, 5:333; Al-Baghawi, Sharh
as-Sunnah, 3906; At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 5876, 5950, 5991.

450 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

When the verse, “Come, let us gather together our sons and
your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves;
then let us earnestly pray and invoke the curse of Allah on those
who lie” [3:61], was revealed, the Prophet (peace be on him)
collected ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hassan and Hussayn and said, “Lord, here
is my family. 99655

(104) They are the right-principled caliphs and the
rightly-guided imams.

We have already referred to the hadith which the compilers of
the Sunan collections have recorded from Al-‘Irbad Ibn Sariyyah
and which At-Tirmidhi has rated sahih. Ibn Sartyyah says that one
day the Prophet (peace be on him) gave a very moving sermon.
Tears ran down from the eyes and hearts trembled with fear. One of
us said, “Messenger of Allah, this seems to be a farewell sermon!
What is your advice for us?” He said, “I advise you to listen (to
your leader) and to obey him. Those who live after me will see
many changes. You must then follow my ways and the ways of the
right-principled and rightly-guided caliphs who come after me.
Abide by them and hold them 1251.276 Avoid innovations, for every
newly invented, baseless idea or practice (bid ‘ah) will only lead you
astray. 99657

The order of honor in which these caliphs stand is the same
order in which they assumed power. However, Abt Bakr and
‘Umar have a distinction in comparison with the other two. The
Prophet (peace be on him) enjoined us to follow the ways (sunnah)
of the nght-principled caliphs, but he only asked us to imitate two of
them, Abt: Bakr and ‘Umar. He said, “Imitate those who come after
me, Abt Bakr and ‘Umar.’®°® There is a difference between
following one’s ways (ittibd‘ sunnatihi) and imitating him (igtida
bihi). Hence the status of Abt Bakr and ‘Umar is higher than the
status of ‘Uthman and ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with them all.

It has been reported that Abt’. Hanifah considered ‘Ali to be
greater than ‘Uthman, but the commonly accepted view in his

*°°Muslim, Fadda’il as-Sahdbah, 2404; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Mandgib, 3724; Ahmad,
1:185; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 3:108-109.

6561 iterally, "Bite on it with your molars.”

*°7Aba Dawid, 4607; At-Tirmidhi, 2678 with the remark that the hadith is hasan
sahih; Ion Majah, 42; Ahmad, 4:126, 127; Ad-Darimi, 1:44-45; Al-Hakim, 1:95-96,
97, and Adh-Dhahabi has endorsed Al-Hakim’s evaluation of it being authentic.

8D iscussed earlier; it is authentic.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 451

madhhab is that ‘Uthman was greater than ‘Ali. This is also the view
of the Ahl as-Sunnah in general. I have already mentioned the words
that ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf spoke to ‘Ali: “I discussed the matter
with the people. They are with ‘Uthman.” Ayytb As-Sakhtayani has
said, “Those who do not consider ‘UthmAn better than ‘Ali insult the
Muhajirtin and the Ansar.”

The two Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim have recorded the
words of Ibn ‘Umar: “We used to say even when the Prophet (peace
be on him) was alive that the best of his ummah after him was Abi
Bakr then ‘Umar and then ‘Uthman.’”®”?

(105) We believe that the ten Companions, those whom
the Prophet (peace be on him) named and gave the glad
tidings that they would go to Paradise, will go to
Paradise, as he said, and what he said is true. Those
Companions are: Abi Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, ‘AIH,
Talhah, Az-Zubayr, Sa‘d, Sa‘id, ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn
‘Awf and Abu ‘Ubaydah Ibn Al-Jarrah, “the trustee of
this ummah”. May Allah be pleased with them all.

We have mentioned some of the merits of the four caliphs.
Regarding the other six, Muslim has recorded a hadith that ‘A’ishah
said that one night the Prophet (peace be on him) could not sleep and
said, “I wish a pious man from my Companions kept guard for me
tonight.” She then heard the rattling of weapons. The Prophet (peace
be on him) asked, “Who is it?” Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas said,
“Messenger of Allah, I have come to keep guard for you.” In a
variant of the hadith the words are, “I feared for the Messenger of
Allah and came to guard him.” the Prophet (peace be on him) then
prayed for him and slept.®°°°

The Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim have recorded a hadith
that at the battle of Uhud the Prophet (peace be on him) encouraged
Sa‘d to shoot his arrows with these words, “Shoot, may my father
and mother be sacrificed for 6011.56 The reference to the sacrifice

9 A]-Bukhari, 3697; Abi: Dawid, 4627, 4628; At-Tirmidhi, 3707; Ahmad, 2:14; At-
Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 13131, 13132, 13281, 13301. Contrary to the view of the
commentator, the hadith is not found in Muslim.

‘Muslim, 2410; Al-Bukhari, 2885, 7231; At-Tirmidhi, 3757; Ahmad, 6:141; Ibn
Abi ‘Asim, 1411; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 3:501.

°°! Al-Bukhari, 2905, 4058, 4059, 6184; Muslim, 2411; At-Tirmidhi, 3756; Ibn
Majah, 129; Ahmad, 1:92.

452 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

of both the parents by the Prophet (peace be on him) was a rare
honor granted to Sa‘d.

Muslim mentioned in his Sahih that Qays Ibn Abi Hazim said
that he had seen the hands of Talhah by which he shielded the
Prophet at the battle of Uhud; they had been crippled.°°* Muslim has
also mentioned that Aba ‘Uthman Al-Nahdi said that at one point
during that battle there was no one with the Prophet (peace be on
him) except Talhah and Sa‘d.°° The two Sahihs record from Jabir
Ibn ‘Abdullah that at the battle of the Ditch the Prophet (peace be on
him) gave a call and Az-Zubayr responded. The Prophet (peace be
on him) called a second time, and Az-Zubayr responded again,
whereupon the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Every prophet has
a helper (hawari); my helper is Az-Zubayr.’°™ This version of the
hadith occurs in Muslim’s Sahih. The two Sahihs also have the
hadith narrated by Az-Zubayr that the Prophet (peace be on him)
asked who would go to the Band Qurayzah and report to him on
their activities. Az-Zubayr says that he went to them and returned
with the information the Prophet (peace be on him) wanted. The
Prophet (peace be on him) prayed for him and said, “My father and
mother be sacrificed for you.’”®

In his Sahih, Muslim recorded on the authority of Anas Ibn
Malik that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Every ummah has a
trustworthy one (amin) and our trustworthy one, people, is Abia
‘Ubaydah Ibn Al-Jarrah.”® the two Sahihs record the hadith
reported by Hudhayfah Ibn Al-Yaman that the people of Najran
came to the Prophet (peace be on him) and said, “Messenger of
Allah, send us a trustworthy person.” He said, “Certainly I will
send you a truly trustworthy person.” Then everyone raised his head
and looked to him. He selected Abi ‘Ubaydah and sent him.°°’

Sa‘id Ibn Zayd testified that the Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“Ten people will go to Paradise. The Prophet will go to Paradise; —

°° Al-Bukhari, 3724, 4063; Ibn Majah, 178; Ahmad, 1:161. Contrary to the view of
the commentator, the hadith does not occur in Muslim. |
663 Al-Bukhari, 3724, 4060; Muslim, 2414.

64 Al-Bukhari, 2846, 2847, 2997, 3719, 4113, 7261; Muslim, 2415; At-Tirmidhi,
3745; Ibn Majah, 122; Ahmad, 3:307, 314, 338, 365.

°° Al-Bukhari, 3720; Muslim, 2416; At-Tirmidhi, 3743; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 1390.

666 Al-Bukhari, 3744, 4380, 4381, 7255; Muslim, 2419, At-Tirmidhi, 3790, 3791;
Ahmad, 3:125, 133, 146, 175, 189, 212, 245, 281, 286; Ibn Abi Shaybah, 12:135.
°°7 Al-Bukhari, 3745, 4380, 4381, 7254; Muslim, Fada’il as-Sahadbah, 2420; At-
Tirmidhi, Al-Mandqib, 3759; Ahmad, 5:385, 401; Ibn Majah, 125; Al-Baghawi,
Sharh as-Sunnah, 3929.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 453

Abi Bakr will go to Paradise; ‘Umar will go to Paradise; ‘Uthman
will go to Paradise; ‘Ali will go to Paradise; Talhah will go to
Paradise; Az-Zubayr will go to Paradise; Sa‘d Ibn Malik will go to
Paradise; and ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf will go to Paradise.” Sa‘id
said should people ask him he would name the tenth. They asked
and he answered, “Sa‘id Ibn Zayd,” and added, “The participation
of any of these men once in a campaign with the Prophet (peace be
on him) which raised dust to his face is better than a whole lifetime
of your work, even if you lived as long as Noah.”

This hadith has been recorded by Abt Dawid, Ibn Majah, and
At-Tirmidhi who has rated it as sahih.°°® At-Tirmidhi has also
recorded the hadith reported by ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf that the
Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Abi Bakr will go to Paradise;
‘Umar will go to Paradise; ‘Ali will go to Paradise; ‘Uthman will go
to Paradise; Talhah will go to Paradise; Az-Zubayr Ibn Al-‘Awwam
will go to Paradise; ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf will go to Paradise;
Sa‘id Ibn Zayd Ibn Nawfal will go to Paradise and Abii ‘Ubaydah
Ibn Al-Jarrah will go to Paradise.”®? This hadith has also been
recorded by Imam Ahmad in his Musnad. The hadith which Abi
Bakr Ibn Abi Khaythamah has recorded has the name of ‘Uthman
before the name of ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with them both.

Abt Hurayrah narrated that once the Prophet (peace be on him)
was at Mount Hira’. With him was Abii Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman,
‘Ali, Talhah and Az-Zubayr. The rock on which they were sitting
shook. The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Be still. There is no
one on you except a prophet, a 5100109 (sincere one) or a shahid
(martyr).’°’° Muslim and At-Tirmidhi have recorded this hadith and
noted a number of channels through which it has been transmitted.

The Ahl as-Sunnah honor these ten Companions and believe that
they are greater than the others. Their achievements and merits are
very well-known. Some ignorant people avoid saying “ten” and
doing things that are ten, since they hate the ten most eminent
Companions who were promised Paradise. They make an exception
only for ‘Ali. It is strange, however, that they hate the number ten

663 Abii: Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4649, 4650; At-Tirmidhi, A/-Mandqib, 3748, 3757; Ibn
Majah, Al-Mugaddamah, 134: Ahmad, 1:1 Al-Hakim, Al/-Mustadrak, 4:440. It is
authentic.

°°? At-Tirmidhi, A/-Mandqib, 3748; Ahmad, 1:193; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah,
3925. The hadith is sahih.

*Muslim, Fada’il as-Sahdbah, 2417; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Mandqib, 3698; Ahmad,
2:419; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 3924; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 1441, 1442.

454 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

and love the number nine, while they hate nine out of the ten. They
dislike all the first Muhajirin and the Ansar who pledged fealty to
the Prophet (peace be on him) under the tree and who were one
thousand and four hundred.°®’' Allah was well pleased with them as
He said, “Allah’s good pleasure was on the Believers when they
swore fealty to you under the tree” [48:18]. Muslim, in his Sahih,
and others record from Jabir that the Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“None of those who pledged fealty under the tree will enter the
Fire.’””’* Muslim has also the hadith reported by Jabir that Hatib Ibn
Abi Balta‘ah’s slave asked the Prophet (peace be on him) whether
Hatib would enter the Fire. The Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“No, he will not, for he participated in the Battle of Badr and the
campaign of Hudaybiyyah.’””’ |

The Rafidah, however, disown the majority of these
Companions. In fact, they disown all the Companions of the
Prophet (peace be on him) except a small number of them, about
thirteen to nineteen persons. Suppose they were the ten most wicked
persons in the world; would anyone refrain from using the term ten?
Allah has said, “There were in the city nine men of a family who
made mischief in the land, and would not refrain” [29:48]. Should
one then avoid using the number nine? On the other hand, Allah has
mentioned with approval the number ten in various contexts in the
Qur’an, for example, “There are ten (days) in all” [2:196]; “We
appointed for Moses thirty nights, and completed (the period) with
ten (more)” [7:142]; and “By the break of day, and by ten nights”
(89:1-2]. The hadith also mentions the number ten in different
contexts, for example, “The Prophet used to sit in i ‘tikaf during the
last ten days of Ramadan;’”’”* “Seek it (the Night of Qadr) in the last

6" Different estimates have been made. According to one report the number of the
Companions present at Hudaybiyyah was 1,500 (see Al-Bukhari, 4152, Muslim,
1856, 72, 73); according to another, there were 1,400 (see Al-Bukhari, 4154, 4840,
4150 and 4153; Muslim, 1856, 1858). According to a third report, there were 1,300
(see Al-Bukhart, 4155; Muslim, 1~57); and according to a fourth report over 1,400
(see Al-Bukhari, 4151). For a discussion see Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bdri, 7:341; Ibn Al-
Qayyim, Zdd al-Ma ‘dd, vol. 3, pp. 287-288.

°”?Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

*°Muslim, Fada’il as-Sahdbah, 2195; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Mandgib, 3863; Ahmad,
3:325, 349; At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 3064; Ibn Abi Shaybah, 12:155; Al-Hakim, A/-
Mustadrak, 3:301.

°’* Al-Bukhari, 2025, 2026, 2044, 4998; Muslim, 1171, 1172; Aba 135650, 2462,
4263, 2466; At-Tirmidhi, 790, 803; Ibn Majah, 1769, 1770; Ahmad, 2:281, 336,
355, 401, 5:141, 6:50, 92, 168, 169, 232, 279.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 455
ten nights of Ramadan;’”” and, “There is no other day wherein your
deeds are more dear to Allah than the ten days (of Dhu al-
Hijjah).”"”

In lieu of these ten Companions, the Rafidah extoll their twelve
imams. The first was ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, about whom they make the
baseless claim that he was the heir (wasi) of the Prophet (peace be
on him). The second was Al-Hassan, the third was Al-Hussayn,
may Allah be pleased with both of them. The fourth was ‘Ali Ibn Al-
Hussayn Zayn Al-‘Abidin, the fifth was Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Al-
Baaqir, the sixth was Ja‘far Ibn Muhammad As-Sadig, the seventh
was Misa Ibn Ja‘far Al-Kazim, the eighth was ‘Ali Ibn Musa Ar-
Rida, the ninth was Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Al-Jawwad, the tenth was
‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ar-Rida, the eleventh was Al-Hussayn Ibn ‘Ali
Al-‘Askari, and finally, Muhammad Ibn Al-Hassan. They love these
imams to excess, going well beyond any acceptable limit.

However, there is nothing in the hadith about them, and what
there is goes against their beliefs about these people, for example,
the two Sahihs have a hadith narrated by Jabir Ibn Samrah that he
went with his father to the Prophet (peace be on him) who said,
“The affairs of the people will continue to be good as long as they
are ruled by twelve people,” and then he said something which Jabir
could not hear. So he asked his father about it. His father said that
the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “All of them will be from the
Quraysh.” In another version of the hadith the words are, “Islam
will continue to be a dominant power until the twelfth caliph.”

In a third version the words are, “This thing will remain
dominant until the twelfth caliph.’”’’’ And it was as the Prophet
(peace be on him) said. The twelve caliphs were: the four nghtly-
guided caliphs, Mu‘awiyah, his son Yazid, ‘Abdul-Malik Ibn
Marwan, his four sons and ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abdul-‘Aziz between them.
After them the caliphate began to decline. Contrary to this, the
Rafidah believe that during this period the affairs of the ummah were
in complete disorder, that the men in authority were unjust and
corrupt, rather hypocrites and infidels, and that the “people of truth”
(ahl al-haqqg) were more despised and oppressed than the Jews.

°75 Al-Bukhari, 2017, 2019, 2020; Muslim, 1169; At-Tirmidhi, 792; Ahmad, 2:291,
519, 6:50, 56, 77, 204.

°° Al-Bukhari, 969; At-Tirmidhi, 757; Aba) Dawid, 2638; Ibn Majah, 1727; Ahmad,
1:224, 338; Ibn Hibban, 324; Ad-Darimi, 2:25.

°77A]-Bukhari, 7222, 7223; Muslim, 1821; At-Tirmidhi, 2224; Ahmad, 5:86, 87, 89,
90, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 106, 107, 108.

456 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

They are absolutely wrong; on the contrary, Islam continued to
expand and grow under those twelve caliphs.

(106) Whoever’ speaks well of the Prophet’s
Companions, his pure and pious wives - free from any
impurity - and his noble and righteous descendants -
free from any impurity - is free from hypocrisy.

I have already mentioned some ahddith stating the merits of the
Prophet’s Companions. Here is another, which Muslim has
recorded in his Sahih: Zayd Ibn Argém says that once the Prophet
(peace be on him) gave a sermon at a place between Makkah and
Madinah called Khumm. He praised Allah and then said, “People!
Know that I am simply a man. Allah’s messenger (the angel of
death) may soon come, and I will submit. I am leaving with you two
heavy burdens. One is the Book of Allah, which is guidance and
light. Hold fast to it and act upon it.” He then discussed the subject
at length and exhorted people to follow the Qur’an sincerely. “The
second thing,” he said, “is my family (ah/-bayti). I ask you to fear
Allah with regard to my family.” He repeated these words three
times.

Al-Bukhari has mentioned another tradition that Abt Bakr As-
510010 said, “Mind Muhammad’s words about his family.’””’ |

The reason the author has put above hypocrisy those who honor
the Prophet’s Companions, his wives and descendants 1s that rafd,
or the creed of the Rafidah was expounded first by a hypocrite and
heretic. He wanted to destroy Islam and denigrate the Prophet (peace
be on him), as is stated by a number of scholars. This was
‘Abdullah Ibn Saba’.®®° When he announced his Islam he intended

°’’Muslim, Fadd’il as-Sahabah, 2408; Ahmad, 4:366; Ad-Darimi, 2:431-432; At-
Tahawi, Mushkil al-Athar, 4.368; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 1550; Al-Hakim, 3:109, 148, 533.
°” Al-Bukhari, 3713, 3751.

*®° Abdullah Ibn Saba (d. ca. 40/660), the leader of an extremist Shi‘i sect, As-Sabi’ah,
was from Yemen. He was first a Jew, then embraced Islam, only to undermine it. He
moved from one place to another and instigated people against Islam and its leaders.
Starting from Hijaz, he went to Basrah and Kifah, then to Damascus. He tried to
arouse people against the third caliph, ‘Uthm4an, but could not succeed and was driven
out to Egypt. He preached that Muhammad would return like Jesus, that every prophet
has a legatee (wasi) and that ‘Ali was the wasi of Muhammad and the last of the
legatees, that ‘Ali is alive and living up in the clouds, that the souls transmigrate
from one body to another after death. Ibn ‘Asakir Tarikh Dimashq, 7:41; Adh-
Dhahabt, Mizdn al-‘Itidal, vol. 2, ‏.م‎ 426; Al-Ash‘ari , Maqalat al-Islamiyyin, ‏.م‎ 15;

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 457

to undermine Islam through his evil designs, just as Paul had done
with Christianity. Ibn Saba’ first posed as a pious devotee, engaged
in enjoining good and forbidding evil. He then began to incite
people against ‘Uthman and worked for his murder. When ‘Ali went
to Kufah, he deified him and rallied people round him so that he
might achieve his evil designs. When ‘Ali came to know this, he
ordered Ibn Saba’ killed. But Ibn Saba’ left the place and fled to
Qargis. His story is well known in the history books.

We have stated earlier that ‘Ali chastised those who exalted him
over Abt Bakr and ‘Umar, and gave them the same punishment
which is inflicted on a slanderer. But the heresies of the Khawaryj,
or the Haruriyyah, and the Shi‘ah continued to be echoed by the
mischief-mongers. This explains how rafd is the gateway to the
undoing of Islam. Qadi Abi Bakr Ibn At-Tayyib has discussed at
length the Batiniyyah and their designs to undermine Islam. He
says, “Their missionaries first persuade a Muslim to accept the
beliefs and practices of the Shi‘ah. When he accepts them they tell
him that the Elders (Salaf) did an injustice to ‘Ali and killed Al-
Hussayn. Then they ask him to repudiate the Bantu Taym, Banu
‘Adiy, Bant Umayyah and Bant ‘Abbas, and to believe that ‘Ali
will come back, that he has knowledge of the Unseen, that Allah
entrusted to him the creation of the world, and so on and so on - all
the foolish ideas of the Shi‘ah. When they see that he responds to
their call and feels for the injustices and cruelties that ‘Ali and his
sons had to suffer, they think they have achieved their goal.”

In fact, these people begin by maligning the Companions of the
Prophet (peace be on him), then they malign his wives and then
even the Prophet himself, for in the view of these mistaken people,
the family of the Prophet went no less astray than his Companions.

(107) The scholars of the Elders and their successors,
whether they are hadith and tradition scholars or scholars
of figh and rational sciences, should not be mentioned
except in good terms. Whoever speaks ill of them is not
on the right path.

Allah has said, “If anyone contends with the Messenger, even
after guidance has been plainly conveyed to him and follows a path
other than that of the men of faith, We will leave him on the path he

Ash-Shahristani, A/-Milal wa an-Nihal, (ed. Muhammad Sa’id Kilani; Cairo:
Maktabah Mustafa Al-Babi Al-Halabi, 1396/1976), vol. 6, p. 174.

458 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

has chosen and land him in Hell — and what an evil refuge” [4:115].
This means that the duty of a Muslim is not only to be loyal to Allah
and His Prophet but also to be loyal to the Muslim community, as
the Qur’an has stated, particularly those who are the heirs of the
Prophet, whom Allah has made like stars for the guidance of the
people in darkness over sea and land, and in whose knowledge and
piety the community has complete faith.°°' For every community
before Muhammad (peace be on him, to which a prophet) was sent,
their scholars were the worst of them, but as for the Muslim
ummah, the scholars are the best of them. They represent the
Prophet (peace be on him) in his ummah, and revive his ways that
are forgotten. The Book of Allah supports them and they support it,
it extols them and they extol it.

There is complete agreement among the scholars of this ummah
that the Sunnah of the Prophet (peace be on him) must be followed.
Hence, if anyone has said anything that conflicts with a hadith there
may be one of the following three acceptable excuses for him not to
act upon it: one, he may have doubts whether the hadith is authentic;
second, he may not be sure whether the hadith applies to the case in
which he has given his opinion; and third, he may be of the view
that the hadith has been abrogated.

The ‘ulama’ have a place of honor among us, for they tell us
what the Prophet (peace be on him) taught, and explain to us what
we cannot understand by ourselves. May Allah be pleased with them
and make them pleased. “Our Lord, forgive us and our brethren
who came before us into the faith, and leave not in our hearts rancor
against those who have believed. Our Lord, You are indeed Full of
Kindness, Most Merciful” [59:10].

(108) We do not exalt any friend (wali) of Allah over
any one of His prophets, peace and blessings be upon
them. On the contrary, we believe that a single prophet
(nabi) is greater than all the walis combined.

The author is refuting here the view of the monists and the
ignorant Sifis.°*’ The well-grounded people follow the revelation
and observe the law. Allah has enjoined upon everyone to follow the
Prophet (peace be on him). He has said, “We sent not any

**'For a discussion of this point, cf. Ibn Taymiyyah, Majma‘ al-Fatawa, 20:231-233.
***For Ibn Taymiyyah’s discussion on this point, see Jami‘ ar-Rasd’il, vol. I, pp.
205-7; Majmi‘ al-Fatdwa, 2:219-247; 11:225-229; Dar’ Ta‘arud al-‘Aql wa an-Naq]l,
5:4.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi | 459

messenger but to be obeyed in accordance with the will of Allah. If
they had only, when they were unjust to themselves, come unto you
and asked forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah
indeed Oft-Returning Most Merciful. But no, by your Lord, they
can have no (real) faith, until they make you judge in all disputes
between them, and find in their hearts no resistance against your
decisions, but accept them with the fullest conviction” [4:64-65]. He
has also said, “Say: If you do love Allah follow me. Allah will love
you and forgive you your sins: For Allah is Oft-Forgiving and
Merciful” [3:31].

Abit ‘Uthman Al-Nishapiri has said, “Whoever is governed by
the Sunnah in his words and deeds speaks wisdom, but whoever is
guided by his fancies and lusts speaks bid‘ah.” Another Sufi has
said, “When a Sufi ignores a sunnah he does so out of conceit.”
This is true, for if he does not follow the teachings of the Prophet
(peace be on him), he is simply pursuing his own whims and
ignoring the guidance of Allah. This is conceit and arrogance. It is
acting like those who are referred to in the verse, “They say: ‘We
will not believe until we receive (exactly) like what is received by
Allah’s messengers.’ Allah knows best whom to entrust his
mission” [6:124].

Many of these people think they can attain what the prophets
attained through their own means, through intensive devotion and
purification of the soul, without following the ways of the prophets.
Some have claimed that they are better than the prophets. One has
even said that the prophets and messengers received their knowledge
of Allah from the niche or lamp of the Seal of the Saints, and that he
is that seal. This “truth” which he claims for himself is no different
from what Pharaoh said, namely that the world exists out there by
itself, and that there is no separate independent creator.

In fact, this man says that he is Allah. To be sure, Pharaoh
denied Allah apparently, but in the heart of his heart he believed in
Allah, and believed in a way better than they do. He believed in an
independent Creator while they believe that the world and the
Creator are one. This is the belief of Ibn ‘Arabi and Sifis like him.
However, when Ibn ‘Arabi saw that he could not change the words
of the Shar‘, he began to say that though prophecy (nubaiwwah)
ended, sainthood (waldyah) has not. He further claimed that his
sainthood is higher than any prophethood, higher than the status any
prophet or messenger may attain, and that the prophets receive light
460 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

from his waldyah. His words are, “The status of a prophet is in
between, above the messenger and below the saint (wali).’”°*?

This is turning the Shar‘ upside down, for according to the
Qur’an, every righteous Believer is a wali. Allah has said, “Behold!
Verily on the friends (awliyd’) of Allah there is no fear, nor will
they grieve, those who believe and (constantly) guard against
disobedience” [10:62-63]. Prophethood (nubiiwwah) 1s therefore

higher than waldyah, and messengerhood (risd/ah) is higher than
prophethood, as we have explained previously. _ |
In his Fustis, Ibn ‘Arabi has written:

The Prophet likened prophecy to a wall made of bricks which
was all completed except for the place of one brick, and he said
that he was that brick. However, the Prophet did not see the
(whole) wall; that is why he said one brick. But the Seal of the
Saints must see (the whole wall). He must see what the
Prophet has described, and (also) see himself in the wall in
place of two bricks, see himself filling the place of the two
bricks and thus completing the wall. The reason he sees the
place of two bricks is that the wall is formed of a silver brick
and a golden brick. The silver brick is the outer side of the
wall with all that it implies of rulings, for (the Prophet)
receives from Allah laws in which he is externally obeyed.
Since (the Seal of the Saints) sees things as they are, he must
see this thing also in the way (I have described). That is to
say, he 15 at the place of the golden brick on the inner side, for
he receives from the same source from where the angel receives
who reveals to the Messenger. If you understand what we have
hinted at, you will have knowledge that is useful.°*

Who 15 a greater infidel than one who likens himself to a golden
brick and likens the Messenger to a silver brick, and exalts himself
over and above the messengers? These are mere fancies of these
people. In the words of the Qur’an, “There is nothing in their
breasts but (the quest of) greatness which they will never attain”
[40:56]. The infidelity (kufr) of this man who says such things 5
obvious. There are many more statements of this kind in his
writings. In some, his kufr is very explicit; in others, it is implicit.
His statements are to be studied carefully so that his erroneous ideas

°*>See Ibn ‘Arabi, Al-Futuhat al-Makkiyyah, 2:252. See also Ibn Taymiyyah, Dar’
Ta ‘arud al-‘Aql wa an-Nag]l, 10:204 and Jami‘ ar-Rasa’il, 1:209.

*§4See Ibn ‘Arabi, Fuss al-Hikam, (ed. Abii al-‘Ala ‘Afifi; Cairo: Dar Ihya Al-Kutub
Al-‘Arabtyyah, ‘Isa Al-Halabi, 1365/1946), vol. I, ‏.م‎

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahdwi 461

may be exposed. Some of his ideas are stated clearly and everyone
can see that they are wrong. In the case of others, one has to have a
very sharp intellect to see and detect the error. The kufr of Ibn
‘Arabi and men like him is more repulsive than the kufr of those
who say, “We will not believe until we receive (exactly) like what
was received by Allah’s messengers” [6:124].

Ibn ‘Arabi and people like him are hypocrites (munafigin) and
destroyers of Islam (zanddiqah); they believe in the identity of Allah
and the world. They will be immersed deep in the lowest abyss of
the Hell-fire. They are hypocrites because they present themselves
as Muslims, and put on a show of Islam as the hypocrites at the time
of the Prophet (peace be on him) posed as Muslims while they were
infidels at heart. The Prophet (peace be on him) treated them as
Muslims on the basis of what they did openly. Had they revealed
their inner infidelity, the Prophet (peace be on him) would have
treated them as apostates. Opinions differ on whether the repentance
of an apostate will or will not be accepted. The correct view is that it
will not be accepted. This is the view of Abi Hanifah, as reported
by Mu‘alla. And to Allah we look for guidance.

(109) We believe in the miracles (karamat) that have
proceeded from them and have been reported by reliable
reporters.

The term mu ‘jizah is used for everything that is a violation of
natural phenomena.°* Earlier scholars used kardmah as a synonym,
but later scholars differentiated between them. They used mu ‘Jizah
for the miracles of a prophet and kardmah (literally grace) for the
miracles of a wali. The common element between the two 15 the
violation of natural phenomena. Three things are the causes of
excellence: knowledge, power, and _ self-sufficiency. In their
absolute forms, they are to be predicated of Allah alone. He is the
only One Who knows everything, can do anything and needs
nothing. This is the reason He asked His Messenger not to claim
any of these when He told them, “Say: I tell you not that with me are
the treasures of Allah, nor do I know what is hidden, nor do I tell
you I am an angel. I but follow what is revealed to me” [6:50].
These words were spoken by the last prophet and messenger of
resolute purpose. They were also spoken by Noah, the first prophet

°*°See for more on this point, Ibn Taymiyyah’s discussion in Majma‘ al-Fatawa, vol.
11, pp. 311-335.

462 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

of resolute purpose and the first messenger Allah sent to people on
earth. Both disclaimed these things when people asked for them.

Allah has referred to knowledge of the Unseen in several verses,
for example, “They ask you about the hour — when will be its
appointed time” [79:42]. Concerning power: “They say: ‘We will
‘not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth for us from
the earth; or until you have a garden of date trees and vines and
cause rivers to gush forth in their midst, carrying abundant water; or
you cause the sky to fall in pieces as you say (will happen) against
us; or you bring Allah and the angels before us, face to face; or you
have a house adorned with gold; or you mount a ladder right into the
skies. No, we will not even believe your ascending until you send
down to us a book that we can read’” [17:90-93].

Sometimes people reproached the Prophet for his human needs.
Allah has also mentioned this: “They say: ‘What sort of a messenger
is this who eats food and walks through the streets?’” [25:7]. He
has asked His Messenger to tell them that he cannot have any of
those things except what Allah gives him. He can know only what
He reveals to him, dispense with only what He enables him to
dispense with, or do only those wonders which He empowers him
to do. If you think over these categories you will find that all
miracles belong to one or the other of them.

A miracle may serve a purpose which Islam has commended, in
which case its performance is right, either obligatory or
commendable. But if it secures a thing which Islam has only
permitted, it will be regarded as a worldly blessing for which one
should thank Allah. If it produces something which is forbidden or
undesirable, it will invite punishment or Allah’s hatred. Bal‘am Ibn
Ba‘tr was given signs, but he misused them and incurred Allah’s
wrath. Such things happen when the person. concerned makes a
wrong judgment, follows a view blindly, does not know things
well, is swayed by some emotion, does not possess sufficient
power, or is impelled by a need. In short, a miracle is either
commendable, objectionable, or permissible. In the event it 5
permissible but produces something good it is a blessing; but if it
does not, then it is like any useless thing.

Aba ‘Ali Al-Jawzijani®*® has said, “Follow the Shari‘ah
constantly and do not run after miracles. You may love miracles, but
your Lord loves your perseverance in following the Shari‘ah.”
Sheikh Shihab ad-Din As-Suhrawardi wrote in his ‘Awéarif, ““When
the devotees of our times hear that the pious men and saints of

°**For the words quoted here see ‘Attar, Tadhkirat al-Awliyd’, vol. 2, ‏.م‎ 101.

Commentary on the Creed of At- [1 011101 463

earlier times worked numerous miracles, they also want to perform
them and have that power. I wish they would suppress that desire
and blame their deeds for which they are not given the miracles. If
they knew this, they would not worry about it. They should know
that sometimes Allah gives miracles to a sincere devotee so that he
may increase in conviction, reduce his interest in worldly things,
and suppress evil desires. Sincere devotees should strive to hold fast
to the Shari‘ah; this is the truest and the greatest miracle.””*’ There is
no doubt that the heart is often more effective than the body. If
good, it will produce good effects; if evil, it will produce evil
effects. This means that the effects produced by the heart may be
pleasing to Allah and may be displeasing.

Jurists have discussed the question of retribution for killing
someone by occult means. But these people peer into the working of
the cosmic world and think that a miracle by itself is a thing of
honor. They do not know that the real miracle is to constantly follow
the Shari‘ah, nor do they know that the most favored to Allah are
those whom He has made to do what He loves, who obey Him and
His Messenger, and who help His friends and do battle with His
enemies. They are in truth the wdlis of Allah, about whom He has
said, “Behold! Verily on the walis of Allah there is no fear, nor will
they grieve” [10:62].

When Allah bestows on anyone a miracle or any other blessing,
or tests him by inflicting on him something painful, it is neither
honor nor dishonor from Allah. A miracle 15 an honor if you do it to
fulfill Allah’s will; but it is a dishonor when you do it to defy His
will. Allah has Himself warned, “Now as for man, when his Lord
tries him, giving him honor and gifts, he says (puffed up): ‘My
Lord has honored me.’ But when He tries him, restricting his
subsistence for him, then he says (in despair): ‘My Lord has
humiliated me!’” [89:15-16].

In short, with regard to miracles, people are of three kinds: those
for whom miracles add to their honor; others to whom they expose
to Allah’s punishment; and the third category of people are those for
whom miracles are just like any other good that is permissible, as
we have said above.

Miracles, whether cognitive or active, vary according to the
word of Allah, which is of two kinds, existential and religious.°**

*’’Shihabuddin As-Suhrawardi, ‘Awarif al-Ma ‘arif, (Beirut: Dar Al-Kutub Al-‘ Arabi,
Ist ed. 1966), p. 33. 0

633 ‏عع>‎ also Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmii‘ al-Fatdwa, 11:270-271, Al-Furgan bayn Awliyda’
Ar-Rahman wa bayn Awliya’ ash-Shaytdn, ‏.م‎ 1181, and Ibn Al-Qayyim, Shifa‘ al-
‘Alil, ‏.م‎

464 — Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

The former is referred to in the famous prayer of the Prophet (peace
be on him), “I take shelter in the irrevocable words of Allah which
neither the pious nor the villain can resist,’°*’ and in many verses of
the Qur’an, such as, “Verily when He intends a thing His command
is “Be,” and it is!” [36:82]; and, “The word of your Lord does find
its fulfillment in truth and in justice. None can change his words”
{6:115]. The whole cosmos is governed by these words, as are
miracles.

The second kind of words are religious. They are the Qur’an and
the Shar‘ which He has given to His Messenger (peace be on him)
and which consists of injunctions, prohibitions and information.
Man’s duty towards them is to know them, to act upon them, and to
enjoin what Allah has enjoined; and his duty towards the existential
words is to know them and to produce things according to them.
The first words are regulative and creative, the second prescriptive
and religious. To know the first is to know the natural phenomena,
and to know the second 15 to know religious injunctions. To have
power over the first is to overcome natural processes, whether they
pertain to oneself, as when one walks on water flies through the air,
or sits in fire, or they pertain to others, as when one cures the
disease of anybody, kills him, or makes him rich or poor. To have
power over the second is, first, to submit to the commands of Allah
and His Messenger (peace be on him) and follow the Qur’an and
Sunnah, externally and internally, and, then, to ask others to submit
to Allah and His Messenger.

Now that this point is clear, let me further state that if a Muslim
works no miracles, cognitive or active, it will not harm his piety. If
he does not know anything hidden or effect anything extraordinary
in the outer world, it will not affect his position with Allah. It may
even be to his advantage sometimes, for a miracle raises one in
honor only when he uses it for a religious purpose, otherwise it may
be a liability; it may even expose him to punishment in this life or the
Hereafter. Some miracles promote religion and some destroy it.
They promote religion when they are governed by it, just as power
and money promote religion when they are controlled by the Shar‘.
The best example that has ever been set for the use of political power
and money is that of the Prophet (peace be on him) and then of his
successors, Abt Bakr and ‘Umar. Whoever considers miracles to be
ends in themselves and uses religion as a means is like one who
uses religion to earn money. He does not practice religion because
he fears Hell or loves Paradise, which is what is required of him

°®°Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 465

according to the Shar‘. A number of people boast that they have
risen above the fear of Hell or the love of Paradise, but oddly
enough, the highest object of their religion is to work some petty
wonders in the world.

To be sure, when one is perfect in faith and practice, one gets
miracles when one needs them. Allah has clearly stated that, for
example, “For him who fears Allah and obeys His commands, He
prepares a way out, and He provides for him from (sources) he
could never imagine” [65:2-3]; “If you fear Allah, He will grant you
a criterion (to judge between right and wrong)” [8:29]; “If they had
done what they were (actually) told, it would have been best for
them, and would have gone furthest to strengthen their (faith). And
We should then have given them from Our Presence a great reward,
and We should have shown them the Straight Way” [4:66-68]; and,
“Behold! Verily on the friends of Allah there is no fear, nor will they
grieve; those who believe and constantly guard themselves against
evil — for them are glad tidings in the life of the present and in the
Hereafter” [10:62-64]. The Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“Beware of the insight of the Believer; he sees with the light of
Allah,” and then he recited the Qur’anic verse, “Behold! In this there
are portents for those who read the signs” [15:75].

At-Tirmidhi has recorded this hadith from Abi Sa‘id AI-
Khudri.°”? The Prophet (peace be on him) narrated Allah’s words,
“Whoever opposes a friend of Mine declares war against Me. The
closest My servant comes to Me is by doing the duties I have
imposed on him. And My servant comes closer and closer to Me
through supererogatory deeds until I love him; and when I love him
I become his ears with which he hears, his eyes with which he sees,
his hands with which he strikes, and his legs with which he walks.
When he asks something of Me I give him; and when he seeks My
protection I protect him. I do not hesitate in doing anything I want to
do except when I take out the soul of a believing servant of Mine.
He does not like to die, and I do not like to displease him, but there
is no alternative’®’' In short, Allah loves perseverance in
obedience, but the soul loves marvels. And Allah is the Guide.

°° At-Tirmidhi, At-7afsir, 3127; Ibn Jarir, Jami‘ al-Bayan, 14:30. But one of the
transmitters of the hadith, ‘Ati’ah Al- ‘Awfi is a poor transmitter. At-Tabarani has
recorded the hadith through a different channel (see A/-Kabir, 7497) but its narrator,
‘Abdullah Ibn Salih, is weak in memory. Nevertheless, Al-Haythami has held the
hadith to be hasan (see his Majmii‘ al-Fawa’id, 10:268). See also Ibn Kathir, Tafsir
al-Qur’dn al-‘Azim, 2:555. Al-Albani has, on the other hand, shown the hadith to be
weak. .

*°'Discussed earlier; it is an authentic hadith without the statement, “but there is no

466 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

The Mu‘tazilah deny the miracles of the pious. This is absolutely
wrong and contradicts observed facts. They say that if we admit
them it will be difficult for people to distinguish them from the
miracles of the prophets, and, consequently, to differentiate between
a saint and a prophet — a consequence they say that must be avoided.
This argument is not correct, for the difficulty arises only when a
saint works miracles and claims to be a prophet, but not when he
does not claim that. And if he claims to be a prophet, he is not a
saint but a liar and an imposter. We have earlier discussed the
difference between a real prophet and an imposter who claims to be
a prophet, when commenting on the author’s words, “Muhammad
is a servant of Allah and His chosen prophet.”

I would like to elaborate more on the concept of insight
(firdsah). We have three kinds of insight in people.®’* One is the
insight of faith (firdsah imdniyyah), which 15 produced by a light
that Allah casts into the heart of His obedient servant. It is, in fact,
an idea that occupies the heart and overwhelms it, as a lion
overcomes its farisah (prey). It is from here that we get the word
firdsah. This insight varies according to the power of faith: the
stronger the faith, the sharper the insight. Abt. Sulayman Ad-Darani
said, “Firdsah is an intuitive perception on the part of the soul, a
vision of the hidden. It is one of the stages of faith.”

The second is an acquired insight (firdsah riyddiyyah). It 5
acquired through hunger, vigilance and solitude. When the soul 5
freed from various encumbrances, it acquires insight and
illumination depending upon its degree of emancipation. This insight
is available to a Believer as well as to a non-believer; it is neither a
sign of faith, nor a proof of sanctity. It does not reveal the truth that
saves or the path that leads to salvation. It belongs to the same
category to which the insights of rulers, statesmen, doctors and
others belong.

The third insight is physiognomic (firdsah khalqiyyah).
Physicians and scientists have written about this topic. From the
physical features of a person one infers some of his moral traits,
since Allah has related the two in some relation. It has been
observed, for example, that a person with an unusually small head
has a weak intellect. It has also been noted that a broad chest
indicates large-heartedness, and a narrow chest indicates meanness,
as small and dull eyes signify a weak mind and a cold heart.

alternative.”
*°?See the discussion by Ibn Al-Qayyim in Madarij as-Sdlikin, vol. 2, pp. 484-487.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 467

(110) We believe in the signs of the Hour, such as the
emergence of the Great Liar (ad-Dajjal), the descent of
Jesus son of Mary from Heaven, and we believe in the
rising of the sun from the west,. and the appearance of
the Beast of the Earth from its place.

‘Awf Ibn Malik Al-Ashyja’l said that he met the Prophet (peace be
on him) at Tabak while he was resting in a tent. The Prophet (peace
be on him) said to him, “Count six things that will appear before the
Hour: my death; then the conquest of Al-Quds; then two deaths that
will take as many lives as the disease of the chest kills sheep; then an
increase in affluence so great that one will not feel happy even if one
is given a hundred dinars; then wars that will enter all the houses of
the Arabs; then peace between you and the Banu Al-Asfar
(Romans), who will break the treaty and attack you with eighty
regiments, with twelve thousand soldiers in each regiment.’”°”* This
hadith has been recorded by Al-Bukhari, Abii Dawid, Ibn Majah
and At-Tabarani.

Hudhayfah Ibn Asid says that once they were talking about the
Hour, when the Prophet (peace be on him) came and asked, “What
are you talking about?” They said, “We are talking about the Hour.”
He said, “The Hour will not come before ten things come to pass:
the Smoke, the Great Liar (Dajjal), the Beast, the rising of the sun
from the west, the descent of Jesus son of Mary from Heaven, Gog
and Magog, three landslides, one in the east, one in the west and
one in the Arabian peninsula, and finally, a fire that will appear in
Yemen and drive people to their gathering place.’”°”* This hadith has
been recorded by Muslim.

Muslim and Al-Bukhari have also recorded a hadith in their
Sahih collections from Ibn ‘Umar that when the Great Liar (Dajjal)
was mentioned in front of the Prophet (peace be on him), he said,
“It will not be difficult for you to recognize him. Certainly Allah is
not one-eyed. (Saying that, he pointed to one of his eyes.) But the
Great Liar (Dajjal) will be blind in the nght eye, which will be like a
squeezed grape.’””° This is the wording of Al-Bukhari.

°° Al-Bukhari, 3176; Aba Dawid, 4292, 4293; Ibn Majah, 4042, 4095; Ahmad,
6:25, 27; At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 18:40, hadith 70, 72, 98, 119, 122, 150.
**Muslim, Al-Fitan, 2901; Aba Dawid, A/-Malahim, 4311; At-Tirmidhi, A/l-Fitdn,
2183; Ibn Majah, A/-Fitan, 4055; Ahmad, 4:6.

®° Al-Bukhari, 3439, 3441, 5902, 6999, 7026, 7128; Muslim, Al-Imdn, 169; Abi

468 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Anas Ibn Malik said that the Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“Every prophet has warned his people against the one-eyed Great
Liar (Dajjal). Certainly, he will be one-eyed, but your Lord is not
one-eyed. On his brow will be writ k-f-r,’°’° that is, he is a kafir
(infidel), as has been explained in another version of the hadith.

Al-Bukhari and others have recorded from Abt Hurayrah that
the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “By the One in Whose hand my
life is, the son of Mary will come down to you as a judge, just and
fair. He will demolish the cross, kill the swine, and abolish the
jizyah. There will be such an abundance of wealth that no one will
accept charity, and one prostration before Allah will be much more
precious than all that the world has.” After narrating the hadith, Abt
Hurayrah said, “Read, if you wish, the verse, ‘And there is none of
the People of the Book but must believe in him (Jesus) before his
death; and on the Day of Judgment He will be a witness against
them [4:159].’?’

There are other ahddith also which say that Jesus son of Mary
will descend from Heaven and kill the Great Liar (Dajjal),
whereupon. Gog and Magog will appear and Allah will destroy them
in one night at his request. But we cannot go into those details here.

As for the emergence of the Beast from the Earth and the rising
of the sun in the west, Allah has said, “And when the word 1s
fulfilled against them (the unjust), We will produce from the earth a
Beast to speak to them, because mankind did not believe with
assurance in Our revelations” [27:82]; and, “Are they waiting to see
if the angels come to them, or your Lord! The day that certain of the
signs of your Lord do come, no good will it do to a soul to believe
in them then, if it believed not before, nor earned righteousness
through its faith. Say: Wait, we too are waiting” [6:158]. In his
exegesis of this verse Al-Bukhari noted the hadith reported by Abu
Hurayrah in which the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “The Hour
will not come until the sun rises in the west. All those on earth that

see it will believe, but by then it will not benefit any who had not
believed before.’”’*

Dawtd, As-Sunnah, 4757; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Fitan, 2235, 2241; Ahmad, 2:37, 131;
Ibn Abi Shaybah, 15:128; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 4255, 4256.

°° Al-Bukhari, 7131, 7408; Muslim, A/-Fitan, 2933; At-Tirmidhi, A/-Fitan, 2245;
Abt Dawid, 4316; At-Tayalisi, 1963.

°°”? Al-Bukhari, 2222, 2476, 3448, 3449: Muslim, A/-Imdn, 155; At-Tirmidhi, A/-
Fitan, 2233; Abt Dawid, Al-Malahim, 4324; Ahmad, 2:240, 272, 290, 394, 406,
411, 482, 494, 538.

8 Al-Bukhari, 4635, 4636, 6506; Muslim, A/-/man, 157; Abii Dawid, Al/-Malahim,

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi | | 469

Muslim has recorded that ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr said that he
remembered and will never forget the words of the Prophet (peace
be on him) when he said, “The first of the signs to appear is the
rising of the sun in the west and the appearance of the Beast in the
forenoon. Whichever of these two happens, the other will follow on
its heels.”°”’ The first of the signs means the first of those signs
which are lesser known. The Great Liar (Dajja/) will surely appear
before that; similarly Jesus will come down from Heaven, and Gog
and Magog will emerge before that. All these signs are known
because they are related to man. The appearance of the Beast, on the
other hand, is a strange phenomenon, and all the more strange
because it will speak to people and point out who are faithful and
who are not. This will be the first earthly sign that goes against
- natural phenomena. The rising of the sun in the west will be the first
extraordinary sign.

There are a number of works on the signs of the Hour that may
be consulted. We cannot go into further details in this short book.

(111) We do not believe in diviners and fortune-tellers,
nor do we believe in those who expound ideas
incompatible with the Qur’an, the Sunnah and the
consensus of the ummah. :

Muslim and Ahmad have recorded in their collections that
Saftyyah bint Abi ‘Ubayd heard from a wife of the Prophet (peace
be on him) that he said, “Whoever goes to a fortune-teller (‘arrdf)
and inquires about anything, his prayers will not be accepted for
forty nights.”’’° Ahmad has recorded another hadith in his Musnad,
which is reported by Abi Hurayrah, in which the Prophet (peace be
on him) said, “Whoever inquires of a fortune-teller or a diviner
(kahin) and believes in what they say disbelieves in what has been
revealed to Muhammad.”’"!

Some scholars include astrologers in the meaning of 7
others say that they fall into the same category. If this is the situation
of one who inquires, you can well imagine what will be the verdict
against those who are inquired of. The two Sahihs of Al-Bukhari

4312; Ibn Majah, 4068; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 4243.

*°’Muslim, Al-Fitan, 2941; Abii Dawid, A/-Malahim, 4310; Ibn Majah, 4069;
Ahmad, 2:201; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 4243. ‏ش‎
‎Muslim, As-Salam, 2230; Ahmad, 4:68, 5:380; Abi Nu‘aym, Al-Hilya, 10:406-7.
”'Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

See Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmii‘ al-Fatadwa, 35:193-5.

40 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

and Muslim and the Musnad of Ahmad also record the hadith
reported by ‘A’ishah that when the Prophet (peace be on him) was
asked about diviners he said, “They are nothing.” People said,
“Prophet of Allah, they sometimes say things that come true!” He
said, “The jinns pilfer the truths and drop them into the ears of their
devotees, and they mix with them over a hundred lies.””””

It is also recorded in the Sahih that the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “The price of a dog, the earnings of a prostitute, and the gift
(hulwdn) offered to a diviner are all evil.”’°* Hulwdn is commonly
called (halawah) sweets. One may place in the same category a tip
for the astrologer, or the fee of the fortune-teller who uses arrows
marked with different letters, or small pebbles, or draws various
lines in the sand. Different scholars such as Al-Baghawi, Qadi
‘Ayad, and others have reported a consensus of the scholars that
these things are strictly forbidden.

In the two Sahihs there 15 a hadith reported by Zayd Ibn Khalid
that one morning at Hudaybiyyah the Prophet (peace be on him)
gave a sermon. It had rained during the previous night. He said,
“Do you know what your Lord said tonight?” the people said,
“Allah and His Messenger know better.” He said, “Allah has said,
‘Some of my servants will believe in Me in the morning and some
will deny Me. Those who say that the rain was a blessing from
Allah will believe in Me and deny the stars, but those who say that it
was caused by one or another star will deny Me and believe in the
stars.”””°° In the Sahih of Muslim and the Musnad of Ahmad we
have another hadith reported by Abu Malik Al-Ash‘ari where the
Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Four things are remnants of the
days of ignorance (jadhiliyyah) in my ummah which they will not
give up: taking pride in one’s descent, finding fault in the lineage of
others, invoking stars for rain, and weeping loudly at death.””°

There are many more sayings of the Prophet (peace be on him)
and his Companions, as well as statements by scholars, regarding
the prohibition of such things. But we cannot mention them here for
lack of space.

3 Al-Bukhari, 3210, 5762, 6213, 7561; Muslim, As-Saladm, 2228; At-Tahawi,
Mushkil al-Athar, 3:114-5; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 3258.

4 Al-Bukhari, 2237, 2282, 5346, 5761; Muslim, 1567, 1568; Aba Dawid, 3428;
At-Tirmidhi, 1276; An-Nasa’i, 7:309; Ibn Majah, 259; Ahmad, 4:118-119, 120.

™ Al-Bukhari, 846, 1038, 4147, 7503; Muslim, Al-/mdn, 71; Aba Dawid, Art-Tibb,
3906; An-Nasa’i, 3:164-5; Ahmad, 4:117; Al-Humaydi, 813; Abdur-Razzaq, A/-
Musannaf, 21003; Ibn Hibban, 188.

”6Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 471

Astrology has been censured by the Qur’an and the Sunnah on
the grounds that it traces the events of the earth to the conditions of
the stars in the heavens. This has been condemned by all the
messengers of Allah. The Qur’an says, “And the magician thrives
not (no matter) where he goes” [20:69], and “Have you not turned
your vision to those who were given a portion of the Book. They
believe in jibt and the taghut” [4:51]. “Umar Ibn Al-Khattab and
others have said that jibt is sorcery.

Al-Bukhari has recorded in his Sahih the words of ‘A’ishah,
“My father, Abd Bakr, had a servant who worked for him. One day
he brought some food and gave it to Abt: Bakr, who ate it. He then
said, ‘Do you know what it was?’ Abu Bakr asked, ‘What was it?’
He said, ‘Once, before Islam came, I divined for a man although I
did not know much. I only deceived the person. Today I met him
and he gave me a tip. This was the thing from which you ate.’ Abii
Bakr inserted his finger into his throat and vomited all that he had
eaten.”””°’

It is the duty of the rulers and all those who are in authority to
abolish astrology, divination, fortune-telling, geomancy, casting lots
and taming voices, and forbid their performance in inns, houses,
~ open places and roads. Those who know that these things are
forbidden and have the power to destroy them but do not should
recite the verse, “They did not forbid one another the iniquities
which they committed. Evil indeed were the deeds which they did”
[5:82]. Those who engage in these arts are cursed. They utter evil
things and devour evil things. There is absolutely no disagreement
among the ummah on this point. In the Sunan collections we also
have a hadith which Abt Bakr As-Siddiq narrated from the Prophet
(peace be on him), who said, “When people see evil and do not
remove it, Allah may not take time to punish them all.”’°*

People who commit these things which the Qur’an and the
Sunnah have forbidden are of different shades. Some of them are
cheats; they say that they control jinns and have spiritual experiences
like mystics, but they are simply frauds. They should be so severely
punished that it proves a deterrent for others. Some of them may
even be killed. I mean those who claim prophecy on the basis of
their tricks or try to change the Shari‘ah. Another category of people
are those who seriously cultivate these things and resort to magic.

7 Al-Bukhari, Mandqib al-Ansdar, 3843.
798 At-Tirmidhi, At-Tafsir, 2168; Aba Dawid, Al-Malahim, 4338; Ibn Majah, A/-
Fitan, 4005; Ahmad, 1:2,5,7,9.

472 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Scholars in general are of the opinion that magicians should be
killed. This is the view of Aba Hanifah, Malik, and Ahmad 5
reported of him, and the view of ‘Umar, his son ‘Abdullah,
‘Uthman and other Companions. If there is a difference among the
imams it is only with regard to the question of whether or not a
magician should be first asked to recant or whether he should be
declared kafir for indulging in magic, or whether he should be killed
on the grounds that he is causing mischief on earth. Some say that if
he kills anybody with his magic he should be killed, but if he does
not commit anything blasphemous (ku/r) by his words or deeds he
should not be killed but only punished. This is the view of Ash-
Shafi‘i and it is one opinion of Ahmad's school.’””

There are different views as to what magic (sihr) is. Most
scholars say that magic 15 what causes the death or illness of a
person without using any visible means. Others say that it is only a
matter of thought. However, all agree that if it involves invoking the
seven planets or any star, or praying to them, or prostrating before
them or seeking their favor by wearing some kinds of rings or
garments, or burning incense and so on, it is definitely an act of
blasphemy and idolatry and it must be avoided and stopped. This
was what the people of Abraham used to practice. That is why Allah
says about Abraham, “And he glanced a glance at the stars and then
said: Lo! I feel sick” [37:88-89]. Allah also says, “When the night
grew dark upon him he beheld a star,” until the verse, “Those who
believe and obscure not their belief by polytheism, theirs is safety;
and they are rightly guided” [6:76-82].

They also all agree that all spells, charms, oaths, and invocations
that involve shirk must be prohibited, whether or not jinns are tamed
by them. Every statement that contains kufr is disallowed. Even
those spells whose meanings are unknown should also be
eschewed, for they might involve shirk or kufr. Only those charms
are allowed which do not involve shirk. “There is no harm in a
charm,” the Prophet said, “which does not have shirk.”’"°

Seeking the protection of jinns is also forbidden. Allah has
condemned the disbelievers for that practice. Allah says, “There
were persons among mankind who took shelter with persons among
the jinns, but they increased them in folly” [72:6]. When the Arabs
passed through a certain valley they would say, “We seek refuge in
the custodian of this valley from the harms that its evil beings may
cause.” They believed that by virtue of this incantation they would

™See Ibn Taymiyyah, Majma‘ al-Fatdwa, 28:346, 29:384.
™°Muslim, As-Salam, 2200; Abi Dawid, 3886.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 473

be safe until the morning. “But they increased them in folly’ means
that when man seeks refuge in the jinns it only increases their sin,
disobedience and evil. They would say that they had become
protected from jinn and man. The jinn will also increase its
haughtiness and will increase its kufr when man does such an action
towards them.

Allah has said, “One day He will gather them all together and
say to the angels: Was it you that these men used to worship? They
will say: ‘Glory to You, our tie 15 with You as Protector, not with
them.’ Nay, but they worshipped the jinns: most of them believed in
them” [34:40-41]. These people say that they call upon the angels
and invoke them through these charms and they visit them. They are
utterly mistaken. The ones that descend upon them are evil jinns.
Allah made this clear when He said, “One day He will gather them
all together (and say): Assembly of jinns! Many among men did you
seduce. Their friends among them would say: ‘Our Lord! We make
profit from each other, but (alas!) we reached our term which You
did appoint for us.” He will say: the Fire be your dwelling place;
you will dwell therein forever, except as Allah wills, for your Lord
is full of wisdom and knowledge” [6:128]. Men benefit from jinns
in the sense that they secure their ends and receive information about
things unknown, and the jinns profit from men in the sense that they
are honored, invoked, prayed to, and worshiped by men.

There are people who have evil experiences, who see visions,
enter into dialogue with “invisible beings” (rijal al-ghayb), and
perform miracles, and, on that basis, claim that they are the friends
(awliya’) of Allah. Such people have assisted the polytheists against
the Believers, and claimed that the Prophet (peace be on him) had
asked them to fight the Believers and help the polytheists because
the Believers had flouted the Shari‘ah. In fact, they are the brethren
of the polytheists.

Opinions differ regarding these people. Some scholars deny
outright the existence of invisible beings; but they have been seen,
and the testimony of those who have seen them has been transmitted
by reliable persons. Had these people seen them and ascertained
their existence, they would have submitted to them. Other scholars
testify to their existence and accept the fact as the will of Allah; they
believe that there 15 a way to Allah other than the way of the
prophets. A third section, which rules out the existence of walis
outside the sphere of prophetic followers, thinks, however, that
both groups receive help from the Prophet (peace be on him). These
people have respect for the Prophet (peace be on him) but are
ignorant of his religion and the Shari‘ah.
44 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

The truth is that these so-called awliya’ are followers of devils,
and the invisible beings are none other than jinns. Jinns are called
rijal in the verse, “There are persons (rijal) among mankind who
took shelter with persons (rija/) among the jinns. But they increased
them in folly” [72:6]. Had they been men they would have been
visible. True, men are sometimes not seen, but they are not
invisible. Those who think that the rijal al-ghayb are human are
wrong. The reason people have differed regarding their identity 5
that they are not able to distinguish between the friends of Satan and
the friends of Allah.

Some people say that Sifis (fugara’) should be left alone to their
experiences. This is wrong. We must examine their deeds and
experiences 1n the light of the Qur’an and the Sunnah of Muhammad
(peace be on him). What agrees with them should be accepted, and
what does not should be rejected. The Prophet said, “Whoever does
something which differs from our ways, his work is null and void.”
Ina variant of the hadith the words are, “Whoever comes out with
something new in our religion which does not belong to it, his
innovation is null and void.”’'' There is, therefore, no way (fariqah)
other than the way of the Prophet (peace be on him), no experience
(hagigah) other than his experience, no shari‘ah other than 5
Shari‘ah, and no faith other than his faith. After him, no one will
reach Allah and secure His favor or Paradise except by following the
Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him), both externally and
internally.

Whoever does not believe in the things he has said, and does not
comply with what he has enjoined, whether it concerns the internal
acts of the heart or the external acts of the body, is not even a
Believer, let alone a friend (wali) of Allah. It makes no difference
whether he flies through the air, walks on the waters, peers into the
Unseen, or turns wood into gold. What are his miracles worth? If he
does not do what is enjoined, and refrain from what is forbidden,
his miracles are nothing more than satanic acts which can only take
him away from Allah and bring upon him His wrath. However, the
insane, like infants, are not responsible; they neither have faith in
Allah, nor submit to His commands internally and externally, which
would make them friends of Allah, or members of His party that
would be happy, or soldiers of His army that would be triumphant.
They will be counted as Muslims following their Muslim parents, as

"™" Al-Bukharl, 2697; Muslim, 1718; Abi Dawid, 4606; Ibn Majah, 14; Ahmad,
6:270; Ibn Hibban, 26, 27.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 475

Allah has said, “And those who believe and whose families follow
them in faith, to them We will join their families. Nor will We
deprive them (of the fruits) of aught of their deeds. Yet is each
individual in pledge for his deeds” [52:21].

Some people think that simple-minded and ecstatic people are
Allah’s friends (awliya’) even though they may not follow the
Prophet (peace be on him) in his words, deeds and experiences.
They are absolutely mistaken. These simple- minded persons can be
either wicked enemies of religion, impostors and frauds, or insane,
and therefore, excusable. How can one exalt them over the awliya’
of Allah, who follow His Messenger. How can they even compare
with them? Some say that they may be following the Prophet (peace
be on him) internally, if not externally. This is not correct. One must
follow the Prophet internally as well as externally. Yunus Ibn |
‘Abdul-A‘la As-Sadafi says that he said to Ash-Shafi'l that our
friend, Al-Layth, used to say, “If you see a man walking on water
do not extol him unless you examine his life in the light of the
Qur’an and the Sunnah.” Ash-Shafi‘i said, “Al-Layth has
underscored the point. If you see a man walking on water and flying
through the air, do not be deceived by him unless you examine him
in the light of the Qur’an and the Sunnah.”

Some people claim that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “I
looked at the people of Paradise. Most of them were simpletons (al-
bulh).”’'* But this is not a hadith of the Prophet, nor should one
ascribe that statement to him. Paradise has been created for sane
people whose reason leads them to faith in Allah, His angels, His
books, His messengers and the Last Day. Allah has described the
people of Paradise at various places in His Book, but never has He
mentioned balah (lack of intelligence) as one of their virtues. What
the Prophet (peace be on him) has said 1s, “I cast a look at the people
of Paradise and I saw that most of them were poor people (al-
fugara’).”"'* He did not say simpletons (al-bulh).

Among the Siifis there is a group called maldmiyyah.’"* They
deliberately do things to invite blame on themselves and claim that

"This is not a hadith of the Prophet (peace be on him), as the Commentator has
correctly pointed out. Some of its transmitters have been rated as weak, poor of
memory, even liars, and the hadith has been called rejected (munkar) and false (baril).
See the note by the editors, Dr. ‘Abdullah ‘Abdul-Muhsin At-Turki and Shu‘ayb AI-
Arnawiut, of Sharh al- ‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah, vol. 2, p. 770.

"? Al-Bukhari, 3241, 5198, 6449, 6546; Muslim, 2737; At-Tirmidhi, 2602, 2603;
Ahmad, 1:234, 359, 429; 4:429, 437, 443.

"’The Malamiyyah are a group of Sifis who indulge in practices calling for public

46 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

they follow the Shari‘ah in their heart. They think that in this way
they fight off hypocrisy and conceit. But they fight one wrong with
another wrong, none of which is correct.

Similarly, some Stfis give a loud cry on hearing a beautiful
song and fall unconscious. They are also misguided. It is not good
for anyone to look for an opportunity to lose consciousness. The
Companions and their Successors never lost consciousness, even
when they heard the Qur’an. Allah has described their experience in
these words, “When Allah is mentioned they feel a tremor in their
hearts, and when they hear His verses rehearsed find their faith
strengthened, and put (all) their trust in their Lord” [8:2]; and,
“Allah has revealed (from time to time) the most beautiful message
in the form of a Book consistent with itself (yet) repeating (its ©
teachings in various respects). The skins of those who fear the Lord
tremble thereat. Then their skins and their hearts do soften to the
celebration of Allah’s praises. Such is the guidance of Allah. He
guides therewith whom he pleases, but such as Allah leaves astray
can have none to guide” [39:23].

Some scholars have mentioned in good terms “the wise of the
insane” (‘ugald al-majdnin). They are the people who were sane at
one time, then turned mad. One of their signs is that when they
become a little saner they talk of the faith which is there in their
hearts, and which saves them from falling into evil when they lapse
into insanity. On the other hand, those who were infidel or wicked
and then turned insane, their insanity does not erase the effects of
their previous infidelity or wickedness. The Believers who were
pious before they became insane will be raised along with other
pious Believers on the Day of Judgment. However, loss of reason,
whether produced by insanity or caused by anything else, does not
elevate the status of its bearer, no matter whether you call him mad
or insane. His faith and piety continue to be on the same level he
was before. The intervening insanity neither increases nor decreases
them; it only bars him from earning merits as it protects him from
suffering punishment. As for the previous deeds, it does not affect
them at all. 7

Hearing certain songs, some people begin to rave and speak in
tongues. This is something satanic. It is Satan who speaks with their
tongue, just as he speaks with the tongue of the possessed person.
We cannot imagine that loss of reason is a cause or a condition for

reproof only to assure their sincerity of purpose and avoid self-conceit or display of
piety. Their founding leader was Abii Hamdan Qassar (d. 271) from Nishapur. See
Jam?’, Nafahat al-Uns, ‏.م‎ 63; Hijwirt, Kashf al-Mahjib, pp. 68-78.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 177

Allah’s love or favor. This is the belief of those who are absolutely
mistaken. One of their poets has said:

They are people who demolish the command,

and pull down the hedge.

They have no duties to do, no supererogatory acts to perform.
They are insane, but the revelations of their insanity

are 50 precious that sanity prostrates itself at their feet.

These are the lines of a misguided person, or rather an infidel,
who thinks that one receives truths in madness that are not available
to reason. He may have seen some madmen having visions or
working wonders. Had he known that devils often associate with
lunatics as they associate with magicians and diviners, he would not
have thought that everyone who is insane and works wonders is a
friend of Allah; that is sheer blasphemy. Allah has said, “Will I
inform you (people,) on whom it is that the evil ones descend? They
descend on every lying, wicked person” [26:221-222]. Hence,
whoever 15 assisted by the evil ones must be lying and wicked.

Those who engage in various spiritual exercises, retire to
abandoned places, and stay away from Friday prayers or the daily
prayers in assembly are those whose efforts have been wasted in
this life, although they think they are doing something good. Allah
has sealed their hearts. The Prophet (peace be on him), as is
recorded in the Sahih, said, “Whoever does not appear for three
Friday prayers due to negligence and without any excuse, Allah
seals his heart.”’'> Whoever diverges from the path of the Sunnah
and does so knowingly incurs the wrath of Allah; but if he does not
know it, he is simply mistaken. This is the reason we have been
asked to pray to Allah in every prayer to guide us to the straight
path, the path of those on whom he has bestowed His grace — the
prophets, the nghteous (in word and deed), the martyrs, and the
pious - and what a good company they form! They are not the ones
who incur the wrath of Allah, nor are they those who have gone
astray.

Some people argue from the story of Moses and Khidr that one
can receive knowledge directly from Allah and dispense with the
prophetic revelation. These people are absolutely mistaken; they are
heretics who want to undermine Islam. Moses was not sent to
Khidr, nor was Khidr required to obey him. That is why he asked

">The hadith is sahih, but it is not to be found in Al-Bukhari or Muslim. It is
mentioned in At-Tirmidhi, 500; Abi Dawiid, 1052; An-Nasa’i, 3:88; Ibn Majah,
1125; Ahmad, 3:424; Ibn Khiizaymah, 1857; Ibn Hibban, 554; Al-Hakim, 1:280.

F18 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI

48 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Moses whether he was the Moses of Bani Isra’il and Moses told
him yes. Prophet Muhammad (peace be on him), on the other hand,
was sent to all humanity. Had Moses and Jesus been alive they
would have followed him. When Jesus comes down again he will
judge according to the shari‘ah of Muhammad. Hence, if anyone
thinks that he is with respect to Muhammad (peace be on him) as
Khidr was with respect to Moses, or believes that anyone else can
be in that position, he should renew his faith and make the
confession of faith afresh, for he is no longer a Muslim, let alone a
wali of Allah. In fact, he is a wali of Satan. This is the line that
separates the enemies of Islam from its nghtful followers.

Those who say that the Ka‘bah circumambulates some of their
leaders, wherever they may be, are no better. I would ask them a
simple question: How 15 it that the Ka‘bah did not go to
Hudaybiyyah and circumambulate the Prophet (peace be on him)
when he was prevented from entering Makkah and looking upon it?
These people are like those about whom Allah has said, “For oath,
each one of them wants to be given scrolls (of revelation) spread
out! By no means! But they fear not the Hereafter. Nay, this surely
is an admonition. Let any who will, keep it in remembrance”’ [74:5].

(112) We believe that keeping together (Jamada‘ah) is the
true and correct path, and that disunity 16205 to
deviation and torment.

Allah has spoken on this subject many times, for example, “And
hold fast all together, by the Rope which Allah (stretches out for
you) and be not divided among yourselves” [3:103]; “Be not hke
those who are divided among themselves and fall into disputations
after receiving clear signs, for them is a dreadful penalty” [3:105];
“As for those who divide their religion and break up into sects, you
have no part in them in the least. Their affair is with Allah. He will
in the end tell them the truth of all that they did’ [6:159]; and,
“Verily they will not cease to dispute, except those on whom your
Lord has bestowed His mercy” [11:118-119]. The last verse clearly
states that those who receive Allah’s mercy avoid disputation and
dissension. Allah has also said, “(Their doom is) because Allah sent
down the Book in truth but those who seek causes of dispute in the
Book are in a schism far (from the purpose)” [2:176]. |

I have already mentioned the hadith in which the Prophet (peace
be on him) said, “The people of the two books were divided into
seventy-two sects, and this ummah will be divided into seventy-
three sects (millah) all of which will go to Hell except one, and that
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 479

is the jamd‘ah.” A variant of the hadith states that the people asked,
“What is the jamd ‘ah, Messenger of Allah?” He said, “It is the path
my Companions and J are treading.”’”'® This hadith clearly states that
there will be dissension in the ummah and that all the dissenters will
be doomed except the people who follow the Sunnah and preserve
unity (the ‏أطخ‎ as-Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah).

Ahmad has recorded another hadith reported by Mu‘adh Ibn
Jabal that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Satan is to man as the
wolf is to the sheep. Remember that the wolf pounces on the sheep
which leaves the flock. Refrain from schism, maintain unity, and
adhere to the community and the mosque.””’’ The Sahihs of Al-
Bukhari and Muslim have recorded that when Allah revealed the
words, “Say: He has power to send calamity on you from above,”
the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “I take shelter from it in Your
countenance.” When Allah added, “or from below,” he again said,
“T seek refuge in Your countenance.” Then Allah said, “or to cover
you with confusion in party strife, giving you a taste of mutual
vengeance, each from the other” [6:65], and the Prophet (peace be
on him) said, “These two are less painful.”’'®

This hadith shows that Allah will set one group of the ummah
against another and let them attack each other. It also shows that the
Prophet (peace be on him) condemned this state-of affairs, which is
a kind of lapse into the ignorance of the pre-Islamic era. Az-Zuhri
said, “Troubles started when the Companions of the Prophet were
still of a goodly number. They agreed that if a person was killed,
any property was destroyed, or anyone was woundé¢d_on the basis
of an interpretation of the Qur’an, it would not be avenged. They
treated it as if it had been committed during the period of
ignorance.””’'”

_ Malik has recorded a report with its chain of transmitters that
‘A’ishah said, “People have ceased to act upon the verse, ‘If two
parties among the Believers fall into a quarrel, make peace between
them. But if one of them transgresses beyond bounds against the
other, then fight you (all) against the one that transgresses until it

"Tiscussed earlier; it is authentic.

"7Ahmad, 5:232-233, 343; At-Tabarani, A/-Kabir, vol. 20, pp. 344, 345; Aba
Nu‘aym, Al-Hilya, 2:247. Al-Albani says that its chain 1s weak.

"8 Al-Bukhari, 4628, 7313, 7406; At-Tirmidhi, At-Tafsir, 3065; Ahmad, 3:309; Al-
Baghawt, Sharh as-Sunnah, 4016; Al-Humaydi, 1259. However, the Commentator is
not correct that Muslim has also recorded the hadith.

™See ‘Abdur-Razzaq, Al-Musannaf, 18584; Al-Bayhagqi, As-Sunan al-Kubra, 8:175.

480 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

complies with the command of Allah [49:9].”’?° When one group of
Muslims fights against another group, others must try to make peace
between them, as Allah has said. If this is not done there will be
disorder and chaos, and wars will go on endlessly, as it was before
Islam.

When disputed matters, whether concerning the fundamentals of
the religion or its details, are not referred to Allah and His
Messenger (peace be on him), the correct view does not become
evident and the disputants persist in confusion without any clear
guidance. If Allah’s mercy is upon them, they may tolerate each
other and avoid war, as the Companions did in various
controversies during the caliphates of ‘Umar and ‘Uthman. They
allowed each other to act upon his views in matters of ijtihadd and
refrained from fighting one another. But when people do not receive
Allah’s mercy, they quarrel and fight among themselves; they either
denounce one another as infidel (kafir) and wicked (/asiq), or put
each other in jail, or torture and kill one another. Those who forced
people to say that the Qur’an was created and persecuted people
belonged to this type of group. They came out with a new,
unjustified belief (bid‘ah), denounced all those who disagreed with
them as infidels, deprived them of their liberty, and subjected them
to torture.

When people are unknowledgeable about any teaching of the
Prophet (peace be on him), they may behave justly or unjustly.
Those who act justly are those who act in accordance with what they
know of prophetic hadith and they do not wrong others. The
wrongdoer is one who transgress against others, and most of them
commit that wrong knowingly. Allah has said, “The people of the
Book did not dissent therefrom except through envy of each other
after knowledge had come to them” [3:19]; for if they had acted
justly as they had been taught, they would have allowed others to act
according to their views. They would have allowed the followers of
different imams to follow their imams, because, as they said, they
themselves were unable to find out the verdict of Allah and His
Prophet (peace be on him) in matters, and had to refer to their
imams, who acted as the Prophet’s deputies. This was the most they
could do. Similarly, followers of the imams should not say, if they
want to be fair, that their imams are correct even when they do not
know their proofs, and that others are wrong, while they may be
excused for what they do.

”° Al-Bayhagqi, As-Sunan al-Kubra, 8:172.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 481

Differences on fundamentals are of two kinds: difference by
variation and difference by contradiction. The former is of many
kinds. One is wherein all the different views or practices are
justified, for example, the different ways of reading certain verses of
the Qur’an that were prevalent among the Companions. One of them
recited a particular verse in one way, and another in another way,
and when the two quarreled, the Prophet (peace be on him)
disapproved of their quarrel and said, “Both of you are correct.””””'
the same is true of the different ways of the call to prayer (@dhdn),
or its announcement (iga@mah), or its opening; or of the causes for
corrective prostration (sajdat as-sahw); the ways of tashahhud, or of
prayer in times of fear; the number of takbir in ‘Id prayers, and so
on. All the different ways of doing these things have come down
from the Prophet (peace be on him) and are equally lawful, even
though some may be preferable to or stronger than others.

There have been people in the ummah who have quarreled and
fought over some of these issues, for example, the issue of whether
one should repeat the words of the igamah twice or just once. They
certainly violate the command of the Prophet (peace be on him).
There have also been people who, led by the desires in their hearts,
not only stick to one idea or practice and refrain from others but
even forbid them. They are guilty of committing the forbidden.

The second difference by variation is usually a matter of
semantics. People often use different words to express the same
idea, as for example, when they try to define a thing, argue from it
or characterize it, and so on. It is unfair and wrong, in such cases,
to extol one usage and condemn another or attack its proponent, and
SO on.

Difference by contradiction arises when two contradictory
statements are made on an issue, whether concerning principles or
details. According to the majority opinion, in such cases only one
view can be correct, and since different views contradict each other,
the issue becomes serious. However, my observation is that the
view which one rejects often has an element of truth or has some
texts to support it. This means that when you reject the opposing
view, you are rejecting a truth along with the untruth. It also means
that though your opponent is mistaken on the basic issue, you are
also wrong in some respect.

This mistake is often committed by the Ahl as-Sunnah. As for
the heretics (ahl al-bid‘ah), their error is obvious. Everyone whom
Allah has guided and enlightened will realize that the warning which

121 Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

482 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

the Qur’an and the Sunnah have issued against the views they
expound is perfectly correct. Very often reason also exposes their
error, in which case it is light upon light.

Returning to difference by variation, the practice of denouncing
an opponent in such matters has not been approved. In fact, when at
the time of the Prophet (peace be on him) a difference arose on a
particular issue, people on either side did not reproach or censure
each other. The Qur’an appreciated that attitude in these words,
“Whether you cut down (you Muslims) the tender palm-trees or you
left them standing on their roots, it was by leave of Allah, and in
order that He might cover with shame the rebellious transgressors”
[59:5]. The difference arose about cutting down some trees (of the
Banu Al-Nadhir): one group cut them down and the other abstained
from cutting. Another case has been referred to in the Qur’an in this
way, “And remember David and Solomon, when they gave
judgment in the matter of the field into which the sheep of certain
people had strayed by night. We did witness their judgment. To
Solomon we inspired the correct understanding of the matter, (but)
to each (of them) we gave judgment and knowledge” [21:87-89].
Notice that Allah inspired Solomon with the correct judgment, but
he praised both for their knowledge and sagacity.

The Prophet (peace be on him) did the same in the case of those
whom he had sent to the Bani’ Qurayzah. He praised both those
who said their ‘Asr prayer on time and those who said it later when
they had reached the land of the Banti Qurayzah.’”’ He also said, “If
a ruler makes every effort he can and arrives at the correct judgment,
he will have two rewards. But if he makes every effort and does not
arrive at the correct judgment,.he will have one reward.”””*°

The other kind of difference is when one party is to be
commended and the other censured. This has been referred to in the
verse, “If Allah had willed, the succeeding generations would not
have fought among each other after clear signs had come to them,
but they chose to wrangle, some believing and others rejecting’
[2:253]; and the verse, “Those two antagonists dispute with each
other about their Lord. But those who deny (their Lord), for them
will be cut out a garment of Fire” [22:19].

Most of the differences in the ummah belong to the first
category. They are produced by lust and avarice, and cause
bloodshed, destruction of property, dissension and hatred. One

”? Al-Bukhari, 946, 4119; Muslim, 1770; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 3798.
” Al-Bukhari, 7353; Muslim, 1716; Aba Dawtd, 3574; Ibn Majah, 2314; Ahmad,
4:198, 204, 205; At-Tirmidhi, 1326; An-Nasa’i, 8:224.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 483

party does not admit the truth which is with the other, and is unfair
to it. Alongside the truth it has, it acquires some untruths. The other
party does the same. This is why Allah has traced the difference to
mutual envy and transgression. He has said, “And no one differed
other than the people who were given the Book; they differed after
the clear signs had come to them on account of transgression (baghi)
one upon the other” [2:213]. Allah has mentioned baéghi — going
beyond the acceptable limit — in many places so that our ummah may
learn the lesson.

The Prophet (peace be on him) expressed the same idea in a
hadith recorded in the Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim. Abu Az-
Zanad narrated from Aba Hurayrah that the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “Do not worry about things I have left out. People before
you ruined themselves by asking too many questions and disputing
about the teachings of their prophets. Refrain from what I have
forbidden, and do what I have commanded to the best of your
ability.”’** the Prophet (peace be on him) did not like people to delve
into things that he had not discussed, or put a lot of questions about
those things he had commanded and dispute about them, for that had
destroyed the earlier communities.

Differences among the Believers regarding the Book of Allah are
of two kinds, one about its revelation, and the other about its
understanding. However, on both issues, every group has only part
of the truth with it. The first issue is, for example, how the Qur’an
is Allah’s speech, and how it has been communicated. One group
says that the Qur’4n is Allah’s speech in the sense that He has
produced it out of His will and Power, but He has created it in some
other thing, so that it does not subsist in Him. Others say that it is an
attribute of Allah that subsists in Him, and not something which He
has created, but He has not spoken it of His will and Power. Both
of them have an element of truth with them and an element of
untruth. Each believes in the truth it has and denies the truth that the
other has. We have discussed this point earlier.

As for the matter of interpretation, there are also many views and
every view has some truth with it and some untruth. ‘Amr Ibn
Shu‘ayb has reported from his father and he from his father that
once the Prophet (peace be on him) came to a group of his
Companions who were discussing the issue of pre-destination.
Some were referring to one verse of the Qur’&n, and others to
another. The Prophet (peace be on him) got angry, his cheeks

”41-Bukhari, 7288; Muslim, 1337; At-Tirmidhi, 2679; An-Nasa’i, 5:110-11; Ibn
Mayah, 2; Ahmad, 2:247, 313, 428, 456-7, 467, 482, 495, 508, 517.

484 : Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

became red like a pomegranate. He said, “Is this what you are asked
to do? Is this what is required of you? Are you to set one part of the
Qur’an against another? Mind the things J have said, carry out what
I have commanded, and refrain from what I have forbidden.” In a
variant of the hadith the words are, “The things that you are doing
have led many a people astray. They quarreled over the teachings of
their prophets, and set one part of their book against another. The
Qur’an has not been given to you for you to oppose some of its
verses against others. They support and bear out one another. Act
upon what you understand of the Qur’an, and believe in what you
do not.” Another variant adds, “The communities before you were
not cursed until they disagreed among themselves. Disputation over
a verse of the Qur’4n is a kind of infidelity.”’’? This is a famous
hadith and has been recorded in Musnad and Sunan collections. Its
main part has also been produced by Muslim in his Sahih from
“Abdullah Ibn Ribah Al-Ansari. He said that one day at noon,
“Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr came to the Prophet (peace be on him). Two
men were quarreling over a verse of the Qur’an. The Prophet (peace
be on him) came out, his face red with anger. He said, “The peopl
before you were destroyed when they quarreled over their book.”
Different heretical groups interpret the Qur’an differently. They
believe in some parts of it and deny others. They accept what agrees
with their views and reject what does not. They either change the
meaning of the verses by interpretation or declare them ambiguous
and unclear, concerning which their meanings are not known to
anyone. This is how they deny the ideas which Allah has
communicated. This is simply blasphemous (kufr). To believe in
words without believing they have meanings is to believe as People
of the Book believe, about whom Allah has said, “The similitude of
those who were charged with (the obligations of) the Mosaic law but
who subsequently failed in those (obligations) is that of a donkey
which carries huge tomes (but understands them not)’ [62:5]; and
“There are among them illiterates who know not the Book, but see
(therein their own) desires, and they do nothing but conjecture”
[2:78]. That 15, they read the Book without understanding it. This 5
not the way a Believer should approach the Qur’an. He should act
upon what he understands of it, and leave to Allah what he does not
understand. The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Act upon what
you understand, and what you do not understand leave to one who

9 ٠. . ٠. . .
”°Discussed earlier; it is authentic.
Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 485

understands it.”’’’ This is how one will obey the Prophet (peace be
on him).

(113) the religion of Allah in the heavens and on the
earth is one, and it is the din of Islam. Allah has said,
“Verily the religion before Allah is Islam” [5:3]; and,
“(Allah) has chosen for you as your religion Islam”
[5:3]. Islam steers a course between excess and
negligence, between anthropomorphism and negation,
between coercionism and_ libertarianism, between
complacency and despair.

In the Sahih there is a hadith reported by Abii Hurayrah that the
Prophet (peace be on him) said, “We, the community of prophets,
have a single religion.”’** In the Qur’an, Allah says, “If anyone
desires a religion other than Islam, never will it be accepted of him”
[3:85]. This declaration is for all times. Religion is one for all
peoples, past and present. The difference is only in matters of law
(Shar ‘). Allah has said, “To each among you We have prescribed a
law and an open way” [5:51].

‘Islam is the religion that Allah has promulgated for mankind
through His prophets. Its basic principles as well as its details have
all come from the prophets. Its ideas are clear to everyone, young
and old, literate and illiterate, intelligent and unintelligent. One can
enter into its fold in no time, and get out of it even faster, just by
denying a word, falsifying or contesting it, attributing something to
Allah that He has not revealed, or doubting what He has revealed,
defying His commandments, refusing to believe His statements, and
50 on.

One who is aware of the Qur’an and the Sunnah will testify that
Islam is a clear religion, easy to learn. People would come to the
Prophet (peace be on him) from great distances, learn Islam from
him and return to their homes. One might find some difference in his
wordings, but that is because he instructed everyone according to
people’s conditions. If someone came from a far-off country, like
Dimdm Ibn Thatlabah’”’ or the man from Najd,’*° or the people of

"'Part of the hadith just mentioned.

"8 A1-Bukhari, 3443; Muslim, 2365; Ahmad, 2:406, 437; Abi Dawiid, 4675.
Dammam Ibn Thatlabah belonged to the tribe of Sa‘d Ibn Bakr. He visited the
Prophet in Madinah in the ninth year of the hijrah and embraced Islam. (See Ibn
Hisham, As-Sirah, 2:573-5; Ibn Sa‘d, Tabagat as-Sahdbah, Beirut: Dar Sadir,
1388/1968, vol. 1, ‏.م‎ 299; Ahmad, 2382; Abt Dawid, 487; Al-Bukhari, 63; Muslim

486 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

‘Abdul-Qays,’*' he would teach them what they would not forget.
He knew, however, that his religion would reach the different
comers of the world, and that he would be sending missionaries to
teach people whatever they needed to know. If someone came from
a nearby place and could visit frequently afterwards, he taught him
one thing after another gradually. If he knew that the questioner was
aware of the basic principles he would tell him more advanced
things. It was to such a questioner that he once said, “Say, ‘I believe
in Allah and keep constantly on the correct path.’””*”

However, those who invent new things which Allah has not
sanctioned cannot find any justification for them in the Sunnah of
the Prophet (peace be on him), or in the teachings of any other
messenger. Their ideas as well as what they imply are equally
wrong, just as the truth and all its implications are correct.

The author states, “Islam steers a course between excess and
negligence.” Allah has said, “People of the Book! Do not exaggerate
in your religion nor utter anything about Allah save the truth”
[4:171]; “Say: People of the Book! Exceed not in your religion the
bounds (of what 15 proper) trespassing beyond the truth” [5:80];
and, “You who believe! Make not unlawful the good things which
Allah made lawful for you. But commit no excess, for Allah loves
not those given to excess. Eat of the things which Allah has
provided for you, lawful and good, and fear Allah in Whom you
believe’ [5:90-9]].

The Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim have recorded that
‘A’ishah said, “Some Companions of the Prophet (peace be on him)
asked his wives about his routine of worship at home. When they
were told about it, one of them said that he would not eat meat,
another said that he would not marry, and a third said that he would
not sleep in a bed. When the Prophet (peace be on him) came to
know of this, he said, ‘What has happened to these people? Why are
they thinking of such things? Look at me: I fast some days and eat
some days; I sleep as well as pray in the night. I eat meat, and I have
wives. Whoever turns away from my way (Sunnah) is not of
me.’”’*? In a variant of the hadith recorded in other collections the

12.)

™°See Al-Bukhari, 46, 1891, 2678, 6956; Muslim, 11; Malik, A/-Muwatta, 1:175.
"See Al-Bukhari, 53; Muslim, 17; and for details, see Ibn Qayyim, Zddal-Ma ‘ad,
3:205-209.

™Muslim, Al-imdn, 38; Ahmad, 3:413, 385; At-Tirmidhi, 2410; Ibn Majah, 3972;
Ibn Hibban, 2543; Ad-Darimi, Sunan, 2:298.

3 A1-Bukhari, 5063, 6601, 7301; Muslim, 1401, 2356; An-Nasa’i, 6:60; Ahmad,
3:241, 259, 285, 6:45; Al-Baghawi, 96, 100.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi | 487

words are, “They inquired about the Prophet’s worship, when they
were told about it, they considered it to be too little.”’**

Ibn Jurayj reported from ‘Ikrimah that the reason verses 90 and
91 of Strat Al-Ma’idah were revealed was that ‘Uthman Ibn
Maz‘tn, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, Ibn Mas‘tid, Al-Migdad Ibn Al-Aswad
and Salim, the client of Aba Hudayfah (may Allah be pleased with
them all) thought to devote themselves exclusively to Allah. They
were going to sit at home, staying away from their wives, wearing
the clothes of an ascetic and abstaining from good food. They ate
and wore only what the Christian mendicants would eat and wear,
and they even intended to have themselves castrated. Nights they
passed in worship, and days in fasting.

Then Allah revealed the verse, “You who believe! Make not
unlawful the good things which Allah made lawful for you. But
commit no excess, for Allah loves not those given to excess. Eat of
the things which Allah has provided for you, lawful and good, and
fear Allah in Whom you believe” [5:90-91]. This was revealed
concerning their abandoning their wives, food and clothing, and
their continual fasting and late-night prayers, as well as their thought
of castration. When the Prophet received news about them, he sent
for them and said, “Your body has a right on you, and your eyes
have a right on you. Fast, but also eat; pray, but also sleep. He 15
not of us who leaves our way.” Thereupon, they turned to Allah and
said, “Lord! We accept and submit to what You have revealed.’””*°

“Islam steers a course between anthropomorphism and
negation.” We have explained earlier that Allah loves to be described
in the way He has described Himself, or as His Prophet (peace be
on him) has described Him, without comparing His attributes with
our attributes. We should not think that He hears as we hear, or sees
as we see, and so on. Nor should we negate His attributes and deny
what He has predicated of Himself or what the person most
knowledgeable of Him, His Prophet (peace be on him), has
predicated of Him. Negation 15 as wrong as comparison. We have
discussed this point before. The author himself referred to it when
he wrote, “Whoever does not refrain from negation as well as
comparison strays and fails to uphold true transcendence.” The basis
of this idea is the verse, “There is nothing whatsoever like unto
Him, and He 15 Als-Seeing, All-Hearing” [42:19]. The first part of

™4 Ahmad, 3:259; Al-Bayhaqi, As-Sunan al-Kubra, 7:77; Al-Bukhari, 5063.
"Tafsir At-Tabari, 12348; As-Suyati, Ad-Durr al-Manthar, 2:307-308. This
particular narration, though, 1s weak according to Al-Albani.

488 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

the verse is a refutation of anthropomorphism, and the second of
negation.

“Islam is between coercionism and libertarianism.” We have also
discussed this topic. We have said that man is not coerced into his
words or deeds. His actions are not like the movements of a
shivering person or of a tree swaying under a strong wind. Nor are
they created by man; they are accomplished by man but created and
brought into existence by Allah.

We have also discussed the idea the author has expressed in the
words, “Islam is between complacency and despair.” We have said
that man must fear the punishment of Allah on the one hand, and
expect His mercy on the other, and that fear and hope are like the
two wings with which one flies to Allah and to the last abode.

(114) This is our faith and our religion in form and
spirit. We have nothing to do with those who differ
from what we have said and elaborated. We pray to
Allah that He may confirm us in faith, let us die upon it,
Save us from erroneous ideas and heretical doctrines
such as those advanced by the anthropomorphists
(mushabbihah), Mut‘tazilah, Jahmiyyah, determinists
(Jabariyyah), free-willers (Qadariyyah), and others who
have differed from the Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah and
fallen into error. We have nothing to do with them. In
our view, they are astray in their thinking and
wrongdoers. And to Allah we turn for guidance and
safety.

“This” refers to all the author has said from the beginning of the
book until here. By anthropomorphists (mushdadbbihah), he means
those who conceive of Allah’s attributes on the analogy of human
attributes. They do just the reverse of what the Christians do. The
latter conceive of a creation, Jesus, peace be upon him, on the
pattern of the Creator, and make him a god. These people, on the
other hand, liken the Creator to the created and anthropomorphize
Him. One of the leading exponents of this view was Dawid AI-
Jawaribt.

The Mut‘tazilah, like ‘Amr Ibn ‘Ubayd, Wasil Ibn ‘Ata’ ‏لذ‎
‎Ghazzal and their followers, were given this name because they
seceded from the Community (jamd ‘ah) after the death of Al-Hassan
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 489

Al-Basri’**® in the beginning of the second century Hijri, and held
separate meetings. According to Qatadah and others, this is the
reason they are called Mu‘tazilah, or Secessionists. Others say that
the first man to develop the basic idea of that school was WaAsil [bn
‘Ata’, and ‘Amr Ibn ‘Ubayd, a student of Al-Hassan Al-Basri,
joined him. During the reign of Hartin Ar-Rashid, Abt: Al-Hudhayl
wrote two books and expounded their doctrines at length. He was
the one who formulated the five tenets of the school: justice, unity of
Allah, enforcement of the threatened punishment, the position
between two positions, and the duty of enjoiming good and
forbidding evil. In those doctrines, the Mu‘tazilah have mixed truth
with untruth, a common characteristic of all heretical schools.

With regard to divine acts they are anthropomorphists. They
imagine Allah’s acts on the pattern of human acts. They say that
what is good for man is good for God, and what is bad for man 5
bad for God. Basing their thoughts on this principle, they claim that
Allah has to do certain things and eschew others. This is wrong.
Suppose a person finds his male servants fornicating with his maid
servants but does not stop the sin; he is either approving it or he is
unable to check it. But this is not what we say when Allah does not
stop his servants from fornication. Hence His actions cannot be
judged on the pattern of human actions. This is a very important
point. The reader is advised to consult the relevant works on the
subject.

The Mu‘tazilah deny the fore-ordainment of things on the pretext
of justice. They say that Allah does not create evil or ordain it. If He
created it and then punished people for doing it, He would be
committing injustice. But Allah is just and cannot commit injustice.
Hence there has to be in His Kingdom, they conclude, what He
does not will, for it is not possible that He wills something and it
does not come into being; that would mean that He is not
omnimpotent. Far exalted is Allah above that. By a similar argument
they deny the uncreated nature of the Qur’an, under the cover of
their doctrine of divine unity. They say that if the Qur’an were
uncreated there would be more than one eternal being. But they do
not realize that it also follows from their argument that knowledge,
power, and all the other attributes of Allah are created. They cannot
deny this without contradicting themselves.

The essence of their third principle is that since Allah has
threatened sinners with punishment, He cannot withdraw it and defy

©The text says after the death of Al-Hassan, but most likely this is simply a mistake,
as the event actually took place during Al-Hassan’s life.

490 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

his own verdict. Just as He cannot go back on his promise, He
cannot go back on his threat. This means that He cannot pardon and
forgive whomever He wills.

The doctrine of the position between the two positions means
that when a person commits a grave sin he loses faith, but does not
enter into not having faith. Their last doctrine means that we must
enjoin upon others what we are ourselves commanded to do, and
ask them to believe in what we are required to believe. Under cover
of this principle they have justified armed revolt against the rulers
(a immah) when they perpetrate an injustice.

We have discussed these doctrines earlier, and need not enter
into them here. The Mu‘tazilah claim that their doctrines of justice
and unity of Allah are rational truths, that they are prior to
revelation, and that they form the basis for its rational justification.
If they advance some arguments from hadith in their support, they
advance them only as additional evidence. They boast that they do
not base their principles on hadith, and that they know their truths
even before they know the authenticity of the hadith. That is why
some of them do not use textual evidence for their arguments; they
carry little value in their eyes. Others include them just to show that
revelation agrees with reason, also to win over the consent of people
for their doctrines. They do not base them on revelation. The Qur’an
and the hadith are for them only supporting evidence, like an
additional force not necessary to meet the enemy, or an additional
exhortation for something that one likes to have by himself.

It is against this treatment of the Shar‘ that ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abdul-
‘Aziz warned when he said, “Do not be like those who follow the
truth when it agrees with their wishes, and oppose it when it does
not. You will not be rewarded because your wish happens to
coincide with the truth; but you certainly will be chastised if you do
not comply with it, for in either case you are only following your
wish.” In the same way, actions will be judged according to their
intentions, and everyone will have what he has intended.”’’ Action
depends on motive and intention, and conviction depends on
knowledge and assent. If conviction concerns a matter of faith, it is
part of faith; and if a deed is done with a good motive it is good,
otherwise not. Hence the ideas of the Believers that are based on
things other than faith are like the acts of good people that are not
done with good motives. In the fold of the Mu‘tazilah there are

?7A1-Bukhari, 1, 54, 2529, 3898, 5070, 6689, 6953.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 497

many who are enemies (zindiq) of Islam; their efforts have gone to
waste in this life, even though they think that they are doing good.

The Jahmiyyah are the followers of Jahm Ibn Safwan As-
Samarqandi. Jahm negated the attributes of Allah and denuded them
of their meaning. He learned this from Al-Ja‘d Ibn Dirham, whom
Khalid Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Qasri killed on the Festival of Sacrifice (“Id
al-Adha). Addressing the gathering on that occasion, he said,
“People! Offer your sacrifices, and may Allah accept them. As for
me, I will sacrifice Ja‘d Ibn Dirham. He says that Allah did not take
Ibrahim for His friend, nor did He speak to Moses. Exalted 15 Allah
above what he says about Him.” Then he descended from the pulpit
and killed Ja‘d. He had already consulted the scholars of his time,
who were from the Elders, and gotten their advice. May Allah bless
them.

Jahm expounded the ideas of Al-Ja‘d after him in Khurasan and
got a following. He entered into a debate with some polytheists
called the Sumaniyyah,’** became a skeptic and abandoned prayer
for forty days. The Sumantyyah were a group of Indian
philosophers who denied everything except sense perception. They
asked Jahm, “Can the Lord whom you worship be seen, smelled,
tasted or touched?” He answered in the negative. They said, “Then
He is non-existent.”” Jahm could not answer, and abstained from
worshiping anything for forty days.’*’ When the god of his
conception went out of his mind, Satan replaced it with another,
whom his imagination created next. He claimed that Allah is pure
existence without any attributes, and followed Ja‘d’s line of
thought.

It has been reported that Ja‘d had contacts with the Sabaean
philosophers of Harran, and took a few ideas from some Jewish
philosophers who had left their religion and joined the company of
Labid Ibn Al-A‘sam, the magician who had cast a spell over the
Prophet (peace be on him). Jahm was killed by Salm Ibn Ahwaz at
Khurasan, where his ideas had already become popular. The
Mu‘tazilah adopted his ideas though not to the extent that he did in
negating Allah’s attributes. He denies the names any reality, but they
deny only the attributes, accepting the names.

Scholars have discussed the question of whether the Jahmiyyah
are included in the seventy-two damned sects (referred to in hadith).

"*The Sumaniyyah are the Buddhists, followers of Gautama Buddha.
™See Al-Qasimi, Tarikh al-Jahmiyyah wa al-Mu'‘tazilah, (Beirut: Muwassat Ar-
Risalah, 1399/1979), pp. 22-23.

492 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Among those who consider them outside the realm are scholars such
as ‘Abdullah Ibn Mubarak and Ytsuf Ibn Asbat.

Their ideas spread at the time when Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal
and other scholars were being put to trial. They gained in strength
and number during the reign of Ma’mtin, who resided for some time
in Khurasan and came into contact with the Jahmiyyah. It was from
Tarsus that he issued orders for the trial of the scholars in the year
218 A.H. Ma’min died the same year. In 220 A.H., Imam Ahmad
was put in prison in Baghdad. The same year Mu’tasim called him
to debate with the Mu‘tazilah. Ahmad refuted all the arguments they
advanced, showed that their beliefs had no basis and that they were
wrong in calling people to their beliefs and putting them to torture.
Mu’tasim intended to set Ahmad free, but certain people advised him
that Ahmad should be beaten, lest the prestige of the government be
impaired. Ahmad was beaten and the news spread among the
masses. The government was frightened and set him free. For
details of the story the reader should consult the history books.

Jahm held some views that no one shared with him. He said that
Paradise and Hell would perish in the end; that faith (imdn) is
nothing but knowledge and not having faith (Aufr) is nothing but
ignorance; that no one does anything, everything is done by Allah;
and that actions are attributed to men only metaphorically, just as it
is said that a tree moves, the heavens revolve, or the sun sets. A
poet has said of Jahm:

“T wonder that Satan openly calls people to the Fire,
under a name which is derived from Jahannam (Hell).”

Abt Hanifah was asked about his view on body and incident.
He said, ’A curse be upon ‘Amr Ibn ‘Ubayd for leading people to
discuss such subjects.”

The determinists (Jabriyyah) derive their basic doctrine from
Jahm Ibn Safwan, as we have said before. They believe that the acts
of man are as determined as his height and color. This is diametri-
cally opposed to the view of the free-willers (gadariyyah) who deny
predestination (gadr). The Qadariyyah are called Qadariyyah because
they deny gadr, just as the Murji‘ah are called Murji‘ah because they
deny irja‘, namely that people are not left to the judgment of Allah
whether He punishes them or forgives them. The Jabriyyah have
been sometimes called Qadariyyah because they affirm gadr or
predestination in an exaggerated sense. This is like calling the
Muryji‘ah those who say that we cannot be certain about reward or
punishment, that all matters concerning individuals or species are
deferred, that no one can even say that those who repent will or will
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 493

not be rewarded, or that those who do not repent will or will not be
punished. The earliest Murji‘ah even abstained from saying anything
about ‘Uthman and ‘Ali and testifying to their faith or lack of faith.

The compilers of the Sunan collections have recorded many
ahddith censuring the Qadariyyah. One is what Abii Dawid has
recorded in his Sunan from ‘Abdul-‘Aziz Ibn Abi Hazim, through
his father and through Ibn ‘Umar, that the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “The Qadariyyah are the Magians of this ummah. Do not
visit them when they are ill, or join their funeral processions when
they die.”’*° There are many more ahddith about them, but the
hadith scholars have doubted if they were spoken by the Prophet
(peace be on him). The truth is that they are the words of some
Companions. Different, however, is the case with the ahddith about
the Khawarjy. In the Sahih collections alone, there are ten ahddith
about them. Three of them have been recorded by Al-Bukhari and all
ten by Muslim. The resemblance of the Qadariyyah to the Magians is
quite obvious. In fact, their doctrine is in a sense worse than that of
the Magians, for the latter posit only two creators, while they posit
innumerable creators.

These heresies, which contradict one another, emerged during
different periods of trial and tribulation in the history of the ummah.
Al-Bukhari has recorded in his Sahih that Sa‘id Ibn Al-Musayyib
said, “When the first calamity, namely the murder of ‘Uthman,
occurred, none who had participated in the battle of Badr survived.
When the second calamity occurred it took its toll of all those who
had participated in the campaign of Hudaybiyyah. When the third
calamity occurred, it took away the power and the reason of the
people.”’*' The Khawarij and the Shi‘ah emerged during the first
period, the Qadarityyah and the Murji‘ah in the second, and the
Jahmiyyah and other sects after the third. They were thus the people
who divided the religion and broke it up into sects.

They opposed one heresy with another heresy. One exceeded all
limits in love of ‘Ali, while another called him an infidel. One sect
exaggerated the threats of punishment, even condemned a section of
the Believers to Hell forever; while another belittled all punishments
and even abolished some of them altogether - I mean the Mujri‘ah.
One overdid Allah’s transcendence to the extent that His attributes
were negated, while another affirmed His attributes to such excess
that He was completely anthropomorphized. All came out with

*"Discussed earlier; it is weak.

‎Al-Bukhari, 4024.‏ ةا

494 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

problems and arguments that had no basis in the texts of the Qur’an
and Sunnah, and they discarded those which the Qur’a4n and Sunnah
offered. Some even delved into the books of the Jews, Christians,
Magians, and Sabaeans, and took many of their ideas and
arguments, changing sometimes their words and sometimes their
meaning. They thus came out with a mixture of truth and untruth,
shelving the truth which the Prophet (peace be on him) had taught.
This led to disputes and controversies on such things as substance,
incidents, corporeality, and so on.

The reason for the errors of these and other sects was that they
left the straight path that Allah had commanded them to follow. He
has said, “Verily, this is My Way, leading straight. Follow it, and
follow not (other) paths. They will scatter you about from His
(great) Path” [6:153]; and, “Say (Prophet): This is My Way, I do
invite unto Allah on evidence clear as the seeing with one’s eyes, I
and whoever follows me” [12:108]. See how “ways” of the people
has been put in the plural in contrast to the Way of Allah in the
singular. Ibn Mas‘id says that once the Prophet (peace be on him)
drew a line and said, “This is the Way of Allah.” Then he drew
some other lines left and right of that line and said, “These are the
ways on each of which there is an evil one who calls people to it.”
He then recited the verse, “Verily, this is My Way, leading straight.
Follow it, (and) follow not (other) paths. They will scatter you
about from His (great) path. Thus does He command you that you
may be righteous” [6:153].’*”

The most important thing we can do is pray for the correct path.
This is why Allah has commanded us to recite the opening siirah of
the Qur’an (Al-Fatihah) in every rak‘ah of every prayer, obligatory
or otherwise, and pray for the Straight Path. This is also the reason
many scholars consider the reading of Al-Fatihah in every rak‘ah to
be compulsory. In fact, it is one of the greatest and noblest prayers.
Allah has commanded us to say in it, “Show us the Straight Path,
the path of those on whom You have bestowed Your grace, those
whose portion 15 not wrath, and who go not astray” [1:6-7].

Commenting on these words, the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “The Jews are the people whose portion 1s wrath, and the
Christians are the ones who went astray.”’*’ The Prophet (peace be
on him) has also said, “You will certainly follow the ways of the

* Ad-Darimi, Sunan, 1:67; Ahmad, 1:435, 465; Tafsir At-Tabari, 14168; Al-Hakim,
2:318, and Adh-Dhahabi has endorsed Al-Hakim’s evaluation of it being authentic.
Part of a long hadith, At-Tirmidhi, 2954, 2955; Ahmad, 4:378; At-Tayalisi, 1040;
Ibn Hibban, 1715, 2279.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 495

people that went before you, step by step, to the extent that if they
go into the hole of a lizard you will also enter it.” People asked him,
“Messenger of Allah, do you mean the Jews and Christians?” He
said, “Who else!””’** This hadith has been recorded in the Sahih
collections.

A number of the Elders stated, “If a scholar deviates from the
correct path, he thereby resembles the Jews. If a devotee deviates,
he thereby resembles the Christians.” This is the reason you see that
heretical theologians like the Mu‘tazilah bear some resemblance to
Jews. It 15 not without reason that the Jewish scholars loved the
books of the Mu‘tazilah and lauded their views, while the leaders of
the Mu‘tazilah felt an affinity with the Jews and preferred them to
the Christians. Most misguided Sifis, on the other hand, bear a
resemblance to Christians. They have a liking for monasticism,
incarnation, unification, and other similar things. They condemn the
theologians, and the theologians condemn them and criticize their
ideas regarding musical sessions (samd‘), ecstasy (wajd), and a
number of ascetic and devotional practices which they have
developed.

The heretical sects treat revelation in two ways.’*” Some alter the
meaning of the texts, while others charge the prophets with
ignorance. The former are of two types. One group says that
revelation uses imagery; they are the ahl al-wahm wa at-takhyil; the
other group misinterprets and distorts the texts, they are the ahl at-
tahrif wa at-ta’wil. The first group’*° says that the prophets spoke of
Allah, the Hereafter, Paradise and Hell in words that do not reveal
the truth. They used symbols and images with which their people
were conversant; consequently, the latter believed that Allah was a
huge being, that bodies will be resurrected, and that people will
enjoy pleasures in Paradise and suffer pain in Hell pertaining to their
bodies. In reality, however, things will be completely different. The
prophets had to say what they said because that was the only way to
reform and elevate the common people. If they said what was not
true, it was only for the good of the people. That was the view of
Ibn Sina and others like him.

™4 Al-Bukhari, 3456, 7320; Muslim, 2669; Ahmad, 3:84, 89, 94; At-Taydlisi, 2178;
Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 74; Al-Baghawi, 4196. See also Ibn Majah, 3994; Ahmad, 2:327,
450, 511, 527; Ibn Abi ‘Asim, 72, Al-Hakim, 1:37.

™See Ibn Al-Qayyim, Bada’ii al-Fawa’id (Makkah, Maktabat An-Nahdah ‏حلت‎
‎Islamityyah As-Sa‘udiyyah, n.d., 2:32.

“See Ibn Taymiyyah, Dar’ Ta ‘arud al-‘Agl wa an-Nagl, 1:8-9.

406 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

The second group’*’ which misinterprets and distorts revelation
says that the prophets did not intend to convey what their words
apparently mean; they only conveyed the truths we discover through
reason. Hence they try by every means to interpret the revelation to
agree with their own ideas. It is not surprising, therefore, that most
of them are not sure of their interpretations, and hold out the
possibility that the texts may mean something different.

As for those who say that the prophets and their followers are
unaware of the truth, they are only ignorant of what Allah wants to
convey through the book He has revealed, or through the words He
has inspired in His prophets. They assert that it 15 quite possible that
no one knows the real meaning of the Scripture besides Allah,
neither Gabriel nor Muhammad, nor any other prophet, not to
mention the Companions and the Successors. When Muhammad
(peace be on him) pronounced the verse, ”’Allah Most Gracious is
firmly established on the Throne” [20:5], or “To Him mount up (all)
words of purity” [35:10], or “What prevents you from prostrating
yourself to one whom I have created with My hands” [38:75], he
did not know their real meaning, nor does any one else know tit
except Allah. This 15, they claim, what the Elders believed.

Some people in this group say that what Allah means by these
words is different from what they apparently suggest, and that no
one knows their real meaning except Allah, just as no one knows
when the Hour will come except He. Others admit that, in principle,
texts should be interpreted literally, but they say, like their
comrades, that the Prophet (peace be on him) did not explain the real
intention of many Qur’anic verses which they regard to be
allegorical and vague. The result is that there is no agreement among
them as to which verses are allegorical and which are not. A few of
them even say that the Prophet (peace be on him) himself was not
aware of the real meanings, and that he left it to scholars to discern
the real meanings by interpreting the verses in the light of rational
principles.

To sum up, these people are one in saying that the Prophet
(peace be on him) either did not know or did not explain, and that
they have succeeded in unraveling the truth with their reason. They
are therefore justified, they claim, in interpreting the words of the
Prophet (peace be on him) according to their reason. They also claim
that the prophets and their followers were not acquainted with the
rational sciences, and therefore did not understand the revealed
texts. All these ideas of theirs are false and rubbish.

“Ibid., 1:12-20.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 497

We pray to Allah to save us from them and their proponents.
Glory to You, Lord, the Lord of Honor and Power. You are free
from what they ascribe to You. And peace be on the messengers. All
praise is for You, Lord and Cherisher of the Worlds.
498 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 499
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES

‘ABDUL-JABBAR: ‘Abdul-Jabbar Ibn Ahmad Al-Hamadani (d.
415/1024), an eminent theologian and writer, leader of the
Mut tazilah of his time, Shafi‘i jurist and grand judge of Rayy, was
the author of many books. His magnum opus on theology was AI-
Mughni, which has been edited and published in many volumes by
Ad-Dar al-Misriyyah li at-Talif wa at-Tarjumah in Cairo. His Sharh
al-Usil al-Khamsah is a one-volume exposition on the fundamental
principles of the Mu‘tazilah. He also commented on some selected
chapters and verses of the Qur’an under the title Tanzih al-Qur’an
min al-Matda’in. He also discussed some allegorical verses under the
title, Mutashabih al-Qur’an (edited by Dr. ‘Adnan Zarzir, 1969).
‘ABDULLAH IBN RAWAHAH: ‘Abdullah Ibn Rawahah Ibn
Tha‘labah Al-Ansari (d. 8/629), a poet and warrior from the Khazraj
tribe in Madinah, gave allegiance to the Prophet (peace be upon him)
along with others at the valley of ‘Aqabah beofre the Prophet
migrated to Madinah. He participated in all the battles beginning
with Badr. In one of the campaigns, the Prophet (peace be upon
him) appointed him governor of Madinah in the Prophet’s absence.
He was beseiged along with others at Mawtah and killed.

ABU BAKR: Abi Bakr As-Siddiq (573-13/634), the closest
friend of the Prophet (peace be on him) before and after Islam, the
greatest of all the Companions and the first caliph, suppressed the
apostasy of the Arabs after the Prophet’s death, reestablished the
rule of Islam over Arabia, and had the Qur’an collected and written
down in one volume.

ABU AD-DARDA’: Abi Ad-Darda’ ‘Uwaymir Ibn Malik Ibn
Qays Al-Ansari (d. 32/652) was a great Companion of the Prophet
from the Khazraj tribe of Madinah. He was also an ascetic and a
warrior. He was appointed judge over Damascus by Mu‘awiyah at
the order of Caliph ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab. He was a scholar of the
Qur’an and taught it in Syria where he died. He narrated 117
ahdadith.

ABU HANIFAH: Abi Hanifah An-Nu‘man Ibn Thabit Ibn Zuti
(80/699-150/767), the great founder of the Hanafi school of figh,
was born and brought up in Ktifah in a family that had come to Iraq
from Afghanistan. Besides figh, Abi Hanifah also considerably
influenced the development of orthodox theology. The book, 4/-
Figh al-Akbar, is attributed to him but it is certainly not his work.
However, judging from the various statements that have been
preserved from him in different works that mention him, his views
on imdn, islam, predestination, human freedom and responsibility,
500 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawivyah

sin and salvation, and the status of the Qur’an can be ascertained.
These views were later developed by people of ‏قلط‎ school,
particularly Aba Manstr Al-Maturidi (d. 332/943). See A. J.
Wensinck, The Muslim Creed (London: Frank Cass & Co, 1965),
chs. VI-VH; Muhammad Abt Zahrah, Abi Hanifah: Hadvdtuhu wa
Asruhu wa Ard’uhu wa Fighuhu (Cairo: Dar Al-Fikr, n.d.), pp.
168-188.

ABU HUDHAYFAH: Abi Hudhayfah Ibn ‘Utbah Ibn Rabi‘ah
(d. 12/633) was a Companion who first migrated to Abyssinia and
then to Madinah. He participated in the battle of Badr and all
subsequent battles. He was killed during the Battle of Yamamah.
ABU AL-HUDHAYL: Abi Al-Hudhayl Muhammad Ibn Al-
Hudhayl Al-‘Allaf (135/752-235/849), leader of the Mu‘tazilah of
Basrah at this time, an astute dialectician, he is credited with the
formulation of the five fundamental principles of the school, and
commanded respect from the Abbasid caliphs, Al-Ma’min, Al-
Mu‘tasim and Al-Wathig. Among his students was Ibn Abr Dawud,
the powerful minister of the Abbasids.

ABU HURAYRAH: Abi Hurayrah (d. 58/678) was the greatest
narrator of hadith. He narrated, according to a very cautious recent
study, 1,236 ahddith. (See Mustafa A‘zami, Studies in Hadith
Methodology and Literature (Indianapolis: American Trust
Publications, 1977), p. 26.)

ABU AL-HUSSAYN- AL-BASRI: Abia Al-Hussayn
Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali At-Tayyib Al-Basri (d.480/1044) was a famous
Mu‘tazili theologian and jurist. He settled in Baghdad where he
died. His writings include Al-Mu‘tamad fi Usil al-Figh in
jurisprudence, Tasaffuh al-Adillah fi Usual ad-Din, Ghurar al-
Adillah, Sharh Usil al-Khamsah, and Al-Intisar fi ar-Radd ‘ala ar-
Rdwandi in theology.

ABU KHAYTHAMAH: Abi Bakr Ahmad Ibn Zubayr Abi
Khaythamah (d. 279/892) was a famous scholar of hadith, history
and genealogy. He was born in Nasa’ and settled in Baghdad. He
studied hadith with Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Yahya Ibn Mu‘in, and
wrote a great biographical work called At-Tarikh al-Kabir, which
the famous scholar of hadith, Ad-Daraqutni, held in great esteem.
ABU MUSA: ‘Abdullah Ibn Qays Ibn Salim Abi Misa AI-
Ash‘arl, an eminent Companion, was born in Zabid in Yemen in
602 C.E. He came to Makkah and embraced Islam and took part in
the battles. The Prophet (peace be on him) appointed him governor
of Yemen. He was also appointed governor of Basrah and Kifah by
the later caliphs, ‘Umar and ‘Uthman. He served on the tribunal
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 501

appointed to decide the feud between ‘Ali and Mu‘awtyah. He died
in Kufah in 44/665. He narrated 355 ahddith.

ABU SA‘ID AL-KHUDRI: Abi Sa‘id Sa‘d Ibn Malik Ibn Sinan
Al-Khudri (d.74/893) was a Companion of the Prophet (peace be on
him) from the Khazraj tribe of Madinah. He was one of those who
served the Prophet (peace be on him) from time to time. He
participated in twelve battles and narrated 1,170 ahddith.

ABU SHAMAH: ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Isma‘il Ibn Ibrahim,
commonly known as Abi Shama (599/1202-665/1267) was
historian, a Shafi‘i jurist and a grammarian from Damascus. He 5
the author of Ar-Rawdatayn fi Akhbar ad-Dawlatayn, Al-Murshid
al-Wajiz ila ‘Ulam al-Kitab al-‘Aziz, Ibraz Al-Ma‘ani fi Sharh ash-
Shatibiyyah, and Al-Bida‘ wa al-Hawddith.

ABU TALIB: Abi Talib ‘Abd Manaf Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib Ibn
Hashim, an uncle of the Prophet, who looked after him after his
father and grandfather died, loved him like one of his sons, let him
preach Islam freely, and protected him from the evils that the leaders
of the Quraysh might have done to him. He did not, however,
embrace Islam, and died in the eighth year of the Prophet’s call.
ABU TALIB AL-MAKKI: Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn ‘Ati’ah Al-
Harithi Abt Talib Al-Makki (d. 386/996), an ascetic and Sufi, 5
born in Al-Jabal between Baghdad and Wasit. He lived most of life
in Makkah, where he delivered sermons and achieved fame. He then
went to Basrah, and from there to Baghdad, where he expoused
some strange ideas which the people disapproved of and they
therefore refrained from attending his sermons. He was the author
of a very popular work on Sufism, 0111 al-Qulib, from which Imam
Al-Ghazali drew heavily in writing his [hyd ‘Ulim ad-Din.

ABU ‘UWANAH: Abi ‘Uwanah Al-Waddah Ibn ‘Abdullah (d.
186/802) was a war captive from Juyan who was brought to Basrah
where he distinguished himself as a very reliable narrator of hadith.
ABU YUSUF: Abi Yisuf Ya‘qtb Ibn Ibrahim Ibn Habib ‏لذ‎
‎Ansari (113/731-182/798), the foremost disciple of Abt Hanifah,
who, along with Muhammad Ibn Al-Hassan Ash-Shaybani,
contributed most to the development of Hanafi figh. He was also
well versed in hadith and maghdazi. Scholars such as Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal and Yahya Ibn Mu ‘in narrated ahddith from him. He served
as gadi al-qudat (chief judge) during the reigns of Al-Mahdi, Al-
Hadi and Hartin Ar-Rashid. He was the author of Kitab al-Khardj, a
great work on government revenues, and Adab 01-0307. He was
born in Kufah and died in Baghdad.

AL-AKHTAL: Ghayath Ibn Ghawth Ibn As-Salat Al-Akhtal (d.
90/708), one of the three top poets in the Umayyad period, was
502 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

born in Hirah in Iraq, joined the Umayyad court and wrote odes in
their praise. A collection of his poetry has been published.
‘AMMAR IBN YASIR: ‘Ammar Ibn Yasir Al-Kanani (d.
37/657) was one of the earliest Companions to embrace Islam. He
built the first Islamic mosque at Quba’, was appointed governor of
Kifah by ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, joined the army of ‘Ali and was
killed at the battle of Siffin.
AL-AMIDI: Sayf ad-Din Abi Al-Hassan ‘Ali Ibn Abi ‘Ali Ibn
Muhammad Ibn Salim At-Taghlibi Al-Amidi, a jurist, usu/i and
theologian, was born in Amid in 551/1156. He went to Baghdad
and from there to Syria and then to Cairo. He became famous for his
learning and students flocked to him. Out of envy, some scholars
attributed wrong ideas to him and then attacked him, whereupon, he
left Egypt and went to Damascus where he died in 630/1233. His
writings include Al-[hkam fi Usiil al-Ahkadm, and Muntaha al-Usul,
concerning legal theory, and Ghdyat al-Maram fi ‘Ilm al-Kaladm in
theology. 0

‘AMR IBN ‘UBAYD: Abt ‘Uthman ‘Amr Ibn ‘Ubayd (80/699-
144/761) initiated, along with his brother-in-law Wassil Ibn ‘Ata’
(d. 131/748), the Mu‘tazili theology. ‘Amr was known for his
devotion and asceticism. He was born in Basrah and died on the
way back from a trip to Makkah. His writings include a collection of
the comments of Al-Hassan Al-Basri on the Qur’an and a book on
divine unity and justice.

AL-‘AYNI: Badr ad-Din Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Al-‘Ayni (d.

855/1451), a renowned scholar of Hanafi figh, hadith, tafsir, usil,
history and grammar, and a prolific writer, was born in Kaykin,
brought up in ‘Ayntab, learned from scholars in Halab and Quds,
and settled in Cairo, where he lectured, gave fatawa and served as
chief judge (qddi al-quddat). His writings include, among others, a
voluminous commentary on the Sahih of Al-Bukhari, a commentary
on Kanz ad-Dagd’iqg on Hanafi figh, and ‘Aqgd al-Jumdan,
concerning history.

‘A°ISHAH: Umm al-Mu’minin ‘A’ishah bint Abi Bakr As-
510010, a great narrator of hadith, a distinguished jurist and very
knowledgeable in Arabic history and literature, was married to the
Prophet (peace be on him) in the second year after the Hijrah, and of
all his wives she was most dear to him. She was not happy with the
latter part of ‘Uthman ’s rule, but when he was killed she led the
campaign calling for avenging his blood. This led her to the Battle of
the Camel against ‘Ali. The last years of her life she passed quietly
and she died in 58/678. The number of ahddith she narrated reaches
2,270.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 503

‘ALI IBN ABI TALIB: ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, a cousin and son-in-
law of the Prophet (peace be on him), one of the three earliest
Muslims, the fourth caliph, and a great scholar of the Qur’an, hadith
and figh. He died in Ktfah in 40/660.

AL-ANBARI: Abi Bakr Muhammad Ibn AlI-Qasim Ibn
Muhammad Ibn Bashar Al-Anbari (271/884-328/940) was a scholar
of the Qur’an and hadith, a man of letters and a grammarian. He
came from Al-Anbar, a city near the Euphrates River in Iraq. His
writings include Al-Kafi in grammar, Gharib al-Hadith in hadith,
and Sharh al-OQas@’id as-Sab‘ah at-Tiwal and Al-Adddd in literature.
AL-ASH‘ARI: Aba Al-Hassan Al-Ash‘ari (260/873-324/935),
founding head of the Ash‘ari school of theology, was in his early
career a pupil of the famous Mut‘tazili1 theologian Al-Jubba’t.
However, at the age of forty he realized that the Mu‘tazili theology
was in conflict with the Qur’4n and Sunnah. Therefore, he gave it
up.and developed a new theology which, thanks to the works of
some great thinkers and writers in the following centuries, became
the dominant ideology of the Muslim world. Al-Ash‘ari expounded
his ideas in many books, the most important of which are 41-7
and Al-Luma’. His Magqdldat al-Islamiyyin is the most authentic
history of early Islamic theology. For the quote above from that
work, see the edition by H. Ritter, op cit., pp. 155-156.
AL-AWZA‘TI: Abu ‘Amr ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Amr Al-Awza‘i
(88/707-157/774) was the imam of the Syrians in hadith and figh.
He first lived at Al-Awza‘ in Damascus, then moved to Beirut where
he died. He composed a book on hadith, and his figh dominated
Spain up to the time of Al-Hakam Ibn Hisham (d. 207/822).
AYYUB AS-SAKHTIYANI: Aba Bakr Ayyab Ibn Abi
Tamimah Kisan As-Sakhtiyani (66/685-131/748) was a great
narrator of hadith and a leading fagih famous for his piety and
ascetic living, has narrated about 800 ahddith. He was based in
Basrah.

AL-BAGHAWI: Abi Muhammad Al-Hussayn Ibn Mas‘tid Ibn
Muhammad Al-Baghawt (436/1044-516/1122) was the auuthor of
Sharh as-Sunnah and a voluminous commentary on the Qur’an,
Ma ‘alim at-Tanzil, besides many other books. |
AL-BAJI: Abt Al-Walid Sulayman Ibn Khalaf Al-Baji (d.
474/1081), a Spanish scholar of hadith and a Maliki jurist and
judge, was born in Beja and died in Almeria, Spain. (See Al-
Zarkali, Al- ‘Alam, vol. II, ‏.م‎ 125). His abridged edition has been |
mentioned by Dr. Saghir Hassan Ma‘sumi, ed., /khtilaf al-Fugaha’
li Imam At-Tahadwi (Islamabad: Islamic Research Institute,
1391/1971), p. 39.
504 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

AL-BALKHI: Aba Muti‘ Al-Hakam Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Balkhi (d.
199/814) was one of the most distinguished students of Imam Abi
Hanifah. The famous hadith scholar ‘Abdullah Ibn Al-Mubarak had
great respect for his figh and piety. Cf. Adh-Dhahabi, Mizan Al-
Ttidal, 1:574. _ |

AL-BAQILLANI: Qadi Abt Bakr Muhammad Ibn At-Tayyib Al-
Baqillani (d. 403/1013) was one of the most outstanding Ash‘ari
theologians. He was born in Basrah in 338/949, settled in Baghdad
where he died. His writings include At-Tamhid fi ar-Radd ‘ald al-
Malahadah Al-Mu‘attlah, Al-Ins@f, Kashf Asrar al-Batiniyyah in
theology, and / ‘jaz al-Qur’an on the inimitability of the Qur’an.
AL-BAYHAQI: Aba Bakr Ahmad Ibn Al-Hussayn ‘Ali Al-
Bayhaqi (d. 458/1066) was a leading scholar of hadith from
Khurasan. His works include As-Sunan al-Kubrad (Hyderabad,
1352 A.H.), Al-Asmda’ wa as-Siffat [ed. by Muhammad Zahid ‏لذ‎
‎Kawthari (Cairo: Dar As-Sa‘adah, 1358)] and Dala’il § an-
Nubitiwwah [ed. by Dr. ‘Abdul-Muti‘ Qala‘ji (Beirut: Dar Al-Kutub
Al-‘Ilmtyyah, 1405/1985)]. The latter 15 the work referred to in the
commentary.

AL-BAZZAR: Abi Bakr Ahmad Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘Abdul-Khalig Al-
Bazzar (d. 292/905) was a great scholar of hadith and the author of
a Musndd collection of ahddith. Al-Haythami has collected his
additional ahddith under the title Kashf al-Astar ‘an Zawda’id AI-
Bazzar (ed. Habib Ar-Rahman Al-A‘zami; Beirut: Mu’assasat Ar-
Risalah) in four volumes. Al-Bazzar was from Basrah. He lectured
on hadith in Baghdad, Isfahan and Damascus. He died at Ramlah.
BILQIS: Bilqis was the name given to the Queen of Sheba who
ruled over Yemen when Solomon (965-926 B.C.) ruled over
Palestine and the neighboring area in the north. She 15 referred to in
the Qur’an, 27:22-44.

BISHR AL-MARISI: Bishr Ibn Ghayath Al-Marisi (d. 218/833),
a Hanafi jurist from Baghdad and the titular head of the Marisi
school of Mu‘tazilah theologians, used to vehemently defend the
Mu‘tazili thesis that the Qur’an is created.

AD-DAHHAK: Aba Al-Qasim Ad-Dahhak Ibn Muzahim Al-
Balkhi Al-Khurasani (d. 105/723) was an outstanding commentator
on the Qur’an and a great teacher. He maintained a school which had

3,000 students. He wrote a commentary on the Qur’an. He died in
Khurasan.

AD-DARANI: Abi Sulayman ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Ahmad Ibn
‘Ati’ah Ad-Darani (d. 215/830) was a renowned Sufi was from

Daran, a village in the suburbs of Damascus. He is recorded to have
said, “Gnosis is that you do not aspire to anything in the world
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 505

except the One.” (See Jami‘, Nafahat al-Uns, Lucknow:
Nawalkishore, 1910, p. 40).

AD-DARIMI: Abi Sa‘id ‘Uthman Ibn Sa‘id Ad-Darimi As-
Syistani (200/8 15-280/894) was the leading scholar of hadith during
his time and the compiler of Sunan Ad-Ddrimi. He was also the
author of a work on the refutation of the Jahmiyyah whose author
was the Mu‘tazili theologian, Bishr Al-Marisi. This work was
included in ‘Aga ’id as-Salaf, ed. by ‘Ali Sami Nasshar and ‘Ammar
Jami‘ At-Talibi (Alexandria: Al-Ma‘arif, 1971), pp. 253-566.
ADH-DHAHABI: Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn ‘Uthman Adh-
Dhahabi (673/1274-748/1348), a great scholar and critic of hadith
and a distinguished historian, Turkish by origin, he was born in
Damascus and died there. He was the author of about a hundred
books, the most important of which are Tadhkirat al-Huffaz (four
volumes), Mizdn al-‘Itidal fi Naqd ar-Rijal (three volumes), Tajrid
Asma’ As-Sahadbah (two volumes), Al-Mustadrak ‘ala Mustadrak
Al-Hakim in hadith, and Duwal al-Islam (two volumes), Tdrikh al-
[slam Al-Kabir (thirty-six volumes) in history, and Siyar A ‘lam An-
Nubala’ (twenty-three volumes) in biography.

AD-DUHHAK: Ibn Al-Qasim Ad-Duhhak Ibn Muzahim
(102/720), a scholar of the Qur’an, was a student of Sa‘id [bn
Jubayr, rather than of Ibn ‘Abbas.

AL-FAZARI: Taj ad-Din Al-Fazari (d. 690 A.H.), known as Al-
Firkah, was originally from Egypt but was known for his life in

Damascus. According to Ibn Kathir, he was known for being
knowledgable in many different fields.

AL-GHAZALI: Abt: Hamid Muhammad AlI-Ghazali (450/1058-
550/1111) 15 known as huyat al-Islam for his profound criticism of
Greek philosophy and the defense of Islamic faith. He was born at
Tus, studied figh and kalam with Imam al-Haramayn Al-Juwayni,
took up teaching at the Nizamiyyah College in Baghdad, later gave
that up and pursued a Sufi tarigah, and finally settled in his home
town and devoted himself to writing and teaching. His writings
include many books on Shafi‘i figh, a great work on the principles
life under the title ‏نوز‎ ‘Uliim ad-Din, which is his magnum opus, a
profound criticism of Greek philosophy, Tahdfut al-Faldsafah, a
brilliant exposition of Ash‘ari theology, Al-lqtisdd fi al-I ‘tigad, and
many books on Sufism. Al-Ghazali’s writings, however, are not
free from undesirable philosophical and mystical influences.
AL-HAMADHANI: Abt AIl-‘Ala Al-Hassan Ibn Ahmad Ibn AI-
Hassan (d. 569/1173) was an expert in Qur’anic studies, an
outstanding narrator and a scholar of hadith at Hamadhan.
506 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

AL-HAMADHANI: Abi Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn Abi ‘Ali Al-
Hassan Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Hamadhani (d. 53 1/1137)
was an ascetic and devotee. He was also a great scholar of hadith.
HAMMAD IBN ZAYD: Abi Isma‘il Hammad Ibn Zayd Ibn
Dirham (98/717-179/795) was a great narrator of hadith who was
born in Basrah to a family of Iranian origin. All six compilers of
hadith have accepted his reported ahddith.
HAMMAD IBN SALAMAH: Abi Salamah Hammad Ibn Dinar
(d. 167/783) was a man of letters, a renowned grammarian of the
Basrah school, and an outstanding narrator of hadith. He was
known for his worship and devotion.
HASSAN IBN THABIT: Hassan Ibn Thabit Ibn Al-Mundhir (d.
54/674), the poet of the Prophet (peace be on him) from the Khazraj
tribe of the Ansar, defended Islam through his poetry. His Diwan
(collection of poems) has been published. The verse quoted here
was mentioned by Al-Mubarrad in Al-Kamil fi al-Lughah wa al-
Adab (Beirut: Maktabat Al-Ma ‘arif, n.d.), pp. 9-10.
_~AL-HARWI: Abi Isma‘il ‘Abdullah Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Al-
Ansari Al-Harwi (396/1005-481/1088) was a scholar of hadith, a
Hanbali jurist, an outstanding Sufi and the author of a short and
concise but very popular text on mystical stages, Mandzil as-Sda ‘irin,
which has been commented upon by many scholars including Ibn
Al-Qayyim, whose three volume commentary, Madarij as-Sdlikin,
seeks to review Sufi concepts and practices in the light of the
Qur’an, the Sunnah, and lives of the Elders. Among Al-Harwi’s
other works, we have Al-Fariiq fi as-Sifat and Mandgqib al-Imam
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal. He was born in Qandhar and died in Hirat, in
Afghanistan.
AL-HASSAN AL-BASRI: Abi Sa‘id Ibn Al-Hassan Ibn YAsir
Al-Basri (21/642-110/728), an eminent Successor, a great scholar, a
prolific narrator of hadith, a commentator on the Qur’an, a jurist,
preacher and ascetic, was the most outstanding personality of his
time. Fearless in his criticism of wrong governmental practices, he
had hot exchanges with the notorious Umayyad governor, Al-Hajjaj
Ibn Yusuf, who could not cause him any harm. He was born in
Madinah and died in Basrah.
HUDHAYFAH: Abi Abdullah Hudhayfah Ibn Hisl [bn Jabir Al-
Yaman Al-‘Abassi (d. 36/656) was a Companion of the Prophet
(peace be on him) famous for his chivalry. He had the distinction
that the Prophet (peace be on him) had informed him of the names of
the hypocrites. He took part in various battles during the reign of
‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaéb, who appointed him governor of Al-Mada’in
where he died.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 507

AL-HUMAYDI: Abi Bakr ‘Abdullah Ibn Al-Zubayr Ibn ‘Isa Al-
Qarshi Al-Humaydi, (d. 219/834) was the compiler of the Musnad
Al-Humaydi, ed. by Habib Ar-Rahman Al-‘Azami (Madinah: Al-
Maktabah As-Salafiyyah, n.d.).

IBN ‘ABBAS: ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas, a cousin of the Prophet
(peace be on him), one of the two most eminent scholars of the
Qur’an among the Companions, the fourth most prolific narrator of
hadith, and a distinguished jurist. His expositions of Qur’anic
verses form part of every commentary on the Qur’an; however,
many comments that are attributed to him are not genuine. For the
words that are quoted above in the text, see Al-Hakim, Mustadrak
‘ala as-Sahihayn fi al-Hadith (Hyderabad, India, 1341 A.H.; reprint
Riyadh: Maktabat An-Nasr Al-Hadithah; henceforth referred to as
Al-Hakim), vol. 2, ‏.م‎ 381; ‘Abdur-Razzaq Ibn Hammam As-
San‘ani, Al-Musannaf, ed. by Habib Ar-Rahman Al-‘Azami (Beirut:
Al-Maktab Al-Islami, 1391/1971), hadith no. 6033.

IBN ‘ABDUL-BARR: Shaykh al-Islam Abt ‘Umar Yusuf Ibn
‘Abdullah Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr (368/978-463/1071), a
distinguished scholar of hadith, an eminent Maliki jurist and
historian came from Cordoba in Spain. His writings include Al-
Isti ‘ab fi Ma ‘rifat al-Ashab (a biographical work on the Companions
of the Prophet (peace be on him), At-Tamhid lima fi al-Muwatta min
al-Ma ‘ani wa al-AsGnid (a commentary on Imam Malik’s Muwatta),
Jami‘ Bayan Al-‘Ilm wa Fadlihi, and others.

IBN ABI AL-HADID: ‘Izz ad-Din Abi Hamid Ibn Hibat Allah
(d. 655/1257) was a man of letters and a poet. He was born in Al-
Mada’in. Later he moved to Baghdad where he served in the
government, becoming a close friend of the vizier Ibn Al-‘Algami.
He is famous for his commentary on Nahj al-Balaghah.

IBN ABI SHAYBAH: Abit Bakr ‘Abdullah Ibn Muhammad Ibn
Al-Qadi Abit Shaybah (d. 235/849) was a leading scholar of hadith
from Kufah. He was the author of Al-Musannaf fi al-Ahddith wa al-
Athar (Mukhtar Ahmad An-Nadwi, ed.; Bombay: Dar As-
Salafiyyah, 15 volumes), a Musndd and other books.

IBN AL-‘ALA: Abt ‘Amr Zaban Ibn ‘Ala Ibn ‘Ammar At-
Tamimi, a man of letters and one of the seven leading reciters of the
Qur’an, was born in Makkah in 70/689, brought up in Basrah and
died in Kifah in 154/767.

IBN ‘AQIL: Abi Al-Wafa‘ ‘Ali Ibn ‘Aqil Ibn Muhammad Ibn
‘Aqil (431/1040-513/1119) was a great scholar of figh, usil and
kalam from Baghdad. He was the leader of the Hanbalis in his time.
His writings include an encyclopaedic work, Kitab al-Funiin, Al-
508 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Fusul, Kifdyat al-Mufti on Hanbali figh, and another work on the
principles of jurisprudence.

IBN AL-‘ARABI: Abt Bakr Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn
Muhammad, commonly known as Ibn Al-‘Arabi, was a scholar of
the Qur’an and hadith as well as a Maliki jurist and scholar of
history. He was born in Ishbiliah, Spain in 468/1085. He served 5
a judge in the same city. He died in 543/1148 in Al-Adwa in the East
and was buried in Fas. His writings include Ahkdm al-Qur’an, Al-
Masalik ft Sharh Muwatta Malik, and Al-Qawdsim wa al-‘Awdsim.

IBN ‘ARABI: Abi Bakr Muhiy ad-Din Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali At-
Ta’i, commonly known as Ibn ‘Arabi/Ibn Al-‘Arabi, (560/1165-
638/1240), was born in Murcia (Spain) and died in Damascus. A
mystic of vast learning, great intellect and fertile imagination, he
expounded and elaborated the philosophy of wahdat al-wujiid that
dominated the Islamic world for centuries and still exercises

considerable influence. For his biography, see Sayed Husayn Nasr,
Three Muslim Sages (Harvard, Cambridge, 1964), pp. 92-102. The

best work on his philosophy is by Dr. A. E. ‘Affifi, The Mystical

Philosophy of Muhyid Din Ibnul Arabi (Lahore: Ashra, reprint from
C.U.P.

IBN AL-ATHIR: Majd ad-Din Aba As-Sadat Al-Mubarak Ibn
Muhammad Ibn Al-Athir Al-Jazri (d. 606/1209) is famous for his
Jami‘ Al-Ustl fi ahddith ar-Rasul [ed. by ‘Abdul-Qadir Al-
Aranawut (Maktabah Al-Halwani and Maktabah Dar Al-Bayan,
1389/1969)] in which he put together the ahddith of Al-Bukhari,
Muslim, At-Tirmidhi, Abu Dawtid, An-Nasa’i and the Muwatta of
Malik, as well as for a lexicon on hadith, An-Nihdyah fi Gharib al-
Hadith wa al-Athar [ed. by Tahir Ahmad Al-Zawi and Mahmid

Muhammad At-Tanji (Cairo: Al-Maktabah  Al-Islamiyyah,
1383/1903)].

IBN HAMSHADH: Abt Manstr Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn
Muhammad Ibn Hamshadh (d. 388/998) was a scholar of hadith, a
Shafi‘ jurist and ascetic who came from Nishapur.

IBN HAZM: Abt. Muhammad ‘Ali Ibn Ahmad Ibn Sa‘id Ibn
Hazm (384/994-456/1064), a man of letters and a poet, Zahiri in
figh, rationalist in theology, and a historian of theology, was born in
Cordoba to a family whose ancestors were Iranian. His writings
include Al-Muhalla, in figh, Al-Ihkam fi Usual al-Ahkadm, in
principles of jurisprudence, and A/-Fasl fi al-Milal wa al-Ahwda’ wa
an-Nihal, in theology. 0

IBN KATHIR: Abu AI-Fida’ Isma‘il Ibn ‘Amr [bn Kathir
(700/1301-774/1372), a commentator on the Qur’an, scholar of
hadith, jurist and historian, was born in Jandal in the province of
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 509

Basrah and then moved to Damascus where he died and was buried
near the grave of his teacher, Ibn Taymiyyah. Among his writings
mention may be made of a very popular commentary of the Qur’an,
entitled Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim, a voluminous work on history,
Al-Bidayah wa an-Nihadyah, a summary of Ibn Salah’s ‘Ulim al-
Hadith, Kutub al-Huda fi Ahddith al-Masdnid wa as-Sunan, and At-
Takmil fi Ma ‘rifat ath-Thiqat wa adh-Dhu‘afa wa al-Majahil.

IBN KULLAB: Abi Muhammad ‘Abdullah Ibn Sa‘id Ibn Kullab
Al-Qattan (d. ca. 240/854), was the leader of the Ahl as-Sunnah in
his time. His followers were later absorbed into the Ash‘aris. [See
Al-Maqdisi, Ahsan at-Taqdsim (Leiden: 1885), p. 37.

IBN MALIK: Abt ‘Abdullah Jamal ad-Din Muhammad Ibn
‘Abdullah Ibn Malik At-Ta’i, a grammarian and man of letters, was
born in Jayan in 600/1203, and settled in Damascus where he died
in 672/1273. His works include Khulasat al-Alfiyyah, Tashil al-
Fawa’id and Shahdahid at-Tawdih.

IBN MAS‘UD: Aba Ma‘bad ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘tid (d. 32/652)
was one of the first six to embrace Islam; he served the Prophet for
many years. He was the most knowledgeable Companion of the
Qur’an. “Umar AI-Fartiq, the second caliph, sent him to Ktfah to
teach the Qur’an, where he also served as a Judge and was in charge
of the government treasury.

IBN AL-MUBARAK: Abi ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Al-Mubarak
(118/736-181/797) was a famous scholar of hadith. He traveled a
great deal and collected ahdadith. He lived off of trade, participated in
jihad and gave generously for the sake of Allah. He compiled a
collection of ahddith on jihdd and another on ar-rigdq (‘words that
soften the heart’). He was born in Marwa and died in Hit, near Ar-
Raqqah in Iraq.

IBN AI-QAYYIM: Shams ad-Din Abi ‘Abdullah Muhammad Ibn
Abi Bakr Ibn Ayytb, commonly known as Ibn AlI-Qayyim, an
eminent scholar of the Qur’an, hadith, figh, principles of
jurisprudence, and a great writer, was born in Damascus, studied
with his great teacher Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah for sixteen
years, and established himself as his most distinguished disciple,
expounding his ideas and developing his thought. His writings |
include 730 al-Ma ‘Gd (a famous work on the life and practice of the
Prophet), I‘lam al-Muwagqq4@‘in in jurisprudence, Shifa’ al-‘Alil fi
Masa’il al-Qada’ wa al-Qadr wa al-Hikmat wa at-Ta ‘lil, in theology,
and Madarij as-Salikin (a commentary on the Sufi text Mandzil as-
Sa 1711 by ‘Abdullah Al-Ansari Al-Harwi, reviewing the whole
gamut of Sufi practice, experience and thought and expounding the

suluk of the Salaf. 00001
F19 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI
510 Sharh AI-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

IBN RUSHD: Abt Al-Walid Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn Rushd,
the great Spanish jurist, judge and philosopher, was born in
Cordoba in 520/1126 and died in Morocco in 595/1199. He
commented upon the works of Aristotle and was known as “the
Commentator of the Middle Ages”. His writings include a very
popular work on comparative figh, Biddyat al-Mujtahid wa Nihdyat
al-Mugqtasid, a refutation of Al-Ghazali’s refutation of philosophy,
Tahafut at-Tahdfut, and an exposition of his own method in
theology, Al-Kashf ‘an Manahif al-Adillah fi ‘Aq@’id al-Millah.
IBN SIRIN: Abt Bakr Muhammad Ibn Sirin Al-Ansari (d.
110/728), a very distinguished Successor, a great narrator of hadith,
and a fagih, was known for his piety and devotions.

IBN ‘UMAR: ‘Abdullah [bn ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaéb (d. ca.
74/693) was one of the most outstanding younger Companions. He
was a learned scholar who was known for his piety and strict
imitation of prophetic precepts. He also distinguished himself as a
narrator of hadith, second only to the most prolific narrator, Abu
Hurayrah.

‘IKRIMAH: Abt ‘Abdullah ‘Ikrimah, a Berber slave of Ibn
‘Abbas, freed after the death of his master by the latter’s son, ‘AII,
distinguished himself as a scholar of the Qur’an. Ash-Sha‘bi said
about him, “There is no one on earth more knowledgeable about the
Book of Allah than ‘Ikrimah.” See Adh-Dhahabi, At-Tafsir wa al-
Mufassiriin (Cario: Dar Al-Kutub Al-Hadithah, 1396/1967), vol. 1,
p. 111.

IMRA’ AL-QAYS: Imra’ Al-Qays Ibn Hajar Ibn Al-Harith from —
the tribe of Kindah is generally held to have been the most eminent
poet of pre-Islamic Arabia. He was killed in 545 C.E.

ISHAQ IBN RAHAWAYH: Abi Muhammad Ishaq Ibn Ibrahim
Rahawayh (161/778-238/952), the most distinguished scholar of
hadith and law of inheritance (fara’id) in Khurasan of his time. ‏لذ‎
‎Bukhari, Muslim, At-Tirmidhi and other scholars of hadith have all
reported from him.

JA‘D IBN DIRHAM: Ja‘d Ibn Dirham (d. 118/736) was the
teacher of Marwan Ibn Muhammad, governor of Iraq during the
reign of Hisham Ibn ‘Abdul-Malik. He also influenced the views of
Al-Jahm Ibn Safwan, founder of the Jahmiyyah school of
theologians. Ja‘d believed that man had no free will, that the Qur’an
is created, that Allah did not speak to Moses, and that Allah did not
take Abraham as an intimate friend. On account of these
blasphemies, Khalid Al-Qasri, the governor of Iraq, executed him.
JAHM IBN SAFWAN: Abi Mahraz Jahm Ibn Safwan, the
leader of the Jahmiyyah, was born in Khurasan, lived his early
years in Tirmidh, entered into a debate with some Buddhists which
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 511

lead him to complete skepticism. After forty days he regained faith
in God but, towing the line of Ja‘d Ibn Dirham, he denied that God
had attributes over and above His Essence. He also denied freedom
of will and the eternity of Paradise and Hell. He was killed along
with Al-Harith Ibn Surayj in a battle against the Umayyads. See At-
Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Mulik (Beirut: Dar Ihya At-Turath
Al-* Arabi, n.d.), vol. 7, pp. 220-221, 236-237.
AL-JAWZIJANI: Abi ‘Ali Al-Jawzijani was a disciple of
Muhammad Ibn ‘Alt Al-Hakim At-Tirmidhi (d. 216/831) in
tasawwuf. He was a comtemporary of Junayd Al-Baghdadi (d.
297/909).

AL-JAWARIBI: Dawid Al-Jawaribi was a Rafidi and an
anthropomorphist. He believed that God was a body, though not
solid within. See Adh-Dhahabi, Mizdn al-I‘tidal, entry 2661; Al-
Ash‘ari, Magaldat, ‏.م‎ 209; Al-Baghdadi, Al-Farq bayn_ al-Firaq
(Beirut: Dar Al-Afag Al-Jadidah, 1393/1973), p. 320.
AL-JUWAYNI: Aba Al-Ma‘ali ‘Abdul-Malik Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-
Juwayni (419/1028-478/1085), commonly known as Imam al-
Haramayn, an erudite scholar, an eminent Shafi‘i jurist and the most
distinguished Ash‘ari theologian of his time, hailed from Juwayn, a
small town in the vicinity of Nishapur in Iran. His works on
theology include Kitab al-Irshdd (a classic of Ash‘ari theology),
Ash-Shamil fi Ustil ad-Din and Al-‘Agidah an-Nizadmiyyah (his last
word on the subject).

AL-KHALLAL: Abt Bakr Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Harin Ibn
Yazid Al-Khallal (d. 310/922) was a leading scholar of hadith and a
Hanbali fagih at Baghdad.

AL-KHUNJI: Abi ‘Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Namawar Ibn
‘“Abdul-Malik Al-Khunji (590/1194-646/1248) was an_ Iranian
scholar of figh, logic and philosophy. He was appointed judge in
Cairo where he settled and later died. His writings include Khasf al-
Asrar fi Ghawamid al-Afkadr and Al-Mujiz fi al-Asrar in logic, ‏ال‎
‎Jumal, summarizing the Nihayat al-‘Amal of Ibn Méarziiq At-
Tilimsani.

AL-KHUSRUSHAHI: ‘Abdul-Hamid Ibn ‘Isa Al-Khusrushahi
(580/1184-652/1254) was a Shafi‘i jurist, theologian and
philosopher. He was born at Khusrushah, a town in the vicinity of
Marwa. He was a student of Fakhr ad-Din Ar-Razi. After Ar-RAzi’s
death, he went to Syria where he taught and wrote. He then went to
Al-Kark and joined the company of Al-Malik An-Nasir. Finally he
went to Damascus where he later died. His writings include an
abridgement of Kitab ash-Shifa‘ by Ibn Sina, an abridgement of Al-
Muhadhdhab in figh, and Tatimmah al-Ayat al-Bayyindat.
512 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

LABID: Labid Ibn Rabi‘ah Ibn Malik Al-Amiri was one of the
seven top poets of pre-Islamic Arabia. He embraced Islam at the
hand of the Prophet (peace be on him) and later settled in Kiifah

where he died in 41/661. His Diwan, poetry collection, has been
published and translated into German.

AL-LAYTH IBN SA‘D: Abu Al-Harith Al-Layth Ibn Sa‘d
(94/713-175/791) was the most famous scholar of Egypt of his time
and an eminent fagih. Ash-Shafi‘i said that he was a better faqih
than Malik. It is unfortunate that he did not have students like those
of the other masters to develop his figh. He was born in Khurasan,
and served as a gadi in Cairo, where he died.

AL-LALKA’I: Abi Al-Qasim Hibbatullah Ibn Al-Hassan Ibn
Mansur At-Tabari Al-Lalka’t (d. 418/1027), was a scholar of
hadith, a Shafi‘l jurist and a theologian. He was originally from Iran
but settled in Baghdad and died in Dinawr. His writings include
Sharh Usil I‘tigad Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jamd‘ah, Madhahib Ahl
as-Sunnah, Kitab Rijal as-Sahdbah, Karamat al-Awliya’, and
others.

AL-MAKKI: ‘Abdul-‘Aziz Ibn Yahya Ibn ‘Abdul-‘Aziz Al-Makki
(d. 240/854), a disciple of Imam Ash-Shafi‘i, visited Baghdad
during the time of Al-Ma’mitin (198/813-218/833) where he had a
debate with the Mu‘tazili theologian, Bishr Al-Marisi on the issue of
whether or not the Qur’an is created. A/l-Hidah (edited by Jamil
Saliba; Damascus, 1384/1964) which is attributed to him contains a
refutation of the Mu‘tazil1 viewpoint. Adh-Dhahabi doubted that it
was his work [see Mizdn AI-‘Itidal, ed. by ‘Ali Ahmad Al-Bajawi
(Beirut: Dar Al-Ma‘rifah), 2:639), and his student, As-Subki, agreed
with his assessment (see Tabagdat Ash-ShGfi ‘iyyah al-Kubra (Beirut:
Dar Al-Ma‘rifah, second edition), vol. 2, p. 145.

MALIK IBN ANAS: Malik Ibn Anas Ibn Malik (d. 179/795),
founder of the Maliki school of figh, was the leader of the
muhaddithiin of Madinah during his time. His famous work, A/-
Muwatta, is a collection of ahddith containing also the statements of
Companions and Successors and forms the basis of the figh he
developed. A book on theology, Ar-Risdlah fi al-Oadr wa ar-Radd

‘ala al-Qadariyyah, has been attributed to him, but its authenticity 5
doubtful.

MALIK IBN DINAR: Abi Yahya Malik Ibn Dinar Al-Basri, a
famous narrator of ahddith, lived a simple and ascetic life earning
his livelihood by copying the Qur’an. he died at Basrah in 131/748.

Al-MATURIDI; Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Mahmid AI-
Maturidi (d. 333/944), from a village near Samargand, was an
erudite scholar and leader of the orthodox theologians in the East.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 513

He developed kalam on the lines of Abt Hanifah. His books include
Kitab at-Tawhid, Kitab Tawilat al-Qur’Gn, and Awhdm_al-
Mu ‘tazilah.

MU’ALLA: Abit Ya‘la Mu/alla Ibn Manstr (d. 211/826) was a
student of the great Hanafi Imams, Abt’ Yisuf and Muhammad
Ash-Shaybani. He was an eminent jurist in his own right. He

passed on their works and views. He also narrated ahddith, and was
respected for his piety.

MUSAWIYAH: Mu‘awiyah Ibn Abi Sufyan Sakhr Ibn Harb Ibn
Umayyah was the founder of the Umayyad dynasty and a great
administrator. He embraced Islam in 8 A.H., when Makkah was
conquered. As a scribe of the Prophet (peace be on him), he wrote
down Qur’anic revelations. He served as governor of Jordan at the
time of ‘Umar and of all of Syria at the time of ‘Uthman. When ‘Ali
became the caliph, he did not submit to him. This led to the Battle of
Siffin. After “Ali, Alt’s son Al-Hassan handed over the caliphate to

Mu‘awiyah in 41 A.H. Mu‘awiyah continued to rule until his death
in 60/680.

MU‘ADH IBN JABAL: Abi ‘Abdur-Rahman Mu‘adh Ibn Jabal
Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Aws Al-Ansari (d. 18/639) was a great Companion of
the Prophet from the Khazraj tribe of Madinah. He participated in all
the battles of Islam beginning with Badr. The Prophet (peace be on
him) appointed him gddi in Yemen. He narrated 157 ahddith, died in
Jordan and was burried in Al-Qasir.

MUHAMMAD IBN AL-HASSAN: Abi ‘Abdullah Muhammad
Ibn Al-Hassan Ibn Fargad Ash-Shaybani (131/748-189/864), the
most distinguished disciple of Abi Hanifah, second only to Abt
Yusuf, was born in Wasit and spent his early years in Ktfah where
he joined the company of Abt Hanifah. Later, he moved to Baghdad
and was appointed judge. He died in Ar-Rayy. Hanafi figh owes
more to him for its development than to anyone else. His works
include Al-Mabsit (a compendium of figh), As-Siyar (in
international law), Al-Hujjah ‘ala Ahl Al-Madinah, Al-Jami‘“ al-
Kabir, and Al-Jami‘ as-Saghir.

MUJAHID: Mujahid Ibn Jubayr Al-Makki (21/642-104/722) was
the most eminent student of the great commentator on the Qur’an
and Companion, ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas. His comments on the
Qur’an have been collected and published with notes under the title
Tafsir Mujahid by ‘Abdur-Rahman At-Tahim Muhammad As-Surati
(Islamabad, Pakistan: Majma‘ Al-Buhith) in two volumes.
MUQATIL: Abi Al-Hassan Muqatil Ibn Sulayman Ibn Bashir (d.
150/767), a distinguished commentator on the Qur’an, was
originally from Balkh and settled in Basrah. His writings include
514 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Nawéddir at-Tafsir, Mutashabih al-Qur’an, An-Ndsikh wa. al-
Mansikh (all regarding the Qur’an) and Ar-Radd ‘ala al-Qadariyyah
(in theology). See Al-Zarkali, Al-A ‘lam, 7:281.

MUTARRIF: Abt ‘Abdullah Mutarnf Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Ash-
Shikhkhir Al-‘Amri (d. 87/706), was a great Successor. He was
born during the time of the Prophet (peace be on him), went to
Basrah where he settled and where he died. An ascetic in life, he is
considered a reliable narrator of hadith.

AN-NAKHA‘I: Ibrahim Ibn Yazid Ibn Qays Al-Aswad An-
Nakha‘'l (46/666-96/715) was one of the most eminent Successors.
He distinguished himself as a fagih; in fact, he developed a figh of
his own, and was known as the fagih of Iraq. He lived in Ktfah.
AN-NASAFI: Abi Al-Mu‘in Maymin Ibn Muhammad An-Nasafi
(d. 580/1184) was an eminent theologian of the Maturidi school.
His writings include, among others, At-TamhidliQawa ‘id at-Tawhid
and Tabsirat al-Adillah. A commentary on the former has been
written by Husaém ad-Din Hussayni Ibn ‘Ali Al-Hanafi.
AN-NASAFI: Abi Al-Barakat ‘Abdullah Ibn Ahmad Ibn Mahmtid
An-Nasafi (d. 710/1310) was an eminent scholar of hadith, a Hanafi
jurist, a legal theorist and a commentator on the Qur’an. His
writings include Madarik at-Tanzil wa Haqg@’ig At-Tawil in Qur’anic
exegesis, Al-Kafi fi Sharh al-Wafi and Kanz ad-Daqda@’ig in figh,
and Manar al-Anwar in legal theory. The latter became very popular
and many scholars wrote commentaries on it.

NEGUS: The Negus who ruled over Abyssinia at the time of the
Prophet (peace be on him) and whose real name was Ashamah
welcomed the Muslims who left Makkah and took shelter in his
country when they were being persecuted by the pagans of the
Quraysh tribe. The Negus was convinced of Islam, and embraced it.
He died in the 8th year of the Hijrah when Makkah was conquered.
The Prophet (peace be on him) offered the funeral prayer in absentia
at his death. (See Ibn Hajar, Al-Isabah fi Tamyiz as-Sahdabah, Cairo:
Al-Maktabah Ash-Shargiyyah, 1325/1909, 1:117).

NU‘AYM: Abia ‘Abdullah Nu‘aym Ibn Hammad Al-Khuza‘i (d.
228/842) was to first to collect ahddith in the form of a musnad. At
first he lived in Iraq and Hijaz, but then he settled in Egypt. His
words quoted here were mentioned in Al-Lalka’i, Sharh Usiul
1 11060 Ahl as-Sunnah, ed. by Dr. Ahmad Sa‘d Haddan (Riyadh:
Dar At-Tayyibah; henceforth referred to as Al-Lalka’i, Sharh as-
Sunnah), under hadith 936.

AL-QABISI: Abu Al-Hassan ‘Ali Ibn Khalaf Al-Qabisi (d.
403/1012) was a Maliki jurist and a scholar of hadith.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 515

QADI ‘AYAD: Qadi Abt Al-Fadl ‘Ayad Ibn Misa (476/1083-
544/1149) was a scholar of hadith and a man of letters, born in
Sibtah in Spain and died of poisoning in Morocco. Among his
works the most famous is his work on the life of the Prophet, Ash-
3/1/0 fi Ta ‘rif 111/0110 Al-Mustafa.

QATADAH: Abi Al-Khattab Qatadah Ibn D’amah (d. 118/736), a
man of extraordinary memory, was the most distinguished narrator
of hadith in Basrah.

QUDAMAH: Abi ‘Amr Qudamah Ibn Maz‘iin Ibn Wahb (d.
36/656), a cousin of ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab and one of the earliest
Muslims, migrated to Abyssinia along with his brothers, ‘Uthman
and ‘Abdullah Ibn Maz‘itin. He participated in all the battles
beginning with Badr. ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattéb appointed him
governor of Bahrain. The incident mentioned here is reported by
‘Abdur-Razzaq As-San‘ani, Al-Musannaf, 17076, as well as by Ibn
Abi Shaybah, A/-Musannaf, 9:546. ‏ظ‎

AL-QURTUBI: Abt ‘Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn Abi
Bakr Al-Ansari Al-Qurtubi (d. 671/1272), the great commentator of
the Qur’an, was born in Cordova, Spain. Besides his Qur’anic
commentary, Al-Jami‘liAhkam al-Qur’adn, which became very
popular, he also compiled Al-Asna’ fi Sharh Asma’ Allah al-Husnd,
and At-Tadhkirah fi Ahwal al-Mawta wa Umir al-Akhirah. The
words that follow occur in vol. 1, pp. 302-304 of the Tadhkirah
(Ahmad Hiyazi As-Saqqa, ed., Beirut: Al-Maktabah Al-‘I!miyyah,
1402/1982).

AL-QUSHAYRI: ‘Abdul-Karim Ibn Hawazin Al-Qushayri (d.
465/1072), a disciple of Abt ‘Ali 50-1030030 (d. 405/1014) in
Sufism, is famous for his Ar-Risdlah, which is the most authentic
and comprehensive introduction to Sufi practices, experiences and
concepts as developed by the early Sufis. He also had a commentary
on the Qur’an, Latd ‘if al-Isharat, and other books.

RABI‘AH: Abt ‘Uthman Rabi‘ah Ibn Abi ‘Abdur-Rahman
Farrakh (d. 136/753), commonly called Rabi‘ah Ar-Ra’ily because
of his use of personal judgement in law, was a reliable transmitter of
hadith. Imam Malik, who was his student in jurisprudence, said at
his death, “Thus has passed away the real taste of figh.” [Adh-
Dhahabi, Siyar A ‘lam an-Nubala’. vol. 6, p. 89.

AR-RAZI: Fakhr ad-Din Muhammad Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Al-Hussayn
Ar-Razi (544/1149) was a great Ash‘arl theologian, philsopher,
writer of a great commentary on the Qur’4n (Ma/fatih al-Ghayb,
commonly known as At-Tafsir al-Kabir), a Shafi‘i jurist and legal
theorist. Besides the Tafsir, his writings include many books, such
as Sharh Isharat Ibn Sina, Al-Matalib al-‘Aliyyah in philosophy,
516 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Al-Arba ‘in and Ma‘alim Usiil ad-Din in theology, and Al-Mahsil in
legal theory.

AR-RUZBARI: Abi ‘Ali Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn Al-Qasim
Ar-Ruzbari (d. 322/934) was a noted Sufi mentioned by Al-
Qushayri in his Risdlah. He was born in Baghdad, learned

tasawwif from Junayd and An-Niuri, and settled in Egypt where he
died.

AS-SABUNI: Abi ‘Uthman Isma‘il Ibn ‘Abdur-Rahman As-
Sabuni (373/983-449/1057), a leading scholar of hadith in
Khurasan, was equally versed in Arabic and Persian. He died at
Nishapur. Among his works, the most famous 1s ‘Agidat as-Salaf
wa Ashdab al-Hadith.

AS-SAHRUWARDI: Sheikh Shihab ad-Din Abu Hafs ‘Umar
Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amwayh (539/1144-632/1234)
was the founder of the Suhrawardi order of Sufis. He was the chief
Sufi saint (shaykh ash-shuyiikh) in Baghdad in his time. His ©
preceptor in sulik was his uncle, Abt. Najib As-Suhrawardi (d.
563/1168). His most famous work was ‘Awdrif al-Ma‘arif, a very
popular work among mainstream Sufis.

SA‘ID IBN AL-MUSAYYIB: Abi Muhammad Sa‘id Ibn Al-
Musayyib (13/634-94/713) was a great scholar of the Qur’an and
hadith and one of the seven renowned jurists of Madinah. He is
hailed as the Leader of the Successors (Sayyid at-Tabi‘in). He was

an authority on the judgements of ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, and was
known for piety and simple living. He died in Madinah.
ASH-SHAFI‘I: Muhammad Ibn Idris Ibn Al-‘Abbas Ash-Shafi‘
(150/767-204/819), the founder of the Shafi‘I school of figh, was
born in Syria, brought up and educated in Makkah, studied figh
with Imam Malik in Madinah and with Imam Muhammad Ash-
Shaybani in Iraq, and settled in Egypt in 199/814, where he
developed his own school of figh. His RisaGlah, which enunciates
the basic principles of his jurisprudence, underlines the importance
of hadith in figh, while Al-Umm enshrines his figh in detail. (See
Al-Zarkalt, Al- ‘Aldm, vol. 6, ‏.م‎ 26.

ASH-SHAHRISTANI: Aba Al-Fath Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdul-
Karim Ibn Ahmad Ash-Shahristani, a famous historian of theology,
was himself a distinguished theologian and philosopher. He was
born in Sharistan, a place between Nishapur and Khawarizm, in
467/1074. He went to Baghdad in 510/1116 and stayed there for
three years. He then returned to his own city where he died in
548/1153. He two most famous works are Al-Milal wa an-Nihal, in
history of theology, and Nihdyat al-Iqdam fi ‘Ilm al-Kalam, in
theology.
Commentary on the Creed of At- 1 2111 517

SHARIK: Abia ‘Abdullah Sharik Ibn ‘Abdullah An-Nakha’i (d.
177/793) was a narrator of hadith and a jurist who was appointed
judge in Kifah by the Abbasid ruler, Al-Mansir. Sharik was
vehemently opposed to innovations; on the other hand, he was lax in
narrating hadith. That is why some scholars of hadith were not
prepared to accept ahddith which are not reported by anyone other
than him. See Adh-Dhahabi, As-Siyar, 8:37.

ASH-SHIBLI: Aba Bakr Ibn Jahdar Ash-Shibli (247/861-
334/946), a disciple of Junayd, was the leading Sufi of his time in
Baghdad. In the early part of his career he was extremely emotional
and ecstatic. His shathdat and deificatory words, some of which As-
Sarraj has explained (Al-Luma, ed. ‘Abdul-Halim Mahmid, and
Taha ‘Abdul-Bagi Suri, Cairo: Dar Al-Kutub Al-Hadithah,
1380/1960, pp. 478-81), come from this period; in practice,
however, he observed the Shari‘ah except on some occasions when
he was deeply intoxicated. Later on, he became sober and proved to
be a great Sufi sheikh.

SHU‘BAH: Shu‘bah Ibn Al-Hajjaj Ibn Al-Warad Al-‘Antaki
(82/701-160/776) was an outstanding scholar of hadith in Basrah.
He was one of the founders of the science of jarh wa ta‘dil. He
wrote a book called 0707816 fi al-Hadith. See Al-Zarkali, Al-
A ‘lam, 3:242.

SUFYAN ATH-THAWRI: Abii ‘Abdullah Sufyan Ibn Masriiq
Ath-Thawri (97/716-161/778) was called the Leader of the Believers
in hadith. He was born and brought up in Kifah. He refused to
accept the post of judge offered by Mansur. He left Kufah in
144/761 and lived in Makkah and Madinah. Among his books are

two collections of hadith, one large and one small.
SUFYAN IBN ‘UYANAH: Abii Muhammad Sufyan Ibn

‘Uyanah Ibn Maymin (107/725-198/814) was born in Kitfah but
settled in Makkah where he died. A well-known transmitter of
hadith, he left a collection, Al-Jadmi‘, and a book on 12/5177 (AI-
Zarkali, Al-A ‘lam, 3:159).

AT-TABARI: Abo Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn Jarir At-Tabari
(224/839-3 10/923), a great historian, an eminent jurist of the rank of
mujtahid, and an outstanding commentator on the Qur’an, was born
in Tabaristan and settled in Baghdad, where he died. His
commentary, Jami‘ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’dn, is the greatest
commentary available to us that is based on the tradition of the
Elders. No less outstanding is his work of history, Tarikh al-Umam
wa al-Muluk. He 1s also the author of Tahdhib al-Athar, Ikhtilaf al-
Fugaha’ and Adab al-Qudat.
518 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahadwiyyah

AT-TAYALISI: Abi Dawid Sulayman Ibn Dawid Ibn Al-Jariid
At-Tayalisi (d. 203/818), a renowned scholar of hadith, the author
of a musnad and other works, hailed from Basrah.

AT-TUSTARI: Abi Muhammad Sahl Ibn ‘Abdullah At-Tustari
(d. 283/897) was from Tustar in the Persian province of
Khawzistan, where he taught Islamic sciences and instructed others
in Sufism before he went to Basrah and settled there. He was
known for his abstinence, renunciation, fasting throughout the year,
and miracles. Walter De Gruyter has studied his commentary on the

Qur’an in The Mystic Vision of Existence in Classical Islam (Berlin
and New York: 1980).

UMM SALAMAH: Umm al-Mu’minin Umm Salamah Hind bint
Abi Umayyah Ibn Al-Mughirah was one of the earliest Muslims.
She migrated to Abyssinia along with her husband, Abt Salamah,
where the latter died. She was later married to the Messenger of

Allah (peace be upon him), whom she joined in Madinah in 4 A.H.
She died in 59 A.H.

‘UMAR IBN AI-KHATTAB: ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab (?/583-
24/644) was the greatest Companion of the Prophet (peace be on
him) after Abt Bakr. He succeeded the latter as caliph, defeated the
Persian and Roman empires, extended the rule of Islam from Iran to
Egypt, and carved out the institutions of the new governrnent and
society. He is known for his profound knowledge of the Qur’an and
hadith, and for creative insight into figh.

AL-UMAWI: Yahya Ibn Sa‘id Abban Ibn Sa‘id Ibn Al-‘As Al-
Umawi was a scholar of hadith and a reliable narrator. He died in
Kufah in 194/810.

UMAYYAH IBN ABI AS-SALAT: ‘Abdullah Ibn Abi As-Salat
Ibn Abi Rabi‘ah Ath-Thagafi was a famous poet of Ta’if. He heard
about the Prophet (peace be upon him) but did not believe in him. It
is narrated that when some of his poems were read to the Prophet
(peace be upon him), he said, “His tongue believes but his heard
denies.” According to Al-Albani, that story is not authentic.
(Muhammad Nasr ad-Din Al-Albant, Si/silat al-Ahddith ad-Da ‘ifah,
no. 1546.) See Ibn Qutaybah, Ash-Shi‘r wa ash-Shu‘rad (Ahmad
Muhammad Shakir, ed.; Cairo: Dar Al-Ma‘arif, n.d.), p. 459.
WAHB IBN MUNABBAH: Abi ‘Abdullah Wahb Ibn
Munabbah (d. 110/782), from Sanaa, was an honest and reliable
transmitter of hadith. He also narrated a lot of Jewish traditions, and
he is credited with a book on the history of the Kings of Himyar.
AL-WARRAQ: Mahmid Ibn Hassan Al-Warrag (d. ca. 225/840)
was a poet, mostly composing edifying poems. Ibn Abi Ad-Dunya
quoted from him in his works and Al-Mubarrad noted some of his
lines in his Al-Kamil.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 519

WASIL IBN ‘ATA’: Abt Hudhayfah Wasil Ibn ‘Ata’ (80/699)
was a man of letters and an orator who initiated the Mu‘tazili
movement in theology. He was born in Madinah and brought up in
Basrah. He was in the circle of Al-Hassan Al-Basri’s students, but
on the issue of the status of one who commits a grave sin he left him
(i ‘tazla ‘anhu), thus giving the name of i ‘tizal to his movement. He
sent his colleagues to various parts of the Abbasid caliphate - Kafah,
Khurasan, Armenia and Morocco - to preach the ideas of the school.
He is also credited with writing a work on the Qur’an, Ma ‘ani al-
Qur’an, and some on theology, Asndf al-Murji’ah, As-Sabil ila
Ma ‘rifat al-Haqq and Al-Khutab fi at-Tawhid.

YUSUF IBN ASBAT: Yisuf Ibn Asbat was a Sufi of the third
century Hijri, known for his asceticism. A number of his aphorisms
are quoted by Adh-Dhahabi (Siyar, 9:50) and Abu Nu‘aym (AI/-
Hilyah, vol. 8, pp. 237 ff.)

AZ-ZAHIDI: Abt Ar-Raja’ Najm ad-Din Mukhtar Ibn Mahmiid
Ibn Muhammad Az-Zahidi (d. 658/1260) was a great Hanafi jurist
from Ghaznin in Khawarizm. He was the author of Qunyat al-
Munyah li Tatmim al-Bughyah. He gave this name to this work
because he based it on the book, Munyat al-Fuqaha’, by his teacher,
Fakhr ad-Din Badi’ Ibn Abi Manstr Al-Hanafi. The Qunyah has not

been published yet. (See Haji Khalifah, Kashf al-Zuniin, pp. 1357,
1886).

AZ-ZAMAKHSHARI: Abi Al-Qasim Muhammad Ibn ‘Umar
Az-Zamakhshari (467/1075-5381146), a great man of letters, a poet
and grammarian, a staunch Mu‘tazili, is famous for, more than
anything else, his commentary on the Qur’an, A/-Kashshaf ‘an
Haqa’iq wa Ghawdmid at-Tanzil. This work is usually published
along with the critical comments of Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‏لخ‎
‎Munir Al-Iskandarani (d. 683/1284) who refuted its Mu‘tazili
doctrines. Al-Zamakhshari was born in Zamkhar in Khawarizm,
went to Baghdad, and from there to Makkah where he lived many
years. He finally returned to Khawarizm where he died.
AZ-ZAYLA‘I: Jamal ad-Din ‘Abdullah Ibn Yisuf Ibn Muhammad
Az-Zayla‘t (d. 762/1360), a Hanafi jurist and usuli and a scholar of
hadith was born in Zayla‘ in Somalia and died in Cairo. His Nasb
ar-Rdyah fi Takhrij Ahddith al-Hiddyah is a work on the ahddith
referred to in the famous work of Hanafi figh, Al-Hidayah.
Az-ZUHRI: Muhammad Ibn Muslim Ibn ‘Ubaydullah Ibn
‘Abdullah Ibn Shihab Az-Zuhri (51/671-124/721) was a man of
extraordinary memory and the most outstanding scholar of hadith
among the Successors. He is considered the “first” to compile the
Sunnah. He also wrote a book on the life of the Prophet (peace be
520 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahdwiyyah

upon him) that has recently been published. He was born and
brought up in a Qurayshi family in Madinah and he later settled in
Syria where he died.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahdwi 521

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ad-Dib, ‘Abdul-‘Azim. /mam al-Haramayn. Kuwait. Dar al-Qalam.
1401/1981.

As-Salman, ‘Abdul-°Aziz Muhammad. A/-Kawashif al-Jaliyyah ‘an
Ma ‘ani al-Wasitiyvah. Riyadh. Maktabat al-Kiyad al-Hadithah.
6th ed.1398/197 |

‘Abdul-Jabbar, Qadi. Fadl al-I ‘tizal wa Tabagqat al-Mu ‘tazilah. ed.
Fuwad Sayyid. Tunis. 1393/1974.

. Mutashabih al-Qur’an. ed. ‘Adnan Zarzir. Cairo. 1969.

. Sharh al-Usiil al-Khamsah. ed. ‘Abdul-Karim ‘Uthman.
Cairo. Maktabah Wahbah. n.d.Tathbit Dala’il an-Nubiwwah.
ed. ‘Abdul-Karim ‘Uthman. Beirut. Dar al-‘Arabah. 1386/1966.

‘Abdul-Karim, ‘Uthman. ‘Abdul-Jabbar Ibn Ahmad Al-Hama-
dhdni. Beirut. Dar al-‘Arabiyyah. 1386/1967.

. Sirat Al-Ghazali. Damascus. Dar al-Fikr. n.d.

‘Abdul-Mayid An-Najjar. Al-Mahdi Ibn Tumurt. Beirut. Dar al-
Gharb al-Islami. 1403/1983.

‘Abdul-Malik Ibn ‘Isa Ibn Darbas. Risdlah fi adh-Dhabb ‘an Abi AI-
Hassan Al-Ash ‘ari. ed. ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad AI-Faaqihi.
Madinah. 1404/1984. |

*Abdul-Qadir Al-Hanafi. Al-Jawahir al-Mudiyyah fi Tabagqat al-
Hanafiyyah. ed. ‘Abdul-Fattah M. Al-Hilwa. Cairo. Matba‘at
‘Isa Al-Halabi. 1398/1978..

‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Hassan Ash-Shaykh. Fath al-Majid Sharh
Kitab at-Tawhid. by Sh. Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdul-Wahhab. ed.
M. Hamid Al-Fiqi. Cairo. Matba‘at as-Sunnah al-Muhammadiy-
yah. 1377/1957.

*Abdul-Rahman Ibn Al-Qasim. Ad-Durar as-Sunniyyah fi al-
Ajwibah al-Najdiyyah. Beirut. Al-Maktab al-Islami. 2nd ed.
1385/965.

‘Abdus-Subhan. “Al-Jahm Ibn Safwan and his Philosophy.”
Islamic Culture. XJ (1937). 221-227.

‘Abdullah Ibn Ahmad Ibn Hanbal. As-Sunnah. Makkah. Al-Mat-
ba‘ah al-Salafiyyah. 1349 A. H.

Abt ‘Azbah Hassan Ibn ‘Abdul-Muhsin. Ar-Rawdah al-Bahiyyah fi
ma bayn al-Asha‘irah wa al-Maturidiyyah. Hyderabad. 1322.

Abi Al-Barakat. A/l-Mu ‘tabar fi al-Hikmah. Hyderabad. 1375.

Abt Dawid, Sulayman Ibn Ash‘ath. Sunan. ed. Muhammad Muhiy
ad-Din ‘Abdul-Hamid. Cairo. Al-Maktabah at-Tyariyyah al-
Kubra. 1370/1951; Beirut. Dar Ihya at-Turath al-‘Arabt. n.d.
522 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Abi Hanifah (ascribed to). Al-Figh al-Akbar. with commentary by
Mullah ‘Ali Al-Qari. Beirut. Dar al-Kutub al-‘IImiyyah. 1404/
1984. 3

. with commentary by Abi Mansir Al-Maturidi. Hyderabad.
1321A.H.

. with commentary by Ahmad Al-Maghnisawi. Hyderabad.
1321 A.H.

Abt Hanifah. Wasiyyah. with commentary by Mullah Hussayn.
Hyderabad. 1321 A.H.

Abi Nu‘aym. Hilyat al-Awliya’ wa Tabagqat al-Asfiya’. Beirut. Dar
al-Kitab al-‘Arabi. 3d ed. 1980/1400.

Abu Ya‘la Al-Misali. Musnad. ed. Hussayn Salim Asad.

Damascus. Beirut. Dar al-Ma’min li at-Turath. 1st pr. 1406/
1986.

Abu Ya‘la, Qadi. Al-Mu‘tamad fi Ustl ad-Din. ed. Wadi Zaydan
Haddad. Beirut. 1974.

Abt Zahrah. Abt Hanifah: Haya@tuhu wa Asruhu, Ard’uhu wa
Fighuhu. Cairo. Dar al-Fikr al-‘ Arabi. n.d.

. [bn Hanbal: Hayatuhu wa ‘Asruhu, Arad’uhu wa Fighuhu.
Cairo. Dar al-Fikr al-° Arabi. 1367/1947.

‘Affifi, A.E. The Mystical Philosophy of Muhyid Din Ibnul ‘Arabi.
Cambridge. U.P. 1936. reprint Lahore. Ashraf. n.d.

Al-Afghani, M. Sa’id. Shaykh al-Islam ‘Abdullah Al-Ansari AI-
Harwi. Cairo. Dar al-Kutub al-Hadithah. 1388/1968.

Al-Ajiri, Abd Muhammad Ibn Al-Hussayn. Ash-Shari ‘ah. ed.
Muhammad Hamid Al-Fiqi. Cairo. Matba‘at as-Sunnah al-
Muhammadiyyah. Ist ed. 1369/1950.

Al-Albani, Muhammad Nasir ad-Din. Al-Ahd@dith ad-Da ‘fah wa al-
Mawdi‘ah. Beirut. Al-Maktab al-Islam1. 1392/1972.

. Irwé al-Ghalil fi Takhrij Ahddith Mandar as-Sabil. Beirut.
Al-Maktabah al-Islamiyyah. 1399/1979.

Al-Amidi, Sayf ad-Din ‘Ali. Ghayat al-Maram fi ‘Ilm al-Kalam. ed.
Hassan Mahmid ‘Abdul-Latif. Cairo. Lajnat Ihya at-Turath al-
Islami. 1391/1971.

. Al-Thkam fi Usiil al-Ahkam. Cairo. Dar al-Ma‘arif. 1332/
1914.

Al-‘Amili, Muhsin Al-Amin. A ‘yan Ash-Shi‘ah. Damascus.
Matba‘at Ibn Zaydin. 1356/1937.

Amir Badshah. Taysir at-Tahrir fi Usual al-Figh. Cairo. Matba‘ah
Muhammad ‘AIi. n.d.

Al-Ash‘ari, Abt Al-Hassan ‘Ali. A/l-Iba@nah ‘an Usil ad-Diyanah.
Hyderabad. n.d.; ed. with notes by Fawqiyyah Hussayn
Mahmid. Cairo. Dar al-Ansar. 1397/1977.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi | 523

. Kitab al-Luma’ fi ar-Radd ‘ala Ahl al-Zaygh wa al-Bid ‘ah.
ed. and trans. by K. J. McCarthy. Beirut. 1955.

. Magalat al-Islamiyyin. ed. Helmut Ritter. Wiesbaden. Franz
Steiner Verlag. 1980.

Al-‘Askari, Al-Murtada. ‘Abdullah Ibn Saba. Cairo. Dar al-Kitab al-
‘Arabi. 1381 A. H.

Al-Asnawt, Jamal ad-Din. Minhdj al-Wusil ila ‘Ilm al-Usil. in the
margin of At-Tagrir wa at-Tahrir of Ibn Amir Hajj. Beirut. Dar
al Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah. 1403/1983.

‘Attar, Farid ad-Din. Tadhkirat al-Awliya’. Tehran. 1331 A.H.

‘Ayad, Qadi. Ash-Shifa‘ fi Ta ‘rif Huqiq Al-Mustafd. Beirut. Dar
al-Kutub al-Islamtyyah. n.d.

Al-‘Aynt. Al-Bindyah fi Sharh al-Hiddyah. ed. Muhammad ‘Umar
Al-Ramfiri. Beirut. Dar al-Fikr. 1401/1981.

Ayyub ‘Ali, Aba Al-Khayr Muhammad. ‘Agidat al-Islam wa al-
Iman Al-Maturidi. Dakka. Al-Mu’assasah al-Islamiyyah. 1404/
1983.

A‘zami, Mustafa. Studies in Hadith Methodology and Literature.
Indianopolis. American Trust Publications. 1977.

Al-Badawti, ‘Abdur-Rahman. Madhdahib al-Islamiyyin. Beirut. Dar
al-Malayin. 1971.

Al-Baghawi, Hussayn Ibn Mas‘td. Ma ‘dlim at-Tanzil. Printed in
the margin of Tafsir al-Khazin. Beirut. Dar al-Fikr. n.d.

. Sharh as-Sunnah. ed. Shu‘ayb Al-Arnawit and Muhammad
Zuhayr Ash-Shawish. Beirut. Al-Maktab al-Islami. 1390/1971.

Al-Baghdadi, Isma‘il Basha. Hadyat al-‘Arifin. Baghdad. Maktabat
al-Muthanna; Istanbul. 1955.

Al-Baghdadi, ‘Abdul-Qahir. Al-Farg bayn al-Firaq. ed. Muhammad
Zahid Al-Kawthari. Cairo. 1367/1948; Beirut. Dar al-Afaq al-
Jadidah. 1393/1973.

. Usul ad-Din. Istanbul. 1346/1928.

Al-Baghdadi, Al-Khatib. Al-Kifayah fi ‘Ilm ar-Riwdyah. Hyder-
abad. Reprint: Beirut. Al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmtyyah. n.d.

Al-Baqillani, Qadi Abt Bakr Ibn At-Tayyib. Al-Baydn ‘an al-F arg
bayn al-Mu jizat wa al-Karamat wa al-Hiyal wa al-Kahanat wa
as-Sihr wa al-Nayranjat. Beirut. 1958.

. Al-Insaf fi ma Yajib ‘Itigaduhu wa la Yujiizu al-Jahl bihi.
ed. Muhammad Zahid Al-Kawthari. Cairo. ‘Izzat ‘Attar. 1369/
1950.
. Kitab at-Tamhid. ed. Abt Kidah and Khudayri. Cairo.
1366/1947.
Al-Baydawi. Tawaili’ al-Anwar. Cairo. 1323/1905.
524 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Al-Bayhaqi. Al-Asma’ wa as-Siffat. ed. Zahid Al-Kawthari and
Najm ad-Din Muhammad Amin Al-Kurdi. Cairo. 1358.

. Dala’il an-Nubiwwah wa Ma ‘rifat Ahwal Sahib ash-
Shari ‘ah. ed. ‘Abdul-Mu‘ti Qala‘ji. Beirut. Dar al-Kutub al-
‘IImiyyah. 1405/1985.

. Al-I ‘tigad wa al-Hiddyah ila Sabil ar-Rushd. ed. Ahmad
Ahmad ‘Isam Al-Katib. Beirut. Dar al-Afaq al-Jadidah. 1401/
1981.

. As-Sunan al-Kubrd. \st print. Hyderabad Dakan. 1352
A.H. reprint. Beirut. Dar al-Ma‘rifah. n.d.

Al-Buydri, Ibrahim Ibn Muhammad. Commentary Tuhfat al-Murid

on the Jawharat at-Tawhid of Ibrahim Al-Ligani. Cairo. 1352/
1934.

Al-Biqa’i. Tanbih al-Ghabi ila Takfir Ibn ‘Arabi. ed. ‘Abdur-
Rahman Al-Wakil. Cairo: Matba‘at as-Sunnah al-Muhamma-
diyyah. 1373/1953.

Al-Bukhari, Muhammad Ibn Isma‘il. As-Sahih. ed. Muhibb ad-Din
Al-Khatib and Muhammad Fuiwéad ‘Abdul-Baqi; Cairo: Al-Mat-
ba‘ah as-Salafiyyah. 1400 A.H.

. Khalq Af‘al al-‘Ibdd. Alexandria: Al-Ma‘arif. 1971.

Al-Busiri, Shihab ad-Din Ahmad. Misbah al-Zujdjah fi Zawa ‘id [bn
Majah. ed. Misa Muhammad ‘Ali and ‘Izzat ‘Ali ‘Ati’ah. Cairo:
Dar al-Kutub al-Hadithah. n.d.; also ed. Kamal Yusuf Al-Hit.
Beirut: Dar al-Jinan. 1406/1986.

Ad-Darimi, ‘Uthman Ibn Sa‘id. Ar-Radd ‘ald Bishr Al-Marisi. ed.
Muhammad Hamid Al-Fiqi. Cairo: Matba‘at Ansar as-Sunnah
al-Muhammadiyyah. 1358/19Z9.

. Ar-Radd ‘ald al-Jahmiyyah. ed. Zubayr Ash-Shawish and
Al-Albani. Beirut. Al-Maktab al-Islam. 4th ed. 1402/1982; also
ed. Gosta Vitestan. Leiden. Brill. 1960.

. Sunan. Beirut. Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah. Cairo: Dar Ihya
as-Sunnah an-Nabawiyyah. n.d. 2 vols.; ed. Fuwwaz Ahmad
Zamzami and Khalid As-Sab’ Al-‘Ilmi. Cairo: Dar ar-Rayyan li
at-Turath; Beirut. Dar al-Kutub al-‘Arabiyyah. 156 ed.

1407/1987.

Ad-Daraqutni, “Ali Ibn ‘Umar. Ad-Du‘afa wa al-Matriikin. ed.
Subhi Al-Badari As-Samira’1. Beirut: Mu’assasat ar-Risalah.
1404/ 1984.

__. An-Nuzil. ed. ‘Ali Nasir Al-Faqgihi. Madinah. Ist ed.
1403/1983.

. As-Siffat. ed. ‘Abdullah Al-Ghunayman. Maktabat ad-Dar.
1402/1982.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 525

. Sunan., Ed. ‘Abdullah Hashim Al-Yamani. Cairo: Dar al-
Muhaysin. 1386/1966.

Ad-Dasiiqi, Ahmad Ibn ‘Arafah. Hashiyyah ‘ala Sharh Umm al-
Barahin of Muhammad Yisuf As-Sanisi. Cairo. Mustafa al-
Halabi. 1358/1939.

Ad-Dawidi, Muhammad Ibn ‘Alt. Tabagat al-Mufassirin. Beirut.
Dar al-Kutub al-‘IImiyyah. 1403/1983

Ad-Dawwani, Al-Jalal. Sharh ‘ald al-‘Aqa’id Addiyyah. with
hashiyyah by As-Siyalkoti. Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah al-Khayriyyah.
1322 A.H.

Ad-Daylami, Muhammad Ibn Al-Hassan. Qawd ‘id 408:10 AI-
Muhammad al-Batiniyyah. Cairo. 1950.

Adh-Dhahabi, Muhammad Hussayn. At-Tafsir wa al-Mufassiriin.
Cairo: Dar al-Kutub al-Hadithah 1396/1967.

Adh-Dhahabi, Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn ‘Uthman. Al/-‘Ibar fi
Khabar man Ghabar. Kuwait. Dar al-Matbii‘at wa an-Nashr.
1383/1963.

. Al-I‘tidal fi Naqd ar-Rijal. ed. ‘Alt Ahmad Al-Byawt.
Beirut. Dar Ihya al-Kutub al-‘Arabiyyah. 1382/1962.

. Siyar A ‘lam an-Nubala’. ed. Shu‘ayb Al-Arnawit and
Hussayn Al-Asad. Beirut: Mu’assasat ar-Risalah. 1401/1981.

. Tadhkirat al-Huffaz. Hyderabad. 1390/1970.

. Al- ‘Ulu li al-‘Ali Al-Ghaffar. Cairo: Matba‘at Jama‘at Ansar
al-Sunnah. 1357/1938; abridged by Nasir ad-Din Al-Albani.
Beirut: Al-Maktab al-Islami. Ist ed. 1401/1981.

Donaldson,. D.M. The Shi ‘ite Religion. London. 1935.

Badar ‘Awn, Faysal. ‘I/m al-Kalam wa Mada@risuhu. Cairo:
Maktabah Sa‘id Raf*at. 1977. |

Gardet, L. and M.M. ‘Anawati. Introduction a la Théologie
Musulmane. Paris: 1948. Arabic trans. Falsafat al-Fikr ad-Dini
bayn al-Islam wa al-Masihiyyah by Sh. Subhi As-Salih and
Farid Jabbar. Beirut: Dar al-‘Ilm li al-Malayin. 1967.

Al-Ghamidi, ‏ا‎ | | | min al-Ilahiyydt.
Madinah: 1402/1982.

Al-Ghazali, Imam Muhammad. 41-47 ‘tn fi Usil ad-Din. Cairo:
Al-Maktabah at-Tiyariyyah al-Kubra. 1344/1925.

. Fada’th al-Batiniyyah. ed. Abdur-Rahman Badawi. Cairo:
Ad-Dar al-Qayytmiyyah. 1383/1964.

. Faysal at-Tafrigah bayn al-Islam wa al-Zandagqah. ed.
Sulayman Ad-Dunya. Cairo: Dar Ihya al-Kutub al-*Arabityyah.
1381/1961.

. Ihya ‘Uliim ad-Din. Cairo: Matba‘ah Mustafa al-Babi al-
Halabi. 1358/1969.

526 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

. Al-Iqtisad fi al-I‘tiqgad. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘II[miyyah.
1403/1983; with intoduction by ‘Adil ‘Awwa. Beirut: Dar al-
Amanah. 1388/1969.

. Al-Magqsad al-Asna’ fi Sharh Asma’ Allah al-Husna. Cairo:
Al-Jundi. 1968.

. Al-Mungidh min ad-Dalal. ed. ‘Abdul-Halim Mahmid.
Cairo: Maktabah Anyalo. 1964.

Al-Ghurabi, ‘Ali Mustafa. Abt Al-Hudhayl Al-‘Allaf. Cairo: 1949.

Gibb, H. A. R. Mohammedanism. London. 1949.

. Modern Trends in Islam. Chicago. 1947.

Gauthier. La Théorie d’Ibn Rochd sur les Rapports de la Religion et
de la Philosophie. Ph.D. thesis. 1909.

Haji Khalifah. Kashfaz-Zunian. Istanbul. Wakalat al-Ma‘arif.
1362/1943; Beirut: Dar al-‘Ultm al-Hadithah. n.d.

Al-Hakim An-Nisabiri. A/-Mustadrak ‘ald as-Sahihayn fi al-Hadith.
Hyderabad Dakan. 1341 A.H.. reprint. Riyadh: Maktabat an-
Nasr al-Hadithah. n.d.

Halkin, A.S. Moslem Sects and Schisms. Tel Aviv. 1935.

Gharabah, Hammidah. A/-Ash ‘ari. Matba‘at ar-Risalah. Cairo:
1953.

Al-Harwi, Abt Isma‘il. Al-Arbd ‘in fi Dala’il at-Tawhid. ed. “Ali
Ibn Muhammad Al-Fagihi. Madinah. 1404/1984.

Al-Haythami, Nutr ad-Din ‘Ali. Kashf al-Astdar ‘an Zawa@ id al-
Bazzar. ed. Habib Ar-Rahman Al-A‘zami Beirut: Mu’assasat ar-
Risalah. n.d.

. Majma‘ al-Fawa’id wa Manba’ al-Fawa’id. Beirut: Dar al-
Kutub al-‘Arabiyyah. 3rd ed. 1402/1982.

Horten. Die Spekulative und Positive Theologie in Islam nach Razi
und Tusi. Leipzig. 1912.

Hujwirl, ‘Ali. Kashf al-Mahjib. ed. V.A. Zukovsky. Tehran. 1926.
Al-Humaydt, “Abdullah Ibn al-Zubayr. Musnad. ed. Habib ar-Rah-
man Al-‘Azami. Madinah. Al-Maktabah 25-52131199312. n.d.;

Karachi. al-Majlis al-‘Ilmi. 1382/1962.

Nasr, Sayyed Husain. Three Muslim Sages. Cambridge: Harvard.
1964.

Al-Hiwaydi, Yahya. 1 10] al-Islam fi al-Qar’ah al-
[frigiyyah. Cairo: Maktabat an-Nahdah al-Misriyyah. n.d.

Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr. Al-Isti ‘ab fi Ma ‘rifat al-Ashab. printed in the
margin of Ibn Hajar’s book, Al-Isdba. ed. Taha Muhammad
Zayni. Cairo: Maktabat al-Kulliyat al-Azhariyyah. 1397/1977.

. Jami‘ bayn al-‘Ilm wa Fadlihi. ed. ‘Abdul-Karim Al-Khatib
and ‘Abdur-Rahman Hassan Mahmid. Cairo: Dar al-Kutub al-
Hadithah. 1395/1975.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 527

. At-Tamhid. ed. Mustafa Ibn Ahmad Al-‘Alawi and
Muhammad “Abdul-Kabir. Ribat: al-Matba‘ah al-Malkiyyah.
1387/1967.

Ibn “Abdul-Hadi. Al-‘Ugiid ad-Durriyyah min Mandgqib Shaykh al-
Islam Ahmad Ibn Taymiyyah. ed. M. Hamid Al- -Fiqi. Cairo:
1356/1938.

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz. Sharh al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah. ed. ‘Abdullah
*Abdul-Muhsin At-Turki and Shu‘ayb Al-Arnawit. Beirut:
Mu’assasat al-Risalah. 1408/1987.

. also ed. Ahmad M. Shakir. Riyadh. 1376; Bashir M. ‘Uytn.
Taif, Damascus. 1408/1988; Nasir ad-Din Al-Albani and others.
Beirut: Al-Maktab al- Islami. 1404/1984.

Ibn ‘Abdul-Wahhab, Muhammad. Masa il al-Jahiliyvah. Cairo: Al-
Matba‘ah as-Salafiyyah. 3rd ed. 1394.

Ibn Abi ‘Asim. As-Sunnah. ed. Nasir ad-Din Al-Albani. Beirut: Al-
Maktab al-Islami. Ist ed. 1400/1980.

Ibn ‘Abidin. Radd al-Muhtar ‘ala ad-Durr al-Mukhtar. Cairo: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Arabiyyah. 1330/1911.

Ibn Abi Al-Hadid, ‘Abdul-Hamid. Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah. ed.
Abi Al-Fadl Ibrahim. Cairo: ‘Isa Al-Halabi. 1958.

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz. Al-/ttiba‘. Lahore. 1401 A.H. Oman. 1405 A.H.

Ibn Abi Shaybah. 41-1717. ed. M. Nasir ad-Din Al-Albani.
Damascus. Al-Matba‘ah al-Umumiyyah. n.d

. Al-Musannaf fi al-Hadith wa al-Athar. ed. Muhammad
‘Abdul-Khalig and Mukhtar Ahmad An-Nadwi. Bombay. Dar
as-Salafiyyah. 1309/1402.

Ibn Abi Ya‘la. Tabagat al-Handabilah. ed. Muhammad Hamid AI-
Fiqi. Cairo: Matba‘at as-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah. 1371A.H.

Ibn ‘Adiy. Al-Kdmil fi Du‘afa ar-Rijal. Beirut: Dar al-Fikr. 1404/
1984.

Ibn Al-Altisi, Nu*man Khayr ad-Din. Jald al-‘Aynayn fi Muhakamat
al-Ahmadayn. Cairo: Matba‘at al-Madi. 1381/1961.

Ibn Amir Hajj. At-Tagrir wa at-Tahbir. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-
‘IImiyyah. 1403/1983.

Ibn (AI-)°Arabi, Muhiy ad-Din. Fusis al-Hikam. ed. Abt Al-‘Ala
‘Affifi. Cairo: Dar Ihya al-Kutub al-‘Arabiyyah. ‘Isa Al-Halabi.
1365/1946.

. Al-Futuhdat al-Makkiyyah. Beirut: Dar Sadir. n.d. 4 vols.

. Al-Isra’ ila al-Maqam al-Asrad’. Hyderabad. 1367/1948.

. Lata if al-Asrar. ed. Ahmad Zaki Stiyyah and Taha Sarwar.
Cairo: Dar al-Fikr al-‘Arabr. 1385/1961.

. At-Tajalliyat al-Iahiyyah. ed. ‘Uthman Yahya. Cairo: AI-
Hay’ah al-Misriyyah al-‘Ammah. 1389/1969.

528 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

. Rasa@’il Ibn ‘Arabi. Hyderabad. 1361. reprint. Beirut: Dar
Ihya at-Turath al-°Arabi. n.d.

Ibn ‘Asakir, ‘Alt Ibn Al-Hassan. Tabyin Kidhb al-Muftari fi ma
Nusiba 115 al-Imadm Abi Al-Hassan Al-Ash ‘ari. Beirut: Dar al-
Kitab al-‘Arabi. 1399/1979.

. Tarikh Dimashq, al-Madinah al-Munawwarah. Maktabat
ad-Dar. 1407 A.H.

Ibn Al-Athir, ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad. Jami‘ al-Usil. ed. ‘Abdul-Qadir
Al-Arnawit. Damascus. Maktabat al-Halwani. 1389/1969; also
ed. Muhammad Hamid Al-Fiqi. Cairo Matba‘at as-Sunnah al-
Muhammadiyyah. 1374/1955.

. Al-Lubab fi Tahdhib al-Ansdb. Cairo: Matba‘at al-Qudsi.
1357/1369.

. An-Nihdayah fi Gharib al-Hadith wa al-Athar. ed. Tahir
Ahmad Az-Zawi and Mahmtid Muhammad At-Tanaji. Cairo: Al-
Maktabah al-Islamiyyah 1383/1963.

. Usud al-Ghabah fi Ma ‘rifat as-Sahdbah. Cairo: Al-Jami‘ah
at-Ta‘awuniyyah li an-Nashr wa at-Tiba‘ah. 1364/1964.

Ibn Battah, ‘Abdullah. A/-[bdnah ‘ald Usil as-Sunnah wa ad-
Diydnah. ed. Rida Mu‘tt. Makkah. Al-Maktabah al-Faysaliyyah.
1404/1984.

Ibn Furuk. Mash@kil al-Hadith wa Bayanuhu. ed. Masa Muham-
mad ‘Ali. Cairo: Matba‘at Hassan. n.d.

Ibn Hibban. As-Sahih. ed. ‘Abdur-Rahman M. ‘Uthman, M.
‘Abdul-Muhsin Al-Kutubi. Al-Madinah. Al-Maktabah as-
Salafiyyah. 1390/1970.

Ibn Hajar Al-‘Asqalani. Anba’ al-Ghumr bi Abna’ al-Umr. Cairo:
1392/1972.

. Ad-Durar al-Kaminah. Hyderabad. 1350/1931.

. Fath al-BGri bi Sharh Sahih Al-Bukhari. ed. Muhammad
Fuwad ‘Abdul-Bagi, Muhibb ad-Din Al-Khatib and Qusayy
Muhibb ad-Din. Cairo: Dar ar-Rayyan. 1407/1986.

. Al-Isdbah fi Tamyiz as-Sahabah. Cairo: al-Matba‘ah ash-
Shargiyyah. 1325/1907.

. Lisan al-Mizdn. Hyderabad, 1329 A.H. reprint- Beirut:
Mu’assasat al-Islami li al-Matbi‘at. 2nd ed. 1390/1972.

. Tahzib at-Tahzib. Hyderabad. India. 1326 A. H.

Ibn Hajar Al-Makki. As-Sawd ‘ig al-Muharrigah fi ar-Radd ‘ala Ahl

_ al-Bid‘ah wa al-Zanddiqah. ed. ‘Abdul-Wahhab ‘ Abdul-Latif.
Maktabat al-Qahirah. 2nd ed. 1385/1965.

Ibn Hammam, Kamal ad-Din. A/-Musayarah fi al-Akhirah. Cairo:
Matba‘at as-Sa‘adah. 1347 A.H.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 529

Ibn Hanbal, Ahmad. Al-Musnad. Beirut: Al-Maktab al-Islam1.
1398/1978.

. Ar-Radd ‘ala al-Jahmiyyah wa al-Zandadigqah. ed.
Muhammad Hamid AI-Fiqi. Cairo: Matba‘at as-Sunnah al-
Muhammadiyyah. 1375/1956; ed. ‘Abdur-Rahman AI-‘Umay-
rah. Riyadh. Dar al-Liwa. 1397/1977.

Ibn Hazm. Al-Fasl fi al-Milal wa al-Ahwa wa an-Nihal. Cairo: 1317
A.H. Maktabat as-Salam al-‘Alamiyyah, n.d.

. Al-Ihkam fi Usil al-Ahkdm. ed. Anmad Muhammad
Shakir. Beirut: Dar al-Afagq al-Jadidah. 1402/1983.

Ibn Hisham. As-Sirah an-Nabawiyyah. ed. Mustafa As-Saqqa,
Ibrahim Al-Abyari and ‘Abdul-Hafiz Shalbi. Cairo: Mustafa Al-
Halabi. 1355/1936.

Ibn “Imad Al-Hanbali. Shadharat adh-Dhahab fi Akhbar man
Dhahab. Matba‘at al-Qudsi. 1350 A.H.

Ibn ‘Iraq, ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad. 71271217 ash-Shari‘ah. ed. ‘Abdul-
Wahhab ‘Abdul-Latif. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah. 1401/
1981.

Ibn Al-Jawzi. Daf’ Shubh at-Tashbih bi Akuff at-Tanzih fi ar-Radd
‘ala al-Mujassimah wa al-Mushabbihah. ed. M. Zahid Al-
Kawthari. Cairo: Al-Maktabah at-Tawfigiyyah. 1976.

. Dhamm al-Hawa. ed. Mustafa ‘Abdul-Wahid. Cairo: 1381/
1962.

. Mandagqib al-[mam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal. Cairo: Al-Khanyji.
1349 A.H.

. Al-Mawdi ‘at. ed. ‘Abdur-Rahman Muhammad ‘Uthman.
Madinah. Al-Maktabah as-Salafiyyah. Ist ed. 1386/1966.

. Al-Muntazam fi Tarikh al-Umum wa al-Muluk. Hyderabad.
1357 A.H.

. Talbis Iblis. Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah al-Muniriyyah. 2d ed.
1368 A.H.
. 200 al-Masir fi ‘Ilm at-Tafsir. Damascus. Al-Maktab al-
Islami. Ist ed. 1384/1964.
Ibn Khallikan. Wafaydat al-A ‘yan. ed. Ihsan ‘Abbas. Beirut: Dar
Sadir. 1398/1978.
Ibn Kathir. Al-Bidayah wa an-Nihayah. ed. Anmad Abt Mulhum et
al. Cairo: Dar ar-Rayyan li at-Turath. 1408/1988.
. Fada il al-Qur’an. Beirut: Dar al-Andalus. 1403/1983.
. Kitab an-Nihdyah aw al-Fitan wa al-Malahim. ed.
Muhammad Al|-Zayni. Dar al-Kutub al-Hadithah. 1389/1969.
2 vols.
. Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim. Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah. 1405/
1984. 4 vols.
530 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Ibn Khuzaymah. Kitab at-Tawhid wa Ithbat Siffat Ar-Rabb ‘Azza
wa Jalla. ed. ‘Abdul-‘Aziz Ibn Ibrahim. Riyadh. Dar ar-Rushd.
Ist ed. 1408/1988. 2 vols.

. As-Sahih. ed. Muhammad Mustafa Al-A‘zami. Beirut: Al-
Maktab al-Islami. 1390 A.H. 4 vols.

Ibn Majah. Sunan. ed. Muhammad Fiwad “Abdul-Baai. Beirut: Dar
Ihya at-Turath al-‘Arabi. n.d. 2 vols.

Ibn Mundah, Muhammad Ibn Ishaq. Al-Imdn. ed. ‘Ali Ibn
Muhammad AlI-Faqih. Madinah. Islamic University Press. Ist
ed. 1401/1981.

. Ar-Radd ‘ald al-Jahmiyyah. ed. ‘Ali [bn Muhammad Ibn
Nasir Al-Faqth. Madinah. 1401/1981.

. Kitab at-Tawhid wa Ma ‘rifat Asma’ Allah ‘Azza wa Jalla wa
Siffatihi ‘ala al-Ittifaq wa at-Tafarrud. ed. ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad
Ibn Nasir Al-Fagih. Madinah. Maktab al-Jami‘ah al-Islamiyyah.
Ist ed. 1409 A.H.

Ibn Al-Murtada. Al-Munyah wa al-Amal fi Sharh Kitab al-Milal wa
al-Niihal. ed. Thomas Arnold. Hyderabad. 1316.

Ibn An-Nadim. Al-Fihrist. Cairo: Al-Maktabah at-Tyariyyah. 1348.

Ibn Qatlubgha. ‏ةذ‎ fi Tabaqat al Hanafiyyah. Baghdad.
1962.

Ibn Al-Qayyim. Asma’ Muwallafat [bn Taymiyyah. ed. Salah ad-
Din Al-Munajjid. Damascus. 1372/1953.

. Bada’i’ al-Fawd’id. Makkah. Maktabat an-Nahdah al-‘II-
miyyah as-Sa‘tdiyyah. n.d.

. Ad-Da ‘wah ad-Dawa’. ed. Muhammad Muhiy ad-Din
‘Abdul-Hamid. Cairo: Matba‘at al-Madani. 1377/1958.

. Hadi al-Arwah ila Bildd al-Afrah. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-
‘Iimiyyah. n.d.

. Hidayat al-Haydarda fi ar-Radd ‘ald al-Yahid wa an-Nas4Gra.
ed. Sayf al-Din Al-Katib. Beirut: Dar Maktabat al-Hayat. 1400/
1980.

. Ighdathat al-Lahfan min Masa’il ash-Shaytdn. Beirut: Dar al-
Ma‘rifah. 1358/1939. 2 vols.

. Madarij as-Salikin. ed. Muhammad Hamid Al-Fiqi. Cairo:
Al-Matba‘ah al-Muhammadiyyah. 1375/1956. 3 vols.

. Rawdat al-Muhibbin wa Nuzhat al-Mushtdagin. ed. Ahmad
Ubayd. Cairo: Matba‘at as-Sa‘adah. 1375/1956.

. Ar-Rih. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah. Ist ed. 1402/
1982. .

. As-Sawd ‘ig al-Mursalah ‘ald al-Jahmiyyah wa al-

Mu ‘attilah. ed. ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ad-Dakhil, Riyadh. Dar al-
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 531]

‘Asimah. 1408 A.H.; abridged and edited by Muhammad Ibn
Al-Musali. Beirut: Dar an-Nadwah al-Jadidah. 1405/1984.

. Shifa‘ al-‘Alil fi Masa’il al-Qada’ wa al-Qadr wa al-Hikmat
wa at-Ta ‘lil. Cairo: Dar al-Fikr. 1398/1978.

. ‘Uddat as-Sabirin wa Dhakhirat ash-Shdakirin. ed. Zakariyya
‘Ali Yusuf. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah. n.d.

. 200 al-Ma ‘ad. ed. Shu‘ayb Al-Armawit and ‘Abdul-Qadir
Al-Arnawit. Beirut: Mu’assasat ar-Risalah. 1399/1976.

Ibn Qazi Shuhbah. T7arikh. ed. ‘Adnan Durwaysh. Damascus. Al-
Ma‘had al-‘Ilmi al-Faransi. 1397/1977.

Ibn Qudamah. Ithbat Sifat al ‘Uli. ed. Ahmad Ibn Atiyyah Al-
Ghamidi. Beirut: Mu’assasat ‘Ultm al-Qur’an. 1409/1988.

. Al-Mughni. ed. Muhammad Salim Muhaysin and Sha‘ban
Muhammad Isma‘il. Cairo: Maktabat al-Jumhurtyyah al-‘Arab-
tyyah; Riyadh: Maktabat ar-Riyadh al-Hadithah. n.d.

. Tahrim an-Nazar fi Kutub Ahl al-Kalam. ed. trans. George

51200151 under the title. Censure of Speculative Theology.
London. Luzac. 1962.

Ibn Qutaybah. Al-[khtilaf fi al-Lafz wa ar-Radd ‘ala al-Jahmiyyah.
Alexandria. Mawsha‘at al-Ma‘arif. 1991. A.D.

. Ash-Shi’r wa ash-Shu ‘ard’. ed. Anmad Muhammad Shakir.
Cairo: Dar 155/3 al-Kutub al-‘Arabiyyah. 1369/1950; also ed. M.
Badr ad-Din Abi Furas An-Na‘sani. Cairo: M. Amin Al-Khanji.
1322/1904.

. Tafsir Gharib al-Qur’an. ed. Fawad Ahmad Sagar. Cairo:
‘Isa Al-Halabi. 1438/1958.

Ibn Rajab. Jami‘ al-‘Ulim wa al-Hikam. Cairo: Mustafa Al-Babi
Al-Halabi. 1346/1927.

Ibn Rushd, Abt Al-Walid. Fas/ al-Magal fi ma bayn ash-Shari ‘ah
wa al-Hikmah min al-Ittisal. Al-Jaza’ir. 1938.

Ibn Sa‘d. At-Tabagqat al-Kubrd. Beirut: Dar Sadir. 1388/1968. 9
vols.

Ibn As-Sunni. ‘Amal al-Yawm wa al-Laylah. ed. ‘Abdul-Qadir

Ahmad ‘Ata’. Cairo: Maktabat al-Kulliyat al-Azhariyyah. 1389/
1969.

Ibn Taghri, Jamal ad-Din. An-Nujum al-Zahirah fi Mulik Misr wa
al-Qahirah. Cairo: Al-Mu’assasat al-Misriyyah al-‘Ammah.
1383/1963.

Ibn Taymiyyah. Bayan Talbis al-Jahmiyyah fi Tasis Bid ‘ihim al-
Kaladmiyyah. ed. Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdur-Rahman A]-Qasim.
Makkah. 1392 A.H.

. Bughyat al-Murtad. Cairo: 1329 A.H.
532 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

. Dar’ Ta ‘arud al-Aql wa an-Nagql. ed. Muhammad Rashad
Salim. Riyadh. Imam Muhammad Ibn Sa‘id Islamic University.
1399/1979.

. Al-Furqdn bayn Awliya’ ar-Rahman wa bayn ‏نز أطت‎ ash-
Shaytan. Cairo: Dar al-Fikr. n.d.

. Al-Hasanah wa as-Sayyiyyah. ed. Muhammad Jamil Ghazi.
Cairo: Matba‘at al-Madani. 1391/1971.

. Al-Iman. Damascus. Al-Maktab al-Islami. 1381/1961.

. 101106 as-Sirat al-Mustagim. ed. Muhammad Hamid Al-Fidi.
Cairo: Maktabat as-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah. 1369 A. H.

. Jami‘ ar-Rasa@’il. ed. M. Rashad Salim. Jiddah. Dar al-
Madani. 2nd ed. 1405/1984. 2 vols.

. Jawab Ahl al-‘Ilm wa al-Iman. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-
‘Ilmiyyah. 2nd ed. 1394/1974. |

. Al-Jawab as-Sahih li man baddala Din al-Masih. Cairo:
Matabi‘ al-Majd at-Tyariyyah. n.d. 4 parts.

. Majmi‘at ar-Rasa@’il wa al-Masa il. ed. Rashid Rida. Cairo:
Maktabat al-Manar. 1341 A.H.

. Majmi‘ Fatawa Shaykh al-Islam Ahmad Ibn Taymiyyah.
ed. ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Muhammad Ibn Qasim AI-Asimi and
his son, Muhammad. Riyadh. 1404 A.H. 37 vols. |

. Minhdj as-Sunnah. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamtyyah.

n.d.; also ed. Rashad Salim. Riyadh. Imam Muhammad Ibn
Sa‘tid Islamic University Press. 1406/1986.
. An-Nubiwwat. Beirut: Dar al-Qalam. n.d.

. Sharh Hadith an-Nuzil. Beirut: Al-Maktab al-Islami. 4th ed.
1389/1969.

Ibn Tuliin. Ath-Thighar al-Bassam fi Dhikr man Waliya Qadda’ ash-
Sham. ed. Salah ad-Din Al-Munajjid. Damascus. 1376/1956.

Al-‘lji, ‘Abdur-Rahman ‘Add ad-Din. Kitab al-Mawagqif fi ‘Ilm al-
Kalam. with commentary by Ash-Sharif Al-Jurjani, and
marginal notes by As-Siyalkitt and Hassan Chalpi. Cairo:
Matba‘at as-Sa‘adah. 1325/1907.

Imra’ Al-Qays. Diwan. ed. Muhammad Abi Al-Fadl Ibrahim.
Cairo: Dar al-Ma‘arif. 1389/1969.

Al-Isfara’ini, Aba Al-Muzaffar. At-Tabsir fi ad-Din wa Tamyiz al-
Firgqah an-Najiah ‘an al-Firag al-Halikin. ed. Muhammad Zahid
Al-Kawthari. Cairo: 1359/1940. |

Al-Jahiz, Abii ‘Uthman. Thalath Rasd@’il. Cairo: 1926.

Jalal, M. ‘Abdul-Hamid Musa. Nash ‘at al-Ash‘arityyah wa
Tatawwurihda. Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-Lubnani. 1395/1975.

Jami‘, ‘Abdur-Rahman. Nafahat al-Uns. Lucknow. Nawal-Ki-
shore. 1910.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 533

Al-Jawhari. As-Sihah. ed. Ahmad ‘Abdul-Ghafitr ‘Attar.
Beirut: Dar al-Malayin; 2nd ed. 1399/1979.

Jawwad, ‘Ali. 7arikh al- ‘Arab qgabl al-Islam. Beirut: Dar al-
Malayin; Baghdad. Maktabat an-Nahdah. 1976. 8 vols.

Al-Jurjani. Sharh al-Mawadgif li al- ‘Iji. Cairo: 1925.

. At-Ta rifat. Istanbul. 1300 A.H. Cairo: Mustafa Al-Halabi.
1357/1938.

Al-Juwayni, Imam al-Haramayn. Al- ‘Agidah an-Nizamiyyah. ed.
M. Zahid Al-Kawthari. Cairo: Matba‘at al-Anwar. 1367/1948.

. Rislah fi al-Istiwa wa al-Fawgqiyyah wa al-Harf wa as-
Sawt. Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah al-Munirtyyah. n.d.

. Kitab al-Irshdd. ed. Muhammad Yisuf Misa and ‘Ali
*Abdul-Mun‘im ‘Abdul-Hamid. Cairo: Maktabat al-Khanji.
1369/1950.

. Lum’ al-Adillah fi Qawa ‘id Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-JamdG ‘ah.
ed. Fawgiyyah Hussayn Mahmid. Cairo: Ad-Dar al-Misriyyah
li at-Talif wa at-Tarjumah. 1385/1965.

. Ash-Shamil fi Usul ad-Din. Cairo: ed. ‘Ali Sami An-
Nashshar et al. Alexandria. 1969.

Al-Khayyat, “‘Abdur-Rahman. 41-1721157 wa ar-Radd ‘ala Ibn Ar-
Rawandi. Cairo: Dar al-Kutub al-Misriyyah. 1925; Beirut: 1957.

Kraus, Paul. Rasa ‘il ar-Razi al-Falsafiyyah. Cairo: 1939.

Al-Kutubi, Ibn Shakir. Fawdat al-Waf‘iyat. ed. Muhammad Ibn
Muhiy al-Din ‘Abdul-Hamid. Cairo: Matba‘at an-Nahdah al-
Misriyyah. 1951.

Al-Lakhnawi, ‘Abdul-‘Alt Muhammad. Sharh Musallam ath-
Thubit. in the margin of Al-Mustafa by Al-Ghazali. Beirut:
Dar Sadir. n.d.

. Al-Fawa’id al-Bahiyyah fi Tarajim Al-Hanafiyyah. Cairo:
1324 A.H. |

Al-Lalka’i, Hibatullah. Sharh 1 1 as-Sunnah wa al-
Jama ‘ah. ed. Ahmad Sa‘d Hamdan. Riyadh. Dar at-Tayyibah.
1402 A.H.

Loust, H. Essai sur les Doctrines Sociales et Politiques de Taqi
ad-Din Ahmad Ibn Taimiya. Le Caire. 1939; Arabic trans. (of
a part) by ‘Abdul-‘Azim ‘Ali and notes by Mustafa Al-‘IImi.
Cairo: Dar al-Ansar. 1396/1977.

. “Le Reformisme D’Ibn Taymiya.” Islamic Studies. Sept.
1962. vol. I, no. 3. pp. 27-47.
“Le Reformisme Orthodoxe des Salafiyyah.” REJ. 1932.

Macdonald, D.B. Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence and
Constitutional T. heory. New York. 1903.
534 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Al-Maydani, ‘Abdul-Ghani. Sharh al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah. ed.
M. Muti’ Al-Hafiz and M. Riyadh al-Malith. Damascus;
Maktabat an-Nuri. 1390/1970.

Al-Makki, ‘Abdul-‘Aziz. Al/-Hidah. ed. Jamil Saliba. Damascus.
1384/1964.

Al-Malati, Abt’ Al-Hassan Muhammad Ibn Ahmad. 41-17 7151/77 wa
ar-Radd ‘ald Ahl al-Ahwa’ wa al-Bid‘ah. ed. Muhammad Zahid
Al-Kawthari. Cairo: Matba‘at ‘Izzat al-‘Attar. 1368/1949.

Malik. A/l-Muwatta. ed. Muhammad Fiwad Abdul-Badi. Cairo: ‘Isa
Al-Halabi. 13770/1951; also ed. Ahmad Kattb Armush. Beirut:
Dar al-Nafais. 1402/1982.

Al-Maqdisi. Ahsan at-Taqdasim. Leiden. 1805.

Al-Marwazi, Ahmad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Sa‘id. As-Sunnah. Riyadh: Dar al-
Thaqafah al-Islamiyyah. n.d.

Al-Maturidi, Abt Mansir. Kitab at-Tawhid. ed. F. Kholeif.
Alexandria. Dar al-Jami‘at al-Misriyyah. n.d.

Al-Mawardi, Abt al-Hassan. [‘l@m an-Nubtiwwah. Cairo: Maktabat
al-Kulliyat al-Azhariyyah. 1391/1971.

McCarthy, R.J. ed. and tr. A/-Luma’ and Risdlat Istihsan al-Khawd
fi ‘Ilm al-Kalam. Beirut: 1955. | |

Michel, Thomas F. A Muslim Theologian’s Response to
Christianity: Ibn Taymiya’s Al-Jawab as-Sahih. New York.
Caravan Books. 1984.

Al-Mizzi. Tuhfat al-Ashraf bi Ma ‘rifat al-Atraf: Hyderabad. India.
1397/1977.

Al-Mubarrad. Al-Kdamil fi al-Lughah wa al-Adab. Beirut: Maktabat
al-Ma‘arif. n.d.

Muhammad ‘Abduh, Ash-Shaykh. At-Tawhid. Cairo: Matba‘at al-
Manar. 1366 A.H.

. Risalat al-Waridat fi Nazriyat al-Mutakallimin wa as-
Sufiyyah. Cairo: Matba‘at al-Manéar. 1344/1925.

Al-Musali, Abt 21-201. Al-lkhtiyar li Ta ‘lil al-Mukhtar. ed.
Mahmid Abt Dagigah. Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah. 1395/1975.

Muslim Ibn Al-Hajjaj. As-Sahih. ed. Fuwad ‘Abdul-Baqi. Beirut:
Dar Thya at-Turath al-‘Arabi. 1375/1965. 4 vols.

Al-Mutanabbi. Diwan. with commentary by Al-Akbari. ed. Mustafa
As-Saqqa, Ibrahim Al-Abyari and ‘Abdul-Hafiz Shalbi. Cairo:
Maktabat Mustafa Al-Halabi. 1391/1971.

Nadir, Albert Nasri. Falsafat al-Mu ‘tazilah. Alexandria. 1950.

An-Nasa’i. Ad-Du‘afa. Hyderabad. 1323 A. H.

. Sunan. with commentary by As-Suyiti and gloss by As-
Sindi. Beirut: Dar [hyd at-Turath al-Islami. 1384/1930. 8 vols.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 535

An-Nashshar, ‘Ali Sami. Nash ‘at al-Fikr al-Falsafi fi al-Islam.
Cairo: Dar ‘Aqa’id as-Salaf. Alexandria. Al-Ma‘arif. 1971.

An-Nawbakhti, Hassan Ibn Musa. Firag ash-Shi‘ah. ed.
Muhammad Sadiq. Najaf. Al-Matba‘ah al-Haydariyyah. 1379/
1959.

An-Nawawi. Al-Arba ‘in. text with English translation. Ezzeddin
Ibrahim and Denys Johnson-Davies. Damascus. The Holy
Qur’an Publishing House.

Patton, W.M. Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and the Mihna. Leiden. 1897.

Al-Qari, Ibrahim Ibn ‘Abdullah. Mandqib Ibn ‘Arabi. ed. Salah ad-
Din Al-Munajjid. Beirut: 1959.

Al-Qarshi, ‘Abdul-Qadir. Al-Jawahir al-Mudi‘ah fi Tabagqat al-
Hanafiyyah. ed. ‘Abdul-Fattah M. Al-Haltiwa. Cairo: ‘Isa Al-
Halabi. 1398/1978.

Al-Qashani, Kamal ad-Din ‘Abdur-Razzaq. [stilahat as-Sufiyyah.

_ ed. M. Kamal Ja‘far. Cairo: Al-Hay’ah al-Misriyyah al-
‘Ammah. 1981.
Al-Qasimi. Tarikh al-Jahmiyyah wa al-Mu ‘tazilah. Beirut: Mu’as-
sasat ar-Risalah. 1399/1979.

Al-Qazwini, Muhammad Al-Mahdt. Manahij ash-Shari‘ah fi_ar-
Radd ‘ala Ibn Taymiyyah. Najaf. Al-Matba‘ah al-‘Alwiyyah.
1374 A.H..

Al-Qudali, Muhammad Ibn Salamah. Musndd Ash-Shihdb. ed.

Hamadi ‘Abdul-Mayid As-Salafi. Beirut: Mu’assasat ar-Risalah.
1405/1985.

Al-Qummi, Ibn Babwayh. At-Tawhid. Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah.
1387/1967.
Al-Qurtubi, Muhammad Ibn Ahmad. Al-Jami‘ li Ahkam al-Qur’Gn.
Cairo: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi. 1387/1967.
. At-Tadhkirah fi Ahwal al-Mawta wa Umir al-Akhirah. ed.
| Ahmad Hyazi As-Saqqa. Beirut: Al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah.
1402/1982.
Al-Qushayri. Ar-Risdlah. ed. ‘Abdul-‘Alim Mahmiid and Mahmiid
Ibn Sharif. Cairo: Dar al-Kutub al-Hadithah. 1972.
Rahbar, Dawid. God of Justice. Leiden. 1960.
Razaur Rahim. “Al-Ghazali’s Shifa al-Ghalil.” Islamic Studies.
September 1963. vol. 2. No. 3. pp. 399ff.
Ar-Razi, Fakhr ad-Din. Ass at-Taqdis. Cairo: Matba‘at Kurdistan
al-“IImiyyah. 1328 A.H.
. 1 1106001 Firaq al-Muslimin wa al-Mushrikin. ed. ‘Ali Sami
Nashshar. Cairo: Matba‘at an-Nahdah al-Misriyyah. 1356/1938.
. Kitab al-Arba ‘in fi Usiil ad-Din. Hyderabad. 1353 A.H.
. Al-Mabahith al-Mashrigiyyah. Hyderabad. 1343.
536 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdawiyyah

. Muhassal Afkar al-Mutaqaddimin wa al-Muta’akhkhirin.
Cairo: Matba‘ah al-Hussayniyyah. n.d.
. Sharh Asma’ Allah al-Husnd. ed. Taha ‘Abdur-Rawutf

Sa‘d. Cairo: Maktabat al-Kulliyat al-Azhariyyah. 1396/1976.
Ar-R4zi, Ibn Abi Hatim. Al-Jarh wa at-Ta ‘dil. Hyderabad.
1361/1942.

Rifa‘i, Ahmad Farid. A/-Ghazali. Cairo: ‘Isa Al-Halabi. 1356/1937.

As-Sabini. ‘Agidat as-Salaf wa Ashab al-Hadith. ed. Badar ‏حاط‎
‎Badar. Kuwait; Ad-Dar as-Salafiyyah. 1404/1984.

As-Safadi. Al-Wafi bi al-Wafiyat. ed. M. Yusuf Najayin.
Weisbaden. Frank Steiner. Verlag. 1971.

As-Sakhawi, Shams ad-Din. Ad-Daw al-Lami‘ li Ahl al-Qarn at-
1 151 . Cairo: Maktabat Al-Quds. 1355/1926.

As-San‘ani, ‘Abdur-Razzaq. Al-Musannaf. ed. Habib Ar-Rahman
Al-A‘zami. Beirut: Al-Maktab al-[slami. 1392/1972.

As-Sam ‘ani, ‘Abdul-Karim. A/-Ansdab. ed. ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn
Yahya Al-Yamani. Hyderabad. 1385/1966.

As-Saniis1, Muhammad Ibn Yusuf. Umm al-Barahin aw ‘Agidat at-
Tawhid. Cairo: Mustafa Al-Halabi. 1374/1955. German trans.
by Wolf. 1848.

Seale, Morris S. Muslim Theology. London. Luzac and Co. 1964.

Sell, E. The Faith of Islam. London. 1880.

Ash-Shahristani, ‘Abdul-Karim. A/l-Milal wa an-Nihal. ed.
Muhammad Sa‘id Kilani. Cairo: Maktabah Mustafa Al-Babi Al-
Halabi. 1397/1976. 2 vols.

. Nihayat al-Iqgdam fi ‘Ilm al-Kalam. ed. and trans. Alfred
Guillaume. Oxford University Press. 1934.

Ash-Shawkani, Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali. Al-Fawa ‘id al-Majmi‘ah fi al-
Ahadith al-Mawdiu ‘ah. ed. ‘Abdur-Rahman Al-Yamani. Cairo:
Matba‘at al-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah. 1380/1960.

. Irshad al-Fuhil ila Tahqig al-Haqq min ‘Ilm al-Usul. Cairo:
Mustafa Al-Halabi. 1356.

Ash-Shirazi, Abt Ishaq. Tabagat al-Fugaha’. ed. Ihsan “Abbas.
Beirut: Dar ar-Ra’id al-‘Arabi. 1978.

Subhi, Ahmad. Nazariyat al-Imamah ladda ash-Shi ‘ah al-Ithna-
‘Ashariyyah. Cairo: Dar al-Ma‘arif. 1969.

As-Subki, Taj ad-Din ‘Abdul-Wahhab. Tabagat Ash-ShdGfi ‘iyyah al-
Kubra. Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah al-Hussayniyyah. 1324; Beirut: Dar
al-Ma‘rifah. n.d.

Suhayr, M. Mukhtar. At-Taysin ‘inda al-Muslimin. Cairo: 1971.

As-Suhrawardi, Shihab ad-Din. ‘Awarif al-Ma ‘arif. Beirut: Dar al-
Kutub al-‘Arabi. Ist ed. 1966.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 537

As-Sulami, Abi ‘Abdur-Rahman. Tabagdat as-Sufiyyah. ed. Nur ad-
Din Sharibah. Cairo: 1372/1953.

As-Surati, “Abdur-Rahman. Tafsir Mujahid. Islamabad. Majma‘ al-
Buhtth. n.d.

As-Suyutti, Jalal ad-Din. Husn al-Muhddarah fi Ma ‘rifat Misr wa al-

Qahirah. Cairo: Matba‘at al-Mawsu’at. 1321/1903.

. Ad-Durr al-Manthir fi at-Tafsir bi al-Ma’thir. Beirut:
Muhammad Amin Dan. 1314/1896.

. Al-La‘Gli al-Masni‘ah fi al-Ahddith al-Mawdi ‘ah. Beirut:
Dar al-Ma‘rifah. 3rd ed. 1401/1981.

. Sawn al-Mantiq wa al-Kalam ‘an Fann al-Mantiq wa al-
Kalam. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah. 1947.

. Tabaqat al-Huffaz. ed. ‘Ali Muhammad ‘Umar. Cairo:
Maktabah Wahbah. 1393/1973.

Sweetman, W.J. [slam and Christian Theology. London. 1945.

At-Tabarani, Sulayman Ibn Ahmad. A/-Mu ‘am al-Kabir. ed. Hamdi
‘Abdul-Hamid As-Salafi. Baghdad. Wazarat al-Awgaf wa ash-
Shuyin al-Diniyyah. 1403/1983.

. Al-Mu ‘jam as-Saghir. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah.
1403/1983.

At-Tabart, [bn Jarir. Jami‘ al-Bayan ‘an Ta’wil Ayi al-Qur’an.
Cairo: Matba‘at Mustafa Al-Babi Al-Halabi and Sons. 3d ed.
1388/1968; Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah. 1392/1972.

. Tafsir At-Tabari. Title given to the edition of At-Tabari’s
commentary on the Qur’4n by Mahmtid Muhammad Shakir and
Ahmad Muhammad Shakir (Cairo: Dar al-Ma‘arif. 1380/1960)
with the ahddith numbered serially.

. Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Mulik. Beirut: Dar Ihya at-Turath al-
‘Arabi. n.d. 6 vols. |

At-Taftazani, Sa‘d ad-Din. Sharh ‘ald al-‘Aqa’id an-Nasafiyyah.
Cairo: Maktabah Muhammad ‘Ali Sukayh. 1358/1939.

. Sharh Mukhtasar al-Muntahé al-Usili. Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah
al-Amirtyyah. 1317/1899.

At-Tahawi, Abt Ja‘far. Mushkil al-Athar. Hyderabad Dakan.

1333 A.H.

. Sharh Ma ‘ani al-Athar. ed. Muhammad Zuhri An-Najjar.
Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmtyyah. 1399/1979.

Tash Kubri Zadah. Miftah as-Sa‘aGdah wa Misbah al-Hiddyah.
Hyderabad. 1329 A. H.

At-Tayalisi, Abti Dawtid. Musnad. Hyderabad. India. 1321 A.H.
reprint Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah. n.d.

538 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Thomson, W. “Al-Ash ‘ari and His Al-Ibanah.” The Muslim World,
XXXII. (1942). 242-260: review of Klein’s translation of the
Ibanah.

At-Tirmidht. Sunan. ed. Muhammad Fiwad ‘Abdul-Baai. Cairo:
Maktabat Mustafa Al-Halabi. 1385/1968.

Tritton, A.S. Muslim Theology. London. Luzac. 1947.

At-Tusi, Abt Nasr As-Sarraj. A/-Luma’ fi at-Tasawwif. ed.
‘Abdul-Halim Mahmid and Taha ‘Abdul-Baqi Surtr. Cairo:
1960.

Umayyah Ibn Salat. Diwan. ed. “Abdul-Hafiz As-Sath. Damascus.
Al-Matba‘* at-Ta‘awuniyyah. 1394/1974.

Al-‘Ugayli. Kitab ad-Du ‘afd al-Kabir. ed. ‘Abdul-Mu‘ti Amin
Qala’ji. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah. 1404/1984.

Walter De Grwyter. The Mystic Vision of Existence in Classical
Islam. Berlin and New York. 1980.

Watt, W.M. Free Will and Predestination in Early Islam. London.
1948.

Wensinck, A.J. La Pensée de Ghazzali. Paris. Maison Nenve.
1940.

. The Muslim Creed. London. Frank Cass and Co. 1965.

Wolfson, Harry Austin. The Philosophy of the Kalam. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press. 1976.

Al-Yafi‘l. Mir at al-Jinan. Hyderabad. 1337.

Al-Zamakhshari, Muhammad Ibn ‘Umar. Al-Kashshaf ‘an Haqa’iq
wa Ghawdmid at-Tanzil. Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah. n.d.

Al-Zarkali. Al-A ‘lam. Beirut: Dar al-‘Ilm 11 al-Malayin. 1979.

Al-Zarkan, Muhammad Salih. Fakhr ad-Din 47-1027 wa Ard ’uhu
al-Kalamiyyah wa al-Falsafiyyah. Beirut: Dar al-Fikr. n.d.

Al-Zayla‘t. Nasb ar-Rayah li 43071 al-Hiddyah. Beirut: Al-
Maktabah al-Islamiyyah. 1393/1973.

Zayd Ibn *Abdul-‘Aziz. Ar-Rawdat an-Nadiyyah Sharh al-‘Aqidah
al-Wasitiyyah. Riyadh. Maktabat ar-Riyad al-Hadithah. 2nd ed.
1388/1968.

Al-Zurqani. Ash-Sharh ‘ald al-Mawahib al-Ladunniyyah li Al-
Qastalani. Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah. 3d ed. 1393/1973.

Zwemer, S.M. The Muslim Doctrine of God. Edinburg. 1905.
