id

te 2 ( - ,
“5 ١ ‏لفن‎
‏لهف‎
‎COMMENTARY
‎ON THE 0

“we BY
COMMENTARY
ON THE

CREED OF AT-TAHAWI
BY
IBN ABI AL -IZZ

SHARH AL -‘AQIDAH AT - TAHAWIYYAH

TRANSLATED BY
MUHAMMAD ‘ABDUL-HAQQ ANSARI
KINGDOM OF SAUDI ARABIA
Ministry of Higher Education
Al-Imam Muhammad ibn Saud Islamic
University
Deanery of Academic Research

COMMENTARY
ON THE

CREED OF AT-TAHAWI
BY
IBN ABI AL -’IZZ

SHARH AL -’AQIDAH AT - TAHAWIYYAH

TRANSLATED BY
MUHAMMAD *ABDUL-HAQQO ANSARI

AL-IMAM MUHAMMAD IBN SA’UD ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY
2 IMADAT AL-BAHTH AL-’ILMI
RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA
INSTITUTE OF ISLAMIC AND ARABIC SCIENCES IN AMERICA
1421 A.H.-2000 CE.
IN THE NAME OF ALLAH
THE COMPASSIONATE THE MERCIFUL
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
1421 A.H.-2000 A.D.
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction XVii
Translator’s Preface xix
Commentator’s Preface xIvii
The Creed of At-Tahawi Ivii
The Creed and its Commentary 1
Tawhid: Affirming God’s Unity 1

Two aspects of tawhid:
tawhid al-ilahiyyah, and tawhid al-rubitbiyyah
Tawhid 15 inherent in man
The Qur’an expounds on and argues for God’s unity
Tawhid in faith and in action
The prophets’ tawhid was the most perfect
Criticism of the mystical view of tawhid

God is unlike anything 23
To affirm attributes of God 1s not to liken Him

with His creatures (tashbih)
Words common between the Creator and the created

denote nothing real

Nothing is impossible for God 31

The Qur’an mentions God’s positive attributes in detail,
and negative attributes in brief
Mutukallimiin do just the reverse

God is Eternal and Everlasting 35
The Qur’an uses the words: the First and the Last
Mutakallimiin use the word Al-Qadim,

which is not a happy choice
38

41

45

49

66

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Nothing comes into existence except what
God wills

Two kinds of Divine will: creative and prescriptive

Creative will does not necessarily imply that God
approves of the object He creates

Prescriptive will implies that God approves of
the object He commands men to do

Both the wills have some purpose which may concern
man, God or both

It is not necessary that God should help one to do
what He asks him to do

God is beyond understanding and imagination
The Jahmiyyah are wrong 12 saying that to affirm
attributes of God is to anthropomorphize Him
Theological discussion does not admit of syllogistic
or analogical argument; it admits only the
argument of priority

God is Living and All-Sustaining
He is the Creator and the Provident
He causes death and shall raise again

All the attributes of God are eternal

This is true of essential attributes, such as
knowledge and power,

Of active attributes such as creation, and

Of voluntary attributes such as coming, descending,
mounting, anger and pleasure

The meaning of coming, mounting, anger etc.,
is known to us; what is not known is their modality

Do things happen to God?

Essence and attributes, whether one or different?

Name and the Named

Events as a class have no beginning and God
is active from eternity

God is Creator, Originator, Lord, Reviver, etc.,
from eternity

God has power over all things; the impossible in
itself is nothing

God has created things with knowledge

He Ordained them in due measures, and fixed their terms

V1
Commentary on the Creed of 41-1 01 ‏آنه‎

He knew what people would do even before
He created them

Things happen as He ordains and wills

This does not mean that He approves of everything
people do

Nor does pre-ordination offer any Justification
for doing evil

His guidance and protection 15 a favor from him

Refutation of the view that God must do
what is best for man

His decision is not reversed, resisted or frustrated

Prophecy of Muhammad (pbuh) 76
Muhammad is a servant of God, and the most perfect
man is the most perfect servant of God
Miracle is a proof among other proofs of prophecy
Other proofs are: the message, teachings, life
and conduct, works and achievements of the prophet
It is on these grounds that Negus of Abyssinia and
Heraclius of Syria testified to Muhammad’s prophecy
The difference between nabi and rasil
Muhammad 1s the seal of the prophets
ahddith on the subject
He is the leader of the pious
He is the chief of the apostles
He is the best of all the prophets, but this should not
be said to degrade other prophets
He is very dear to God
Grades of love
Every claim to prophecy after him 15 false
He is sent to men as well as to jinns

The Qur’an | 96
The Qur’an 15 the word of God
It has proceeded from Him in an unknown manner
as articulated speech
To say that it is spoken by God is not to
anthropomorphize him
Verses and ahddith saying that God speaks;
the meaning of His speech
The Qur’an is an attribute of God, not something created

Vil
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

It has been brought down to Muhammad by Gabriel,
acting simply as a messenger

It is not the word of a human being, one who says
that is a kafir

Speech 15 an attribute of God, and He has been speaking
from eternity as and when He has willed

His speech as a class 1s eternal

Refuting the objection that God shall then be
the locus of contigent events

The Qur’an is the word of God whether recited,
written or remembered; and it 1s uncreated

However, our reciting, writing, or remembering 5
our act, and is contigent, as is the voice or the ink
involved in the process

This is the view of Abu Hanifah and the ‏أطخ‎ al-Sunnah

The view of later Hanafis on the subject 15 not correct

The view that God’s speech 1s a simple inaudible idea,
and what is recited 15 its interpretation 1s wrong

Beatific Vision 119
People will see God in Paradise in an unknown manner
and without encompassing Him
Verses referring to it must not be interpreted allegorically
Refutation of the arguments advanced by the Mu‘tazilah
Ahddith on the subject are very clear
However, no one has seen or can see God in this life
Did the Prophet see God in his life?
Mu‘tazili interpretation of texts is not correct
Tawhid is to believe in what has come down from
the Prophet authentically

Islam is to believe, submit, and refrain
from misinterpreting texts 136
Three kinds of people destroy religion:
Rulers pursuing policies opposed to the Shar‘
511115 following kashf and experience
Mutakallimin arguing from reason alone
Al-Ghazali on the inadequacy of kalam
The reason the Salaf condemned kalam
The root cause of error is lack of reflection on
the Qur’an and the Sunnah

VIil
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

Philosophers and theologians speak about the
limitation of philosophy and kalam
Meaning of ta’wil
Ta’wil in the Qur’an and Sunnah
Ta’wil in early commentaries
Ta’wil in the works of later jurists and mutakallimin
Interpreting divine names:
Avoid both negation and anthropomorphization
God’s hands, face, eyes

God and space (jihah)
Ascension of the Prophet | 162
His Fountain 167
His Intercession 170

Intercession by other prophets, ‘u/amda’ and martyrs
Praying in the name of someone
Tawassul

God’s Covenant with Mankind 182
Tawhid is inherent in man
Shirk is alien to human nature

Fore-ordainment 191]

God knows from eternity who will go to Paradise and
who will go to Hell, as well as their deeds leading
them to their destination

Everyone gets the opportunity to do what he or she
has been created for

Fore-ordainment is a secret of God;
one should not delve into it

Everything good and bad is brought out by God’s
creative will, which does not necessarily imply
His approval

However, God does not will pure evil

God may not help one do what He approves of

Fore-ordainment and repentence

Fore-ordainment and resignation (rida@’)

We are not required to resign to everything decreed
210

223

242
246

261

266

Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

The Pen and the Tablet

What shall come into existence till the Last Day
has been written down

No one can change what has been written

Earning is not opposed to trust

There is no change in God’s fore-knowledge

Faith in fore-ordainment is necessary

What gadr implies

Questioning gadr is a disease —

The Throne and the Footstool

The Throne and the Footstool are real

But God does not need the Throne

He encompasses all and is above all

Verses and ahddith that speak of His being above
the world (fawgiyyah)

Twenty reasons for His fawqiyyah

Sayings of Abu Hanifah on the subject

‘Uli and fawgiyyah

The knowledge that God 15 above the world is inherent
in human nature

God took Abraham as friend

Angels, Prophets and Heavenly Books

Angels, their grades and functions

We must believe in all the prophets of God and in
all His books

As for Muhammad (pbuh), we must believe in him
as well as follow his teachings

One is muslim and mu’min so long as one

witnesses to what the Prophet has brought

The Qur’an may be read in all the seven established ways

The Faithful Spirit has brought down the Qur’an and
conveyed it to Muhammad (pbuh)

Sin, Faith and Salvation |

No Muslim becomes kGfir by committing a sin unless
he or she thinks it to be lawful

To deny what the Prophet has affirmed, affirm what
he has denied, legalize what he has prohibited, or
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

prohibit what he has legalized 15 kufr; and whoever
does so is a kafir

However, one should refrain from calling a particular
person kafir, for he may be mistaken or may not be
aware of relevant texts

The Ahi al-Sunnah do not excommunicate on
grounds of bid ‘ah

Kufr as used in the Qur’an and Sunnah is of varying
degrees: one justifies excommunication (takfir),
another does not

Sin exposes one to God’s punishment

We hope that God will forgive nghteous Muslims and
put them in Paradise, but we cannot be sure

Similarly, we fear about the sinners, but they should not
lose hope

Punishment for sins 1s waved for ten reasons

Complacence and disappointment both are wrong;
the right course is in between

One goes out of imdn only by repudiating what has
brought him into it

Iman and Islam 283
Does imdn include works or not?
Many scholars of hadith and jurists say that it does.
Abu Hanifah and his followers say that it does not;
however, the difference is not important.
Does imdn increase or decrease?
Arguments of the ahi al-hadith
Arguments of the Hanafi School,
and comments on them
Ahdadith telling that works are parts of 701
Verses and ahddith that imdn increases and decreases
Sayings of the Companions on the subject
Iman and islam mean the same when mentioned singly,
but mentioned together they mean different things
All that has authentically come down from
the Prophet is true
The Ahl as-Sunnah do not ignore texts or oppose
to it their reason or the word of any person.
A one-man hadith which is accepted by the ummah
provides knowledge

XI
313

317

326

330

336

349

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

All Believers are friends (awliya’) of God
Meaning of waldyah

Waldyah and taqwa

Grades of awliya’

The most perfect awliya’ are those who are most
obedient to God

Articles of Faith

God, Angels, Heavenly Books, Prophets, Last Day,
Fore-ordainment

Every hasanah and sayyiyyah is from God

God does not create pure evil

Supplication 15 worship

Faith in all the prophets without discrimination

Those who commit grave sins (kaba’ir)

God may forgive them,

Or punish them in Hell for a time

However, they will not stay there for ever,
even if they do not repent

What is kabirah?

Salah may be offered behind a sinner
and behind one guilty of bid ‘ah

Salah should be offered at the funeral of every Muslim,

except an open hypocrite

We do not send anyone to Paradise or Hell
Nor do we charge anyone with kufr or shirk
or 21/60 unless he 15 guilty of it openly
We do not take up sword against anyone
unless it is necessary
We do not revolt against our leaders and rulers
even if they are unjust, nor defy their orders
unless they order something sinful

We follow the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah,
and avoid dissension
We love the just and the honest
When something is unclear, we say God knows better
Wiping on leather socks (in wud’) 1s right
Hajj and Jihdd shall continue under all Muslim

01
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

authorities, 210115 or impious

Akhirah: Life after Death 348

Angels that note down our deeds

Angels of Death

Spirit (ar-riih) 15 created

An-nafs and ar-rith

Is spirit mortal?

Angels that visit in the grave

Reward and punishment in the grave

Resurrection, Judgement, reward and punishment,

Bridge and Balance

Paradise and Hell exist at the present

Most Salaf and khalaf believe that Paradise shall last

forever, but Hell will disappear in the end

God has created some people for each; whom He has
allotted for Paradise He has allotted as a favor,
and whom He has allotted for Hell He has done so
because His justice demanded it

Power and Responsibility 392
Power is of two kinds: before and at the time of action
The former 15 the basis of obligation,
but it is not sufficient to produce action
Thus, the power concomitant to action is created
Human actions are created by God and acquired by men
Criticism of the Mu‘tazili view
How 1s it that God should punish man for actions
He has created?
God does not charge man except what he can do
Everything happens as He wills, knows and decrees
However, God does no injustice; in fact He has
prescribed mercy on Himself

Benefits to the Dead 414
Funeral prayer

Prayer at the grave

Charity

Fasting, hajj, reciting the Qur’an

God responds to prayer and grants it

God’s Anger and Pleasure | 426
God gets angry and is pleased as and when He likes

011
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

To interpret God’s anger and pleasure allegorically
is incorrect

Companions of the Prophet and Khulafa’ 430
We love all the companions, but not anyone to excess
Nor do we disown anyone
Love for them is part of imdn, and hatred for them 1s
kufr and nifag
After the Prophet the first rightful Ahalifah was
Abu Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Uthman, then ‘Ali
The order of their khiladfah 15 the order of their honor
Besides these four, there are six more to whom
the Prophet gave the good tidings of entering Paradise
Whoever speaks well of the Prophet’s companions and
his wives is free from hypocrisy

‘Ulama’ and Awliya’ 458
‘Ulama’ of the Ummah should be honored

No friend (wali) of God should be exalted over a prophet

One prophet is better than all the awliya’ combined

Criticism of Ibn ‘Arabi

Miracles are true, and when ascertained should be believed

Kinds of miracles: effective and cognitive

Miracles are an honor only when they serve religion

Insight (firdsah) and its kinds

Signs of the Hour 468

Diviners, Fortune Tellers 470
We do not believe in them

Nor in the astrologers

Magic and its kinds

Sifis

Rijal al-Ghayb

Mystical experience

The Malamatiyyah

Sima‘ and spiritual excercises

The story of Moses and Khidr

Unity of the Jama‘ah, differences and sects 479
Preservation of the unity of the jamd ‘ah

X1V
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

Differences should be referred to the Qur’4n and Sunnah
Differences are of two kinds:
Difference of variation
Difference of contradiction
God’s religion is one, and it is Islam
Islam is between excess and negligence
between tashbth and negation,
between coercionism and libertarianism,
between complacency and pessimism
Review of heretical sects
Mushabbihah, Mu‘tuzilah, Jahmiyyah,
Jabariyyah, Qadariyyah
Heretical sects treat revelation in two ways:
Some alter the meaning of text,
Others charge the prophets with ignorance

Biographical Sketches 499
Bibliography 521

XV
56 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

(30) And he is the seal of the prophets.

Allah has said, “Rather, he is the Messenger of Allah and the
seal of the prophets” [33:40]. And the Prophet (peace be on him)
himself said, “The similitude of the prophets is that of a palace
which is beautiful and perfect except that the place of one brick 5
vacant. Whoever goes round it 15 struck by its beauty. However, he
wonders why the place of one brick is empty. When I was sent, that
empty place was filled and the building became complete. With me
the line of the messengers has been sealed” [recorded in the Sahihs
of Al-Bukhari and Muslim].”°

He also said, “I have many names. I am Muhammad. I am
Ahmad. I am Al-Mahi (the Destroyer), as through me Allah will

destroy infidelity. And I am Al-Hashir (the Gatherer), as following
me people will be raised from the graves and gathered together. And
I am Al-‘Aqib (the Last), as there will be no prophet after me.”””!

In Sahih Muslim it is recorded from Thawban that the Messenger
of Allah (peace be on him) said, “Among my nation will arise thirty
great liars. Each of them will claim that he is a prophet. However, I
am the seal of the prophets and there will be no prophet after 7
Muslim has also recorded that the Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“Allah has exalted me above all the prophets by favoring me with six
things that He did not give to any other prophet: He has enabled me
to express many things in few words; He has helped me by casting
fear into the hearts of our enemies; He has allowed me the spoils of
war; He has permitted me to worship anywhere on the earth and has
deemed it pure; He has sent me as His messenger to all mankind;
and He has sealed the series of prophets with me.””°

” Actually, the wording of the hadith as mentioned by the commentator occurs neither
in Sahih Al-Bukhari or Sahih Muslim. Instead it is mentioned by Ibn ‘Asakir in
Tarikh Dimashq (Madinah: Maktabat ad-Dar, 1407 A.H.) and by As-Suyiti in Al-
Jami‘ al-Kabir. However, with a slightly different wording, the hadith may be found
in Al-Bukhari, 3535; Muslim, 2286; and Ahmad, 2:256, 312, 398, 412. All of these
ahddith are narrated by Abi Hurayrah. Similar ahddith reported by other Companions
may be found in Al-Bukhari, 3534; Muslim, 2297; At-Tirmidhi, 2613; Ahmad, 3:361
and 5:137.

" Al-Bukhari, 3532, 4896; Muslim, A/l-Fada’il, 2354; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Adab, 2842;
Ad-Darimi, 2:317, 318; Ahmad, 4:81, 84. |

This is part of a hadith in Abt Dawid, Al-Fitan wa al-Malahim, 4252; At-Tirmidhi,
Al-Fitan, 2220; Ahmad, 5:278. The commentator stated that it is from Sahih Muslim
but this is not correct. However, there are ahddith in Sahih Muslim with the same
meaning. See Muslim, Al-Imarah, 1920 and Al-Fitan 2889.

™Muslim, 523; At-Tirmidhi, 1553; Ahmad, 2:411, 412.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 87

(31) He is Leader (imam) of the Pious.

An imam is one whose example is followed. The Prophet (peace
be on him) was sent as an example to be followed. As Allah has
said, “Say (Muhammad): If you truly love Allah, then follow me
and Allah will love you” [3:31]. Whoever follows him and obeys
him is one of the pious.

(32) He is Chief of the Messengers.

The Prophet said, “I will be leading the children of Adam on the
Day of Resurrection. I will be the first to rise from the grave. I will
be the first to intercede and the first whose request will be
granted.””* This hadith was recorded by Muslim. The words that
occur in the hadith concerning intercession are, “I will be the leader
of all mankind on the Day of Judgment.”’’ Muslim and At-Tirmidhi
recorded, on the authority of Wathilah Ibn Al-Asqa, that the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “Allah chose the people of Kinanah from
among the children of Isma‘il, and the Quraysh from among the
Kinanah, and Bani Hashim from among the Quraysh. And me he
chose from Bani Hashim.””°

One might say that this statement is not consistent with the
hadith recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim in which the Prophet
said, “Do not exalt me above Moses. On the Day of Judgment,
when everyone will be unconscious, I will be the first to regain
consciousness. And lo and behold, Moses will be holding a side of
the Throne. I will not know whether he gained consciousness before
me or was exempted by Allah from falling unconscious.”’’ How can
one reconcile this hadith with the hadith that states, “I am the leader
of all the children of Adam. However, this is not boasting. 78

The response to this is that the Prophet (peace be on him) made
the former statement for a particular reason. A Jew once said to a

“Muslim, Al-Fadda ‘il, 2278; Abii Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4673; Ahmad, 2:540.

Part of a long hadith on intercession referred to earlier. See Al-Bukhari, A/-Anbiya’,
3340, 3361; Muslim, Al-Iman, 194; At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Qiyadmah, 2436; Ahmad,
2:435, 436.

>Muslim, Al-Fada il, 2276; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Mandgib, 3612; Ahmad, 4:107.

" Al-Bukhari, 2411, 3408, 6517, 6518, 7428; Muslim, Al-Fada’il, 2373; Abt
Dawud, As-Sunnah, 4671; Ahmad, 2:264.

‎At-Tirmidhi, Az-Zuhd, 3618; Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd, 4308; Ahmad, 3:2 and 1:281,‏ ةا
.296 ,295 ,282

88 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Muslim, “No, and I swear by the One Who chose Moses over
mankind.” The Companion got upset and slapped the Jew, saying,
“You dare say that while the Prophet is among us!” The Jew went to
the Prophet (peace be on him) and complained about the Muslim
_ who had slapped him. Then the Prophet (peace be on him) made the
above statement. In fact, if the Prophet (peace be on him) 15 exalted
out of some sectarian bias or caprice, it is blameworthy. Even jihad
is ruined 11 someone fights for the sake of partisanship. Certainly
Allah has forbidden boasting. But Allah has also said, “We have
exalted some prophets over others” [17:55], and, “These
messengers We endowed with gifts some above the others: to one of
them Allah spoke, others He raised to degrees of honor” [9:253].
This means that what is blameworthy is to prefer one in the manner
of boasting, in the sense of demeaning the others. This is how the
hadith, “Do not exalt one prophet over another,” is to be
understood,” if that hadith is confirmed, as it is mentioned in the
same hadith as the hadith concerning Moses and is contained in Al-
Bukhari and elsewhere. But some say that there is a defect in this
hadith, as opposed to the hadith of Moses, which is authentic,
without any defect, according to the consensus.*

Some people have given a different reply. They say that the
meaning of the hadith, “Do not exalt me above Moses,” or “Do not
exalt one prophet above another,” is that one should not exalt one
particular prophet over another. However, there is nothing wrong in
making a general statement without referring to a particular person,
such as, “I am the leader of all the children of Adam. However, it is
not boasting.” Since the hadith refers to the greatness of the Prophet
in general terms, there is nothing wrong in it. If you say that X 5
the best of all the people in the city, you are not comparing him with
any particular person and, as such, there is nothing wrong in it. But
it is completely different when you say X is better than Y. It is better
to avoid such specific references. This is the answer given by At-
Tahawi in his Sharh Ma ‘ani al-Athar.'

” Al-Bukhari, 3414; Muslim, A/-Fada’il, 2373. With a slightly different wording, the
hadith is also found in Muslim, 2374; Ahmad, 3:33; Abii Dawid, 6668; and AI-
Bukhari, 4638, 6912; 6917, 7427.

‘This is a strange statement by the Commentator, as none of the scholars of hadith,
including [bn Hajr and others, have pointed out any defect in the hadith.

*! At-Tahawi, Sharh Ma‘ani al-Athar, ed. by Muhammad. Zuhri An-Najjar (Beirut: Dar
Al-Kutub al-‘IImiyyah, 1399/1979), first edition, vol. IV, pp. 316-316.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 89

Concerning what has been recorded that the Prophet (peace be
on him) said, “Do not exalt me over Jonah (Yunus Ibn Matta),” a
Sufi was asked about this hadith but said he would not say what it
meant until they gave him a large sum of money. When he received
the money, he said that the hadith meant that Jonah enjoyed the
same closeness to Allah in the stomach of the fish as Muhammad
(peace be on him) enjoyed during the night of his ascension. Sufis
extol such kinds of exegesis, but it only proves their ignorance of
the prophetic or divine language. The hadith stated above does not
occur with those words in any of the reliable books of hadith. The
words that occur in the Sahih are, “No one should say, ‘I am better
than Yunus Ibn Matta’.’” Another version of the hadith states,
“Whoever says, ‘I am better than Yinus Ibn Matta’, has committed
a falsehood.’** The words in this hadith are general. What they
mean is that no one should exalt himself over Jonah. But it does not
follow that Muslims should not exalt Muhammad (peace be on him)
over Jonah (peace be on him). Allah has said that Jonah was
swallowed by a fish because he had done something that did not
behoove him. Allah’s words are, “And remember the companion of
the fish (Dhu an-Nin), when he departed in wrath, He imagined that
We would not punish him. But he cried through the depths of
darkness: “There is no god but You, Glory to You. I was indeed
wrong’” [21:87].

Some people have thought that they were better than Jonah since
they did not do what Jonah did. Whoever thinks that is certainly
wrong. In fact, every devoted servant of Allah said the same as what
Jonah said, “There is no god but You, Glory to You. I was indeed
wrong” [21:87], as the first and the last of the prophets said. The
first of them, Adam, said; “Our Lord, we have wronged our own
souls. If you forgive us not and bestow not upon us Your mercy,
we will certainly be lost” [7:23]. And the last and greatest of all the
prophets, Muhammad (peace be on him), said, as reported in an
authentic hadith from ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib concerning the opening of
the prayer, “O Allah, you are the King, there is no god but You.
You are my Lord and I am Your servant. I have wronged myself. I
admit my mistakes. Forgive me, then, all of my mistakes. No one
forgives sins except You...” (to the end of the hadith).°’ Moses also

8? Al-Bukhari, 3415, 3416, 3431; Muslim, 2376, 2377; Abi Dawid, 4669; Ahmad,
1:242, 254.

Muslim, 771; Abi Dawid, As-Salah, 760; At-Tirmidhi, Ad-Da ‘wat, 3417, 3418,
3419; An-Nasa’i1, 2:129-130; Ahmad, 1:94, 95.

90 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

said, “‘My Lord, I have indeed wronged myself. Please forgive
me.’ And he was forgiven as Allah is the Oft-Forgiving, the Most
Merciful” [28:16].

Allah said about Jonah, “Wait with patience for the command of
Your Lord and be not like the companion of the fish” [68:48], thus
forbidding the Prophet (peace be on him) to be like Jonah and,
instead, commanding him to be like those messengers of resolute
purpose. Allah tells him, “Have patience like those of resolute
purpose had patience” [46:35]. As for those who say, “I am better
than he,” given that it is not fitting for a superior to boast over an
inferior, what about the case where the boasting person actually is
not superior to the others? Truly, Allah does not love arrogant,
vainglorious people. In Sahih Muslim it is recorded that the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “It has been revealed to me that you should
be humble; no one should boast over another, and no one should
affront anyone else.’”** Since Allah has prohibited boasting over
ordinary Muslims, what about exalting oneself over a noble
prophet? This is why the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “It does
not behoove anyone to say, ‘I am better than Yunus Ibn Matta’.’”
This is a general prohibition stating that everyone should refrain
from exalting himself over Jonah.

As for the hadith, “Whoever says, ‘I am better than Yunus Ibn
Matta’ is mistaken,” if the Prophet (peace be on him) really was
superior to Jonah, then this statement would be incorrect and the
Prophet (peace be on him) would have been wrong. This possibility
is obviously ruled out, as the Prophet (peace be on him) would not
utter a falsehood. Therefore, the hadith should be taken to refer to
men in general. That is, “Whoever says that 15 mistaken.” That the
Prophet is not included therein is not difficult to accept. Allah has
said, “If you were to join (gods with Allah), truly fruitless would be
your work...” [29:65]. Although these words have been addressed
to the Prophet (peace be on him), he has been protected from ever
committing shirk. Therefore, such statements are simply
pronouncing a general rule regarding reward or punishment for
different acts.

The Prophet stated that he is the leader of all of the Children of
Adam because he had to make such a statement, for we could not
possibly know his position except through him. Since no prophets
would come after him, he had to inform us of his exalted position in
Allah’s sight. In the same way, he told us about the virtues of the
prophets before him (Allah’s blessings be on all of them). That is

“Muslim, Al-Jannah, 2865; Abi Dawid, A/-Adab, 4895; Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd, 4179.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 91

why he followed up his statement by saying, “and this is not
boasting.” Could anyone who believes in Allah and the Hereafter
actually say that the position of one who ascended to his Lord, a
position so great and honorable, is like the position of one who was
swallowed by a fish because he had dome something worthy of
blame? How can one exalted, honored and favored be equated with
one who faced an ordeal and was scolded? One was taken directly to
the presence of Allah and the other was chided. The person who
gave such an explanation of the hadith had built his distorted
conclusion on words that the Messenger (peace be upon him) did
not say. His words cannot be cited against the view that Allah is
above the world, a view which is established by numerous definitive
texts and evidences, which exceed one thousand, as we will discuss
later, God willing, when discussing the author’s statement, “Allah
encompasses all things and is above all.”

(33) He is very dear to the Lord of the Worlds.

It is confirmed that the Prophet (peace be on him) enjoyed the
highest degree of Allah’s love, which is khillah (intimacy). He said,
“Allah took me as His most intimate friend (Ahalil) as He had earlier
taken Abraham as His most intimate friend.”*’ On another occasion
he said, “If I were to take an inhabitant of the Earth as my most
intimate friend, I would chose Abi Bakr. But Allah, the Most
Gracious, has taken your companion (i.e. the Prophet) as His most
intimate friend.’*° Both of these ahddith are in the Sahih (of Imam
Muslim). They clearly refute those who say that khillah (intimacy)
was only for Abraham while mahabbah (love) was for Muhammad.
Therefore, they say, Abraham is the khalil Allah (‘the intimate of
Allah’) while Muhammad is Allah’s habib (‘beloved’). In the Sahih,
there are also the words, “Let it be known that I (the Prophet) have
no khalil among mankind.’”’

As for love, it has been confirmed for many others besides the
Prophet (peace be on him). For example, Allah says, “Allah loves
those who do good” [3:134]; “Truly, Allah loves the pious” [3:76],

and, “Truly, Allah loves those who keep themselves pure and clear’
[2:222].

*>Part of a hadith in Muslim, Al-Masdjid, 532; also in At-Tabarani, A/-Kabir, 1686.
**Muslim, Fada’il as-Sahadbah, 2383; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Mandqib, 3656; Ibn Majah,
93; Ahmad, 1:377, 389, 409, 433.

’™Muslim, 532; At-Tabarani, A/-Kabir, 1986.

92 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

It is clear, therefore, that those who say that intimacy (khullah)
was reserved for Abraham and that Muhammad was only given love
(mahabbah) are wrong. The truth is that khillah was reserved for
both of them while love was granted to many others. At-Tirmidhi
recorded on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas a hadith which states,
“Abraham is the khalil of Allah. As for me, I am the habib of Allah.
And this is not boasting.’** But this hadith is not authentic.

Love has different degrees:

First is ‘ilagah, where the heart has fondness for the beloved.

Second is irddah, where the heart is inclined towards the
beloved and seeks the beloved.

Third is sabdbah, where the heart overflows with love which
cannot be checked, in the same way that the flow of water into a
tunnel cannot be checked.

Fourth is ghardm, where the love clings to the heart and 15
always present. From the same root 15 gha@rim, which means ‘one
who keeps constant company’. Allah has used it as an adjective,
“ ‏عطا...‎ torment of Hell will always be with them (gharam)” [25:65].

The fifth 1s mawaddah or widd. This is the pure, sincere and
real love. Allah says in the Qur’an, “The Merciful will set for them
His pure love (wiidd)” [19:96].

Sixth 1s shaghaf, which is infatuation, or love that has gone into
the innermost recesses of the heart.

The seventh is 1570. This is the extreme love that even threatens
the life of the lover. One cannot attribute this kind of love to Allah,
nor is this the kind of love that the servant has for his Lord, even
though some people do use this term. There 15 a difference of
opinion concerning why it is prohibited. Some say that it is because
the word never occurs in the Qur’an or hadith. Other reasons are
also given. Perhaps, it is prohibited to use this term because it
implies lust (shahwah).

Eighth 1s tatayyium, which means love that enslaves.

Ninth 1s ta ‘abbud, or worship.

And tenth is khiillah. This is the love that permeates and fills the
spirit and the heart of the lover.

These types have also been mentioned in n different sequences by
different people. But the above order is the best. A little reflection
will reveal its merits.

Part of a long hadith in At-Tirmidhi, 3620; Ad-Darimi, 1:26. However, two of its
transmitters, Zam‘ah Ibn Salih and Salamah Ibn Wahram, are rated weak (da’if)
transmitters. At-Tirmidhi has consequently called it gharib.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 93

Know that mahabbah and khillah have been attributed to Allah.
They are attributed in a way becoming His greatness and majesty, as
is the case with all His other attributes. Of the different types of love
mentioned above, only four are to be predicated of Allah, irddah,
witdd, mahabbah and khillah, since these are the only terms that
have been mentioned in the texts (of the Qur’an and Sunnah).

There is a difference of opinion about the exact definition of
mahabbah. Around thirty definitions have been given. But they
hardly fare better than love. They usually obscure more than
illuminate. Such terms are clear and need no definition. They are as
clear as water, air, earth, hunger and so on.

(34) All claims to prophecy after him are false (ghayy)
and fanciful (hawa).

It was established earlier that Muhammad (peace be on him) was
the last of the prophets. Hence, anyone who claims prophethood
after him is a liar. If such a person should perform miracles and
present clear proofs of his sincerity, how can he be called a liar? We
reply to this by saying that such would never occur and the question
is merely hypothetical. In fact, it 1s not possible. This is true because
Allah has declared him to be the last prophet. Therefore, it 5
impossible that anyone could claim to be a prophet and not have
some signs that show that his claim is false.

Ghayy 15 the opposite of rashad (nightly guided). And hawa
means that it comes from a person’s desires. That 15, such a claim to
prophecy is based on the desires of the soul and not on evidence.
Hence, it is a false claim.

(35) He has been sent to all jinns and all mankind with
truth, guidance, light and illumination.

Concerning the Prophet being sent to all the jinns, Allah states,
quoting a jinn, “My people, hearken to the one who invites you to
Allah..” [46:31]. Strat Al-Jinn also indicates that he was sent to
them. Muq§atil said, “Allah never sent a messenger to both men and
jinns before him.” But that is a very strange statement. For Allah has
said, “Assembly of jinns and men, did prophets from among you
not come to you?” [6:130]. Messengers were only human and there
were no jinn messengers. This is what Mujahid and others of the
Elders and later scholars stated. Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Messengers are
from humans, and from jinns are only warners.” The apparent
meaning of the words of the jinn, “We hearkened to the book that

F6 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI
94 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

was revealed after Moses,” suggests that Moses was also sent to the
jinns. Allah knows best.

Ibn Jarir reported that Ad-Dahhak Ibn Muzahim believed that the
jinns did have their own messengers and he used the above verse to
support his claim. But using that verse as evidence may not be
correct, since it is vague and not specific. It 1s - Allah knows best -
like Allah’s statement, “Out of the two come pearls and coral”
[55:22], which actually means ‘from one of them’. 7

That the Prophet (peace be on him) was sent to all mankind has
been clearly stated in the Qur’an. Note the following verses, “We
have not sent you but as a messenger to all mankind giving them
glad tidings and warning them” [34:28]. “Say (Muhammad):
Mankind! I am the messenger of Allah to you all’ [7:158]. “This
Qur’dn has been revealed to me by inspiration that I may warn you
and all those whom it reaches” [6:19]. “And We have sent you as a
messenger to mankind and enough is Allah for witness” [4:79]. “Is
ita matter of wonderment to men that We have sent our inspiration
to a man among themselves — that he should warn mankind and give
the good news to the Believers that they have before their Lord the
lofty rank of sincerity” [10:2]. “Blessed is He Who sent down the
criterion to His servant, that it may be an admonition to all creatures”
[25:1]. “And say to the People of the Book and to those who are
unlearned: Do you (also) submit yourselves? If they do, they are in
correct guidance. But if they turn back, your duty is to convey the
Message”’ [3:20].

The Prophet (peace be on him) also stated, “Allah has given me
five things which He did not give to any prophet before me: He
supported me by casting fear into the hearts of my enemies, even if
they were a month’s journey away; He has made the whole earth
pure for me and allowed me to pray anywhere I wish, so my
followers may offer prayer wherever they are when the time comes;
He has allowed me to use the spoils of war that He did not allow to
others before me; He has allowed me intercession (shafa‘ah); and
He has sent me to all of mankind, whereas He had sent each earlier
prophet only to his own community.”®’ This hadith was recorded by
both Al-Bukhari and Muslim. He also said, “Whoever hears of me,
be he Jew or Christian, and does not believe in me, will go to
Hell.”®° This was recorded by Muslim. It is known by necessity, or
in other words, it is self-evident to all who know the teachings of

*°Al-Bukhari, 335, 438, 3122; Muslim, Al-Masdjid, 521; An-Nasa’i, Al-Ghusl,
1:219-211; Ad-Darimi, As-Saldh, 1:322-323; Ahmad, 2:412; At-Tirmidhi, 1553.
Muslim, Al-Iman, 153.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 95

the religion of Islam that the Prophet (peace be on him) was sent to
all of mankind.

Some Christians argue that he was sent only to the Arabs. This
is obviously wrong. If they accept that he was a prophet, they must
accept everything he said. He himself stated that he was sent to all
mankind. The Messenger (peace be on him) does not lie. Whatever
he says must be accepted. Furthermore, it is an established fact that
the Prophet (peace be on him) wrote to Xerxes, Caesar, the Negus,
Maqawaas, and many other kings of his time, and invited them to
Islam.

The author said, “wa kafati al-wara” and the use of the jar
(genitive case) does not seem to be correct, grammatically speaking,
with respect to the word kafah because the Arabs only use the word
in the substantive case.””

There are three opinions concerning the syntactic parsing of the
Qur’anic verse, “And We have not sent you (Muhammad) save as a
bringer of good tidings and a warner unto all mankind (kdfatan li an-
ndass)” [34:28]. The first opinion 15 that it is the substantive kaf and
the doer of the action. The 12 at the end is a hyperbole.’’ The
meaning of the verse in this case would be ‘You keep the people
away from evil.’ Some say it is the infinitive kaff, meaning kaffan,
meaning that he is only sent to constrain people from evil
completely, the use of the infinitive for the substantive being
common. The second opinion is that it is substantive for the word
“mankind’’. But this 15 objected to because hdl al-majriir cannot be
preceeded by anything, according to the majority of the scholars.
The response to that 15 that the Arabs use it a lot in that manner and it
must be accepted. This is the chosen opinion of Ibn Malik, the
famous grammarian. Therefore, the verse means, “We did not send
you except to all the people.” The third opinion is that it is an
adjective for the unstated, assumed infinitive, meaning, therefore:
‘as a complete mission’. The objection to this has already been
stated and that is that kafis only used in the substantive case.

The author’s words, “the truth (a/-haqgq), guidance (al-huda),
light (an-nar) and illumination (ad-diya’)” all refer to the Faith (ad-
din) and the Shari‘ah which the Prophet (peace be on him) brought

’'For a discussion of this point, see Ibn Taymiyyah, Al-Jawab as-Sahih li man
Baddala Din al-Masih (Matabi al-Majd at-Tijariyyah, n.d.), vol. 2, pp. 38-42.

”* Again, this is in reference to the grammatical structure of the Arabic text of the
Creed and need not concern the English reader, but has been included in the
translation for the sake of completeness.

”>Otherwise, the word would be feminine.

96 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

and which have been established by the texts of the Qur’an and other
proofs. Diya’ is stronger than nur. Allah has said, “It is He Who
has appointed the sun a dazzling radiance (diya@’) and the moon a
radiating light (nar) [11:5].

(36) The Qur’an is the word of Allah.

It originated from Him as articulated speech in an unknown
manner (bila kayfiyyah). Allah revealed it to His Prophet by
inspiration (wahi). The Believers bear witness to its revelation. They
are certain that 15 the actual speech of Allah. It is not created like the
speech of human beings. Whoever hears it and thinks it is the
speech of man 15 an infidel. Allah has condemned and censured him
and threatened him with Hell-Fire when He says, “I will burn him in
the Hell-Fire” [74:26]. By Allah’s threatening with the Fire those
who say, “This is nothing but the word of a mortal” [74:25], we
know and become certain that it 15 the speech of the Creator of
mankind and is completely unlike he speech of mankind.

This is one of the basic and most important principles of Islam.
But on this question, many people and groups went astray. What
At-Tahawi, may Allah have mercy on him, stated is the truth, which
is proven by Qur’an and Sunnah for whoever ponders them. It is
also supported by natural human endowment (fitrah) that is not
vitiated by doubts or corrupted by erroneous ideas.

People were divided into nine groups over this question of the
speech of Allah.”* These were:

1. The word of Allah is nothing but ideas that descend upon a
human soul from the active intellect, according to some, or from a
different source, according to others. This is the view of the
Sabaeans and the philosophers.

2. It is a creation of Allah that exists separate from Him. This is
the view of the Mu‘tazilah.

3. It is the thought in the mind of Allah, at once command,
prohibition, enunciation and information. When it was
communicated in Arabic it became the Qur’an. When it was
communicated in Hebrew it became the Torah. That is the opinion of
Ibn Kullab and those who agree with him, such as Al-Ash‘ari and
others.

**In the subsequent discussion, Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz closely follows what was written by
Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmiu‘ al-Fatadwa, vol. 2, pp. 162-213, and Ibn Al-Qayyim,
Mukhtasar as-Sawa’iq al-Mursalah, vol. 2, pp. 286-298.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 97

4. It is the outward letters and sounds which assembled in
eternity. A group of theologians and scholars of hadith hold this
view.

5. It is certainly letters and sounds, but Allah uttered them in
speech after a time during which He had not spoken. This is the
opinion of the Karramiyyah and others.

6. It is the speech of Allah that He brings into being out of His
knowledge and will, subsisting by Him. This is the opinion of the
author of Al-Mu ‘tabar.’® Ar-Razi seems to have been inclined to this
opinion in his Al-Matalib al-‘Aliyyah.

7. It refers to an idea subsisting in Him, which He created later
in someone else. This view was held by Abt Mansir Al-Maturidi.

8. It refers to an eternal idea subsisting in Him, as well as the
sounds that He created in someone else. This 15 the view of Abt AI-
Ma ‘ali and his followers.

9. Allah has been speaking from eternity if, when and as He
_ wills to speak. He has been speaking in words which have sounds
that can be heard. As a whole, His speech 15 eternal, even though a
particular sound 15 not eternal. This 15 the view of the leading imams
of the hadith and Sunnah.

The author again has used a kasrah in inna al-Qur’an kalam
Allahu. The reason for it 15 the same as in the earlier statements.
That 15, they are all ruled by the governing words, “We say (naqul)
about Allah’s oneness.””’

The words of the author, “It originated from Him as articulated
speech in an unknown manner (bila kayfiyyah),” are directed
against the Mu‘tazilah and those who believe that the Qur’an did not
proceed from Allah, as noted above. They say that we call it the
word of Allah simply to honor it, in the same way that we say the
house of Allah, or the camel of Allah. They misinterpret the texts,
and their conclusions are false.

Things that are ascribed to Allah are sometimes intangible and
sometimes they are things that exist. When we ascribe objects to

**In their notes to the text, At-Turki and Al-Arnawit doubt the ascription of this view
to scholars of hadith since the opinion 15 not in conformity with the Sunnah.

*°The author of Al-Mu‘tabar fi al-Hikmah (Hyderabad, 1375) is Abia Al-Barakat
Hibbatullah Ibn Malka (ca. 547/1152), a physician and a very distinguished.
philosopher of Islam. He was originally a Jew but later embraced Islam. He was the
court physician of Al-Mustanjid. He died during Ramadan and was buried in Baghdad.
77 Another grammatical point. After the phrase, “We say (naqul)” the following related
clauses must begin with a kasrah instead of a hamza to show that they are related to
the first clause. |

98 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Allah, we mean that they are distinguished and honorable objects
which Allah created. This is what we mean when we say, for
example, the house of Allah, the camel of Allah, and so forth. But
when we ascribe intangibles to Allah and say, for example, the
knowledge of Allah, His power, His honor, His glory, His majesty,
His-speech, His life, His transcendence, His dominance, which are
all His attributes; it is not possible that they were created by Allah.

When we say that Allah speaks, we are affirming one of His
attributes of perfection. Its denial is to attribute to Him a defect. This
is clearly demonstrated by Allah’s statement, “The people of Moses
made, in his absence, out of the ornaments the image of a calf (for
worship) which seemed to make a lowing sound. Did they not see
that it could neither speak to them nor show them the way?” [7:148].
The worshipers of the calf, their infidelity notwithstanding, knew
their Lord better than the Mu‘tazilah, since they did not say to Moses
that His Lord could not speak. About the calf Allah also says,
“Could they not see that it would not return them a word (for
answer), and that it had no power either to harm them or to do them
good?” [20:89]. From this remark it is clear that the inability to
answer or speak is an argument which Allah has used to deny the
divinity of the calf.

The strongest objection that the Mu‘tazilah have raised against
Allah’s speech is that 1t would mean comparing Allah with man and
attributing to Him a body. This objection is not valid. When we say
that Allah speaks we add the qualification, “as it behooves His
majesty”. Allah has said, “That day We will set a seal on their
mouths. But their hands will speak to us, and their feet will bear
witness to all that they did” [36:65]. We do believe that hands and
feet will speak, but we do not know in what manner they will speak.
Similarly, Allah says, “They will say to their skins: ‘Why do you
bear witness against us?’ They will reply: ‘Allah has given us ability
to speak, He Who gives ability to speak to everything’” [41:21]. We
likewise believe that pebbles and food glorified Allah, that stones
gave salutation, and the sounds of articulated words came from them
even though they did not have a mouth.’®

The author has pointed to this in his words, “It originated from
Him as articulated speech in an unknown manner (bild kayfiyyah).”
That is, it proceeded from Him and He uttered it in a manner
unknown to us. He further underlines this point by saying, “as
articulated speech (gawl-an).” Qawl is a verbal noun and, as such, it

*8Muslim, 2277; Ahmad, 5:89, 95, 105; At-Tirmidhi, 3624; Ad-Darimi, 1:12; and Al-
Bukhari, 3579; Ahmad, 1:460; At-Tirmidhi, 3633; Ad-Darimi, 1:15.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 99

stresses that it was really an action of uttering words. Allah has
emphasized the same by using the verbal noun taklim. He says,
“kallama Allahu Misa taklima (Allah spoke to Moses in words)”
[4:164]. What can there be other than truth except misguidance?

Some of the Mu‘tazilah said to Abt ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘Ala, ““We wish
you would read, kallama Allaha Misa’”’ - changing Allah to the
objective case and giving the meaning that Moses spoke. Abi ‘Amr
said to them, “Suppose I recite the verse in the manner you say,
what will you do about the verse, ‘When Moses came to the place
appointed by Us, and His Lord spoke to Him (kallamahu Rabbuhu)
[7:143]?” Thus the Mu‘tazilah were flustered.

How much evidence is there in the Qur’an and Sunnah that Allah
speaks to the people of Paradise and others? For example, Allah
says, “Peace! a word (of salutation) from a Lord Most Merciful”
[26:58]. Jabir reported that the Messenger of Allah (peace be on
him) said, “When the people of Paradise are enjoying their life in
happiness, a light will shine forth and they will raise their heads
and, lo and behold, Allah will appear to them from above. He will
say, ‘Peace be on you, people of Paradise.’ This is the meaning of
Allah’s words, ‘Peace! a word (of salutation) from a Lord Most
Merciful.’ He will look upon them and they will look upon Him.
They will not turn their glances to any other bounty as long as He
looks upon them. (Then) a veil will be drawn over Him. However
His grace and His light will continue to shine over their abode.” 108
This hadith was recorded by Ibn Majah and others.

That hadith affirms Allah’s attribute of speech as it also affirms
His visibility and transcendence. Given that, how could the opinion
that all of the Lord’s speech is one thought be true? Allah says in the
Qur’an, “Surely those who sell the covenant of faith with Allah and
their own oaths will have no portion in the Hereafter, nor will Allah
speak to them or look at them” [3:77]. Allah will thus humiliate them
by not speaking to them. It means that Allah will not speak to them
- with any noble speech; that is the correct interpretation, because in
another verse it states that Allah says to the people in the Hell-fire,
‘Away with you into this (gnominy)! And speak no more unto Me”

Thus changing the meaning to ‘Moses spoke to Allah’.

"Ibn Majah, Al-Mugaddamah, 184; Aba Nu‘aym, Hilyah al-Awliyd’ wa Tabagqat al-
Asfiyd (Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi, 1400/1980, 3rd edition; henceforth referred to
as Al-Hilyah), vol. 6, pp 208-209. Among the narrators of this hadith is Abu ‘Asim
Al-*Ibadani, who is slrghtly weak. And his source was Al+Fadhl Ibn ‘Isa Ar-Ruqashi,
whose ahadith are rejected. See Al-Haythami, Majmd‘ az-Zawda’id wa Manba‘ al-
Fawa 10 (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Arabi, 1402/1982), 3rd edition, vol. 7, ‏.م‎ 98.

100 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

[23:108]. It is obvious that if He were not to speak to His faithful
servants they would come down to the level of the unfaithful, and
there would be no sense in specifying that He would not speak to
His enemies.

A subchapter in the Sahih of Al-Bukhari has been given the
name “The speech of the Lord, Blessed and Exalted, with the People
of Paradise.” That subchapter contains a number of ahddith. The
greatest blessing that the people of Paradise will receive is the vision
of Allah’s face and His speaking to them. Denying that is denying
the real essence of Paradise, the highest and best blessing available
therein.

The Mu‘tazilah argue that since Allah has said, “Allah 1s the
Creator of all things,” and since the Qur’an is a thing, it must
therefore be created. This is really strange. This is because,
according to them, the actions of human beings are created by men
and not by Allah. They exclude such acts from being “things” while
they include the speech of Allah as a “thing’’, though it is one of His
attributes. By it (His speech), things are created as it 1s by His
command that things come into existence. He says, “(He made) the
sun, the moon and the stars subservient by His command (amr).
Know, it is for Him to create (khalqg) and to govern (amr)” [7:54].
He has thus differentiated between creation and command. if
command had been something created, there must have been another
command to create it. But this implies a third command to create the
second command and so on, ad infinitum. This is plainly false.
Again, if their argument were extended, it would include such
attributes of Allah as knowledge and power, and reduce them to
created things, which is open blasphemy. His knowledge is a thing.
His power is a thing. His life is a thing. If these things were
included under the verse, “Allah 15 the Creator of all things,” they
would be considered created after a time when they did not exist.
Exalted is Allah above such beliefs. |

How can it be correct to become a speaker by someone else’s
speech? That is not correct. If that were true, all the speech that He
creates in any non-living or living animal would equally be His
speech and there would be no difference between speaking (nataqa)
and making somebody speak (antaga). On the Day of Judgment, our
skins will say, “Allah has made us speak” [41:21], and they will not
say, “Allah has spoken.” It would also mean that He is the speaker
of every word that He creates in any creature, be 1t something false,
a lie, an infidelity, or crazed words. Allah is exalted above that. But,

in fact, monists do not shy away from such statements. Ibn ‘Arabi,
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 101

for example, said, “Every word that comes into being is His word,
whether it 15 in prose or in poetry.”

If it were correct to be qualified with an attribute that another
has, it would be correct to call a seeing person blind and vice-versa,
the former because someone else is blind and the latter because
someone else is endowed with sight. It would also be correct to
ascribe to Allah every attribute that He has created in anything —
colors, smells, tastes, measurements, and so on.

Similar objections were made by Imam ‘Abdul-*Aziz Al-Makki
against Bishr Al-Murisi in a debate before Al-Ma’miin. He asked the
latter not to go beyond the text of the Qur’an to prove his point.
Bishr appealed to the caliph to direct ‘Abdul-‘Aziz not to insist on
texts from the Qur’an and to argue with him on other grounds. He
said, “If then ‘Abdul-‘Aziz does not give up his view and accept that
the Qur’an is created, I may be killed.” ‘Abdul-‘Aziz said, “Would
you like to open the debate.” Bishr said, “You go ahead.” ‘Abdul-
‘Aziz said, “You have to take one of the following three positions 5
there 15 no fourth possibility. Either Allah created the Qur’an, His
speech in our view, in Himself; or He created it as existing by and in
itself; or He created it in something else.”’ Bishr replied, “I believe
that Allah created the Qur’an as He created every other thing,” and
he refused to reply directly to the question. Al-Ma’min asked
‘Abdul-‘ Aziz, “Explain the matter yourself and leave Bishr for he
seems confounded.” ‘Abdul-‘Aziz said, “If Bishr says that Allah
created His speech in Himself, this 15 impossible because Allah
cannot be the locus of anything contingent and created. He cannot
have in Him what is created. If, on the other hand, he says that
Allah has created it in something else, he would have to accept that
every speech which Allah has created in anything 15 His speech.
Finally, 11 He says that He has created it as existing by and in itself,
that is inconceivable, for there is no speech but what exists by a
speaker, as there is no will but what exists by one who wills, and no
knowing but what exists by a knower. We cannot think of any
speech that exists by itself and speaks by itself. Since all of these
possibilities are unacceptable, and the Qur’an cannot be said to have
been created in any of these senses, we conclude that it is an
attribute of Allah.” This is the gist of the debate that Imam ‘Abdul-
‘Aziz narrated in his book, Al-Hidah.'°’

!"! ‏رط[‎ ‘Arabi, Al-Futihat al-Makkiyyah (Beirut: Dar Sadir, n.d.), vol. 4, p. 141.

102

“Al-Hidah, pp. 79-80. As noted earlier, this work most likely is not authentically
that of ‘Abdul-‘ Aziz.

102 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

The denotation of the word kull (all) varies according to the
context and is determined by the clues that the language carries.
Referring to the storm that He sent upon the people of ‘Ad, Allah
says, “It will destroy all things (Aulli shayy) by the command of its
Lord. Then by the morning nothing was to be seen except their
houses” [46:25]. The houses are things but they are not included in
the “all things” that were destroyed by the storm. This is because
what was meant was that the storm would destroy everything which
can usually be destroyed by a strong storm and which deserved to
be destroyed. Similarly, Allah described what 811015 possessed in
these words, “She was given all things” [27:23]. What 15 meant by
‘all things” here is everything that kings need. This qualification can
be understood from the context. What the hoopoe wanted to say is
that she had everything to rule her kingdom with and needed
nothing. Many other examples of this nature can be given.

The meaning in the verse, “The Creator of all things” [13:12], 1s
everything that is created. Everything other than Allah is created.
This will definitely include human acts but certainly would not
include Allah and His attributes because they are not other than He.
Allah has all the attributes of perfection; they are inseparable from
His essence. The separation of the attributes from the essence is
inconceivable, as we have said earlier when commenting on the
eternity of divine attributes. In fact, the verse which the Mu‘tazilah
quote in their support goes against them, for if Allah’s words,
“Allah created everything,” were itself created, it could not be cited
as an argument.

As for their argument from the verse, “We have made (ja ‘alnda) it
a Qur’an in Arabic” [45:3], it is their weakest argument. When ja ‘ala
is used in the sense of khalaga (create), it has only one object. For
example, the verses, “He made (ja ‘ala) the darkness and the light”
[6:1], “We made (ja ‘alna) from water every living being. Will they
not believe? And We have set (ja‘alnad) on the earth mountains
standing firm, lest it should shake with them, and we have made
(ja‘alnd) therein roadways (between mountains) for them to pass
through so that they might find their way. And We have made
(ja ‘alnad) the heavens as a canopy well-guarded” [21:30-32].

But when ja ‘alnd takes two objects, 1 does not mean create. For
example, “And break not your oaths after you have confirmed them.
Indeed you have made (ja ‘altum) Allah your surety” [16:91]; “And
make not Allah’s name (/@ taj‘ala) an excuse in your oaths against
doing good, or acting nghtly” [2:244]; “Those who have made
(ja‘ala) the Qur’an into shreds” [15:91]; “And take not (/a@ taj‘al)
with Allah another object of worship” [17:39]; “And they make
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 103

(ja‘alu) into females angels who themselves serve Allah’ [43:19].
Such verses are numerous. What I want to say is that we should
understand in a similar vein the verse, “We have made (ja ‘alnd) it a
Qur’an in Arabic” [43:3].

Similarly unsound is their argument from the verse, “He has
called (niidiya) from the right bank of the valley from a bush in
hallowed ground” [28:30]. This means, they claim, that Allah
created the words in a bush and Moses heard it from the bush. But
they ignore the words that precede and follow the verse. Allah said,
“When he arrived there. a voice called (nudiya) him from the nght
side of the valley” [28:30]. Nida is a call from a distance. Hence it
means that Moses heard the call from the fringe of the valley. Then
Allah says, “In the hallowed ground from a bush” [28:30]. This
means that the call was made on the hallowed ground near the bush.
For when I say that I heard the words of Zayd from the house, what
I mean is that the words came from the house and not that the house
spoke. If the words which Moses heard had been created in the
bush, the bush would have been their speaker. Hence, the words
(which occur in the verse), “Moses, I am Allah, the Lord of the
Worlds,” would have been uttered by the bush. Now can these
words be uttered by something other than Allah?

If it is possible that a thing other than Allah may say these
words, it is also correct for Pharaoh to have said, “I am your lord,
most high” [19:24]. For both sets of words are created and spoken
by a being other than Allah. To meet this objection, they have tried
to differentiate between the two speech acts. They say that the
former words were created by Allah in the bush, but it was Pharaoh
who created the latter words. This leads them to believe that there is
a creator other than Allah. This is an issue related to the question of
human acts, which we will take up later, God willing.

One might refer to the verse, “This is truly the word of an
honored messenger” [69:40; 81:91], and argue that the Qur’an was
produced by a messenger, either Gabriel or Muhammad. To refute
this argument, it is enough to point out that the verse says that is a
word of a messenger that is conveying it on behalf of the sender. It
does not say that is the word of an angel or prophet. By that, one
knows that is being conveyed on behalf of the sender and it was not
being created by the conveyor.

Furthermore, the same words are found in two verses; in one
verse, it refers to the angel Gabriel and in the other it refers to
Muhammad (peace be on him). This further supports the argument
that the Qur’an is the word of the messenger only in the sense that
he was communicating it rather than originating it, for if one had
104 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

composed it, the other could not have been its composer. Again,
following the words in Sirah 81, we have the adjective “faithful”
(amin) qualifying the messenger. This shows that the messenger
communicated the words as they were revealed to him, neither
adding anything from himself nor deleting anything. He faithfully
conveyed everything he was told.

Again, Allah has condemned as an infidel one who says that the
Qur’an is the word of a man. Since Muhammad was a man,
therefore, whoever says that the Qur’an is the word of Muhammad
in the sense that he composed it is certainly an infidel. It makes no
difference if instead he says that 15 the word of a jinn or angel.
Words are the words of the one who originally states them and not
of the one who communicates them. If someone recites the line,
“Stop! Let us weep to remember / a beloved and a house...”” you
will say that is the poetry of Imra‘ Al-Qays.'°* Similarly, if you hear
someone say, “Actions will be judged by their motives, and
everyone will have what he intended,”'”* you will say that these are
the words of the Prophet (peace be on him). Or if you hear one
reciting, “Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds, Most
Gracious, Most Merciful, Master of the Day of Judgment. You only
do we worship and Your aid only do we seek” [1:1-4], you will say
that these are the words of Allah - that is, if you have knowledge of
those facts. Otherwise you would say, “I do not know whose words
these are.” If anyone contradicted you on this point, he would be —
wrong. That is why, whenever one hears a poem or a passage from
anyone, he asks, “Are these your words or someone else’s?”’

In short, the Ahl as-Sunnah, the four schools of figh and others
of the Elders and later scholars all agree that the Qur’an is the
uncreated speech of Allah. Beyond that point, the later scholars
differed as to whether the speech of Allah is a single thought
existing in itself or if it is words and sounds which Allah uttered at a
particular time and not before, or He has been speaking from
eternity, if, when, and as He has willed, and that His speech as a
class 1s eternal.

Some Mu‘tazilah do say that the Qur’an is uncreated. But by that
they mean that the Qur’an is not fabricated, concocted or false. That

The line quoted here is part of the first verse of a famous ode of his. See his Diwan,
ed. by Muhammad Abi AlI-Fad] Ibrahim (Cairo: Dar Al-Ma‘arif, 1389/1969), p. 8.
'*Part of a hadith in Al-Bukhari, 1, 54, 2529, 3898, 5070, 6689, 6953; Muslim, A/-
Imarah, 1907; Abt’ Dawid, At-Taldq, 2201; At-Tirmidht, Al-Jihdd, 1647; An-Nasa’l,
At-Taharah, 1:58-60; Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd, 2427; Ahmad, 1:25, 43.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 105

is, it 15 true and authentic. There is no question that this meaning is
consistent with what all Muslims believe.

The point on which they have differed is whether the Qur’an is a
thing created by Allah, or whether it is His words which He has
spoken and which exist by Him. This was the question put by the
Ahl as-Sunnah. As to its fabrication or spuriousness, there is no
difference among Muslims that such an allegation is false. There is
also no question that the leaders of the Mu‘tazilah and others are
from heretical sects. They admit that their beliefs concerning tawhid,
Allah’s attributes and predestination are not things passed down,
either from the Book or the Sunnah or from the leaders of the
Companions and those who followed them in goodness. They claim
that human reasoning has led them to such conclusions. They claim
that they only take legal rulings on practical acts from the leading
imams. If people were left to their uncorrupted nature and instinctive
reasoning there would not have been differences among them. But
Satan has put baseless ideas into their minds and has divided them

into sects. The Qur’an says, “Those who seek causes of dispute in
the Book are in a schism far from the purpose” [2:176].

At-Tahawi’s words imply that Allah has been speaking from
eternity as and when He has willed, and that His speech as a class is .
eternal. This is also the view of Aba Hanifah, as appears in his Al-
Figh al-Akbar, in which he says:

“The Qur’an 15 the word of Allah, whether written in the
book, remembered in the hearts, recited by the tongues or
revealed to the Prophet. Our recitation of the Qur’an is created
and our writing of the Qur’an is created and our reciting of it is
created. But the Qur’an itself is not created. What Allah has
mentioned in the Qur’dn quoting from Moses and others and
from the earlier prophets and from Pharaoh and Iblis, all of
that is the speech of Allah, in which He is informing about
them. It is the uncreated speech of Allah. The speech of Moses
and other created beings 15 itself created. But the Qur’an is the
word of Allah and not their speech. Moses heard Allah’s words
when He spoke to him. He spoke to him with the speech
which is His attribute from eternity. And all of His attributes
are different from the attributes of the creatures. He knows, but
not as we know. He has power, but not as we have power. He
sees, but not as we see. He speaks, but not as we 655

'° Al-Figh al-Akbar, pp. 40-50.

106 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

From Abi Hanifah’s words, “Moses heard Allah’s words when
He spoke to him. He spoke to him by the speech which is His
attribute from eternity,” it is clear that he means that when Moses
came He spoke to him and it does not mean that He was always and
will always be saying, “O Moses...” as some people understand
from Allah’s words, “When Moses came to the place appointed by
Us, and His Lord addressed him...” [7:143]. Aba Hanifah’s words
contradict the view which some of his followers, like Abt’: Manstr
Al-Maturidi and others, hold that the speech of Allah is one single
idea that subsists in Him and is inaudible and what is heard 1s the
sound that Allah creates in the air. And Abt Hanifah’s words,
“speech which is His attribute from eternity,” further refute the view
that Allah came to have the attribute of speech at a particular time and
not before that.

Some aspects of the views of the Mu‘tazilah, such as that the
Qur’an is speech dependent on the will and power of Allah, that He
speaks when He wills, and that He speaks one thing after another,
are true and must be accepted. Similarly, some ideas of others, such
as that the speech of Allah subsists in Him and is His attribute, and
that an attribute subsists only in a subject, are also true and must be
accepted and adhered to. It is obligatory to accept whatever
statements are correct from the different groups and to turn away
from whatever of their statements are refuted by the Shari‘ah and
sound reason.

It may be said to us that our view makes Allah the locus of —
contingent events. This objection, we may reply, is rather vague. In
one sense, events subsist by Allah. None of the earlier scholars have
denied this. On the contrary, the texts of the Qur’an and Sunnah, the
statements of the leading imams, as well as the verdict of reason,
uphold it.

When the prophets said that Allah said or called or conversed
intimately or that He spoke, they certainly did not mean that Allah
created those words which exist separately from Him. On the
contrary, they wanted their audience to understand that Allah is the
speaker of these words, that they subsist in Him, not in anything
else, and that He has uttered them. This was the understanding of
‘A’ishah, as appears in her statement that she made when Allah
refuted the allegation that was brought against her, “I thought I was
too insignificant a creature for Allah to speak about me in a
revelation that would be recited.”’°® If by the speech of Allah

Dart of a long hadith, Al-Bukhari, 2261, 4141, 4750; Muslim, At-Tawbah, 2270;

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 107

something else was meant, something not what the people generally
understood, it would have been explained that it has a different
meaning to it, since it 15 not permissible to delay an explanation from
the time it 1s needed.

Neither language nor reason 15 aware of a speaker whose speech
does not subsist by him. If these (objectors) say that they do not
accept this view because it would be conceiving Allah on the pattern
of man (tashbih), they should not affirm Allah’s other attributes
either. If they say, “He knows but not as we know,” we simply say,
“He speaks but not as we speak.” In fact, the same holds for all of
His attributes.

One cannot conceive of a powerful man whose power does not
exist in him or of a living thing whose life does not exist in him.
(Similarly, one cannot think of a speaker whose speech does not
exist in him.) The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “I seek refuge in
Allah’s perfect words, which neither the righteous nor the wicked
can escape.””’°’ Can an intelligent person say that the Prophet (peace
be on him) sought refuge in a created thing? In fact, that invocation
is like his statements, “I seek refuge in Your pleasure from Your
anger. I seek refuge in Your forgiveness from Your punishment;”’°*
or, “I take refuge in the majesty and power of Allah from the evil
that I encounter or might encounter;’’'”’ and, “I take refuge in Your
greatness from being stabbed from beneath.’”''® All of those are
attributes of Allah. And this aspect has been discussed in its proper
place; here we are just making a quick reference to it.

Many later Hanafis believed that the speech of Allah is one and
that multiplicity concerns its expression in words, not in itself.
Words are created; they are called the word of Allah because they
express His speech and communicate it. When it was communicated
in Arabic, 1t became the Qur’an, and when it was communicated in
Hebrew, it became the Torah. Hence, it 15 the language that varies,

Ahmad, 6:197; Abii Dawid, 4735.

‎Ahmad, 3:419. Part of a hadith rated suhih which has been recorded by Ibn As-‏ ؟"!
‎Sinni, ‘Amal al-Yawm wa al-Laylah, ed. by ‘Abdul-Qadir Ahmad ‘Ata’ (Cairo:‏
‎Maktabat al-Kulliyat al-Azhariyyah, 1389/1969), p. 632.‏

‎'8Part of a hadith in Aba Dawid, As-Salah, 1427; At-Tirmidhi, Ad-Da‘wat, 3561;
An-Nasa’l, As-Salah, 3:248; Ibn Majah, /ga@mat as-Salah, 1179; Ahmad, 1:96, 118,
150; Muslim, 486.

‎Part of a hadith in Muslim, As-Salam, 2202; Aba Dawid, At-Tibb, 3891; At-
Tirmidhi, At-Tibb, 2081; Ibn Majah, At-Tibb, 3522; Ahmad, 4:217.

‎Part of a hadith in Ahmad, 2:125; Aba Dawid, A/-Adab, 5074; An-Nasa’i,
Isti‘adhah, 8:282; Ibn Majah, Ad-Du ‘a’, 3871.

108 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

not the speech. When we say that words are the speech of Allah, we
say so in a metaphorical sense.

This view 15 wrong. It would mean that the words, “Do not
come near adultery” [17:32], have the same meaning as “Be
steadfast in prayer” [2:143]. Similarly, the Verse of the Throne
[2:255] would mean the same as the verses concerning transactions
involving debt [2:282-3]. And the meaning of Strat Al-Ikhlas [112]
would mean the same as Strat Al-Lahab [111]. Little reflection 5
needed to be convinced that this view 1s wrong and conflicts with
the beliefs of the Elders.

The truth is that the Torah, Gospel, Psalms''' and Qur’dn are
literally Allah’s word. In fact, His words are innumerable and
infinite. He has been speaking from eternity what, when, and as He
has willed. And He will go on speaking forever likewise. He says,
“Say: If the ocean were ink to write the words of my Lord, sooner
would the ocean be exhausted than would the words of my Lord,
even if we added another ocean like it for its aid” [18:109]; and, “If
all the trees on earth were pens and the ocean were ink, with seven
oceans behind it to add to its supply, the words of Allah would not
be exhausted. For Allah is Exalted in Power and Wise” [31:27]. If
what the scriptures contain were simply an interpretation of Allah’s
speech and not actually Allah’s speech, why 1s it forbidden for the
sexually unclean and otherwise impure to touch it? If what they were
to recite was not the Word of Allah, why is it forbidden for the
sexually unclean to recite the Qur’an? The speech of Allah is equally
what is remembered by hearts, recite by mouths, and written in
books. In all of these forms it is literally Allah’s speech, as Abi
Hanifah has said in Al-Figh al-Akbar.''’

If you say, “What is written in the Book is Allah’s speech,” a
literal, correct meaning could be understood. When you say that this
speech 15 written by someone and in his handwriting, this is also
literally correct. Similarly, if you say that there 15 ink in the Book
with which the speech is written, this is also literally correct. But
when you say that the ink is in the Book, it is not like saying that the
heavens and the earth, Muhammad and Jesus are there in the book.
And both these statements are unlike the statement that there is the
speech of Allah in the Book. If you do not differentiate between the
various meanings of “in” in these statements, you will be mistaken
and will not be guided to the truth.

‘This is, of course, in reference to the true revelations and not what is in possession
of the Jews and Christians today, called the Old Testament and the New Testament.
'?Al-Figh al-Akbar, p. 40.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 109

Similarly, one must differentiate between reading (gird’ah),
which is an act of the reader, and the thing read (magqrii’), which is
the Creator’s speech. You will certainly be misled if you do not
differentiate between these two. If a person finds written on a
parchment, “Know that everything other than Allah is to perish,”
written by a known scribe, he can literally say that this is a line of
poetry by Labid, or that this is literally the writing of such-and-such
scribe. Both these statements are literally correct and the soundness
and literal meaning of each are not to be confused with the
soundness and literal meaning of the other.

Grammatically, “qur’an” is a verbal noun. It may mean the act
of reading, as in the verse, “Carry on the reading (qur’dn) at dawn;
for the reading (qur’dn) at dawn is witnessed” [17:78]. The Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “Make the reading (qur’an) sweet with your
voice.”''? And sometimes it is used to mean what is being read.
Allah says, “When you recite the Qur’an, seek Allah’s protection
from Satan, the rejected one” [16:78]; and, “When the Qur’an is
read, listen to it with attention and hold your peace, that you may
receive Allah’s mercy” [7:204]. The Prophet (peace be on him) used
the word in that meaning when he said, “The Qur’4n has been
revealed according to seven ahriif (‘modes’).”''* Many more verses
and ahddith can be cited for the two usages. Things exist at different
levels: actual existence in reality, in the mind, in speech and in
writing. A thing that exists in reality is comprehended as an idea,
then expressed in words, and then recorded. Therefore, it being
written in a book 15 its fourth level of being.

Speech has no relationship with the mushaf (written record), but
speech is what is written without tongue or mind being mediators.
The differences between it being recorded in the scriptures of old
and on a fine parchment unrolled and in a Book kept hidden are very
clear. When Allah says about the Qur’an, “And lo, it is in the
Scriptures of the men of old” [26:196], He means its mention,
description and information about it, in the same way that
Muhammad (peace be on him) is recorded with them (i.e. his
description).

Abia Dawid, As-Salah, 1468; An-Nasa’i, Al-Iftitah, 2:179-180; Ad-Darimi, 2:474;
Ahmad, 4:283, 285, 296, 304; Ibn Majah, 1342. Its chain is sahih.

''*Al-Bukhari, 2419, 2992, 5041, 6936, 7550; Muslim, As-Salah, 818; Abi Dawid,
As-Salah, 1475; At-Tirmidhi, A/-Qir’at, 2944; An-Nasa’i, As-Salah, 2:150-152;
Ahmad, 1:24, 40, 43.

2.2110 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Certainly, the Qur’an was revealed by Allah to Muhammad and
not to anyone else beforehand. That is why Allah says, “in the
scriptures (zubuar),” and did not say, “in the written document” nor
“in the Parchment.” Zubur is the plural of zubr and means
‘recording and collection’. Allah’s statement, “And lo, it is in the
Scriptures of the men of old” [26:196], means the scriptures of the
people of the past. In the wording and its root, the word is very
clear. Hence, the Qur’an is very clear and free from any kind of
confusion. This is similar to the statement, “...whom they will find
described (maktiiban) with them” [7:157]. Here, maktiban means
mentioned (or described). This is different from Allah’s words,
“(and a Scripture inscribed) on fine parchment unrolled” [52:3-4], or
“on a guarded tablet” [85:22], or “in a Book kept hidden” [56:78],
because the governing word in these types of sentences must either
be a “general verb” (al-fa‘al al-‘amah), such as the verbs to be,
become, and so on. These verses need such words. Or we can
assume maktib fi kitab (‘recorded in a book’) which are different
from the general verbs.

Al-kitab sometimes is mentioned and means the place of the
writing and sometimes it is mentioned meaning what is being
written. One must differentiate between writing the speech in a book
and recording the actual thing that exists in reality. Such a thing that
exists in writing can only have its description recorded.''? The more
one ponders these meanings, the clearer the difference becomes.

The speech of Allah as an objective reality is what one hears
from Him or from His Messenger. When the hearer hears it, he
knows it and remembers it. Hence, the speech of Allah is, for the
hearer, something heard, known and remembered. When he utters
it, it is something read or recited by him. And when he writes it, it is
something written by him. In all these forms, it 15 literally, not
metaphorically, the speech of Allah. One cannot deny this and say
that what is written in the Book or what is recited by the reciter 5
not the speech of Allah. Allah says in the Qur’an, “If one among the
pagans asks you for asylum, grant it to him, so he may hear the
word of Allah” [9:6]. Obviously, he will not hear the words of Allah
from Allah directly but he will hear them from the one who conveys
it from Allah. The verse refutes the view that what is heard 15 only
an interpretation of Allah’s speech and not the speech of Allah itself.
For Allah has said, “Until he hears the word of Allah,” and He did
not say, “Until he hears the interpretation of Allah’s speech.” The

'!>That it is, one cannot actually record the person Muhammad or ‘Abdullah. The most
one can do is mention or describe that person.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 177

words are to be taken literally according to the basic rule. Anyone
who says that what 15 written in the Book 15 an articulation or a
report of Allah’s speech, but not the speech itself, contradicts the
Qur’an, the Sunnah and the faith of the Elders of the Muslim nation.
That is sufficient to show that he has erred.

At-Tahawi’s words also reject the view that the speech of Allah
is a single inaudible idea, and that what 15 heard, revealed, recited or
written is not the speech of Allah but its formulation. He clearly
states, “The Qur’an is Allah’s speech and originates from Him.”
Similar statements have also been made by many other of the Elders.
They stated that the Qur’an begins from Allah and returns to Him.
The statement, “begins from Allah” is directed against the
Jahmiyyah of the Mu‘tazilah and others who say that Allah created
the speech in an object from where it has originated. But the Elders
stated, “It begins from Allah,” that is, it is Allah Who has spoken it,
not any other being. Allah has said in the Qur’&n, “The revelation of
this Book is from Allah, the Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom,”
[39:1]; “But the word from Me will come true” [22:13]; and, “Say:
The Spirit of the Holy (Gabriel) has brought the revelation from
Your Lord in truth” [16:102]. And the meaning of the Elders’
statement, “It returns to Him,” is that it will be completely
withdrawn from hearts and paper without leaving anything behind,
as has been stated in many ahddith.''®

At-Tahawi’s words, “in an unknown manner (bila kayfiyyah),”
means that the modality of Allah’s speech is unknown, not that it is
called speech in a metaphorical sense. “Allah revealed it to His
Prophet by inspiration (wahi)” means that He has sent it down to
him through an angel. The angel Gabriel heard it from Allah. The
Messenger Muhammad (peace be on him) heard it from the angel.
And he, the Prophet, recited it to the people. Allah says, “It is a
Qur’an which We have divided into parts so that you may recite it to
men at intervals. We have revealed it in stages” [17:106], and “The
spirit of faith and truth came down with it to your heart and mind,
that you may admonish in the perspicuous Arabic tongue” [26:193-
195}. This verse also affirms the transcendence of Allah.

Some people have argued that the “sending down” of the Qur’an
(inzal al-Qur’adn) should be understood like the similar phrases in

''8Ibn Majah, 4049. Commenting on this hadith, Al-Busiri stated that its transmitters
are reliable (thigdt). See Misbah az-Zujajah fi Zawa’id Ibn Majah, ed. by Misa
Muhammad ‘Ali and Dr. ‘Izzat ‘Ali ‘Ati‘ah (Cairo: Dar al-Kutub al-Hadithah), p. 254.
Also see the hadith in Al-Hakim, A/l-Mustadrak, 4:473.

112 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

the Qur’an, such as “sending down rain” (inzal al-matar), “sending
down iron” (inzal al-hadid), and “sending down eight kinds of
cattle” (inzal thamaniyat azwaj min al-an‘am). The answer to this
argument is that, in the case of the Qur’an, it has been specifically
stated that is sent down from Allah. Note all of the following verses,
“Hd Mim. The revelation of this Book is from Allah, exalted in
Power, Full of Knowledge” [40:1-2]; “The revelation of this Book
is from Allah, the Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom” [39:1]; “a
revelation from Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful” [42:2]; “This
is the revelation of the Book, in which there is no doubt, from the
Lord of the Worlds” [32:2]; “We sent it down during a blessed
night; for We ever wish to warn against evil. In that night is made
distinct every affair of wisdom by command from Our presence. We
have been sending (Our message)” [4:2-5]; “Say: Then bring a book
from Allah which is a better guide than either of them, that I may
follow it! Do, if you are truthful” [28:49]; “Those to whom We have
given the Book know full well that it has been sent down from your
Lord in truth” [6:114]; and, “Say: The Holy Spirit (Gabriel) has
brought the revelation from your Lord in truth” [16:102].

But in the case of rain, it has been specifically mentioned that 5
sent down from the sky, “We send down pure water from the sky
(as-sama@’)” [25:48], that is, from above. At another place, it has
been made clear that is being sent down from al-muzun [56:69], and
at a second place from al-mu‘siradt [78:14]. Both of these phrases
mean the clouds. As for iron or cattle, nothing has been mentioned
concerning their source. Therefore, how can one liken the sending
down of the Qur’an with these other types of sending down? Iron is
a mineral that is found in the mountains, the highest portions of the
earth. It is said that the higher up it 1s found, the better the quality.

Similarly, animals are created through birth, which requires the
sperm to come down from the loins of the male animal into the
womb of the female animal. That is why the word anzal is used and
not yunzil. Then the fetus comes down from the womb of the
mother to the earth. Furthermore, it 15 well-known that the male
animal is on top of the female during mating, so the sperm travels
from an upward location downwards. Then, when the animal is
born, it once again moves downward from the womb. There are two
ways one can understand the verse, “And He provided for you
(anzala lakum) of (min) cattle” [39:6]. Min here could be understood
to mean, “We provided for you types of animals, eight pairs of
animals,” or “We provided for you cattle which are of eight
types... » The following verse can also be understood in the same
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi — 717913

two ways, “He has made for you pairs of yourselves, and of the
cattle also pairs...” [42:11]. |

At-Tahawi’s words, “The Believers bear witness to its
revelation,” mean that what he has said about the Qur’an being the
speech of Allah and about its revelation is the belief of the Elders,
the Companions of the Prophet (peace be on him) and their
righteous successors. And that this is the truth.

His words, “They are certain that is the actual speech of Allah. It
is not created like the speech of humans,” are directed against the
Mut‘tazilah and others. He has said the word, “actual’’ in order to
refute the erroneous view that Allah’s speech is one inaudible idea or
that it is mental speech (kaldm nafsi) that is not heard from Him. A
speech act which is thought and not spoken is not speech in reality,
otherwise a mute would also be a speaker. It would also follow that
what is written in the scripture cannot be called Qur’an or the word
of Allah; it would only be an interpretation of Allah’s speech not the
speech itself. If a mute were to gesture concerning something and
another person understood him and wrote down what he was trying
to say, 1 would be the latter person’s words that he used to express
the mute’s idea. This example exactly illustrates the view they hold.
To be sure, they do not call Allah mute; but they do say that the
angel grasps the idea that subsists in Allah without any letters or
sounds. The angel grasps this pure idea and then he expresses it in
words. It is the angel, then, that composed the Qur’a4n and
articulated it in Arabic, or Allah created the words of the angel in a
thing other than him, such as air.

To those who say that the speech of God 15 a single idea, we
may put the following question. Did Moses (peace be on him) hear
all of the idea, or just part of it? If the answer is that he heard all of
it, then the claim is that he heard all of the speech of Allah. It is
obvious that that is not correct. If the answer is that he heard part of
the idea, this implies that the idea is divisible. The same would be
true of every other word which Allah has spoken or revealed to
anyone. Again, when Allah said to the angels, “I will create a
vicegerent on the earth” [2:30], or, “cBow down to Adam” [2:34],
was it the whole of His speech or part of it? If the reply is that it was
the whole speech, it is absurd. But if the answer is that it was a part,
it would amount to admitting that Allah’s speech is not singular but
multiple.

There are four different opinions about what kalam (speech) and
gawl (statement) mean. One opinion is that it connotes the word as

well as the meaning, just as the word insdn (man) connotes both the
body and the spirit. This is the view of the Elders. The second is
114 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

that it connotes the word only, and the meaning is not part of its
connotation but only its implication. A group of the Mu‘tazilah and
others hold this view. The third is that 1t connotes the meaning only
and its application to the word is only metaphorical, since the word
is only a sign for the idea. This view is held by Ibn Kullab and his
followers. The fourth is that at times it connotes the word and at
times the idea. Some later followers of the Kullabi school are of this
opinion. And they (the followers of Ibn Kullab) also have a third
view, which has been narrated from Abt Al-Hassan. This view
states that when it refers to Allah’s speech, it is used metaphorically,
but when it refers to human speech, its meaning is literal. This is so,
he says, because the speech of men exists by them, since there can
be no speech without a speaker. But the speech of Allah, he thinks,
does not exist by Him. Therefore, it cannot be said to literally be His
speech. For an elaborate discussion of these views, see the relevant
works.

Those who believe that Allah’s speech is one, argue from the
lines of Akhtal, “Indeed speech exists in the heart/The tongue 5
simply its indicator.”

This proof is incorrect. It is strange that when someone cites a
hadith from one or the other of the two Sahih collections, they object
to it and say that is only a solitary report (khabar al-wahid), even
though scholars agree that such a hadith should be accepted and
acted upon. But on the other hand they argue from a poet’s couplet,
which is doubtful and not even found in his diwan (collection of
poems). In fact, the first line of the couplet has been narrated in a
different way, “Indeed the thought (al-baydn) exists in the heart...”
This seems to be more authentic. Even if we grant that the lines are
Akhtal’s to begin with, we cannot use them as proof. The Christians
deviated with respect to the meaning of kalam. They believe that
Jesus (peace be on him) is the Word of Allah (Jogos). They claim
that divinity merged in him with his humanity, or that he is partly
human and partly divine. Would it then be acceptable to argue from
the lines of a Christian poet who has a mistaken view of theology
and kalam while disregarding the meaning of kalam which is
established and well known in Arabic? Furthermore, the meaning of
the couplet is not correct. It implies that a mute is to be regarded as a
speaker, since he has speech in his mind even though he cannot utter
it nor can people hear him. I have stated the points here briefly. For
details, one should refer to the relevant works.

There is an interesting point concerning this view. It has a close
affinity with the beliefs of the Christians regarding divinity and
humanity. They say that the speech of Allah is only an idea that
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 115

exists in Him and is inaudible. As for its articulated form, it 15
created. Hence, the relationship between the speech of Allah, as an
eternal idea subsisting in His essence, and the created words, which
express the idea, is like the divine appearing in a man who, as the
Christians believe, is Jesus. Notice this interesting resemblance.''’

Another proof that Allah’s speech is not just an idea existing in
Him 1s the hadith of the Prophet (peace be on him), “No human
speech is permitted during our prayers.’''® Another hadith states,
‘Allah commands whatever He wills, and He commands that you
should not speak during your prayers.”''’? The scholars are agreed
that if someone unnecessarily and intentionally speaks during
prayer, his prayer is nullified. They also all agree that the thoughts
that occur in one’s mind concerning worldly things do not nullify
the prayer; only speech nullifies the prayer. This shows that the
Muslims are in agreement that (the thought in the mind) is not
speech. |

There is also a hadith in the two Sahihs that states that the
Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Allah overlooks for my nation the
thoughts that occur in the minds as long as they are not spoken
aloud or acted upon.”’”” Hence the Prophet (peace be on him)
differentiated between the thought in the mind (hadith an-nafs) and
speech. He stated that no one would be punished for evil thoughts
unless he spoke them (or acted upon them). There is no difference
on this point among the scholars. It is clear, therefore, that only
what is uttered by the tongue is speech (kaladm). This 15 what is
known from the Arabic language in which the Law-Giver has
addressed us.

There is also a hadith in the Sunan that Mu‘adh asked the
Prophet (peace be on him) whether people will have to account for
what they say. The Prophet (peace be on him) told him, “Will
anything hurl people on their faces in the Fire other than what the
tongues reap?! This also shows that speech is an act of the

''7See Ibn Taymiyyah, Al-Jawdb as-Sahih, vol. 3, p. 73.

''’Part of a hadith in Muslim, Al-Masdjid, 537; Abi Dawid, As-Salah, 930; An-
Nasa’l, As-Sahw, 3:14-18; Ahmad, 5:448, 449.

'“ Aba Dawid, As-Salah, 924; An-Nasa’i, As-Sahw, 3:19; Ahmad, 1:377, 409, 415,
435, 463; Al-Humaydi, 94; Ibn Abi Shaybah, Musannaf, 2:37. _

°° Al-Bukhari, 2528, 2529, 6664; Muslim, Al-/mdn, 127; Abia Dawid, At-Taldg,
6:156-157; Ibn Majah, At-Taldg, 2040.

'*'Part of a hadith in At-Tirmidhi, Al-/mdn, 2619; Ibn Majah, 3973; Ahmad, 5:231,
236, 237. Its chain in At-Tirmidhi is broken, but Al-Arnawit has called it a sahith
hadith due to its numerous pieces of supporting evidence.

116 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

tongue. In short, the words gawi (statement) and kaladm (speech)
and all of their derivatives — perfect, imperfect, imperative,
participial and so on — refer to word as well as meaning in the
Qur’an, hadith and language of the Arabs. There was never any
dispute among the Companions or their righteous followers
regarding the meaning of kalam. It was disputed only in later times
by heretical scholars, whereafter the controversy spread far and
wide. |

There is no question, then, that to know the meaning of kaldm,
gawi and similar terms, we do not have to refer to a poet. Every
speaker of Arabic, past or present, has used these words and knows
what they mean, just as he knows what ra’s (head), yad (hand) and
rijl (leg) mean.

Definitely anyone who says that the speech of Allah is an idea
existing in Him and what is read, remembered, written or heard
from any reciter is an account (hikdyah) of His speech and
something created, 15 also saying that the Qur’4n 15 created, although
he may not be aware of it. Allah says, “Say: If the whole of
mankind and jinns were to gather together to produce the like of the
Qur’an, they could not produce the like thereof” [17:88]. What is
referred to here? Is Allah pointing to what 15 in His mind or to what
is recited and heard by the people? Obviously, it is to what is recited
and heard by the people, for what is in the soul of Allah is not
something to be pointed to, sent down, recited or heard. The words,
“They could not produce the like thereof’ cannot mean that they
would not be able to produce something like what is in Allah’s soul,
which they cannot even hear or know. There is no way to know or
gain access to what is in the soul of Allah.

If they say that Allah is pointing to the representation and
formulation of what is in His soul, rather than itself, and that this is
what is recited, written or heard, they are simply saying that the
Qur’an is created. They commit a blasphemy greater than that of the
Mu‘tazilah, because to represent (hikdyah) a thing is to produce
something like or similar to it. This would amount to the
representation and simulation of Allah’s attributes. Furthermore, if
the recitation were a kind of representation, it would mean that men
can produce speech similar to the speech of Allah, and this would
contradict the inimitability of the Qur’an. It would also mean that the
reciter uses letters and sounds to represent something that is without
letters and sounds.

But we know that the Qur’an consists of si#irahs that are arranged
and verses that are articulated, and that are written on sacred leaves.

Allah says, “Bring then ten si#rahs forged like unto it” [11:13];
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 117

“Nay, these are verses self-evident in the hearts of those endowed
with knowledge; and none but the unjust reject our verses” [29:49];
and, “It is in books held greatly in honor, exalted in dignity, kept
pure and holy” [80:13-14]. Ten good deeds are recorded for every
letter of the Qur’an that a person recites. The Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “I do not say that AlifLadm Mim is a letter; rather, alifis a
letter, 1271 is a letter and mim is a letter.’ It is the Qur’an which is
preserved in the hearts of its memorizers and heard from the tongues
of its reciters. Sheikh Hafiz ad-Din An-Nasafi said in Al-Manar,
“The Qur’an is the name for both the wording and the meaning.”

Other theologians have made similar statements. It is attributed
to Abii Hanifah that he once said it was sufficient to recite the
Qur’an in Farsi during prayer, but he later changed his mind and
said, “It is not permissible for anyone who has the ability to recite
(in Arabic) to recite it in other than Arabic.” Others have said that if
someone reads it in other than Arabic, he must either be crazy and
deserve medical attention or he is a heretic who deserves to be
killed. This is so because Allah spoke it in that language. Its
miraculous nature is in both its language and its meaning.

The author has said, “Whoever hears it and thinks it 15 the
speech of man is an unbeliever.” Those who deny that the Qur’&an is
the word of Allah, or say that it 15 the word of Muhammad or any
other creature, human or angel, are undoubtedly unbelievers. Even
those who say it is the word of Allah but then distort the meaning of
that statement are no different from those who say, “This is nothing
but the words of a mortal’ [74:25]. They share in such unbelief.
Satan has certainly led those people astray. God willing, we will
discuss their situation in particular while discussing the author’s
words, “We do not charge anyone who faces the Ka‘bah in prayer
with unbelief on the basis of a sin unless he holds that sin to be
lawful.”

The words of the author, “It is completely unlike the word of
any mortal,” mean that it is incomparably more eloquent, true and
dignified. Allah has said, “Whose words would be truer than
Allah’s?” [4:87]; “Say: If the whole of mankind and jinns were to
gather together to produce the like of the Qur’an, they could not
produce the like thereof’ [17:88]; “Say: Bring ten s#rahs similar to
it’ [11:13]; and, “Say: Bring then a surah like unto it’ [10:38]. The
Arabs who were masters of Arabic and bitterly opposed to the

—'?? at-Tirmidhi, Thawab al-Qur’Gn, 2912; Ad-Darimi, Fadda’il al-Qur’an, 2:429; Al-
Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 1:555.

118 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Qur’an could not produce a small surah like any of those in the
Qur’an. This proves the veracity of the Messenger’s statement that it
is from Allah. They were incapable of producing anything similar to
it with respect to both its language and its meanings. In fact, they
could not produce anything even similar to either of these two
aspects. This was the case because the Qur’an was in perfect Arabic,
absolutely flawless and most eloquent. The challenge that no human
can produce anything like it is with respect to both its language as
well as its meanings, that is, words as well as meaning, not just
language. The disjoined letters at the beginning of various surahs of
the Qur’an point to the Qur’an’s having been revealed in the
language and style that the Arabs were acquainted with.

Haven’t you noticed that after every such set of disjoined letters
there comes a mention of the Qur’an? For example, “Alif Lam Mim.
This is the Book without doubt” [2:1-2]; “Alif Lam Mim. Allah!
There is no God but He, the Living, the Self-Sustaining, Eternal. It
is He Who sent down to you (step by step) in truth the Book”’ [3:1-
3]; “Alif Lam Mim Sad. A Book revealed to you” [7:1-2]; and, “Alif
Ldm Ra. These are the verses of the Book of Wisdom,” [19:1-2],
and so on. This is to remind them that the noble and gracious
Prophet (peace be on him) who was sent to them did not bring them
what they could not understand. Instead, he addressed them in their
own language.

Heretics have often used the disjoined letters as a pretext to deny
that Allah has uttered the Qur’an or that Gabriel heard it from Him.
They have similarly used the verse, “There is nothing like unto
Him” [33:11], to deny the attributes of Allah. But the rest of the
latter verse, “and He 15 the Hearing, the Seeing,” refutes their denial
of divine attributes. Similarly, many verses, such as “then bring a
surah like unto it” [10:38], also refute their view that the words of
the Qur’an were not revealed. This is because the verse challenges
people to produce a siirah, not just separate letters or words. And
the shortest su#irah in the Qur’an consists of just three verses. This 1s
why Abi Yusuf and Muhammad, the students of Abu Hanifah, have
said that during prayers one should not recite fewer than three short
verses or one long verse equivalent to them, as any part of the
Qur’an less than that may not be inimitable. And Allah knows best.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 119

(37) Anyone who attributes something human to Allah Is
an infidel.

All those who grasp this point will take heed and refrain from
saying things such as the unbelievers say. And they will know that
He, in His attributes, is not like human beings.

Having said that the Qur’an is literally the word of Allah,
originating from Him, the author thought it proper to remention that
Allah is not like man in any of His attributes. Negation follows
affirmation in order to remove the possibility of anthropomorphism.
That is, although Allah certainly speaks, His speech does not share
the attributes that characterize human speech, for “there is nothing
like Allah and He 15 the All-Hearing, All-Seeing” [42:11]. This
verse 15 the best example for anyone to follow who wants to affirm
the attributes of Allah and avoid both anthropomorphism and
negation. He wants to secure the pure and delicious milk that trickles
down from between the excretion of negation and the blood of
anthropomorphism. The negator, in fact, worships a void. And the
anthropomorphist worships an idol. We will elaborate this point
later while commenting on the author’s statements, “Anyone who
does not avoid both negation and anthropomorphism strays far away
and fails to glorify Allah,” and “Islam is between negation and
anthropomorphism.” There is no question that negation is worse
than anthropomorphism. We will also discuss that later. The way
Allah has described Himself, and the way the Prophet (peace be on
him) described Him, contain no anthropomorphism. The attributes
of the Creator are as it behooves Him. And the attributes of the
created are as it behooves them.

The words, “All those who grasp this point will take heed,”
mean that if one ponders what the author has said regarding the
affirmation of Allah’s attributes and the negation of
anthropomorphism and its evil consequences, he will understand
and not make statements similar to that of the disbelievers.

(38) The seeing of Allah by the people of Paradise is
factual, without their vision being all-encompassing and
without the manner of their vision being known.

As it states in the Book of our Lord, “Some faces that Day will
beam looking towards their Lord” [75:22-23]. The explanation of
this is as Allah wills and according to His knowledge. Whatever the
Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) has said about it and has
come down to us through authentic ahddith will come to pass as he
said it and meant it. We do not try to interpret his words according
120 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

to our opinions and imaginations. No one 15 safe in his faith unless
he submits completely to Allah (to Whom belongs glory and
greatness) and His Messenger (peace be on him) and entrusts the
knowledge of things that are ambiguous to the one who knows
them.

The Jahmiyyah and the Mu‘tazilah deny the beatific vision, as do
some of the Khariyis and Imaémiyyah. But their view is wrong and
refuted by the Qur’an and Sunnah. Those who affirm their belief in
the vision constitute the majority of the Muslim nation, including the
Companions of the Prophet, their Successors, the imams of Islam
whom the community hails as their leaders, the scholars of hadith,
and all of the theological schools of the Ahl as-Sunnah. The belief in
the beatific vision 15 one of the most important and greatest
principles of Islam. It is the goal that those who have worked hard
are preparing for. It 15 this that the competitors are competing for,
and only those who have been veiled from their Lord and turned
from its gate will refuse it.

From the evidence for it, the author has mentioned the verse,
“Some faces that Day will beam looking towards their Lord.” This 5
one of the clearest proofs. But those who are bent upon altering the
meaning of the Qur’anic verses under the guise of fa’wil
(reinterpretation) will find various verses on the Hereafter, Paradise,
Hell and Judgment quite easy to twist. If anyone is determined to
misinterpret a text and give it a meaning which does not fit into the
context, it may not be difficult for him to find such a way.

This approach has played havoc with religion and life. This 1s
what the Jews and Christians did with the texts of the Torah and
Gospel. Allah has warned us against doing the same. But vicious
people have not heeded the warning and have in fact followed in
their footsteps. What harm misinterpretation has done to Islam and
Muslims! Was not ‘Uthman, may Allah be pleased with him, killed
because of a misinterpretation of the texts? Did not the battles of the
Camel and Siffin, the killing of Al-Hussayn, and the incidents of Al-
Harrah'’”’ take place on account of it? Did not the Kharijis,
Mu‘tazilis and Rafidis commit their heresies because of it? And did

'**Uthman was killed in the year 35 A.H. The battle of the Camel took place at
Basrah the following year between the army of ‘Ali, on the one side, and the army of
‘A’isha, Talhah and. Az-Zubayr, on the other. The Battle of Siffin, a place near Ar-
Raqqah on the bank of the Euphrates River, took place in the year 37 A.H. Al-
Hussayn was killed at Karbalah, near Kiifah, on the tenth of Muharram, 61 A.H. And
in 63 A.H., the army of Yazid Ibn Mu‘awiyah attacked Madinah and slaughtered men
and women in the eastern part of the city, called Harrah, or Harrat Waqim.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 121

not the Muslim nation become divided into seventy sects because of
it?

The above-mentioned verse associates looking (nazar). with the
face, which is its proper position. It takes the preposition 47
meaning ‘towards’. This clearly shows that what is meant in that
verse is seeing with the eyes. And since there is no counter-
indication that the apparent meaning 1s not the intended meaning, it
is clear that seeing the face of Allah with the eyes is what is meant.

The word nazar may mean different things according to its use
with or without a preposition. When it is used without a preposition,
it means ‘to wait’, as in the verse, “Wait for us (unzuriind), so that
we may borrow some light from you” [57:13]. When it is followed
by the preposition fi it means ‘to think or reflect upon’, as in the
verse, “Do they not reflect upon (lam yanzuru fi) the sovereignty
over the heavens and the earth’ [7:185]. However, when it 15
followed by the preposition 1/2, it means ‘to see with the eyes’, as in
the verse, “Look at (unzuru ila) its fruits when it bears fruit” [6:99].
And what 11, in addition, the face, which is the place from which
one sees, 1s explicitly mentioned? Ibn Mardawayh recorded through
his chain of authorities from Ibn ‘Amr that the Messenger of Allah
(peace be on him) said about the verse, “Some faces that Day will
beam looking towards their Lord” [75:22-23], “The faces will beam
due to the radiance and beauty of Allah’s face.”'** Al-Hassan said,
“Faces will look at their Lord and will be brightened by His light.”
Ibn ‘Abbas, as was related by Abii Salih,'*? said, “Looking towards
their Lord means that they will look upon the face of their Lord, the
Most High.” “Ikrimah said, “Some faces will that Day beam because
of the blessing they enjoy. And ‘looking towards their Lord means
that they will look upon their Lord.” He also quoted a similar
statement from Ibn ‘Abbas. This is the view of all the commentators
of the Qur’4n among the Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jama ‘ah.

Allah has said, “They will have there all that they wish, and
there will be more besides” [50:35]. At-Tabari mentions that ‘Ali Ibn
Abi Talib and Anas Ibn Malik stated that the reference in the verse 5
to the vision of Allah.'”°

'*4 At-Tabari has recorded this report in his commentary, Jami‘ al-Baydn, vol. 29, p.
120. Its chain is very weak. It contains Thuwayr Ibn Abi Fakhtah, about whom it is
said that he lied and his ahddith should not be accepted.

'*° Abia Salih is not reliable according to Ibn ‘Adiy.

'°At-Tabari, Jami‘ al-Baydn, vol. 26, pp. 173-176.

122 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Similarly, in the verse, “To those who do good there is a goodly
reward (husnah) and more besides (ziyddah)” [10:26], “goodly
reward” means Paradise, and “more besides” means looking upon
the face of Allah. This 15 how the Messenger of Allah (peace be on
him) and his Companions explained that verse. Muslim recorded in
his Sahih from Suhayb that the Messenger of Allah (peace be on
him) recited the verse, “To those who do good there is a goodly
reward and more besides,” and then said, “When the people of
Paradise enter Paradise and the people of Hell enter Hell, a voice
will call, ‘People of Paradise! Allah has given you a promise which
He wishes to fulfill.” They will say, ‘What is it? Has He not tilted
the balance in our favor, made our faces bright, saved us from the
Fire, and entered us into Paradise?’ Thereupon Allah will lift the veil
and they will look upon Him. He will not give them anything dearer
and lovelier than a look at His face. And that is the ziyddah
(mentioned in the verse).””'’

This hadith has also been recorded by other compilers of hadith
and has been transmitted through different chains and with different
wordings. They all say that “more” in the verse means looking upon
the face of Allah. The Companions of the Prophet (peace be on him)
also explained the verse in a similar fashion. Ibn Jarir At-Tabari
recorded such from a number of them, including Abi Bakr As-
Siddig, Abu Hudhayfah, Abi: Musa Al-Ash‘ari and Ibn ‘Abbas,
may Allah be pleased with all of them.

Allah also says, “Truly, from that Day they will be veiled from
their Lord” [83:15]. Ash-Shafi‘l and other imdms have used this
verse as proof of the beatific vision for the people of Paradise. At-
Tabari and others recorded from Al-Muzani from Ash-Shafi‘1, and
Al-Hakim recorded from Al-Asamm from Ar-Rabi‘a Ibn Sulayman,
who said, “I was with Muhammad Ibn Idris Ash-Shafi‘I when a
letter came to him from As-Sa‘id inquiring as to his opinion about
the verse, ‘Truly from that Day, they will be veiled from their Lord,’
and he said, ‘Since some people will incur the wrath of Allah and
will not be allowed to see Him, it implies that the friends of Allah
will have His pleasure and will be able to see ‏رورز]]‎ 8

The Mu‘tazilah, on the other hand, argue from the verses, “You
cannot see me” [7:143], and “No vision can grasp Him” [6:106].

'’Muslim, Al-Imdn, 81; At-Tirmidhi, 2555, 3104; Ibn Majah, 187; Ahmad, 4:332,
333. The wording of the hadith quoted here is that of Ibn Majah.

'8Al-Bayhaqi, Mandqgib Ash-Shafi‘i, ed. by As-Sayyid Ahmad Sagar (Cairo:
Maktabah Dar at-Turath, 1391/1971), vol. 1, p. 419.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 123

But the fact is that these verses go against them. Take the first verse.
It suggests the possibility of the beatific vision in many ways. First,
a person like Moses, whom Allah honored by talking to him and
making him His messenger and who knew his Lord more than
anyone of his time, cannot be imagined to have requested something
which was not possible for him to request. The Mu‘tazilah, on the
other hand, believe that what he asked for is the greatest
impossibility.

Second, Allah did not rebuke Moses for asking for the vision,
although when Noah asked for his son to be saved, Allah rebuked
him for his request, saying, “I give this counsel to you lest you act
like the ignorant” [11:46].

Third, Allah only said to Moses, “You will not see Me.” He did
not say, “I cannot be seen,” “It is impossible to see me,” or “I am
invisible.” The difference between the two sets of answers is clear.
Suppose you have a stone in your pocket and someone who thinks it
is food begs you for it. The correct response would be, “It is not
food.” But suppose you did have something edible in your pocket.
The correct response then could be, “You will never eat it.”” Hence,
the correct understanding of the verse is that Allah is visible, but
Moses was not able to see Him in this world because human
faculties are not capable of seeing Him. |

Fourth, Allah says, moreover, “Look at the mountain. If it
abides in its place, then you will see Me” [7:143]. In other words, if
a solid and strong thing like the mountain cannot stand the
manifestation of Allah in this world, how can a weak creature like
man stand up to it?

Fifth, Allah does have the power to make the mountain abide in
its place when He manifests Himself. It was certainly possible, and
that is the reason He made the vision contingent on it. Had it been
impossible, there would have been no difference between what He
said and the words, “If the mountain abides in its place, I will eat,
drink and sleep,” as these are all the same to the Mu‘tazilah.

Sixth, Allah states, “When His Lord manifested His glory on the
mountain, He made it as dust” [7:143]. If, as these words say, Allah
could manifest Himself to a lifeless thing like a mountain, which is
not a being that may perceive reward or punishment, why should He
not manifest Himself to His prophets and friends in the Abode of
Grace? In fact, what He wanted to teach Moses was that when a
mountain could not stand His manifestation, even more so a weaker
being like man could not stand it.

Seventh, it 15 a fact that Allah spoke to Moses, called him and
entered into a dialogue with him. Now, if it was possible for anyone
to converse with Allah, to speak with Him and to hear from Him
124 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

without any intermediary, it should even more so be possible for
him to see Him. One cannot deny vision without denying such a
conversation. Hence, no wonder that the Mu‘tazilah denied that,
too.

As for the argument that Jan'’’ in lan tar’ani (‘You will not see
me’) rules out the vision forever, even in the Hereafter, it is not
correct. Lan does not necessarily negate something for all times to
come, even if it is followed by a word like abadan (forever).
Therefore, without the word “forever,” it certainly does not imply
eternity. For example, Allah has said, “But never (/an) will they
express such desire” [2:95]; but later says, “Then they will cry out:
‘Angel! Let your Lord put an end to us’” [43:77]. Again, if the
denial had ruled out the vision forever, it would not have been
contingent upon something else. In such cases, which are quite
common in the Qur’an, lan does not negate a thing forever. Allah
says, “I will not leave (Jan abraha) this place until my father permits
me” [12:80]. This demonstrates that lan does not perpetuate the
negation. Sheikh Jamal Ad-Din Ibn Malik has written, “Whoever
thinks Jan denies something forever, His view I reject and uphold
the contrary.

As for the second verse, “Vision does not grasp Him” [6:106], I
will show that it suggests the possibility of vision in a very subtle
way. Allah has said these words while praising Himself. And to
praise is to affirm something, but to simply negate something is not
to affirm anything. Therefore, you cannot praise anybody simply by
denying something. When Allah praises Himself with a negation, it
implies an affirmation. For example, when He denies slumber or
sleep for Himself, it is praise because it implies the perfection of His
world-sustaining activity. Similarly, the negation of death implies
the perfection of His life; the negation of weariness implies the
perfection of His energy; the negation of any partner, wife, son,
daughter or assistant implies the perfection of His lordship, divinity
and authority; the negation of eating and drinking implies the
perfection of His self-sufficiency; the negation of intercession
without His permission implies His absolute oneness and autonomy;
the negation of injustice implies the perfection of His justice,
knowledge and self-sufficiency; the negation of forgetting and
ignorance implies the perfection of His knowledge and 15 ‏لله‎
‎comprehensiveness; and the negation of any peers implies the
perfection of His essences and attributes.

'*"Implying future negation.

Commentary on the Creed of At- _ 125

That is why Allah does not praise Himself by simply negating
something that does not imply anything positive. The object that is
qualified with some want shares that want with non-being; and no
one can be perfect that shares something with non-being. The true
meaning of the verse, therefore, is that, even though Allah can be
seen, He cannot be grasped or encompassed. So the words, “Vision
does not grasp Him” [6:106], underlie His greatness, that He 15 so
exalted above everything that none will encompass Him, even
though they will see Him. Idrak means ‘to comprehend and to
encompass’; it is more than simply seeing. The Qur’an says, “When
the two groups saw each other, the people of Moses said, ‘We are
going to be overtaken (mudrakin). He (Moses) said, ‘By no means”
[26:61-62]. Moses did not deny being seen (ri’yah]. He only
denied that they would be overtaken (idrak). Rii’yah and idrak
sometimes go together but not always. One can see Allah but cannot
grasp Him, just as one can know Him but cannot comprehend Him.
This is how the Companions of the Prophet and the imams have
understood this verse, as 15 clear from their comments quoted
earlier. But this aspect is not confined only to Allah; the sun which
Allah created may be seen but not encompassed by people.

Concerning the ahddith of the Prophet (peace be on him) and
statements of the Companions that suggest beatific vision, they are
mutawatir.'°° The compilers of the Sahih, Musnad and Sunan
collections have recorded them. Consider the following examples.

Abt Hurayrah narrated that some people asked the Messenger of
Allah, “Will we see our Lord on the Day of Judgment?” He
answered, “Does it hurt you when you see the full moon?” They
said, “No, Messenger of Allah.” He then said “Is it difficult for you
to see the sun on a cloudless day?’ They said, “No, Messenger of
Allah.” He then said, “You will see Him in the same way.” ‏لذ‎
‎Bukhari and Muslim recorded this hadith with its full text.'*' They
have also recorded a similar hadith from Abt Sa‘id Al-Khudri.'*?

Jarir Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Bajali said, “We were sitting with the
Prophet (peace be on him) and he looked to the moon of the
fourteenth night (a full moon). Then he said, ‘You will see your
Lord with your eyes just as you see this (moon). You will not have

'°See Ibn Al-Qayyim, Hddi al-Arwah ild Bildd al-Afrah (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-
Islamiyyah, n.d.), p. 205.

‎Al-Bukhari, At-Tawhid, 7437; Muslim, Al-/mdan, 182; Aba Dawid, As-Sunnah,‏ اذا
‎At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Jannah, 2560; Ahmad, 2:275, 293, 368, 524.‏ ;4730

‎Al-Bukhari, 7439; Muslim, 183; Ibn Khiizaymah, Kitab at-Tawhid, p. 169, 172,‏ ةذ
‎Al-Lalka’i, Sharh as-Sunnah, 818.‏ ;173

‎F7 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI

126 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

to trouble each other in trying to see Him.” This hadith was also
recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.'*?
The hadith of Suhayb mentioned earlier was recorded by
Muslim and others.'** |
In another hadith, Abii Misa narrated that the Prophet (peace be
on him) said, “There will be two gardens of silver there (in
Paradise), where everything including the utensils will be of silver.
And there will be two gardens of gold, where everything including
the utensils will be of gold. Nothing will be there to restrain the
faithful from seeing their Lord, the Most Blessed and Most High, in
the Gardens of Everlasting Bliss except a cloak of glory over His
countenance.” This was recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.’**
‘Adiy Ibn Hatim narrated that the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “You will certainly meet Allah on the Day you will meet Him.
There will be no veil between you and Him, nor an interpreter to
interpret. He will say, ‘Did I not send you a messenger to deliver
My message? You will answer, “Yes, O Lord. He will say, ‘Did I
not give you riches and honor you? And you will say, ‘Yes, O
Lord....’” This hadith was recorded by Al-Bukhari in his Sahih.'*°
About thirty Companions'*’ have related the hadith of beatific
vision. Anyone who studies them will know with certainty that the
Messenger (peace be upon him) said them. If I had not laid down
the condition of being brief in this work, I would have quoted them
all; however, anyone who wants to know this subject thoroughly is
advised to study them. In addition to the vision of Allah, they also
tell of Allah speaking to whom He likes, that He will come to judge
the creatures on the Day of Judgment, that He is above the worlds,
that He will call them with a voice everyone at a distance will hear,
like one who 15 close, that He will appear (tajallda), that He will

'*> Al-Bukhari, 554, 573, 4851, 7434, 7435, 7436; Muslim, A/-Masdjid, 633; Abi
Dawud, As-Sunnah, 4729; At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Jannah, 2554; Ibn Méajah, Al-
Muqaddamah, 177; Ahmad, 4:360, 362, 365.

'*Muslim, Al-/mdn, 81; At-Tirmidhi, 2555, 3104; Ibn Majah, 187; Ahmad, 4:332,
333. The wording of the hadith quoted earlier was that of Ibn Majah.

°° Al-Bukhari, 4878, 4880, 7444; Muslim, Al-imdn, 180; At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-
Jannah, 2530; Ibn Majah, Al-Mugaddamah, 186; Al-Lalka’i, Sharh as-Sunnah, 834.
°A1-Bukhari, 1413, 3595; Muslim, 1016, 67; At-Tirmidhi, 2415; Ibn Majah, 185;
Ahmad, 4:256, 377.

"See Ibn Kathir, Kitab an-Nihdyah, Muhammad Az-Zayni, ed. (Dar al-Kutub al-
Hadithah, 1389/1969), vol. 2, pp. 300-303; Al-Ajuri, Ash-Shari‘ah, Muhammad
Hamid Al-Fiqi, ed. (Cairo: Matba‘at as-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah, 1369/1950), pp.
264-270; Al-Lalka’i, Sharh as-Sunnah, 3:470-499.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 127

laugh, and so on. All this surely strikes the Jahmiyyah and
Mut‘ tazilah like a lightning bolt.

How can one know the principles of the religion of Islam from
sources other than the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His
Messenger? And how can one interpret the Book of Allah in a way
other than how His Messenger and the Companions of His
Messenger, in whose language the Qur’an was revealed, explained
it? The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Whoever comments on the
Qur’an simply on the basis of his opinion will take his own seat in
the Hell-fire.’”’'’® In another version of the hadith, the wording is,
“Whoever comments on the Qur’an without knowledge will take his
own seat in the Hell-fire.”'’? Aba Bakr was asked about the
meaning of abb in the verse, “fakihatan wa abban’” [80:31], and he
replied, “If I say anything with regard to the Qur’an that I do not
properly know, what heaven will protect me and what earth would
hold me?”

To liken the sight of Allah to the sight of the sun or the moon is
not making a likening to Allah; it is simply comparing one with
another and not one object with another object. But it contains proof
that Allah is above His creation; otherwise, how can one see
something without facing it? Anyone who says that we will see
Allah but He will not be in any direction should ask himself whether
he is not contradicting his reason or if he has something wrong with
his ability to reason; otherwise, if he says that Allah will be seen but
not in front, behind, to the right, to the left, above or below the
viewer, everyone who has unbiased reasoning will refute him.

This is why the Mu‘tazilah insist that anyone who denies that
Allah is above the world must also deny that He may be seen. They
say, “How can it be that He is seen without any direction.”

We do not see Him in this life because our vision is not capable
of that, not because He cannot be seen. If someone tries to see the
sun, he cannot, but not because it cannot be seen but because our
eyes are too weak. In the Hereafter, Allah will strengthen the sight

8 At-Tirmidhi, At-7afsir, 2952; Tafsir At-Tabari [Ibn Jarir At-Tabari’s commentary
on the Qur’an edited under this title by Mahmiid Muhammad Shakir and Ahmad
Muhammad Shakir (Cairo: Dar Al-Ma‘arif, 2nd ed., n.d. The ahddith mentioned by Ibn
Jarir have been numbered in this edition. Henceforth, this edition will be referred to
as Tafsir At-Tabari and the ahdadith will be mentioned by their numbers), hadith no.
73, 74, 75, 76 and 77. The chain of this hadith contains ‘Abdul-A‘la Ibn ‘Amir Ath-
Tha‘labi, who is weak.

'? At-Tirmidhi, At-Tafsir, 2951; Ahmad, 233, 269, 323, 327. This hadith also
contains the same weak narrator as the previous narration.

128 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

of humans such that they will be able to see Him. That is why,
when Allah manifested Himself, “Moses fell down senseless. And
when he came to, he said, ‘Glory unto You! I turn to You repentant,
and I am the first of (true) Believers’” [7:143], because no living
being can see You except that he will die. No lifeless being faces
You but does tumble down. Similarly, human beings cannot see
angels in their true forms, save for those whom Allah helps to do
so, such as when He helped our Prophet (peace be upon him) to do
SO.

Allah says, “They say: ‘Why is an angel not sent down to him?’
If We did send an angel, the matter would be settled at once” [6:8).
More than one of the pious Elders stated while commenting on this
verse, “They are not able to see an angel in his real form. If He were
to send them an angel, He would make him in human form. Then it
would be confusing to them: is he human or an angel? It 1s,
therefore, from the complete blessings of Allah upon us that he sent
a messenger to us from among our own kind.”

The Mu‘tazilah could not force them to accept that proposition
until they made them agree that Allah is neither inside the world nor
outside it. But the statement of one who says that He is there and
can be seen but not in any direction is closer to sound reasoning than
the statement of one who says that He exists by Himself but He 5
not anywhere nor can He be seen.

One can counter the argument of those who deny the vision of
Allah, because it implies that Allah is located somewhere, in the
following manner. What is meant by direction? Is it a being or a
non-being? If you mean by it a being, then your argument is that
what is not in some being cannot be seen. But this premise is not
proven; in fact, it is a false argument, for the surface of the world
can be seen even though it is not in another world. If you say that it
is anon-being, then the minor premise of your argument is not true,
for we do not accept that Allah is not somewhere in that sense.

How can one talk about the basis of the religion when one is not
taking his thoughts from the Book and the Sunnah, but instead is
deriving them from the statement of a human being; or if one claims
that he is taking it from the Book of Allah but does not take the
explanation of the Book of Allah from the hadith of the Messenger,
nor looks to them or to what the Companions and their followers
stated that have been narrated to us through trustworthy
transmission? Those people did not just transmit the wording of the
Qur’an; they transmitted both its wording and its meaning. They did
not learn the Qur’an as a child learns it; instead, they learned it with
its meaning. Whoever does not follow their methodology, but
speaks only from his own opinion, and whoever speaks according
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 129

to his opinion or what he thinks is Allah’s religion, without taking it
from the Book and the Sunnah, is a sinner, even 11 what he says 5
correct. But whoever takes his statements from the Book and the
Sunnah 15 to be rewarded even if he makes a mistake; though if he 5
correct, his reward is to be doubled.

And the author said, “The seeing of Allah by the people of
Paradise is factual.’ It seems that he is limiting the seeing to the
people of Paradise and denying it for others. There is no doubt that
the people of Paradise will see their Lord in Paradise. Similarly,
they will see Him when the people are gathered before they enter
Paradise. That is confirmed in the two Sahihs by the Messenger of
Allah (peace be upon him).'*° The following verse also points to
that, “The salutation on the Day they will meet Him will be “Peace’”’
[33:44]. There is a difference of opinion concerning the seeing by
the people who are gathered on the Day of Judgment. There are
three opinions on this matter:

1) Only the Believers will see Him.
2) All the people will see Him, Believers and disbelievers, but

then He will be veiled from the disbelievers and they will

never see Him again after that.

3) Along with the Believers, the hypocrites will also see Him, but
not the other unbelievers.

There is a similar difference of opinion concerning those whom
Allah will speak to on the Day of Judgment.

The ummah has agreed that no one can see Allah with his eyes in
this world. There is no dispute over this question except for the case
of the Prophet (peace be upon him) alone. Some people deny that he
saw Allah with his eyes, while others affirm his seeing. Qadi ‘Ayad
discussed in his book, Ash-Shifa, the difference of opinion among
the Companions and later scholars concerning this topic. He
mentioned that the Prophet’s wife, ‘A’ishah, denied that he had seen
Allah with his eyes. She told Masruq, when he had asked her, “Did
Muhammad (peace be upon him) see his Lord?” She said, “My hair
stands on end from what you have said.” Then she said, “Whoever
tells you that Muhammad saw his Lord has truly stated a
falsehood.”'*' ‘Ayad states, “Many people hold the same view as
‘A’isha. It 15 the well-known opinion of Ibn Mas‘iid and Abt
Hurayrah, although the latter has been reported to have affirmed the
opposite. The opinion that the Prophet did not see Allah and that no

'“°Such ahddith were presented earlier in this section.
'41 Al-Bukhari, 4855, 7380; Muslim, A/-/man, 177; At-Tirmidhi, 3068, 3228; and
Ahmad, 6:49-50.

130 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

one can see Him in this life is held by a number of scholars of
hadith, jurists and theologians. It 15 recorded from Ibn ‘Abbas that
he said that the Prophet (peace be upon him) did see his Lord with
his eyes.'** But ‘Ata’ narrated from him that he said he saw Him
with his heart.'*® Concerning whether the Prophet (peace be upon
him) saw Him with his eyes, there 1s nothing definitive nor is there a
clear text. People have referred to the two verses of Strat An-Naym
concerning this matter. But what they state 15 debatable and may be
cited for either view. As for the ahddith, there is nothing clear or
definitive in them.”'**

The above is what Qadi ‘Ayad has stated and it 15 the truth. In
principle, the seeing of Allah in this life is not ruled out. If it were
impossible, Moses would not have requested it. But there is no
clear text that states that the Prophet saw Him with his eyes. In fact,
there are some narrations that show that he did not see Him. For
example, Muslim recorded in his Sahih from Abit Dharr, who said,
“T asked the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him), ‘Did you see
your Lord?’ and he said, ‘He is Light; how could I see him?””'*

And another narration states, “I saw light.” Muslim also
recorded a hadith from Abt Musa Al-Ash‘ari who said, “The
Prophet (peace be upon him) addressed us and told us five things:
Truly Allah does not sleep, nor does it behoove Him to sleep; He
fixes everyone’s share, large or small; the deeds of the night are
raised before Him before the deeds of the day; and the deeds of the
day are raised to Him before the deeds of the night; and His veil 5
light - and in one narration “fire”. And if He were to remove it, the
splendor of His countenance would burn everything that His eyes
would fall upon.”'*° Therefore, and Allah knows best, the
meaning of his statement to Abt: Dharr, “I saw light,” means he saw
the veil. Furthermore, the statement, “He 1s light; how could I see
Him?” means that the light which is His veil prevented him from
seeing Allah. That is, “How could I see Him when the light of the

'4? Al-Bukhari, 4176; At-Tirmidhi, 3134.

‘Muslim, 176; At-Tirmidhi, 3281; Al-Lalka’i, Sharh as-Sunnah, 910-911.

410501 ‘Ayad, Ash-Shifa ft Ta‘rif Hugitg Al-Mustafa (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-
Islamiyyah, n.d.), pp. 195-202.

'*°Muslim, 178. The words in Ahmad, 5:147, are, “I saw Him as a light; how could |
have seen Him?”

'“°Muslim, Al-Imdn, 179; Ibn Majah, 195; Ibn Hibban, 266; Al-Bayhaqi, A/-Asma’
wa as-Siffat, op cit., pp. 180-181; Ibn Mundah, A/-/mdn (‘Ali Ibn Muhammad AI-
Faqihi, ed.; Madinah: Islamic University Press, Ist edition, 1401/1981), hadith no.
775, 776, 777, 778, 779.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 131

veil was between me and Him preventing me from seeing Him.”
That is explicit concerning the negation of his seeing. And Allah
knows best. ‘Uthman Ibn Sa‘id Ad-Darnmi relates the agreement of
the Companions on this point.

It is more important to us to affirm his seeing of Gabriel than his
seeing of his Lord, because although the seeing of his Lord is much
greater and exalted, his position as prophet does not rest upon that
seeing whatsoever.

At-Tahawi has stated, “without their vision being all-
encompassing and without the manner of their vision being known,”
that is, because of His complete majesty and sublimity, eyes will see
Him but will not be able to grasp or encompass Him, just as one can
know Him but cannot grasp Him. Allah says, “No vision will grasp
Him” [6:103]; and, “They will not encompass Him with their
knowledge” [20:1 10].

As for his statement, “The explanation of this is as Allah wills
and according to His knowledge... We do not try to interpret his
words according to our opinions and imaginations,” that 1s, as the
Mu‘tazilah have done with the texts of the Book and the Sunnah
concerning visions of Him. They have distorted the words of Allah
and the words of His Messenger. The correct interpretation is what
iS in accordance with what is in the Sunnah; and the incorrect
interpretation contradicts it. The interpretation which is not
supported by the context or suggested by evidence found in the text
cannot be the intention of its Speaker, Who knows how to express
His words clearly and wants to guide people. Had He meant
something which is not apparent from the words, He would have
put some clues in the text to indicate their meaning, so that nobody
would be misled or confused. Allah has said that His words are
clear, precise and full of guidance. But if He means something
which is not apparent from His words, or puts in something that
may indicate that He means other than what comes easily to every
mind, His language cannot be said to be clear and precise. The
purpose of interpretation is not to suggest something new but to
expose what the author meant by his words.

Many people miss this point. Interpretation is an effort to
understand the intention of the speaker in his words. When you say,
“This is the meaning of the words,” you are saying that this 15 the
meaning that the speaker had in mind. If it does not correspond to
what the speaker meant, you are wrongly imputing something to the
speaker.

The intent of the speaker may be known through different
means:

1) He may explicitly state his meaning.
132 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

2) He may use words whose meanings are well known and avoid
saying anything that may suggest that he does not mean their
meanings. This is strengthened by adjoining the words to statements
that make what he 15 saying abundantly clear. Allah’s saying, “God
spoke to Moses directly” [4:163], and, “You will see your Lord
with open eyes as you see the sun at noon when there are no
clouds,””’*’ are so clear that anyone who hears them will know what
the speaker means by them. If he states what the speaker means, and
what his words clearly state and imply, and what other evidence
further support, he tells the truth. But if he interprets the words to
mean what they do not imply, and what is not indicated by other
evidence, his claim that what he is saying is what the speaker means
is false; it is nothing but a subjective interpretation or wishful
imagining.

The fact is that if someone says,, “We interpret it this way,” or
“We construe it this way,” he is giving the word a meaning different
from what has been intended. If an opponent objects to his
interpretation, and he fails to meet his objection, he will say, as
people generally do, “I have understood the word in a non-literal
sense.” |

Someone might say, “But the interpretation has another meaning
that you have not mentioned.” That is, if a word cannot be taken in
its literal sense, 1t cannot be regarded as meaningless; rather, we take
the word in its metaphorical sense, that is, in a sense it implies but
not what it originally meant. The response is that when you say that
this is what the word means, you are stating that this 1s what the
speaker intends by it. That may be either correct or incorrect, as was
stated earlier. It is obviously impossible for the speaker to intend
something which is contradictory to the real and apparent meaning
of his words and not make it clear to his listeners that that 15 what he
means. |

Furthermore, (this probability is even less probable when) he
chooses language which underlines that the apparent meaning 5
intended. We do not deny that a speaker may not intend what his
words mean literally, but this happens when the speaker deliberately
wants to be vague or wants to confuse the listener. But we do not
accept that he would mean the opposite of what he said when at the
same time he was intending to be clear and manifest and have his
intent understood. This would be all the more unacceptable if he
went on strengthening the apparent meaning of his words by

'*7A hadith in the same sense occurs in Al-Bukhari, 4581; Muslim, 183.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 133

including words that precluded a metaphorical interpretation and he
did so repeatedly and even used similes.

At-Tahawi has said, “No one is safe in his faith unless he
submits completely to Allah (to Whom belongs glory and greatness)
and His Messenger (peace be on him) and entrusts the knowledge of
things that are ambiguous to one who knows them.” That is, one
should submit to the texts of the Qur’4n and Sunnah and refrain
from raising doubts and making wrong interpretations. One should
avoid saying that reason contradicts this or that narration, or that
reason should be allowed to prevail when narrations conflict with it,
as reason is the basis of narrated reports and if there is any
contradiction between them reason takes precedence. Actually, that
would never occur, but it may seem to some people that it occurs. If
there seems to be a conflict between reason and a narration, and the
tradition is authentic, then what is claimed to be rationally true is
definitely not true. If the person investigated the matter, that would
be made clear to him. On the other hand, if the tradition is not
authentic, there is no question of conflict. In fact, it is inconceivable
that there could be a conflict between rational truth and an authentic
tradition.

The maxim, “whenever there is a conflict between reason and
tradition, reason should be allowed to prevail,” is not true. When
there is a contradiction between the two, we cannot affirm both of
them, nor can we disregard both of them, for one of the contraries
must be true. Nor can we prefer reason over the traditions, for
reason has demonstrated the validity of the traditions and has proven
the necessity of accepting the words of the Prophet (peace be upon
him). If we reject the narrated reports, we reject the conclusion of
reason. If we reject the conclusions of reason, then it cannot be
accepted as something that can contradict the narrated reports,
because what is not evidence cannot contradict anything. Hence,
preferring reason leads to not preferring it. Hence, it is not
permissible to consider it superior. It 1s reason that points out the
truthfulness and correctness of what has been transmitted (sami ‘).
The state of what has been transmitted must be in accordance with
what has been proven by reason. If it is permissible for the guide to
it to be incorrect, the transmitted evidence will be considered
incorrect. Therefore, reason must be a correct guide and evidence. If
it were not so, it could not be followed in any case, not to speak of
putting it prior to transmitted reports. In that case, putting reason
before transmitted reports then becomes an insult to reason itself.'**

'“8That is, since reason is the thing that has proven that transmitted reports take

134 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

One must submit completely to the Messenger (peace be upon
him), fulfill his commands, believe in his words and bear witness to
their truth, without opposing them as untrue or doubtful based on
false reasoning called rational truths, or prefer over them erroneous
concepts that the human mind has spun. One should submit only to
his authority, obey only his commands, and believe only in him in
the same way that one must worship only his Sender and surrender
to Him alone, looking only to His mercy and putting one’s trust
only in Him.

These are two aspects of tawhid and the person will not be saved
from the Hell-fire unless he possesses both of them: the belief in the
oneness of the Sender and belief in the distinctive following of the
Messenger. One should not appeal to any other authority nor accept
any other rule. One must not make compliance with his commands
or belief in his words contingent on one’s agreement with the
teachings of his teacher, mentor, imdm, group or sect that he
respects. One should not say that one will believe in his words only
when these people approve of them — as then he would actually be
submitting to them — or ignore his words and commands, or change
their meanings under the guise of interpretation. It is far better to
meet Allah with all kinds of sins — save associating partners with
Him — than to meet Him in that condition.

When one hears an authentic hadith, he should consider it as if
he is hearing it from the Prophet (peace be upon him) himself. Is it
permissible for him, then, to defer his assent or compliance until he
makes sure that is in agreement with the views and the doctrines of
some people or sect? Instead, it is incumbent upon him to put his
words into action immediately without any hesitation. He must not
hesitate to accept it because it contradicts.someone else’s view; on
the contrary, he should refuse to accept anyone else’s opinion when
it does not agree with the statement of the Prophet (peace be upon
him). Neither should he oppose the Prophet’s statements with
analogies. Let him destroy every analogy and accept the words of
the Prophet. Nor may he change the meaning of the Prophet’s
words to agree with the ideas their protagonists call rational;
otherwise, he will be among the ignorant and prevented from what
is correct. Assenting to the words of the Prophet (peace be upon
him) may never be made contingent upon their agreement with the
views of anybody, no matter who that person may be.

Imam Ahmad said that Anas Ibn Iyadh narrated that Abt Hazm
narrated on the authority of Amr Ibn Shu‘ayb, on the authority of

precedence.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 135

his father, from his grandfather, who said, “My brother and I sat in
a gathering that was more beloved to me than red camels. When we
arrived, we saw that some elder Companions of the Prophet (peace
be upon him) were sitting at one of the doors to his house. We did
not like to sit between them and separate them, so we sat in a corner
by ourselves. They were discussing a verse of the Qur’an. The
discussion became heated and they raised their voices. The Prophet
(peace be upon him) came out in anger. His face was red. He
threw dirt at them and said, “Be quiet, people. Because of this
peoples before you were destroyed. They differed with their
prophets and set one verse of their books against another. Truly, the
Qur’an has not been revealed for one part of it to oppose another,
but it was revealed such that one part of it confirms the other. What
you know of it, apply it. And concerning what you do not know of
it, refer it to one who does know it.”””

Allah has unequivocally forbidden speech about Him not based
on proper knowledge. He says, “Say: The things that my Lord has
forbidden are shameful deeds, open or secret, sins and trespasses
against truth, associating partners with Allah for whom He has
given no authority, and to say things about Allah of which you have
no knowledge” [7:33]. Allah also says, “Follow not that whereof
you have no knowledge” [17:36]. The servant of Allah must
consider what Allah sent His messengers with and what He revealed
in His books as the truth that he must follow. He must believe that it
is the truth and correct. The statements of the rest of mankind are to
be compared in their light. If such statements are in agreement with
what they say, they are true; if they differ from what the prophets
and revealed books say, they are false. If one is not certain whether
they are in agreement or disagreement, as perhaps the meaning of
the statement of a person is ambiguous or if one understands the
meaning but does not know if the Messenger said anything that may
confirm or deny it, then he must hesitate and not speak without
knowledge. Knowledge is what is confirmed by evidence.
Beneficial knowledge is what the Messenger (peace be upon him)
brought. It is true that there is some knowledge that the Messenger
did not convey but is related to the matters of this world, such as
medicine, mathematics and agriculture. But as for matters related to

‘4? Ahmad, 2:181, 185, 195, 196; ‘Abdur-Razzaq As-San‘ani, A/-Musannaf, Habib Ar-
Rahman Al-Azami, ed. (Beirut: Al-Maktab al-Islami, 1392/1972), hadith no. 20367;
Ibn Majah, Al-Mugaddamah, 25. Its chain is hasan. Muslim, Al-‘/im, 2666, is similar
to it.

136 | | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

the divine and to religion, that knowledge is to be taken from the
Messenger and no one else.

(39) The foundation of Islam is not made firm except

with the support of unreserved assent and submission to
Allah.

This statement is an example of a metaphor. The physical foot is
not made firm unless it is supported by something. What he means
to say 1s that Islam is not confirmed for one who does not submit to
the words of the two revelations (the Qur’an and Sunnah), does not
bow to their commands without questioning their wisdom or does
not oppose them with one’s one ideas or views. Al-Bukhari
recorded that Imam Muhammad Ibn Shihab Az-Zuhri said, “The
message comes from Allah. It is the responsibility of the Messenger
(peace be upon him) to convey the message, and it is encumbent
upon us to submit to it.” This is a concise, encompassing statement
on this matter. |

The best simile given concerning human reasoning and the
transmitted texts is the following. Human reason, with respect to the
transmitted texts, is like an ignorant, common follower compared to
the scholar who can make ijtihdd. In fact, it is much less than that
because it 15 possible for the commoner to become a scholar but it 5
not possible for the scholar to become a messenger-prophet. If the
common follower knows of a scholar and directs another commoner
to him, and then the scholar and the commoner who pointed him out
differ about a matter, the second commoner who asked the question
must follow the statement of the scholar and not the statement of the
one who pointed him out to him. If the commoner who pointed him
out were to say, “The correct opinion is mine and not that of the
scholar because I am the source for your knowledge of the scholar.
If you take his statement over mine, you are disparaging the source
by which you knew he was a scholar. Therefore, the reproach must
be in the secondary matter (the scholar).” The commoner who asked
the question should tell him, “When you bore witness that he was a
scholar and pointed him out, you bore witness that he is to be
followed and not you. Therefore, my following you 112 that
knowledge was for something particular; it does not mean that |
have to agree with you on everything. And your mistake in your
disagreement with the scholar, who is more knowledgeable than
you, does not necessarily mean that you were mistaken in your
knowledge that he 15 a scholar.” That is even given the fact that he
knows that the scholar is capable of making a mistake.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 137

Human reason testifies that the Prophet (peace be upon him)
cannot make a mistake when it comes to communicating Allah’s
message. It is not permissible for him to make a mistake in that area.
Therefore, what he says must be submitted to, accepted completely
and put into practice. We know, as an obligation from the religion of
Islam, that 11 a man were to say to the Messenger, “This Qur’an that
you are reciting to us and the wisdom that you have come with
contain lots of things that contradict what we know with our minds.
We know with our knowledge your sincerity and honesty by our
reasoning. If we accepted everything that you say while it
contradicts what our mind says, that would be disparaging our
knowledge with which we confirm what you say. Therefore, we
believe that there is some contradiction in your words and we turn
away from them and do not accept them as guidance or knowledge,”
that man would not be a Believer in what the Messenger brought and
the Messenger would not accept that from him. In fact, 11 that were
permissible, then anyone could disbelieve in anything that the
Prophet (peace be upon him) brought. Minds are of different levels
and lots of doubts exist. Devils continue to cast suspicions into
people. Therefore, everyone could say something like the above
concerning what the Prophet (peace be upon him) commanded or
said.

But Allah says, “The Messenger’s duty 15 only to communicate
the message clearly” [24:54]; and, “What is the mission of the
messengers but to communicate the message clearly” [16:35]. Also,
“We sent not a messenger except to teach in the language of his
people, in order to make things clear to them. Now Allah leaves
astray those whom He pleases, and guides whom He pleases”
[14:4]; “There has come to you from Allah a light and a perspicuous
Book” [5:17]; “Ha Mim. By the Book that makes things clear’
[44:1-2]; “These are the verses of the perspicuous Book” [12:1]; “It
is not a tale invented, but a confirmation of what went before it, a
detailed exposition of all things, and a Guide and a Mercy to any
such as believe” [12:111]; “We have sent down to you the Book
explaining all things, a Guide and a Mercy, and glad tidings to
Muslims” [16:89]. There are many more verses of this nature in the
Qur’an.

Concerning belief in Allah and the Hereafter, either the
_ Messenger spoke what demonstrates the truth, or he did not. The
latter is ruled out. If he spoke what leads to the truth while using
terms that are not clear or are ambiguous, he would not have
conveyed the message clearly. But the best of all generations have
witnessed that he did convey the message. Allah, too, has borne
witness against them in a great place. Therefore, whoever claims
138 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

that the Prophet did not convey the message clearly in matters related
to the basics of the religion has made a false accusation against the
Prophet (peace be upon him).

(40) He Who seeks knowledge that has been barred from
him, and whose intellect is not prepared to surrender,
will be veiled from a pure understanding of Allah’s
unity, clear knowledge and correct faith.

This is an elaboration of the earlier point along with a warning
that one should not discuss the principles of the faith or any other
aspect of the religion without proper knowledge. Allah says,
“Pursue not that of which you have no knowledge; for every act of
hearing, seeing or feeling in the heart will be asked about (on the
Day of Reckoning)” [17:36]; “Yet among men there are such as
dispute about Allah without knowledge, and follow every evil one
obstinate in rebellion. About the evil one it is decreed that whoever
turns to him for friendship, he will lead him astray and guide him to
the penalty of the Fire” [22:2-3]; “And yet, there is among men such
a one who disputes about Allah, without knowledge, without
Guidance and without a Book of Enlightenment, disdainfully
bending his side in order to lead men astray from the path of Allah.
For him is disgrace in this life, and on the Day of Judgment, We
will make him taste the penalty of the burning Fire” [22:8-9]; “And
who is more astray than one who follows his own lusts devoid of
guidance from Allah? For Allah guides not people given to wrong-
doing” [28:60]; and, “They follow nothing but conjecture and what
their own souls desire, even though there has already come to them
guidance from their Lord” [53:23]. And there are other verses that
point to the same meaning.

Abii Umamah AlI-Bahili narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(peace be upon him) said, “The people who have the guidance of
Allah do not stray unless they indulge in intellectual disputation,”
and then he read the verse, “They set this forth to you only by way
of disputation”’ [43:58]. At-Tirmidhi recorded this hadith and called
it hasan (good).'”°

‘A’ishah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon
him) said, ““The most detestable people in the sight of Allah are those

'*° At-Tirmidhi, At-7afsir, 3250; Ibn Majah, Al-Mugaddamah, 48; Ahmad, 5:252, 256;
At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 8067. At-Tirmidhi rated the hadith hasan, and Al-Hakim called
it sahih. (See Al-Mustadrak, 2:447-448.)

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 139

who dispute and quarrel.” This was recorded in the two Sahihs (of
Al-Bukhari and Muslim).'”’

No doubt, anyone who does not submit completely to the
Messenger has some shortcoming in his tawhid, as he speaks
according to his own opinion and desires or he follows somebody
else’s opinion or desire rather than the guidance from Allah. The
shortcoming in his tawhid 1s by the same amount that he departs
from what the Messenger brought. In those matters, he has taken a
god other than Allah. Allah says, “Do you see such a one who takes
for his god his own desires and impulses?” [25:43]. That is, he is a
servant to what his own soul desires.

Truly evil has spread in this world from three main groups of
people. As ‘Abdullah Ibn Al-Mubarak said:

Sin, I know, kills the heart,

and its perpetuation defiles man.

Avoid sin, you will revive the heart,
Defy the self, you will secure happiness.
Three people destroy religion:

kings, corrupt theologians and monks.

Evil rulers dishonor the Shari‘ah by pursuing wrong policies
and replacing its just laws with their own, unjust regulations. They |
prefer them to the rule of Allah and His Messenger. Corrupt
theologians — they are the ones that violate the Shari‘ah — with their
opinions and false logic, they allow what Allah and His Messenger
have forbidden and vice-versa, they neglect what the Shari‘ah
accepts and vice-versa, they make general what the law has made
specific and vice-versa, and so on. The monks or hermits are the
ignorant Sufis who turn away from the realities of the faith and law.
Instead they turn to their mystical experiences, ecstacies,
imaginations and Satanic revelations. They construct a religion that
Allah has not authorized and they deny His religion that came from
the tongue of His Prophet (peace be upon him). They turn away
from the realities of faith due to Satanic deception and egotistical
desires.

This first group says that 11 administrative expedience conflicts
with the law (shar‘), administrative expedience takes precedence.
And the other groups say that if human reasoning conflicts with
what has been transmitted, human reasoning takes precedence. And

'S' Al-Bukhari, Al-Mazalim, 2457; At-Tafsir, 4253; Al-Ahkam, 7188; Muslim, A/-
‘Ilm, 2668; At-Tirmidhi, At-Ta/fsir, 2976; An-Nasa’1, Al-Qudat, 8:248; Ahmad, 6:55,
62, 205.

140 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

the people of mystical experiences say that if there is a conflict
between mystical experiences and manifestations and the literal
meaning of the law, mystical experiences and manifestations come
first

Abi Hamid Al-Ghazali (may Allah have mercy on him) wrote in
his book, Jhyd ‘Uliim ad-Din, which is one of his best books or
perhaps his best book:

If you ask if the knowledge of disputation and speculative
theology is blameworthy, like astrology, or if it is permissible
or recommended, you should know that people have taken
extreme positions on this question. Some say that it is heresy
and 15 forbidden. For a servant of Allah to meet Allah having
committed every sin except polytheism is better for him than
to meet Allah knowing speculative theology. Some say it is
obligatory, either upon the community as a whole or upon
individuals themselves, and that learning it is one of the best
deeds and one of the best ways to get closer to Allah. It is the
fulfillment of the science of tawhid and a defense of Allah’s

religion. Those who say it is forbidden include Ash-Shafi‘1,
Malik, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Sufyan and the leaders of the
scholars of hadith from the early predecessors.

After quoting their words extensively, he concludes that there is
a consensus of opinion on the subject among the scholars of hadith
from the Salaf that the Companions of the Prophet (peace be upon
him) knew their faith better than anyone else and were most
competent to state it, but did not enter into these subjects; they feared
that it would lead to evil. The Prophet (peace be upon him) had
warned them, “Doomed are those who unnecessarily enter into
hairsplitting and unnecessary subtleties.”’!>”

These scholars also argue that if theological formulations were
part of the faith, the Prophet (peace be upon him) would have
ordered them first and foremost. He would have shown them the
way and would have praised their experts.

Then Al-Ghazali mentions the rest of their arguments and
presents the arguments of the other side. Finally, he says:

If you ask what my conclusion is I will answer in some
detail. There is some benefit and some harm (to such sciences).
It may at times be permitted, at times commended, and at
times obligatory, just as it may at times be undesirable and at
times forbidden. As for its harmful aspects, it creates doubts,

'S2Muslim, Al-‘Ilm, 2670: Aba Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4608: Ahmad. 1386.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 141

subjects faith to discussion, removes conviction and offers
instead only inconclusive arguments which hardly satisfy
people. In addition, it injects harmful beliefs into the mind,
builds up emotions in their favor, and leads to insistence on
them. This is, however, due to the prejudice that theological
controversy generates.

As for the benefits of kalam (speculative theology), it 5
generally believed that it reveals truth and makes us know
things as they are, but this is not true. Kalam does not deliver
that good; it rather conceals and misleads than reveals and
guides. If you had heard these same words from a hadith
scholar or a Hashawi,'*? you could have said that people who
do not know a thing usually condemn it. But these are the
words of a person who had mastered kalam and fathomed its
depths, who ranks among its leading exponents, and is no less
versed in other disciplines. It is he who is saying that kalam
does not offer truth. The most that it does is define and analyze
issues and work out the implications of different views, but
this is rare.'**

The statements of others like him are clear proofs. The pious
predecessors did not disapprove of kalam simply because it was
new terminology for old truths, like terminologies for other
sciences, or because it advanced rational arguments to establish truth
and refute untruth. They condemned it because it expounded ideas
which are false and contradict the Qur’an and Sunnah and correct
sciences. The road that the theologians take does not lead to truth,
and the method they employ is too lengthy and of little use. It is like
the meat of an emaciated camel which 15 placed on top of a trackless
mountain that is difficult to climb and 1n addition not good to secure.

If there is anything good in the ka/dm, it has already been stated in
the Qur’an in a far better manner. Kalam does nothing more than
prolong the discussion or complicate the issue. As a poet once said:

If it were not for the competition for this world,

the books of debate, Al-Mugni and Al-‘Amad would not
have been written |

by their claim they are solving difficult questions;

and because of the books that were written,

the problems became even more difficult to solve.

153 The Hashawiyyah are extreme literalists in their understanding of texts, and gross
anthropomorphists, attributing a body to Allah.

'**Al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulam ad-Din (Cairo: Matba‘at Mustafa Al-Babi Al-Halabi,
1358/1939), vol. 1, pp. 94-97.

142 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

They claim that they resolved doubts and put an end to
misconceptions, but anyone familiar with it knows that it only added
to them.

It is inconceivable that one cannot reach the truth, guidance,
knowledge and certainty in the Book of Allah and the words of His
Messenger, yet he can find it in the words of those perplexed
theologians. In fact, we must take what Allah and His Messenger
stated as the source and beginning point. We must reflect upon and
understand their meanings and know their proofs and evidence,
whether it be rational or super-rational. We should then consider the
supporting or dissenting statements people make, analyze their ideas
and ascertain their possible interpretations. Then, what agrees with
what the Prophet (peace be upon him) stated we accept; and what
does not agree with it we reject.

Kalam operates with a number of terms, such as compound,
body, space, substance, dimension, matter, accident, and so on.
None of these words occurs in the Qur’an or Sunnah in the sense in
which theologians use them, nor have they been used in those
senses in ordinary language; theologians use them in 5
different from their common meanings. Hence, it is necessary for
them to be explained in common language and then compared with
the arguments and concepts that the Qur’an has advanced. In this
way, we will be able to find out what is true in kalam and what is
false. |

Take, for example, the term tarkib (composition). It has many
meanings.

First, it may mean to form something out of two or more
different things. This is called tarkib mazj (complex composition).
An example is an animal being composed of the four elements,
having various parts and limbs. It is obvious that composition in this
sense is not applicable to Allah. When we ascribe different attributes
of perfection, like transcendence, it does not mean that Allah is a
composite being in this sense.

Second, composition may mean combining two things by
placing them side by side. This is called tarkib al-jawar (joining).
An example is the placing of the two parts of a door side by side.
For certain, Allah is not a combination of attributes in this sense.

Third, it may mean forming a compound out of particles of the
same kind, called atoms.

Fourth, it may be a combination of matter and form, for
example, making a ring out of silver, the shape of the ring being its
form and silver being its matter. Theologians believe that a body is a
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 143

combination of atoms, and they enter into useless discussions about
whether atoms combine in twos, fours, sixes, eights or sixteens.

It 15 clear that composition in these last two meanings does not
apply to the attributes of Allah, Who transcends the world. Let it
also be clear that a body 15 not necessarily a combination of atoms,
and the definition of the body which theologians give is simply
arbitrary. For a detailed discussion of this point, however, one
should refer to the relevant works.

Fifth, composition may refer to the combination of essence and
attributes. Theologians call this tarkib but they do so only in order to
deny Allah’s attributes. But in this sense, the term is simply their
fabrication; it is not a part of language, nor is it found in the Qur’an
or Sunnah. There is no sanction for this use, and we do not have to
accept it. Even if we grant the term and allow them to use it in the
context of Allah’s attributes, we will say that it is not the word but
the meaning which is of importance. You may give it any name you
like, but you should realize that the ruling concerning it 15 not passed
on words alone without taking into consideration their meaning. If
you want to call milk “wine”, it would not be prohibited simply
based on that nomenclature.

Sixth, tarkib may refer to a combination of essence and
existence. Our mind imagines that they are two different things, but
in reality they are not. Can we get essence (dhat) divested of its
existence or existence stripped of its essence? This is impossible.
Theologians have debated the question whether the essence of Allah
is His existence or different from it and have thus put forward many
senseless ideas. The best among them have abstained from saying
one thing or the other and have been left skeptical. Many times it is
through analysis that erroneous ideas vanish.

Their root cause of error is their turning away from the words of
Allah and His Messenger, and their turning to the ideas of the
Greeks and other nations. Such people are called ahl al-kalam
(speculative theologians) because they come up with truths that were
not unknown before, or advance ideas which seldom avail, or give a
rational demonstration of truths that we can perceive through our
senses.

This is not to deny, however, that some of their arguments may
be useful, particularly those which they have advanced against the
sophists. However, whoever proffers ideas, ignoring the text of the
Qur’an and Sunnah or in opposition to said texts, behaves just like
Iblis, who did not submit to Allah’s command. Instead, he said, “I
am better than he (Adam); you created me from fire, and him from
clay” [7:12]. But Allah says, “He who obeys the Messenger, obeys
144 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Allah; but if anyone turns away, We have not sent you to watch over
their (evil) deeds” [4:80]. Allah also says, “Say: If you love Allah,
then follow me. Allah will love you and forgive you your sins, for
Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful’ [3:31]. Also, “But no, by
your Lord, they can have no (real) faith until they make you judge mn
all disputes between them and find in their souls no resistance
against your decision, but accept them with the fullest conviction”
[4:65]. Allah has thus vowed that they would not be true Muslims
until they made the Prophet (peace be upon him) the arbiter,
accepted his verdict happily and submitted to him in complete
submission.

(41) He sways (yatadhabdhab) between faith and
disbelief, confirmation and denial, and acceptance and
rejection. He will be subject to vain suggestions,
perplexed and lost, neither a sincere Believer nor an
open denier.

Yatadhabdhab means ‘puzzled’ and ‘undecided’. This 15 the
characteristic of all those who ignore the Qur’an and Sunnah and
indulge in blameworthy kalam, or try to combine it with the Qur’an
and Sunnah by interpreting the texts in the light of their views or the
views of others whenever there is a conflict between them. In the
end, they are confused, lost and full of doubt. Ibn Rushd Al-Hafiz,
who was one of the most knowledgeable of philosophers, wrote in
Tahafut at-Taha@fut, ““Who has written anything in metaphysics that
is to be treasured?” Al-Amidi, the top thinker of his time, noted that
he could not overcome his doubts on major issues. Al-Ghazali
likewise expressed his dissatisfaction with theology, gave it up and
took up the study of hadith. At the time of his death, the Sahih of
Al-Bukhari was in his hands. Abu ‘Abdullah Muhammad Ibn

‘Umar Ar-R4zi wrote 1n a book on the varieties of pleasure:

Reason ends in a blind valley,

and the philosopher goes nothing but astray.

Our souls have never been at peace with our bodies,
We got nothing in the world except unhappiness.
The best we achieved in our pursuits

is nothing except “It is said,” and “They said.”
How many great men and great nations

perished and disappeared in no time?

Many men rose higher than mountains, but
vanished in the end, while the mountains remained.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 145
41-1321 also said:

I have pondered the methods of theology and philosophy.
They lead nowhere. The best method is that of the Qur’an.
When it wants to affirm something, it says, for example,
“(Allah) the Gracious is firmly established on the Throne”
[20:5], or “To Him rise all words of purity” [35:10]. But when
it wants to negate something, it says, “There is nothing
whatsoever like Him” [35:11], or “They will not encompass
Him in their knowledge” [20:110]. Whoever passes through the
experience I have passed through will surely come to the same
conclusion I have reached.

Abt ‘Abdullah Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdul-Karim Ash-Shahristani
likewise expressed his disappointment with the philosophers and
theologians. They get nothing, he said, except bewilderment and
remorse. His words are:

By Allah! I have visited all the academies,

and seen everyone in these high places.

But I found none except with his chin

In his hands in wonder, or gnashing his teeth in regret.

Abii Ma‘ali Al-Juwayni said, “Friends, avoid kalam. Had I
known the end kaldm has brought me to, I would not have engaged
in it.” At the time of his death, he said, “I entered the deep waters of
kalam and left the sciences of Islam. People warned me against it.
Now, if Allah does not have mercy on Ibn Al-Juwayni and save
him, he is doomed. Let everyone know that I die in the faith of my
mother.” Another narration says, “in the religion of the old women
of Nishapur.” 7

Shams ad-Din Al-Khusrushahi, the most distinguished student
of Fakhr ad-Din Ar-R4zi, replying to a question from a learned
visitor about his faith, said, “I believe in what the rest of the
Muslims believe.” The questioner further asked, “Are you
convinced and fully satisfied with it?” He nodded and said, “I thank
Allah for that blessing. By Allah, I do not know what I am to
believe. By Allah, I do not know what I am to believe. By Allah, I
do not know what I am to believe.” And then he cried until his beard
was wet.

Ibn Abi Al-Hadid, the famous Iraqi litterateur, said:

O bundle of mistaken views!
I passed my whole life in your pursuit
but got naught but bewilderment.
146 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Many have wandered in your valley

And got naught but toil and trouble.

The curse of Allah be on those

who claim they are famous thinkers.

They are surely wrong, and what they claim
They have achieved is beyond the power of man.

On his deathbed, Al-Khunji said, “The only thing that I learned
from my studies is that the possible needs something to bring it into
existence. But need is something negative. Woe is me! I am dying,
but I have not been able to know anything positive.”

Another theologian said, “I lie in bed, put a blanket over my
face, and pit one argument against another until dawn. But I never
reach a conclusion.”

Whoever reaches that state and is not then enveloped in the
mercy of Allah must become a heretic. Abi’ Yusuf said, “Whoever
tries to understand the religion through kaldm turns into a heretic
just as the one who tries to make money through alchemy turns into
a pauper, or the one who seeks strange (gharib) ahddith lands in
untruth.” Ash-Shafi‘l said, “In my opinion, the exponents of kalam
should be flogged with branches and shoes and taken through
villages and towns with someone announcing, ‘Come and see, this
is the punishment for ignoring the Qur’4n and Sunnah and indulging
in kalam.’” —Healso said, “I have studied the books of kalam and
I wonder how a Muslim could utter the things which they contain. It
would be far better for a man to meet Allah with everything He has
forbidden — with the exception of ascribing partners to Allah — than
for him to meet Allah with kalam.”

One can find many such theologians at the end of their lives
returning to the faith of old women, affirming what they believe,
and recanting their theological subtleties which conflict with the faith
they had used to be so certain about. Afterwards they discovered the
falsehood of what they believed or their correctness is not made
clear to them. Eventually, they join — if they are saved from
punishment — the level of those who follow the people of
knowledge, such as children, women and Bedouins.

The remedy for this disease is what the “Physician of the Soul”
(peace be on him) used to say when he woke from his sleep to offer
his night prayers, “O Allah, Lord of Gabriel, Michael and Israfil,
Originator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the Unseen and
the Apparent, You decide between Your servants in their disputes, |
beseech You, with Your permission, to show me the truth
concerning the matters which people have disputed. It is truly You
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 147

Who guides whom You will to the straight path” [recorded by
Muslim].'”°

The Prophet (peace be on him) appealed in the name of the Lord
of Gabriel, Michael and Israfil to be guided with Allah’s permission
to the truth in the matters wherein people differ because the true life
of the heart is in guidance and these three angels have been entrusted
by Allah to look after life. Gabriel is entrusted with the revelation,
which is the cause of the life of the heart; Michael is entrusted with
the rain, which is the cause of life for every animal and living
organism; and Israfil is entrusted with blowing the Horn, which will
bring the dead back to life and return the souls to their bodies.
Appealing to Allah in the name of these great spirits and guardians
of life can have a great effect in ensuring a favorable response. And
Allah is the Supporter. |

(42) The belief of a person in the seeing of Allah by the
people of Paradise is not correct if that person tries to
imagine what it is like or if he tries to interpret it
according to his own understanding, since’ the
interpretation of this seeing or the meaning of any of the
subtle phenomena which are in the realm of Lordship, is
by avoiding its interpretation and strictly adhering to
submission. This is the faith of Islam. Those who do
not refrain from negating Allah’s_ attributes’ or
conceiving them on human patterns are surely mistaken,
they are unable to glorify Allah properly.

These words are directed at the Mu‘tazilah and their ilk who
deny the Beatific Vision, as well as those who conceive of Allah on
the pattern of His creatures. The Prophet (peace be on him) said,

“You will see your Lord as you see the full moon.”'*® Since “as

modifies “you see”, the comparison is definitely between the two
visions and not the objects seen. So the hadith is very clear that
Allah will appear in Paradise and people will actually see Him. It
leaves nothing left unclear. What could be clearer or more explicit
than that? If a hadith like this is allowed to be interpreted
metaphorically, no text can actually be relied upon. Surely, it cannot
be interpreted to mean that men will know their Lord as they know

'*° Ahmad, 6:156; Muslim, Salat al-Musafirin, 770; Abii Dawid, As-Salah, 776; At-
Tirmidhi, Ad-Da ‘wat, 3416; An-Nasa’1, Qiydm al-Layl, 3:212-213; Ibn Mayjah,
177:01 as-Salah, 1357.

'°°Recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim, and discussed earlier.

148 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

the full moon. Some people have argued for this interpretation based
on verses like, “Do you not see how your Lord dealt with the People
of the Elephant” [105:1], and other verses in which the word 767 -
‘see’ has been ascribed to the heart.

To be sure, seeing is sometimes an act of the eye, sometimes it
is an act of understanding, and sometimes a type of dream, and so
on. But in every case there is something in the language of the
statement that makes it clear what kind of seeing is actually meant. If
there are no contextual clues as to the intended meaning, the
language will be deemed vague and obscure rather than clear and
precise. What statement can be clearer than the statement, “You will
see your Lord as you see the sun at noon when there are no clouds
in the sky”?'’’ Can anyone possibly raise the question as to whether
these words refer to seeing with the eyes or seeing with the mind?
Would anyone waver about the real meaning of this hadith except
one whose heart has been sealed by Allah?

Some might argue that they resorted to such an interpretation
because reason rules out the possibility of seeing Allah. To this we
respond: Your claim is rejected by most reasonable people and there
is nothing in reason that would reject such an occurrence.
Furthermore, if reason were asked about a being that exists by itself
but cannot be seen, it would consider that being an impossibility.

The words of the author, “If that person tries to imagine what it
is like, or if he tries to interpret it according to his own
understanding...”” mean that those who first imagine that Allah’s
vision should have such and such properties, similar to other things,
and then confirm such properties that they have imagined, are
anthropomorphists. If they deny vision based on those false
grounds, they are then negators of Allah’s attributes. What they
should actually reject is their own image of the Vision and not the
Vision itself. One should affirm what is true and negate what is
false.

This is the idea which the author wants to convey by the
statement, “Those who do not refrain from negating Allah’s
attributes or conceiving them on human patterns are surely mistaken;
they are unable to glorify Allah properly.”’ The Mu‘tazilah are under
the impression that they are glorifying Allah by rejecting the concept
of His Vision. Is it an act of glorification to negate an attribute of
perfection? One whose vision is denied does not have the attribute of
perfection, for the non-being is also not visible. But perfection is in
the affirmation of vision and, at the same time, denial that the vision

'°7 Ahmad, 3:16; Muslim, Al-Iman, 183; Ibn Majah, A/-Mugaddamah, 179.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 149

is all-encompassing of Him. The same is the case with knowledge.
We will not be praising Allah if we say that we cannot know
anything of Him. In fact, we will be praising Him if we affirm that
we can know Him and at the same time deny that we can fully
comprehend Him. Certainly, Allah cannot be encompassed by either
vision or knowledge.

The author’s words, “Or if he tries to interpret 1] according to his
own understanding,” are directed against those who interpret the text
in a way other than what it apparently means, or what every Arab —
would understand from it. Later writers use the term “interpretation”
(ta wil) in this sense. They say that ta ’wil is to understand words in
a sense different from what they apparently and overtly mean. In
this way, they alter the meanings of various texts. They say, “We
reinterpret whatever differs from our opinions.” They give this
distortion (tahrif) the name fa’wil in order to make it sound
appealing and acceptable, but Allah condemns those who try to
make falsehood appealing. Allah says, “Likewise did We make for
every messenger an enemy, evil ones among men and jinns,
inspiring each other with flowery discourses by way of deception”
[6:112]. The point is to be taken from the meaning and not the
words. Many false ideas have been “proven” in flowery language
that actually opposes the true evidence.

The author’s words here are similar to his words discussed
earlier, “We do not try to interpret His words according to our
opinions and imaginations.” He stresses the meaning 01 that
statement with his words, “The interpretation of this seeing or the
meaning of any of the subtle phenomena which are in the realm of
Lordship, is by avoiding its interpretation and strictly adhering to
submission. This is the faith of Islam.” He 15 saying here that one
must refrain from fa ’wil (fanciful interpretation), or what is called
interpretation, which is actually distortion of the text. But the author
used a polite way to argue with them (so he did not call it
distortion), as Allah has stated, “Argue with them in the way that is
best” [16:125]. At the same time, though, he is not saying that
everything that is termed fa wil is to be avoided. Nor should one not
sometimes abandon the apparent meaning of a text when and if there
is some dominating proof for such an action in the Book and the
Sunnah. What he means is that one must avoid the false, innovated
interpretations that go contrary to the opinions of the pious
forefathers, and that the Book and the Sunnah demonstrate to be
wrong; and one must avoid speaking about Allah without
knowledge. From the fraudulent examples of ta wil (interpretations)
are the interpretations of the evidence concerning Beatific Vision, the
evidence concerning Allah’s transcendence, the interpretation that
750 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Allah did not speak to Moses and that Allah did not take Abraham as
His friend.

In fact, the word ta ’wil itself began to be used in a manner other
than its original sense. The meaning of ta’wil in the Book of Allah
and the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) is the
reality of the thing that the text points to. For example, the ta’wil of
an informative statement is the occurrence of the action described;
and the ta’wil of a prescriptive statement is the performance of the
action prescribed. ‘A’ishah said, “The Messenger of Allah (peace be
on him) used to say during his bowing (in prayer), “Glory be to
You, Allah, our Lord, and praise to You. Allah. Forgive me, in
implementation (yata ‘awwalu) of the Qur’an.”'°® Allah also says in
the Qur’an, “Do they just wait for the fulfillment (ta’wil) of the
event? On the day the event is finally fulfilled (yati‘tawiluhu) those
who disregarded it before will say: “The messengers of our Lord did
indeed bring true (tidings)’” [7:53]. In a similar sense is the notion
of ta’wil of a dream or ta’wil of a deed. For example, Allah says,
“This is the fulfillment (ta ’wil) of my dream I had before’”’ [12:100];
“He will teach you the interpretation (ta’wil) of the stories” [12:6];
“That is the best and most suitable for final determination (ta’wil)”
[4:59]; “Now I will tell you the reality (ta wil) of those things which
you were unable to be patient with” [18:78]; and, “Such 15 the
interpretation (ta wil) of things concerning which you were unable
to be patient” [18:8]. Who can deny the existence of those kinds of
ta’wil and the knowledge of what is related to command and
prohibition from them?

As for informative statements, such as reports about Allah and
the Hereafter, no one knows their ta ’wil, which is their exact reality.
All that is known about them is what they state, but they cannot
simply be known by description. If we do not have a prior idea of
an object or have not yet experienced something, we cannot know
its reality (ta’wil) simply through description. In this sense, the
ta’wil of ultimate realities is known only to Allah. But the fact that
no one else knows their ta’wil in this sense does not mean that we
cannot understand them. There 15 no verse in the Qur’an that Allah
does not require us to reflect upon. Nor has He revealed a word
whose meaning He does not like us to know, although its ultimate

'8She was referring to the verse, “Glorify and praise your Lord, and pray for
forgiveness” [110:3]. This was recorded in Ahmad, 2:230; Al-Bukhari, 817, 4968;
Muslim, As-Salah, 484; Abii Dawiid, As-Salah, 877; Ibn Majah, 197:01 as-Salah,
1437; An-Nasa’i, Al-Iftitah, 2:219.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 157

reality is known to none but Him. This is what the word ta’wil
means in the Qur’an, the Sunnah and statements of the Elders,
regardless of whether it is in agreement with the apparent meanin
of a text or not. |

The word fa’wil is used by many commentators on the Qur’an,
such as Ibn Jarir'’’ and others, to mean the exegesis of the passage
regardless of whether it 15 the apparent meaning of the words or not.
This is a famous usage of the term. In that case, ta’wil is the same
thing as tafsir; what is correct is praised and what is wrong 1s
rejected.

Concerning “No one knows its ta’wil except Allah and those
truly grounded in knowledge,” [3:7], there are two readings of this
verse. One reading stops after the words, “except Allah’, and a
second reading that does not stop at that point. Both of these
readings are correct. What is meant by the first reading are the
equivocal verse the knowledge of whose ultimate reality is hidden
by Allah. The second reading, however, refers to the relatively
unequivocal verses whose meanings the scholars know, which is
also their ta ’wil.

Those who pause after the words, “except Allah”, do not mean
by ta’wil the meanings of the words. A necessary consequence of
that belief would be that there are some words that Allah revealed to
His Messenger whose meanings no one knows, not even the
Messenger. The people of knowledge would have no portion of
such knowledge and could only say, “We believe in the Book; the
whole of it is from our Lord” [3:7]. But this is what any ordinary
Believer could say, not just those grounded in knowledge. It is
necessary that the people grounded in knowledge be somehow
distinguished from laymen. In fact, Ibn ‘Abbas said, “I am one of
those well-grounded in knowledge who know the ta’wil.” He was
truthful in that statement, as the Prophet (peace be on him) had
prayed for him with these words, “O Allah, let him have a good
understanding and insight into faith, and teach him ta wil’ [recorded
by Al-Bukhari and others].'®° And the Prophet’s supplication was
never not responded to. Mujahid said, “I recited the Qur’an to Ibn
‘Abbas, from its beginning until its ending, and I stopped after each

‎the meaning of ta’wil according to Ibn Jarir, see his Jami‘ al-Bayadn, vol. vi,‏ عمس "ذا
‎p. 201.‏

‎‘The hadith in these words have been recorded by Ahmad, 1:266, 314, 328, 335; and
At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 10614, 12506. Only its first sentence occurs in Al-Bukhari,
143; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 3944.

152 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

verse and asked him about 11.” The numerous reports that have come
from him show that he commented upon the meaning of the entire

Qur’an and never said about any verse, “This is from the equivocal
verses whose meaning no one except Allah knows.”

Some colleagues say that the equivocal verses are the separate
letters that appear at the beginning of some chapters of the Qur’an.
This has been narrated from Ibn “Abbas. But many people have
spoken about the meanings of those verses. If their meanings are
known, they are not equivocal verses; if they are not known, they
are equivocal and the rest of the verses’ meanings are understood.
And that is the desired conclusion.

Furthermore, Allah says, “There are some verses that are
unequivocal, those are the foundation of the Book. And others are
equivocal” [3:7]. Those letters sitting by themselves are not
considered complete verses according to the majority of the scholars
who reckon the verses of the Qur’4an.

Ta ’wil in the terminology of the later jurists and theologians
means to understand a word in a sense less probable than one more
probable for some reason that demands it. It is in this sense that the
ta’wil of many verses, informative or prescriptive, have been
disputed. Of these interpretations, those which agree with the text of
the Qur’an and Sunnah are correct, and those which disagree with
them are wrong. This is discussed in detail in the relevant works. It
is mentioned in At-Tabsirah'®' that Nasir Ibn Yahya Al-Balkhi
narrated on the authority of “Umar Ibn Isma‘il Ibn Hamad Ibn Abi
Hanifah, from Muhammad Ibn Al-Hassan, who was asked about
the verses and reports about the attributes of Allah whose literal
meanings could lead to anthropomorphism and he said, “We take
them as they have come down to us and we believe in them. And we
do not say, ‘How 1s that?’ ‘How is this?’”

One must know that an incorrect, blasphemous meaning cannot
be the apparent or implied meaning of a text. If anyone understands
it in such a way, it is only because he is deficient in his
understanding and has a shortcoming in his knowledge. As it is said
concerning the words of some people, “How many times do correct
words come from a weak-minded person. But he is destroyed
because of his weak understanding.” Also, “It is incumbent upon
me to take the poems from their places. But it is not my fault if the
cow does not understand them.

'*!This is probably Tabsirah al-Adillah fi al-Kalam by Abi Al-Mu‘in Maymin Ibn
Muhammad An-Nasafi (d. 508/1114].

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi | 153 -

What could one then say about Allah’s statement — and He 1s the
most truthful and best of speech — concerning the Book as “a Book
whose verses have been clearly stated and then explained in detail,
from One Who is Wise and well-acquainted (with all things)”
[11:1]. Those who subject the texts to their own interpretations
believe, in fact, that the language of the Qur’an and hadith are
blasphemous and misleading. They state that the Qur’an and Sunnah
do not clearly state the faith and that they fail to formulate Allah’s
oneness in terms befitting His majesty. That is the reality of the
statements of those who make ta ’wil.

The truth is that what the Qur’an points to is the truth. And it
does not prove things that are false. Instead, these misguided people
think that the Qur’anic statements are faulty and should be
interpreted in a different manner.

It must be said to these people, “The door that you have opened,
although you claim to have been able to defeat some of your brother
Muslims in some minor details, is also a door that you have opened
to the polytheists and heretics. You do not have the ability to close
it. For if you have allowed the twisting of the words of the Qur’an
from how they are understood without any legal evidence for such
scripture twisting, then what are the principles that distinguish an
acceptable interpretation and a twisting that is not acceptable?”

If you respond to that criticism by saying, “What is definitely
proven by reason to be unacceptable, we will reinterpret; others we
will accept as they are,” Then it must be asked of you, “According
to what reason will you measure the definite conclusions of reason?”
The Karmatian esoterics claim that their reason has demonstrated
that no text can be taken at face value. The philosophers claim that
reason contradicts the texts that speak of the resurrection of the
body. The Mu‘tazilah claim that reason repudiates the Beatific
Vision and falsifies His foreknowledge of human acts, as well as
His speech and mercy. The door to such interpretations has led to so
many claims based on reason that not all of them can be mentioned
in this place.

There are two greatly unacceptable consequences of their view.
First, we do not accept anything of the meanings of the Book or
Sunnah until we research the matter in great detail to determine if
reason will accept such a proposition. And every group which
diverges from the Book claims that reason points to what they
believe in. The matter can only end in nothing but confusion and
chaos.

Second, people will lose firm faith in all that the Prophet (peace
be on him) said because they will not be certain that the apparent
meaning of his speech is what he meant. Furthermore, the
154 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

interpretations of his speech are contradictory. This means that we
would not be able to know from the Qur’an and hadith what the
message of Allah is for His people. The mission of the Prophet
(peace be on him) was to convey Allah’s message, and the Qur’4n is
that supreme message. Therefore, we find the people of ta’wil
quoting the Qur’an and Sunnah only to support the views which
they have already formed and not to base their views on the Qur’an.
If the Qur’an and Sunnah are in agreement with what their reason
states, they agree with it. If it contradicts what their reason accepts,
they reinterpret it. This has opened the door to hypocrisy and
heresy. We ask Allah to save us.

(43) Those who do not refrain from nafi (negating the
attributes of Allah) and tashbih (imagining Allah’s
attributes to be like human attributes) go astray and fail
to glorify Allah properly.

Negating Allah’s attributes (nafi) or conceptualizing them to be
like human attributes (tashbih) are diseases of the heart. Diseases of
the heart are of two kinds: the disease of doubt and the disease of
lust. Both have been mentioned in the Qur’an. Allah says, “Be not
too complaisant of speech, lest one in whose heart is a disease
should be moved with desire” [33:32]. He has referred to the former
in these verses, “In their hearts there is a disease; and Allah has
increased their disease” [2:10]; and, “But for those in whose hearts
is a disease, it will add only doubt to their doubt” [9:125]. This
disease is one of doubt and it is worse than the disease of lust. The
latter 1s cured when the lust is satisfied, but there is no cure for
doubt, unless Allah has mercy on the patient and rescues him from
it.

Misconceptions concerning the attributes of Allah may lead
either to their negation or to anthropomorphism. The former is
worse than the latter, for it implies rejecting and falsifying the
Prophet’s teachings, whereas the latter is to exceed the limits set by
the Prophet (peace be on him). To liken Allah’s attributes to the
attributes of creatures is infidelity, for He has said, “There is
nothing like unto Him” [42:11]. But to negate His attributes is also
infidelity, for He has said, “He is All-Hearing, All-Seeing” [42:11].

_ This is one kind of tashbih. Tashbih is actually of two types.
One is comparing the Creator with the created. This is the type that
the theologians have tried endlessly to refute and falsify. But the
people who hold that kind of thought are fewer than the people who
believe in the second kind of tashbih, which is to liken the created
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 155

with the Creator. This is the case with those who worship Christ,
Ezra, the sun, the moon, idols, the angels, fire, water, the calf, the
graves, jinns and other things. These are the people to whom the
messengers were sent to call them to the worship of Allah alone,
with no partners. |

(44) For our Lord is qualified with the attributes (sifat)
of uniqueness (wahdaniyyah) and the characteristics

(nu ‘ut) of absolute singularity (fardaniyyah). No created
being shares with Him these attributes.

The author shows that to glorify Allah properly is to deny or
affirm the attributes that He has respectively denied or affirmed of
Himself. In fact, the author takes these aspects from Strat Al-Ikhlas
(Purity of Faith) in the Qur’an. His statement, “For our Lord is
qualified with the attributes (sifat) of uniqueness (wahdaniyyahy” 5
derived from “Say: He is Allah, the One and Unique.” And his
words, “and the characteristics (nu‘Ut) of absolute singularity
(fardaniyyahy’, are taken from “Allah, the Absolute, He begets not,
nor is He begotten.” The statement, “No created being shares with
Him these attributes,” 1s derived from the words, “There is none like
unto Him” [112:4].

These words also emphasize the point which the author made
previously about affirming the attributes of Allah and denying
anthropomorphism. The words sifah (pl. sifat) and na‘t (pl. nu iit)
are Synonyms or very close in meaning, where the former qualifies
the essence (dhat) and the latter qualifies acts. Wahdaniyyah and
fardaniyyah have likewise been considered synonymous. Some say
that the difference between them is that wahdaniyyah refers to
essence while fardaniyyah refers to attributes. Allah, Most High, is
one, unique in His essence and singular 1 in His attributes. This is
true and there is no difference of opinion concerning it. I, however,
feel that there 15 a kind of redundancy in the words, not only here
but at many places. This kind of style is more suitable for sermons
and prayers, rather than for a discussion on tawhid. Moreover,
flowery and rhyming prose is more suitable for the former than the
latter. The words, “There is nothing like unto Him,” that are found
in the Qur’an [42:11] emphasize the glory of Allah better than the
words, “No created beings share with Him these attributes,” which
is stated here.
156 | Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahawiyyah

(45) Allah is supremely exalted above definition of Him
or from being restricted, or from needing any parts,
limbs or instruments. He is not bound by the six
directions of space as all created beings are.

Before commenting on this text, I would like to make a few
general remarks. First, people can be divided into three groups on
the question of whether terms like those mentioned in the text can be
applied to Allah. One group affirms such terms for Allah; another
group denies them; a third group, which follows the way of the
Elders, calls for more clarification. The third group neither affirms
them in general until it is made clear that what is affirmed by such
terms is to be affirmed and what is negated by such terms is to be
negated. They take this approach because later scholars use such
terminology that includes a lot of vagueness and ambiguities, as is
the case with other types of terminology. Therefore, not all of them
use the same term to mean exactly the same. Hence, anyone who
denies it completely denies what is both correct and incorrect
without discrimination, and imputes to those who affirm them things
that they never said. Some of those who affirm such terms include |
in their connotations ideas that go against the views of the Elders
and conflict with the Qur’an and Sunnah, or have nothing in them
either for or against them. We have not the right to attribute to Allah
things that He did not attribute to Himself, nor did His Messenger
attribute to Him, either with respect to negation or affirmation. On
this point we must be followers and not innovators.

It is necessary to investigate this subject, that is, the subject of
attributes, and to attribute to Allah what Allah and His Messenger
have affirmed and to negate of Allah what Allah and His Messenger
have negated. Adhering to the terms used in the texts (of the Qur’an
and Sunnah) will protect one in matters of affirmation and negation.
We affirm what terms and meanings Allah and His Messenger have
affirmed; in addition, we negate any terms or meanings that the texts
have negated.

As for the terms concerning which there is no explicit
affirmation or negation, we do not make any general statement about
them until we can determine what is meant by them. If their
meanings are correct, we accept them, although it is best to use the
terms actually found in the texts (of the Qur’an and Sunnah) and not
use the vague terms unless there is a pressing need to do so. But
even then, they must be accompanied by contextual evidence that
shows their meanings. For example, one might be speaking to
someone who will not be convinced or will not understand except
when those terms are employed.
Commentary on the Creed of At- 1 01 1 157

The author has included this passage in order to refute
anthropomorphists like Dawtid Al-Jawaribi and others like him who
say that Allah 15 a solid thing or a body with organs. Exalted is He
above what they ascribe to Him.

The author is correct in his statement but later, people extended
his negation and overstepped the limits. This is in need of further
explanation. The Elders are in agreement that man cannot define
Allah or His attributes. Abii Dawtd At-Tayédlisi said that Sufyan,
Sht‘bah, Hammad Ibn Zayd, Hammad Ibn Salamah, Shurayk and
Abt ‘Uwanah never tried to define Allah or liken Him to or compare
Him with anything. They would simply narrate the hadith and
refuse to elaborate on the narrations. When pressed, they would
only quote a saying of a Companion or a Successor. We will return
to this point when discussing the author’s words, “He has barred
His creatures from comprehending Him.” He means that no one can
define Allah, and not that Allah is not distinguished from His
creation, separate from it, apart from it. ‘Abdullah Ibn AI-
Mubarak'®’ was asked, “How should we think of our Lord?” He
said, ““Think that He is on the Throne, completely different from His
creatures.”” Someone asked, “Is He different by definition?” He
said, “Yes, by definition.”

We know that definition sometimes refers to what separates one
thing from another and distinguishes it. Since Allah does not reside
in any of His creation, nor does He exist by them, but on the
contrary He exists by Himself and brings all things into existence
and sustains them, no one would object to defining Allah in this
sense; otherwise, it would mean denying Allah’s existence and
essence. But if we understand definition in the sense of
comprehending Him as He is and stating it in words, that is
impossible.

There is a consensus among the Ahl as-Sunnah on this point.
Abit: Al-Qasim Al-Qushayri says in his Ris@lah that Aba ‘Abdur-
Rahman As-Sulaémi narrated from Abt Manstr Ibn ‘Abdullah, and
he from Abt Al-Hassan Al-‘Anbari that Sahl Ibn ‘Abdullah At-

11151311, answering a question about the existence of God, said,
“Allah’s essence is qualified with knowledge. He cannot be
encompassed in knowledge, or seen by eyes in this world. He is
available to faith, but transcends definition and comprehension, and
does not reside in anything. Eyes will see Him in the Hereafter

'°?For the quote from ‘Abdullah Ibn Al-Mubarak here, see Ad-Darimi, Ar-Radd ‘ala al-
Jahmiyyah (Damascus: Dar al-Kutub al-Islami, 1381/1961), p. 50.

F8 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI

158 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

manifested in His power and authority. He has barred creatures
from knowing His essence, but has helped them to know Him
through His signs. Hence, hearts know Him, but eyes cannot
compass Him. The faithful will see Him with their eyes, but
encompass Him or scan His majesty they will not.”'°

As for the terms “parts, limbs or instruments’, some of the
negators used them to deny some attributes that are confirmed by
definitive evidence, such as hand and face. Abi Hanifah wrote in
Al-Figh al-Akbar, “Allah has a hand (yad), face (wajh) and a soul
(nafs). He has Himself mentioned them in the Qur’an. They are His
attributes, and we must affirm them without inquiring into their
nature. We should never say that His hand 1s power or blessings, as
by doing so one nullifies the attribute.’’'°* What the Imam stated is
confirmed by definitive evidence. For example, Allah has said,
“What prevents you from prostrating yourself to one whom I have
created with My two hands” [38:75]. Also, “On the Day of
Judgment the whole of the earth will be but His handful and the
heavens will be rolled up in His right hand” [39:67]. Concerning
His face, Allah has stated, “Everything (that exists) will perish
except His Own countenance” [28:88]; also, “But will abide forever
the countenance of your Lord” [55:27]. (Concerning His soul),
Allah has stated (quoting Jesus), “You know what is in my soul
though I know not what 15 in Your soul (nafs)” [5:116]; and, “Your
Lord has inscribed for Himself (nafsihi) the rule of mercy” [6:54];
also, “And I have prepared you for Myself (nafs7)” [20:41]; and,
finally, “But Allah cautions you to remember His soul (nafsahu)”
[3:28]. The Prophet (peace be on him) stated in the famous hadith of
intercession, “People will come to Adam and say, ‘Allah created you |
with His hands, commanded the angels to bow to you and taught
you the names of all things.’”'®°

It is not correct to say that the dual ‘hands’ here means ‘power’
as the words, “whom I have created with My two hands” [38:75]
cannot be understood as “whom I have created with My two
powers,” otherwise Iblis could have said to Allah, “You had also
created me with Your power,” so Adam would have no superiority
over him. Iblis — even with his infidelity — knew Allah better than

‘©? Al-Qushayri, Ar-Risdlah, ‘Abdul-Halim Al-Mahmiid and Mahmiid Ibn Ash-Sharif,
eds. (Cairo: Dar al-Kutub al-Hadithah, 1972), p. 585.

'64 4.Figh al-Akbar, pp. 58-59.

‘Part of a long hadith on intercession in Al-Bukhari, 4476, 7516. Also «ee Al-
Bukhari, 6565; Muslim, 193; Ibn Majah, 4312.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 159

the Jahmiyyah. Furthermore, there is no evidence for them in the
statement of Allah, “Do they not see that it is We Who have created
for them — among other things which Our hands have fashioned —
cattle, which are under their dominion” [36:71]. Allah has used
“hands” in the plural because the genitive pronoun, “Our,” whose
construct it is, 15 also plural; both underline the dominion and the
majesty of Allah. “Hands” in the plural form has never been used
with a singular genitive pronoun, nor has the dual been used with a
plural genitive pronoun. Hence, the words, “which Our hands have
fashioned” [35:71] cannot be compared with the words, “whom I
have created with My two hands” [38:75].

The Prophet (peace be on him) also said about Allah, “His veil is
light. If He were to remove it, the splendor of His face ‘would burn
every creature His eyes would fall upon.”

On the other hand, one does not say about these attributes that
they are organs (ada), limbs (jawarih), instruments (adwd?) or parts
(arkan, sing. rukn). For rukn is a part of the essence (mahiyyah),
and Allah is absolutely one, perfect and indivisible (Al-Ahad, As-
Samad). Similarly, “organs” gives the impression of division and
differentiation. Allah is exalted above that. This is clear in the verse,
“who have made the Qur’an into ‘idin (shreds)” [15:91]. ‘Idin is
from the same root as ‘adwat. Jawarih (limbs) implies the idea of
acquisition and use. Adwdt are the instruments which are used for
bringing about some good or preventing some evil. All of those
meanings are ruled out with respect to Allah. This is the reason none
of these words have been used in reference to Allah (in the Qur’an
or Sunnah). The words used in the text have correct meanings to
them. They are free from any kind of confusion or guile. Therefore,
one must not use terms other than the ones used in the texts (of the
Qur’an or Sunnah) when it comes to affirming or negating
something about Allah; otherwise one may affirm something that is
incorrect or negate something which is correct. All of these other
terms are vague and can be interpreted in different ways, nght as
well as wrong.

As for the word jihah (direction), it may imply something
existent or non-existent. It is well known that there is nothing in
existence except the Creator and the created. Hence, if by direction
one means an existent other than Allah, it would be something

'°°This is a sahih hadith that was discussed earlier. For more on this point, see Ibn
Taymiyyah, Majmi‘ al-Fatdwa, 3:45-46, 6:363-366; and Ibn Al-Qayyim, Mukhtasar
as-Sawa’iq al-Mursalah, 2:153-174.

160 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

created. As such, it could not encompass Allah, for no created being
can encompass Him. Exalted is He above that. If by the word
“direction” one means something non-existent, that is, beyond the
‘ bounds of this world, then there is nothing there except Allah.
Taking “direction” in this sense, if we say that Allah is in a certain
direction or space, it 15 correct, for it means that He 15 above the
world, beyond the limits of creation and beyond everything.

Those who negate direction, those who desire by that to deny
that Allah is transcendent and above the creation, use as their
evidence that all directions and space are created. But Allah must
have been before any kind of direction or space. Moreover, if Allah
is in a direction or space, it would mean that a part of the world is
eternal, or that there was a time when Allah was above space and
then entered into it. These arguments are advanced to show that
Allah is not in anything created, whether we call it space, direction
or anything else. This is true. But the fact is that space is not
something existing but it is only a point of view (amr i ‘tibari). There
is no doubt that spaces or directions (jihdat) are boundless and what
is not in the boundless does not exist.

What the author stated, “He is not bound by the six directions of
space as all created beings are,” is true in the sense that nothing
created can encompass Him. On the contrary, He encompasses all
and is above all. This is what the author means by this statement, as
later he states, “Allah encompasses all and is above all.”” When we
put these words together with the above sentence, it becomes clear
that what he wants to say is that Allah is not surrounded or
encompassed by anything, as created beings are; on the contrary, He
encompasses everything and is above everything.

But there are two more observations that must be made
conceming his statement. First, it would have been better for him to
avoid the use of these terms which are general and vague. One could
accuse him of making contradictory statements and argue that he
affirms that Allah encompasses everything and is above everything,
and at the same time he denies that He is above all. However, this
charge can easily be repudiated by saying, as we have done, that
what he denies is that anything created can encompass Him. (This
example shows) that using the wording of the texts (of the Qur’an
and Sunnah) is best.

Second, his statement, “as all created beings are,” suggests that
all created beings are contained. This is debatable. If he means by
that that they are contained by something existing, that 1s not true,
for the world is not contained by another world. If this were not the
case, one would then run into an infinite regression. On the other
hand, if he means ‘bound by something that does not exist,’ that too
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 167

is not correct. Not everything created is in a non-being. Some things
are inside other things, just as the heavens and earth are in the
Footstool, and so on. In addition, some things mark the ultimate
limit of the created world, such as the Throne. In any case, the
world is not in any other created object as otherwise we would not
be able to avoid an infinite regression, as we have just stated.

One might respond to this objection by stating that the word sa ‘ir
in the words sa ‘ir al-mubtada ‘at (as all created beings are) does not
mean ‘all’ but ‘the rest’ of the created beings, which is the orginal
meaning of the word. Sa ’ir comes from the same root as su ’r, which
means what is left over from a drink or meal. Hence, the reference
here would be ‘most of the created things and not all of them,’ or
‘the majority and not the totality’. Hence, what the author means is
that Allah is not bound by anything, as are most of the creation. He
is absolutely unbounded. However, we cannot imagine that the
author 15 one of those who say that Allah is neither in the world nor
outside of it, as some commentators have suggested. But his
meaning is that Allah is too exalted for any of His creatures to
encompass Him and too perfect to need anything, be it the Throne or
anything else.

It 1s debatable whether Imam Abd Hantfah ever said these
words. His opponents attacked him on much more trivial matters.
Had they thought he made a statement like this, they would have
openly denounced him and that denunciation would have been
known to everyone. On the contrary, Abt Muti Al-Balkhi narrated
that Abii Hanifah confirmed Allah’s being above the world, as we
will mention later, God willing. But the most apparent meaning of
the words mentioned here imply negation of that concept. There is
no statement of this nature in either the Book or the Sunnah. For that
reason 1 say that there is some debate as to whether Abu Hanifah
actually said it. The best course would be to refrain from saying
anything general on this issue. Had it been a matter related to the
words stated in the texts of the Qur’an and Sunnah, such as
mounting the Throne (istiw@) or coming down (nuzul), we could
talk about them. Only an ignorant person would say that when Allah
comes down to the lowest heaven,'®’ as we have in the hadith, the

'°7Allah’s descent has been referred to in various ahddith. See Al-Bukhari, 1145,
6321, 7494; Muslim, Salat al-Musafirin, 758; Abt Dawiid, As-Saldh, 1315; At-
Tirmidhi, Ad-Da‘wat, 3493; Ibn Majah, /gdmat as-Saladh, 1366; Malik, Al-Muwatta
(Muhammad Fuwad ‘Abdul-Baqi, ed., Cairo: ‘Isa Al-Halabi, 1370/1951), 1:214;
Ahmad, 2:264, 265, 267, 282, 419, 487, 504; Ad-Daraqutni, Kitab an-Nuzul (‘Ali
Ibn Muhammad Ibn Nasir, ed; Madinah: Al-Faqihi, 1403/1983), pp. 102, 103, 107;

162 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Throne will be above Him and He will be in between the two realms
of the universe. This goes against the consensus of the Elders as
well as the Qur’an and the Sunnah.

Furthermore, Shaykh al-Islam Abit ‘Uthman Isma‘il Ibn
‘Abdur-Rahman As-Sabini wrote that he heard from Abid Mansitr
Ibn Hamshadh that Abt Hanifah was asked about the hadith that
mentions Allah’s descending. He replied, “Allah descends in a
manner unknown 10 6

Those who keep silent on the issue of Allah’s transcendence
over the world do so because their knowledge of the Qur’an, the
Sunnah and the sayings of the Elders is limited. For that reason,
some of them reject the notion that Allah is above the Throne. They
say that He is neither above nor beside it, nor inside or outside the
world. They thus describe Allah in negative and impossible terms.
They decline to predicate of Him what He has predicated of
Himself, such as His being above the world or established on the
Throne. Others say that He resides in everything. Still others say
that He is all that 15 there, and so on. Far exalted is Allah above all
these wild surmises and blasphemous statements. We will, God
willing, discuss the transcendence (‘u/u) of Allah in detail later,
while commenting on the author’s statement, “He encompasses all
and is above all.”

(46) The ascension (mi‘raj) of the Prophet (peace be on
him) is a fact. He was taken in person for a journey by
night, and lifted awake and in body to the heavens, and
from there to such heights as Allah pleased. Allah
Showered upon him His favors as He pleased and
revealed to him what He liked. His heart did not falsify
what his eyes saw. Blessed is he in this life and in the
Hereafter.

Mi‘raj means a device by which one goes up or ascends. It
works like a ladder. Its nature, however, is unknown. We believe in
it without inquiring into its nature, as we do with all other
transcendental realities. The author has stated, “He was taken for a

Al-Bayhaq}i, Al-Asmd’ wa as-Sifat, ‏.م‎ 449; Al-Lalka’i, Sharh ‘Agidat Ahl as-Sunnah,
-p. 745. All of the above ahddith were reported by Abi Hurayrah. For reports from
other Companions, see As-Suyiti, Al-Azhar al-Mutanathirah, p. 124.

‘*SAbi ‘Uthman Isma‘il As-Sabini, ‘Agidat as-Salaf, Badr Al-Badr, ed. (Kuwait: Ad-
Dar as-Salafiyyah, 1404/1984].

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 163

journey by night, and lifted awake and in body to the heavens.”
However, there are three different views on this subject.

One view is that 1] was a journey of the soul, but his body was
not left behind. This 15 the view of ‘A’ishah and Mu‘awiyah (may
Allah be pleased with them) as recorded by Ibn Ishaq. Al-Hassan
Al-Basri is also reported to have had the same view.

But one must distinguish between the view that the Prophet
(peace be on him) was taken for a journey by night while asleep and
the view that it was a journey of the soul without the body. There is
a great difference between the two. ‘A’ishah and Mu‘awiyah did not
say that the journey was while he was asleep; they only said that he
was taken with his soul for a journey in the night though his body
was left behind. The difference between the two may be explained
as follows. What one sees in sleep is a representation of his
thoughts in sensible form. For example, he will see that he is taken
up to the heavens or to Makkah, although his soul neither ascends or
travels. The angel of dreams produces images for him representing
those things. When ‘A’ishah and Mu‘awiyah said that the nocturnal
journey (isra’) took place in sleep, what they meant is that the soul
went for a journey leaving the body behind and then it returned to
it.'°’ Thus, they consider this one of the Prophet’s special
privileges, as no other soul can attain a complete ascent to the
heavens except after death.'”°

Another view 1s that the isra’ took place twice, once while the
Prophet (peace be on him) was awake and once while he was
asleep. Those who hold this view try to reconcile the hadith narrated
by Shurayk in which the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Then I
got up from sleep”’’' with other narrations of the hadith.

Some say that the isra’ occurred once before revelation and a
second time after revelation commenced. Another view is that it took
place three times, once before he received revelations and twice
afterwards. It seems that whenever people come across a new hadith
which they cannot explain, they assume a-new event in order to

‘According to Al-Albani, the narration from ‘A’ishah and Mu‘awiyah is not

authentic, so there is no need to try to give it this interpretation.

‘Ibn Al-Qayyim has discussed the issue at length in Zad al-Ma‘ad, Shu‘ayb Al-
Arnawit and ‘Abdul-Qadir Al-Arnawit, eds. (Beirut: Mii’assassat Ar-Risdlah, n.d.),
3:401.

'" The words, “Then I got up from sleep,” occur only in the narrations of Shurayk and
are considered to be one of his mistakes. In his version of the hadith, Ibn Hajr noted
ten. features which do not coincide with other versions of the hadith. See Ibn Hayjr,
Fath al-Bari, 13:404-405S.

164 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

harmonize the different narrations. But this sophistry is only uttered
by people who are not proficient in hadith, for the leading scholars
of hadith all agree that the isra’ took place only once, in Makkah,
after the revelations began, one year before the emigration, while
others say a year and two months before the emigration, as Ibn
‘Abdul-Barr mentioned.

Commenting on this, Shams ad-Din Ibn Al-Qayyim stated, “I
wonder how people think that the isra’ occurred many times. How
could it be that they think that Allah would command fifty prayers
and the Prophet (peace be on him) would go back and forth between
Him and Moses until He reduced them to five and say, ‘I have
reduced them and made them incumbent on my servants,’ and then
go over the whole thing again, commanding fifty prayers first and
then again reducing them to five! The scholars of hadith have noted
that Shurayk, who reported such a hadith of the isra’, was mistaken
in his narration. Muslim recorded the best of his narrations and then
said, “He has altered the order of things, putting later things earlier
and earlier things later, he has also added some things and deleted
others. And Muslim did not record his narration and he did well in
not doing so.”!””

The hadith of isra’ states that the Prophet (peace be on him) was
taken while awake, in body, for a journey by night from the Sacred
Mosque in Makkah to the Bayt al-Maqdis in Jerusalem. He was
riding on Buraq, accompanied by Gabriel. At the Bayt al-Maqdis,
the Prophet (peace be on him) dismounted, tied Buraq with a ring at
the gate of the mosque, and led a prayer during which all the
prophets were present. Some say that he dismounted in Bethlehem
and led a prayer there, but this 15 not correct howsoever.

Then the Prophet (peace be on him) was taken from Jerusalem to
the first heaven. At the request of Gabriel, the gate was opened and
the Prophet (peace be on him) saw Adam, the father of humanity,
therein. The Prophet (peace be on him) greeted him. Adam
welcomed him and returned his greeting and affirmed his
prophethood. He was then taken to the second heaven. Its gate was
opened and he saw Yahya Ibn Zakariyya (John) and ‘Isa Ibn
Maryam (Jesus) therein. He greeted them and they, in return,
greeted him and affirmed his prophethood. Then he ascended to the
third heaven. Therein he saw Yisuf (Joseph). He greeted him and
his greeting was responded to. Yusuf welcomed him and also
affirmed his prophethood. He then ascended to the fourth heaven.

‘Ibn Al-Qayyim, Zddal-Ma ‘dd, 3:42.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 165

Therein he saw Idris, who greeted the Prophet (peace be on him),
welcomed him and affirmed his prophethood. He then was taken to
the fifth heaven, wherein he saw Hartin Ibn ‘Imran (Aaron), who
greeted him, welcomed him and affirmed his prophethood.

He then was taken to the sixth heaven wherein he saw Moses.
Moses greeted him, welcomed him and affirmed his prophethood.
When he left him, Moses cried. It was asked of him, “What makes
you cry?” He said, “I cry because I see that the young man who is
sent after me will have more followers going to Paradise than I
will.” Thereafter, the Prophet (peace be on him) was taken to the
seventh heaven where he met Abraham and greeted him. Abraham
greeted him and affirmed his prophethood. From there he was taken
to the sidrat al-muntaha (the lote-tree of the utmost boundary) and
then he was shown the bayt al-ma‘mir (the much-frequented
house).

Then he was taken to the Inaccessible, exalted be His Majesty
and Hallowed be His Names. He came close to Him, a distance of
two bows or less.'”* Allah revealed to His servant what He pleased.
He obligated fifty prayers. Thereafter, the Prophet (peace be on him)
returned. When he passed by Moses, Moses asked him about what
had been ordained. He told him of the fifty prayers. Moses said that
they would be too much for his followers and that he should go
back to Allah and request Him to reduce it for his followers. The
Prophet (peace be on him) turned to Gabriel as if seeking his advice.
He motioned, “Yes, if you wish.” So he took him back to Allah, the
Mighty, the Most High and Most Holy while He was at the same
place — this is the wording of Al-Bukhari in his Sahih and of some
of the narrations — and He reduced the amount by ten prayers.

Then he descended until he came to Moses. He informed him of
what had happened and he said, “Go back to your Lord and ask for
it to be reduced.” He continued to go between Moses and Allah, the
Blessed and Most High, until the prayers became five in number.
Moses told him to go back again and ask for more of a reduction,

'™This sentence, too, is part of the hadith reported by Shurayk and is one of his
mistakes. The commentator should have pointed this out. Al-Khattaébi observed that
the hadith has been narrated through channels other than Shurayk, but these words do
not occur in them. Ibn Kathir said that Shurayk mixed things up in narrating the
hadith and added:words that did not occur in the hadith reported by others. Ibn Kathir
also quoted the remarks of Al-Bayhaqi that the words, “He came closer...”, as they
occur in the Qur’an (53:8), refer to Gabriel, not Allah. This is agreed upon by all the
commentators of the Qur’an, but here Shurayk quotes them in the wrong context. See
Ibn Kathir, Tafsir al-Qur’an al- ‘Azim, (Beirut: Dar Al-Ma‘rifah, 1405/1984), 3:3.

166 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

but the Prophet (peace be on him) then said, “I have now become
shy of my Lord, but I am pleased and I submit.” At that point, there
was an announcement, “T have fully ordained what I wanted to make
obligatory and I have reduced the burden on my servants.”’ 4

I mentioned earlier that there is a difference of opinion among
the Companions as to whether or not the Prophet (peace be on him)
saw his Lord with his eyes, and stated that the correct opinion is that
he saw Allah with his heart, not with his eyes. The one referred to in

the two verses of Strat An-Najm, “The heart did not falsify what he
saw’ [verse 11], and “He has certainly seen him descending another
time” [verse 13], 1s Gabriel, as we authentically know from the
Prophet (peace be on him) himself. The Prophet (peace be on him)
saw Gabriel twice in the original form in which he was created.

As for “approaching” and “coming near” mentioned in verse 8 of
the same sirah, “He approached and came near,” they are different
from the ones mentioned in the hadith of isra’. ‘A’ishah and Ibn
Mas‘id have clarified that it was Gabriel who approached and came
near. The context of the verse confirms this. The verses read, “He
was taught by one mighty in power, imbued with wisdom, for he
appeared (in stately form) while he was in the highest part of the
horizon. Then he approached and came nearer.” On the other hand,
the approaching and coming nearer mentioned in the hadith of isra’
is that of Allah. It was Allah Who approached and came near.'’” As
for Strat An-Najm, on the other hand, it was Gabriel whom the
Prophet (peace be on him) saw descending at the sidrat al-muntaha.
He saw him once on earth and the other time near the sidrat al-
muntaha.

One of the proofs that the Prophet (peace be on him) was taken
in bodily form while awake is the verse, “Glory be to Allah, Who
did take his servant (‘abd) for a journey by night from the Sacred
Mosque (at Makkah) to the Farthest Mosque (in Jerusalem)” [17:1].
The word ‘abd is an expression used for both the body and the
spirit, in the same way that insdn (human being) is a word that
includes both the body and the spirit of a person. This is the

'The hadith of the Isra’ as reported by Anas Ibn Malik through Malik bin Sa‘sa‘ah
has been recorded by Al-Bukhari, 3207, 3887; Muslim, 164; An-Nasa’i, 1:217:
Ahmad, 4:208, 210; Ibn Hibban, 48; and At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 19:599. The text the
commentator quoted is from Ibn Al-Qayyim’s Zddal-Ma ‘ad (vol. 3, p. 38) and not
directly from Al-Bukhari; and Ibn Al-Qayyim did not quote the exact words of Al-
Bukhari.

‘The commentator is relying on the words of Shurayk, which, as mentioned earlier,
are mistaken narrations from Shurayk.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 167

common, well-known usage of the term. That 15 the correct meaning
(here). The isra’, therefore, was with both (the soul and the body).
Reason cannot preclude that. If one can doubt the ascent of a human
being, then one can also doubt the descent of the angels. That can
also lead to the denial of prophethood which is clear infidelity
(kufr).

One may ask what the wisdom 15 behind the Prophet (peace be
on him) first being taken to the Bayt al-Magqdis (in Jerusalem). The
answer is, and surely Allah knows best, that this was done in order
to demonstrate that Muhammad’s prophethood was true. When the
Quraysh asked the Prophet (peace be on him) to describe Jerusalem,
he described it to them.'’® He also informed them about the caravan
that he passed by on his trip.'’’ Had he been taken directly up to the
heavens from Makkah, that would not have happened. Nobody, of
course, could have asked him about the description of heaven and
then check the veracity of his statement. But since they were
acquainted with the Bayt al-Maqdis, they could ask him about it.

In the hadith of ascension there is evidence for the confirmation

of Allah’s transcendence about the creation, if one were to ponder it.
And with Allah is guidance.

(47) Al-Hawd (the Fountain), which Allah will grant the
Prophet (peace be upon him) as an honor to quench the
thirst of his nation, is factual.

_ The ahddith narrated concerning the Fountain reach the level of
mutawatir. They have been narrated from thirty some-odd
Companions. Our teacher, Sheikh ‘Imad ad-Din Ibn Kathir, may
Allah shower His blessings upon him, has collected all the channels
through which the ahddith have been transmitted in his great history,
Al-Bidayah wa an-Nihdayah.'"*®

Among those chains is what Al-Bukhari recorded ‏ده‎ the
authority of Anas Ibn Malik, who narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (peace be on him) said, “My fountain will be as wide as the
distance from Aylah to San‘a in Yemen. And it will contain as many
jugs as the stars in the sky.”"””

'7°See the hadith in Al-Bukhari, 3886, 4710, and Muslim, 170.

'"’ Ahmad, 1:374; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir al-Qur’dn al-‘Azim, 3:15.

‘Ibn Kathir, An-Nihdyah, Dr. Ahmad Abi Mulhim, et al., eds. (Cairo: Dar Ar-
Rayyan li at-Turath, 1408/1988), 1:337-73.

'” Al-Bukhari, 6580; Muslim, Ar-Rigdq, 2303; At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Qiyadmah, 2444;
Ahmad, 3:230.

168 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Anas also narrated that the Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“Some of my companions will come to my Fountain. When I see
them and they are presented to me, they will be detained on the way
while coming to me. I will say, ‘My companions!’ It will be said,
“You do not know what they innovated after you.’” [recorded by
Muslim].'®°

Ahmad recorded from Anas Ibn Malik that one time the Prophet
(peace be on him) dozed off for a little while. He then raised his
head and smiled. Then he either said to them or they said to him,
“What has made you smile?” He said, “A surah has just been
revealed to me. It says: ‘In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious,
the Most Merciful, We have given you the Kawthar (the Fountain of
Abundance)...’ until the end of the siéirah. Then he said, “Do you
know what the Kawthar is?” They said, “Allah and His Messenger
know best.” He said, “It is a river that Allah will give me in
Paradise. It will abound in goodness. On the Day of Judgment, my
followers will come to it and find there as many cups for drinking as
the number of stars. Some of them, however, will be taken away. I
will say, ‘O Allah, they are from my nation.’ Allah will say, “You
do not know what they did after you.’”'®' Muslim recorded that
hadith with the wording, “It is a river which my Lord has promised
me. It will abound in goodness. It will be a fountain to which my
followers will come on the Day of Judgment.”’®’ The rest of the
hadith is the same as the one recorded by Ahmad.

The meaning of the hadith is that there will be two outlets from
that River of Abundance to the Fountain. The Fountain will be on
the Plain of Judgment facing the Bridge (as-Sirat) which will cause
people to stagger. Some of them will not be allowed to drink from
the Fountain since they had apostasized from Islam. People such as
they will not be able to cross the bridge. |

Al-Bukhari and Muslim record on the authority of Jundub Ibn
‘Abdullah Al-Bajali, who heard the Messenger of Allah (peace be on
him) say, “I will precede you at the Fountain.”'®’ Farat, the word
used in the hadith, means the one who reaches the water first.

'°Muslim, Al-Fada’il, 2304; Al-Bukhari, 6582. Also see Al-Bukhari, 6576, 6583;
Muslim, 2290, 2297; Ahmad, 5:333, 339, 388.

‎Ahmad, 3:102; Abii Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4747; An-Nasa’i, 2:133.‏ !ذا

‎'®’Muslim, As-Salah, 400.

‎'83 Al-Bukhari, 6589; Muslim, Al/-Fada’il, 2289; Ahmad, 4:313; Al-Humaydi, 779;
At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 1688, 1689.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 169

Al-Bukhari recorded from Sahl Ibn Sa‘d Al-Ansari that the

Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) said, “I will precede you at
the Fountain. Whoever comes to it will drink from it, and whoever
drinks from it will never be thirsty again. Some people will come to
me, whom I will recognize and who will recognize me, and then
there will be a barrier between me and them.” Abii Hazm, one of the
narrators of the hadith, said, “An-Nu‘man Ibn Abi ‘Ayyash heard
me (while I was narrating that). He said, ‘Is that how you heard it
from Sahl?’ I said yes. He said, ‘I swear that I heard it from Abi
Sa‘id Al-Khudri, but he added the words, “They are from my
nation. And it will be said, “You do not know what they innovated
after you.’ I will say, ‘Get away, get away to those who changed
after me.’””””””! 84

What can be concluded from all the ahddith narrated about the
Fountain is that it is a great and huge Fountain. Its water will come
from the River of Abundance, mixed with the water of Paradise. It
will be whiter than milk, colder than ice, sweeter than honey, and
better smelling than musk. The Fountain will be vast and as long as
it is wide. The distance between its two corners will be equal to a
month-long journey. In some of the ahdadith it states, “Its water will
continue to increase as long as people drink from it. From the mud
at its bottom will come musk. And from its pebbles will come
pearls, gold bars and various kinds of jewels.” Glory be to the One

Who creates whatever He pleases.
| Some ahddith state that every prophet has a Fountain, but the
Fountain of our Prophet (peace be on him) is the greatest and
sweetest of them and will give drink to the largest number of
people.'*” May Allah, by His grace and generosity, include us
among them.

Abit ‘Abdullah Al-Qurtubi wrote in At-Tadhkirah, “Opinions
differ regarding the Balance and the Fountain, as to which comes
first. Some say that the Balance will come first. Others say that the
Fountain will come first. Abii Al-Hassan Al-Qabisi says that the first
opinion is correct.” Al-Qurtubi also supports it according to the

'**The commentator gave the meaning of the hadith and not the exact wording found
in Al-Bukhari. See Al-Bukhari, 7050.

‘This hadith, with somewhat different wording, occurs in At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-
Qiydmah, 2445. At-Tirmidhi’s chain is weak. In Majma‘ az-Zawda’id (10:363), ‏عاط‎
‎Haythami states that At-Tabarani also recorded it and except for one transmitter of the
hadith, Marwan Ibn Ja‘far As-Samari, whose reliability is disputed, the other
narrators are reliable. Al-Albani concludes that the hadith is hasan due to some
supporting evidence he found for it.

170 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

meaning. He says that people will be thirsty when they come out of
their graves, so they will go to the Fountain first and then to the
Balance and the Bridge. Abt). Hamid Al-Ghazali, in Kashf ‘Ilm al-

Akhirah, narrates from some of the Elders who wrote on this topic
that the Fountain will come after the Bridge. But this is a mistake,
says Al-Ghazali. Al-Qurtubi said, “That is correct. You should not
think that this is going to happen in this world. It will be on a
different world, that will shine like silver, where no blood will be
shed, no one will be wronged, and where Allah will come down for
judgment.”

May Allah curse those who deny the existence of the Fountain.
They will be barred, I fear, from it on the Day of Judgment.

(48) Ash-Shifa‘ah (intercession) that has been prepared
on their (the Muslims’) behalf is also a fact, as has been
reported in the ahadith.

Intercession 15 of many varieties. Some of them are agreed upon
by the Muslim nation. Concerning others, the Mu‘tazilah and other
heretics reject them. The first type is the first intercession and the
greatest, and is the exclusive privilege of our Prophet (peace be on
him) from among all his brother prophets and messengers (may
Allah’s blessings be upon all of them). There are many ahddith
recorded in Al-Bukhari, Muslim, and other works about this ©
intercession from a number of Companions.

From among those narrations is the narration of Abi: Hurayrah,
who said, “Once a lamb was brought to the Messenger of Allah
(peace be on him). A leg of lamb was offered to the Prophet as that
was his favorite. He took some bites from it and then said, ‘I will be
the leader of the people on the Day of Judgment. Do you know
why? Allah will gather everyone from the earliest to the latest times
on a single plain (where an observer will be able to see all of them
and they will be able to hear the announcer. And the sun will come
near them. They will face a situation that they cannot bear.) Some
people will say, ‘Don’t you see the condition you are in and the state
that you have reached? Will you not seek one who can intercede
with your Lord?’ Some people will say, ‘Appeal to your father,
Adam.’ They will go to him and say, ‘Adam, you are the father of
all mankind and Allah created you with His own Hands and
breathed into you a spirit from Him, and commanded the angels to
bow down to you and made you live in Paradise. Will you not
intercede for us with your Lord? Don’t you see in what a (miserable)
state we are in and what kind of situation we have reached?’
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 171

“Adam will reply, ‘My Lord is so angry, as He has never been
before and will never be in the future. And He forbade me the tree
but I disobeyed (Him). (I am worried about my) own self. Myself!
Go to somebody else. Go to Noah.’ Then they will go to Noah and
say, “Noah, you were the first of the messengers of Allah to the
people of the earth, and Allah named you a thankful servant. Can’t
you see what a terrible state we are in and what a situation we have
reached?’ Noah will reply, “Today my Lord is so angry, as He has
never been angry before or will ever be angry again. I have myself
to worry about. Myself! Go to someone else. Go to Abraham.’

“They will then say, ‘Abraham, you are the prophet of Allah and
His dear friend on earth. Can’t you see our condition, how
miserable it is?” He will say, ‘My Lord is very angry today, as He
has never been angry before or will ever be angry again.’ He will
then recall his misstatements and say, ‘I fear for myself. I fear for
myself. Go to Moses.’ Then they will go to Moses and say, ‘You
were a messenger of Allah. Allah chose you for His message and
spoke especially to you. Intercede for us with your Lord. Can’t you
see the state we are in? Can’t you see what situation we have
reached?’ Moses will say to them, ‘My Lord is very angry today, as
He has never been before nor ever will be again. I killed someone
whom I was not commanded to kill. I am worried about myself,
myself, myself. Go to someone else. Go to Jesus.” “Then they
will say, ‘Jesus, you are a messenger of Allah and His word that He
bestowed on Mary and a spirit from Him — the Prophet (peace be on
him) then said, ‘Jesus was just this — and you spoke to people while
in the cradle. Intercede for us with your Lord. Can’t you see what a
miserable state we are in? Can’t you see what a situation we have
reached?’ Jesus will say, ‘My Lord is angry today, as He has never
been before nor will ever be again.’ And he will not mention any sin
(on his part, but will say:) ‘Go to someone else. Go to Muhammad
(peace be on him).’

“They will go to Muhammad and say, ‘Muhammad, you are a
messenger of Allah and the last prophet. Allah has forgiven you
your past and future sins. Intercede for us with your Lord. Can’t
you see what a miserable state we are in? Can’t you see the situation
we have reached?’ I will then stand and go to the Throne and bow
down to my Lord, the Exalted. Then Allah will teach me some
words that I did not know and inspire me to praise Him in words
that were not given to anyone before me. He will say, ‘Muhammad,
raise your head, ask and it will be given; intercede and your
intercession will be accepted.’ I will say, ‘O Lord, my nation, my
nation. O Lord, my nation, my nation. O Lord, my nation, my
172 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

nation.” He will say, ‘For those of your nation who have no
reckoning to face, enter them through the right door of Paradise.
Others will enter Paradise through the other doors along with the
rest of your followers. The Prophet (peace be on him) then said,
“By the One in Whose hand 15 my soul, the distance between the
two sides of the door will be like the distance between Makkah and
Hajar or between Makkah and Busra.” [recorded by Al-Bukhari and
Muslim; but with this particular wording it is only to be found in the
Musnad of Ahmad]."°

The most amazing thing is that some scholars who narrate this
hadith from more than one chain do not even mention the first
intercession, in which Allah comes to decide the affairs among the
people, as is mentioned in the hadith about the Blowing of the
Trumpet. But that is the point of the narration and it is what the
beginning context alludes to. The people will seek intercession from
Adam and the prophets after him to decide among the people. They
will seek rescue from their place, as the text of the remaining
narrations show. When they reach the place of gathering, that 5
when they will mention intercession concerning the sinners of the
nation and their rescue from the Hell-fire.

It is as 11 the purpose of the Elders, narrating this hadith in an
abbreviated matter, was to refute the Khawarlj) and those who
followed them from among the Mu‘tazilah. Those are the people
who reject the notion that anyone will be taken out of the Hell-fire
after entering it. Therefore, they mention only that portion of the
hadith in which it clearly states the refutation of those people and
their heresy that contradicts the hadith.

This is explicitly mentioned in the hadith of the Trumpet. If I did
not fear that it would lengthen this work, I would include all of that
hadith. Some of the things 1t mentions are that they will go to Adam,
then Noah, then Abraham, then Moses, then Jesus, and then come
to the Messenger of Allah Muhammad (peace be on them all). He
will go and bow down under the Throne in a place called Al-Fahs.
Allah will say, “What is the matter?” although He is fully informed
of it. The Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) will say, “O Lord,
You promised me intercession, so my intercession is concerning
Your creation. Judge among them.” Allah, the Most High, will say,
“That is your intercession. I will bring them and judge among all of
you.” He then will say, “Go back and wait among the people.”

! 56 Ahmad, 2:435-436.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 173

Then it mentions the splitting of the heavens. The angels will
descend among clouds and then the Lord, Glorified and Most High,
will come and decide the matter. The angels that are closest to Allah
will be singing His praises in a special manner. Allah will place His
footstool wherever He wishes on His earth. Then He will say, “I
have been silent to you since I created you until this day, listening to
your statements and watching your deeds, so be silent for me. Here
are your deeds and here are your records that will be read to you.
Whoever finds good should thank Allah. Whoever finds other than
that should not blame anyone except himself.”

Then the hadith states, when the people of Paradise arrive at
Paradise, they will say, “Who will intercede for us with our Lord to
enter Paradise?” They will say, “Who has more right to that than
your father, the one created by Allah’s hand and into whom He
breathed a spirit from Him and spoke to directly.” So they will go to
Adam and seek that from him. Then the Prophet (peace be on him)
mentioned Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and then Muhammad
(peace be on him). Finally, the Messenger of Allah (peace be on
him) said, “They will come to Paradise and I will take hold of the
ring of the door. Then I will seek to open the door. It will be opened
for me and I will be welcomed therein. When I enter, I will see my
Lord and fall prostrate. Then I will be permitted to praise Allah in a
manner that was not taught to any of His creation. Then Allah will
say to me, ‘Get up, Muhammad. Intercede and your intercession
will be accepted. Ask and it will be given.” When I raise my head,
Allah will say — and He knows best: ‘What is your purpose?’ I will
say, ‘O Lord, you promised me intercession. I intercede for the
people of Paradise to enter Paradise.’ Allah then will say, ‘I accept
your intercession. And I permit them to enter Paradise...’” The
imams, Ibn Jarir, in his Tafsir, At-Tabarani, Aba Ya‘la Al-Mawsalt,
Al-Bayhadi and others recorded this hadith.'*’

The second and third forms of intercession concern the
Prophet’s intercession for those people whose good and bad deeds
are equal. He will intercede on their behalf to have them enter
Paradise, and he will also intercede for other people who were
ordered to go to Hell but due to the intercession of the Prophet
(peace be on him) they will be spared.

'"’This is a very lengthy hadith. In its chain is Isma‘il Ibn Rafi, who is weak, and
Muhammad Ibn Yazid or Ziyad, who is unknown. In his commentary on the Qur’an,
Ibn Kathir called this hadith “very strange”.

174 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

The fourth type of the Prophet’s intercession will be for raising
the ranks of those who enter Paradise above the level they deserve
from their actions. The Mut‘tazilah accept only this type of
intercession and they reject all the other forms, although they are
confirmed in mutawatir ahadith.

The fifth type of intercession refers to intercession to allow some
people to enter Paradise without any reckoning. The best evidence
for this type of intercession is the hadith of ‘Ukashah Ibn Mihsan,
in which the Prophet (peace be upon him) supplicated for him to be
among those seventy thousand who will enter Paradise without any
reckoning. This hadith is recorded in Al-Bukhari and Muslim.'**

The sixth form of intercession concerns lightening the
punishments of those who deserve it, like the Prophet’s interceding
for his uncle Abi Talib’s punishment to be lightened.'®’ After
mentioning this type of intercession, Al-Qurtubi stated in Af-
Tadhkirah, “One might say, ‘But Allah says, “No intercession by
any intercessor will protect them’”’ [74:48]. The response to that 5
that the intercession certainly will not rescue the non-believers from
Hell, but it will rescue the Believers from the Fire and allow them to
be admitted into Paradise.”"”°

The seventh kind of intercession refers to the Prophet (peace be
on him) asking permission for all the Believers to enter Paradise, as
mentioned earlier. In Sahih Muslim it is recorded from Anas that the
Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) said, “iI will be the first to
intercede for admitting people to Paradise. ‏ا‎

The eighth form of intercession 15 the Prophet’s intercession for
the people of his nation who committed great sins and were sent to
Hell. He will intercede for their release from Hell. This type of
intercession has been mentioned in ahddith that reach the level of
being mutawdtir. Perhaps the Khawarij and Mu‘tazilah were not
aware of that fact and therefore they held a differing opinion, being
ignorant of the authenticity of these ahddith and refuting those who
were knowledgeable of them, thus continuing in their heresy.
Actually, this type of intercession is also performed by the angels,
prophets and other Believers. The Prophet (peace be on him) will be
given four opportunities to exercise this type of intercession.

'§§ Al-Bukhari, 5811, 6542; Muslim, Al-/mdn, 216, 217.

'®? Al-Bukhari, 3883; Muslim, Ash-Shifd ‘ah, 209; Al-Humaydi, 460.
'°° Al-Qurtubi, At-Tadhkirah, 1:249.

'*'Muslim, Al-imdn, 196; Ad-Darimi, 1:27; Ahmad, 3:140.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 175

From the hadith on this topic is the hadith of Anas Ibn Malik
who said that the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) said, “My
intercession will be for the people of my nation who committed great
sins” [recorded by Imam Ahmad].'”

Al-Bukhari recorded in the Book of Tawhid (of his Sahih) that
Sulayman Ibn Harb narrated to us that Hamad Ibn Zayd narrated to
us that Ma‘bad Ibn Hilal Al-‘Anazi said, “The people of Basrah
gathered and went to Anas Ibn Malik. Thabit Al-Bunani went with
us. We asked Anas about the hadith of intercession. Anas was in his
house. We decided that we would see him when he prayed the
dhuhr (noon) prayer. We asked for his permission to enter and he
gave it to us and he was sitting on his carpet. We said to Thabit, “Do
not ask him about anything else before asking him about the
intercession.’ (He said, ‘Abii Hamzah, these people, your brothers
from Basrah, have come to you to ask you about the hadith of
intercession.) He said, ‘Muhammad (peace be on him) told us:

“When it is the Day of Resurrection, people will be wandering
in distress. They will go to Adam and say, ‘Intercede for us with
your Lord.’ He will say, ‘That is not for me, but you should go to
Abraham, as he is the beloved friend of the Merciful.” They will go
to Abraham and he will say, ‘That is not for me. Go go Moses, for
he is the one whom Allah spoke to directly.” So they will go to
Moses and he will say, ‘That is not for me to do, but you must go to
Jesus; he is the spirit of Allah and His word.’ They will then come
to Jesus and he will say, ‘That is not for me to do, but you must go
to Muhammad.’ Then they will come to me and I will say, ‘This is
for me to do. I will ask permission from my Lord and He will give
me permission. He will put in my heart some words of praise which
I do not know now. I will praise Him with those words, then I will
fall prostrate to Him. The call will come, “Muhammad, raise your
head. Speak and you will be heard. Intercede and your intercession
will be fulfilled. Ask and it will be given.”

“7 will say, “O Lord, my nation, my nation.” It will be said,
“Go, take out whoever has a grain of faith in his heart.” I will then
go and do so. Then I will return and praise Allah (again) with those
words of praise. Then I will fall prostrate to Him. It will be said,
“Muhammad, raise your head. Speak and you will be heard.
Intercede and your intercession will be fulfilled. Ask and it will be

'? Ahmad, 3:213; Abt Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4739; At-Tirmidhi, Sifat Yawm al-
Qiyadmah, 2436; Ibn Hibban, 2596. It is sahih.

176 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

given.” I will say, “O Lord, my nation, my nation.” It will be said,
“Go, take out whoever has a even a‘particle of faith in his heart.” I
will then go and do so. Then I will return and praise Allah (again)
with those words of praise. Then I will fall prostrate to Him. It will
be said, “Muhammad, raise your head. Speak and you will be
heard. Intercede and your intercession will be fulfilled. Ask and it
will be given.” I will say, “O Lord, my nation, my nation.” It will
be said, “Go, take out whoever has even the tiniest, tiniest amount
of faith in his heart and take him out of the Hell-fire.” I will go and ©
do so.””

‘Thabit said, ' When we left Anas, I said, ‘We should pass by
Al-Hassan; he has hidden himself in the house of Abt Khalifah,'”°
and tell him about what Anas just narrated to us.” We went to him
and greeted him. He gave us permission to enter. We said to him,
‘Abii Sa‘id, we are coming to you from Anas Ibn Malik. We have
not seen anything like what he narrated to us about the intercession.’
He asked what he said. We then proceeded to narrate the hadith to —
him. We came to the end of it, and he said, ‘What else did he say?’
We said, ‘He did not add anything to that for us.’ He said, ‘Anas
has narrated that entire hadith to me for twenty years. I do not know
if he forgot the rest of it or was afraid to tell you the rest of it lest
you rely on it solely (and not work).’ We said, ‘Abi Sa‘id, narrate it
to us.’ He laughed and then said, ‘Mankind has been created hasty.
I only said that to you because I want to narrate it to you.’

“He (the Prophet, peace be on him) then said, ‘I will return a
fourth time and praise Allah (again) with those words of praise.
Then I will fall prostrate to Him. It will be said: ‘Muhammad, raise
your head. Speak and you will be heard. Intercede and your
intercession will be fulfilled. Ask and it will be given.’ ‘I will say,
“O Lord, give me permission concerning all of those who said,
‘There 15 no one worthy of worship except Allah’ (to take them out
of Hell).”’ He, the Most High, will say, ‘By My honor and glory, by
My majesty and greatness, I will take out from the Fire whoever has
said, “There is no god except Allah.”’” This is the wording of the
hadith in Muslim’s narration.'”* _

The hadith scholar Abt Ya‘la narrated from ‘Uthman that the
Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) said, “Three (groups of

! "1 He was hiding in order to evade Al-Hajaj Ibn Yusuf Ath-Thagafi.
'* Al-Bukhari, 7510; Muslim, 193, 326; Ibn Majah, 4312; Ahmad, 3:116, 244, 247,
248.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 177

people) will intercede on the Day of Judgment, the prophets, then
the scholars and then the martyrs.””'”°

In the Sahih, there is a hadith from Abt Sa‘id from the Prophet
(peace be on him) who said, “Allah will say, “The angels have
interceded; the prophets have interceded; the Believers have
interceded. The only one left is the Most Merciful of the Merciful.
He will then take a handful from the Hell-fire and will release
therefrom a people who never did any good deeds...””’”°

People are divided into three opinions concerning the issue of
intercession. The polytheists, the Christians, the extreme heretics
who revere Sifi masters to excess, and others consider intercession
with Allah by those whom they consider revered in a way similar to
the kind of intercession that takes place in this world. The
Mu‘tazilah and Khawary reject the notion of our Prophet’s or
others’ intercession for those who committed great sins. As for the
Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah, they affirm the notion of our
Prophet’s intercession for the people who committed great sins, as
well as the intercession of others, but no one will be allowed to
intercede except with Allah’s permission, and He will specify the
people who will be interceded for, as 15 stated in authentic ahddith,
such as the hadith of intercession which says, “They will go to
Adam, then Noah, then Abraham, then Moses, then Jesus, and
Jesus will say to them, ‘Go to Muhammad, for he is a servant
whose past and later sins were forgiven by Allah.’ Then they will
come to me and I shall go. When I see my Lord, I shall fall prostrate
to Him. And I shall praise Him with words of praise that He shall
give to me that I cannot state now. He will say, ‘Muhammad, raise
your head. Speak and you will be listened to. Intercede, and your
intercession will be accepted.’ Then I will say, ‘O my Lord, my
nation.’ Then He will state the people for me and I will enter them
into Paradise. Then I shall go and bow down and He will state some
people for me...” He mentioned that three times.”””’

As for praying to Allah in the name of the Prophet (peace be on
him) or anyone else in this world, the matter needs some detail. If

‘Recorded by Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd, 4313. Al-‘Ugayli mentioned the hadith in Kutab
ad-Du‘a’fa al-Kabir (‘Abdul-Mu’ti Amin Qala‘ji, ed.; Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-
‘IImiyyah, 1404/1984), vol. 3, ‏.م‎ 67. He said that one of its narrators, ‘Anbasah Ibn
‘Abdur-Rahman, is to be avoided, according to Al-Bukhari, while Abii Hatim called
him a forger, and the person he narrated the hadith from is unknown. AI-Albani
concludes that this hadith is fabricated.

'°6Part of a long hadith in Muslim, Al-iman, 183, 302; Ahmad, 3:94.

'°’Part of the long hadith on intercession referred to earlier.

178 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

the supplicator says, “By the right of Your prophet (upon You)” or
“By the right of so-and-so” and swears by a created being to
impress on Allah to answer his supplication, that act 15 to be avoided
for two reasons. First, it is a kind of swearing by someone other
than Allah. Second, it involves the belief that someone has some
night over Allah. It 1s not allowed to swear by anyone other than
Allah, and no one has any right over Allah except what He has laid
down for Himself, as in Allah’s saying, “Jt was incumbent upon Us
to aid those who believed” [30:47].

Also, in the confirmed hadith in Al-Bukhari and Muslim when
the Prophet (peace be on him) said to Mu‘adh while he was riding
behind him on an animal, “Mu‘adh, do you know what is the right
of Allah upon His servants?” He answered, “Allah and His
Messenger know best.” He said, “His right upon them is that they
should worship Him and not ascribe anything as a partner to Him.
Do you know what the right of the servants is upon Allah if they do
such a thing?” He said, “Allah and His Messenger know best.” He
told him, ”Their right upon Him is that He should not punish
them.”’’* That right is an obligation according to His perfect words
and His truthful promise. Furthermore, it is not the case that the
servant himself has any such right upon Allah, as one created being
might have over another created being. Allah is the real benefactor of
man for any good which he receives from anyone. The obligatory
right that they have is due to His promise not to punish them. The
fact that He will not punish them 15 not something one can swear by,
nor may Allah be invoked in its name or on its account. In fact,
nothing is a means to something except what He has made a means
to it.

Similarly, a hadith in the Musnad from Abi Sa‘id from the
Prophet (peace be on him) reports that a man who was walking to
prayer said, “I beseech You by the right of this walking of mine and
by the right of those who beseech You.”!”” This is the right of the
beseechers that Allah has made incumbent upon Himself. It
therefore behooves Him to respond to their prayer and reward their
worship. A poet spoke well when he said:

‎Al-Bukhari, 2856, 5967, 26267, 6500, 7373; Muslim, A/-/mdn, 30; At-Tirmidhi,‏ ةا
‎Al-Iman, 2645; Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd, 4296; Ahmad, 3:260, 261.‏

‎'°? Ahmad, 3:21; Ibn Majah, A/-Masdjid, 778. Ibn As-Sunni has said that two of the
transmitters of this hadith, Fudayl Ibn Marziiq and ‘Ati’ah Al- Awfi, are weak. Hence
the hadith is weak. Ibn As-Sunni, ‘Amal al-Yawm wa al-Laylah, 83. Also see Al-
Albani, Silsilat al-Ahddith adh-Dhda’ifah wa al-Mawdi‘ah (Beirut: Al-Maktab ‏علج‎
‎Islami, 1392/1972), hadith no. 24.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 179

Men have no rights over Allah,

And nothing done for Him goes unrewarded.
If men are punished, His justice requires it;
If they are rewarded, it is simply His grace.
And His grace knows no bounds.

One may ask: What is the difference between the words “by the
right of those who beseech You” and the words “by the night of
Your Prophet”?*”’ The answer is that the first one amounts to saying
“by the nght of those who beseech You whose prayers You have
promised to hear and, as I am one of them, please grant my prayer.”
On the other hand, the phrase “By the night of so-and-so,” even if he
had a right over Allah on account of a promise that He had made to
him, has no relation to Allah’s responding to the supplication of the
supplicator. It is as if he said, “Since so-and-so is one of your
devoted servants, answer my prayer.” What is the relationship
between the two and what requires the other to be answered? This 1s
actually an act of trespassing the limits of supplications. Allah has
said, “Call on your Lord with humility and in private; for He does
not like those who trespass the limits” [7:55]. The above manner of
beseeching Allah is an innovation. It has never been narrated from
the Prophet (peace be on him), any of his Companions, nor any of
the Successors and not from any of the imams; it 1s only found in
the temples and amulets that are written by ignorant people and 1
tarigahs.

Supplication is one of the greatest acts of worship. Worship
must be founded upon the Sunnah and obedience (to said Sunnah)
and not upon personal whims or innovations.

If by saying, “by the nght of so-and-so” one’s intention is to
adjure Allah to do something in his name, that, too, is forbidden. To
adjure someone other than Allah in the name of a created being is not
allowed; therefore, what about adjuring the Creator in the name of a
creature? The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Whoever swears by
anything other than Allah has associated (partners) with Him.”?"”'
That it is why Abt Hanifah and his two companions said that it 5
disliked for the supplicator to say, “I ask you by the right of so-and-
so, by the right of your prophets and messengers, by the right of the
Inviolable Mosque, or by the nght of al-mash‘ar al-haram,” and so

*”’Note that the hadith the first phrase is based on is weak, as mentioned above.
Therefore, there is no real need to respond to this question.

*°' Ahmad, 2:34, 69, 87, 125; Abi Dawid, 3251; At-Tirmidhi, An-Nudhar, 1535; Al-
Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 1:18. It is an authentic hadith. :

180 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

on. In fact, Abt’ Hanifah and Muhammad disliked for anyone to
say, “O Allah, I ask you in the name of the seat of Your glory, the
Throne,” but Abii Yusuf did not dislike such a statement after he had
heard a narration concerning it.”°

If a person should say, “I beseech You in the name of the status
that so-and-so has with You,” or “I seek a means to You through
Your prophets, messengers and devoted servants,” and he thinks
that so-and-so has a place of honor with Allah that he should invoke
Allah through him, such a statement is forbidden. Had this been the
practice of the Companions during the lifetime of the Prophet (peace
be on him) they would have continued doing likewise after his
death. But they used to seek a means to Allah during his lifetime
through the Prophet’s own supplications.”°’ They used to ask him to
pray for them. Then they would say, “Amen” to his supplications,
as was the case in 21-1511506 (the prayer for rain) and other times.
When the Prophet (peace be on him) died, ‘Umar said, when they
went out to make the prayer for rain, “O Allah, when we did not
have rain we asked the Prophet to pray for us and You gave us rain.
Now we ask you through the uncle of the Prophet.’”’°* Then he
asked ‘Abbas to pray for them and to beseech Allah. He did not
adjure Allah to give rain in the name or position which ‘Abbas had
in Allah’s sight. If that had been the case, the Companions would
have done it by the Prophet’s position and honor, as he definitely
had a greater and more honorable position with Allah than ‘Abbas.

Some say 1n prayer, “I ask You in the name of my obedience to
Your Messenger and love for him,” or “by my belief in him and the
rest of Your prophets and messengers and my believing in them,”
and so on. This 15 one of the best types of supplications, means of
approach and seeking intercession.

The words, “seeking approach to Allah by a certain person” are
somewhat vague. Some people make mistakes based on these words
because they do not understand their meanings. If you ask someone
to pray and supplicate for you while he 15 alive, that 1s permissible.

?°°See Ad-Durr al-Mukhtar with the commentary Radd al-Muhtar, 6:395-397. The
tradition which Aba Yasuf seemed to have relied upon was considered by Ibn Al-Jawzi
to be fabricated. See Az-Zayla‘i, Nasb ar-Rayah (Beirut: Al-Maktabah al-Islamiyyah,
1393/1973), 4:272-3. Al-Albani and Al-Arnawit are in agreement with Ibn Al-Jawzi
concerning this hadith.

For a discussion of this point, see Ibn Taymiyyah, 191108 as-Sirdt al-Mustagim
(Muhammad Hamid AI-Fiqi, ed.; Cairo: Maktabat as-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah,
1369), pp. 398ff. :

704 Al-Bukhari, 1010, 3710; Ibn Hibban, 2861; At-Tabarani, A/-Kabir, 84.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 187

But 11 you love and follow someone and he deserves to be loved and.
followed, and you ask him to pray and supplicate for you in the
name of his being worthy of praying and supplicating or in the name
of your love for him or if you swear by him, then this is improper or
forbidden. Similar is the case when you pray in the name of
something and take it as a means or swear by it.

An example of the first type is the story of the three young men
who sought shelter in a cave. This is a well-known hadith recorded
by Al-Bukhari, Muslim and others. A boulder fell and closed the
opening to the cave upon them. They approached Allah by
mentioning some good deeds they had done sincerely for His sake.
Each of them said, “If You know that I did that seeking Your
countenance, rescue us from the situation which we are in.” Finally,
the boulder was removed and they walked out of the cave.”” These
people prayed to Allah through their pious deeds, and pious deeds
do contribute to the acceptance of a prayer. Allah ‘has promised that
He will grant the prayers of those who have faith in Him and do
good deeds, and that He will increase His favors upon them.

In sum, intercession with Allah is not like intercession between
human beings. One who intercedes with a man not only pleads for
the petitioner but also joins in his prayer. There are then two who
pray. He also joins the intercessor, because with his intercession he
becomes a co-granter of the object that 15 requested. In short, he
joins the petitioner as well as the petitioned. But Allah is one,
without a second. No one can therefore intercede with Him without
His prior permission. He is in full control of everything. No one
shares with Him in anything. That it is why the chief intercessor will
bow down before Allah on the Day of Judgment and praise Him.
Only then will He say, “Raise your head, speak and you will be
heard. Ask and you will be given. Intercede and it will be granted.”
Allah will determine the categories of people whom the Prophet
(peace be on him) will take out of Hell and enter into Paradise.
Thus, everything is in the hands of Allah, as He has said, “Say:
Indeed, this affair is completely Allah’s” [3:159]; “Not for you, but
for Allah is the decision” [3:128]; and, “Is it not His to create and to
rule” [7:54].

Although no one can intercede with Him except for one He
permits and for whomsoever He wills, He has given the intercessor
the honor of having his intercession accepted. The Messenger of
Allah (peace be on him) said, “Intercede and you shall be rewarded

*°° Al-Bukhari, 2215, 2272, 2333, 3465, 5974; Muslim, Adh-Dhikr, 2743; Abi
Dawid, A/-Buyi‘. 3387; Ahmad, 2:116.

152 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

for it. Allah commands through the tongue of His Prophet what He
wills.”’°° In the Sahih, it is recorded that the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “Tribe of Manaf, I cannot save you from (the punishment
of) Allah. Safiyyah, aunt of the Prophet of Allah, I cannot save you
from Allah. ‘Abbas, uncle of the Prophet of Allah, I cannot save
you.””’’ Another hadith in the Sahih records that the Prophet (peace
be on him) said, “I should not see any of you coming on the Day of
Judgment carrying on your shoulders a camel braying or a goat
bleating or a skin waving, and saying, ‘Save me!’ I will say, ‘I have
conveyed to you the message. Now I cannot do anything for
you.”””® If the best and greatest of all the intercessors says to his
dearest ones, “I cannot save you from Allah,” what do you think
will be the situation for everybody else?

When someone prays for anybody or intercedes for him, and
Allah hears his prayer and grants his request, he did not at all effect
the realization of the object prayed for in the same way it occurs in
the human context. It is Allah Who has made him pray and
intercede. It 15 He Who creates his acts. It is also He Who first
inspired the sinner to repent and then He accepts his repentance. He
is the One Who inspires him to do good deeds and then rewards him
for them. He is the One Who inspired the person to pray and then
He grants his prayer. This is based on the foundations of the beliefs
of the Ahl as-Sunnah who believe in predestination and that Allah is
the Creator of all things.

(49) The covenant that Allah made with Adam and his
descendants is a fact.

Allah has said, “And remember the day when your Lord drew
forth from the Children of Adam, from their loins, their descendants
and made them testify concerning themselves, (saying:) Am I not
your Lord? They said: Yes, we do testify to that. That was lest you
should say on the Day of Judgment: Of this, we were unaware”’
[7:172]. Thus Allah has stated that He brought out the children of
Adam from their loins testifying concerning themselves that Allah 1s
their Lord and their Master and that there is no god but Allah. A

296 Al-Bukhari, 1432, 6027, 6028: Muslim, A/-Birr wa as-Salah, 2627; At-Tirmidhi,
2674; Abi: Dawid, 5131; An-Nasa’1, 5:77-78; Ahmad, 4:400, 409, 413; Al-Humaydi,
771.

?°7T Al-Bukhari, 2753, 3527, 4771; Muslim, Al-Imdn, 204; Ahmad, 2:333, 350, 360,
398, 399; An-Nasa’1, 6:248, 249, 250.

*°’Part of a long hadith in Al-Bukhari, 3073; Muslim, 1831; Ahmad, 2:426.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 183

number of ahddith also mention that the Children of Adam were
brought out from his loins and “the people of the nght hand” were
separated from “the people of the left hand”. Some of the ahddith
also mention that they were made to testify that Allah is their Lord.

Among these ahddith is the hadith recorded by Ahmad, on the
authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, who narrated that the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “Allah made a covenant with the offspring of Adam on
the plane of ‘Arafah. He took out from his loins all the children
whose seed He had sown in him. He spread them before him and
addressed them directly and said, ‘Am I not your Lord?’ They said,
“Yes, we testify to that.”” The Prophet (peace be on him) then
recited the rest of the verse, “(This was) lest you should say on the
Day of Judgment: ‘Of this, we were unaware,’ or lest you should
say: ‘Our fathers before us may have taken false gods, but we are
their descendants after them. Will you then destroy us because of the
deeds of men who were futile?’” [7:172-173]. This hadith was also
recorded by Al-Nasa’i, Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatim. Al-Hakim
recorded it in Al-Mustadrak and said, “Its chain is authentic, but Al-
Bukhari and Muslim did not record it.””°?.

Imam Ahmad has recorded another hadith which states that
“Umar Ibn Al-Khattéb was asked about the above-mentioned verse.
He said that the Prophet (peace be on him) was asked about it and he,
said, “Allah created Adam, touched his back with His nght hand,
brought out a group of his descendants, and said, ‘I have created
these people for Paradise, and they will do the work of the people of
Paradise.’ He touched his back again and brought out another group
of his descendants and said, ‘I have created these for Hell, and they
will do the work of the people of Hell.’” Then a man said,
“Messenger of Allah, why should we do deeds then?” He answered,
“When Allah, the Most High, creates a man for Paradise, He
engages him in the deeds of the people of Paradise until he dies
doing those deeds and enters (on that account) Paradise. But when
He creates a man for Hell, He engages him in the deeds of the
people of Hell until he dies doing those deeds and enters him on that
account into the Fire.’””'® This hadith was also recorded by Abi

> Ahmad, 1:272; Tafsir At-Tabari, 15338; Al-Bayhaqi, Al-Asmda’ wa as-Siffat, pp.
326-327; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 2:325. See also Al-Haythami, Majma‘ az-
Zawa ‘id, 7:25. Al-Albani says this hadith is authentic.

210 Ahmad, 1:44-45.

184 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Dawid, At-Tirmidhi, Al-Nasa’i, Ibn Abi Hatim, Ibn Jarir and by
Ibn Hibban in his Sahih.?"'

At-Tirmidhi has recorded another hadith from Abu Hurayrah
that the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) said, “When Allah
created Adam he touched his back, whereupon all his descendants
that Allah will create until the Day of Resurrection came out of his
back. He put a speck of light between the eyes of each one and
presented them to Adam. ‘Who are these people?’ Adam asked.
‘They are your children,’ He replied. Adam looked at one of them
whose light impressed him the most. He asked, ‘Lord, who 1s this?
He said, ‘This is one of your later descendants, and his name is
David.’ He asked, ‘What is his lifespan?’ ‘Sixty years,’ He replied.
Thereupon Adam requested, ‘Lord, take forty years from my life
and add them to his.’ But at the time of his death, when the angel
approached him, he said, ‘Don’t I still have forty more years?’ the
angel said, ‘Didn’t you give them to your descendant, David?”
Then the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Thus Adam refused, and
his children refused after him. He forgot, and his children also
forgot. He erred, and his children also erred.” At-Tirmidhi said after
recording this hadith, “It 15 hasansahih.” Al-Hakim also recorded it
and said, “It is authentic according to the conditions of Muslim,
although neither he nor Al-Bukhari recorded it.”

Imam Ahmad also recorded another hadith on the authority of
Anas Ibn Malik, who narrated that the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “One of the people marked for Hell will be asked on the Day of
Judgment, ‘If you had everything that is on the earth, would you be
willing to give it as ransom for your own sake? He will say, ‘Yes.’
Then Allah will tell him, ‘i asked you for something much less than
that. I made a covenant with you when you were in Adam’s loins
not to associate any partner with Me. But you refused and insisted
on associating partners with me.”” This hadith was also recorded by
Al-Bukhari and Muslim.’!”

*!' Aba: Dawid, 4703; At-Tirmidhi, 3075; An-Nasa’I in Al-Kubra (as quoted by Al-
Mizzi in Tuhfat al-Ashraf, 8:114); Ibn Hibban, 6133; Tafsir At-Tabari, 15357; Al-
Lalka’i, Sharh ‘Agidat Ahl as-Sunnah, 990; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 77. Al-
Albani stated that this hadith is authentic due to supporting evidence, except for the
statement, “He touched his back”, for which he found no supporting evidence.

2 At-Tirmidhi, At-Tafsir, 3078; Ibn Hibban, 5134; Al-Bayhaqi, Al-Asma’ wa as-
Siffat, p. 324; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 1:64, 2:325. According to Al-Albani, it is
sahih. |

* Ahmad, 3:127, 129, 218; Al-Bukhari, 3334, 6538, 6557; Muslim, A/-Munafigian,
2805.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 185

In addition, there are yet other ahdadith that show that Allah took
Adam’s descendants from his loins and that He differentiated
between the people of Hell and the people of Paradise.’'*

On the basis of these ahddith, some people say that the souls are
created before the bodies. But these traditions do not say that the
souls continued to exist after they were first brought out. The most
that they say is that their Creator and Originator shaped their souls,
fixed their forms, determined their ages and deeds, and took them
out from their source and then put them back. He also fixed the time
that each individual soul would come into existence. They do not
state that Allah created them at that time with a permanent existence
and then kept them in one place, after which He will put them into
their bodies, one after the other, as their time became due. Ibn Hazm
is of the above opinion but the ahddith do not prove that. It 15 true
that Allah, Glorified be He, created one group of people after that,
according to a predetermined plan and they will appear in existence
accordingly. This is also true for every one of His creatures. He has
determined their measures, ages, properties and forms; then He
brings them into existence according to the fixed plan.

What is narrated on this topic only refers to what has been stated
above. Some of them show that Allah also brought out their
semblances and images and separated the happy ones from the
wretched.

As for their bearing witness, this occurs in the two statements of
Ibn ‘Abbas and Ibn ‘Amr,’'? may Allah be pleased with them. This
is why a number of people, both of the Elders and later generations,
say that the covenant referred to is that Allah created the souls with
knowledge of His Oneness (tawhid), as was mentioned earlier in the
hadith of Abt. Hurayrah. The meaning of Allah’s words, “We bear
witness” 1s, ‘Certainly we bear witness that You are our Lord.’ This
is the opinion of Ibn ‘Abbas and Ubayy Ibn Ka‘b. Ibn ‘Abbas also
said, “They testify against one another.” Some say that, “We bear
witness” is a statement of the angels. Such people stop at the word,
“certainly”. This is the opinion of Mujahid, Ad-Duhhak and As-
Sudi. As-Sudi also stated, “This is a statement from Allah Himself
and His angels that they bear witness to the children of Adam
testifying to that.” the first opinion is apparently more correct. The

*'4See As-Suytti, Ad-Durr al-Manthar fi at-Tafsir bi al-Ma‘thir (Beirut: M. Amin
Danj, 1314/1896), 3:141-145; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir al-Qur’dn al-'Azim, 2:261-264; Ibn
Al-Qayyim, Ar-Rih (Beirut: Dar Al-Kutub Al-Islamiyyah, 1402/19820, pp. 211-216.
*'’The hadith of Ibn ‘Abbas was mentioned earlier. For the hadith of Ibn ‘Amr, see
Tafsir At-Tabari, 15354, 15355, 15356.

186 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah —

other statements are mere suppositions that do not have any evidence
for them. The evident meaning of the verse supports the first
opinion.

One should note that some of the commentators on the Qur’an
mention only the first statement that Allah will take the children of
Adam out from his loins and they will bear witness against
themselves and then they will be returned. This was the course of
Ath-Tha‘labi, Al-Baghawi and others. Some of them do not even
mention that. They say that Allah planted in them the evidence
concerning His Oneness in Lordship and Godhood and their minds
and reason bear witness to what Allah has demonstrated for them.
This was the approach of Az-Zamakhshari and others. Some
mention both opinions, such as Al-Wahidi, Ar-Razi, Al-Qurtubi and
others. But Ar-Razi ascribes the first opinion to the Ahl as-Sunnah
and the second opinion to the Mu‘tazilah.

Certainly the verse does not actually support the first opinion,
that is that they were taken from Adam’s loins. All it states is that
they were taken from the loins of the Children of Adam. The
mention of them being taken from Adam’s loins and the evidence for
itis in some ahdadith. Some such ahddith mention them being taken
out, and that some are decreed for Paradise and some are decreed for
Hell, as in the hadith of ‘Umar. Some mention them being taken out
and Adam looking at them without any mention of any kind of
decree or testimonial, as in the hadith of Abt Hurayrah. The reports
that state them bearing witness — in the manner described 1n the first
opinion above — are only those statements that come from Ibn
‘Abbas and Ibn ‘Amr (and not from the Prophet, peace be on him).
The hadith scholars have some doubt about those narrations. None
of the compilers of sahih ahdadith recorded it save Al-Hakim in Al-
Mustadrak, and Al-Hakim is well known for being lax when it
comes to including non-authentic ahddith in his collection.

The hadith that states that some are decreed to go to Paradise and
some are decreed to go to Hell points to the question of
predestination. This has considerable evidence for it. There is no
dispute over this issue among the Ahl as-Sunnah. The heretical
Qadariyyah sect differ from them on this point.

As for the first point, there is a dispute concerning this matter
between the Elders and later scholars of the Ahl as-Sunnah. If I had
not decided to be brief, I would have recorded all of the ahdadith
concerning that matter and what is said regarding it, and the
reasonable statements and verses that point to it.

Al-Qurtubi said this verse is problematic. The scholars have
discussed its interpretation. We will mention what they say in
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 187

accordance with what I have come across. Some people say that the
meaning of the verse is that Allah took from the loins of the children
of Adam, one from the other. (Some say) the meaning of, “And they
bear witness against themselves, ‘Am I not your Lord’” that by His
creation, He is pointing to His Oneness because every adult person
knows of necessity that he has just one Lord. (“Am I not your
Lord’) implies that that statement is taking the place of their
testimony against themselves (and they are admitting to it). As Allah
says about the heavens and the earth, “Come, both of you,
willingly” [41:11]. This was the opinion of Al-Qafal and Atnab.
Some say that Allah took the souls out before He created the bodies
and He gave them the knowledge to understand what He was saying
to them. Then Al-Qurtubi later quoted some ahddith that were related
to this matter.

The strongest evidence for the first opinion 15 the hadith of Anas
that 15 recorded in Al-Bukhari and Muslim. That hadith has Allah
saying, “I wanted something from you which was much easier than
that. I took an oath from you when you were in Adam’s loins not to
worship anyone with Me. But you refused and you associated
partners with Me.” But this hadith was narrated through a different
chain with the wording, “I asked for less than that from you and
something easier but you did not do it, so go to the Hell-fire.” In
that narration, it does not say anything about Adam’s loins.
Furthermore, the first narration does not mention taking them from
Adam’s loins in the manner described by the people of the first
opinion.

In fact, the first opinion implies two very strange things. First, it
means that the people were speaking at that time, they affirmed faith,
and by that the proof is established against them on the Day of
Judgment. Second, (they claim) that the verse points to that opinion,
but it does not for many reasons. First, the verse says, “from the
children of Adam” and does not say, “from Adam’. And the verse
says, “from their backs” and not “from his back’. And that is
substitution of the part for the whole or a substitution of implication.
The latter is a better interpretation. Third, the verse says, “from their
descendants” and not “from his descendants’. Fourth, the verse
says, “and they testified against themselves” (i.e., ‘He made them
witnesses against themselves’). But a witness must recall what he is
witnessing. It is a reference to his witness after he entered this
world, as will be shown later, and does not mention any testimony
before that.

Fifth, Allah mentions that the wisdom behind that testimony was
to establish the proof against them so that they could not say on the
188 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Day of Judgment, “Lo, of this we were unaware.” But the proof 5
established against them by the messengers and the natural
inclinations that Allah has created in people. As Allah says,

..messengers of good cheer and of warning, in order that mankind
might have no argument against Allah after the messengers” [4:165].

Sixth, they are reminded of that so they will not be able to say,
“Lo, of this we were unaware.” It is well known that they are
unaware of all being brought out from Adam’s loins and bearing
testimony at that time; none of them recall that.

Seventh, Allah says, “Or lest you should say: ‘It is only that our
fathers ascribed partners to Allah of old and we were their seed after
them’” [7:173]. Two points of wisdom were mentioned concerning
their being taken out and testifying: they could not claim to be
unaware and they could not use following their fathers as an excuse.
The unaware has no idea of what is going on, and the follower
follows someone else in what he is doing. These two points of
wisdom would be non-existent if the proof were not through the
messengers and the natural inclination (fitrah).

Eighth, Allah says, “‘Will you destroy us on account of what
those who follow falsehood did?’” [7:173]. If they were to be
punished for their arrogance and polytheism, they could say that,
but Allah punishes them for refusing to follow His messengers and
for denying His messengers. (If Allah were to punish them for
blindly following their fathers in idolatry without establishing the
proof against them through messengers, He would have destroyed
them on account of the actions of those who acting falsely; or He
would have destroyed them although they were unaware of the
wrong that they were doing;) but Allah stated that He does not
destroy a town unjustly while their people are unaware: He destroys
them only after warning by sending messengers.

‘Ninth, Allah made everyone testify against himself that He 15
their Lord and Creator. And Allah uses that testimony as proof
against them in numerous places in the Qur’an. For example, Allah
says, “If you ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they
will say, ‘Allah’” [31:25]. This is the proof that they testified to
against themselves and which they are reminded of by Allah’s
messengers. Allah says, “Is there any doubt about Allah, the Creator
of the heavens and the earth?” [19:10].

Tenth, He has made that a sign that clearly and unquestionably
points to its conclusion (to the extent that none of the evidence
points to anything else). This is the nature of Allah’s signs. (They
point to a particular and necessary conclusion based on knowledge
thereof.) Allah says, “Thus We detail Our revelations, that haply
they may return” [7:174]. This 1s based on the natural instincts and
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 189

inclinations upon which Allah has created mankind and there is no
change in Allah’s creation. There is no infant that was not born
according to that human nature. No infant is born in accordance with
any other nature. That is something that he has no control over.
There will never be any change or alteration in that. We pointed out
the evidence for that earlier. Allah knows best.

Ibn Atiya and others were blessed to come to this conclusion.
But they dreaded differing with the apparent meaning of the hadith
that clearly states that Allah took them out (from Adam) and made
them testify against themselves and then returned them. This is why
Abt Mansir Al-Maturidi quoted both opinions in Sharh at-Ta ’wilat
and concluded that the second opinion is stronger. He discussed it
and leaned towards that opinion.

No doubt the affirmation of belief in one Lord is part of human
nature. Polytheism (shirk), on the other hand, is something
introduced and alien to its nature. Children learn polytheism from
their parents. If, on the Day of Judgment, they try to plead that their
fathers practiced polytheism and they merely were following them as
they did in other matters such as eating, clothing and housing, it will
be said to them, “You knew the truth about the Creator. You
accepted that Allah is your Lord without any partners, and you
testified to that against yourself.” the testimony of a person against
himself can only be his admitting to something. Allah says in the
Qur’an, “Believers, stand firmly for justice, as witnesses for Allah,
even if against yourselves” [4:135]. This does not mean that one
must say, “I testify against myself such-and-such,” but 1] means to
confess it. (On the Day of Judgment) you will be asked, “Why did
you abandon that knowledge and conviction that you bore witness to
against yourself for polytheism (shirk)? In fact, you have gone from
something known and confirmed to something that you have no
knowledge about in reality, following those who have no authority
over you (in matters that you need not follow them) as opposed to
the worldly customs — concerning those things you may not have
had any knowledge that they are evil and they may have contained
some benefit for you. But that is not the case with polytheism (there
is no benefit to it and you know its evil). You bore witness and you
had the knowledge to know that it is evil but you turned away from
the truth.”

The religion which a child takes from his parents is a pattern of
habits and behavior meant to promote happiness in this world. A .
child obviously has to have someone to look after him. The people
who have the most right to that is his parents. Therefore, Islamic
law considers the child to be following the religion of his parents
with respect to laws related to this world. Allah will not punish such

F9 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI
190 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

a child for that way of life — according to the strongest opinion —
until he reaches the age of maturity and the proof is established
against him. At that time, he must follow the religion of knowledge
and reason, that is, the religion that he knows by his reasoning is the
correct religion. If his parents are (in that case) nghtly guided, he
follows their religion, as Joseph did. Allah says, quoting him, “I
followed the religion of my fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob”
[13:30]. Similarly, Jacob’s children said to him, “We will serve
your God and the God of your fathers, Abraham, Ishmael and
Isaac” [2:133].

But if the parents go against the way of the messengers, the
person must still follow the way of the messengers. Allah says, “We
have enjoined on man kindness to parents, but if they strive to force
you to join with Me (in service) anything of which you have no
knowledge, obey them not” [29:8]. If a person follows his parents
blindly without ascertaining the truth, and in fact discards the truth
that is evident to him, he is actually following his own desires and
fancies. Allah has cautioned against this in these words, “When it 1s
said to them, ‘Follow what Allah has revealed,’ they say, ‘No, we
will follow the ways of our fathers.” What! Even though their
fathers were devoid of wisdom and guidance!” [2:170]

That 15 actually the situation of many people who were born into
Muslim families. They follow what their fathers were following
with respect to beliefs and practices. If it is wrong, they are not
aware of it (because they have not bothered to study the matter). He
is Muslim by environment, not by choice. When he is asked in the
grave, “Who is your Lord?” He will say, “Uh, uh, I don’t know, I
don’t know. I heard the people saying something so I said the
same.”

The sensible person must ponder that situation. He must advise
himself and stand up for Allah’s sake. He must look to see which
party he belongs to. And Allah is the only Guide. Tawhid ar-
rububiyyah (the Lord’s oneness) does not stand in need of (any
additional) evidence; its truth is inherent in man. The closest thing a
person can examine is his own life. First he was a drop of semen
that proceeded from between the backbone and the ribs. It settle in a
safe abode under three layers of darkness. It developed by itself,
unaffected by anything the parents or anyone else might have done.
Were it placed on a sheet or plate and all the doctors of the world
gathered to produce a man out of it, they would not be able to do so.

It is impossible to conceive of your life in terms of nature. The
elements of nature are dead and incapable of doing anything. They
cannot be described as living. The dead cannot do any act or think
about doing anything. If you think about how a drop of semen
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 197

passes from one state to another until it becomes a human being,
you will be convinced that the Creator 15 one. From that, you can
move one to tawhid al-uluhiyyah or that He 15 the only One worthy
of worship. For when the mind realizes that he has a Lord Who
created him, how could he possibly worship anything else? the more
one thinks and ponders, the more he will be certain and firm
conceming tawhid. And Allah is the Guide. There is no lord other
than He, and no one worthy of worship except Him.

(50) Allah knows from eternity and knows in an instant
the number of people who will go to Paradise and the
number that will go to Hell. They will neither be
increased or decreased (from what He knows).
Similarly, He knows the acts which anyone will do.

Allah has said, “Verily, Allah knows everything” [8:75]; and
“Allah is fully acquainted with all things” [33:40]. He has
knowledge of everything from eternity to eternity. His knowledge is
never preceded by ignorance of something. He said, “And your
Lord never forgets (anything)” [19:64]. ‘Alt Ibn Abi Talib narrated
that once he attended a funeral with some people at Baqi al-Gharqad.
The Prophet (peace be on him) came and sat down on the ground
and the people sat around him. He had a stick in his hand and his
eyes were fixed on the ground. He starting scratching the earth with
the stick and said, “There is no breathing soul except that Allah has
already written where it will go, Paradise or Hell, and whether it
will be happy or miserable.”

A man then said, “Messenger of Allah, should we not then rely
on what has been written and abandon our deeds?” The Messenger
of Allah (peace be on him) answered him, “Those who are of the
happy ones will do the deeds of the happy. Those who are of the
miserable ones will do the deeds of the miserable.’ He then said,
“Work, for everyone will find it easy to do that for which he has
been created. The happy ones will have the opportunity to do the
deeds of the happy, and the miserable ones will have the opportunity
to do the deeds of the miserable.” He then recited the verses, “So
Whoever gives (in charity) and fears (Allah), and (in all sincerity)
testifies to the good, We will make smooth for him the way to Bliss.
But Whoever is a greedy miser and thinks himself self-sufficient and
denies the good, We will indeed make smooth for him the way to
192 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

misery” [92:5-10]. This hadith was recorded by both Al-Bukhari
and Muslim.’'®

(51) Everyone is eased to what he was created for, and
it is the action with which a man’s life is sealed which
dictates his fate. Those who are fortunate are fortunate
by the decree of Allah. Likewise, those who are
wretched are wretched by the decree of Allah.

The hadith narrated by ‘Ali which states, “Go on working, for
everyone finds it easy to do that for which he was created,” has just
been mentioned. And Zuhayr recorded from Abt Az-Zubayr that |
Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah said: ‘Suragqah Ibn Malik Ibn Ju‘shum came (to
the Prophet) saying, “Messenger of Allah, explain to us our religion
as 11 we were just now created. How are we going to work? Are we
in a situation where everything has been predetermined and
recorded, or are we to begin anew in the future?” He said, “No,
verily, you are going to work in a situation where everything has
been predetermined and recorded.” He said, “Then why should we
work?” Zuhayr (the subnarrator said), “Then Abt’ Az-Zubayr said
something that I did not understand. I asked him what he said and
he answered (that the Prophet said), “Go on working, for everyone
gets facilitated his opportunity (to do his deeds).’” [recorded by
Muslim].”!

Sahl Ibn Sa‘id As-Sa‘adi narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(peace be on him) said, “A man may do the deeds that will look to
the people as if they are the deeds of Paradise but he is of the
inhabitants of Hell. And a man may do the deeds that will look to the
people as if they are the deeds of Hell and he is from the inhabitants
of Paradise’’'® [recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim]. In AI-
Bukhari’s recording, he has the additional words, “The deeds will
be reckoned by the deeds performed when the person’s life is sealed
(i.e, at the time of his death).’”"”

Al-Bukhari and Muslim also record a hadith from ‘Abdullah Ibn
Mas‘itid in which the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him), the

716 Al-Bukhari, 1362, 4945, 4946, 4947, etc.; Muslim, Al-Qadr, 2647; Abi Dawid,
As-Sunnah, 4694; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Qadr, 2136; Ahmad, 1:82, 129, 132, 140; Ibn
Mayjah, A/-Muqaddamah, 78; Ibn Hibban, 34, 35.

*!"Muslim, 2628; Ahmad, 3:292, 293; At-Tayalisi, 1737; Ibn Hibban, 737.

?'8Part of a hadith in Al-Bukhari, 2898, 4202, 4207, 6493, 6607; Muslim, A/-/man,
112; Ahmad, 5:332.

719 Al-Bukhari, Al-Qadr, 6493, 6607.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 193

most honest of people, said, ’In the wombs of your mother, your
creation proceeds in this way: “You stay as a drop of sperm for forty
days. It then turns into congealed blood for a similar amount of
time. Then it becomes a lump (fetus) and stays as such for another
similar amount of time. At that moment, an angel is sent who blows
into it the soul. The angel is commanded to write four things about
the being: its provision, age, deeds and whether it will be saved or
doomed. By the One besides Whom there is no god, some of you
do the work of the people of Paradise until you are only an arm’s
length from Paradise, then what has been ordained in the Book
overtakes you, and you begin to do the work of the people of Hell
and you enter into it. And some of you go on doing the deeds of the
people of Hell until you are an arm’s length from Hell, then what
has been ordained in the Book overtakes you, and you begin to do
the deeds of the people of Paradise and enter 11.22" Ahddith and
statements of the Elders are many on this topic.

Abt ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr wrote in At-Tamhid, “The people
who recorded these reports on this topic are many. Most of the
theologians have discussed such ahddith. The Ahl as-Sunnah come
together in faith and belief in these reports. They do not dispute
them. And in Allah is protection and guidance.”””'

*?° Al-Bukhari, 3208, 3332, 6594, 7454; Muslim, Al-Oadr, 2643; Aba Dawid, As-
Sunnah, 4708; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Qadr, 2138; Ibn Majah, Al-Mugqaddamah, 76; Ahmad,
1:382, 414, 40; Al-Humaydi, 126.

221 ‏م15‎ ‘Abdul-Barr, At-Tamhid (Mustafa Ibn Ahmad Al-‘Alwi ‏ع‎ M. ‘Abdul-Kabir, eds.;
Ribat: Al-Matba‘ah Al-Malakityyah), 6:12.

14 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

(52) The exact nature of Allah’s decree is Allah’s secret
in His creation. Neither any angel near the Throne nor
any sent messenger has been given any knowledge of it.
To delve into it or reflect too much about it only leads to
destruction and loss, and results in rebelliousness. One
Should take every’ precaution concerning such
investigation, thought, and allowing of doubts’ to
appear. Verily, Allah has withheld the knowledge of
gadr from His creatures and He has prohibited them
from seeking it. Allah says in His Book, “He is not
questioned for His acts, but they are questioned”
[21:23]. Therefore, if one asks, why He did that, he has
rejected the command of the Book, and whoever rejects
the command of the Book becomes an infidel.

Fore-ordainment (gadr) 15 a secret that Allah has not disclosed to
any of His creatures. He creates and destroys, makes poor and
makes rich, gives death and gives life, misleads and guides. ‘Ali
said, “Qadr is Allah’s secret, so do not try to uncover it.” |

The differences of opinion among the people concerning fore-
ordainment is something well-known. What the Ahl as-Sunnah wa
al-Jama‘ah believe is the following. Everything is according to
Allah’s ordainment and measure. Allah creates the actions of human
beings. Allah says, “We have created all things according to a fore-
ordained measure” [54:49]; and “He has created everything and
formed it on a definite measure” [25:2]. Allah wills and decrees
infidelity from the disbelievers. He is not pleased with it nor does
He like it, but that is His Will with respect to creation (and allowing
that thing), but He 15 not pleased with it as a way of life.

The free-willers (Qadariyyah) and Mu‘tazilah disagree with that.
They claim that Allah wills faith on the part of the disbelievers but
the disbelievers themselves have willed not to believe. They are
forced to take that position just so they do not have to say, Allah
wills disbelief from the disbelievers and then punishes them for it.
They have become like one who jumps out of the frying pan into the
fire; they fled from one thing and ended up in something much more
evil. Their belief requires that the will of the disbeliever dominate the
will of Allah because Allah had willed faith for them — according to
their belief — and the disbeliever willed disbelief and the will of the
disbeliever was fulfilled while Allah’s was not. This is one of the
worst articles of faith. It is a statement that has no evidence for it; in
fact, 11 contradicts the evidence.

Al-Lalka’I recorded a hadith of Bagiyyah from Al-Awza’I who
stated that Al-‘Ala Ibn Al-Hajjaj narrated to them from Muhammad
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 195

Ibn ‘Ubayd Al-Makki concerning Ibn ‘Abbas, who was told that a
man was coming who disbelieved in gadr. Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Guide
me to him,” as Ibn ‘Abbas was blind by that time. They asked him,
“What will you do to him?” He said, “By the One in Whose hand 5
my soul, if I could catch him I would bite his nose until I bit it off.
Also, if I could catch hold of his neck, I would break it, for I have
heard the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) say, “I can see the
women of Bantu Fahm going around Al-Khazraj, moving their
buttocks in an idolatrous march.’ This (this man’s belief) is the first
idolatry (shirk) in Islam. By the One in Whose hand is my soul, this
heresy of theirs will lead one to say that Allah does not ordain good
in the same way they deny that He ordains evil.” Ibn ‘Abbas’
words, “This is the first idolatry in Islam....deny that He ordains
evil,” is consistent with his statement, “Qadr rounds out the belief in
tawhid. Whoever believes Allah is one and then denies gadr has
contradicted his tawhid,””?

‘Umar Ibn Al-Haytham said: “We went out on a vessel. With us
was a Qadari (free-willer) and a Magian. The Qadari said to the
Magian, ‘Accept Islam.’ the Magian said, ‘When Allah wants it.’ the
Qadari said, ‘Allah wants it but Satan does not want it.’ the Magian
said, ‘Allah wants something and Satan wants something and the
result is what Satan wants; then Satan is stronger.’” In another.
narration, he said, “Then I am with the stronger of the two.”

A Bedouin stopped at a meeting that included ‘Amr Ibn ‘Ubayd
among them. The Bedouin said, “You people, my camel has been
stolen, so ask Allah to return it to me.” ‘Amr Ibn ‘Ubayd said, “O
Allah, You did not will that the camel of this man be stolen, so I beg
you to return it to the man.” Then the Bedouin said, “I have no need
of your supplication.” He said, “Why not?” He answered, “Allah
did not will it to be stolen and it was stolen. I am afraid that if He
wills it to be returned it will not be returned.”

A man asked Abii ‘Isam Al-Qastalani,’** “If Allah forbids me
guidance and leaves me astray and then He punishes me, will He be

*?? Al-Lalka’i, Sharh Usal I‘tigad Ahl as-Sunnah, 4:625. One of the transmitters of the
hadith, Al-*Ala Ibn Al-Hajjaj, is weak and unreliable, hence the hadith is weak.
*?>This narration is also weak, both as a statement of the Prophet (peace be on him)
and as a statement of Ibn ‘Abbas, as Al-Albani pointed out in his footnotes to the
commentary.

224 Abii ‘Isam Al-Qastalani’s history could not be traced. The words attributed to him
here actually form part of a dialogue between the Mu‘tazili theologian, ‘Abdul-Jabbar
Al-Hamadani (d. 415/1024) and the Ash‘ari theologian, Abi Ishaq Al-Isfara’ini. See
Al-Lalka’i, Sharh as-Sunnah, 6:104.

196 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

doing justice?” Abt ‘Isam said, “If guidance is something that He
owns, He may give it to whom He likes and withhold it from
whomever He wills.”

As for proofs from the Qur’a4n and Sunnah concerning fore-
ordainment, they include the following:

“If We had so willed, We could certainly have brought every
soul its true guidance. But the word from Me will come true. I will
fill Hell with jinns and men all together” [32:13].

“If it had been your Lord’s will, they would still have believed —
all who are on the earth. Will you then compel mankind, against
their will, to believe?” [10:99].

“But you will not will except as Allah wills, the Cherisher of the
Worlds” [81:29].

“But you will not will except as Allah wills, for Allah is full of
knowledge and wisdom” [76:30].

“Whom God wills, He leaves to wander; and whom He wills,
He places on the Way that is correct” [6:39].

“Those whom Allah (in His plan) wills to guide, He opens their
heart to Islam; those whom He wills to leave astray He makes their
breast close and constricted as if he were engaged in sheer ascent in
the sky” [6:125].

The cause of error is the equation of mashi‘ah and irddah
(determinative and executive will) with rida and mahabbah
(approving and loving will). Both the determinists (Jabariyyah) and
the free-willers (Qadariyyah) make this equation. They are in
agreement on this point but thereafter they differ. The determinists
say that the entire world moves as it is ordained and willed by Allah;
therefore, He approves of all of it and loves all of it. The free-
willers, who deny fore-ordainment, say that since sin is not loved
and approved by Allah, it is neither willed nor ordained by Him. It
is outside of His determination (mashi ‘ah) and creation (khalq).

But the Qur’an, Sunnah and sound human nature clearly
distinguish between determinative will (mashi‘ah) and loving will
(mahabbah).*? As for the texts from the Qur’4n concerning
deterministic and executive will, some of them have already been
quoted. The texts concerning approving and loving will include
Allah’s statement, “Allah does not love mischief” [2:205]; “He does
not approve of ingratitude from His servants” [39:7]. After
prohibiting polytheism, wrongdoing, adultery and pride, Allah says,

>For a discussion of this distinction, see Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmia‘ al-Fatawa, 8:475-
480, or Ibn Al-Qayyim, Madadrij as-Sdlikin, 1:253-254.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi | 197

“The evil of such things is hateful in the sight of your Lord”
[17:38].

In the Sahih, it is recorded that the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “Allah dislikes you to engage in three things: useless
conversation, too much questioning and wasting wealth.”’’° In the
Musnad (of Ahmad) there 15 a hadith that says, “Allah loves you to
act upon the concessions He has made, just as He dislikes you to do
what He has forbidden.’””’

In his prayers, the Prophet (peace be on him) used to say, “O
Allah, I seek refuge in Your pleasure from Your anger, and I seek
refuge in your forgiveness from Your punishment, and I seek refuge
in You from You.’”’® Consider how the Prophet (peace be upon
him) used to seek refuge in the attribute of pleasure from the
attribute of anger, and from the action of forgiveness from the action
of punishment. The first is for an attribute and the second for the
consequences of an attribute. Then he tied them all together with His
essence. All of those return to Him, the One, and not to anyone else.
He is in fact saying: What I seek refuge from happens by Your
decree and will, and what I seek refuge in is Your pleasure and
forgiveness, that also depend on Your decree and will. If You like to
be kind to Your servant, You may forgive Him. If You will to be
angry with him, You may punish him. Save me, therefore, from
what I do not like and guard me against it. This will also be by Your
will. Hence, the desirable and the undesirable both are by Your
decree and will. Thus I seek refuge in You from You, in Your
power, might and mercy, from what Your power, might, justice and
wisdom will do. I am not seeking refuge in anyone else from
anyone else, nor am I seeking refuge in You from anything caused
by anyone else. It 1s all caused by You.

See what truths regarding Allah’s unity and man’s servitude are
contained in these words. No one will know them except those who
know Allah and know what it means to be His servant.*”’

One may ask: How is it that Allah decrees something yet He
does not like it or approve of it? How can He will and create
something and, at the same time, dislike and hate it? This question

*°6Al-Bukhari, 1477, 2408, 2975, 6473, 7292; Muslim, Al-‘Aqdiyyah, 1593;
Ahmad, 4:246, 249, 250, 251, 255.

227 Ahmad, 2:108; Ibn Hibban, 2742, 3568.

*°8Discussed earlier.

*°°For more on this point, see Ibn Al-Qayyim, Madarij as-Sdlikin, 1:254-255, and
Shifd al-‘Alil (Riyadh: Maktabat Ar-Riyad Al-Hadithah, 1323 A.H.), pp. 272-273.

198 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

has divided the people into different sects and groups with each
group’s methodology and opinion being clearly divided.

Know that will is of two kinds: one which is willed because and
for itself, and the other which is willed because and for something
else. The thing that is willed for itself is sought and loved for itself
and for what it brings about of good. It is willed as a type of will for
it as a goal and end. As for the thing which 15 willed because and for
something else, it itself is not the goal of what 1s willed; it has no
real benefit to it from itself, but is a means to the actual goal and
will. Therefore, it is disliked by the willer from the point of view of
its existence in itself; but what it leads to is the thing that 15 actually
willed. Therefore, two aspects are combined in one: dislike for it
and willing it to be. There is no contradiction or conflict here, since
they are related to other things. It is similar to medicine which is
disliked though the one who takes it knows that it contains his cure.
Another example is the amputation of a diseased organ which is
necessary to save the life of a patient; or a person who undertakes an
arduous journey because he will reach a desired and liked goal.
People often do things that they do not like in the hope that they will
produce desired results, even if the results are only probable and
they cannot be certain about them.

But what about the One Who has nothing hidden from Him?
Allah may dislike something, but this does not counter His willing
that thing for another purpose as it will be a cause for something that
is beloved to Him. For example, Allah created Iblis. He is the being
of wickedness in ways of life, actions, beliefs and volitions. He is
the cause of many human beings’ unhappiness and for their actions
that are displeasing to Allah. He is the deliverer of the acts that are in
opposition to what Allah loves and is pleased with. At that same
time, though, he is a means for many things that Allah will love to
bestow on His creatures. Therefore, his existence is more beloved to
Allah than his non-existence. This is true for many reasons,
including (the following):

(By creating Iblis) Allah demonstrates to His servants His ability
to create opposites and contraries. He has created a being who is the
most wicked and the cause of every wickedness. Yet, at the same
time, He created his opposite, the angel Gabriel. Gabriel is one of
the most noble of all creatures and a source of every good. Blessed
be the Creator of the latter and the former. Similarly, this power of
Allah’s is demonstrated in His creation of night and day, disease and
cure, life and death, right and wrong, good and evil. This is part of
the detailed evidence of His perfect power, absolute authority,
dominion and rule, for He has created those opposites. They are set
up against one another. He has used them for meeting His goals. If
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 199

the world were devoid of these opposites, we would not have
witnessed the faultless wisdom, the absolute power and the perfect
rule He has over all things.

Second, Iblis enables the manifestation of such names (and
attributes) of Allah as the Dominant, the Avenger, the Just, the One
Who chastises, Who is strict in punishment, Who is quick to judge,
Whose grip is strong, Who brings low, and Who humiliates. These
names and actions are all part of perfection. Their objects, therefore,
have to exist. If the jinns and humans were similar in nature to the
angels, none of these names would have become manifest.

Third, Iblis makes possible the manifestation of such names of
Allah as show that He forbears, forgives, overlooks and forgoes the
violations of His rights, and sets sinners free. If He had not created
things which He detests but which makes possible the manifestation
of these names, these benefits and wisdom would have been lost.
The Prophet (peace be upon him) referred to this point when he
said, “If you do not sin, Allah will remove you and put in your place
a people who will sin and then ask Him to forgive them, that He
may forgive them.”””°

Fourth, Iblis makes possible the manifestation of the wisdom
and knowledge of the One Who is wise and knowing, Who places
things in their proper places, and nothing in the wrong place, as is
dictated by His wisdom and knowledge. He knows to whom He
should give His message. He knows who are fit for it and who will
receive it gratefully and who are not fit for it. If undesirable causes
were removed because they produced evil consequences, the good
things that outweigh these evils would have never been realized.
Look at the sun, the moon and the wind. They produce good as well
as evil but their good greatly outweighs their evil.

Fifth, if Iblis had not been created, a number of things by which
men affirm their servitude to Allah would not have occurred. The act
of worship in jihad is one of the most beloved acts of worship to
Allah. If all people were Believers, that act of worship would be
nullified as well as its consequences of having loyalty and enmity
for the sake of Allah. Similarly, the worship in the acts of
commanding good and eradicating evil, in having patience, in going
against one’s desires, in sacrificing out of love for Allah, in
repentance and asking forgiveness, in seeking refuge in Allah from
being overtaken by his enemy, and being protected from the evil
one’s plots, and so on, are all part of the wisdom that the human

>°Muslim, At-Tawbah, 2749; At-Tirmidhi, Ad-Da ‘wat, 2526; Ahmad, 2:305, 309.
See also Muslim, 2748; At-Tirmidhi, 3539; Ahmad, 5:414.

200 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahawiyyah

mind would not have been able to discover (if it had not been for the
creation of Iblis).

Someone might ask if it would be possible to achieve those good
things without that cause. This question itself is invalid. It supposes
that one can have an outcome without a cause, a consequence
without having an antecedent. It 15 like hypothesizing a son without
a father, movement without a moving object, repentance without one
_ to repent, and so on. |

One may ask if those things that one must have in order to
produce these good things are desirable for that reason or are
undesirable and evil in every respect. This question is responded to
in two ways. First, from the point of view of Allah, should Allah
love these acts because they are conducive to other things He holds
dear, even though He dislikes them in themselves? And, second,
from the point of view of the human being, is it permissible for him
to be pleased with those things on that account? These are basically
two different questions.

The first thing to note is that evil is always traced to non-
existence, that is, the non-existence of good. The factors that lead to
evil are evil on this account. But as for their simply existing, they
have nothing evil in them. For example, evil souls as existing beings
are good but they become evil by losing any goodness in them.
They have been created as moving beings. When they are given
knowledge or inspiration for the good, they move to the good. But
when they are not given it, they move by themselves in the opposite
direction. Movement, from the standpoint of being simply
movement, is good. It can become evil in a relative sense or in
relation to something else but not simply from the point of view that
it is movement. All evil is wrongdoing, which means placing a thing
in a wrong place. If it were put 12 its proper place, it will not be evil.
This means that its evil character is something relative.

This is why punishments that are properly meted out are good in
and of themselves, although they are evil with respect to the person
being punished due to the pain that it inflicts that goes against the
natural disposition for pleasure. That is, pain is evil with respect to
him. But the act is good with respect to the one inflicted upon when
it is meted out properly. Allah never created anything one hundred
percent evil without any good aspects to it. His wisdom prevented
that. It is inconceivable for Allah to desire something that is evil in
all its aspects that has no benefit whatsoever in its creation. All good
is in His hands and no evil proceeds from Him. In fact, everything
that comes from Him is good. Evil occurs because of its lack of
being related or attributed to Him. If it had proceeded from Him, it
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 201

would not have been evil. Thus the severance of this relation with
Allah makes a thing evil.

One may argue that all relations have not been severed; evil is
still something that has been fore-ordained and created. This is true,
but in this respect the thing is not evil. Certainly its existence is
attributed to Allah, but from that point of view it is not evil. It is evil
because He has not made it good or conducive to anything good.
This deprivation of goodness is not a “thing” that one may ascribe to
Allah, Who has every good in His hands.

If further explanation is desired, note that the causes of good are
three: creation, preparation (i‘da@d) and promotion (imddd). To
create something is good, and that is for Allah only. Similarly,
preparing something (for something else) and promoting it 15 also
good. When there is no preparation or promotion, evil comes about.
Their absence is not something attributed to Allah; He just does the
opposite.

If one asks why Allah did not promote and strengthen the thing
(with goodness) when He created it, the response is that His
wisdom did not require it. It required only its creation. Its creation 1s
good; evil enters into it because it has not been promoted and
strengthened. One may then ask: Why is it that Allah did not
promote everything He created? This question 15 invalid. It assumes
that the wise course is to put all existing things on the same level.
This is wrong. On the contrary, wisdom requires disparity between
things, as is apparent in this world. Disparity, it should be clear,
does not arise from the creation of different varieties of things;
rather, it arises from the absence of certain things that are not the
object of creation. As for creation itself, there is not disparity in it.”*!
If you still cannot understand this point, then act upon the words of
the 14

“If you cannot do a thing,
Leave it, and do what you can.”

One may ask: How is it that Allah likes His servants to do
something but does not help them do it? the reply is that His help
may sometimes cause the loss of something more dear to Him than
that particular act He likes His servant to do; or that act may produce
some evil that He dislikes more than He likes that act to be
performed. Allah points to that in His saying, “If they had intended
to come out, they would certainly have made some preparation

*>!For a discussion of this point, see Ibn Al-Qayyim, Madarij as-Salikin, 2:200ff.
**?This is a line from an ode by the poet and warrior, Ma‘dikarab Az-Zubaydi, famous
for his chivalry before his Islam as well as after it.

202 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

thereof. But Allah was averse to their being sent forth. So He made
them lag behind” [9:46]. Allah states that He disliked their going off
to jihad with the Prophet (peace be on him), which is an act of
obedience. And when He disliked that act from them He made them
lag behind. Then Allah mentions some of the evils that would have
resulted had they gone with the Messenger of Allah (peace be on
him). Allah says, “If they had gone forth with you, they would not
have added to your strength, but only made for disorder, and gone
to and fro in your midst sowing sedition among you. And there are
some among you who would have listened to them” [9:47]. Thus
the evil that would have resulted was greater than the potential good
from their going forth. Hence, His wisdom and mercy required that
He make them lag behind. This example can be used as a basis upon
which other cases may be judged.

Now comes the second aspect, that concerning human beings.
These possibilities are not only conceivable in his case but also
realities. Human beings hate evil and sinful acts committed by men,
chosen, willed and executed by them. On the other hand, human
beings accept them, resign themselves to them, as they happen
according to how Allah has known them, written, willed and created
them. We are pleased with whatever is from Allah but dislike what
is from men. This is the path of those with real knowledge. Other
people denounce evil without any qualification. However, their view
does not differ from the view of the former group since, when they
condemn evil without any qualification, they do not have Allah’s
will and pre-determination in mind.

The essence of the matter is that the part of evil which comes
from Allah is not undesirable, but what comes from man 1s
undesirable. If anyone says that nothing comes from man, the
response 15 that this is the fallacious determinism from which few
people have been rescued. It has been comparatively easier to save
the Free-Willers from their quagmire. The way of the Ahl as-
Sunnah, which is between that of the Free-Willers and determinists,
is the one that happily escapes the predicament of the other two
groups.

One may ask: How is it possible for one to repent when one
knows that actions have been fore-ordained, willed and created by
Allah, and they occur for their own reasons? This poses a problem
only for those who cannot see things in their proper perspective. He
is the one who considers evil a virtue since it involves compliance
with the determinative will of Allah and who thinks that even though
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 203

he has disobeyed Allah’s command, he has obeyed His will. A
poet’*’ has said concerning this matter:

“T am to repent for what He chooses for me;

Is not all that I do in compliance with His will?”

Such people are of the most blind and most ignorant of Allah
and His commands and creative will. They are unaware that
obedience is compliance with the religious command of Allah and to
His prescriptive will, and not concurrence with His fore-ordainment
or creative Will. If concurrence with the creative will of Allah were
an act of obedience to Him, Iblis would have been the most obedient
of Allah, as well as the people of Noah, Htid, Salih, Lot and
Shu‘ayb, and even the followers of Pharaoh would have been the
most obedient servants.’** This is truly ignorance.

However, when one realizes his inability and finds that things
occur according to the will of Allah, that one depends upon Him
absolutely and that one needs His protection all the time; then one 5
working for Allah and not for himself. Under those circumstances,
he will never commit a sin. He will be under the protection of the
One Who has said of such a man, “He hears by Me, sees by Me,
strikes by Me, and walks by Me.”’*? One cannot imagine that a man
in such a state could disobey Allah. When this state passes away and
he is aware of himself only, his desires overcome him and he falls
pray to various enemies. But as the mist of natural existence
vanishes, he feels ashamed for his acts, repents and returns to Allah.
For, in the state of sin, his carnal self had the upper hand and he had
forgotten the Lord. Naturally, when that state passes away, he

enters into a different state, into an existence for his Lord and not for
himself.**°

**>This line has been attributed to the famous poet, Muhammad Ibn Sawar Ibn Isra’tl
Ibn Al-Khidr Ash-Shaybanti (d. 677/1278). See Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmia’ al-Fatawa,
8:257; About the poet’s life, see Adh-Dhahabi, A/-‘Jbar fi Khabar man Ghabar
(Kuwait: Dar Al-Matbi‘at wa An-Nashr, 1383/1963), 5:316.

**“See the discussion on this point by Ibn Taymiyyah, Majma‘ al-Fatdwa, 8:257.
>>The hadith expressing this meaning is the one which Al-Bukhari recorded (6502):
the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Allah the Almighty has said, ‘Whosoever shows
enmity to a friend of Mine, I will be at war with him. My servant does not draw near to
Me with anything more loved by Me than the duties I have imposed on him, and My
servant continues to draw near to Me with supererogatory deeds until I love him.
When I love him, I become his ears with which he hears, his eyes with which he sees,
his hands with which he strikes, and his foot with which he walks. Were he to ask
(something) of Me, I would surely give it to him. And were he to ask Me for refuge, |
would surely grant that to him.’”

**°For a discussion of this point, see Ibn Al-Qayyim, Madarij as-Sdlikin, 2:193-204.

204 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Again, one might argue, since disbelief is ordained and
determined by Allah, and we are commanded to be pleased with
whatever Allah ordains, how can we reject and dislike it? First, we
are not commanded to be pleased with everything Allah has ordained
or commanded. There is no evidence for that in the Qur’an or
Sunnah. There are things ordained that are to be accepted and there
are things ordained that are to be detested and denounced, just as
Allah does not approve of some of things that He ordains. In fact,
some of the things that He ordains He actually detests. Similarly, we
are to hate, detest and condemn certain things.

Second, there are two aspects involved here. The first is the
decree of Allah, which 15 an act associated with the essence of Allah.
The second is the object that has been decreed, and this is something
other than and separate from Allah. As far as the decree itself is
concermed, it is always good, wise and just. We accept and are
pleased with all of it. The object that 1s decreed 1s also of two kinds,
one which we should accept and welcome, and the other, which we
should not accept or be pleased with.

Third, the decree itself also has two aspects to it. The first 1s its
connection and attribution to Allah. From this point of view, one
must be pleased with it. The second aspect has to do with its relation
and connection to the human being. From this point of view, it may
be either something to be pleased with or something not to be
pleased with. Consider the case, for example, of murder. One aspect
of it is that it has been ordained by Allah, written and willed by
Him, and made the end of the life of that man. As such, we accept it
and resign ourselves to it. The second aspect is that it has been
committed by a killer who decided to kill the man, carried out the
killing, and violated the command of Allah. As such, we denounce it
and are not pleased with it.

The author stated, “Za‘ammuq into the problem of fore-
ordainment (gadr) is to court the displeasure of Allah.” Ta‘ammug
means to exaggerate in search of something, that is, to exaggerate in
trying to discover the secrets of gadr and to engage deeply in
discussion of it may lead to the displeasure of Allah and the loss of
His favors. Hence, one should avoid delving into it and entering
into controversies.

He then stated, “One should take every precaution concerning
such investigation, thought and allowing of doubts to appear.”

Abi Hurayrah reported that some of the Companions came to
the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) and told him, “We
sometimes get ideas that are too obnoxious to mention.” the Prophet
(peace be on him), “Do you really get them?” They said, “Yes.” He
then said, “That is a clear sign of faith.” Muslim recorded this
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 205

hadith.’*’ the words, “a clear sign of faith” refer to the feeling which
the Companions had regarding their ideas, the feeling that they
disliked them and did not want to state them.

Muslim also recorded from ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘td that the
Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) was asked about the
whisperings of Satan. He said, “They are the unmistakable proofs
of faith.”’°* This hadith implies the same meaning as the above
hadith from Abt Hurayrah. When one experiences evil whisperings
and insinuations and tries to suppress them, one is fighting with
Satan, and that is certainly a sign of faith.

This was the way of the Companions and their righteous
Successors. After them came people who voiced their ideas and
ventilated their doubts and filled tomes. Not only did they blacken
pages but they blackened hearts. They set their false ideas against
the truth and tried to suppress the truth. This is the reason the author
has so strongly condemned the discussion of gadr. ‘A’ishah
narrated that the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) said, “The
person most hateful to Allah is the one who engages in controversy
and violent disputation.””°? Ahmad recorded a hadith saying that
Abii Mu‘awiyah narrated to us, saying that Dawid Ibn Abi Hind
narrated to us, on the authority of ‘Amr Ibn Shu‘ayb from his
father, on the authority of his grandfather, who said, “One day the
Prophet (peace be on him) passed by a group of people who were
discussing fore-ordainment (gadr). His face turned red with anger as
if a pomegranate had exploded. He said, ‘What has happened to you
that you are setting one verse of Allah’s book against another! Those
who engaged in such things before you were destroyed.’” the
narrator stated that never before did he so much hate to be with a
group as the one the Prophet (peace be on him) addressed that day.
Ibn Majah also recorded it.”*°

Allah has said, “They had their enjoyment of their portion (bi-
khalagihim), and you have of yours, as did those before you; and
you indulge in idle talk as they did” [9:69]. The word khalaq means
‘portion’, as Allah says, “And they will have no portion in the

?™Muslim, Al-Imdn, 132; Abi’ Dawid, A/-Adab, 5111; Ahmad, 2:397, 441, 456; Ibn
Hibban, 145, 146, 148. ‏ش‎

**Muslim, Al-/mdn, 133; Ibn Hibban, 149; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 59: At-
Tahawt, Mushkil al-Athar (Hyderabad, 1331; reprint- Beirut: Dar Sadir), 2:251.
**’Discussed earlier. It was recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

Ibn Majah, 85; Ahmad, 2:178, 181, 185, 195; Al-Lalka’i, Sharh Usil I‘tigad Ahl
as-Sunnah, 1118, 1119; ‘Abdur-Razzaq, Al-Musannaf, 20367. According to Al-
Albani it is sahih.

206 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Hereafter” [2:200]. That is, you enjoyed your portion in this world
as the people before you enjoyed their portion; and you engage in
idle talk in the same fashion they did.

Allah has thus associated enjoyment of one’s portion with
indulgence in idle talk. This is because corruption in religion occurs
either in action or in belief. The former is caused by evil desires, and
the latter is caused by doubt. Al-Bukhari recorded from Abi
Hurayrah that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “My community
will follow in the footsteps of earlier communities, step by step, and
do everything they did, small or big.” the people asked, “Do you
mean the Persians and the Romans?” He said, “Are there people
other than these?’’*'! ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar narrated that the
Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) said, “My people will follow
in the footsteps of the children of Israel. If they had intercourse with
their mothers openly, some of my people would also do that. If they
divided into seventy-two sects, my people will divide into seventy-
three sects, all of which will go to Hell except one sect.” They
asked, “Who is (that one) group, Messenger of Allah?’ He
answered, “The sect that follows the way I and my Companions are
treading” [recorded by At-Tirmidhi].**’

Abt Hurayrah reported that the Messenger of Allah (peace be on
him) said, “The Jews divided into seventy-one or seventy-two
groups and the Christians did so also. My people will be divided
into seventy-three groups.” Recorded by Abi Dawid, Ibn Majah,
and also by At-Tirmidhi, who said it is hasan sahih.”*”

Mu‘awiyah Ibn Abi Sufyan narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(peace be on him) said, “The People of the Two Books divided their
religion into seventy-two schisms. This nation will divide into
seventy-three schisms — following desires — all of them in the Hell-
fire except one, and that is the jamd ‘ah (‘community’).’””“*

The most controversial issue, and the issue that caused the most
differences of opinion, is that of gadr. Discussion on this topic has
reached its extreme limit.

The author stated, “If someone asks, “Why did He do that?” he
has rejected the command of the Book. And whoever rejects the

**! Al-Bukhari, 7319, also 3456, 7320; Muslim, 2669; Ibn Majah, 3994; Ahmad,
2:450; Ibn Hibban, 6668.

**? At-Tirmidhi, A/-/man, 2641. It is hasan.

* Aba Dawiid, As-Sunnah, 4596; At-Tirmidhi, A/-/mdn, 2642; Ibn Majah, A/-Fitan,
3991; Ibn Hibban, 2614; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 1:128. It is hasan.

“4 Aba Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4597; Ad-Darimi, Sunan, 2:241; Ahmad, 4:102; Al-
Lalka’l, Sharh Usual I'‘tiqgad Ahl as-Sunnah, 150. It is hasan.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 207

command of the Book becomes an infidel.” This statement is true
because the edifice of servitude to Allah and faith in Allah, His
books and His messengers rests upon complete submission to Him
without questioning the wisdom of His laws, His commands and
His prohibitions. Allah has nowhere mentioned a community that
believed in its prophet and in his message and then demanded
reasons for the laws he enacted or the things he enjoined upon them
or prohibited them. If they had done that, they would not have been
true Believers in His prophet. On the contrary, whatever community
He has mentioned had submitted to its prophet and believed in
whatever he said. If 11 knew the reasons for His commands that was
so much the better; but if it could not know them, it never deferred
its compliance with the commands until it knew the reasoning
behind them; it did not concern itself with that matter. The place of
its prophet was greater and more respected in its sight (so it did not
have to) ask him such questions. It 1s recorded in the Gospel (that
Jesus said), “Children of Israel, ask not why God has commanded,
but ask what He has commanded.” That was the custom of the
Elders of this community, those who were most knowledgeable and
intelligent. They never asked the Prophet, “Why did Allah command
this? Why did He forbid this? Why did He decree this? Why did He
do that?” They knew that that was the antithesis of their faith and
submission. The structure of Islamic life is built on unqualified
surrender and submission.

The first step on this road is to testify that what the Prophet
(peace be on him) commands is true, then to resolve firmly to obey
it, then to begin doing it without delay, and remove the obstacles
along the road, then to exert oneself fully and perform it in the best
possible way, and finally, to do it just for the sake of obeying the
command, not hesitating to fulfill it until you know the wisdom
behind it such that you do the act only if you know the wisdom
behind it and otherwise you do not do it. This behavior negates —
submission and blemishes obedience.

Al-Qurtubi quoted Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr who said, “If anyone asks
for reasons in order to increase his knowledge, remove his
ignorance or gain insight into the religion, there is no harm in that;
the cure for ignorance is in asking. But whoever asks in a spirit of
defiance and not for the sake of learning or gaining insight, that is
forbidden, no matter how little or much he should ask.”

Ibn Al-‘Arabi said, “The scholar must gather together all the bits
of evidence, look into various approaches, gather the information
necessary for reaching a judgment, and formulate the argument
properly. If a problem arises and it is attacked in the correct way,
Allah opens the door to the correct answer.”
208 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

The Prophet said, “Of the best Islamic behavior is a man
avoiding the things that do not concern him” [recorded by At-
Tirmidhi and others].**°

There is no doubt that whoever rejects a command of the Book
must be considered a disbeliever. But those who interpret any
command of the Book due to some conception that they have must
have the correct approach explained to them so they will be able to
follow it. Allah is not questioned about His actions simply because
He has absolute powers and authority, as Jahm and his followers
believe, but because His actions have good reasons for them and are
required by His mercy and Justice.

We will return to this point later when commenting upon the
author’s words, “We do not call anyone an infidel for committing a
sin unless he makes that act lawful. 79246

(53) This is all that people with enlightened hearts need
to know, people who are devoted servants of Allah, and
constitutes the degree of those firmly grounded in
knowledge. Verily, Knowledge is of two types: one
existent (or accessible) in creation and one inaccessible
in creation. To deny the knowledge that is existent is
infidelity; to claim the knowledge that is inaccessible is
also infidelity. Faith is not confirmed until a person
accepts the knowledge that is existent and abandons
seeking the knowledge which is inaccessible.

The word “this” in the author’s words above refers to what the
author discussed earlier, that is, the truths which the Shari‘ah has
expounded and which should be believed and practiced. In his
statement, ‘‘and constitutes the degree of those firmly grounded in
knowledge,” knowledge means knowledge of what the Prophet
(peace be on him) taught, the general principles as well as the
details, the affirmations as well as the negations. What is meant by
“non-accessible knowledge” is the knowledge concerning fore-
ordainment that Allah has withheld from His creatures.’ And what is
meant by the “existent (or accessible) knowledge” is the knowledge
of the Shari‘ah, the principles of faith as well as the rules of
practice. Whoever rejects anything the Messenger presented 15 one
of the disbelievers. Whoever claims to possess knowledge of the

*49 At-Tirmidhi, Az-Zuhd, 2318; Ibn Majah, Al-Fitan, 3976; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-
Sunnah, 4132.
46See Section 67 of the author’s text.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 209

Unseen is one of the disbelievers. Allah has stated, ““He knows the
Unseen, and does not acquaint anyone with His mysteries
(ghaybihi) except a messenger whom He chooses” [72:26-27]; and,
“Verily the knowledge of the Hour is with Allah (alone). It is He
Who sends down rain, and He Who knows what is in the wombs.
No one knows what it is that he will earn on the morrow; nor does
anyone know in what land he is to die. Verily with Allah is full
knowledge, and He is acquainted with all things” [31:34].

If the wisdom of Allah is hidden from us and is not known to
us, that does not mean that no purpose or reason underlies the
creation or action. Do you not see that the wisdom behind Allah’s
creation of snakes, scorpions, mice and insects 15 unknown to us?
All we know about these things is that they are harmful. But this
does not mean that Allah did not create them or that there is no
purpose in Allah’s creating them, for ignorance of a matter is not
proof of its non-existence.

(54) We believe in the Pen, the Tablet and all that is
written on it.

Allah has said, “Nay, this is a glorious Qur’an (inscribed) in a
Preserved Tablet” [85:21-22]. Abt. Al-Qasim At-Tabarani recorded a
hadith narrated by his chain of transmitters back to the Prophet
(peace be on him), who said, “Allah created a Preserved Tablet out
of white pearls with pages made of red rubies. Its pen is of light. Its
writing is of light. Allah turns to it three hundred sixty times a day.
(Its width is as much as the distance between the sky and the earth.)
He creates and sustains, causes life and death, honors people and
vilifies people, and does what He wills.””*’

This is the Preserved Tablet, wherein Allah wrote the measures
of created beings. And this is the Pen that Allah created and wrote
with in the Preserved Tablet. In Sunan Abi Dawid it is recorded
from ‘Ubadah Ibn As-Samit that the Messenger of Allah (peace be
on him) said, “The first thing that Allah created was the Pen. He
said to it, ‘Write.’ It said, ‘O Lord, what shall I write?’ He

47 At-Tabarani recorded this hadith in Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, 12511. Two of its
transmitters, Zayad Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Buka’i and Al-Layth Ibn Abi Salim, are weak.
Hence the hadith is weak. At-Tabarani also recorded this hadith through a different
chain (hadith no. 10605) but, according to that narration, it is a saying of the
companion Ibn ‘Abbas. (See Al-Haythami, Majmi‘ az-Zawa’id, 7:191.)

210 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

answered, ‘Write the measure of everything until the Hour (of
Judgment) occurs.””***

Scholars differ as to whether the Pen or the Throne was the first
of the created things. There are two opinions, as noted by Al-Hafiz
Abi Al-‘Ala Al-Hamadh§ani. The stronger opinion is that the Throne
was created before the Pen, based on what is confirmed in the Sahih
from ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr, who narrated that the Messenger of Allah
(peace be upon him) said, “Allah created the measures of all things
fifty thousand years before the creation of the heavens and the earth
while His Throne was on the waters.’”*? This hadith shows that the
measures were fixed after the creation of the Throne.

As for the hadith of ‘Ubadah, the statement, “The first thing
Allah created was the Pen...” is either one or two sentences. If it is
only one — which is the correct view — its meaning is, “When He
first created the Pen, He said, ‘Write.’” This is stated in one
narration, ““When Allah first created the Pen He said, ‘Write.’” If it
15 two sentences, where both “First” and “the Pen” are in the
nominative case, it must be understood to mean that it was the first
thing created of this creation. In this case, the two ahdadith will be in
agreement, as the hadith of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr states clearly that
the Throne preceded the measurements — an event that coincided
with the creation of the Pen. In another version of the hadith, the
words are, “When Allah created the Pen, He said to it, ‘Write.’”’

The Pen referred to in these hadith 15 the first, best-and most
glorious Pen. Many commentators on the Qur’an are of the opinion
that it is the Pen by which Allah swears in the verse, “Nin. By the
Pen, and by what they write” [68:1-2].’°° the second pen is the pen
with which the revelations that are sent to prophets and messengers
are written. Those who write with this pen are the governors of this
world. All pens are in the service of their pens. During the
Ascension (isra’), the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him)
heard the movement of these pens,’’' which record the things that
Allah reveals He will do concerning this world above and the lower
world.

**SAbu Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4700; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Oadr, 2155, At-Tafsir, 2319;
Ahmad, 5:317. This hadith is sahih according to Al-Albani and Al-Arnawit.

**°This hadith was discussed earlier. It is recorded by Ahmad and others and is
authentic.

?°See Ibn Kathir, Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim, 4:401.

?5' Al-Bukhari, 349, 1636, 3342; Muslim, 163.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi | 217

(55) If all creation gathered together to prevent
something that Allah has decreed will occur, they would
not be able to prevent it. And if they all gathered
together to have something done that Allah has decreed
will not occur, they would not be able to do it. The Pen
has finished writing whatever will occur until the Last
Day.

Earlier was presented the hadith of Jabir from the Messenger of
Allah (peace be upon him) in which Suragah Ibn Malik Ibn Ju‘shum
said, “Messenger of Allah, teach our religion to us as if we were just
now created. What are we going to do? Are we going to do what the
pens have already written and what has been ordained, or will we be
doing something new?” the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him)
said, “No, you will be doing what the Pens have written and what
has already been ordained.”

Ibn ‘Abbas stated that one day he was riding behind the Prophet
when he turned to him and said, “Son, I want to teach you some
words. Remember Allah and He will remember you. Remember
Him and you will find Him with you. Ask of Him whenever you
want to ask, and pray for His help whenever you need help. Know
that if the whole world combines to do you any good, they will not
be able to do it unless Allah has decreed it for you. And if they all
combine to cause you harm, they will not be able to do anything
except what Allah has ordained for you. The pens have been lifted
and the pages have dried” [recorded by At-Tirmidhi, who called it
hasan sahih.}*’

In recordings of this hadith other than that of At-Tirmidhi, it
states, “Remember Allah and you will find Him in front of you.
Know Allah during times of ease and He will know you during
times of hardship. Know that what missed you was not to come to
you, and what afflicted you was not to miss you. Know that help
comes with patience. Know also that relief comes with suffering.
And know that along with hardship comes ease.”””*

*>*?Recorded by Muslim, discussed earlier.

?53 At-Tirmidhi, Siffat al-Oiyamah, 2516; also see Ahmad, 1:293, 303, 307. It is
sahih. |

?4An-Nawawi has mentioned this wording in his Arba‘in (text with English
translation by Ezzeddin Ibrahim and Denys Johnson-Davies, Damascus: The Holy
Qur’an Publishing House, 1976, pp. 69-71). Ibn Rajab said this hadith was recorded
by ‘Abd Ibn Humayd in his Musnad with a weak chain. (Jami‘ ‘Uluim wa al-Hikam, p.
174). Ahmad also recorded a longer version of this hadith (Musnad, 1:307) with three

212 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

The word pen in the above ahddith has been used in the plural.
This shows that there are pens to write the measures of things that
are different from the first Pen mentioned earlier along with the
Preserved Tablet. In fact, the ahddith show that there are four types
of pens and these are different from what was described earlier. The
first Pen is for writing the measures of all created things. This is the
Pen that was mentioned in connection with the Preserved Tablet.
The second pen was created with Adam. This pen is for recording
the measures of mankind. The Qur’&n refers to it when it states that
Allah wrote the acts of human beings, their provisions, ages and
destinies right after He had created their father Adam. The third pen
is referred to in many authentic ahddith which state that after
conception an angel is sent to the fetus in the womb of the mother to
blow the soul into it. He is then asked to record its provisions,
lifespan, deeds and whether it will be saved or doomed. The fourth
pen is referred to in verses and ahddith that state that when a person
reaches the age of maturity, two honorable angels are appointed to
record 2155 7

Once it is known that everything proceeds from Allah, it is a
necessary conclusion that one must fear and revere only Him. Allah
says, “Therefore, fear not men, but fear Me” [5:47]; “Fear Me and
Me alone” [2:41]; “It is such as obey Allah and His Messenger, and
fear Allah and do right that will win in the end” [24:52]; and, “He is
the Lord of Righteousness (tagwda@) and the Lord of Forgiveness’’
[75:56]. There are many other similar verses in the Qur’an. It is
plain that everyone fears something, since he does not live alone.
Even a king whose commands are not disobeyed has to ward off
things that may harm his people. Therefore, everyone has to fear
and be wary of something. If he does not have fear of the Creator,
he has fear of the created. Since the likes and dislikes of people
differ, one may like what another hates. He will not be able to
satisfy everyone. Ash-Shafi‘l said, “You cannot succeed in pleasing
everybody.” Hence, the proper course is to do what is right and
avoid all evils. Do not, though, try to please people. This is not

chains, but only of them is unbroken, the third being unbroken and authentic.

*°5Tn the Qur’dn it states, “But verily over you (are appointed angels) to protect you,
kind and honorable, writing down (your deeds). They know all that you do” [82:10-
12]. There is a hadith reported by ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib and ‘A’ishah that states, “The
Pen will not write the deeds of three persons: children until they reach the age of
maturity, people asleep until they awake, and the insane until they regain sanity.”
[See Ahmad, 1:116, 118, 140, 158 and 6:100, 101, 144].

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 213

possible nor are you required to do it. But pleasing Allah is both
possible and required.
| Furthermore, the created cannot be independent of Allah. If a
person fears his Lord, he will not have to look to people for
assistance. “A’ishah wrote to Mu‘awiyah - some have narrated this
as a statement of the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) and
others as a statement of ‘A’ishah — “Whoever displeases people to
please Allah, Allah will be pleased with him and endear him to
people; and whoever pleases the people by displeasing Allah, those
who praised him first will end up abusing him.’”’°* Hence, if a
person pleases Allah, He will relieve him from needing people’s
help and love and eventually He will cause them to be pleased with
him. Truly, ultimate happiness is for those who fear Allah and act
righteously. Allah will love him and the people will love him, as is
confirmed in the two Sahihs from the Prophet, who said, “When
Allah loves someone He calls Gabriel and says, ‘i love so-and-so
and you, too, must love him.’ Thereafter Gabriel loves him and
announces in the heavens, ‘Allah loves so-and-so, so all of you love
him, too.’ Then the inhabitants of the heavens love him. Finally, he
is loved by all on earth.’”°’ the Prophet (peace be upon him) also
said the opposite about those whom Allah dislikes.

It is clear that no one is free of fear; one fears either the Creator
or some of the created. However, when one fears the created, one
loses more than one gains, for obvious reasons. But the fear of
Allah is what secures happiness in both this world and the next. He
is the Lord of Righteousness (tagwda) and the Lord of Forgiveness.
He is the One Who forgives sins. None of the creations can forgive
sins and none of them can save anyone from His punishment. He
alone can offer protection and there is no protection in anyone other
than Him. Some of the Elders will say, “The God-fearing person is
never in need because Allah has said, ‘For those who fear Allah, He
prepares a way out and provides for them from sources they could
never imagine [65:2-3].”’ He has thus guaranteed a way out which
no one else can guarantee. Furthermore, He will determine a
provision for them they that will not have conceived. If this does not
occur, it means there is some shortcoming in the person’s piety and

°° At-Tirmidhi, Az-Zuhd, 2414; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 4213; Ibn Hibban,
276, 277; Al-Humaydi, Musnad, 266; Al-Quda’i, Musnad ash-Shahab, 499, 500, 501.
According to Al-Albani, the hadith is authentic both as a statement of the Messenger
of Allah (peace be upon him) and as a statement of ‘A’ishah.

?>7Al-Bukhari, 3209, 6040, 7485; Muslim, A/-Birr wa as-Salah, 2637; At-Tirmidhi,
At-Tafsir, 3160; Al-Muwatta, 2:953; Ahmad, 2:267, 341, 413, 509, 514.

214 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

God-consciousness. He must seek Allah’s forgiveness and repent to
him. Then Allah says in the verse, “If anyone puts his trust in Allah,
sufficient 1s Allah for him” [65:3]. Allah will take care of him and he
will never be in need of anyone else.

Some people think that trust repudiates earning one’s livelihood
or seeking necessary means. If the thing has already been
determined, there is no need to look for means and sources. This
belief is wrong. The means to earning a livelihood are sometimes
obligatory, sometimes praiseworthy, sometimes permissible,
sometimes undesirable and sometimes forbidden, as has been
explained in the relevant works. The Messenger of Allah (peace be
upon him) was the best of anyone when it came to relying upon
Allah. But he used to wear wargear for the battle. He also used to
walk in the marketplaces to earn a livelihood, to the extent that the
disbelievers said, “What sort of a messenger is this who eats food
and walks through the marketplaces?” [25:7]. Many of those who
believe that earning and seeking means of livelihood are
incompatible with trusting in Allah actually live off what other
people give them, either of charity or gifts, including the gifts of tax
collectors, police officers and the like. This is discussed in the
relevant works. This is not the place to discuss that in detail. In
particular, one may look at the commentary on the verse, “Allah
blots out or confirms what He pleases, with Him is the Mother of
the Book” [13:39].

Concerning the verse, “Every day He is engaged in some work”’
[55:29], Al-Baghawi quoted Muqfatil’s observation that this verse
was revealed to counter the Jewish belief that Allah does not do
anything on the Sabbath.?°® the commentators state that among the
things He is engaged in are giving life and death, sustaining,
honoring a people, humiliating another people, healing the sick,
freeing captives, relieving the problems of the distressed,
responding to supplications, giving to one who asks, forgiving sins,
and numerous other deeds that cannot all be mentioned here, that He
does for His creation whenever He wills.*””

?>8Ibn Al-Jawzi, Zad al-Masir, 8:114; Al-Baghawi, Ma ‘alim at-Tanzil, printed on the
margin of Tafsir al-Kha@zin (Beirut: Dar Al-Fikr), 4:270.
?59See Ibn Kathir, Tafsir al-Our’an al-‘Azim, 4:273.

