COMMENTARY
ON THE

CREED OF AT-TAHAWI
BY
IBN ABI AL -IZZ

SHARH AL -‘AQIDAH AT - TAHAWIYYAH

TRANSLATED BY
MUHAMMAD ‘ABDUL-HAQQ ANSARI
KINGDOM OF SAUDI ARABIA
Ministry of Higher Education
Al-Imam Muhammad ibn Saud Islamic
University
Deanery of Academic Research

COMMENTARY
ON THE

CREED OF AT-TAHAWI
BY
IBN ABI AL -’IZZ

SHARH AL -’AQIDAH AT - TAHAWIYYAH

TRANSLATED BY
MUHAMMAD *ABDUL-HAQQO ANSARI

AL-IMAM MUHAMMAD IBN SA’UD ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY
2 IMADAT AL-BAHTH AL-’ILMI
RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA
INSTITUTE OF ISLAMIC AND ARABIC SCIENCES IN AMERICA
1421 A.H.-2000 CE.
IN THE NAME OF ALLAH
THE COMPASSIONATE THE MERCIFUL
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
1421 A.H.-2000 A.D.
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction XVii
Translator’s Preface xix
Commentator’s Preface xIvii
The Creed of At-Tahawi Ivii
The Creed and its Commentary 1
Tawhid: Affirming God’s Unity 1

Two aspects of tawhid:
tawhid al-ilahiyyah, and tawhid al-rubitbiyyah
Tawhid 15 inherent in man
The Qur’an expounds on and argues for God’s unity
Tawhid in faith and in action
The prophets’ tawhid was the most perfect
Criticism of the mystical view of tawhid

God is unlike anything 23
To affirm attributes of God 1s not to liken Him

with His creatures (tashbih)
Words common between the Creator and the created

denote nothing real

Nothing is impossible for God 31

The Qur’an mentions God’s positive attributes in detail,
and negative attributes in brief
Mutukallimiin do just the reverse

God is Eternal and Everlasting 35
The Qur’an uses the words: the First and the Last
Mutakallimiin use the word Al-Qadim,

which is not a happy choice
38

41

45

49

66

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Nothing comes into existence except what
God wills

Two kinds of Divine will: creative and prescriptive

Creative will does not necessarily imply that God
approves of the object He creates

Prescriptive will implies that God approves of
the object He commands men to do

Both the wills have some purpose which may concern
man, God or both

It is not necessary that God should help one to do
what He asks him to do

God is beyond understanding and imagination
The Jahmiyyah are wrong 12 saying that to affirm
attributes of God is to anthropomorphize Him
Theological discussion does not admit of syllogistic
or analogical argument; it admits only the
argument of priority

God is Living and All-Sustaining
He is the Creator and the Provident
He causes death and shall raise again

All the attributes of God are eternal

This is true of essential attributes, such as
knowledge and power,

Of active attributes such as creation, and

Of voluntary attributes such as coming, descending,
mounting, anger and pleasure

The meaning of coming, mounting, anger etc.,
is known to us; what is not known is their modality

Do things happen to God?

Essence and attributes, whether one or different?

Name and the Named

Events as a class have no beginning and God
is active from eternity

God is Creator, Originator, Lord, Reviver, etc.,
from eternity

God has power over all things; the impossible in
itself is nothing

God has created things with knowledge

He Ordained them in due measures, and fixed their terms

V1
Commentary on the Creed of 41-1 01 ‏آنه‎

He knew what people would do even before
He created them

Things happen as He ordains and wills

This does not mean that He approves of everything
people do

Nor does pre-ordination offer any Justification
for doing evil

His guidance and protection 15 a favor from him

Refutation of the view that God must do
what is best for man

His decision is not reversed, resisted or frustrated

Prophecy of Muhammad (pbuh) 76
Muhammad is a servant of God, and the most perfect
man is the most perfect servant of God
Miracle is a proof among other proofs of prophecy
Other proofs are: the message, teachings, life
and conduct, works and achievements of the prophet
It is on these grounds that Negus of Abyssinia and
Heraclius of Syria testified to Muhammad’s prophecy
The difference between nabi and rasil
Muhammad 1s the seal of the prophets
ahddith on the subject
He is the leader of the pious
He is the chief of the apostles
He is the best of all the prophets, but this should not
be said to degrade other prophets
He is very dear to God
Grades of love
Every claim to prophecy after him 15 false
He is sent to men as well as to jinns

The Qur’an | 96
The Qur’an 15 the word of God
It has proceeded from Him in an unknown manner
as articulated speech
To say that it is spoken by God is not to
anthropomorphize him
Verses and ahddith saying that God speaks;
the meaning of His speech
The Qur’an is an attribute of God, not something created

Vil
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

It has been brought down to Muhammad by Gabriel,
acting simply as a messenger

It is not the word of a human being, one who says
that is a kafir

Speech 15 an attribute of God, and He has been speaking
from eternity as and when He has willed

His speech as a class 1s eternal

Refuting the objection that God shall then be
the locus of contigent events

The Qur’an is the word of God whether recited,
written or remembered; and it 1s uncreated

However, our reciting, writing, or remembering 5
our act, and is contigent, as is the voice or the ink
involved in the process

This is the view of Abu Hanifah and the ‏أطخ‎ al-Sunnah

The view of later Hanafis on the subject 15 not correct

The view that God’s speech 1s a simple inaudible idea,
and what is recited 15 its interpretation 1s wrong

Beatific Vision 119
People will see God in Paradise in an unknown manner
and without encompassing Him
Verses referring to it must not be interpreted allegorically
Refutation of the arguments advanced by the Mu‘tazilah
Ahddith on the subject are very clear
However, no one has seen or can see God in this life
Did the Prophet see God in his life?
Mu‘tazili interpretation of texts is not correct
Tawhid is to believe in what has come down from
the Prophet authentically

Islam is to believe, submit, and refrain
from misinterpreting texts 136
Three kinds of people destroy religion:
Rulers pursuing policies opposed to the Shar‘
511115 following kashf and experience
Mutakallimin arguing from reason alone
Al-Ghazali on the inadequacy of kalam
The reason the Salaf condemned kalam
The root cause of error is lack of reflection on
the Qur’an and the Sunnah

VIil
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

Philosophers and theologians speak about the
limitation of philosophy and kalam
Meaning of ta’wil
Ta’wil in the Qur’an and Sunnah
Ta’wil in early commentaries
Ta’wil in the works of later jurists and mutakallimin
Interpreting divine names:
Avoid both negation and anthropomorphization
God’s hands, face, eyes

God and space (jihah)
Ascension of the Prophet | 162
His Fountain 167
His Intercession 170

Intercession by other prophets, ‘u/amda’ and martyrs
Praying in the name of someone
Tawassul

God’s Covenant with Mankind 182
Tawhid is inherent in man
Shirk is alien to human nature

Fore-ordainment 191]

God knows from eternity who will go to Paradise and
who will go to Hell, as well as their deeds leading
them to their destination

Everyone gets the opportunity to do what he or she
has been created for

Fore-ordainment is a secret of God;
one should not delve into it

Everything good and bad is brought out by God’s
creative will, which does not necessarily imply
His approval

However, God does not will pure evil

God may not help one do what He approves of

Fore-ordainment and repentence

Fore-ordainment and resignation (rida@’)

We are not required to resign to everything decreed
210

223

242
246

261

266

Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

The Pen and the Tablet

What shall come into existence till the Last Day
has been written down

No one can change what has been written

Earning is not opposed to trust

There is no change in God’s fore-knowledge

Faith in fore-ordainment is necessary

What gadr implies

Questioning gadr is a disease —

The Throne and the Footstool

The Throne and the Footstool are real

But God does not need the Throne

He encompasses all and is above all

Verses and ahddith that speak of His being above
the world (fawgiyyah)

Twenty reasons for His fawqiyyah

Sayings of Abu Hanifah on the subject

‘Uli and fawgiyyah

The knowledge that God 15 above the world is inherent
in human nature

God took Abraham as friend

Angels, Prophets and Heavenly Books

Angels, their grades and functions

We must believe in all the prophets of God and in
all His books

As for Muhammad (pbuh), we must believe in him
as well as follow his teachings

One is muslim and mu’min so long as one

witnesses to what the Prophet has brought

The Qur’an may be read in all the seven established ways

The Faithful Spirit has brought down the Qur’an and
conveyed it to Muhammad (pbuh)

Sin, Faith and Salvation |

No Muslim becomes kGfir by committing a sin unless
he or she thinks it to be lawful

To deny what the Prophet has affirmed, affirm what
he has denied, legalize what he has prohibited, or
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

prohibit what he has legalized 15 kufr; and whoever
does so is a kafir

However, one should refrain from calling a particular
person kafir, for he may be mistaken or may not be
aware of relevant texts

The Ahi al-Sunnah do not excommunicate on
grounds of bid ‘ah

Kufr as used in the Qur’an and Sunnah is of varying
degrees: one justifies excommunication (takfir),
another does not

Sin exposes one to God’s punishment

We hope that God will forgive nghteous Muslims and
put them in Paradise, but we cannot be sure

Similarly, we fear about the sinners, but they should not
lose hope

Punishment for sins 1s waved for ten reasons

Complacence and disappointment both are wrong;
the right course is in between

One goes out of imdn only by repudiating what has
brought him into it

Iman and Islam 283
Does imdn include works or not?
Many scholars of hadith and jurists say that it does.
Abu Hanifah and his followers say that it does not;
however, the difference is not important.
Does imdn increase or decrease?
Arguments of the ahi al-hadith
Arguments of the Hanafi School,
and comments on them
Ahdadith telling that works are parts of 701
Verses and ahddith that imdn increases and decreases
Sayings of the Companions on the subject
Iman and islam mean the same when mentioned singly,
but mentioned together they mean different things
All that has authentically come down from
the Prophet is true
The Ahl as-Sunnah do not ignore texts or oppose
to it their reason or the word of any person.
A one-man hadith which is accepted by the ummah
provides knowledge

XI
313

317

326

330

336

349

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

All Believers are friends (awliya’) of God
Meaning of waldyah

Waldyah and taqwa

Grades of awliya’

The most perfect awliya’ are those who are most
obedient to God

Articles of Faith

God, Angels, Heavenly Books, Prophets, Last Day,
Fore-ordainment

Every hasanah and sayyiyyah is from God

God does not create pure evil

Supplication 15 worship

Faith in all the prophets without discrimination

Those who commit grave sins (kaba’ir)

God may forgive them,

Or punish them in Hell for a time

However, they will not stay there for ever,
even if they do not repent

What is kabirah?

Salah may be offered behind a sinner
and behind one guilty of bid ‘ah

Salah should be offered at the funeral of every Muslim,

except an open hypocrite

We do not send anyone to Paradise or Hell
Nor do we charge anyone with kufr or shirk
or 21/60 unless he 15 guilty of it openly
We do not take up sword against anyone
unless it is necessary
We do not revolt against our leaders and rulers
even if they are unjust, nor defy their orders
unless they order something sinful

We follow the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah,
and avoid dissension
We love the just and the honest
When something is unclear, we say God knows better
Wiping on leather socks (in wud’) 1s right
Hajj and Jihdd shall continue under all Muslim

01
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

authorities, 210115 or impious

Akhirah: Life after Death 348

Angels that note down our deeds

Angels of Death

Spirit (ar-riih) 15 created

An-nafs and ar-rith

Is spirit mortal?

Angels that visit in the grave

Reward and punishment in the grave

Resurrection, Judgement, reward and punishment,

Bridge and Balance

Paradise and Hell exist at the present

Most Salaf and khalaf believe that Paradise shall last

forever, but Hell will disappear in the end

God has created some people for each; whom He has
allotted for Paradise He has allotted as a favor,
and whom He has allotted for Hell He has done so
because His justice demanded it

Power and Responsibility 392
Power is of two kinds: before and at the time of action
The former 15 the basis of obligation,
but it is not sufficient to produce action
Thus, the power concomitant to action is created
Human actions are created by God and acquired by men
Criticism of the Mu‘tazili view
How 1s it that God should punish man for actions
He has created?
God does not charge man except what he can do
Everything happens as He wills, knows and decrees
However, God does no injustice; in fact He has
prescribed mercy on Himself

Benefits to the Dead 414
Funeral prayer

Prayer at the grave

Charity

Fasting, hajj, reciting the Qur’an

God responds to prayer and grants it

God’s Anger and Pleasure | 426
God gets angry and is pleased as and when He likes

011
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

To interpret God’s anger and pleasure allegorically
is incorrect

Companions of the Prophet and Khulafa’ 430
We love all the companions, but not anyone to excess
Nor do we disown anyone
Love for them is part of imdn, and hatred for them 1s
kufr and nifag
After the Prophet the first rightful Ahalifah was
Abu Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Uthman, then ‘Ali
The order of their khiladfah 15 the order of their honor
Besides these four, there are six more to whom
the Prophet gave the good tidings of entering Paradise
Whoever speaks well of the Prophet’s companions and
his wives is free from hypocrisy

‘Ulama’ and Awliya’ 458
‘Ulama’ of the Ummah should be honored

No friend (wali) of God should be exalted over a prophet

One prophet is better than all the awliya’ combined

Criticism of Ibn ‘Arabi

Miracles are true, and when ascertained should be believed

Kinds of miracles: effective and cognitive

Miracles are an honor only when they serve religion

Insight (firdsah) and its kinds

Signs of the Hour 468

Diviners, Fortune Tellers 470
We do not believe in them

Nor in the astrologers

Magic and its kinds

Sifis

Rijal al-Ghayb

Mystical experience

The Malamatiyyah

Sima‘ and spiritual excercises

The story of Moses and Khidr

Unity of the Jama‘ah, differences and sects 479
Preservation of the unity of the jamd ‘ah

X1V
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

Differences should be referred to the Qur’4n and Sunnah
Differences are of two kinds:
Difference of variation
Difference of contradiction
God’s religion is one, and it is Islam
Islam is between excess and negligence
between tashbth and negation,
between coercionism and libertarianism,
between complacency and pessimism
Review of heretical sects
Mushabbihah, Mu‘tuzilah, Jahmiyyah,
Jabariyyah, Qadariyyah
Heretical sects treat revelation in two ways:
Some alter the meaning of text,
Others charge the prophets with ignorance

Biographical Sketches 499
Bibliography 521

XV
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 215

(56) What has missed someone was not to befall him,
and what has befallen him was not to miss him.

This follows from what was stated earlier, that whatever Allah
has decreed must come to pass. A poet expressed this point
beautifully when he said:

“What Allah has ordained will certainly happen.
Ignorant and wretched are those who blame their lot.”

Another poet said:

“Be content, young man, with what is given you,
for Allah does not forget even an ant.

If things turn in your favor welcome them,

but if they go against you, don’t worry.”

(57) Everyone must know that Allah already knows
everything that is going to happen in His creation and
He has fixed their measures definitively and irrevocably.
There is nothing He has created in either the heavens or
the earth that can contradict it, add to it, erase it, change
it, decrease or increase it in any way.

This is founded upon what has already been mentioned, that
Allah knew about the creation before its existence and fixed its
measure before its creation. The Messenger of Allah (peace be upon
him) said, “Allah ordained the measures of things fifty thousand
years before He created the heavens and the earth, while His Throne
was on the waters.’”’°° This means that Allah knew that things
would come into existence at the time and in the form His
consummate wisdom has fixed. They come into existence just as He
knew. The world, with its wonders, could not have been created
except by One Who had minutely planned it in advance. Allah says,
“Should He not know it, He that created it? And He is the One Who
understands the finest mysteries and is well acquainted with them”
[67:14].

The extremists among the Mu‘tazilah deny that Allah knew all
things from eternity. They say that Allah does not know of the
actions of a human until he does it. Well exalted be Allah above
what they say. Imam Ash-Shafi‘l said, “Debate the Qadariyyah with
(the concept of) knowledge. If they acquiesce in it, you will pull the

?°This is an authentic hadith that was discussed earlier.

216 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

ground from under their feet. If they deny it, they are infidels.”
Allah knows that “A” has the ability to do something and that he will
do it. He, furthermore, rewards him when he does that act. He
knows too that “B” can do it but will not do it, so He will punish
him for not doing it. Allah punishes him because he does not do the
things that he actually has the ability to do. Allah knows that in ~
advance. Obviously, He does not punish anyone for not doing the
things that they were not capable of performing, nor does He enjoin
such things upon such people.

One could argue that this necessitates that the servant has the
ability to change Allah’s knowledge because if Allah knows that he
will not do something, but he has the ability to do something, then
he has the ability to change what is Allah’s knowledge. This is
fallacious. The response to this argument is that just because a man
has power over an act, it does not mean that he produces a change in
the knowledge of Allah. Those who claim such a change can only
do so when the act 15 actually done. But when the act is actually
done, Allah already knew that that act will be done, not that it would
not be done. It is never the case that an act occurs which Allah
“knew” would not happen. On the contrary, if it happens, Allah
knew beforehand that it would happen. If ‏غ1‎ does not happen, Allah
knew beforehand that it would not happen. As for us, we do not
know if Allah knew about a thing until it happened. His knowledge
corresponds to the actual event. It is inconceivable that things
happen such as to change His knowledge. Whatever happens 5
what He knew beforehand. Hence, if a person did not perform a
specific act, this does not alter His knowledge whatsoever. All that it
shows is that one could do a thing which did not occur. But 11 it had
actually occurred, Allah would have been aware that it will happen
rather than that it will not happen.

One might also say that when a thing does not happen, Allah
knows that it will not happen, but if a person was able in the first
place to do it, it means he altered God’s knowledge. This is not
correct. It only means that he had power over it but did not do it. If
he had done it, then what Allah would have known is that it will
happen. Hence, if something in the power of man occurs, it is its
occurrence that Allah knew beforehand. These people presume, on
the contrary, that the act happened whereas Allah knew that it would
not happen. This is false. It is just like saying let us suppose that
something happens whereas it does not happen. This is simply a
self-contradicting assumption.

Some might still say that if it is impossible that a thing should
happen which Allah knew beforehand would not happen, then it
cannot be said to be within the power of man. This confusion arises
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi — 217

because the term “impossible” is ambiguous. Here the thing is
impossible not because one does not have power over it, or because
one cannot do it, or that it is something impossible in itself. On the
contrary, it is very much possible, it is within one’s power and one
can do it. But if 1t were to happen, Allah knew beforehand that it
would happen. And if it does not happen, Allah knew beforehand
that it would not happen. But when it was assumed that it would
happen, although its prerequisites were not fulfilled, it became
impossible, impossible in the sense that something was posited
without its necessary prerequisites being realized. When this occurs,
everything 15 impossible!

One of the consequences that follows from the view these people
hold is that no one can have power over anything, neither man or
Allah, for, if Allah knows in Himself that He will do something, it
does not mean that He has lost the power not to do it. Similarly, if
He knows in Himself that He will not do a thing, it does not mean
that He has no power to do it. The same 15 true for human acts that
He has ordained. And Allah knows best.

(58) This is a fundamental aspect of faith, a necessary
aspect of knowledge and of our realizing Allah’s
Oneness and Lordship. As Allah has said, “He created
all things and ordained them in due measures” [25:2];
and, “Allah’s command is always a decided decree”
[33:38].

Here the author is alluding to what has been discussed
conceming belief in gadr and Allah’s fore-knowledge of things
before their creation. The Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him)
stated while responding to a question about faith, “(Faith) is that you
believe in Allah, His angels, His books, His messengers and the
Last Day, and to believe in fore-ordainment of both good and bad.”
At the end of the hadith, the Messenger said, “‘Umar, do you know
who the questioner was?” He said, “Allah and His Messenger know
best.” the Prophet (peace be upon him) told him, “It was Gabriel
who had come to teach you your religion.” Muslim recorded this
hadith.’®'

The words, “(This is) our realizing Allah’s Oneness and
Lordship” mean that one’s belief in tawhid and recognition of

?6'Muslim, Al-iman, 8; Abi Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4695; At-Tirmidhi, Al-/man, 2610;
An-Nasa’i, Al-Imdan, 8:97; Ahmad, 1:28, 51, 52; Ibn Hibban, 168. See also Al-
Bukhari, 50, 4777; Ibn Majah, 64; Muslim, 9; An-Nasa’i, 8:101-3.

218 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Allah’s Lordship is not complete unless one believes in these
attributes of Allah. If one believes in a creator other than Allah, he
has committed shirk (polytheism). If that is true, what is the
situation of a person who believes that everyone creates his own
actions? For this reason, the Qadariyyah (free-willers) have been
called the Magians of this nation. Such ahddith have occurred in the
works of the Sunan.

Abt Dawid recorded from Ibn ‘Umar that the Messenger of
Allah (peace be upon him) said, “The Qadariyyah are the Magians of
this nation. If they become ill, do not visit them. If they die, do not
join their funeral prayer.””°

Abii Dawid also recorded from Hudhayfah Ibn Al-Yaman that
the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said, “Every
community has its Magians. The Magians of this nation are those
say that there 15 no fore-ordainment. If one of them dies, do not
attend their funeral prayers. If one of them gets sick, do not visit
him. They belong to the followers of the great Imposter (ad-Dajjal).
It is certain that Allah will join them with him.’”®’

Abit Dawid also recorded from ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab that the
Prophet (peace be upon him) said, “Do not mix with the people of
‏007و‎ (those who deny fore-ordainment) and do not converse with
them.”*°*

At-Tirmidhi recorded from Ibn ‘Abbas that the Messenger of
Allah (peace be upon him) said, “Two groups of people have no
portion in Islam: the Murji‘ah and the Qadariyyah.””®°

But all of the ahddith related from the Messenger of Allah (peace

be upon him) concerning the Qadariyyah are weak.’®° Nevertheless,
there are reports concerning them from the Companions that are
authentic. For example, Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Fore-ordainment is the

?©? Abii. Dawiid, As-Sunnah, 4691; Al-Hakim, 1:85; Ahmad, 2:86; Al-Lalka’i, Sharh
as-Sunnah, 1150; Al-Ajuri, Ash-Shari ‘ah, ‏.م‎ 190. Also see Ibn Majah, 92. The chain
of this hadith is definitely weak. According to Al-Albani, it has other chains that
strengthen it.

23 Aba Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4692; Ahmad, 5:407; Al-Lalka’i, 1155. Its chain is
definitely weak.

*64 Abii Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4710, Al-Qadr, 4720; Ahmad, 1:30; Al-Lalka’i, 1124; Al-
Hakim, 1:85. One of the transmitters of the hadith, Hakim Ibn Sharik Al-Hudhayl}, is
unknown, so it is weak.

76° At-Tirmidhi, Al-Qadr, 2149; Ibn Majah, Al-Mugqaddamah, 73. The hadith is weak as
one of its transmitters, Nazar Ibn Hayyan, is weak.

*°°This is the opinion of the majority of the hadith scholars. However, Al-Albani has
graded the first hadith above as hasan.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 219

unifying thread of tawhid. Hence, whoever professes Allah’s unity
but denies fore-ordainment, his denial contradicts his profession of
tawhid.’”°’ This is because the belief in fore-ordainment involves
the belief that Allah’s knowledge is eternal, that what He has made
manifest 15 part of His unlimited knowledge, and that He has
determined in advance the measures of things He has created. Many
people, such as polytheists, Sabaeans, philosophers and others have
gone astray on this issue and have denied that Allah has knowledge
of things particular or otherwise. Consequently, this has led them to
deny fore-ordainment.

As for Allah’s omnipotence and power over all things, this is
denied by the Qadariyyah in general, since they say that Allah did
not create the actions of human beings. They consider these acts
outside of Allah’s creative will and power.

They also deny the fore-ordainment of human destinies which
has been clearly established in the Qur’an, hadith and consensus of
the nation. That it is why they have been generally condemned by
the Companions and later scholars. Ibn ‘Umar, for example, was
asked about people who said that their acts were not fore-ordained
and that they did them new. He said, “Tell them that I have nothing
to do with them and that they have nothing to do with me.”

Qadr is the ordaining of things according to the knowledge Allah
has of them. It involves the following principles. First, Allah knows
things before they come into existence. This means that His
knowledge is eternal. This is a refutation of those who deny that His
knowledge is eternal. Second, fore-ordainment (aqdir) is to fix the
measures of things, namely the properties and attributes which they
will have. Allah has said, “He created all things and ordained them
in due measure” [25:2]. This means that creation involves two kinds
of pre-measurement: ordaining things as such or fixing their
measures, and doing so before they come into existence. Since Allah
has fixed the measures of things in all their details, qualitative and
quantitative, His knowledge of each and every individual thing is
perfect. Hence, those who think that Allah knows only the
universals and not the particulars are wrong. Qadr involves eternal
knowledge as it involves the knowledge of each and every
individual thing.

767 Al-Lalka’i, Sharh, 1112; Al-Ajuri, Ash-Shari‘ah, ‏.م‎ 215; Ibn Battah, Al-Ibdnah
(Rida Mu‘it, ed.; Makkah: Al-Maktabah Al-Faysaliyyah, 1404/1984), 2:234-235.
But the narration is weak. Al-Haythami noted that At-Tabarani ascribed these words to
the Prophet (peace be upon him) but one of its transmitters, Hani Ibn Al-Mutawakkil,
is weak. (See Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, 7:197.)

220 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Third, gadr means that Allah reveals detailed information about
things before their creation. Therefore, it is not ruled out that some
of His servants may know about various things before they are
brought into existence (if Allah chooses to tell them such). This
further enforces the truth that their Creator must be even more
knowledgeable about them. If He has informed His servants about
them, He cannot Himself lack that knowledge. Fourth, gadr means
that Allah is free to decide what to do, or to create what He wills,
and nothing is incumbent or obligatory upon him. Fifth and finally,
it means that the things that He ordains are contingent, that they
come into being after they were not there. He first determines their
measures and then creates them.

(59) So woe to those who quarrel 2011 fore-
ordainment, who delve into it with a diseased heart,
trying to unravel its profound mysteries’ through
delusions, and who land themselves deep in sin by their
baseless, lying conjectures.

There is for the heart life and death, disease and health, just as
there is for the body; in fact, it is even greater for the heart. Allah
says, “Can he who was dead, to whom We gave life and a light
whereby he can walk among men, be like him who is in the depths
of darkness from which he can never come out?” [6:122]. That is,
he was dead because of his infidelity (kufr) and Allah gave him life
through faith. A living and sound heart, by its nature, abhors and
flees from falsehood and evil when presented with it; it will never
turn to it. But the dead (or diseased) heart does not distinguish
between good and evil. As ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘id once said, “One
who does not have a heart that can distinguish nght from wrong is
certainly doomed.’”®® the same is true of the heart that is sick
because of lust and desires; the more sick it is, the more it 5
attracted to evil.

Diseases of the heart are of two kinds, disease of lust and
desires and disease of doubt and skepticism. The disease of doubt is
far more harmful than the disease of lust. The most damaging doubt
is the one that concerns fore-ordainment. The heart becomes
severely ill, but the sick person does not realize it due to his turning
away from correct knowledge and its causes. Sometimes his heart is

*°° At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 8564. Al-Haythami notes that the transmitters of this

tradition are among the transmitters of the Sahih collections (Majma‘ az-Zawa’id,
7:275).

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 221

completely dead and he does not even feel it. The sign of such death
is that he ceases to feel the pinch of evil deeds and the pain of not
knowing truth while entertaining false beliefs. If the heart 15 alive, it
feels pain by the presence of evil, and the stronger its life, the more
acute 1s that feeling. A poet has said:
“For the mean, meanness is not at all painful
The dead hardly feel the pain of a wound,”

Sometimes he feels that he 15 ill, but it 15 difficult for him to take
bitter medicine and have perseverance in doing so. He therefore
prefers to remain sick rather than swallow the bitter medicine. His
medicine, though, goes to fight his desires and lusts, though this is
the most difficult thing for him to do. But at the same time, there is
nothing more beneficial for him.

Sometimes he is able to persevere for a time but then loses his
will. He is not able to stick with it and he stops. This is all because
his awareness of his great disease is inadequate and his
determination is weak. He is like a person who has to pass through
a fearful tunnel in order to gain peace and tranquility. He needs
patience and certainty. If he lacks them, he 1s likely to turn back
from the middle of the tunnel, especially if he has no one
accompanying him on that journey. He is likely to think that if
others have not traveled it before him, he should all the more not
risk it. This is the condition of the majority of mankind, who have
consequently met their doom. A man of faith and determination, on
the other hand, 15 not discouraged if few have traveled the road or if
none can accompany him. In his heart he feels the company of the
first band of travelers about whom Allah has said, “Those on whom
is grace of Allah: the prophets, the sincere (lovers of truth), the
martyrs, and the righteous (who do good); and what a beautiful
fellowship” [4:69].

Abt Muhammad ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Isma‘il, known as Abi
Shamah, wrote in Al-Bid‘ah wa al-Hawddith, ““Whenever one is
asked to adhere to the jamd ‘ah (the community), what is intended 5
that one should abide by the truth and follow it. However, there are
more rejecters than abiders. The truth is what the first band of
Muslims at the time of the Prophet, his Companions, lived by. The
views cf the mistaken and misguided people who came afterwards
have no value.”’’® Al-Hassan Al-Basri said, “The way of the

*°This is part of an ode composed by Al-Mutanabbi. See his Diwan with commentary
by Al-‘Akbari (Mustafa As-Saqqa Ibrahim Al-Abyari and ‘Abdul-Hafiz Ash-Shalabi,
eds.; Cairo: Maktabat Mustafa Al-Halabi, 1391/1971), 4:92-101.

*Tbn Al-Qayyim, Ighdthat al-Lahfan min Masda’id ash-Shavtan (Muhammad Hamid

F10 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI

222 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

Sunnah is between the ways of the fanatic and the lackadaisical.
Stick to it; Allah will bless you. The followers of the Sunnah were
in the minority in the olden days, and in the minority in the
remaining days — people who did not indulge in affluence like the
affluent or in unauthorized innovations like the innovators, and
persevered on the path of the Sunnah until they meet their Lord. Try
to live as they lived.”

The sign of a sick heart is aversion to a good diet and useful
medicine, with fondness for a bad diet and harmful drugs. There are
thus four things involved here: good diet and useful medicine, bad
diet and harmful drugs. The healthy heart prefers the good and the
useful over the bad and the harmful. The sick heart is the opposite of
that.

The best food is the food of imdn (faith). The most useful
medicine is the medicine of the Qur’an; both contain food and
medicine. Whoever seeks remedies in other than the Qur’an and
Sunnah is then the most ignorant and most misguided of people.*”!
Verily, Allah says, “Say: It is a guide and a healing to those who
believe. And for those who believe not, there is a deafness in their
ears and it is a blindness in their eyes. They are called to from afar”
[41:44]; “We send down the Qur’an, which 1s healing and a mercy
to those who believe. To the unjust it causes nothing but loss after
loss” [17:82]; and “Mankind, there has come to you a direction from
your Lord and healing for the diseases in your hearts, and for those
who believe a Guidance and a Mercy” [10:57].

The Qur’an is the complete healer for all the diseases of the heart
and the body and the medicine for both this life and the Hereafter,
but not everyone is qualified to be treated by 1t. However, if a sick
man treats himself in the light of its prescriptions and uses its
medicine sincerely and in good faith, and observes the precautions
that it prescribes, his disease will not persist. How can a disease
persist in the face of the words of the One Who created the heavens
and the earth, words that will make the mountains cleave asunder
and the earth crack if they were to descend on them! There is no
disease of the heart or the body but the Qur’an has a word about its
cause, treatment, and the precautions one should take. But this
knowledge is revealed to those whom Allah has given insight in His
Book.

As for the author’s statement, “trying to unravel its profound
mysteries through delusions,” refers to fore-ordainment, but it is the

Al-Fiqi, ed.; Beirut: Dar Al-Ma‘rifah, n.d.), 1:69.
"Ibid, 1:68-70.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 223

mystery of Allah among the creation. Those who try to disentangle it
actually try to know the Unseen. Allah has said, “He alone knows
the Unseen, nor does He make anyone acquainted with His
mysteries, except a messenger whom He has chosen” [72:26-27].
And the words, “and who land themselves deep in sin by their
baseless, lying conjectures,” refers to surmises about fore-
ordainment.

(60) The Throne and the Footstool are realities.

Allah makes this very clear in His Book. Allah says, “He is the
Lord of the Glorious Throne” [85:15]; “Raised high above ranks,
He is the Lord of the Throne” [40:15]; “Allah Most Glorious 1s
firmly established on the Throne” [20:5]; “There 15 no god but He,
the Lord of the Honorable Throne”’ [23:116]; “Allah, there is no god
but He, Lord of the Supreme Throne” [27:26]; “Those who sustain
the Throne and those around it sing glory and praise to their Lord,
believe in Him, and implore forgiveness for those who believe”
[40:7]; “And eight will that Day bear the Throne of the Lord above
them” [69:17]; “And you will see the angels surrounding the Throne
on all sides, singing glory and praise to their Lord” [39: 75}.

As for the ahddith on the subject, one that occurs in the Sahih is
a supplication that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) used
to say when faced with a problem: “There is no god but Allah, the
Glorious, the Forebearing. There is no god but He, the Lord of the
Supreme Throne. There is no god but Allah, the Lord of the heavens
and the Lord of the earth, and the Lord of the Honorable Throne.”

Ahmad recorded another hadith reported by ‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul-
Muttalib that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) once
asked, “Do you know what the distance between the heavens and
the earth is?” They said, “Allah and His Messenger know best.” He
said, “It is the distance of a five hundred years’ journey. The same
is the distance between one heaven and another. The same is the
distance between the two sides, the lower and upper part of the one
heaven. Beyond the seventh heaven, there is an ocean as deep as the
distance between Heaven and the earth. Beyond the ocean there are
eight huge goats whose hooves are as far removed from their knees
as Heaven from the earth. The Throne of Allah is beyond all of
these. Its lower side is as far from its upper side as Heaven is from
the earth. And Allah is above that. And nothing from the actions of

272 Al-Bukhari, 6345, 6346, 7426, 7431; Muslim, 2730; At-Tirmidhi, 3453; Ahmad,
1:228, 245, 259, 280, 339, 356.

224 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

human beings is hidden from him.” This was also recorded by Abi
Dawid, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah.’””

Abt Dawid and others have recorded through their chain of
authorities in the hadith that mentions the creation of the Throne that
the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said, “The Throne of
Allah is on the heavens like this,” and he rounded his fingers in the
shape of 8 4

Al-Bukhari recorded another hadith in which the Messenger of
Allah (peace be upon him) said, “When you pray for Paradise, pray
for al-Firdaws. It is the highest part of Paradise and the center of
Paradise, and above it is the Throne of the Merciful.””’> There are
two narrations of this hadith. One states, “and above it is the
Throne,” and the other narration states, “Its roof is the Throne.”

Some of the theologians claim that the Throne is spherical and
encompasses the universe from all sides. Sometimes they call it ‏اه‎
‎falak al-atlas (the outer spherical world) or the “ninth sphere”. This
is not correct. It is confirmed in the texts that it has legs that the
angels will carry. The Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said,
“On the Day of Judgment, everyone will give a cry and fall in a
swoon. I will be the first to arise. Lo and behold, Moses will be
there, holding on to one of the legs of the Throne. I do not know
whether he will have regained his senses before me or will have
been spared swooning since he already experienced it ‏أ‎

Literally the word ‘arsh means the throne of a king. Allah said
about Bilgis, “She had a magnificent throne (‘arsh)” [27:23]. It 15
not something spherical. Arabs do not understand that meaning and

"3 Aba Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4733; At-Tirmidhi, At-7afsir, 3320; Ibn Majah, A/-
Muqaddamah, 193; Ahmad, 1:206, 207; Al-Bayhaqi, Al-Asmd’ wa as-Siffat, p. 399;
Al-Hakim, 2:500-501. This hadith was reported by ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umayrah from AI-
Ahnaf Ibn Qays, from Al-‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib. No one considers ‘Abdullah
Ibn ‘Umayrah reliable except Ibn Hibban, but it was Ibn Hibban’s custom to consider
unknown narrators as trustworthy, a practice that differs from that of the other hadith
scholars. Al-Bukhari stated that it is not known that he ever heard from Al-Ahnaf. Ibn
Al-‘Arabi considers this hadith and others similar to it to actually have their source in
the stories of the Jews and Christians. Al-Albani simply calls the hadith weak.

274 Aba: Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4726; Ad-Darimi, Ar-Radd ‘ala al-Jahmiyyah, ‏.م‎ 24; Al-
Bayhaqi, Al-Asma’ wa as-Siffat, pp. 417-418; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 92; Al-
Ajuri, Ash-Shari ‘ah, ‏.م‎ 293. However, the hadith is weak. Al-Albani observes that
this hadith (which also mentions the creaking of the Throne) is not authentic.

That it is not the exact wording from Al-Bukhari, wherein it states, “It is the middle
of Paradise and the highest of Paradise.” Recorded by Al-Bukhari, 7433; Ahmad,
2:335.

*7°Discussed earlier. It was recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 225

the Qur’an was revealed in the language of the Arabs. It must mean
a throne with legs that the angels might hold and carry. It is like a
dome placed on the universe and its roof. Umayyah Ibn Abi As-
Salat has stated:

They glorify Allah and He deserves glory.

He is our Lord in the heavens, the Magnificent.
He has raised a spacious structure that baffles man.
And over it, He has put his Throne,

too high for the eyes to scan.

Around it are angels bowing their heads in awe.*””

‘Abdullah Ibn Ar-Rawahah, may Allah be pleased with him,
said in an ode refuting a charge his wife made against him:

I swear that the word of Allah is true

That the Fire is the abode of the infidels,
That the Throne floats on water,

That the Lord of the Worlds is on the Throne
Which is borne by mighty angels
consecrated by the Lord.

These lines were mentioned by Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr and others.*”®

Abt Dawid recorded a hadith in which the Messenger of Allah
(peace be upon him) said, “I have permission to tell you that one of
the angels that holds the Throne of Allah is such a huge being that
the distance between the lobe of his ear and his shoulder is a seven
hundred years’ journey.”””’ In a version recorded by Ibn Abi Hatim,
the distance was said to be the seven hundred years’ flight of a bird.

For those who distort the Word of Allah and consider the
Throne to mean ‘kingdom’, how will they deal with Allah’s words,
“And eight (angels) will that Day bear the Throne of your Lord
above them’ [69:17], or the verse, “His Throne was over the
waters” [11:7]? Will they say that eight angels will bear the
Kingdom of Allah on that Day or that His Kingdom was over the
waters or that Moses will hold the legs of His Kingdom (on the Day

?™Diwadn Ummayyah Ibn Abi As-Salat (‘Abdul-Hafiz As-Satli, ed.; Damascus: Al-
Matba At-Ta‘awuniyyah, 1394/1974), pp. 399-400.

Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr, Al-Isti‘ab fi Ma‘rafat al-Ashab, printed on the margin of Ibn
Hajr’s Al-Isaba (Taha Muhammad Zayni, ed.; Cairo: Maktabat Al-Kulliyat Al-
Azhariyyah, 1397/1977), 2:287. See also Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh Dimasha, p. 340, 342;
Adh-Dhahabi, Siyar A ‘lam an-Nubald, 1:238.

77 Abt: Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4727; Al-Bayhaqi, Al-Asmda’ wa as-Siffat, p. 398. It is an
authentic hadith.

0026 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

of Judgment)? Will any sensible person who knows what he is
saying actually make such statements?

As for the Footstool (a/-Kursi), Allah has said, “His Footstool
extends over the heavens” [2:255].

Some people say that the Footstool is the same as the Throne.
- The correct opinion is that they are different. This has been recorded
from Ibn ‘Abbas and others. Ibn Abi Shaybah recorded in Sifat al-
‘Arsh and Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak — and he said that this
narration was authentic according to Al-Bukhari’s and Muslim’s
standards but they did not record it — from Sa‘id Ibn Jubayr that Ibn
‘Abbas said, while commenting on the verse, “His Footstool
extends over the heavens” [2:255], “The Kursi is a footstool. And
as for the Throne, only Allah knows what it is exactly.” These
words have been ascribed to the Prophet (peace be upon him) but
the correct narration is as a statement of Ibn ‘Abbas.”*° As-Sudi
said, “The heavens and the earth are inside the Footstool and the
Footstool is in front of the Throne.””®'

Ibn Jarir recorded that Abu Dharr narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (peace be upon him) said, “In comparison to the Throne, the
Footstool is nothing more than a small iron ring in a boundless
desert.”?*” |

Some say that the Kursi is His knowledge. This has been
ascribed to Ibn ‘Abbas.’** But what has been authentically narrated
from him is what we have just quoted from the book of Ibn Abi
Shaybah. All other things attributed to him are mere conjecture and
erroneous theology. The Chair is simply a footstool in front of the
Throne like a step. This is what a number of the Elders have stated.

(61) Allah is not in need of the Throne and what is
beneath it. He encompasses all and is above everything.
His creation is not able to encompass Him.

Regarding the words, “Allah is not in need of the Throne and
what is beneath it,” Allah says in the Qur’an, “Indeed, Allah is

?89See Ibn Kathir, Tafsir al-Qur’dn al-‘Azim, 1:457.

8! As-Suyiiti, Ad-Durr al-Manthur, 2:18.

*8? Tafsir At-Tabari (title given by Mahmiid Muhammad Shakir and Ahmad Muhammad
Shakir to their edition of Ibn Jarir’s commentary in which they have numbered the
ahddith and reports [Cairo: Dar Al-Ma‘arif, 1987], hereinafter simply referred to as
Tafsir At-Tabari), hadith no. 5794. See also Al-Bayhaqi, Al-Asmda’ wa as-Siffat, pp.
404-405. But the chains for all these ahddith are very weak.

‎Tafsir At-Tabari, hadith nos. 5787, 5788.‏ ذةة

~Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahdadwi 227

altogether independent of His creatures” [29:6], and “Allah is free of
all wants, Worthy of all praise” [35:15]. The author mentioned these
words at this point because, after mentioning the Throne and the
Chair he wanted to point out that Allah does not depend on or need
that Throne or what is below the Throne. Thereby, he makes it clear
that Allah’s creating the Throne and ascending it was not done due
to any need. Instead, it was done for some other reason that His
wisdom determined. If something is above some other thing, it does
not follow, therefore, that the latter surrounds or encompasses the
former or holds and sustains it; nor does it follow that the former
needs the latter and depends upon it. Look at heaven, how it is
above the earth but not in need of it. Allah is incomparably superior
to the heaven. So how could His being on the Throne imply that He
depends upon it or needs it?

Transcendence (‘u/iz) is an attribute of Allah. It means that He
sustains with His power the entire universe, which depends upon
Him for its existence, while He is above and independent of it and
encompasses it. He is above the Throne and sustains it with His
power and sustains all those who bear it. He does not at all depend
on the Throne; on the contrary, the Throne depends upon Him. He
encompasses it, but it does not encompass Him. He surrounds it,
but it does not surround Him. These attributes of Allah are
exclusively His. They are not shared by any other being.

Those who deny that Allah 1s above the Throne would not do so
if they understood the concept as we do. They would then be guided
to the straight path. They would realize that what has been revealed
is in agreement with reason and they would follow the evidence. But
they diverge from the evidence and hence, stray from the straight
path. The correct course in such matters is the course which Imam
Malik took when he was asked about istiwd in the verse, “He then
ascended (istiwd) the Throne” [7:54]. He said, “/stiwd is known,
but its modality is not known.” the same answer, it has been
reported, was given by Umm Salamah. One narration even ascribes
this statement to the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him)
himself.***

*4Tbn Taymiyyah wrote that this statement has been attributed to both Umm Salamah
and the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him). As a statement of the Prophet (peace
be upon him), it is definitely not authentic. As for a statement of Umm Salamah, Al-
Lalka’i narrated a tradition attributing these words to her (Sharh ‘Agidat Ahl as-
Sunnah, 3:397). But one of its transmitters, Muhammad Ibn Ashras As-Salmi, 1s
accused of lying. That it is the statement of Imam Malik has been mentioned by many
a scholar. See Al-Bayhaqi, Al-Asmda’ wa as-Siffat, ‏.م‎ 408; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari,
13:406.

228 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

The author stated, “He encompasses all and is above
everything,” which means that Allah encompasses all and is above
all. But some manuscripts of the Creed state, “Allah encompasses
everything that is above the Throne.””®? the first reading is correct. It
means that Allah encompasses everything and is above everything.
Allah knows best, but perhaps the second reading was just a mistake
of one of the scribes, who was then followed by later scribes; or
perhaps some misled heretics did this intentionally in order to alter
the meaning and avoid the idea of Allah’s transcendence. There is no
third possible explanation for this mistake. It has been established
that the Throne is above all created things and nothing created is
above it. There is, therefore, no sense in saying that Allah
encompasses everything that is above the Throne; actually, there 1s
nothing above it to be encompassed. We conclude, therefore, that
the word “and” is part of the text and that the text should read, “He
encompasses all things and 1s above all things.”

As for Allah’s encompassing everything, Allah has stated the
following, “But Allah does encompass them from behind” [85:20];
“Indeed, it is He That does encompass all things” [41:54]; “But to
Allah belong all things in the heavens and on the earth, and He it 1s
That encompasses all things” [4:126]. But His encompassing does
not mean that He is like a sphere, surrounding things with
everything inside of His essence. Greatly exalted is Allah above
that. What it means is that He encompasses them by His knowledge,
power and majesty, that before His majesty things are nothing more
than a mustard seed. It is narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The seven
heavens and the seven earths and all that there is between them are in
the hand of Allah just as a mustard seed is in the hand of one of
you.” It is obvious that when we have a mustard seed in our hand,
we can grip it and hold it or put it down. However, in either case,
we are different from it, beyond it, and above it in every respect.

What then about Allah, the Great, Whose greatness transcends
all description? He can, if He wills, take all the heavens and earth in
His grip now, as He will do on the Day of Judgment, and He will
not be acquiring a power that He did not have before. If this is the
case, then there is nothing strange in saying that Allah will come
near to a point of the world even though He will be on His Throne
beyond the heavens, or in saying that He will bring any one of His
creatures near to Him. Those who deny that do not have the proper
understanding of Allah that He deserves. In a famous hadith about
Beatific Vision, it is reported that Abt Razin asked the Messenger of

*®>This transmission is without the conjunction wa (and).

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 229

Allah (peace be upon him), “How will we see Allah, O Prophet? He
is One and we will be many.” the Prophet (peace be upon him)
answered, “I will give you an example from the beings He has
created. Look at the moon. It is one, but all of you see it and it
appears to all of you. Allah is obviously far greater than the
moon.””®° This makes it clear that Allah is grander and greater than
anything. This hadith removes all doubts and answers all questions.

Concerning Allah being above the creations, Allah says, “He is
the Irresistible Power ruling over the beings He has created” [6:18];
and, “They (the angels) all revere their Lord, High above them”
[16:50]. There is also the hadith we just mentioned about the goats
of the mountains: “The Throne is above that and Allah is above all of
that.”’*’ We also quoted the couplet from ‘Abdullah Ibn Rawahah
which speaks about Allah’s transcendence. ‘Abdullah recitedit
before the Prophet (peace be upon him) and received his approval
and he smiled at 11.255 Hassan Ibn Thabit gave the following ode
mentioning Allah’s transcendence:

With Allah’s leave I witness that Muhammad

is the Prophet of the One Who is above the heavens;
that both John and his father

did good things that pleased God;

that the Son of Mary, whom the Jews denied,

was a prophet sent by the Lord of the Throne;

that the prophet who was sent to the people of Ahqaf
called them to submit to Allah and did justly.””

Upon hearing these lines, the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon
him) said, “I also bear witness.’”””°

Abt Hurayrah reported that the Prophet (peace be upon him)
said, “When Allah decreed to create the world, He wrote in a book
which is with Him above the Throne, ‘My mercy outdoes my

8° Abu Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4731; Ibn Majah, Al-Muqaddamah, 180; Ahmad, 4:11, 12.
The chain of this hadith is weak.

*87This hadith is very weak.

*88 As for the hadith that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) approved of
these lines, it is reported by a Successor directly from the Messenger of Allah (peace
be upon him) with no mention of the name of the Companion he heard it from.

*89 Diwan Hassan Ibn Thabit (Walid ‘Arafat, ed.; Dar Sadir, 1394/1974), ‏.م‎ 403.
This saying of the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) was narrated in a mursal
tradition (where the name of the Companion has been left out of the chain). See Adh-
Dhahabi, As-Siyar, 2:518-519.

230 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

wrath.”””?' A variant of this hadith states, “My mercy will overcome
my wrath” [recorded by Al-Bukh§ari and others].

Ibn Majah recorded from Jabir that the Messenger of Allah
(peace be upon him) said, “When people are in Paradise enjoying its
pleasures, a light will shine. They will look at it and, lo and behold,
Allah, the Mighty and Glorious, will look on them from above. He
will say, ‘Peace be upon you, people of Paradise!’” At this point,
the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) recited the verse,
“Peace! —a word of salutation from a Lord Most Merciful” [36:58].
He then continued, “Allah will look at them, and they will look at
Him. They will not remove their eyes from Him to look at any other
bounty as long as they are allowed to see Him.’””

Muslim recorded from the Prophet (peace be upon him),
concerning the meaning of the verse, “He is the First and the Last,
the Evident (Az-Zahir) and the Immanent” [57:3]; “You are the First,
there is nothing before You. You are the Last, there is nothing after
You. You are the Evident (Az-Zahir) and there is nothing above
You. You are the Immanent, there is nothing below you.”””> Az-
Zahir 15 from zuhur, which means ‘to be above’, as in the verse,
“They were powerless to scale (yazharit) it” [18:97]; that is, to cross
over (ya ‘lu) it. These four names of Allah form two pairs of
contrasting names, one signifying His eternity and everlastingness
and the other His transcendence and nearness.

Abit Dawid recorded from Jubayr Ibn Muhammad Ibn Jubayr
Ibn Mut‘im from his father, on the authority of his grandfather, who
said that a Bedouin came to the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon
him) and said, “Messenger of Allah, we are in great trouble. Our
children have died, our property has been destroyed and the cattle
have perished. Pray to Allah to send us rain. We request you to
intercede with Allah for us and we beseech Allah to intercede with
you on our behalf.” the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him)
said, “Woe to you! Do you know what you have said?” He then
kept repeating “Glory be to Allah” until his Companions around him
felt very sorry for what the Bedouin had said. He then said, “Woe to
you! Allah is too great to intercede with anybody whom He has
created. He is exalted above all that. Do you know what Allah is?
He is on His Throne and His Throne is above His heavens, like a

291 Al-Bukhari, 3194, 7404, 7422, 7453, 7553, 7554; Muslim, At-Tawbah, 2751; At-
Tirmidhi, Ad-Da ‘wat, 3537; Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd, 2495; Ahmad, 2:242, 258, 260,
293, 358, 397, 433, 466.

272 Discussed earlier. It is a weak hadith.

Discussed earlier, recorded by Muslim, it is authentic.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 231

dome over them.” He then rounded his fingers to demonstrate this.
He then added, “The Throne appears to crack under Him as a saddle
appears to crack under the weight of the rider.”””*

When Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘adh announced his judgment in the case of
the Banti Qurayzah and said that their warriors should be killed and
their children should be taken captive, the Prophet (peace be upon
him) said, “Your judgment is the judgment of Allah from above the
seven heavens.”’’? This is an authentic hadith. Al-Umawi
mentioned it in detail in his work on the battles (maghdzi) of the
Prophet (peace be upon him). Al-Bukhari and Muslim have recorded
the gist of the hadith.

Al-Bukhari also recorded concerning Zaynab, that she was able
to boast among the wives of the Prophet (peace be upon him),
“Your families married you (to the Prophet) but Allah married me (to
him) from above the seven heavens.’””°

One day ‘Umar passed by an old woman who stopped him and
talked with him for some time. A man said, “Commander of the
Faithful, you have kept the people waiting because of this old
woman.” He said, “Woe to you! Do you know who she 1s? She 5
the one whose complaint Allah heard from above the seven heavens.
She 15 Khawlah, about whom it was revealed, ‘Allah has heard (and
accepted) the statement of the woman who pleads with you
concerning her husband and carries her complaint (in prayer) to
Allah” [58:11]. This was recorded by Ad-Darimi.’”’

Concerning the verse (quoting the words of Satan), “Then I will
assault them from before them and behind them, from their night and
from their left” [7:17], Mujahid narrated that Ibn ‘Abbas said, “He

was not able to see, ‘From above them,’ because he knew that Allah
is above them.’””®

This hadith was discussed earlier; it is weak.

*** Al-Bukhari, 3043, 3804, 4121, 6262; Muslim, A/-Jihadd, 1768; Ahmad) 3:22; Abi
Dawid At-Tayalisi, Musnad (Hyderabad, India: 1321 A.H.; reprint- Beirut: Dar Al-
Ma‘arif, n.d.; hereinafter referred to as At-Tayalisi), hadith no. 2240.

*°¢ Al-Bukhari, At-Tawhid, 7420; At-Tirmidhi, At-Tafsir, 3213; An-Nasa’i, An-Nikah,
6:80.

*°Ad-Darimi, Ar-Radd ‘ala al-Jahmiyyah (Damascus: Dar Al-Kutub Al-Islami,
1381/1961), ‏.م‎ 26. Adh-Dhahabi observed that the link between ‘Umar and Abi
Yazid Al-Madani, who narrated this hadith, is not mentioned. Abi Yazid himself did
not meet ‘Umar. See A/- ‘Uli, abridged by Muhammad Nasir ad-Din Al-Albani (Beirut:
Al-Maktab Al-Islami, 1401/1981), p. 113.

8 Tafsir At-Tabari, no. 14382; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim, 1:204. To Ibn
‘Abbas the chain is weak. At-Tabari records a similar statement from Qatadah (hadith
no. 14372).

232 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Anyone familiar with the hadith of the Messenger of Allah
(peace be upon him) and statements of the Elders will find numerous
statements confirming Allah’s being above the world.

No doubt, when Allah created the creation, He did not create it
within His holy being. Allah is exalted above that. For He is the One
and Absolute Being, Who neither begets nor is He begotten. He
created the creation outside of Himself. Were He not above the
world, although He is other than and separate from it, then He
would have to be something, in which case He would have to be the
opposite. This means that He would have to be below it, which 5
plainly wrong and unbecoming of Allah. The opposite of above 5
below, but this 15 a blameworthy description, as it is the habitat of
Satan, his followers and his soldiers.

If someone says that we do not accept that denying that He is
above must imply that He is below, the reply is that, if you cannot
say that He is either above or below, then He is not actually a being
in and of Himself. When you affirm that He 15 a being in and of
Himself that is not part of the world and He exists beyond it, and
that He is not merely an idea in the mind but a being existing, and if
you admit that anything that exists out there will be, as every rational
being says, either in the world or outside of it - and to deny that will
be more outrageous than denying the self-evident and necessary
truths of reason — then the most reasonable alternative is to say that
Allah is above the world. Now, if the attribute that He transcends
the world and is above it is an attribute of perfection, not a defect or
imperfection, and it does not contradict reason or violate the Qur’4an,
the Sunnah and the consensus, then to deny transcendence will be
committing an absurdity from which the religion of Allah is
completely free. How can one deny that, when the truth is that we
cannot believe in the existence of Allah, or in the revelation to the
prophets or in their books or teachings, unless we believe in His
transcendence. How can one deny that when it is also supported by
unclouded reason and the basic instincts of man?

The texts that clearly state Allah’s transcendence of the world
and His being above His creation are of twenty different types:*””

First, texts in which the preposition “from” (min) has been used
along with “above” (fawq) which together emphasize that one thing
is above the other. For example, “They fear their Lord from high
above them” [16:50].

*”°See also Ibn Al-Qayyim, Mukhtasar as-Sawd’ig al-Mursalah, 2:205-217.

Commentary on the Creed of At- 1 1211 233

Second, texts wherein the same idea 15 stated without using the
preposition “from”. For example, “He is the Irresistible power
ruling over the beings He has created” [6:18, 61].

Third, texts that describe things going up (al-‘uruj) to Him, such
as, “The angels and the spirit go up (ta‘ruju) to Him,” and the
Prophet’s hadith, ““The angels who are with you in the night go up
to Him, and He asks them...’?”°

Fourth, texts that speak of things ascending to Him (as-su ‘ud).
For example, “To Him ascends (yas‘adu) all words of purity”
[35:10]. |

Fifth, texts that clearly state that Allah raises up (raf‘) some
beings to Himself. For example, “Nay, Allah raised him up to
Himself’ [4:150], and “Jesus! I will take you and raise you to
Myself” [3:55].

Sixth, texts that clearly refer to Allah's unqualified
transcendence (al-‘uli al-mutlaq) that embraces all kinds of
transcendence in being, power and honor. Allah says, “He is the
Most High (Al-‘Alt), the Supreme” [2:255], and, “He is the Most
High, Most Great” [34:23]; also, “He is the Most High, Most Wise”
(42:51.

Seventh, texts that state that the Qur’a4n has been sent down
(tanzil) from Allah. These verses include, “The revelation (tanzil)’°'
of this Book is from Allah Exalted in Power Full of Knowledge”
[40:2]. “The revelation (tanzil) of this Book is from Allah, the
Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom” [39:1]; “A revelation (tanzil)
from (Allah) Most Gracious, Most Merciful” [41:2]; “It is sent down
by One Full of Wisdom, Worthy of all Praise” [41:42]; “Say: the
Holy Spirit has brought (down) the revelation from your Lord in
truth” [16:102]; “Ha Mim. By the Book that makes things clear, We
sent it down during a blessed night, for We ever wish to warn
(against evil). In that night is made distinct every affair of wisdom
by command from Our presence. For We ever send revelations”
[44:1-5].

Eighth, texts that say that some beings are with Him and some
are closer to Him than others. For example, “Those who are near to
your Lord” [2:106]; and, “To Him belong all creatures in the
heavens and on the earth, even those who are near to Him...”
[21:19]. The latter verse distinguishes between those who belong to

100 ‏جروم‎ of a hadith in Al-Bukhari, 555, 3223, 7429, 7486; Muslim, Al-Masdjid, 632;
An-Nasa’i, As-Salah, 3:14-19; Ahmad, 5:447, 448.

*°'The word tanzil is usually simply translated as ‘revelation’ but it implies coming
from above.

234 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Him in general, and those who are near to Him from among the
angels and men in particular. And the Messenger of Allah (peace be
upon him) said about the Book that Allah wrote and 15 with Him, “It
is with Him above the Throne.”

Ninth, texts that state very clearly that Allah is fi as-sama which
the commentators of the Qur’an from among the Ahl as-Sunnah
understand to mean that He is above the heavens. They take /fi in the
sense of ‘ald, ‘on’ or ‘above’, or as-samd in the sense of ‘uli (the
highest heaven). They do not differ on this point and there is no
other possible interpretation of the phrase. |

Tenth, texts that state that Allah established Himself (istawa) on
(‘ald) the Throne (al-‘arsh), which is the uppermost part of the
created world. Usually this expression is prefaced by the word
thumma (then), which indicates that Allah established Himself
following another action after the lapse of some time.

Eleventh, texts that state that hands are to be raised towards
Allah in prayer. The Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said,
“Allah is shy to have someone raise his hands up towards Him in
prayer and then turn them down without giving him anything.”’”’
The statement that raising hands in supplication is just like facing the
Ka‘bah in prayer, meaning neither of them suggests the direction
Allah is in, is not correct. The sky is not merely a giblah (direction)
for supplication, as every supplicant knows, as we will explain
later, God willing.

Twelfth, the texts that clearly state that Allah descends (yanzil) to
the lowest heaven every night. Everyone knows that descending
means coming down from a higher place.

Thirteenth, texts that mention pointing upwards to Allah, as the
one who is most knowledgeable of Him (the Prophet) did. He knew
what should be predicated of Him and what should not. He said to
the largest gathering he ever had, and 12 the most sacred place on the
most sacred day, “You will be asked about me. What will you say?”
They replied, “We will testify that you have conveyed the words of
Allah, delivered His message and did your best for our good.” He
then raised his finger towards the sky, towards One Who is above
him and above everything, and said, “My Lord, witness (what Your
servants have said).’”™ It is as if we are even now seeing him raise

102 Discussed earlier. Recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

103 At-Tirmidhi, Ad-Da ‘wat, 3551; Abii Dawiid, As-Salah, 1488; Ibn Majah, Ad-Du ‘a’,
3865; Ibn Hibban, 2399, 2400. At-Tirmidhi called this hadith hasan (good), while
Ibn Hibban considered it authentic.

*°4Dart of a long hadith, Muslim, Al-Hajj, 1218; Aba. Dawid, A/-Mandsik, 1905; Ibn

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 235

his honorable finger toward Allah and hearing the words, “My
Lord! Bear witness.” We do testify that he has fully conveyed the
words of Allah, preached His message as he was asked, and did the
best for the nation that he could do. Verily, he has left nothing for
anyone to explain, or elucidate or expound. And we thank Allah for
that.

Fourteenth, the hadith wherein the one who knew Allah best,
who was the greatest well-wisher for his nation, and who had the
power to put his ideas in most precise and unambiguous terms,
questioned more than one of his people, “Where is Allah?””°

Fifteenth, the ahddith which state that the Prophet (peace be
upon him) testified to the faith of those who said that Allah above in
(fi) the heavens.

Sixteenth, the verse wherein Allah quotes Pharaoh as wanting to
ascend in the sky and see Moses’ God so that he could refute
Moses’ statement that Allah is above the heavens: “Haman! Build
me a lofty palace that I may attain the ways and means — the ways
and means of the heavens that I may ascend to the God of Moses.
But as far as I am concerned, I think Moses is a liar” [40:36-37].
Hence, the Jahmiyyah, who deny that Allah is above the world, are
followers of Pharaoh and those who affirm it are followers of
Moses and Muhammad.

Seventeenth, the hadith that says that the night the Prophet was
taken up the heavens, he commuted between Moses and Allah,
going up to the Lord and coming down to Moses time and again in
order to reduce the number of daily prayers.*”°

Eighteenth, the texts of the Qur’an and Sunnah which say that
the Believers will see Allah in the Hereafter. A hadith states that they
will see Allah as they see the sun and full moon on a clear day. It is
obvious, therefore, that they will see Allah above them. The Prophet
made this quite clear in another hadith when he said, “While the
people of Paradise are enjoying their bounties, a light will shine.
They will raise their heads and, lo and behold, Allah will be
watching them from above. He will say, ‘People of Paradise, peace
be upon you.’” At that moment, the Messenger of Allah (peace be
upon him) recited the verse, “Peace — a word from a Lord Most
Merciful” [36:58]. Then he added, “Then Allah will hide Himself,
leaving behind His mercy and blessings on their abode forever.”

Majah, Al-Mandasik, 3074.

*°°These words occur in a hadith recorded by Muslim, Al-Masdjid, 537; Abu Dawid,
As-Salah, 930; An-Nasa’1, As-Salah, 3:14-19; Ahmad, 5:447, 448.

*°*Discussed earlier. Recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

236 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

This hadith was recorded by Ahmad in his Musnad as well as other
compilers on the authority of Jabir.°°’

One cannot deny Allah’s transcendence without also denying the
vision of Him. This is why the Jahmiyyah have denied both while
the Ahl as-Sunnah have affirmed both. This also explains why those
who affirm the vision of Allah but deny His transcendence waver
between the two propositions and fail to affirm either. We have
noted these points in a brief manner. Were we to expound on them,
the arguments would increase up to a thousand in number. Let those
who deny divine transcendence reply to these points. I am sure they
will not be able to respond to even one argument convincingly.

The sayings of the Elders concerning Allah’s transcendence are
many indeed. For example, Shaykh al-Islam Abu Isma‘il Al-Ansari
recorded in his book 41-1 ‏,و2711‎ with his chain of authorities, that
Abt Mut Al-Balkhi asked Abi Hanifah about a person who had
said, “I do not know if my Lord is in Heaven or on earth.” He said,
“He has committed blasphemy. Allah has verily said, ‘The Most
Gracious is firmly established on the Throne [20:5], and His Throne
is above the seven heavens.” Al-Balkhi then asked, “What if he says
that Allah is established on His Throne but he says that he does not
know if the Throne is up above or on earth.” Aba Hanifah
answered, “He is a disbeliever because he denied that He is up
above (fi as-sama). Whoever denies that He is in Heaven has
committed blasphemy.” Another version adds, “This 15 so because
Allah is in the highest of high places (‘ald ‘illiyin), and He is
. supplicated up to Him and not down.’””®

One should not pay attention to those who claim to follow Abt
Hanifah but deny Allah’s transcendence. Some of the Mu‘tazilah
and others claimed to follow his school even though they had
opposing beliefs. Similarly, many people claim to follow Malik,
Ash-Shafi‘I and Ahmad, whereas they oppose their views. It is
common knowledge that Abi Yusuf, the great disciple of Abu
Hanifah, asked Bishr Al-Marisi to recant his denial of Allah being
on the Throne. Many people, including Abu ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn
Abi Hatim, have narrated this incident.

Those who interpret the word “above” (fawgq) in the hadith and
verses quoted earlier to mean that Allah is more perfect or superior
than the beings He has created, or that He is greater than the Throne,

*’’The hadith does not occur in Ahmad’s Musnad. It was recorded by Ibn Majah and
others, as discussed earlier. It 1s a weak hadith.
*°8See ‘Ali Al-Qari, Sharh Figh al-Akbar, ‏.م‎ 171; Adh-Dhahabi, A/-‘U/i, p. 103.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 237

by comparing those texts with statements like, “as the Ruler is above
(fawq) the Minister” or “the dinar is greater than the dirham” are
making claims that are senseless. A sound heart and mind rejects
such interpretations. To say that Allah is better than man, or greater
than the Throne is just like saying that ice is cold or fire 1s hot, that
the sun is brighter than a lamp, the sky is higher than the roof, the
mountain greater than the pebble, or the Messenger of Allah (peace
be upon him) is better than this or that Jew, or the sky is above the
earth. These are not words of praise or glorification or accolades;
they are some of the most common and insignificant statements one
could make. How can the miraculous word of Allah - concerning
which if mankind and jinns worked together they could not produce
something similar to it - be compared with such statements (by
interpreting them in such a fashion)? In fact, by doing so, one 5
only degrading Allah’s words.

As the proverb states, “If you say that the sword 1s sharper than
the stick, you only disgrace the sword.” Similarly, if someone says
that a pearl is more precious than the skin of an onion or the scale of
a fish, people will laugh at him for such statements, as the difference
between the two being compared is so great that there is no need to
mention their comparison. Obviously, the difference between the
Creator and the created is much, much greater than that. Hence, it is
senseless to say that Allah is greater than the Throne, unless there 5
some compelling need to do so to refute an argument. For example,
Joseph said to his companions in prison, “Are many lords differing
among themselves better or the one God, Supreme and Irresistible?”
[12:39]. Allah also said, “Who is better, Allah, or the false gods
they associate (with Him)?” [22:59]; and, “Allah is best and most
abiding” [20:73].

That Allah is above (fawq) the world needs not to be separately
established. Once it is proven that He transcends the world, it is
proven that He is above it. His transcendence is absolute and
unqualified. He transcends in the sense that He has full control over
all the beings of the world and also with respect to His essence He is
transcendent. If anyone affirms one of these aspects of
transcendence and denies the other, he degrades Allah.

Allah is above the world in every sense. One who understands it
in the sense of status (makanah) and not of place (makdn) should
know that makdnah is the feminine of makdn just as manzilah
(place) is the feminine of manzil. Both the words makdnah and
manzilah are used in social and moral contexts, as the words makdn
and manzil are used in a physical context. We say, “You have a
manzilah (place of honor) in our heart,” or “X has a higher place in
our heart than Y.” There is a transmitted saying which states, “If
238 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

you want to know what manzilah you have in the eyes of Allah, you
_ should look at the manzilah you give to Allah in your heart. For
Allah places you in His heart where you place Him in your heart.”
the manzilah of Allah in one’s heart refers to the knowledge, love
and respect, and so on, which one has for Allah. Now when it is
clear that makdnah and manzilah are simply the feminines of makdn
and manzil, and the feminine always follows the masculine in word
and meaning and is subject to it, then the dignity of an idea in the
mind depends upon the dignity of the thing of which it is the idea. If
the idea corresponds with reality, it is true; otherwise, it is false.

It has been said that the ‘u/# of Allah is a matter of the heart and
means that He is above everything in the heart. That it is correct. But
it is correct because the ‘u/i of Allah in the heart corresponds to His
‘ula over everything in reality. Had He not been higher than
everything by Himself, His eminence in the heart will not be real. It
will have rather meant to regard something to be the highest whereas
it is not the highest.

The spatial transcendence of Allah 15 proved not only by the
transmitted texts of the Qur’4n and Sunnah but it is also proven by
reason and the original nature (fitrah) of man. As for the rational
proof, first, it is obviously true that of two existing beings, either
one will subsist in the other like an attribute or it will exist by itself
separate from the other. Second, when Allah created the world, He
either created it in Himself or external to Himself. The first
alternative is false. Either people reject it by agreement or it
necessarily implies that Allah is the locus of everything evil, nasty
and dirty, from which He is obviously far exalted. The second
alternative means that the world is outside the being of Allah. In that
case, the world will exist separately from Allah, and will be different
from Him. Obviously, it makes no sense to say that Allah is neither
one with the world nor different from it. The third point is that the
proposition that Allah is neither in the world nor outside it simply
amounts to the negation of His existence. Again, this makes no
sense: He exists either in the world or outside of it; there is no third
possibility. Since the first is definitely ruled out, only the second is
left, which is the truth.

As for the argument from the natural disposition (fitrah) of man,
let us note that all human beings naturally and spontaneously raise
their hands in prayer and look upwards when they beseech God.
They consciously think of God as above them when they humble

themselves to Him. Muhammad Ibn Jabir Al-Maqdisi wrote that

Sheikh Abii Ja‘far Al-Hamadhani once attended a lecture by Abt Al-
Ma‘ali Al-Juiwayni, commonly known as Imam al-Haramayn, in
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 239

which he was discussing the concept of Allah’s transcendence. He
said, “Allah existed and there was no Throne. And He is exactly as
He was at that time.” Sheikh Abit Ja‘far asked him, “Teacher, can
you explain the feeling which we naturally have in our hearts?
Whenever we say, ‘O Allah!’ we feel that we should look up. We
look neither nght nor left. How do you explain this feeling?”
Hearing that, Abi: Al-Ma‘ali hit his forehead with his hand and came
down from the pulpit. Abu Tahir wrote that he thought Abt Ja‘far
also stated that Abt Al-Ma‘ali burst into tears and said three times
that Al-Hamadhani had confounded and puzzled him. Abt Ja‘far
was pointing out that Allah has endowed the very nature of man
with the truth that He is above the world; this is not something that
needs to be learned. We feel in our hearts that when we pray to
God, we should look upwards to Him.

People have objected to this argument and said that it is not a
self-evident truth, and that many people have actually denied it. Had
it been an a priori truth, people would not have disputed it; it 1s
nothing more than a hunch. A detailed answer to this objection has
been given elsewhere. Here, suffice it to say that if reason has some
ground to accept their view, it certainly has much more ground to
accept ours; and if it rejects our view, it will reject their view to a
greater extent. If our view 1s wrong in the judgment of reason, theirs
is much more wrong. But if their view can be accepted by reason,
then our view 1s much more acceptable to reason. Both of us claim
that our view is self-evident and the other view is wrong.

If they claim that our view is a fiction, we may also accuse their
view of being fallacious. However, most human beings who are not
sophisticated — not from them or us — will agree with our view. And
if the verdict of the majority is accepted, our view is more likely to
be upheld than the view of our opponents. But if it is rejected, their
view must also be rejected. They have based their view on premises
which they claim are self-evident verdicts of human nature. But not
only their view, but the whole structure of rational argument will
then also fall to the ground. As for us, we at least have the revelation
to the prophets of all ages on our side, which they do not have,
while, at the same time, we possess rational arguments. Those
people also sometimes claim that most rational beings are with them,
but this is not true. Those who affirm the Creator of the world but
say that He is not above the world, or that He is neither outside the
world nor inside it, are only a small faction of rationalist thinkers. In
Islam, no one ever expounded this view before Jahm Ibn Safwan
and his followers.
240 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Some people reject this natural inclination and have said that
hands are raised in supplications because the sky is the giblah for
supplications as the Ka‘bah 15 the giblah for prayer. This 15 not
correct. We put our heads to the ground in prayer but the earth is not
the giblah. A number of points may be made in responding to this
argument. First, none among the Elders has ever said that the sky is
the giblah for supplications. Furthermore, Allah has never revealed
any statement that would support it. Since this is a religious matter,
we cannot imagine that the Elders and scholars were not aware of it.

Second, the giblah for supplications is the giblah of the prayers.
It 15 recommended to face the giblah during supplications. The
Prophet (peace be upon him) used to face the giblah on numerous
occasions while supplicating.*°’ Anyone who says that the giblah
for supplications is different from the giblah of the prayer or that
there are two giblahs, one being the Ka‘bah and the other the sky, is
a heretic and is going against the Muslim community.

Third, the giblah is what the worshiper faces. The Ka‘bah is a
giblah because we face it in the prayers, in supplication, in
remembering Allah (dhikr) and in offering sacrificial animals. We
also turn the face of a dying person and of the dead in the grave
towards it. This is why it 15 called wijhah or 15119821 as opposed to
istidbar. Istiqgbal means to turn one’s face to something while
istidbar means to turn one’s back to something. Hence, what one
points to with one’s head, hands or side is not called giblah, not
even metaphorically. If Heaven were the giblah of supplications, the
supplicant should have turned his face towards it, but we have not
been asked to do that. The direction in which hands are raised is
never called giblah, either literally or metaphorically. This is a
religious tenet, but there is no scriptural evidence that states that the
messengers were asked to face the sky while supplicating. In fact,
they were forbidden to do so.

It is quite natural in prayer to concentrate one’s mind and to
beseech earnestly. This is done by both Muslims and non-Muslims,
scholars and ignorant folk, particularly those who are caught in a
difficult situation. It is also very natural for man, when in distress,
to turn to God; this is something inherent in man. But the giblah is
something that can be subjected to abrogation and change, as the
original giblah was changed from Jerusalem to Makkah.*'® But
looking up in supplication is something innate in man. One who

309 Al-Bukhari, 3960; Muslim, 1794, 1763; At-Tirmidhi, 3081; 3172; Ahmad, 1:30,
32, 6:133, 180, 259.
319 A1-Bukhari, 40, 399, 4486, 4492, 7252; Muslim, 526; At-Tirmidhi, 2966.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 241

turns to the Ka‘bah in prayer knows that Allah 1s not in the Ka‘bah.
But one who beseeches Allah and turns to his Lord and Creator
hopes that His mercy will come down upon him from above.

This fact cannot be countered by pointing to the act of
prostration. Whoever puts his head to the ground submits to One
above him and humbles himself before Him; he never thinks that he
is bowing down to One Who is below on the ground. Bishr ‏لذ‎
‎Marisi is reported to have said, while in prostration, “Glory to my
Lord, the Most Low.” Exalted is Allah above this blasphemy.
Whoever can go to this extent in denying Allah’s fawgiyyah (being
above the world) is very likely to turn into a disbelieving heretic
(zindiq), 11 Allah’s mercy does not redeem him. Such people are
usually far away from righteousness. Allah has said, “We (too) will
turn to confusion their hearts and their eyes, even as they refused to
believe in the first instance” [6:110]; and, “When they went wrong,
Allah let their hearts go astray” [61:5]. One who does not seek the
truth from its signs is left to be doomed. May Allah save us and
forgive us.

As for the author’s words, “His creation is not able to
encompass Him,” this means that no one can encompass Him in
knowledge, vision or any other manner of encompassing. He
encompasses all while nothing encompasses Him.

(62) We say with faith, affirmation and submission that
Allah took Abraham as an intimate friend and that He
spoke directly to Moses.

Allah has Himself said, “Allah took Abraham for an intimate
friend (khalil)” [4:125]; and, “Allah spoke directly to Moses”
[4:164]. Khillah, from which comes the word khalil (intimate
friend), means complete love. The Jahmiyyah deny the possibility of
love between Allah and man. They say that there can be no love
unless the lover and the beloved have something common between
them. Since there is nothing in common between the contingent and
Allah, there can be no love between them. Similarly, they deny that —
Allah spoke to Moses, as we have already mentioned. The first to
expound these ideas in Islam was Al-Ja‘d Ibn Dirham. He began to
preach these ideas in the first quarter of the second century after the
Hijrah. The governor of Iraq and the Eastern Province of that time,
Khalid Ibn ‘Abdullah Al-Qasri, called him to his court in Wasit. He
then addressed the people on the day of ‘Id al-Adha and said,
“People, perform the sacrifice and may Allah accept them. I am
going to offer Al-Ja‘d Ibn Dirham in sacrifice for he says that Allah
242 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

did not take Abraham as His friend nor did He speak to Moses.” He
then went down from the pulpit and killed Al-Ja‘d. He acted on the
advice of the jurists of his time from among the Successors.*'' May
Allah reward him for what he did for Islam and the Muslims.

Al-Jahm Jbn Safwan took the philosophy of Al-Ja‘d,
propagated, elaborated and defended it. The group known as the
Jahmiyyah are named after him. He was killed by Salim Ibn Ahwaz,
the governor of Khurasan.’'” These ideas were passed on to the
Mu‘tazilah, the followers of ‘Amr Ibn ‘Ubayd. Their strength grew
during the reign of Al-Ma’min. It reached the point where the
leading scholars of the Muslims were persecuted and asked to agree
with the ruling theology. The foundation of that thought 15 found
with the polytheists and Sabaeans. They reject the notion that Allah
took Abraham as an intimate friend or that He spoke to Moses. They
said that because khillah means complete love which overpowers
the lover. In support of this suggestion, they quote the lines of a

oet:
P “You have permeated (takhallalta) me like the soul.
That it is why khalil is called khalil””"?

But the love (khillah and muhibbah) which 1s attributed to Allah
is what behooves Him as is the case with all His other attributes.
The love that the verse speaks of is alluded to in a hadith in the
Sahih from Abi Sa‘id Al-Khudri from the Prophet (peace be upon
him) who said, “If I were to take anyone from among the people of
the earth for a khalil, I would have taken Abt Bakr as a khalil. But
your companion (that is, the Prophet himself) is the khalil of
Allah.”?'* Another version states, “I have no relationship to any
khalil (of this world). If I were to take a khalil from the inhabitants
of the earth, I would have taken Abt Bakr as a khailil.” In yet
another version, the words are, “Allah has taken me as a khalil as
He had taken Abraham as a khalil.”’'? the Prophet (peace be upon

*''Aba Al-Haytham Khalid Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Zayd Al-Qasri (d. 126/744) was the
governor of Iraq during the reign of the Umayyad Caliph Hisham (105/725-125/743).
For details concerning this event, see Ibn Athir, A/-Kamal (Beirut: Dar SAadir,
1399/1979), 5:160; Ibn Taghri, An-Nujum az-Zahirah (Cairo: Dar Al-Kutub Al-
Misrtyyah, n.d.), 1:322.

3!2Ibn Jarir At-Tabari, Tarikh, 7:330.

*See Ibn Al-Qayyim, Rawdat al-Muhibbin wa Nuzhat al-Mushtagin (Ahmad Ubayd,
ed.; Cairo: Matba‘at As-Sa‘adah, 1375/1956), pp. 47-49.

*Discussed earlier. Recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

*!5 Also discussed earlier. Also authentic.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 243

him) made it clear that it was not proper for him to have a khalil
from the people, but if that were possible, the person most
deserving to be his khalil would be Abii Bakr. At the same time,
though, on different occasions, he stated that he loved certain
people. For example, he said to Mu‘adh, “By Allah, I love you.’””’®
He made a similar statement to the Ansar of Madinah. Zayd Ibn
Harithah and his son ‘Usamah were known to be beloved to the
Prophet (peace be upon him). There are other examples of this
nature. ‘Amr Ibn Al-*As once asked the Prophet, “What person is
most beloved to you?” He answered, “‘A’ishah.” He said, “From
among the men?” He answered, “Her father.’”'’

It is clear from these ahddith that khillah is a special kind of
love. Its object is loved for its own sake and not for any other
external reason. Obviously, what is loved for some external reason
falls short of that which is loved solely for itself. Since khiillah is
the most perfect love and permeates the whole being of the lover, it
cannot have more than one object. That it is why, when Allah took
Abraham as a khalil, and the latter prayed for a son, and Allah gave
him Isma‘il, and Isma‘il began to attract the love of Abraham, Allah
disliked it that someone else should take the place He had solely in
his heart. He therefore tested Abraham. He asked him to sacrifice
his son so that his khillah would be established over his love for his
son. Abraham submitted to Allah and was ready to carry out His
command. When he intended to slaughter his son, his khillah for
Allah was proved, and. its supremacy over the love for his son was
established. At that moment, Allah rescinded His command, and
Abraham offered a great animal for sacrifice as ransom for his son.
What Allah had required from Abraham was absolute submission to
His command. When this was proved, killing the son ceased to be
something good, consequently that command was withdrawn. From
that time, animal sacrifice was instituted for his followers until the
end of the world.

The Prophet (peace be upon him) shares the khillah of Allah
with Abraham, as was discussed before. He also shares with Moses
the honor of Allah’s direct speech; he was given that honor when he
was taken for the journey by night, known as the isra’. Those
ahdadith were discussed earlier.

*1© abu Dawid, As-Salah, 1522; Ahmad, 5:245, 247; An-Nasa’i, 3:53; Ibn Hibban,
2345; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 1:273. It is an authentic hadith.

*!7Al-Bukhari, 3622, 4358; Muslim, Fada’il as-Sahadbah, 2384; At-Tirmidhi, A/-
Managib, 3885; Ahmad, 4:203.

244 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Here comes a famous question. If Prophet Muhammad (peace
be upon him) 15 considered superior to Abraham, how is that we ask
for blessings upon the Prophet in a manner similar to those that were
bestowed upon Abraham (in the prayer)? the one whom you are
asking to be similar must be superior to the one who 15 seeking to be
similar to him. How can these two contradictory facts be reconciled?
Scholars have given many different answers to that question but
space does not allow a detailed response.

One of the best answers is that “the family of Abraham” includes

prophets but the family of Muhammad does not have anyone else
who was a prophet. If someone seeks blessings for the Prophet and
his family similar to those that were conferred upon Abraham and
his family, which included prophets, the family of Muhammad will
be granted what was given to them, for among them there are none
who reach the level of the prophets. What is left is only that
additional portion that is for the prophets and, therefore, they have
some distinctions that are not found in anyone else.

An even better response is that Prophet Muhammad (peace be
upon him) is from the family of Abraham. In fact, he is the best of
the family of Abraham. Therefore, when we say, “as you blessed
the family of Abraham’, this reaches the Prophet and all the other
prophets who were descendants of Abraham. Furthermore, it
reaches Abraham himself. Allah says, “Lo! Allah preferred Adam
and Noah and the family of Abraham and the family of ‘Imran above
(all His creatures)” [3:33], and included in the family of Abraham
and the family of ‘Imran are Abraham and ‘Imran themselves. In
another verse, Allah says, “save the family of Lot, whom We
rescued in the last watch of the night,” and here the family of Lot
includes Lot himself. Finally, Allah says, “And (remember) when
We did deliver from Pharaoh’s folk” [2:49], and “‘cause Pharaoh’s
folk to enter the most awful doom” [40:46], and these verses include
Pharaoh as part of Pharaoh’s folk.

Therefore — and Allah knows best — most of the narrations on
the prayer upon the Prophet state either, “as You blessed the family
of Abraham” or, as many state, “as You blessed Abraham.” It is
rarely narrated, “as You blessed Abraham and the family of
Abraham.”’'* This is because — and Allah knows best — “as you
blessed Abraham” obviously includes his family and “as you
blessed the family of Abraham” obviously includes Abraham
himself. Similarly, when Abt Awfa brought his alms to the Prophet

3!81t is narrated in this manner in the hadith of Abi Sa’id Al-Khudri in Al-Bukhari,
4798, 6358; in the hadith of Ka‘b Ibn ‘Ujrah in Ahmad, 4:244; and elsewhere.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 245

(peace be upon him), the Prophet (peace be upon him) prayed for
him, saying, “O Allah, bestow blessings upon the family of Abi
Awfa.’”’’ As for those who say, “as You blessed Abraham and the
family of Abraham,” Abraham is not included among the family
since he was explicitly mentioned separately.

Since the household of Abraham was the most honored
household in the world, in general, Allah blessed them with special
characteristics, which include the following. Prophethood and
scripture were to be found in his family. After the trme of Abraham,
all the prophets were from his descendants. Second, Allah made
them leaders who guide by Allah’s command until the Day of
Judgment. Everyone who enters Paradise of Allah’s devoted
servants after the ttme of Abraham, enter it by following his path
and call. Third, Allah chose for Himself two khalils from this
family, as was already mentioned. Fourth, Allah made the members
of this family leaders for the people. Allah says, “Lo! I have
appointed you a leader for mankind. (Abraham) said: ‘And of my
offspring (will there be leaders)?’ He said: My covenant includes not
wrongdoers” [2:124]. Fifth, it was by his hands that the House,
which stands as a place of prayer, a place of safety, direction of
prayer and a place of pilgrimage, was erected. It is as if that House,
having been erected by that family, was bestowing two acts of
honor. Sixth, Allah commanded His servants to pray for the
members of that household. And there are other ways by which
Abraham was given special blessings.

(63) We believe in the angels, the prophets and the
books that were sent down to the messengers. We bear
witness that they were all following the path of manifest
truth.

These are some of the pillars of faith. Allah says, “The
Messenger believes in what has been revealed to him from his Lord,
as do the men of faith: each one of them believes in Allah, His
angels, His books and His messengers”’ [2:285]. He also says, “It is
not righteousness that you turn your faces towards east or west; but
it is righteousness to believe in Allah, and the Last Day, the angels,
and the Book and the prophets” [2: 177].

Allah has made faith to mean faith in all those matters. Allah
calls those who believe in all of those aspects Believers. Allah

19 Al-Bukhari, 1497, 4166, 6332, 6359; Muslim, 1078; Aba Dawid, 1590; An-
Nasa’i, 5:31; Ibn Majah, 1796.

246 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

describes those who disbelieve in those as disbelievers. Allah has
said, “Anyone who denies Allah, His angels, His books, His
messengers and the Day of Judgment has gone far, far astray”
[4:13]. The Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) stated, in a
hadith recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim known as the hadith of
the Angel Gabriel, in which Gabriel asked the Prophet (peace be

upon him) about imdn (faith), “Faith is that you believe in Allah,
His Angels, His books, His messengers and the Last Day, and that
things, good and bad, are fore-ordained by Allah.’”*”°

These fundamental aspects of faith are matters agreed upon by
all the prophets and messengers (peace be upon them all). No people
truly believe in these principles except those who follow the
messengers.

Philosophers and heretics who oppose the prophets deny these
truths in different ways. Philosophers, so-called “wise men”, are the
worst enemies. Anyone who is aware of the reality of what they say
knows that they actually do not believe in Allah, nor His
messengers, nor His books, nor His angels, nor the Day 01
Judgment. Their thought is that Allah is only an existence without an
essence, that He does not know particulars, though everything that
exists in reality is a particular being. They also believe that He does
not do things with His power and will, and that the world proceeds
from Him of necessity from eternity to eternity. If they say that the
world is something made by Him, they say so only because they
want to live in peace with the Believers. The truth is that the world
for them is neither made nor created nor done by Allah. They also
deny His other attributes, such as hearing, seeing, and so on. That
is their belief in Allah

As for Allah’s revealed books, in their opinion they are not the
speech of Allah. For them He neither speaks to anybody or ever
speaks a word. He has never said anything, nor will He speak in the —
future. The Qur’an, they say, has descended from the Active
Intellect upon the heart of a pure and intelligent person distinguished
from other people by three characteristics: a sharp mind capable of
comprehending things better than others; a strong will that can
manipulate material things and change one form to another; and a
powerful imagination that can present ideal powers in sensible
forms, which is their understanding of the angels. They do not
believe angels to be independent beings existing in reality, ascending
and descending, moving from one place to another, or appearing to

3201 iscussed earlier, recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 247

prophets and talking to them. For them, they are only mental
realities having no real existence 1n the outer world.

As for the Last Day, they vehemently deny it. They do not
believe that the world will disintegrate, the heavens will shatter and
fall, the stars will fade, the sun and moon will be rolled up, or that
men will be raised from their graves and taken to Paradise or Hell.
All this is imagery for them which has been stated for the
consumption of the common folk. They describe nothing real and
certainly do not refer to what the followers of the prophets believe.
This is the faith of this wretched and hateful people regarding Allah,
His angels, His books, His messengers and the Last Day — the five
fundamental of Islam.

The Mu‘tazilah replace the five fundamental aspects of belief in
Islam with their own five fundamental premises, and by doing so,
destroy much of the religion. They base their faith on the concept of
body and incident, which they call subject and attribute. From these
attributes, or incidents, they derive the contingency of their subjects,
the bodies. In the same way, they expound the concepts of tawhid
and negate divine attributes, which they equate with the attributes of
a body. They misinterpreted Allah’s acts and His fore-ordainment
and call their new concept justice (‘ad/). Then they developed their
concept of prophethood and law, commands and prohibitions,
promises and threats. They believe that one who commits a major
sin 15 in a state intermediate between faith and not having faith, and
that the punishment which has been promised in the Hereafter will
be carried out without fail. They further believe that these ideas
should be preached to the people, and that they must be asked to
believe in them. This is their concept of enjoining good and
eradicating evil. On the basis of this injunction, they justify armed
revolt against rulers. These are, in short, their five fundamental
principles, which they put in place of the five principles of faith
expounded by the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him).

The later Rafidah determined the basic premises to be four: unity
of Allah (tawhid), justice (‘adl), prophecy (nubuwwah) and imadmah
(belief in the imams).

The principles of the Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah are > the same
as what the Messenger expounded, since faith is essentially in what
he taught. We elaborated this point earlier. The last two verses of

Strat Al-Baqarah state these principles succinctly. That it 1s why
these two verses are of eminent distinction. In Al-Bukhari and
Muslim it is recorded from Abt Man‘ud ‘Uqbah Ibn ‘Amr that the
248 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Prophet (peace be upon him) said, “Whoever reads the last two
verses of Strat Al-Baqarah at night, they will suffice for him.’””'

Muslim recorded from Ibn ‘Abbas, who said, “Gabriel was once
sitting with the Prophet (peace be upon him) when he heard the
sound of something breathing above his head. He raised his head
and said, ‘That is the sound of a door in the sky that has been
opened today for the first time. An angel has come down from it
who has never come down before.’ The angel greeted them and
said, ‘I bear glad tidings. You are given two lights which have not
been given to any prophet before you. They are the Opening Chapter
(Al-Fatihah) of the Qur’an and the last two verses of Strat Al-
Bagarah. You will not recite a word from them that will not be
granted to you.””?””

Abt Talib Al-Makki said that the principles of faith are seven,
meaning the five mentioned in those two verses, and belief in
Allah’s fore-ordainment and belief in Paradise and Hell. That is
correct. They are proven by clear and authentic texts. We cited them
in the discussion of Allah’s unity and prophecy in the earlier
sections.

As for the angels, they have been assigned to various jobs taking
care of the heavens and the earth. In fact, every movement 111 the
world is made by them. Allah says, “They arrange to do the
commands (of their Lord)” [79:5], and “distribute (blessings) by
command” [51:5]. The reference in these verses is to the angels,
according to the people of faith and the followers of the messengers.
Those who actually disbelieve in the messengers and deny the
Creator say that they refer to the stars.

_ The Qur’an and the Sunnah point to different groups of angels
who have been deputed to various things: mountains, clouds, rain,
ovaries of the mothers to see that the fetus develops properly, to
men and women in order to observe and record whatever they do, to
the dead in the grave to ask them about religion, to the heavens to
move them, to the sun and moon, to fire in order to ignite it or
punish the wicked and destroy their houses, to gardens in order to
grow shrubbery, and so on.

The angels are the greatest of Allah’s troops. They include
(those referred to in the following verse:) “by the emissary angels
(sent) one after another... and scatter things far and wide, then

321 Al-Bukhari, 4008, 5008, 5009, 5040, 5051; Muslim, Salat al-Musafirin, 808;
Abi Dawid, As-Salah, 1397; At-Tirmidhi, Thawdb al-Qur’an, 2881; Ibn Majah,
Igamat as-Salah, 1369; Ahmad, 4:118, 121, 122.

*?Muslim, Salat al-Musdfirin, 806; An-Nasa’i, [ftitah as-Salah, 2:138.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 249

separate them from another, then spread abroad a message”’ [77:1-
5]; “by the (angels) who tear out the souls (of the wicked) with
violence; by those who glide along (on errands of mercy), then
press forward as in a race, then arrange to do (the commands of
their Lord)” [79:1-5]; “by those who arrange themselves in ranks,
and are so strong in repelling (evil), and thus proclaim the message
(of Allah)” [37:1-3].

In all these verses, the reference is not to individual angels but to
their groups, parties and armies. Some of them sprinkle mercy,
some inflict punishment, some bear the divine Throne, some are
engaged in worshiping, praising and glorifying Allah only, and so
on. No one knows how many kinds of angels there are except
Allah.

The word malak (angel) means a messenger who is commanded
to carry out the commands of his Sender. Angels, therefore, have no
say in the command, which is completely at the will of Allah, the
One, the Irresistible. Theirs is but to follow His command: “They
speak not before He speaks, and they act (in all things) by His
command. He knows what is before them and what is behind them.
And they offer no intercession except for those who are acceptable,
and they stand in awe and reverence of His (glory)” [21:27-28].
“They all revere their Lord, high above them, and they do all that
they are commanded” [16:50].

They are honorable servants of Allah. Some of them fall into
ranks, some sing His glory. Each of them knows his place, which
he never transgresses. Each carries out, without fail, what he has
been asked. The best among them are those who are in Allah’s
presence, who “are not too proud to serve Him, nor are they weary
of His service; who celebrate His praise, night and day, and do not
ever flag or pause” [21:19-20].

They are headed by three angels: Gabriel, Michael and Israfil.
These three are entrusted with life. Gabriel brings the revelation,
which is the life of the heart and souls. Michael takes care of the rain
by which comes the life of the earth, plants and animals. Israfil is in
charge of the blowing of the Trumpet which leads to the reviving of
the dead.

Angels are thus Allah’s messengers to His creatures, His
ambassadors to His servants, who take His commands to various
parts of the universe and who report to Him on what has happened.
“The heavens seem to crack under their weight. And why shouldn’t
that be the case when there is not a place the size of four fingers in
the universe which is not occupied by an angel worshiping His
250 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

Lord, standing, bowing and prostrating before Him.”’*’ Every day,
seventy thousand of them enter into the Much-Frequented House (of
Allah) and they never return to it.**

The Qur’an is filled with mention of the angels, their categories
and their grades. Sometimes Allah mentions them along with His
name, their blessings along with His blessings, and their honor
along with His Own honor. He has stated that they bear His Throne,
that they are close to Him, that they revere Him, that they are
revered beings in themselves, that they are noble, pure, powerful
and sincere. For example, “Each one (of them) believes in Allah,
His angels, His books and His messengers” [2:285]; “There is no
god but He: that is the witness of Allah, His angels, and those
imbued with knowledge, standing firm on justice” [3:18]; “He it is
Who sends blessings on you, as do His angels, that He may bring
you out from the depths of darkness into light” [33:43]; “Those who
sustain the Throne (of Allah) and those around it sing glory and
praise to their Lord; believe in Him; and implore forgiveness for
those who believe” [40: 7); “And you will see the angels surrounding
the Throne on all sides, singing glory and praise to their Lord”
[39:75]; “But they are servants raised in honor” [21:26]; “Those
who are near to your Lord disdain not to do Him worship; they
celebrate His praises; and bow down before Him” [7:206]; “But if
the disbelievers are arrogant, no matter; for in the presence of your
Lord are those who celebrate His praises by night and by day. And
they never flag” [41:38]; “(They) are kind and honorable” [82:11];
“(They are) honorable, pious and just” [80:16]; “To it bear witness
those nearest (to Allah)” [83:22]; and, “They do not strain their ears
in the direction of the Exalted Assembly” [37:8] the ahddith, too,
mention them often. Therefore, belief in the angels 15 one of the five
basic foundations that form the pillars of faith.

People have debated the question as to who 15 superior, angels
or human beings who are pious. It 15 said that the Ahl as-Sunnah
believe that pious men, or at least the prophets among them, are
superior to the angels. The Mu‘tazilah, on the contrary, believe in
the superiority of the angels. As for the Ash‘aris, some have no
opinion on this issue and others are inclined to believe in the
superiority of the angels. This opinion is also held by a group of the
Ahl as-Sunnah and the Sifis. Shi‘l scholars say that all the imams
are superior to the angels, and have exalted some categories of men

This is found in a hadith in At-Tirmidhi, 2313; Ibn Majah, 4190; Ahmad, 5:173.
Its chain is weak but it is supported by corroborating narrations.
*°4Part of a long hadith on intercession recorded in Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 251

over some categories of angels, and vice-versa. However, no one
worth mention has said that the angels are superior to some prophets
rather than others.

I was very reluctant to discuss this issue, for it does not avail
much and 15 quite insignificant. It approximates those things that one
is not concerned with. “From the best Islam is for a person to leave
those things that do not concern him.’”°?°

Moreover, the Sheikh (At-Tahawi) has not touched upon it,
either negatively or positively. Probably he deliberately refrained
from entering into discussion of it. That work mentions the
questions that Abt Hanifah did not respond to, among which is the
question of whether the angels or the prophets are superior.

Our duty is only to believe in the angels and the prophets. We
are not required to believe that one of them is superior to the other.
Had it been a duty, there would have been some text to guide us on
this issue. Allah has stated, “This day I have perfected (and
completed) for you your religion” [5:3], and “And your Lord 1s
never forgetful” [19:64].

In the Sahih, it states, “Allah has obligated the obligations, so do
not neglect them. He has set the boundaries, so do not go beyond
them. He has prohibited some things, so do not violate them. About
some things He has been silent out of compassion for you, not out
of forgetfulness, so do not seek after them.”’’° It is best not to say
anything about this matter, either affirming or denying any position.

One cannot say that this question is similar to others that are
derived from the Book and the Sunnah, because therein the evidence
is sufficient to give their signs, God willing. What has led me to
discuss this topic is the statement of those ignorant and rude people
that the angel is a servant to the Prophet or that some of the angels
are servants of human beings, referring to the angels in charge of
human beings, and other statements that go against Islam and are
improper.

Claiming one species to be superior to another — if done out of
bigotry and preyudice — is to be rejected. This question is similar to
the question of the superiority of one prophet over another. On that
question there is a clear text, which states, “Of those messengers,

*?>Discussed earlier; ilt is an authentic hadith.

This hadith is not in either of the two Sahihs, as the commentator implies. Instead,
it was recorded by Ad-Daraqutni 4:184, Al-Hakim, 4115, and Al-Bayhaqi, 10:12, 13.
The chain of this hadith is weak. Some scholars declare the hadith hasan, based on
supporting evidence. Al-Albani once did so and then later he discovered, as he stated,
that he was wrong in doing so. Hence, he concludes that the hadith is weak.

252 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

some of whom We have caused to excel others...” [2:253], and
“And We preferred some of the prophets above others” [17:55]. We
discussed that topic earlier while commenting on the author’s
words, “And the leader of the messengers,” that is, the Prophet
(peace be upon him).

The aspect to be considered is what is the strongest evidence and
not what is the more famous statement just because some of the
heretics agreed to it after the question was something that the Ahl as-
Sunnah disagreed about. Abt Hanifah originally stated that the
angels were superior to human beings and then he took the opposite
opinion. Apparently, one of his stances was also to refuse to give an
opinion on this question.

The evidence on this question for both sides point to the virtue
of each species and not the superiority of one over the other. About
the virtue of each species there is no dispute.

Taj ad-Din Al-Fazari (may Allah have mercy on him) wrote a
treatise entitled Al-Isharah fi al-Basharah fi Tafdil al-Bashr ‘ala al-
. Malak. At the end of that treatise he wrote:

Know that this question is one of the innovations of the
theologians. It was not discussed in the early years of this
nation nor by the great scholars who came afterwards. No
principle of faith rests upon this question, nor is it related to
many religious points. For that reason, many who wrote about
faith did not discuss this question in their writings.
Furthermore, a number of people specifically forbade
discussing this issue. Every scholar who wrote on this topic
had some weakness and confusion in their discussion of this
point.

Among the proofs given for the prophets’ superiority over the
angels is that Allah commanded the angels to bow down to Adam.
This is evidence that he was superior to them. For that reason, : 5
refused and became proud, saying, “Do you see this creature which
You have honored over me?” [17:62]

The others reply that the angels’ prostrating to Adam was in
obedience to a command from their Lord; it was worship and
submission to Him and an act of honor and respect for Adam. But
this does not necessarily mean that Adam was superior, in the same
way that Jacob’s prostrating to his son Joseph does not necessarily
mean that Joseph was superior to him or that the Ka‘bah is superior
to people because they bow down toward it in fulfilling the
command of their Lord.

As for Iblis’ refusal to bow down, he was pitting his own
opinion and false analogy against the command by saying that he
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 253

was better than Adam. That is the minor or first premise. The major
premise is not stated but is only implied. The major premise 15 that a
superior being will not bow down to an inferior being. Both of these
premises are false. As for the first premise, clay is superior to fire in
many of its attributes. Therefore, Iblis’ constitution deceived him
and he became proud and refused to bow down. Among the
attributes of fire is the desire for superiority and being inconstant,
fickle and volatile. Furthermore, it ruins everything that touches it
with destruction and burning. But Adam’s element helped him in
repentance, calmness, submission and obedience to the command of
Allah. He admitted his sin and sought forgiveness. Among the
attributes of clay are constancy, calmness, composure, humility,
submission, fear and humility. Whatever comes into contact with it
grows and develops and 15 blessed. This is the opposite of fire.

As for the second premise, that a superior will not bow down to
an inferior, this is also false. Prostration is an act of obedience to
Allah and a fulfillment of His command. If Allah commanded His
servants to bow down to a rock, it will be obligatory upon them to
hurry and fulfill that command. But that is not evidence that what is
being bowed down to is superior to the one prostrating, although
there might be an aspect of honor and respect, in which case it is
evidence that the object being bowed down to is virtuous. These
people also argue that Iblis’ words, “Do you see this creature which
You have honored over me” [17:62], could have been uttered after
he was thrown out of Paradise for refusing to bow down to Adam
and not before. If that is the case, it cannot be used as evidence on
this question.

Another argument presented is that the angels have minds but
they do not have desires, while the prophets have both minds and
desires. Since they prevent themselves from following their own
desires and going after those things they are naturally inclined to,
they must be superior. The others respond by saying that perhaps
the angels achieve, through their constant obedience, worship and
constancy in such acts, what the prophets achieve through the denial
of their desires. At the same time, the length of time that the angels
worship Allah is much greater.

Another argument is that Allah has made the angels messengers
to the prophets, emissaries between Him and them. But this
argument can be used by those who say the angels are superior, and
in fact, it is a stronger proof for them. In that case the argument is
that the prophets are messengers and they are superior to those they
are sent to by virtue of their message. Therefore, the angels who are
messengers to them are superior to them as the messenger angel is a
messenger to the human messenger.

111 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI
254 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

(Those who consider the prophets superior) quote Allah’s
words, “And He taught Adam all the names...” [2:31] (as evidence
of his superiority over the angels). The others reply that this is
evidence of his excellence but not of his superiority. Neither Adam
nor the angels knew anything except what Allah had taught them.
Khidr was not superior to Moses because of the knowledge that he
possessed that Moses did not. Moses and his servant went out in
search of knowledge by going to Khidr. Moses clearly sought
knowledge from him. Khidr told him, “You are following some
knowledge from Allah...” Similarly, Hudhud was not superior to
Solomon because of the knowledge that he had that Solomon did not
have.

Another argument is the verse, “What prevents you from
bowing down before that which I created with My hands?” [38:75].
The others reply again by stating that this is a proof of his
excellence, not his superiority. Otherwise, one must say that Adam
is also superior to Muhammad (peace be upon both of them). If you
say, “He is one of his progeny,” then his progeny includes both
pious and impious people. In fact, on the Day of Judgment, when it
is said to Adam, “Send those of your descendants to the Hell-fire,”
nine hundred ninety-nine out of every one thousand will go to Hell
and one will go to Paradise.**’ What is the use of that superiority
that leads to only one of one thousand being saved.

Another argument is the statement of ‘Abdullah Ibn Salam,
“Allah never created a creature more honorable to Him than
Muhammad...’””’* the first question about this is whether it is an
authentic statement from him. The second question is whether it is a
correct statement, as it is possible that it is something derived from
the books of the Jews and Christians.

There is also the hadith of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr in which the
Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said, “The angels said, ‘O
our Lord, you gave the humans the world to eat, drink and wear
clothing in, and we glorify Your praises and we do not eat, drink or
play. Therefore, as you gave them this world, make the Hereafter
for us.” He said, ‘I will not treat the righteous descendants of the
one I created with My hands the same as the one to which I said,

“Be,” and it was.”’” This was recorded by At-Tabarani.’”’

**’This is part of a hadith narrated by Abii Sa‘id Al-Khudri and recorded in Al-Bukhari
(3348: 4741, 6530, 7483) and Muslim (222).

_ *8A1-Bayhagqi, Dala’il an-Nibuwwah, 5:485-486; Al-Hakim, 4:568-569.

°° At-Tabarani, A/l-Kabir and Al-Awsat. In both of these ahadith’s chains there are
narrators who are considered liars.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 255

‘Abdullah Ibn Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Hanbal recorded
from ‘Urwah Ibn Ruwaym, who said that an Ansari narrated to him
from the Prophet (peace be upon him), “The angels said...” That
narration includes, “...they sleep and rest. Allah says, ‘No (I will
not do what you ask. They make the same request three times and
after each time Allah says, ‘No.””’*°

The first problem with this argument is the authenticity of these
ahddith. There is some discussion concerning their chains and some
question concerning their texts. How can one think of the angels
repeatedly asking such a thing of Allah! Allah has stated about the
angels, “They speak not until He has spoken, and they act by His
command” [21:27]. Can anyone conceive of them being 1n their state
and actually longing for the desires of humans? Sleep is the brother
of death; how could they be envious about it? How could they be
envious about wasted pastimes (lahu) when they are a type of
falsehood?

The others argue that the situation is the opposite. It was Iblis
who was able to whisper to Adam and deceive him with his desire to
be an angel, as is stated in the Qur’an, “Your Lord forbade you this
tree only, lest you should become angels or become of the
immortals” [7:20]. This shows that the superiority of the angels is
something ingrained in the nature of man. This is supported by
Allah’s statement, quoting the women who cut their wrists upon
seeing Joseph, “Allah Blameless! This is not a human being. This 5
none other than some gracious angel” [12:31].

Allah also says, “Say (Muhammad, to the disbelievers): I say
not unto you (that) I possess the treasures of Allah, nor that I have
knowledge of the Unseen, and I say not unto you: I am an angel”
[6:50]. The first group (who say that prophets are superior) state
that this was when it was ingrained in him that the angels were a
great and beautiful creation that were able to perform stupendous
acts. This was especially true among the Arabs, who considered the
angels great beings, to the point that they called the angels the
daughters of Allah. Allah be exalted high above what they say.

Allah also says, “Lo! Allah preferred Adam and Noah and the
family of Abraham and the family of ‘Imran above (all His
creatures) (‘alamin)” [3:33]. The other group answers this by saying
that the word ‘alamin does not necessarily refer to all of His
creatures. In fact, in different contexts it means different things.

*°Recorded by ‘Abdullah Ibn Ahmad, Kitab as-Sunnah, 902; Al-Bayhaqi, Al-Asma’
wa as-Siffat, 316-317. Its chain is weak.

256 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahawiyyah

Note the following verses, ““That he may be a warner to the peoples
(‘alaminy” [25:1]; “They said: ‘Have we not forbidden you to
(entertain) anyone (‘alamin)” [15:70]; “What! Of all creatures
(‘alamin) do you come unto males?” [26:165]; “And We chose them
purposely above all creatures (‘alamin)” [44:32].

Another verse used as evidence 1s, “Lo! Those who believe and
do good deeds, they are the best of created beings (bariyyahy’
[98:7]. The word bariyyah comes from the word bar’a which means
created being. This confirms that the righteous human is the best of
creation. The others respond to this by saying that they become the
best creation because they believe and do good deeds. The angels
are even more befitting of this description; they do not tire or rest in
their devotions. Therefore, this could not mean that human beings
are better than the angels. This is in accordance with those who
recite the word bari’ah with a hamza. As for the reading with yd, the
ya could have been derived from the hamza, or it could be from the
word bard, which 15 clay, as Al-Fara said, according to what Al-
Juhari narrated from him in As-Sihah. In that case, the meaning is
that the pious are the best creation created from clay. Therefore, this
statement does not apply to those who were not created from clay.

The people of the first group say that when they talk about the
superiority of pious human beings they are talking about them when
they reach perfection, reach their goal and the end of their striving,
when they enter Paradise and achieve the closeness to Allah, live in
the highest ranks, and they increase their love of Allah by getting
closer to Him, His appearing to them and their being able to look
upon His noble face. The others reply that the question here is
whether they only reach that stage, being above the angels, or they
are equal in that. If it is confirmed that they will be in ranks above
the angels, then the claim is acceptable, otherwise the argument is
not acceptable.

From the proofs that the angels are superior to humans is the
Qur’anic verse, “The Messiah will never scorn to be a servant unto
Allah; nor will the favored angels” [4:172]. It is confirmed from a
semantic point of view that a sentence like that demonstrates the
superiority of the coupled word over the antecedent. For example, it
is not acceptable to say, “The minister will not scorn to be a servant
of the King, nor will the soldier or guard.” Instead, one ought to
say, “The soldier does not scorn to be a servant of the King, nor
does the minister.” In that way, you precede from the lesser to the
greater. Therefore, if it is confirmed that the angels are superior to
Jesus, it is confirmed that they are superior to all others, as no one
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 257

says that they are better than some prophets and not better than
others.

The others reply to this in many ways. The best of their replies —
or one of their best — is that there is no dispute concerning the
superiority of the strength, endurance and greatness of the angels in
their worship, submission, humility and so on. Jesus does not scorn
such an act, nor will one who has more ability or is of a stronger
nature than he. This order of superiority in this manner does not
necessarily imply superiority in all other manners.

Another verse quoted is, “Say (Muhammad): I say not unto you
that I possess the treasures of Allah, nor that I have knowledge of
the Unseen; and I say not unto you: Lo! I am an angel” [6:50]. This
implies that had he said such a thing he would be claiming to be
something greater than he is, but he would never make such a claim.
The others answer this by saying that the disbelievers were saying,
“What ails this messenger that he eats food and walks in the
markets?” [25:7], wherefore he was commanded to tell them that he
was a human being like them who was in need of what human
beings need concerning earning of livelihood, food and drink, and
that he was not one of the angels that Allah has made with no need
for food or drink. Therefore, this does not necessarily imply a
general kind of superiority.

From the hadith, Muslim recorded from Abt Hurayrah that the
Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said, “The strong Believer
is better and more beloved to Allah than the weak Believer, but in
both of them there is goodness.”°*! It is well known that the strength
of a human does not come anywhere near the strength of an angel.
The others reply by saying that the apparent meaning of the hadith is
in reference to humans — Allah knows best — and does not in general
include angels.

There is another hadith in the Sahih from Abit Hurayrah, in
which the Prophet (peace be upon him) stated, from among the
things he narrated from his Lord, “Allah said, I am as My servant
thinks I am. I am with him when he makes mention of Me. If he
makes mention of Me to himself, I make mention of him to Myself.
If he makes mention of Me in an assembly, I make mention of him
in an assembly better than it...”*** This is a clear text concerning
superiority. The others state that it could imply better for the one
who is remembering Him and not better in a general sense.

3!Muslim, 2664; Ibn Majah, 79, 4168; Ahmad, 2:366, 370.
332 AJ-Bukhari, 7405, 7505, 7537; Muslim, 2675.

258 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Ibn Khuzaymah recorded from Anas that the Messenger of Allah
(peace be upon him) said, “When I was sitting the angel Gabriel
came. He struck me between my shoulders. I stood next to a tree
like a bird’s nest. I sat on one of them (one of the branches) and he
sat on the other. The tree rose until ‏غ1‎ blocked the horizons. I looked
around. If I wished to touch the sky, I would have been able to
touch it. I looked to Gabriel and found him sitting calmly, without
any movement. Then I knew his superiority over me with respect to
his knowledge of Allah.””’’ The others answer by saying that there
is some question about the chain of this hadith and therefore, it
cannot be used as evidence until it 1s confirmed.

In short, this is an unimportant issue and that is why most of the
writers on the subject of creed have not discussed it; and Abt
Hanifah kept silent concerning it, as we have said before. Allah
knows best what is correct. As for the prophets and messengers, we
must believe in all those whom Allah has mentioned in His book.
We must also believe that He has sent many other prophets and
messengers whom He did not mention. Their names and number are
known only to Allah.

We must believe in them as a whole because there is no text that
states their exact number. Allah says, “Of some messengers we have
already told you; of others We have not” [4:164], and “We did
aforetime send messengers before you. Of them, there are some
whose story We have related to you, and some whose story We
have not related to you” [40:78].

We must also believe that they conveyed to their peoples
whatever message they were given by Allah and asked to convey,
that they explained it fully and left no excuse for anyone, and that no
one has the authority to oppose them. Allah says, “Are the
messengers charged with aught save plain conveyance (of the :
message)?” [16:35]; “But if they turn away, your duty 15 only to
preach (the message) clearly” [16:82]; “If you obey him, you will be
on right guidance. The Messenger’s duty is only to preach (the
message) clearly” [24:54]; and “So obey the Messenger, but if you
turn back, the duty of our messenger is but to proclaim the message
clearly and openly” [64:12].

Among the messengers there are those who are said to be of
“resolute purpose” or “absolute resolve” (‘ula al-‘azm). People have
different views about this topic.*** The best view I know of is what

-*’Recorded by Ibn Khizaymah in At-Tawhid, pp. 209-210. It is a weak hadith.
*“Ibn Al-Jawzi has noted ten different views on the subject as to who are the

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 259

Al-Baghawi reports from Ibn ‘Abbas and Qatadah that they are

Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad (may the peace and
blessings be upon all of them). They have been mentioned in the
verse, “And remember We took from the prophets their covenant as
We did from you, from Noah, Abraham, Moses and Jesus, the son
of Mary” [33:7]; and, “The same religion has He established for you
as that which He enjoined on Noah — which We have sent by
inspiration to you and that which We enjoined on Abraham, Moses
and Jesus: namely that you should remain steadfast in religion, and
make no divisions therein” [42:13].

As for Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, we
should believe in him and follow whatever rules (Shari‘ah) he has
given, following it and believing in it, both in general and in
particular aspects.

We believe in all the books that have been given to the
messengers, both those that Allah has mentioned in His Book, such
as the Torah, the Gospel and the Psalms, and those that He has sent
to the prophets but has not mentioned their names. Their names and
number are known only to God.

As for the Qur’a4n, we must believe in it as well as carry out its
commands. This is an additional obligation which we do not owe to
the other books. In short, we must believe that the books given to
the prophets were revealed to them by Allah, that they contain the
truth and guidance, and that they are perspicuous and illuminating,
and that they heal (the diseases of the heart).

Allah has made all these points in the following verses: “Say:
We believe in Allah and the revelation given to us, and to Abraham,
Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the Tribes, and that given to Moses and
Jesus, and that given to (all) the prophets from their Lord. We make
no difference between one and another of them, and we submit to
Allah completely” [2:136]. “Allah: there is no god but He, the
Living, the Self-subsisting, Eternal. It is He Who sent down to you
(step by step) in truth the Book confirming what went before it, and
He sent down the Torah and the Gospel before this as a guide for
mankind, and He sent down the Criterion (al-furgan)” [3:2-3]; “The
Messenger believes in what has been revealed to him” [2:285]; and,
“Do they not consider the Qur’an (with care)? Had it been from
other than Allah, they would surely have found therein much
discrepancy” [4:82]. |

messengers of resolute purpose (see his commentary, Zddal-Masir, op. cit., vol. 7,

pp. 392-393). One of these views is that all the messengers have been of resolute
purpose, and the qualification is defining not restrictive.

260 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

There are many more verses like these, which clearly state that
they are Allah’s words, and that He has revealed them. They also
confirm His attributes of speech and transcendence. He has said,
“Mankind was one single nation, and Allah sent messengers with
glad tidings and warnings, and sent with them the Book with the
truth” [2:213]; “And indeed it is a Book of exalted power. No
falsehood can approach it from before or behind it. It is sent down
by One full of Wisdom, Worthy of all praise” [4:42]; “And those to
whom knowledge has come see that the (Revelation) sent down to
you from your Lord 15 the Truth” [34:6]; “Mankind! There has come
to you an admonition from your Lord and a healing for the
(diseases) in your hearts, and for those who believe, a guidance and
a mercy” [10:57]; “Say: It is a guide and a healing to those who
believe” [41:44]; “Believe, therefore, in God and His Messenger,
and 1n the Light which We have sent down”’ [64:8]; and so on.

(64) As for all those who face our giblah (ahl qiblatina),
we call them muslim and mu’min, so long as they
profess what the Prophet (peace be upon him) taught,
and believe in whatever he said or enjoined.

The Prophet (peace be upon him) has said, “Whoever prays as
we pray, facing our giblah, and eats of the meat of the animals that
we slaughter, is Muslim. He has the same rights and the same duties
as we have.’”*? The words of the author suggest that islam and
iman are one, that a Muslim does not go out of the bounds of Islam
when he commits a sin unless he believes it to be lawful.

By ahl 015121116 the author means everyone who professes
Islam, faces the Ka‘bah (in prayer), even if he entertains wrong
ideas or indulges in sinful acts, unless he denies what the Prophet
(peace be upon him) brought. We will return to this point later when
commenting on the author’s words, “We do not call anyone who
faces our giblah infidel (kafir) on account of any sin, unless he
holds it to be lawful,” as well as on his words, “/slam and imdn
(faith) are one, and muslim and mi’min (Believers) are in essence
the same.”

‎Aj-Bukhari, As-Salah, 391; An-Nasa’i, Al-Imdn, 8:109.‏ 35د

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 261

(65) We neither enter into vain talk about Allah nor do
we dispute obstinately on the matters of His religion.

This is a reproof to the theologians and their rejected theology.
They probe into matters concerning Allah without any knowledge or
authority from Him. “They follow nothing but their desires and
conjectures, even though there has already come to them guidance
from their Lord” [53:23].

Abt Hanifah said, “No one should say about the Essence of
God, except what He has said of Himself.” Another scholar has said
that Allah says, “Whomsoever I like to observe the duties towards
My names and attributes I make humble and reverent. But
whomsoever I expose to the reality of My essence I annihilate. You
may, therefore, choose whichever you like: reverence or
annihilation.” What happened at Mount Sinai proves the point.
When Allah revealed Himself to the mountain, it was shattered and
leveled to the ground. It could not stand the majesty of the divine
Essence. Ash-Shibli has said, “To be free in talking about God 15 to
be disrespectful.”

The words, “We do not dispute obstinately in the matters of His
religion,” mean that we do not dispute with the people of truth (ah/
al-haqq), or raise doubts and objections as heretics do. We do not
want them to enter into useless controversy (mird’) and deviate from
the truth. Mira’ is to call to error, hide the truth, and undermine
Islam.

(66) We do not dispute about the Qur’4n. We bear
witness that it is the speech of the Lord of the Worlds,
which the _ faithful spirit brought down and
communicated to Muhammad, the leader 01 the
messengers (may Allah’s blessings be upon him and all
of his family). It is the speech of Allah, the Most High,
which no speech of any created being can match. We do
not believe that it was created, and we avoid going
against the belief of the Muslim community.

“We do not dispute about the Qur’an.” This may mean that we
do not hold such erroneous ideas as the heretics hold and try to
make them prevail over the truth. We instead believe that the Qur’an
is the “word of the Lord of the Worlds, which the faithful spirit
revealed to Muhammad...”

Or it can mean that we accept the readings of the Qur’&4n without
dispute, and affirm all its recitations which have been confirmed.
262 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

Both these meanings are correct. In support of the second, one may
cite the hadith reported by Ibn Mas‘ud. He said that he heard a man
reciting a verse in a way different from what the Prophet (peace be
upon him) had taught him. He caught hold of the man and brought
him to the Prophet. When he related the story, the Prophet frowned
upon what Ibn Mas‘iid had done, and said, “Both of you are
correct. Do not quarrel over such differences. The people who were
before you quarreled over such things and destroyed themselves.”
This hadith has been recorded by Muslim.**®

Here the Prophet (peace be upon him) warned against disputes
in which every party denies the truth that is with his opponent. Since
both recitations were correct, his warning meant that if they entered
into a controversy they would ruin themselves as had the people
who existed before them.

This is also the reason Hudhayfah urged ‘Uthman (may Allah be
pleased with them), “Save this community from disputing about the
Qur’an. Save it from going the way earlier communities have gone
in quarreling about their books.’”’’ ‘Uthman acted promptly and
made the community agree on a single reading. The community 5
protected from agreeing on a thing which is wrong. Hence, if they
agreed on a single text they did not give up anything that was
necessary, nor committed anything that was forbidden. People were
not obliged to recite the Qur’an in all the seven different ways
(ahruf); they were merely allowed to do so, which was in reality a
concession from Allah. They were permitted to recite in any one of
those modes they liked.

People were not asked to read sirahs of the Qur’an in a
particular order, for no order was fixed by revelation. This is why
the order of the siirahs in the Qur’an of Abdullah Ibn Mas‘tid was
different from the order of the Qur’an of ‘Uthman, or the Qur’an of
any other Companion. However, the order and arrangement of the
verses in a particular stéirah was fixed by revelation and cannot be
altered. In short, when the Companions saw that the ummah would
quarrel and fight among themselves if they were not made to agree
on a single text (harf wahid), they gathered together one text. This 5
the view on this issue that has been commonly accepted by scholars
and reciters of the Qur’a4n among the Elders, Ibn Jarir and others.

Contrary to the belief of the author, the hadith is not mentioned by Muslim; rather,
it is recorded by Al-Bukhari, 2410, 3476, 5062; and Ahmad, 1:393, 412, 456.
*°"See the story related by Ibn Shihab in Al-Bukhari, 4987.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi — 263

Others have said that in the beginning people were allowed to
recite the Qur’an in seven different ways, because if they had been
asked to recite it in one way only, it would have put them in great
difficulty.*** Later on, when they became familiar with one
recitation, found it easy and saw that it was better for them, they
agreed on reciting the Qur’an they way it was given to the
Messenger by the Angel in the final recitation.

Some jurists and theologians have suggested that the ‘Uthmani
text incorporated all the seven ways (al-ahriif as-saba ‘) of recitation,
as it is not permissible to discard any of the seven modes or reading
the Qur’an.**” They say that since the ummah agreed on it, leaving
out all other recensions, it could not have dropped any one
recitation. We answered this argument earlier. We said that people
were not required but only allowed to recite in any of the seven
ways, and that this permission was later withdrawn.

It has been claimed that ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘td said that one

could recite the Qur’an in any way, provided the meaning was not
affected. This is false. What he actually said was, “When I look at
the various ways of recitation prevalent among the Companions, I
find that they are very close to each other. It is just as you say
halumma, aqbil or ta‘al when you ask someone to come to you. So
recite the way you have learned.”?*° |

We have been asked not to dispute with the People of the Book
except in the best way. The only people who have been excepted are
wrongdoers. If this 1s the case, then how will we be allowed to
quarrel with the people of our own giblah! They are certainly better,
in general, than the People of the Book. We should never argue with
those among them who are righteous except in the best possible
way. If any one of them commits wrong by mistake we are not to
dub him an infidel unless we prove to him that he is guilty of a thing
whose perpetrator was called infidel by the Prophet (peace be on
him). Allah has forgiven the lapses which people of this ummah
may commit by mistake or which they forget.**' This is why the

***Ibn Jarir, Jami‘ al-Baydn, op.cit., 1: 56-59.

**’See Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, op. cit., vol. 9, pp. 29-30. Ibn Hajar has written that
Abi Shamah Al-Maqdisi (d.665/1267) says that people differ on the question whether
the Qur’anic text incorporates all the seven modes (ahruf) on which the Book was
revealed or just one harf. Ibn Al-Baqillani believes in the former, and At-Tabarani and
others in the latter, and the latter is the commonly accepted view.

Tafsir At-Tabari, op. cit., hadith no. 48; At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 8680.

341155 Majah, 2045. But the isnad of the hadith is broken (see Al-Busiri, Misbah az-
Zujajah fi Zawa’id Ibn Majah, ed. Misé Muhammad ‘AII and Dr. ‘Izzat Ali ‘Ati‘ah,

264 “Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Elders condemned heretics but did not even consider taking up the
sword against them except as a last resort. We will discuss this point
- later when we comment on the author’s words, “We believe that
truth and good are with unity and that untruth and evil are with
dissension.”

The words, “We believe that the Qur’an is the speech of the
Lord of the Worlds” need no comment. We have already discussed
the point at length while commenting on the author’s words, “The
Qur’an is the speech of Allah, originating from Him in a way that
transcends description.”

As for the words, “which the faithful spirit has brought down,”
they refer to the angel Gabriel, peace be upon him. Gabriel has been
called a spirit because he carries to the prophets among mankind the
revelation that gives them life. He is perfectly faithful and
trustworthy. God has Himself attested to this fact: “With it came
down the spirit of faith and truth to your heart that you may
admonish in the perspicuous Arabic tongue” [26:193]; and, “Verily
this is the word of a most honorable messenger, endued with
power, with ranks before the Lord of the Throne, with authority
there, and faithful to his trust” [81:19-20]. These verses are a
description of Gabriel. They should not be confused with such
verses as, “This is verily the word of an honorable messenger, it is
not the word of a poet” [69:40-41]. Messenger here refers to
Muhammad, peace be upon him.

The words “and communicated to the leader of the messengers”
clearly state the fact that Gabriel taught the Qur’4n to Muhammad
(peace be on him). This refutes the view which the Qaramatah and
others hold that the Prophet articulated the Qur’an in his mind under
an inspiration.*”

The words, “We do not believe that it was created, and we avoid
going against the belief of the Muslim community,” contain a
reprimand for those who say that the Qur’an was created and
thereby oppose the Muslim community. The Elders of the ummah
agreed that the Qur’an is in reality the uncreated speech of Allah.

Cairo: Dar Al-Kutub Al-Hadithah, n.d.). However with a complete isnad, the hadith
has been produced by Al-Bayhaqi, Sunan, 7:356; At-Tabarani, Al-Mu ‘jam as-Saghir
(Beirut: Dar Al-Kutub Al-‘IImiyyah, 1403/1983), 1:270; Ad-Daraqutni, Sunan (ed.
‘Abdullah Hashim Yamani, Madinah and Cairo: Dar Al-Mahasin, 1386/1966,
henceforth referred to simply as Ad-Daraqutni) 4:170-171; Ibn Hibban, 1498; Al-
Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 2:198.

142802 a discussion of this point see Ibn Taymiyyah, Dar Ta ‘Grud al-‘Aq! wa an-Naql,
op. cit., 10:204-06.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 265

The words, “We avoid going against the belief of the Muslim
community,” can also be taken in a general sense. They may mean
that we do not oppose the Muslim community in any belief on which
they agree, for to oppose them is to stray into error and heresy.

(67) We do not charge anyone of the ahi al-giblah with
being an infidel (kafir) for committing a sin, unless he
considers it to be lawful. Nor do we say that sin will not
harm the sinner merely because he has faith.

The author has earlier clarified what he means by ahl al-qiblah.
He said, “We call ahl al-giblah all those Muslims and Believers who
believe in all that the Prophet has taught, and testify that whatever he
has said or enjoined 15 true.” In the lines above he is countering the
Khawarij, who excommunicate anyone due to any sin committed.

The issue of excommunication (takfir) or non-excommunication
has led to a lot of controversy and even persecution. It has also led
to a great deal of division. Opinions and desires have spread all over
on this issue. Different groups have stated different views and
advanced arguments in their support. In general, they have either
taken extreme or moderate positions about those who hold ideas and
beliefs that are opposed in reality or in their judgment to the truth
Allah has revealed to His Prophet, as well as about those who are
guilty of grave sins.

One group does not excommunicate anyone of the ahl al-giblah
and denounces excommunication altogether, even though they are
aware that within the fold of the community there are hypocrites
who are greater infidels than the Jews and the Christians in the eyes
of the Qur’an, the Sunnah and the Consensus, and there are those
who express their hypocrisy whenever they get a suitable
opportunity, in spite of professing Islam outwardly.

However, there 1s no difference in the ummah on the issue that if
anyone openly refuses to acknowledge things that are clearly and
definitively known (zadhir wa mutawdtir) to be obligatory or
forbidden, he will be asked to recant. If he recants, he will be left
alone; otherwise, he will be declared an apostate and infidel, and be
killed. Hypocrisy and apostasy often result from heretical ideas and
evil practices. Al-Khallal noted in his Kitab as-Sunnah a statement
by Muhammad Ibn Sirin, reported through proper channels, that
those who most readily turn apostate are those who have erroneous
ideas and beliefs. Ibn Sirin thinks that it was in the case of such
people that the verse, “When you see men engaged in vain discourse
266 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

about Our signs, turn away from them unless they turn to a different
theme,” [6:68] was revealed.

This 1s why a number of leading scholars of religion refrain
from saying that they do not excommunicate for a sin. They rather
prefer to say that they do not excommunicate for every sin, as the
Khawari do. These are two different positions. The second is, in
fact, a rejection of the Khariji position, which pronounces
excommunication for all sins.

That 1s why the author — and Allah knows best — has qualified
his statement and said, “unless he considers it to be lawful’’.
However, this qualification seems to suggest that the author 1s
referring to errors of practice, not of belief. This is difficult to
accept, for the injunctions of the Shari‘ah in matters of practice refer
not only to action but also to belief, and in matters of belief, not only
to belief but to action as well. Action 15 not confined to the actions of
the body; there are also actions of the heart. In fact, the actions of
the heart are more important, for it is from them that the actions of
the body proceed. However, this objection disappears if the
qualifying clause is taken to read, “unless they believe it to be
lawful’.

“Nor do we say that sin will not harm the sinner if he has
faith...” This is a refutation of the Murji‘l view that sin does not
harm someone if he has faith, just as a good deed does not benefit
someone if he lacks faith. The Murji‘I view is one extreme, while
the Kharii view is the other extreme; the Kharijis excommunicate
for every sin, or every grave sin. Similarly, the Mu‘tazilis say that
grave sins destroy faith completely and leave nothing behind. The
Khawarlj say that sin extrudes the sinner from faith and lands him in
not having faith (kufr). The Mu‘tazilah, on the other hand, say that
sin extrudes him from faith but does not land him in ku/r. This is the
famous “position between the two positions”. However, since they
say that he no longer has faith, they put him in Hell forever.

Some scholars of kalam, figh and hadith take the same position
when it is a question of belief rather than practice, even though the
person concerned may have based his view on a particular
interpretation (ta’wil) of the text. They say that they will
excommunicate everyone who holds a heretical (bid‘t) belief,
without differentiating between a scholar who makes a mistake and
others. They charge him with infidelity and refuse to consider the
possibility that he might be sincere in his effort, even though he did
not get at the correct view. This is something serious, for a number
of authentic traditions say that anyone who has a particle of faith in
his heart will be taken out from the Fire. The texts which these
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 267

people quote in support of the view that holders of erroneous beliefs
will be damned conflict with these traditions. We will return to this
point later when we comment on the author’s words, “those who
commit grave sins will not be condemned to Hell forever, providing
they die with faith in Allah’s oneness”’.

What we want to say is that heretical (bid‘T) beliefs should be
taken in this light. A person may be sincere is his faith, both
outwardly and inwardly, but he happens to misinterpret a text and
holds a heretical belief while being either qualified to make such an
interpretation or a sinner because he was unqualified to make such
an interpretation. Whether or not he was competent to interpret texts,
we cannot say that he ceases to be a Believer because he has a
heretical belief, unless there 15 a text to support such a statement. To
say otherwise would be to follow the lines of the Mu‘tazilah and the
Khawarl. Nor do we say that those who have wrong beliefs should
not be excommunicated. |

The correct view 15 in between these two extreme views. If a
heretical and erroneous view negates what the Prophet has affirmed
or affirms what he has negated, or enjoins what he has forbidden, or
forbids what he has enjoined, we must state the truth concerning it.
We must tell the promised punishment that has been pronounced in
the texts on such beliefs. We must clearly show that it is infidelity
(kufr), and that one who believes it is a disbeliever (AGfir). This is
just as we pronounce the penalties that are laid down in the texts on
wrongs committed against life or property. It is on this ground that
many renowned personalities of the Ahl as-Sunnah have
excommunicated those who say that the Qur’an was created, or that
Allah will not be seen in the Hereafter, or that He does not know
things before they happen. Abt Yusuf says that he argued with Abu
Hanifah for days on the issue whether the Qur’4n was created until
they both agreed that whoever says that the Qur’an was created 15 a
disbeliever (kGfir).’*°

But if the question is about a particular person, whether he will
be punished or whether he is a kdfir, we do not pass any judgment
concerning him unless we have the necessary evidence. For it is one
of the gravest sins to testify against somebody that Allah will not
forgive him or will not have mercy on him, and will condemn him to
Hell forever — this being the penalty that a kdfir will receive after
death. Abu Dawid has mentioned in his Sunan, under the chapter
Al-Adab (‘good behavior’), the report of Abi Hurayrah that the

**See Adh-Dhahabi, Al- ‘Ula ‏.م‎ 140; Al-Bayhaqi, Al-Asmda’ wa as-Siffat, p. 251.

268 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Among the Tribes of Israel there
were two relatives. One was a sinner, the other a great devotee.
Whenever the latter saw the former committing a sin he would ask
him to keep away from it. One day, when he was indulging in a sin
and the devotee asked him to refrain from it, His companion said,
“Leave me to my Lord. Are you my keeper?’ He said, ‘By God, He
will never forgive you and will never admit you into Paradise.’
When they died they were presented to God, Who addressed the
devotee and said: ‘Do you know Me? Do you control My favors?’
Then He turned to the sinner and said, ‘Enter Paradise. You have
My mercy.’ the other he commanded to be sent to Hell.” Abi
Hurayrah added, “By the One Who has my life in His hand, the
devotee spoke a word that ruined his life here and in _ the
Hereafter.’?**

This is so because we do not know if a particular person tried to
find the truth and failed, and therefore deserves to be pardoned, or
whether he could not get the relevant texts on a subject. It is also
possible that he had strong faith and a number of good deeds which
recommend him for Allah’s mercy and pardon. God may forgive
him as he forgave the one who advised his sons to burn his body
when he died and scatter his ashes in the air because he was afraid
of Allah’s wrath. He thought that Allah would not be able to collect
his remains and raise him up.**°

Not stating what will happen to him in the Hereafter does not
mean, however, that we should not punish the heretic in this life,
ask him to recant, or kill him if he does not recant.

If the view that he holds is infidelity (ku/r), we will say that it is
kufr, and call him kdfir, provided the conditions of
excommunication are fulfilled, and that will only be the case if he is
a hypocrite (mundfiq) striving to undermine Islam (zindiq). No one
of the ahl al-qiblah who 15 apparently a Muslim should be
pronounced a Adfir unless he 15 a hypocrite and an enemy of Islam.
This is made clear in the Qur’an. Allah has created three kinds of
people: infidels, whether idolaters or the People of Book, who do
not testify to the unity of Allah and the prophethood of Muhammad;
Believers, who are faithful not only outwardly but also in their
hearts; and hypocrites, who outwardly show that they believe but do
not actually have belief inwardly. All three categories of people have
been mentioned in the beginning of Strat Al-Baqgarah. A person

*4 Aba Dawid, A/-Adab, 4901; Ahmad, 2:323, 363. The hadith is rated hasan. |
Dart of ahadith, Al-Bukhari, 3481, 7506; Muslim, 2756; Ibn Majah, 4255; An-
Nasa’l, 4:113; Ahmad, 2:269.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 269

about whom it is ascertained that he does not really believe, even
though he makes the two confessions of Islam, must be a zindigq.
And the zindig 15 a hypocrite (mundfiq).

This shows that both extremes are wrong, for 11 you call 7
everyone who holds a wrong belief, it will mean that you call a Adfir
those who are not really hypocrites. They may truly love Allah and
His Prophet in their hearts and believe in them sincerely, even
though they may be committing sins. Al-Bukhari has recorded a
hadith reported by Aslam, a client of ‘Umar, from ‘Umar, that at the
time of the Prophet (peace be on him) there was a man named
‘Abdullah, nicknamed Al-Himar (the ass). He used to amuse the
Prophet (peace be on him) with his jokes. He was flogged for
drinking wine. One time he was brought and flogged, a man said,
“0 Allah, curse him. I wonder how many times he will be
punished!” the Prophet said, “Do not curse him. By Allah, he loves
Allah and His Messenger.”’*° This has been the case with many
other people, even scholars and divines. They make statements
similar to those of the Jahmtyyah, Murji‘ah, Qadariyyah, Shi‘ah and
Khawarly; however, such great scholars and divines do not
completely follow such heretical sects although they may agree with
them on some minor points. That 15 why these heretical sects try to
associate themselves with renowned figures among the Elders.

One of the shameful characteristics of the innovating groups 5
that they have a tendency to excommunicate each other. At the same
time, one of the praiseworthy characteristics of the people of
knowledge is that they point out mistakes but do not excommunicate
others.

An objection may be raised against the view which the author
has put forward. It may be pointed out that there are a number of
verses and ahddith which call certain sins kufr. For example, “If any
fail to judge by (the light of) what Allah has revealed they are (no
better than) unbelievers” [5:47]. The Prophet has said, “To abuse a
Muslim is wicked (fisg) and to fight him is unbelief (kufr).”’*’ This
hadith has been reported by Ibn Mas‘itid and recorded by both AI-
Bukhari and Muslim. The Prophet (peace be on him) also said, “Do
not turn into infidels after me, killing each other;’’** “When a

**6 Al-Bukhari, Al-Hudad, 6780; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 2606.

47 4l-Bukhari, 48, 6044, 7076; Muslim, Al-Imdan, 64; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Birr wa as-
Salah, 1983; An-Nasa’i, Tahrim ad-Dam, 7:122; Ibn Majah, Al-Fitan, 3939; Ahmad,
1:385, 411, 433, 439, 446, 454, 460.

“8Part of ahadith, Al-Bukhari, 4403, 6166, 6775, 7077; Muslim, 66, 120; An-
Nasal, 7:126, 127; Abi Dawud, As-Sunnah, 4686; Ibn Majah, Al-Fitan, 3943;

270 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Muslim calls his brother an infidel (Adfir), one of them surely
becomes a kdfir;”**? and, “There are four things which, if all are
found in someone, he is a perfect hypocrite. But if one of them is
found, he is a hypocrite to that extent until he gives it up. They are
that he lies when he speaks, breaks the promises that he makes,
violates an agreement that he makes, and abuses when he
quarrels.”’°° The first two ahddith have been reported by ‘Abdullah
Ibn ‘Umar, and the last one is reported by ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr. “No
fornicator is a Believer while he is fornicating; no thief is a Believer
while he is stealing; and no drinker is a Believer while he is drinking
wine; but one may repent afterwards.’’’' Also, “The difference
between a Believer and an unbeliever is the offering of prayer’
[recorded by Muslim from Jabir].*°? He has also said, “Whosoever
visits a diviner and believes in what he says, or has anal intercourse
with his wife, denies what has been revealed to Muhammad.’”>?
Also, “Whosoever swears by someone other than Allah commits
blasphemy (kufr)” [recorded by Al-Hakim with that wording].°”*
And, “Two things in my ummah are blasphemies (Aur): defaming
anyone’s lineage, and mourning loudly over the dead.’”’’ There are
many more ahddith of this kind.

To answer this objection we will first point out that the Ahl as-
Sunnah are agreed that if a person commits a grave sin he is not
guilty of that kufr which calls for his excommunication and puts him
outside of the realm of Islam, as the Khawarij believe. If it is such
an act that he falls outside the fold of Islam, then he is an apostate
and is to be killed under all circumstances. Therefore, in retaliation

for murder, (if the view of the Khawarij were held) the guardian’s
forgiveness could not be accepted, nor would there be (any need
for) punishment for fornication, theft and alcohol consumption.

Ahmad, 2:85, 87, 104. |

‎Al-Bukhari, 6103, 6104; Muslim, 11, 60; At-Tirmidhi, A/l-/mdn, 2637; Abi‏ ةذ
‎Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4687; Ahmad, 2:18, 44, 47, 60, 112, 113, 142.‏

‎°° Al-Bukhari, 34, 2459, 3178; Muslim, Al-/mdn, 58; Abi Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4688;
At-Tirmidhi, Al/-/man, 2634; An-Nasa’i, 8:116; Ahmad, 2:189.

‎*>' Al-Bukhari, 2475, 5578, 6772, 6810; Muslim, Al-imdn, 57; Abii Dawid, As-
Sunnah, 4689; At-Tirmidhi, Al-/man, 2625; Ibn Majah, A/-Fitan, 3936; Ahmad,
2:243, 317, 376, 386, 479.

‎***Muslim, Al-Iman, 82; Abi’ Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4678; At-Tirmidhi, Al-/mdn, 2618:
Ibn Majah, /gdmat as-Salah, 1078; Ad-Darimi, 1:280. |

‎>? Aba Dawid, At-Tibb, 3904; At-Tirmidhi, At-Taharah, 135; Ibn Majah, Af-
Taharah, 639; Ahmad, 2:408, 429, 476. It is an authentichadith.

‎“Discussed earlier, it is authentic.

‎*°°Muslim, Al-/man, 67; Ahmad, 2:377, 441, 496.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 2/1

Their view, therefore, as a must, is clearly and obviously known to
be false in Islam.

The ‏أطخ‎ as-Sunnah are agreed that one who commits a grave sin
hass not lost faith or Islam, nor does he enter into kufr, and he will
not be consigned to Hell forever like the infidels, as the Mu‘tazilah
wrongly believe. Allah has referred to those who commit grave sins
and called them Believers. For example, “You who believe! the law
of equality is prescribed to you in cases of murder... But if any
remission is made by his brother, then grant a reasonable demand
and compensate him with handsome gratitude...” (2:178]. Allah has
not excluded the murderer from the community of Believers; on the
contrary, He has called him a brother of the person who is the
guardian of the slain, a brother in religion. He has also said, “If two
parties among the Believers fall into a quarrel, make peace between
them... The Believers are but a single brotherhood, so make peace
and reconciliation between your two (contending) brothers” [49:9-
10}.

The Qur’an, the Sunnah and the Consensus (of the community)
all affirm that the fornicator, the robber, and the slanderer will not be
killed; they will only be punished for the crimes they have
committed. This shows that they are not considered apostates. In the
Sahih it 1s recorded that the Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“Whoever has maligned his brother or done any other wrong should
settle it with him now, before the Day when he will have nothing to
pay him. If he has any good deeds his brother will be compensated
from them to the extent of the damage caused. But if he has no good
deeds, the evils of his brother will be transferred to his account, and
he will be cast into Hell.” This is recorded in the two Sahihs.*** This
means that a sinner can have good deeds from which a man whom
he had wronged will be compensated.

Muslim records in his Sahih that the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “Whom do you consider a pauper?” the people said, “He is a
pauper who does not have a dirham or a dinar.” He said, “The real
pauper is one who will be presented to Allah for judgment. He will
have to his credit a great amount of good deeds, huge as a mountain,
but he will have abused someone, grabbed the money of another,
killed a third, slandered a fourth and beaten a fifth. Each one of them
will be paid from his good deeds for the wrong he has done them.

°° Al-Bukhari, 2449, 6534; At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Oiyamah, 2419; At-Tayalisi, 2327;
Ahmad, 2:435, 506. The commentator stated that it is in both the Sahihs but actually
Muslim has not recorded this hadith.

272 . Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

But it will not suffice. Then their evils will be transferred to his
account, and he will be thrown into Hell” [recorded by Muslim].*”’

Allah has said, “Good deeds remove those that are evil”
{11:114]. This means that after one has done wrong and he does
good things afterwards, they may wipe out his evil deeds.

The Mu‘tazilah and the Khawarj are one in saying that whoever
commits grave sins will abide in Hell forever. They only differ with
regard to the way they characterize him. The Khawari call him
kafir, infidel, and the Mut‘tazilah call him /fasig, rebellious and
wicked. This is, however, a only matter of terminology.

The Ahl as-Sunnah agree that the sinner is deserving of the
threatened punishment as stated in the texts, and do not agree with
the Murji‘ah on the point that there 15 no punishment with faith, or
that no good work profits disbelief. If you put the texts of promised
reward that the Murji‘ah cite along with the texts of threatened
punishment that the Mu‘tazilah and the Khawarlyj quote, you will
realize the mistakes of both sides. There is nothing good in their
works except to show the falsehood of the opposing group.

The difference that the Ah] as-Sunnah have among themselves 5
only semantic and inconsequential. They have disputed whether ku/r
has degrees, some worse than others, or whether faith has levels,
some more perfect than others. This question is an offshoot of their
controversy over the meaning of imdan, whether it is confession as
well as action and whether it increases and decreases. However,
they are united on the point that whomever Allah calls kGfir they will
also call kafir. They say that we cannot imagine that Allah will call
kafir someone who judges according to rules He has not revealed
and his Messenger should also call him k@fir, but we should desist
from calling him 627/77. Those among the Ahl as-Sunnah who say
that imadn is confession and action and that it increases and
decreases, also say that the commission of a grave sin is a kufr of
action, not a kufr of belief, and that kufr has degrees, some worse
than others, just like imdn.

But those who say that imdn 15 the affirmation of the heart (at-
tasdiq), that actions are not included in the connotation of imdn, and
that Aufr is denial which neither increases nor decreases, say that the
commission of a grave sin is kufr in a metaphorical rather than real
sense, for after committing real kufr one goes out of the fold of
Islam. In a similar manner they interpret the texts that call different

*°’Muslim, Al-Birr wa as-Salah, 2581; At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Oiyamah, 2418; Ahmad,
2:303, 334, 372.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 27/3

actions imdn. For example, they say that the discipline of prayer that
has been called imdn in the verse, “And Allah will never make your
prayers (iman) of no effect” [2:143]—referring to the prayers said in
the direction of Jerusalem — has been called imadn metaphorically,
because without imdn it carries no weight, or because it is a sure
proof of imdn and a demonstration that its performer is a Believer.
This is the reason, they say, that when a disbeliever offers prayers
like our prayers, we become sure that he has embraced Islam.

There is no difference among the jurists of the ummah that
sinners will face punishment even though they verbally confess and
believe in the heart what has been revealed to the Messenger. They
denounce only those who say that they will abide in Hell forever,
that is, the Khawari and the Mu‘tazilah. But it will be worse if you
exceed the limits in denouncing them, that is, if you first attribute to
them what does not follow from their words and then condemn them
for it. We have been asked to be fair, even with infidels, in our
discussion with them. We should be all the more fair to ourselves.
Allah has said, “You who believe! Stand out firmly for Allah as
witnesses to fair dealing, and let not the hatred of others make you
swerve to wrong and depart from justice. Be just: that is next to
piety, and fear Allah” [5:9].

However, it must be noted that failure to judge by the revealed
law of God may be blasphemy calling for excommunication, or it
may be an ordinary sin, grave or light, or it may be blasphemy i in a
metaphorical sense or in a small degree — whichever is the case -
according to the condition of the person concerned. If a ruler
believes that it is not his duty to judge by Allah’s law or that he is
free to judge or not to judge by it, or that he will not bother about it
even though he knows that he must, then he 15 guilty of ‏,يع‎ the
type of which removes him from Islam.

If, on the other hand, he believes that he should judge by Allah’s
law, and is aware that it applies to the case before him, but he does
not comply with it, knowing that he thus exposes himself to Allah’s
punishment, he is a sinner. One may call him a &k@fir in a
metaphorical sense, or say that he is guilty of minor kufr. But if he
does not know what the ruling of Allah in the case before him is,
even though he has made every effort to know it, and he then goes
wrong, he will be said to be mistaken. He will be rewarded for the
effort he made to know Allah’s ruling and his mistake will be
forgiven.

The author’s words, “Nor do we say that sin will not harm the
sinner if he has faith,” are directed against the Murji‘ah. They could
not form an opinion about some people who appeared in the early
2/4 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

years whom the Companions agreed should be killed if they did not
recant. Qudamah Ibn Maz‘iin and a number of others with him
drank wine after it had been forbidden and argued, based on the
verse, “On those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, there
is no blame for what they ate (in the past) when they guard
themselves from evil, and believe, and do deeds of righteousness”
[5:96]. When the matter was reported to ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, he
consulted ‘Ali and other Companions. They all agreed that if those
people confessed that wine was forbidden they should be flogged,
but if they insisted that it was lawful they should be killed. ‘Umar
then said to Qudamah, “You are wrong. You will go to Hell if you |
do not fear and believe, do deeds of righteousness, and give up
drinking.” As for the verse, it was revealed in a different context.

After the battle of Uhud, when Allah prohibited drinking, some
of the Companions wondered what would happen to their friends
who had died and had drunk wine. It was for them that Allah
revealed the verse and made it clear that if one drank or ate
something when it was not forbidden it would not harm him if he
had faith, feared God, and did deeds of righteousness. Similar was
the case of those who prayed towards Jerusalem and died before
people were commanded to face the Ka‘bah. When Qudamah and
his companions realized their mistake and feared that they might not
be forgiven, ‘Umar wrote to him and quoted the verse, “Ha Mim.
The revelation of this Book is from Allah, Exalted in Power, Full of
Knowledge, Who forgives sin, accepts repentance, is strict in
punishment, and has a long reach (in all things)” [40:1-3]. Then he
said, “I do not know which sin of yours is greater: your commission
of the forbidden act, or your despair of the mercy of Allah.” What
the Companions agreed upon in their days was also agreed upon by
the later religious leaders (a’immah) of Islam.

(68) We hope that the righteous among the Believers
will receive Allah’s pardon and be sent to Paradise
through His mercy, but we cannot be certain about them.
We cannot testify that they will certainly go to Paradise.
As for wrongdoers, we pray to Allah to forgive them.
Although we do fear for them, we are not in despair for
them.

Every Muslim must believe in what the author has said here
concerming himself and others. Allah has referred to all these points
in the Qur’an. For example, “Those whom they call upon do desire
(for themselves) means of access to their Lord, even those who are
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 2/5

nearest. They hope for His mercy and fear His wrath. For the wrath
of your Lord is something to take heed of” [17:57]; “Be not afraid of
them, but fear Me if you have faith” [3:175]; “And fear Me and Me
alone” [2:41]; “Fear none but Me” [2:40]; “So fear not the people,
but fear Me” [5:44]. Allah has also praised those who fear Him with
these words, “Verily those who live in awe for fear of their Lord,
who believe in the signs of their Lord, who join not (in worship)
partners with their Lord, and who dispense their charity with their
hearts full of fear, because they will return to their Lord, it 15 they
who hasten in every good work, and they who are foremost in
them” [23:57-61].

Ahmad in his Musnad and At-Tirmidhi in his Sunan record that
‘A’ishah asked the Prophet (peace be on him) if the words, “those
who dispense their charity with their hearts full of fear’ [23:60] refer
to those who are guilty of adultery, drinking and theft. The Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “No, daughter of Siddiq! They are the ones
who fast, » pray, and give alms, and fear that their deeds may not be
accepted.”

Al-Hassan Al-Basri said of the Companions of the Prophet, “By
Allah, they obeyed Allah most and did numerous good deeds. Still
they feared that their deeds might be turned down.” He added, “A
true Believer does good deeds and fears; a hypocrite, on the other
hand, immerses himself in wrong and does not fear.”

Allah has said, “Those who believed and those who suffered
exile and fought (and struggled) in the path of Allah — they hope for
the mercy of Allah. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful’
[2:218]. Look at this verse. Allah has associated obedience with
having hope in Allah, because one can have justifiable hope only
while fulfilling those causes that will lead to what one hopes for.
This is true not only about the things of this world but also of the
rewards in the Hereafter. A man who has very fertile land but does
not till it or sow seeds in it, yet hopes that it will produce a crop as
rich as one which a well-cultivated land will produce, is certainly a
fool. Similarly a fool is one who hopes to have a son without having
intercourse with his wife, or to become a great scholar of the time
without studying extensively. The same is true of one who hopes
for great rewards and favors in the Hereafter, but does not carry out

8 at-Tirmidhi, At-Tafsir, 3175; Ahmad, 6:159, 205; Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd, 4198. The
transmitters of the hadith are reliable, but the chain of transmission is broken
(mungati‘), for ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Wahab Al-Hamadhani, who reported it from
‘A’ishah, never met her. Al-Albani concludes it is hasan based on supporting
evidence.

276 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

what Allah has commanded or refrain from what He has forbidden,
aornd seek His pleasure.

If you hope to have something you need to do a few things.
First, you should love the thing you want; second, you should fear
you might not get it; and third, you should work for it diligently and
sincerely. A hope which is not accompanied by these things 5
simply an idle wish. Hope is one thing and wishing another.
Everyone who entertains hope should be apprehensive, and every
traveler who is apprehensive should exert himself and hasten for
fear he might not reach his destination. Allah has said, “Allah
forgives not that partners should be set up with Him, but he forgives
anything else, whom He pleases” [4:48]. The polytheist cannot hope
for pardon; Allah has refused it. All other sins are at His mercy, He
may forgive them if He will, or punish if He will.

At-Tabarani has recorded in his Mu ‘Jam that the Prophet (peace
be on him) said, “On the Day of Judgment, the registers of the
people will be of three kinds: one from which nothing will be
pardoned, for it will be a record of setting up partners with Allah.”
Then he recited the verse, “Allah forgives not that partners should be
set up with Him” [4:48, 116]. “In the second register,” he
continued, “everything that is written will be taken into account, as it
will list such wrongs as one has done to one’s fellows. Whatever is
there in the third register, will not be of much importance to Allah,
for it will mention those wrongs that one has done to oneself,
wrongs that are between man and his 17

Scholars have differentiated between grave and light sins in
different ways. We will discuss them when we comment on the
author’s words, “Those who commit grave sins of the ummah of
Muhammad will not be condemned to Hell forever.” Here I will
draw attention to a particular point. It sometimes happens that people
commit a grave sin, feel ashamed, realize the gravity of the act, and
are very much afraid. This reduces the guilt and brings down the sin
to the level of light sins. On the other hand, if they commit a light
sin and feel no shame or care about it and play it down, this makes it
serious and grave. It is a matter of the heart, something more than
action, that everyone can feel within himself and others.

*°°The hadith is not found in At-Tabarani’s Mu jam, neither Al-Kabir nor As-Saghir. It
is reported by Ahmad, 6:240; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 4:575, 576. The latter
considers it to be an authentic (sahih) hadith, but Adh-Dhahabi does not agree with
him on the ground that Sadaqgah, the transmitter of the first hadith (4:575) has been
regarded to be a weak narrator, and Ibn Babnus, the narrator of the second hadith
(4:576) is not very well known.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 277

Another thing which should be noted is that people of virtue and
compassion are more likely to be pardoned for their sins than others.
The penalty of the Fire is waived for various reasons. I will list here
more than ten reasons which are deduced from the Qur’an and
Sunnah.”

The first is repentance. Allah has referred to it time and again in
many verses, such as, “Soon will they face destruction except those
who repent” [19:60]; “On them will be the curse of those entitled to
a curse, except those who repent and make amends...” [2:160].
However, repentance must be sincere. The benefits of sincere
repentance are not confined to any particular category of sins.
People, however, have different opinions regarding the question of
whether to be acceptable repentance has to be total or not. That is, if
one repents of one sin and not of others, will his repentance be
accepted? the correct view is that it will be ‘accepted. °°! People have
also discussed the question whether sins committed before Islam are
erased after embracing Islam even if one does not repent of them, or
must one repent of them, too? Suppose one embraces Islam but does
not abstain, for example, from adultery and drinking, will he have to
account after Islam also for his earlier drinking and adultery? Will he
have to repent of those sins in addition to embracing Islam? Or will
he have to repent of all the sins he had committed? the last view is
the correct view. He has to repent of all the sins he had committed
until the time he embraced Islam. The ummah agrees that repentance
is one of the reasons for which sins are forgiven and penalties
waived. Nothing but repentance draws pardon for all the sins. Allah
has said, “Say: My servants who have transgressed against their
souls! Despair not of the mercy of Allah. For Allah forgives all sins.
He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful’ [39:53]. This is for those who
repent, since Allah has said just after this verse, “Turn you to your
Lord (in repentance) and bow to His will” [39:54].

The second reason for pardon 15 istighfar, to ask for
forgiveness. Allah has said, “Nor was He going to send them a
penalty while they ask for forgiveness” [8:33]. Jstighfar 15
sometimes mentioned by itself and sometimes along with tawbah
(repentance). When it 15 mentioned alone it implies tawbah, just 5
when tawbah is mentioned alone it implies istighfar. Each is
included in the connotation of the other. But when one is joined with

*°°lbn Taymiyyah has mentioned these reasons in detail. See his Majma‘ al-Fatawa,
7:487 -501

36! ‏م5[‎ Al-Qayyim has discussed this point at length in Maddrij as- _Salikin, vol. 1,
pp. 273-276. |

2/8 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

the other, istighfar means to request exemption from the penalty of
the sin one has already committed, and tawbah means to turn to
Allah and pray for protection against the evil consequences of a sin
one might commit in the future.

Examples of this kind of usage in the Qur’an are many, for
example, the words faqgir and miskin. When they are used separately
they imply each other, but when they are used together each has its
own meaning. Allah has said, “For expiation feed 162 7
(indigent persons)” [5:89]; and “But if any is unable to do so, he
should feed sixty masakin [58:4]; and, “If you conceal (charity) and
make it reach the fugara’ (the one really in need), that is best for
you” [2:271]. In these verses the words are mentioned singly and
convey the same sense, both of the needy one who has less than he
needs and of the pauper who has nothing at all. But when they are
mentioned together as in the verse, “Alms are for the fugara’ and the
masakin” [9:60], they refer to different things. 11/0070 means
needy and masdkin means pauper. However, some _ people
understand the words in just the opposite way. Other pairs of words
which imply each other when used separately, and mean different
things when used together are ithm (sin) and ‘udwadn
(transgression), birr (virtue) and taqwa (piety), fusig (defiance) and
‘isydn (disobedience). A somewhat similar pair is kufr and nifagq.
However, kufr (infidelity) has a wider connotation; when it is used
separately it includes nifag (hypocrisy), but when they are used
together they mean different things. Another example 15 imdn and
islam®® which, God willing, we will discuss at length later.

The third means of pardon is provided by good deeds, for one
good act will fetch ten equal rewards and one evil act will incur only
one equal penalty. Woe, therefore, to those whose one-to-one
penalties outdo their ten-fold rewards. Allah has said, “The good
deeds remove those that are evil” [11:14], and the Prophet (peace be
on him) said, “Do good after evil so that it may wipe out the
latter.””’°?

The fourth reason is the suffering one undergoes in the world.
The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “When a Believer suffers from
illness or experiences hardship or loss, grief or anxiety, or feels the
prick of a thorn, part of his sins are forgiven.’ In the Musnad, it

°° For discussion of these terms see Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmia‘ al-Fatdwa, 7:162-170.
363 ‏جروم‎ of ahadith, At-Tirmidhi, Al-Birr, 1988; Ahmad, 5:153, 158, and 5:228, 236;
Ad-Darimi, Ar-Rigdq, 2:323. At-Tirmidhi considers the hadith to be hasan.

5° Al-Bukhari, 5641, 5642; Muslim, A/-Birr wa as-Salah, 2573; At-Tirmidhi, A/-

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 279

is mentioned that when the verse, “Whoever does an evil will be
punished for it” [4:123], was revealed, Abii Bakr said, “Messenger
of Allah, this verse will crush us. Who is there among us who does
not commit a sin!” the Prophet (peace be on him) consoled him,

“Abi Bakr, don’t you exert yourself? Don’t you grieve? Don’t you
suffer from pain? You will be rewarded for all these sufferings.”
Suffering is itself a cause for pardon. If you bear it patiently you are
rewarded for it; but when you grumble over it, you sin. However,
patience and impatience are different from suffering. Suffering 1s
caused by Allah, not man; it is a punishment from Allah for our sins;
consequently it wipes out sin. On the other hand, patience and
grumbling are human acts, calling for reward or punishment.
Suffering brings reward, and since it is caused by Allah, not man,
its reward is a gift from Allah, an unearned favor. Allah has said,
“He gives him from His own presence a great reward” [4:40].
Sickness, therefore, is a reward and an expiation for earlier sins.
People often identify the two, but they are not same: one is the cause
of the other.

The fifth cause of pardon is the torment of the grave. We will
discuss that in detail later.

The sixth cause 15 the supplications which the Believers offer for
their brethren during their lives or after their death.

The seventh cause is the benefits which one is entitled to for the
good deeds one does and which one offers to another — deeds like
giving alms, reading the Qur’an or performing Hajj. We will return
to this subject later.

The eighth cause is the fear and hardship people will experience
on the Day of Judgment.

The ninth cause 1s what is mentioned 1n this hadith recorded in
the two Sahihs. The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “When the
Believers cross the great Bridge (as-Sirdat), they will be detained at a
small bridge between Paradise and Hell, and the wrongs that they
caused to others will be avenged. People will first be purified of
their sins and then allowed into Paradise.’”°°

Jana’iz, 966; Ahmad, 2:302, 335, 3:18, 48, 61, 81. See also Al-Bukhari, 5640, and
Muslim, 2572.

65 Ahmad, 1:11; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 3:74, 75, Al-Bayhaqi, Sunan, 3: 373. The
chain of the hadith is broken. However, there is a sahih hadith reported by Abi
Hurayrah to strengthen it; see Muslim, 2574, and Ibn Hibban, 1736.

*°° Al-Bukhari, 2440, 6535; Ahmad, 3:13, 57, 63, 74. The author implies that Muslim
also recorded this hadith, but this is not correct.

280 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

The tenth cause is the intercession of those entitled to intercede.
We have discussed this in detail before.

The eleventh cause is the grace of Allah not prayed for by
anyone. He has said, “And He will forgive anything else, to whom
He pleases” [4:48, 116]. |

Now, if, in spite of all these facilities, a person is not pardoned,
it means that his sins were great. He should then enter into the Fire,
that his sins may be burned out and he may be purified. No one will
remain forever in the Fire who has a bit of faith in his heart or who
has testified that “there is no god except Allah”. This has been
mentioned in the hadith reported by Anas which was mentioned
earlier.

Let me conclude: In view of all that has been said, we cannot be
positive and definite about anyone of the ummah that he will go to
Paradise or Hell. The only exceptions are those about whom the
Prophet (peace be on him) said that they will go to Paradise. About
others we hope for them as well as fear for them.

(69) Anyone who feels’ secure (from  Allah’s
punishment) or who loses hope (in His mercy) falls
outside the realm of Islam. The correct course for the
ahi al-qgiblah 115 in between these two ways.

The Muslim must both fear Allah’s wrath and hope for His
mercy. The fear that has been commended is what keeps one away
from the things forbidden by Allah. But when fear exceeds this limit
one is likely to lose hope and despair. True, praiseworthy hope, on
the other hand, is what helps one obey Allah in the light of His
guidance, expecting His reward, or repent after committing a sin and
turning to Allah looking for His forgiveness. Allah says, “Those
who believe and those who migrate and struggle in the way of Allah
— they are the ones who hope for Allah’s mercy; and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful” [2:218].

But those who indulge in sin and do nothing good, and put hope
in Allah’s mercy are mistaken. They entertain only deception, false
hopes and vain desires. Abii ‘Ali Ar-Rudhabari, may Allah bless
him, said, “Fear and hope are the two wings of a bird. If they are
fit, the bird is fit to fly; but if one of them is not fit, the bird cannot
fly; and if both are unfit, the bird is on death’s doorstep.”

Allah has praised people who have fear and hope in these
words, “Is one who worships devoutly during the hours of the
night, prostrating himself or standing (in adoration), who takes heed
of the Hereafter, and who places his hope in the mercy of his Lord
(like one who does not)? Say: Are they equal, those who know and
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 281

those who do not know?” [39:9]; and, “Their limbs do forsake their
beds of sleep, while they call on their Lord in fear and hope”
[32:16]. Hope should be accompanied by fear; otherwise it will
produce a feeling of false security. Fear, on the other hand, should
be accompanied by hope; otherwise it will degenerate into despair.
When you fear something, you flee from it. But in the case of Allah,
when you fear Him you turn to Him. The God-fearing flees from
his Lord to his Lord.

The author of Mandazil as-Sda’irin has said that fear is the lowest
level of a spiritual aspirant.*°’ This is not true. Hope and fear, as we
have explained them, are his highest levels. The Prophet has said,
“Allah the Almighty says, ‘I am with the expectation that my servant
has of Me. He should therefore expect (of Me) as he wishes.’” This
is an authentic hadith.*°® Muslim has recorded another hadith in his
Sahih on the authority of Jabir that he heard the Prophet (peace be on
him) say, three days before his death, “None of you should die
except with having good expectations of your Lord.” This is why
some people say that when you are ill you should have more hope
than fear; but when you are well you should have more fear than
hope. ‏ظ‎

Others have said that whoever serves Allah with love only is a
heretic (zindiq); whoever serves Him with fear only is a Khariji
(Hariri); whoever serves Him only with hope is a Muri‘; and
whoever serves him with all three — love, hope and fear — is a true
Believer and a true Believer in Allah’s oneness (mawahhid).
Mahmiid Al-Warraq has very rightly said:

Were you to see the reward for small deeds,

you would certainly love to do great deeds;

and were you to see the punishment for small sins,
you would be certainly keep away from them.

(70) One does not leave the realm of iman except by
repudiating what brought him into it. |

*°7See Ibn Al-Qayyim, Madarij as-Salikin, vol. 2, pp. 37-41.

*** Ahmad, 3:391, 4:106; Ibn Hibban, 2468. Abia Hurayrah’s version of the hadith is
recorded by Al-Bukhari, 7405, 7505, 7537; Muslim, 2675; At-Tirmidhi, 2388; Ibn
Majah, 3822; Ahmad, 2:251, 413, 480, 482, 534.

Muslim, Sifat al-Jannah, 2877; Aba Dawid, Al-Jand’iz, 3113; Ibn Majah, Az-
Zuhd, 4167; Ahmad, 3:293, 325, 330, 390.

282 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

The author is countering here the view of the Khawary and the
Mu‘tazilah, who say that whoever commits a major sin (kabirah)
ceases to be a Believer. He is reinforcing what he said earlier, “We
do not call anyone of the ahl al-giblah infidel (kafir) on account of a
sin, unless he believes that it 15 lawful.” We have already
commented on that point.

(71) Iman (faith) is to profess with the tongue and
believe in the heart that all that the Prophet (peace be on
him) is authentically known to have said or enjoined is
true. [man is one, and with regard to its essence all
Believers are equal. They differ only with respect to
their fear of Allah and piety, abstention from following
evil desires and pursuance of what is best.

Opinions differ as to what iman means. Malik, Ash-Shafi‘1,
Ahmad, Al-Awza’i, Ishaq Ibn Rahaway, the scholars of the ahi al-
hadith, and the scholars of Madinah, may Allah bless them, as well
as the Dhahiris and a faction of theologians think that zmdn 15 to
affirm (¢asdiq) in the heart, profess with the tongue and act with the
body. Many of our scholars, on the other hand, believe what At-
Tahawi, may Allah bless him, has said, namely that imdn 15 to
profess with the tongue and affirm in the heart. Some even say that
oral profession does not form part of the essence of imdn, it is an
additional pillar of ima@n. This is the view of Aba Mansir AI-
Maturidi, may Allah bless him. It has also been ascribed to Abt
Hanifah, may Allah be pleased with him. The Karramis believe that
iman is simply a profession by the tongue; hence, according to their
view, the hypocrites are perfect Believers. Nevertheless, they
believe that the hypocrites will suffer the punishment which Allah
has promised them; thus they contradict themselves.

Al-Jahm Ibn Safwan and Abu Al-Hussayn As-Salihi, a leading
libertarian (Qadari), believe that imdn is a kind of knowledge in the
heart. This view is worse than the one just stated, for it implies that
Pharaoh and his people were Believers, since they knew that Moses
and Aaron, peace and blessings of Allah be on them, were true
prophets even though they denied them. This is clear from what
Moses said to Pharaoh, “You know very well that these things have
been sent down by none but the Lord of the heavens and the earth as
eye-opening evidence” [17:102], as well as from what Allah
observed about them, “And they rejected those signs in iniquity and
arrogance though their souls were convinced thereof. So see what
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 283

was the end of those who acted corruptly!” [27:14]. The People of
the Book knew that Muhammad (peace be on him) was a prophet as
they knew their own sons, but they were not believers in him; in
fact, they were his deniers and opponents. Abi Talib, too, would be
among his Believers according to their view, for he is reported to
have said, “I know that the religion of Muhammad

is the best of all the religions of mankind. Were I not to be scolded
and abused, I would have confessed it openly.”

Actually, even Iblis, would also be a perfect Believer according
to Al-Jahm’s view. He did not plead ignorance of Allah; he knew
Him well, as he said, “My Lord, give me then respite until the Day
the dead are raised” (15: 36]; “My Lord, because you have put me in
the wrong...” [15:39], and “Then, by Your Power, I will put them
all in the wrong” [38:82].

For Al-Jahm, kufr is ignorance of Allah. No one, however, is
more ignorant of Allah than he, for he reduces Allah to a mere Being
and strips Him of all His attributes. There can be no greater
ignorance than this. He is, therefore, a disbeliever (kd/fir) according
to his own testimony.

Besides these, there are other views which are in some sense

modifications or elaborations of these views. I have not mentioned
them, as I do not want to lengthen this commentary. Abt Al-Mu‘in
Al-Nasafi has discussed them at length in his Tabsirat al-Adillah;
and other writers have also discussed them.
In brief, imdn is either a function of the heart, tongue and body,
as the Elders, the three imams and others believe, as we have
mentioned; or it 15 a function of the heart and tongue, but not of
bodily deeds, as Abu. Hanifah, according to At-Tahawi, and the
scholars following him believe; or it is a function of the tongue only,
as the Karramis assert; or it is a function of the heart only, as Al-
Jahm and Abt Mansir Al-Maturidi think, though the former
considers it to be knowledge, while the latter considers it to be
conviction (tasdiq). Of these views those that the Karramis and AI-
Jahm Ibn Safwan hold are obviously false.

The difference between Abt: Hanifah and other imams of the Ahl
as-Sunnah is not substantial. For Abt’ Hanifah the actions of the
body are necessary consequences of faith in the heart; for others,
they are part of faith; but all of them believe that one who commits a
major sin does not thereby cease to be a Muslim; he is at the mercy
of Allah, Who may forgive him or punish him, as He wills. Their
difference, therefore, is merely a matter of semantics, which does
not materially affect imadn. Those who judge that one who does not
284 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

offer prayer is an infidel cite other reasons besides reiterating this
principle,’’° for although the Prophet (peace be on him) denied iman
for the fornicator, the adulterer, the thief, the drinker and the robber,
they were not dubbed non-believers. This is a point on which all are
agreed.*”!

There is also complete agreement among the Ahl as-Sunnah on
the point that what Allah requires from us is both gawi (stating of
faith) and ‘amal (action). Qaw/ includes both confession (igrar) of
the tongue and conviction (tasdiq) of the heart. This is the meaning
of gawi in the statement, “Jmdn is gawl and ‘amal.” Hence the
difference boils down to the question of whether the term imdn
covers all that is required of man or only a part of it. In other words,
is it that imG@n as such means only gawl, and action (‘amal) does not
enter into its connotation, and therefore, when it refers to both gawl
and ‘amal, it refers to the latter metaphorically? This is the point
which 15 in dispute.

It is also agreed upon that one who believes in the heart and
professes with the tongue but abstains from bodily action 1s a sinner
against Allah and His Messenger and exposes himself to Allah’s
punishment. However, some of those who do not include action in
the connotation of imdn have said that, since imdn 1s one thing, their
own imdn is like the imdn of Abt. Bakr As-Siddiq and ‘Umar, even
like the imdn of the prophets and messengers, and the angels
Gabriel and Michael. Here they are going to an extreme. Kufr 15 to
iman as blindness is to eyesight. There is no doubt that men differ in
their eyesight: some cannot see well during the day while others
cannot see well at night; some can see a thick cord but not one that is
thin except with lenses; some can see from an abnormally long
distance, but others cannot.

In the same way - Allah knows best - we should understand the
author’s words, “The Believers are equal in the essence of faith.”
He asserts equality in the essence of faith only, not in other respects.
In fact, faith in the faith formula (kalimah), “[t]here 15 no god except
Allah,” varies in its radiance from heart to heart. There are, in fact,
innumerable degrees of faith’s radiance which are known only to

*See Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 2:179-180; Ibn Qudamah, Al-Mughni, (ed.
Muhammad Salim Munaysin and Sha‘ban Muhammad Isma’il; Cairo: Maktabah ‏اث‎
‎Jamhuriyyah Al- ‘Arabiyyah; and Riyadh, Maktabat Ar-Riyadh Al-Hadithah, n.d.)
vol. 2, pp. 442-447.

*"'See the discussion by Muhammad Anwar Al-Kashmiri, Fayd al-Bari ‘ala Sahih Al-
Bukhari, Cairo, Mataba‘at Al-Hijazi, 1357/1398, vol. I, pp. 53-54, and Ibn
Taymiyyah, Majmia‘ al-Fatawa, 7:297.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 285

Allah. In some hearts it is as bright as the sun, in some it is like
stars, in some like a big lamp, in some like a glowing candle, and in
some like a flickering light. That it is why, on the Day of Judgment
the light of the Believers will shine according to the strength of their
faith in Allah’s unity, and the nobility of their practices. As the light
of the kalimah increases, doubt and disbelief burn away until one
reaches a stage where all uncertainties and vascilations are
completely destroyed. This 15 the stage of the true Believer in tawhid
where the heights of his faith are fully secured against the assault of
all miscreants. Whoever knows that will know the meaning of the
Prophet’s words, “Allah has barred him from the Fire who says,
‘There is no god except Allah,’ and seeks no one’s pleasure but
Allah’s,’?’* or “No one will enter the Fire who says, ‘There is no
god except Allah.””’””

Many people have difficulty in understanding ahdadith of this
nature. Some say that they were later abrogated; some think that they
had been said before rules and regulations were given; some believe
that the Fire which has been referred to in them is the Fire into
which the infidels and hypocrites will be thrown; some are of the
opinion that they only negate that the Believers will dwell in the Fire
forever, and so on. Let us note first that the Prophet (peace be upon
him) did not say that one who simply utters the kalimah with his
tongue is barred from the Fire, for that goes against the well--
established teachings of Islam. The hypocrites utter the kalimah with
their tongues, but they will enter into the depths of the Fire along
with the infidels. It is also plain that the value of an action depends
not on its formal characteristics or on the number of times it is
repeated. It depends on the nobility of the inner state of the heart
which produces it. Think over the hadith which says that on the Day
of Judgment a card will be placed on one side of the Balance, and

*?Part of a long hadith, Al-Bukhari, 425, 1186, 5401, 6423, 6938; Muslim, A/-
Iman, 33; Ahmad, 4:44, 5:449.

33 Muslim has the hadith (hadith no. 29) on the authority of ‘Ubadah that the Prophet |
(peace be on him) said, “Whoever witnesses that there is no god other than Allah, and
that Muhammad is His messenger, Allah will not let enter the Fire.” Muslim (hadith
no. 32) and Al-Bukhari (hadith no. 128) have the hadith on the authority of Anas that
the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Allah will not allow a person to enter into the
Fire who has testified that there 1s no god but Allah and Muhammad is His
Messenger.” However, these ahddith should not be taken literally; for various verses
of the Qur’an and a number of the Prophet’s ahddith state that the sinners among the
faithful will be punished for a time in the Fire and then released. They should be
qualified and interpreted to mean that those who witness to God’s unity and
Muhammad’s prophecy and act righteously will not enter the Fire.

F12 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI

256 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

ninety-nine registers as far as the eyes can see will be placed on the
other pan, but the one will outweigh the ninety-nine and its holder
will be set free. We know that all those who believe in Allah’s
oneness will be given a card like this, but many of them will go to
the Fire. Think of the faith of the person who killed a hundred men,
nevertheless his faith urged him to travel to a village (and explore the
possibility of forgiveness) while he was suffering from a pain in the
chest and struggling with death.’ Think also of the faith of that
harlot who took off her headcovering, drew water in it and offered it
to a thirsty dog, and was forgiven on that account.*”’

Faith is like intelligence in that it differs from person to person.
Although everyone has a core of intelligence which qualifies him as
a rational being and distinguishes him from an imbecile, some are
definitely more intelligent than others. There are also variations in
things that are prescribed or forbidden. One duty may be higher than
another; similarly one forbidden thing may be more reprehensible
than another. Some people have even extended this distinction to the
concepts of rationality and obligation.

The point that faith in the details of the religion represents an
increase in faith in its principles 15 quite obvious. We know that the
duties in the beginning of the revelation were less than those when it
was completed. Again, the duties of those whom the details of the
religion have not reached are not like the duties of those whom they
have reached. The Negus of Abyssinia and others like him were
obviously not required to believe in all the details.

It is also obvious that the faith that produces actions of the heart
and the body is more perfect than the faith which does not produce
them. Similarly, the knowledge upon which one acts is more perfect
than the knowledge upon which one does not act. What cannot
produce anything is plainly weaker than what can. The Prophet said,
“One who is told about something is not equal to one who sees
it.”’’° When Moses was told that his people were worshiping a
heifer, he did not cast the stone tablets down; he threw them only
when he actually saw them worshiping the calf. The reason is not
that he doubted the information Allah gave him; the reason is that the
importance of a thing informed, no matter how reliable is the
informer, is often not realized to the extent it is when it is seen.

>74See the hadith 3470 in Al-Bukhari and 2766 in Muslim.

379 Al-Bukhari, 3467; Muslim, 2245.

‎Hibban, 2088; At-Tabarani, A/-Kabir, 12451. With a different wording the‏ م3715
‎hadith has been reported in Ahmad, 1:215, 271; Ibn Hibban, 2087; and Al-Hakim,‏
‎Al-Mustadrak, 2:321. It is an authentic hadith.‏

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 287

Abraham, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, said, “My
Lord, show me how you give life to the dead.” (Allah) said: “Do
you not believe?” He said: “Yes, but to satisfy my own heart”
[2:260].

For one who has to perform the pilgrimage or pay zakah, his
faith obliges him to know exactly what he has to do, and to believe
in all the details. But one who does not have these duties is only
required to believe in the general fundamentals, not in their details.
When a person embraces Islam he is asked to believe in the basic
principles. But when the time for prayer comes, he is required to
believe that it is his duty, and that he must offer it. In short, people
are not equal with respect to the details they must believe in.

There is no doubt that one who has firm sincerity in his heart
that cannot be overriden by desires or doubts will not commit sins.
If one is not afflicted with desires and doubts, or one of them, one
will not commit sins. However, at the time of committing a sin, his
heart is occupied with the sin and it loses its sincerity and
remembrance of a threatened punishment. Therefore, he sins. This
is why - Allah knows best - the hadith states, “When one fornicates
or commits adultery, he does not do so while he has faith.”’”’ This
means that when he is committing fornication or adultery his faith in
its prohibition disappears, even though faith in the fundamentals
remains there in his heart. He regains faith in the prohibition of
fornication or adultery afterwards. Allah has described pious men in
these words, “Those who fear Allah, when a thought of evil from
Satan assaults them, bring Allah to remembrance, when lo! they see
(aright)” [7:201].

Commenting on the verse, Mujahid, as Layth has reported, said,
“The verse refers to those people who, when they are about to
commit a sin, remember Allah and refrain from it. Know that anger
and passion are two root causes of sin. If he then sees properly, he
will withdraw from that sin.” The wicked, on the other hand, do not
withdraw. “But their brethren (the evil ones),” Allah says, “plunge
them deeper into error and never relax their efforts” [7:702]. That is,
Satan and his army lead their human followers deeper and deeper
into error and do not relax. Ibn ‘Abbas said that the verse means that
neither do men recoil from evil nor do their satanic collaborators
relax their effort to mislead them. When they fail to see evil, their
hearts lose their light, and the evil ones plunge them further and
further into darkness.

*"This hadith was discussed earlier. It is authentic.

288 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

The faith that is then left cannot restrain them. They lose the light
of their heart, cease to perceive evil and no longer feel shame or fear
from it. They are like those who cannot see because they have
closed their eyes even though they are not blind. When the heart is
covered by a thick layer of sin, 1t cannot see the truth even though it
is not as blind as the heart of an infidel. The Prophet (peace be on
him) referred to this when he said, “When a person commits
adultery, faith 15 withdrawn from him; when he repents it is
restored.”

Differences that are found among the Ahl as-Sunnah regarding
imdn are only a matter of semantics. They are nothing to worry
about, unless one group quarrels with another and divides the
ummah. It is also wrong that discredited theologians like the
Murji‘ah and others should use them as ploys to indulge in sin, and
say that since they are perfect Believers, Muslims and friends
(awliya’) of Allah, they do not have to worry about sin. The
Muryji‘ah believe that sin does not harm them if they have faith,
which is absolutely wrong.

١ Abt Hanifah, may Allah be pleased with him, understood iman
according to its lexical meaning as well as based on evidence from
the words of the Qur’an and Sunnah. The other imams, may Allah
bless them, too, understand its literal legal (shadri‘) meaning in the
light of the words of the Qur’an and Sunnah, which, in addition to
conviction (tasdiq), also mention some other properties of the term.
This is in line with what the Shari‘ah does with other terms like
salah (prayer) and hajj (pilgrimage).

One of the arguments which the followers of Abia Hanifah
advance is that semantically imdn means tasdiq, ‘to believe or to
testify’. Allah has quoted the words that the brothers of Joseph said
to their father, “md anta bi mit’minin lang’, that is, bi musaddiqin
land (‘you will not believe us’). Some of them have even claimed a
consensus of philologists on this point. Further, this meaning of the
word, ‘believing in the heart’ (tasdiq bi al-qalb), is the obligation on
man which he owes to Allah. He must believe that the Prophet
(peace be on him) 15 correct in whatever he conveys from Allah.
Whoever does that 15 a mii’min (believer) as far as he and Allah are
concerned. As for igrar (verbal confession), it is a condition for
treating him as a Muslim in this life. However, this is only one
opinion, as we have said before. The opposite of imdn is kufr,

578 Aba: Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4690. Al-Hakim has called the hadith sahih (see his Al-
Mustadrak, 1:22) and Adh-Dhahabi has agreed with him.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 289

which means ‘to give lie to’ or ‘to deny’. Since this is obviously an
act of the heart, imdn, which 15 its opposite, will also be an act of
the heart. The verse, ““Whosoever denies Allah after he has believed
(in Him), except he who 1s forced into it, although his heart is firm
in iman...” [16:106], shows that the heart is the locus of imdn, not
the tongue. Further, 11 imdn were a combination of gawl and ‘amal,
it would be completely lost when one of the parts is lost. Again,
‘amal has been conjoined with imdn on various occasions in the
Qur’an, such as the oft-repeated phrase “who believe (amani) and
do (‘amili) good.” This is another indication that actions and imdn
are different.

Objections have been raised against arguing from the fact that
iman means tasdiq. It has been said, for example, that 104070 is not a
synonym of imdn, although in some contexts it does mean imdn. A
similar objection has been raised against the claim that imdn and
islam are synonymous. One argument that shows that tasdig is not a
synonym of imdn is that when someone pronounces the statement of
a reporter to be true, we say saddaqa-hu, but not amanahu or amana
bihi, although we can say amana lahu (‘he believed in his
statement’). Allah has said, “amana lahu Lit’ [29:26, ‘Lot believed
in his words’]. Or “fa ma amana li Misa illa dhurriyatun min
gawmihi’ [10:83, ‘no one believed in Moses’ (promise) except
some children of his people’]; and “yu’minu bi Allah wa yu’minu li
al-mi’minin” [9:61, ‘he believes in Allah and has faith in the
Believers’]. He has thus differentiated between imdn bi and imdn li.
The former is used for the information given, and the latter for the
informant. This point cannot be countered by pointing out that it is
proper to say, md anta bi musaddigqin lana - ‘you are not going to
believe in us’, for the preposition li is used here in order to
strengthen the participle musaddiq. Everyone knows that it is
sometimes used to strengthen the verbal noun.’”

In short, we never say, gad amantuhu or saddagtu lahu. We
rather say, amantu lahu or agrartu lahu - ‘I believed in or testified to
his statements’. To understand it as agrartu is closer than to
understand it as saddagtu, although there is a difference between
them which is quite clear. If someone speaks about something
visible or invisible it 15 quite proper grammatically to say 5200014 -

‘you are right’ or kadhabta - ‘you are wrong’. When, for example,
someone says that the sky is above us, we may say, sadagta - ‘you

*79See the discussion on the point in Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmi‘ al-Fatawa, 7:290-291.

290 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

are right’. But we do not use the word imdn except when the
information is about something hidden from us. There is no harm in
saying saddaqnahu - ‘we testify that he is right’, to one who says,
“The sun is rising.” But we would not say, amana lahu - ‘we believe
in him’, for iman has the sense of security and trust which are
conceivable only in the context of information about something
unseen. The question of trust does not arise except with regard to
things hidden. This is why amana lahu has never been used in the
Qur’an or elsewhere in literature except in the context of things
unseen.

Iman is not in contrast to takdhib (to deny) but tasdiq is. Iman,
however, is in contrast to kufr, which is not necessarily just
takdhib. 11 1 say, “I know that you are truthful (sddiq), but I will not
follow you; rather I will oppose you and hate you,” I will be guilty
of a major kufr. Hence it is clear that imd@n is not simply tasdiq, nor
is kufr simply takdhib. Kufr is sometimes takdhib but sometimes
more than that, where it includes opposition and hostility. On the
other hand, imdn is not only tasdiq; it is more than that, wherein it
includes assent (muwdfaqah), love (miwalat) and submission
(ingiyad). tasdiq does not give the whole meaning of imdn; and
islam (submission) is only a part of imdn.

If, however, tasdiq is regarded as a synonym, it should be taken
in a wider sense which includes action also. For this wider meaning
of the term one can refer to a hadith of the Prophet (peace be on
him), “The eyes fornicate, and their fornication is to look; the ears
fornicate, and their fornication is to listen... and the private parts
confirm (yusaddiqu) it or deny (yukadhdhibu) 11.350 Al-Hassan Al-
Basri, may Allah bless him, said, “/mdn is neither formal
conformity nor vain expectation; it settles in the heart and is
confirmed by action.”**' If it is tasdig, it is a particular kind of
tasdiq, as 15 the salah, as we discussed earlier. This 15 not a change
in the wording. Allah has not commanded us to have faith in
general, but to have a particular type of faith. He made its
characteristics clear and He explained them. Therefore, the tasdiq
that is imdn, at the very least, is a type of general tasdiq which
cannot be invoked in every general or particular citing without some

*8° Al-Bukhari, 6243, 6612; Muslim, Al-Qadr, 2657; Abi’ Dawid, Adh-Dhikah, 2152;
Ahmad, 2:276. See also Muslim, 2657; Abii Dawid, 2153; Ahmad, 2:317, 319, 343,
344, 349, 372, 379, 411, 535, 536.

*8!Tbn Abi Shaybah, Al-Musannnaf, 11:22. Ibn Taymiyyah has also mentioned it in
Majmi‘ al-Fatdwa, 7:294.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 291

change in the exposition. Jmdn in the words of the Qur’an and
Sunnah can be made up of both the general and the specific. Such is
the case with insdn (human being) which applies to a rational
animal. Or, it could be referring to the complete tasdiq that is in the
heart, which necessitates what follows from the actions of the heart
and the limbs. Those are the necessary acts of complete faith.
Negation of the necessary acts is evidence of the non-existence of
the necessitating cause. |

We say that those necessary acts are sometimes included in the
word itself and sometimes they are not. Or, it could be that the word
is left according to its lexical meaning and that the Shari‘ah adds
something with respect to its ruling. Or, the Qur’an and Sunnah use
the word in a metaphorical sense, it then having a literal Shari‘ah
meaning and a metaphorical lexical meaning. Or, finally, it could be
the case that the Shari‘ah changed its meaning. These are some of
the suggestions of those who follow this opinion.

It has also been pointed out that the words of the Prophet (peace
be on him) fully support the latter view. He has made it absolutely
clear that one 15 definitely not a mi’min who Is said to believe in the
Prophet (peace be on him) but does not profess it with his tongue
though he is able, nor offers salat, nor fasts, nor loves Allah and
His Prophet (peace be on him), nor fears Him, and, on the contrary,
hates the Prophet (peace be on him) and fights against him. He has
also made it clear that our happiness and position in the Hereafter
depend upon our statement of the testimony of faith and our.
sincerely believing in Allah’s unity and acting accordingly. For
example, he said, “Jmdn has more than seventy parts, and the
highest is the confession that there is no god except Allah, and the
lowest is removing a harmful object from the road;’”** “Modesty is
part of iman;’’®’ “The most perfect mii’min is the one who is best in
character;’’** “Simplicity in dress is part of iman.’”*

*°-The wording of the hadith in hadith collections is a little different. hadith 35 in
Muslim and 9 in Al-Bukhari begins with, “/mdn has more than sixty parts (bid wa
sitttin shu‘bah).” hadith 4676 in Abt’ Dawid and 2614 in At-Tirmidhi and 57 in Ibn
Majah begins with, “/mdn has more than sixty or seventy chapters (bid wa sittin aw
sab ‘iin bab).” The reporter of this hadith was not sure whether the Prophet (peace be
on him) said, “more than sixty” or “more than seventy”.

* This is the ending of the hadith mentioned in the previous note.

°84 At-Tirmidhi, Ar-Rida, 1162; Abi Dawid, As-Sunnah, 2682; Ahmad, 2:250, 472,
527; Ad-Darimi, Ar-Rigagq, 2:323; Ibn Hibban, 1211, 1926. It is an authentic hadith.

***Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd, 4118. The words in Aba Dawid, At-Tarajjul, 4161 are, “Do
you hear? Do you hear? Truly, simplicity in dress (al-badhadhah) is part of imdn.”

292 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

If imdn has different parts and each part is called imdn, it
follows that salah is iman, zakah and hajj are imdan, virtues such as
modesty, trust, fear, and submission, even removing an obstacle
from the way, are parts of imadn. Some of these parts are so basic,
like the two shahddahs, that if you lose them you 1059© 71
completely; others are so marginal, such as removing an obstacle
from the road, that if you lose them you do not lose imdn. Between
the two, we have numerous parts of varying importance, some next
only to the shahddah, and others only a little more important than
removing an obstacle from the way. As the parts of imdn are imdn,
similarly the parts of kufr are kufr. To judge according to the rules
revealed by Allah is part of imdn, and to judge against them 15 ku/r.

The Prophet (peace be on him) has said, “Whoever of you sees
an evil, let him remove it with his hand; if he cannot, then let him
use his tongue against it; 11 he cannot, then let him hate it in his
heart; and know that this is the lowest degree of imdn.’”’*° This
hadith was recorded by Muslim, who also noted a variant that ends
with the words, “...beyond that there is not even a particle of
iman.’”*’ At-Tirmidhi has recorded that the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “Whoever loves for Allah, hates for Allah, spends for
Allah and withholds for Allah has perfect iman.’’**> This hadith
means — and true knowledge 15 with Allah — that love and hate are
the foundations of the acts of the heart, and spending money or
withholding it mark their perfection. Since money is at the other end
from the soul, and the body lies between it and money, if one offers
the first and the last to Allah, Allah is really his God in every
respect. He is free from every form of shirk, from seeking anything
other than Allah or pinning his hopes on it; he has the most perfect
iman. These and other similar ahddith fully prove that imdn varies in
strength or weakness according to the deeds that one does.

Later will come the author’s words about the Companions,
“Loving them is the religion, faith and goodness, and hatred (ku/r)
for them is infidelity, hypocrisy and transgression,” wherein he calls
loving the Companions faith and hating them infidelity.

This is a hasanhadith.

Muslim, Al-Iman, 49; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Fitan, 2173; Ibn Majah, Al-Fitan, 4013;
Abii Dawid, 1140, 4340; Ahmad, 3:10, 20, 49, 53; An-Nasa’i, 8:111-112.
*8"Muslim, 50; At-Tabarani, A/-Kabir, 9784; Ahmad, 1:458, 461, 462.

°88 At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Oiyamah, 2521; Ahmad 3:438, 440; Aba Dawid, 4681. This
is an authentic hadith.

Commentary on the Creed of At- 1 2/1117 293

A strange response is that given by Abi Al-Mu‘in Al-Nasafi and
others concerning the above hadith stating the branches of faith.
They say that the narrator said, “sixty or seventy parts.” Thus the
narrator was admitting that he was not certain about whether it was
sixty or seventy and there is no doubt that the Messenger of Allah
(peace be on him) did not have any doubt about it. Furthermore, that
hadith contradicts the Qur’an; therefore, they criticize the
forgetfulness of the narrator and claim he narrates something that
goes against the Qur’an. Look at that strange criticism. If the
narrator was not sure if it was sixty or seventy, this does not mean
that he was not being proficient. Furthermore, Al-Bukhari records it
clearly as sixty parts without any question or doubt. As for the
criticism that it contradicts the Qur’an, what is there in the Qur’an
that goes against it? In fact, the Qur’an contains things that are in
agreement with it. This type of criticism is simply the result of
prejudice and blind following of others (and therefore trying
anything to defend their positions).

It has also been pointed that gaw/ 15 of two kinds: gawl of the
heart, which is faith (i‘tigdd), and gawl of the tongue, which is
uttering the testimony of Islam. Similarly, ‘amal (action) is of two
kinds: actions of the heart, which are intention and sincerity, and
actions of the body. When all four of these disappear, imdn
disappears completely. When faith (tasdiq) of the heart disappears,
the other three do not avail the person; fasdiq is the condition of their
authenticity and significance. If there is tasdiq in the heart but the
others are no longer there, this 15 the case where the dispute arises
(whether such a person is still a Believer or not).

There is no doubt that the non-submission of the body implies
lack of submission on the part of the heart, for if the heart submits,
the body also surrenders and obeys; but if, on the other hand, the
heart does not submit, there will be no assent (tasdiq) that will be
manifested in obedience. The Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“There is a lump of flesh in the body, which, when it is sound, the
whole body is sound; but when it goes wrong, the whole body goes
wrong as a result. Lo! it is the heart.’**? This means that if one’s
heart is good, his body (actions) will definitely be good. The
opposite is not true. However, the point that when a part of imdn is
lost, the whole of imdn 15 lost is true only in the sense that it does

*®°Part of a hadith, Al-Bukhari, 52; Muslim, 1599; Ibn Majah, Al-Fitan, 3984; Abi
Dawud, 3329, 3330; An-Nasa’i, 7:241; Ahmad, 4:271, Ad-Darimi, 2:245.

294 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

not remain intact, but not in the sense that it disappears completely; it
is only impaired.

That faith (imdn) increases and decreases is supported by a
number of Qur’anic verses, prophetic ahddith and sayings of the
Elders. Read, for example, the following verses: “And when His
verses are recited to them they enhance their faith” [8:2]; “And Allah
increases in guidance those who seek guidance (19:76]; “that the
Believers may increase in faith” [74:31]; “It is He Who sent down
tranquility into the hearts of the Believers, that they add faith to their
faith” [48:4]; and, “Those to whom people said: ‘A great army 5
gathering against you, hence you must be afraid of them,’ but it only
increased their faith, and they said: ‘For us Allah is sufficient,’ and
He is the best Disposer of affairs” [3:173].

Obviously, one cannot say that the increase mentioned in the last
verse and the other verses means increase in the objects of faith. Is
there anything in the statement, “A great army is gathering against
you,” which pertains to some additional aspect that one must believe
in? Did the tranquility that Allah sent down into the hearts add to the
objects of faith? Allah sent down to their hearts calmness upon their
return from Hudaybiyyah in order to increase their tranquility and
conviction. This 15 supported by the verses, “They (the hypocrites)
were that day nearer to not having faith than to faith” [3:167], and
the verse, “Whenever there comes down a sitrah some of them say:
“Which of you has had his faith increased by it?’ Yes, those who
believe, their faith 15 increased and they do rejoice. But as for those
in whose hearts is disease, it only adds wickedness to their
wickedness, and they die while they are disbelievers” [9:124-125].
(The former emphasizes the weakening of faith and the latter its
enhancement.) .

Abi’ Al-Layth As-Samargandi, may Allah bless him,
commenting on the last verse in his commentary, has quoted a
hadith reported through Muhammad Ibn Al-Fadl and Abi Al-Qasim
As-Sabadhi, from Faris Ibn Mardwayh, from Muhammad Ibn AI-
Fadl Ibn Al-‘Abid, from Yahya Ibn ‘Isa, from Abt Muti, from
Hammad Ibn Salamah, from Abi Al-Muhazzim, on the authority of
Abi Hurayrah, that a delegation from the tribe of Thagif came to the
Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) and said, “Messenger of
Allah, does imdn increase or decrease?” He replied, “No, imdn is
perfect in the heart. Any addition to it or deduction from it is
infidelity (kufr).”*’° When our teacher, Shaykh Imad ad-Din Ibn

This is not a hadith of the Prophet, as Ibn Kathir has correctly pointed out. See

Commentary on the Creed of At- 1 211117 295

Kathir, may Allah bless him, was asked about this hadith, he said,
“The narrators between Abi Al-Layth and Abt: Muti are not known;
they have not been mentioned in the well-known biographical
works. As for Abt Muti, his name is Al-Hakam Ibn Maslamah Al-
Balkhi. He has been dubbed weak by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Yahya
Ibn Mu‘in, ‘Amr Ibn ‘Ali Al-Fallas, Al-Bukhari, Abu. Dawid, Al-
Nasa’1, Abt Hatim Ar-R4zi, Abt Hatim Muhammad Ibn Hibban Al-
Busti, Al-‘Ugayli, Ibn ‘Adiy, Ad-Daraqutni, and others. As for Abi
Al-Muhazzim, who narrated the hadith from Abt Hurayrah, his
name has not been correctly written by the scribes. His name is
Yazid Ibn Sufyan; he is also not held reliable by many scholars.
Shi‘bah Ibn Al-Hajjaj avoided narrating from him, and Al-Nasa’i
says that he has been discarded. Shti‘bah even implicates him in
fabricating ahddith. He says, ‘If he is given two cents he will
fabricate seventy ahddith.”””'

The Prophet (peace be on him) said that women have a
shortcoming in reason (‘ag/) and faith (din).*?* On another occasion,

he (peace be on him) said, “None of you will be faithful unless I am
dearer to him than his son, father and all mankind.’*’? What he
meant is that no one 15 perfect in faith unless he loves him more than
anyone else. There are many more ahddith like this. You may also
refer to the hadith on the parts of imdn or intercession, or the hadith
which says that all those who have a particle of faith in their hearts
will be taken out from Hell. In the face of all this evidence, how can
one say that the faith of those in the heavens and those on the earth
are all equal, or that they differ in some respects other than faith?

As for the sayings of the Companions, there are also many. Abi
Ad-Darda’ said, “It is part of one’s wisdom to guard one’s faith
against things that could weaken it. It is part of the deep
understanding of a person that he knows if his imdn has increased

Adh-Dhahabi, Mizdn al-I‘tiddl, 3:42; As-Suyiti, Al-La’dali al-Masni‘ah fi ahddith al-
Mawdi‘ah (Beirut: Dar Al-Ma‘rifah, 3rd ed. 1401/181), 1:38; Ibn Hibban, A/-
Majrithin wa ad-Du‘a’fa (ed. Muhammad Ibrahim Zayid; Halab: Dar Al-Wa‘l,
1402/1982), 2:102-3; ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Iraq, Tanzih ash-Shari‘ah (ed. ‘Abdul-
Wahhab ‘Abdul-Latif; Beirut: Dar Al-Kutub Al-‘IImiyyah, 1401/1981), vol. 1, p. 149.
*"!See, for example, Ibn ‘Adiy, Al-Kamil fi Du‘a’fa ar-Rijal (Beirut: Dar Al-Fikr,
1404/ 1984), vol. 7, pp. 2721-2722.

*?Mfuslim, 79, 80; Al-Bukhari, 304, 1462; Abt Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4679; An-
Nasa’l, 3:187. |

393 Al-Bukhari, Al-Imdn, 15; Muslim, Al-iman, 44; An-Nasa’i, Al-Iman, 8:115; Ybn
Majah, Al-Muqaddamah, 67; Ahmad, 3:207, 275, 278.

296 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

or decreased.” ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab used to say to his friends,
“Come on, let us increase our faith,” and then began remembering
Allah the Almighty with them.’”’* Ibn Mas‘id used to say in his
prayers, “O Allah! Increase our faith, certainty and
understanding.’”’> Mu‘adh Ibn Jabal would say to a man, “Let us sit
down and strengthen our faith for a while.”’’° This has also been
reported of ‘Abdullah Ibn Rawahah. ‘Ammar Ibn YaAsir said, “He
perfects his faith who practices three things: does justice to himself,
spends in adversity, and greets everyone.” This has been recorded
by Al-Bukhari in his Sahih.’’’ I need not quote more here; this much
will suffice. And Allah is the Guide.

It has been said that ‘amal (action) has often been mentioned in
conjunction with imdn — this implies that action 15 not included 1n the
connotation of imdan. The first thing that should be noted in this
connection is that imdn is mentioned 11 two ways. Sometimes it 5
mentioned alone, and neither any particular act nor Islam is
mentioned along with it; and sometimes it is mentioned in
association with a religious act or islam. In the first case, imdn
necessarily includes action, for example, “Believers are those who,
when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in the heart” [7:2]; or “Only
those are Believers who have believed in Allah and His Messenger,
and have never since doubted” [49:15]; “They only are true
Believers who believe in Allah and His Messenger” [24:62]; or “If
only they had believed in what has been revealed to him, they would
never have taken them for friends and protectors” [5:84]. The
following hadith may also be cited, “No fornicator fornicates and he
is a Believer;”’> “You do not believe unless you love one
another;’”’? “Whoever cheats us is not of us; “Whoever carries
weapons against us is not one of us.’*°° Some people take the
words “is not of us” to mean “is not like us.” This is wrong. My
Lord! How could that be? That would mean that one who simply

“Ibn Abi Shaybah, A/-Musannaf, 11:26.

°° At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, hadith 8549. Al-Haythami notes that the chain of this
narration 1s good (Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, 10:1875).

16155 Abi Shaybah, A/-Musannaf, 11:26; Abi Nu‘aym, Al-Hilyah, 1:235. The chain
of this narration is good.

°° Al-Bukhari, /fshd as-Salam, 1:82. See also Ibn Abi Shaybah, A/l-Musannaf, 11:48.
*°8Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

Part of ahadith, Muslim, Al-Iman, 54; Aba Dawid, A/l-Adab, 5193; At-Tirmidhi,
Al-Isti‘dhan, 2688; Ibn Majah, 68, 3692; Ahmad, 2:391, 442, 495, 512.

Part of a hadith, Muslim, 101, 102; At-Tirmidhi, 1315; Abi Dawid, 3452; Ibn
Majah, 2224; Ahmad, 2:217, 242.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi | 297

does not cheat is like the Prophet (peace be on him) and his
Companions.

In the second case, where any righteous action 15 associated with
iman, the implication is that imdn is different from action, even
though their predicate is the same. However, the difference is of
varying degrees.*°' The strongest one is between two things which
are not one, and of which neither is a part of the other or has
anything in common with the other, or implies it. This difference
exists, for example, between the things which have been conjoined
in the verse, “He created the heavens and the earth and made the
darkness and the light” [6:1]; or the verse, “He sent down the Torah
and the Gospel” [3:3]. This is the usual meaning of difference. Next
to it is the difference which is found in things that imply each other.
This 15 illustrated in the following verse, “And cover not truth with
falsehood, nor conceal the truth when you know” [2:42]; and “Obey
Allah and obey the Prophet” [5:95]. The third difference is where
One is in conjunction with the other, as in the verses, “Be guardians
of your prayers, and of the midmost prayer” [2:238]; “Whoever is
an enemy to Allah and His angels and His messengers and to
Gabriel and Michael...” [2:98]; or “And remember We took from the
prophets their covenant and from you” [33:7].

This difference has been interpreted in several ways. One 1s that
the second thing 1s included in the first and is, therefore, mentioned
twice. Second and third are that the second 15 not included in the
first in the particular case mentioned, even though it is in principle
included in the first when stated alone. People have interpreted the
phrase, al-fugard wa al-masdkin (the poor and the needy) [9:60] and
other phrases in this manner. It 1s obvious that the meaning will
differ if we take the two words together and if we take them
separately. The fourth difference 15 found when a thing is conjoined
with itself with respect to two of its different qualities or properties.
An example is, “The Forgiver of sin and the Acceptor of repentance”’
[40:3]. A poet has said, “He found her words false and untrue.”
This 15 a case of conjoining synonyms. Some people think that the
same 15 the case in some places in the Qur’4n, such as in the verse,
“To each among you We have prescribed a shari‘ah and a minhdyj,
(law and way)” [5:51]. For a detailed discussion on this point, see
the relevant works.

In light of this analysis we will look at the use of the word imdn
in the Qur’an and the Sunnah. When it 15 used by itself it means

‘Ibn Taymiyyah has discussed the various forms of difference in Majma' al-Fatdwa,
7:172-181.

298 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

what the words 5177“ (righteousness), 124011 (piety), din (religion) or
din al-Islam (religion of Islam) mean. It has been reported that the
background of verse 2:177 is that people asked, “What is imdn?”’
Answering this question, it was revealed, “It is not 5
(birr) that you turn your faces towards East or West; righteousness
is to believe in Allah and the Last Day, the angels, the books and the
messengers; to spend of your substance out of love for Him, for
your kin, for orphans, for the needy, for the wayfarer, for those
who ask, and for the ransom of servants; to be steadfast in prayer,
and practice regular charity; to fulfill the contracts which you have
made; and to be firm and patient in pain (or suffering) and adversity,
and throughout all periods of panic. Such are the people of truth, the
God-fearing” [2:177].

Muhammad Ibn Nasr narrated from Ishaq Ibn Ibrahim, from
‘Abdullah Ibn Yazid Al-Muqri and Al-Mala’1, from Al-Man‘udi
through Al-Qasim, that a man came to Abii Dharr, may Allah be
pleased with him, and asked, “What is imdadn?” He recited the same
verse, “It is not righteousness...” [2:177]. The man said, “I did not
ask you about that.” Abu Dharr said, “A man came to the Prophet
(peace be on him) and asked the same question you asked me, and
the Prophet (peace be on him) recited to him the same verse I have
recited to you. Thereupon, the man said to the Prophet (peace be on
him) what you said to me. When the Prophet (peace be on him) saw
that he was not satisfied, he said, ‘A believer (mi’min) is one who
feels happy when he does good and hopes to be rewarded for it, and
who feels unhappy when he does evil and 15 afraid that he may be
punished for it. 92 A number of Elders have responded in the same
way when they were asked 326011

It has been recorded in the Sahih that the Prophet (peace be on
him) said to the delegation from the ‘Abdul-Qays tribe visiting him,
“T enjoin upon you to believe in none other than Allah. Do you
know what faith in Allah means? It 1s to witness that there is no god
besides Allah, the one and the only God, without a partner. It is to

‘The chain of this hadith is weak. However, its meaning is supported by a hadith
recorded by Al-Hakim on the authority of Abi) Umamah: A man asked the Prophet
(peace be on him), “What is imdn?” He replied, “If you feel happy when you do good,
and feel unhappy when you do evil, then you are a Believer.” the man further asked,
“Messenger of Allah, what is sin?” He replied, “When you feel uneasy over a thing,
leave it.”” [See Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 1:14; Al-Hakim has claimed that the hadith
is sahih and Adh-Dhahabi has endorsed his view).

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 299

establish salah, pay zakah and hand over (to us) a fifth of booty.’”°”
Obviously the Prophet (peace be on him) did not mean by that that
these acts could be called 7mdn in Allah without faith in Him in the
heart. On several occasions he emphasized the necessity of faith in
the heart. It is, therefore, certain that 7mdn is these acts along with
faith in the heart.

What greater proof than the hadith of the Prophet (peace be on
him) can there be to show that actions are included as part of faith?
He defined imadn in terms of actions and did not mention conviction
(tasdiq) of the heart, that 15 because it 1s well known that actions
have no value if rejection 15 in the heart.

In the Musnad, we have a hadith reported by Anas that the
Prophet (peace be on him) said, “/s/@m 15 visible and imdn is
(hidden) in the heart.’””°* This hadith differentiates between imdn
and is/am. This point 15 further supported by the hadith which says
that Gabriel came to the Prophet (peace be on him) one day and
questioned him about is/am, imdn and ihsdn. The Prophet (peace be
on him) answered his questions and then said to the Companions
around him that it was Gabriel who had come to teach them their
religion (din). This means that according to the Prophet (peace be on
him) din 15 islam, iman and ihsdn. There are, therefore, three grades
of people in the religion. There are those who are muslim, then
above them mi’min, and at the top muhsin. /mdn definitively
includes all that comes under is/@m, and ihsdn incudes all that comes
under Islam and imdn. It does not mean that there could be ithsdn
without imdn. Allah has said, “Then We have given the Book for
inheritance to such of Our servants as We have chosen. But there are
among them some who wrong their own souls; some who follow a
middle course; and some who are, by Allah’s leave, foremost in
good deeds” [35:32]. Both those in the middle and the front-runners
will enter Paradise without undergoing any punishment. The
wrongdoers have exposed themselves to the threatened punishment
of Allah according to Allah’s warning.””° This is the destiny of those
who have faith in the heart and submit externally to the Lord, but fail
to fulfill the internal demands of imdn, and therefore expose
themselves to His chastisement.

"S Al-Bukhari, 53, 87, 523, 1398, 3095: Muslim, A/-/mdn, 17; At-Tirmidhi, A/-
Imdn, 2611: Aba Dawid, Al-Ashribah, 3692; An-Nasa‘i. 8:323; Ahmad, 1:278.

** Ahmad, 3:135. But the chain of the hadith is weak, as one of its transmitters, “Ali
Ibn Man‘adah had a weak memory.

’See also Ibn Taymiyyah, Majma’‘ al-Fatdwa, 7:485f.

300 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Of the three terms, is/Gm, imdn and ihsdn, the one that is most
comprehensive 15 ihsdn, but its practitioners are the fewest. Next
comes imdan; it is more comprehensive than islam, but its
practitioners are fewer than muslims. The muhsins are fewer than
the mu’mins, and the mi’mins are fewer than the muslims. The
relation between them is like the relation between risalah
(messengerhood) and nibuwwah (prophethood). Risdlah implies
niubuwwah, and has a wider connotation, but its bearers are fewer
than those of nibuwwah. Every messenger is a prophet, but not
vice-versa.

What does is/4m mean? There are three different views on the
subject.*°° Some people equate it with (professing) the kalimah.
Others define it as the Prophet (peace be on him) did when he was
asked about is/dm and imdn. He defined is/G@m in terms of external
acts of obedience, and defined imdn as faith in the five basic
principles. A third group makes is/4dm synonymous with imdn, and
argues from the hadith, “Islam is to witness that there 1s no god but
Allah, to establish salah and....’”°’ They take is/dm in the sense of
the principles of Islam, which is not the point under discussion here.
On the one hand, they take imdn to mean the assent (fasdiq) of the
heart. On the other hand, they equate is/@m with imdn, from which
it follows that islam is the tasdiq of the heart. This is not supported
by any lexicographer. They have always defined is/dm as
submission and obedience. The Prophet has said, “O Allah, to You I
submit (as/l@mtu), and in You I put my faith (amantu).”*°* He has
explained is/am in terms of external actions, and imdn in terms of
faith in five fundamentals. Hence if one mentions them together one
must explain them as the Prophet (peace be on him) did.

However, 11 imdn is mentioned separately it will include islam,
and if islam is mentioned separately then the muslim has to be a
mu min, There 15 no disagreement on this point. But whether a
Muslim should be called ma ’min or not, there are different opinions,
as we have said earlier.

Does islam imply iman? On this question, too, opinions differ.
Allah has promised Paradise and relief from the Fire on the
condition that one has imdn. He has said, “Behold! verily on the

"Ibid, 7:360.

17 Muslim, 8; Aba Dawid, 4695; An-Nasa’l, 8:97-101; Ibn Majah, 63.

*Part of a hadith, Al-Bukhari, 1120, 6317; Muslim, Salat al-Musafirin, 769; An-
Nasa’i, 3:209-210; Ibn Majah, /gadmat as-Salah, 1355; Ahmad, 1:298, 308, 358.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 301

friends of Allah there is no fear nor will they grieve — those who
believe (amani) and constantly guard against evil’ [11:62-63]; and
“Be you foremost in seeking forgiveness from your Lord and a
Garden (of Bliss) the width whereof is the width of Heaven and the
earth, prepared for those who believe (amani) in Allah and His
messengers” [57:21]. But nowhere has He made entry into Paradise
conditional on islam, even though He has enjoined it and
promulgated it as the only religion acceptable to Him, and sent every
prophet with it. “If anyone desires a religion other than Islam,” He
has said “never will it be accepted of him” [3:85].

To conclude: When islam and imdn are mentioned together it is
different from the case when one is mentioned without the other.
Islam 15 to imdn as the two testimonies - witnessing to Muhammad’s
prophecy in relation to witnessing to Allah’s unity - are to each
other. In essence, these two witnesses are two different things,
though the idea and the effects of the one are associated with the idea
and the effects of the other, as if they were one thing. The same is
the case with is/dm and imdn. No one can have imdn without islam,
or islam without 771671. One has to have islam to some extent in
order to prove his imdn, just as one has to have imdn in order to
authenticate one’s islam.

There are numerous instances in the Qur’an and the Sunnah as
well as in language, which demonstrate the point that things when
conjoined mean one thing and when used separately mean a different
thing. Take, for example, the terms kufr and nifag. When ku/r is
mentioned separately and the context 1s, for example, of punishment
in the Hereafter, the mundfig (hypocrite) is bracketed with the kdfir
(infidel). The Qur’an says, “If anyone rejects faith (yakfur bi al-
iman), his work 15 fruitless, and in the Hereafter he will be among
the losers” [5:6]. We can cite many other verses. The point we are
making is that when they are both mentioned together, kafir means
one who openly declares his kufr (not to have faith) and the munafiq
(hypocrite) is one who asserts faith with his tongue but denies it in
his heart. The same is true for other pairs of words, like birr
(righteousness) and taqwd (piety), ithm (sin) and ‘udwan
(transgression), tawbah (repentance) and istighfar. (seeking
forgiveness), fagir (needy) and miskin (poor), and so on.

The difference between isldm and imdan is attested to by the
verse, “The desert Arabs say: “We believe (amannd).’ Say: You do
not have faith (lam tu ’minu), but say: ‘We have submitted (as/4mnda)
to Allah.’ The faith has not entered your heart...” [49:14]. Some
people have observed that the words “we have submitted” (aslamna)
302 ‏هزنت‎ Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

simply mean that they have surrendered externally although in reality
they are hypocrites (mundfiq). This 15 one interpretation. The other
interpretation, which is generally accepted and is stronger, is that
they are not hypocrites, although complete faith has been denied to
them in the same sense in which it has been denied to a murderer, a
fornicator, a robber and a cheat. The context of the verse also
supports this interpretation. From the beginning of the suéirah up to
this verse, the discussion is focused on evil acts and the
consequences which some of the those who commit them will have
to face. Nowhere have the hypocrites been mentioned. Again, just
after the words under discussion, Allah has said, “But if you obey
Allah and His Messenger, He will not belittle aught of your deeds.”
Obviously, were they hypocrites, their deeds will not be of any
benefit to them. He has further said, “Only those are Believers
(mii’minin) who believed in Allah and His Messenger and have
never since doubted” [49:15]. That is, true and perfect Believers
have these qualities but not the desert Arabs, whose faith is not
perfect.

A further argument is that Allah has allowed their claim, “we
have submitted” (aslamnda). But had they been hypocrites He would
not have allowed this; on the contrary, He would have disallowed it.
Certainly He would have denied the epithet muslim, as he had
denied the epithet maz’min. He has only asked them not to impress
on the Prophet (peace be on him) that they are doing him a favor by
embracing Islam (49:16]. This is another recognition of their islam,
for if their islam had not been genuine, they would have been told
that they were not Muslims but imposters, just as the hypocrites
were told that they were not sincere in their witness when they
witnessed that Muhammad, peace be upon him, was the Messenger
of Allah (63:1]. However, Allah knows best.

This discussion, I hope, completely refutes the view that imdn
and islam are synonymous, as it repudiates the objection that if
islam referred to external acts, it would be possible to accept nothing
other than it, not even the imdn of a sincere person. This 5
obviously false. We have cited the two testimonies (shahddatdn) and
many other things, and established the fact that what they mean
when mentioned separately is different from what they mean when
mentioned jointly. Look, for example, at the first 57072007. The
Prophet (peace be on him) said, “I have been commanded to fight
people until they say: There is no god except Allah.” Obviously, if
they say “There is no god except Allah,’ and deny the
messengership of Muhammad, they will not save themselves from
war; they will have to say, “there is no god except Allah” in the
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 303

proper way, which is, they will have to witness to Muhammad’s
messengership along with Allah’s unity. Similarly, they will not be
witnessing to the messengership of Muhammad, peace be upon him,
unless they witness that all that he has brought is true. This will
imply witnessing to Allah’s unity. On the other hand, if the witness
that. Allah is one is joined with the witness that Muhammad is His
messenger, the first witness will be a witness to Allah’s unity and
the second to Muhammad’s messengership. Similarly, when islam
and imdn are mentioned together, they mean different things. An
example is the verse, “Verily the Muslim men and women, the
mu 771171 men and women” [33:35]. And the Prophet’s. words, “O
Allah, to You I have submitted and in You I believe.’ the meaning
of one 15 different from the meaning of the other. And the Prophet’s
words, “15127 is visible and imdn is (hidden) in the heart.’”'° If just
one is mentioned, it includes the meaning of the other, as in the case
of fagir (poor) and miskin (pauper) and other terms. When fagir and
miskin are used together, they refer to different things; when used
separately, they refer to the same thing. Does anyone say about
Allah’s words, “The expiation of the oath is the feeding of ten of the
needy...” [5:89] that one may give to one who has little as opposed
to one who has nothing, or the reverse? Similar is the case with the
verse, “If you publish your almsgiving, it is well, but if you hide it
and give it to the poor...” [2:271].

This also refutes the machinations of those who ask what the
ruling is in this world and the next for one who believes but does
not submit or who submits but does not believe. If someone can
affirm a ruling for one of them that is not confirmed for the other, it
is clear that his statement is invalid and incorrect.

You can answer such a person by saying that you equate muslim
with mii’min while Allah says, “Verily the Muslim men and women,
the mii’min men and women’’ [33:35]. Allah has made them two
different things. To a person who testified to the imdn of his friend,
the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “You should rather say that he is
a muslim,” and he repeated the words three times.*'' This means
that he affirmed the islam of the person, but refrained from
affirming his imdn. It is, therefore, plain that whoever equates the
two opposes the Qur’an and the Sunnah. Our duty is that whenever
we differ on any point we should turn to Allah and the Prophet

407 This hadith was discussed earlier.

*!°Discussed earlier; it is weak. ;
*"! Al-Bukhari, 27, 1478; Muslim, Al-/man, 150; Ahmad, 1:182.

304 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

(peace be on him). Some texts might appear to be conflicting, but in
reality they are not; they can be easily reconciled with each other, by
the grace of Allah.

Those who consider imdn and Islam to be synonymous argue
from the verse, “Then We evacuated those of the Believers
(mi’minun) who were there, but We found not but one house
inhabited by Muslims” [51:35-36]. This inference is not correct, for
the people who were evacuated were muslim and mi’min, and if
these epithets have been mentioned together it does not mean that
they are synonymous.

The objections that we have mentioned were not advanced by
Abi Hanifah, although they have been advanced by his followers.
He himself never approved of them. At-Tahawi has reported that
Hammad Ibn Zayd recited to Abi Hanifah the hadith which says
that the Prophet (peace be on him) was asked which Islam was
better (to the end),*'” and he added, “Don’t you see that the Prophet
(peace be on him) was asked which Islam was better, and in reply
he said imdn instead of islam, and then mentioned hijrah (migration
in the way of Allah), and jihad, as part of imdn.” Abi Hanifah kept
silent on this, but one of his students urged him to give a reply. He
said, “What should I say? Don’t you see that Hammad 15 quoting the
Prophet, peace be upon him?”

From the fruits of the above difference of opinion is the question
of saying, “I am a Believer, God willing.” Regarding this statement,
they are three opinions — two extremes and one in the middle. Some
say that one must say the words, “God willing (insha’ Allah)’.
Others say that it is forbidden to make such a statement. Other say it
is allowed in some instances and prohibited in others. That is the
soundest of the three opinions. |

Those who say it is obligatory to say “God willing” have two
stances. First, faith is what a person dies upon. A person is a
Believer or a disbeliever in Allah’s sight according to his condition
at death. Because of Allah’s foreknowledge, He knows in what state
the person will die. What occurs before that is of no importance. So
they say that the faith that is followed by infidelity is, in fact, no
faith at all. It is like the prayer that is invalidated before it is finished
or the fast of a person who breaks his fast before sunset. The
Kalabiyyah and others follow this argument. According to them,

*"’For the hadith see Abdur-Razzaqg, Al-Musannaf, 20107; Ahmad, 4:114. Al-
Haythami observes that the hadith has also been recorded by At-Tabarani and that its
transmitters are reliable (Majmit‘ az-Zawa’id, 1:59).

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 305

Allah always loved those disbelievers that He knew would die as
Believers. The Companions, for example, were always beloved to
Allah even before their conversions to Islam. Iblis and all of those
who apostasized were always hated by Allah, even before their
infidelity. This is not the statement of the Elders. Those of them
who did say that one should say “God willing” did not use such an
argument; it is clearly wrong. Allah says, “Say: If you truly love
Allah, then follow me and Allah will love you” [3:31]. Here He is
stating that He will love them if they follow the Messenger. Hence,
following the Messenger is a condition for His love. And the
conditional result must come after the condition. There is other
evidence as well.

A group of people went to an extreme on this point. They would
begin to say “God willing” for good deeds. They would say, “I
prayed, God willing,” and so on, meaning it was accepted. Some of
them even started saying it for everything. One would say, “This is
an article of clothing, God willing,” “This is a rope, God willing.”
If you tell them, “There is no doubt about that (being a rope),”’ They
would say, “Yes, that is true. But if Allah wills to change it, He will
change it.”

Their second point is that absolute faith requires the servant to be
doing everything Allah commands and avoiding everything He
forbids. If a person says, “I am a Believer,” then, in that sense, he
is testifying about himself that he is one of the most pious people,
who is doing everything he is commanded and abstaining from
everything forbidden. He is saying he is from the devoted servants
who are close to Allah. This is self-sanctification if that testimony 5
true. But he must also testify that he will be of Paradise if he dies in
that state.

_ This was the stance of the majority of the Elders who used to
include the words “God willing” when stating they were Believers.
They would also permit not stating it in a different meaning, as we
will mention, God willing. They also stood for the permissibility of
saying “God willing” about something concerning which there is no
doubt, based on the verse, “You will indeed enter the Inviolable
Place of Worship, if Allah wills, secure” [48:27]. Similarly, when
the Prophet (peace be on him) stopped in front of a graveyard, he
said, “We, God willing, will join you.””'’ He also said, “I hope to

*!°Muslim, 249; Abi Dawid, 3237; Ibn Majah, 4306; Ahmad, 2:300, 375, 408; An-
Nasa’, 1:94-95.

306 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

be the most fearful of Allah of all of you.’”"'* There are other
examples also.

Those who forbid such a statement are all those who say that
imadn 15 one entity. They will say, “I know that I am a Believer in the
same way that I know that I made the testimony. My statement, ‘I
am a Believer,’ is the same as my statement, ‘I am a Muslim.’ the
one who says, ‘God willing’ concerning his faith then has a doubt
about it.” They call such people doubters. They respond to the
verse, “You will indeed enter the Inviolable Place of Worship, if
Allah wills, secure” [48:27], by saying that it refers to the feeling of
security or fear. As for entering the House, there is no doubt about
it. Or they say that all or some of them will enter it, as Allah knows
that some of them will die.

There is some question, though, about those two responses.
They end up in the position that they want to flee from. As for
security or fear, Allah states that they will enter in security, and He
knows that. Therefore, there is no doubt about entering or about
them being secure upon doing so. Nor is there any question about
some or all of them entering the House because Allah knows which
ones will do so, again, without any doubt. The statement, “God
willing,” here is emphasis that they will enter, like the person who
says about something he will definitely do: “By Allah, I will do it,
God willing.” Here he does not say “God willing” out of any doubt
but out of desire and resolve. But, in that case, one who does not
fulfill what he stated does not break his oath because he did not
clearly state he would do it.

There is another response that is fairly acceptable. Allah made
such a statement to teach us how to make statements about things
that will happen in the future. But there is some question about
whether that is what is meant by the verse, as the context does not
point to it, but it may be considered something the verse simply
alludes to. |

Az-Zamakhshari responds with two other answers that are false.
The first is that the angel or the Messenger of Allah (peace be on
him) said it and the Qur’an confirmed it.

Those who allow the saying of “God willing” as well as not
saying it have the best evidence from the two groups. The best is the
middle one. If the one who says “God willing’ has some doubt
about his imdn, it is not allowed to say it. This is agreed upon. But
if he means that he is a Believer from those Believers that Allah has

“Muslim, 1110; Abi Dawid, 2389; Malik, 1:289; Ahmad, 6:67, 156, 245.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 307

described in the verses, “They only are (true) Believers whose
hearts feel fear when Allah is mentioned, and when the revelations
of Allah are recited unto them they increase their faith, and who trust
in their Lord, who establish worship and spend of what We have
bestowed on them. Those are they who are in truth Believers, for
them are grades (of honor) with their Lord, and pardon, and a
bountiful provision” [8:2-4], or in the verse, “The true Believers are
those only who believe in Allah and His Messenger and afterward
doubt not, but strive with their wealth and their lives for the cause of
Allah. Such are the sincere” [49:15], then in that case, saying “God
willing” is permissible. Similarly, one who says “God willing,”
meaning that he does not know what his end will be, or in reference
to a command of Allah, without any doubt about his faith, then such
a statement is permissible. This is, as you can see, a strong position.

The author then says, “All that the Prophet (peace be on him) 5
authentically known to have said or enjoined is true.” This is to
refute the view of the Jahmiyyah, the negators (mu ‘attilah) of divine
attributes, the Mu‘tazilah, and the Rafidah, who divide informative
reports into 7211101100117 (reported by many people at every stage of
transmission) and a@hdd (non-mutawédatir) reports and then say that,
although the mutawdatir reports are absolutely authentic, they may
not be definitive with respect to what they are stating, since a text by
itself does not bring about certainty. Even the Qur’anic statements
about Allah’s attributes, they say, do not provide that guarantee. As
for adhdd reports, they do not yield any knowledge; neither its
transmitting chain (isndd), nor its text can be the basis of any
argument. They close on themselves the door to knowledge of
Allah, His names, attributes and acts that come from the Prophet
(peace be on him), and they live on nothing but their whims and
fancies, which they love to call rational truths and demonstrative
proofs. In fact, they have what, in the words of the Qur’an, 15 “like
a mirage in sandy deserts which the man parched with thirst
mistakes for water, until when he comes up to it he finds it to be
nothing and finds Allah with him Who will pay him his account.
And Allah is swift in taking account. Or it is like the depths of
darkness in a vast deep ocean overwhelmed with billow topped by
billow, topped by (dark) clouds: depths of darkness one above
another. If a man stretches out his hand he can hardly see it! For any
to whom Allah gives not light there is no light” [24:39-40].

It is amazing how they exalt their reason over revelation and
disregard the Qur’an. Consequently they move away from divine |
guidance. On the other hand, they hardly get at the true rational
propositions inherent in the nature of man, or implied in _ the
308 Sharh Al-‘Agidah 41-1 ‏مم ناه‎

prophetic texts. Had they sought guidance in revelation they would |
have arrived at rational propositions that agree with natural
intuitions.

These heretics interpret scriptural texts in the light of their
heresies and what they claim to be rational ideas. Whatever agrees
with them, they call clear and unequivocal (muhkam), and they
accept it; and whatever does not agree with what they believe in,
they call equivocal (mutashabih), and they reject it. They say either
that Allah alone knows what it means, or they misinterpret it and
claim that what they say is the correct interpretation. This 15 ‘the
reason the ‏أطخ‎ as-Sunnah denounce them vehemently.

The Ahl as-Sunnah do not neglect any authentic text, or pit
against it any rationalistic proposition or the words of any person,
whoever he may be, as the author has stated. Al-Bukhari narrates
that Al-Humaydi was with Ash-Shafi‘i when a man came and asked
‘his opinion in a particular matter. Ash-Shafi‘l told him the verdict
which the Prophet (peace be on him) had given on that matter. The
man insisted on knowing Ash-Shafi‘l’s own view. He then said,
“Glory is for Allah alone. Do you think I am of those who goes to a
church or to a synagogue or wears a chord? I am telling you the
verdict of the Prophet (peace be on him) and you ask for my
view?!’"'° This is not a stray instance; there are many such
statements that have come down from the Elders. Furthermore,
Allah has said, “It is not fitting for a Believer, man or woman, when
a matter has been decided by Allah and His Messenger, to have any
option about their decision” [33:36].

An @had hadith, when accepted, believed in and acted upon by
the ummah produces certain knowledge according to the majority of
scholars of all the ages.*’° It is treated as a type of mutawatir hadith.
There is no difference among the Elders on this point. Examples of
this kind of hadith are many. One is reported by ‘Umar Ibn AI-.
Khattab. Its opening words are, “Actions will be judged according
to their motives.””'’ Another which is reported by Ibn ‘Umar says,
“The Prophet prohibited the sale of clientage as well as its
donation.’”'* A third, which is reported by Abi Hurayrah, says, “A

*"See Abii Nu‘aym, Hilyat al-Awliya’, 9:106; Al-Bayhagi, Mandgib Ash-Shafi ‘i,
1:474. |

*'’For a discussion of this point see Ibn Al-Qayyim, Mukhtasar as-Sawd’iq al-
Mursalah 2:372-433.

*'Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

*!8 Al-Bukhari, 2535, 6756; Muslim, A/- ‘tg, 1506; Abi Dawid, Al-Fard’id, 2919; At-
Tirmidhi, A/-Buyu‘, 1236; An-Nasa’i, 7:306; Ibn Majah, Al-Fard’id, 2747; Ad-

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 309

woman is not to be married along with her paternal or maternal
aunt.””'’ A fourth hadith says, “All those marriages which are
forbidden because of blood relations are also forbidden on the
ground of fostering.’**° There are many more of this nature. These
ahddith carry the same weight as the news about the change of
giblah, which was given by one man to the people praying at the
Quba’ Mosque, and according to which they turned to the new
giblah, the Ka‘bah.**'

The Prophet used to communicate messages through one man,
or send letters through a messenger, but never did anyone say that
he would not accept the message because it was passed on by only
one man. Allah has said, “It is He Who has sent His Messenger
with guidance and the religion of truth to proclaim it over all
religions” [9:33]. This requires that He should guard and preserve
His revelations and messages so that people may know them. This
also explains why Allah denounces and exposes those who deny the
messenger during his lifetime or after his death. Sufyan Ibn
‘Uyanah said, “Allah never fails to expose one who lies in a
hadith.” ‘Abdullah [bn Al-Mubarak said, “If anyone tries to lie in a
hadith he is exposed and declared a liar.”

Ahdd reports may be correct or incorrect. But distinguishing
between a correct and an incorrect report or a true and false report 5
not possible for everyone. The only scholars who can do that are
those who have devoted themselves to the scrutiny of hadith and its
narrators, who are aware of their lives and views, and know how
careful they were in narration. They never allow anybody to falsely
ascribe a word to the Prophet (peace be on him) even though it may
cost their lives, nor do they allow any liberty to themselves. They
have passed on the religion to us as accurately as they got it; they are
guardians of Islam and defenders of imdn. They are keen critics of
reports and true judges of ahdadith; whoever knows them and their
veracity, honesty and piety, and the care they take in reporting will
be convinced that what they have reported is knowledge. And when

Darimi, 2:398; Ahmad, 2:9, 79, 107.

*’Al-Bukhari, 5109, 5110; Muslim, An-Nikadh, 1408; At-Tirmidhi, An-Nikah, 1126:
Abt Dawid, An-Nikah, 2065; An-Nasa’i, 6:96, 97; Ahmad, 2:229, 423, 426, 432.
**"Al-Bukhari, 2645, 5100; Ibn Majah, 1938; An-Nasa’1, 6:100; Ahmad, 1:275, 339.
With a somewhat different wording the hadith is in Muslim, 1444, 1447; Al-Bukhari,
2646, 3105; Abt Dawid, 2055; At-Tirmidhi, 1146, 1147; An-Nasa’i, 6:96; Ad-
Darimi, 2:156; Ahmad, 6:51, 66, 72, 102, 178.

**'Al-Bukhari, 403, 4488, 4490; Muslim, A/-Masdjid, 526; An-Nasa’i, 2:61, Ad-
Darimi, 1:281; Ahmad, 2:16, 113.

310 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

one acquaints oneself with their work one will realize that the hadith
scholars have a profound insight into the life, work and history of
the Prophet (peace be on him) which is not available to anyone else,
not even a part thereof. This 15 as true as the fact that no one is more
informed on the lives and ideas of Sibawayh and Khalil than the
philologists, or of Hippocrates and Galen than the physicians.
Obviously, if you ask a grocer about a scent or a perfumer about
clothes nothing will be more foolish of you.

Those who negate the attributes of Allah use the verse, “There is
nothing like unto Him” [42:11] as proof to reject a number of
authentic ahddith. Whenever they come across ahddith which go
against their principles or the ideas they have derived from reason or
imagination, they reject them on the plea that they conflict with the
verse, “There is nothing like Him.” This is an act of deception from
them; it fools those whose hearts are even blinder than theirs and is a
twisting of the meaning of the verse. |

They interpret the ahddith on divine attributes 1n a sense which
was meant neither by Allah nor His Messenger (peace be on him),
nor as understood by the leading scholars of Islam. First they
understand the attributes on the pattern of human attributes and then
negate them arguing from the verse, “There is nothing like unto
Him” [42:11]. In this way, they misinterpret the ahddith as well as
the Qur’an. They write books on this principle and project it as the
most fundamental principle of the religion that Allah has revealed.
They read much of the Qur’an and say that its meaning is known
only to Allah, without even pondering the explanation given to it by
the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) and stated as being the
meaning that Allah meant.

Before them, the People of the Book committed the same
mistakes. Allah has condemned them so that we may guard
ourselves against such characteristics. He has said, “Can you
entertain the hope that they will believe in you — seeing that a party
of them heard the words of Allah and perverted it knowingly after
they understood it... There are among them illiterates who know not
the Book, but only their desires (amani), and they do nothing but
conjecture” [2:75-78]. That 1s, they know nothing but amani, which
means that they only recite the Book and do not try to understand it.
Allah has further said, “Then woe to those who write the Book with
their own hands, and then say: ‘This is from Allah,’ to traffic with it
for a miserable price. Woe to them for what their hands write, and
for the gain they make thereby” [2:79]. Thus He has denounced
them for ascribing to Him what they write by themselves and for
securing some gains through it. Both of these are evil: to attribute to
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 317

Allah what He has not said, and to earn in this way some money or
some position in the world. May Allah save us from slips in
statements and actions by His grace and generosity.

The author stated, “All that the Prophet (peace be on him) 5
known to have enjoined or stated is true.” What has come down
from the Prophet (peace be on him) by authentic means 15 of two
kinds: What he himself decreed, and what he said elucidating and
elaborating a law revealed by Allah in His Book. Both are truth that
must be obeyed.

The author also said, “With regard to the essence of imdan all the
Believers are equal. They differ only in respect to the strength of
iman, abstention from evil, and pursuit of good.” In some
manuscripts the words are “with respect to fearing Allah and
- observing piety” instead of “the strength of imdn’’. The first
wording means that although the Believers are one in the essence of
faith (tasdiq) they differ with respect to its (tasdiq’s) strength or
weakness. We have said elsewhere that people have strong or weak
imadn just as they have strong or weak eyesight. The second
wording says that the Believers differ with respect to the acts of their
heart even though they are one with respect to affirmation (tasdiq).
However, the first wording 15 clearly preferable. Allah knows best
what is correct.

(72) All Believers are friends (awliya’) of Allah, the
All-Merciful.

Allah has said, “Behold! verily on the friends (awliyd’) of Allah
there is no fear, nor will they grieve — those who believe and have ~
fear of Allah and obey Him” [10:62-63]. Wali (singular of awliya’)
is from waldyah which is the opposite of ‘addwah, or enmity.
Hamzah reads the verse, “You have no duty to protect them
(walayatihim) until they leave their homes” [8:72] as wilayatihim
with a kasrah on the waw, while everyone else reads it with a fatha
over the waw. Some say that these are simply two different dialects
with the same meaning. Others say that with the fatha it connotes a
duty to support them, while with the kasrah it means authority over
them. Az-Zujaj, an Arabic expert, said that it is permissible to recite
it with a kasrah as one people supporting another is a class of action
and everything of that nature can be recited with a kasrah, such as
khiyatah (sewing), and so on.

The Believers are the friends (awliya’) of Allah, and Allah is
their Protector (Wali). He has said, “Allah is the Protector (Wali) of
those who have faith. From the depths of darkness, He will lead
312 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahadwiyyah

them forth into light. But of those who reject faith, their patrons are
the evil ones; from light they will lead them forth into the depths of
darkness” [2:257]. Allah has also said, “That it is because Allah 1s
Patron of those who believe, and because the disbelievers have no
patron” [47:11]. The Believers are supporters and patrons one of
another. Allah has said, “The Believers, men and women, are
supporters, one of another” [9:71]. “Those who believed and
adopted exile and fought for the faith with their property and their
persons in the cause of Allah, as well as those who gave them
asylum and aid are all friends and supporters, one of another. And
to those who believed but did not migrate, you owe no duty of
protection (walayah) to them until they migrate...” [8:72]. And
“Your real friends are Allah, His Messenger and the Believers —
those who establish regular prayers and regular charity (zakdh) and
bow down humbly (in worship). As for those who tum (for
friendship) to Allah, His messenger and the Believers — it is the
party of Allah that must certainly truumph” [5:58-59].

These verses all prove that the Believers are friends and
supporters of each other, that they are friends of Allah, and that
Allah is their Friend and Protector. He takes those of His servants
who believe in Him into His protection and loves them, and they
love Him. He is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him.
If anyone turns against His friends, he declares war against them.
This walayah, friendship, support and protection is simply a favor
and mercy that He bestows upon them, completely unlike the
walayah of a human being with another that 15 done due to need. He
has said, “Say: Praise be to Allah, Who begets no son, and has no
partner in (His) dominion, nor needs He any to protect Him from
humiliation. You should magnify Him for His greatness and glory”
[19:11]. Allah does not take friends out of any weakness on his part;
He has all the power at His command. Others, on the contrary,
whether kings or commoners, take friends because they are weak or
because they need them for help and assistance.

Waldyah 15 similar to imdn in the author’s view. He thinks that
with regard to the essence of waldyah all Believers are equal. They
differ only in its degree: some are greater wali (patrons) of Allah
than others. Perfect walayah is for those Believers who are pious
(muttagi), fearful of Allah, who eschew evil and obey Him, as He
has said, “Behold! Verily on the friends (awliya’) of Allah there is
no fear, nor will they grieve — those who believe, fear Allah, eschew
evil and constantly obey Him; for them are glad tidings in the life of
the present and in the Hereafter’’ [10:62-64]. The phrase, “those
who believe, fear Allah, eschew evil and constantly obey Him”’ 5
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 313

either a description of those who are Allah’s friends, or a substitute
clause for it, or it 15 assumed to be words of praise, or it 1s marfu'‘
(indicative) for “they’’, or it is a second predicate of the sentence.

Allah’s waldyah is, therefore, for those who have faith and
observe piety. They will have the favor of Allah which has been
promised in the three verses mentioned above. Waldyah is secured
by complying with the will of Allah, the Friend and the Protector
(Walt), in all that He likes or dislikes. It 15 not secured by fasting a
lot, offering a number of prayers, wearing ragged clothes or doing
spiritual exercises. Some say that “those who believe” is the subject
and “for them is the glad tidings” is the predicate but that is
incorrect, as it would break the sentence from what precedes it and
ruin the mode of the verse.

Some forms of waldyah may be mixed with some forms of
‘adawah with respect to an individual Believer, just as faith may
coexist with not having faith, tawhid with shirk, piety with impiety
and hypocrisy with faith. There are different views among the Ahl
as-Sunnah on this point, but their differences are mostly semantic;
only the heretical groups (ahl al-bid‘ah) have any substantial
difference, as we have seen earlier concerning imdn. However, of
all the views, the one that should be adopted 15 the one which agrees
with the Law-Giver’s meanings and wording and not just His
meaning. He has said, “Most of them believe not in Allah except that |
they attribute partners with Him” [12:106]; and “Say: You have no
faith ({mdan); you should only say: We have submitted our wills to
Allah” [49:14]. We have discussed this verse before and said that
the people referred to are not hypocrites. The Prophet said, “There
are four traits, whoever has all of which is a perfect hypocrite, and
whoever has one of them has a part of hypocrisy in him until he
gives it up. They are lying in speech, violating a pledge, breaking a
promise, and abusing in disputes.’”’’ In another version of the
hadith, instead of “breaking the promise” it says, “breaching a
trust.” This hadith has been recorded in the two Sahihs. We also
quoted the hadith earlier which mentions various parts of imdn. A
third hadith states, ““Those who have a particle of faith in their heart
will be taken out of the Fire.’*23

It is, therefore, clear that those who have the least amount of
faith will not remain in the Fire forever, whatever amount of
hypocrisy they may have. They will be punished in the Fire

*?°Discussed earlier; it is authentic.
5 5 35 . . 5
*??Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

314 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

according to the measure of their hypocrisy, then they will be taken
out from it. Obedience to Allah is a branch of imdn, and sin is a
branch of kufr; however, the head of kufr is rejection of faith, and
the greatest imdn 1s belief and conviction (tasdiq).

It has been claimed that the Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“Whenever a group of people gather together, one of them 15 a wali
of Allah. They do not know him, nor does he know himself.’””*
This hadith has no source. It is false. According to it every group,
even a party of infidels and a band of evildoers who will die as
such, will have a wali amongst them.

The complete awliya’ of Allah have been described in these
words: “Behold! on the friends (awliyad’) of Allah there is no fear,
nor will they grieve — those who have faith and practice piety; for
them are glad tidings in the present life and in the Hereafter” [10:62-
64]. The piety referred to here has been explained elsewhere in this
way: “Righteousness is not that you turn your faces towards East or
West; righteousness is to believe in Allah and the Last Day, and the
angels and the Book, and the messengers; to spend of your
substance out of love for Him, for your kin, for orphans, for the
needy, for the wayfarers, for those who ask and, for the ransom of
slaves; to be steadfast in prayer, practice regular charity, fulfill the
contracts which you have made, and to be firm and patient in pain
and adversity and throughout all periods of panic. Such are the
people of truth, the pious (muttagin)” [2:177].

Pious men and women are of two kinds, those who are of
average piety (muqtasid) and those who are close to Allah
(mugarrab).**” the first are those who seek Allah’s pleasure by
doing the obligatory duties of the heart and the body, and the latter
are those who, over and above their obligatory duties, engage in
supererogatory deeds. Al-Bukhari recorded a hadith on the authority
of Abi Hurayrah that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Allah
says: Whoever opposes any of My friends declares war against Me.
None of my servants comes closer to Me than by doing the duties I
have laid on him. And the more My servant does the supererogatory
deeds, the closer he comes to Me. Then I love him, and when I love
him I become his ears by which he hears, his eyes by which he
sees, his hands by which he strikes, and his legs by which he

**“Ibn Taymiyyah has said that this is a completely false tradition; no compiler of
ahadith has ever mentioned it (see Majma’‘ al-Fatdwa, 11:60).

***Ibn Taymiyyah as elaborated this point in his Al-Furgan bayn Awliya’ Ar-Rahman
wa Awliya’ ash-Shaytan (Cairo: Dar Al-Fikr, n.d.), pp. 49ff.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 315

walks. When he begs of Me I give him, and when he asks for My
protection I protect him. I do not hesitate to do anything I decide
except when I am to take the life of a faithful servant. He does not
like to die, and I do not like to displease him.’””°

Wali is the opposite of ‘adi (enemy). It is derived from the word
wala which means ‘to come close’. Hence a wali of Allah is one
who befriends Him by loving what He loves and doing what pleases
Him. It is of such people that Allah has said, “For him who fears
Allah He ever prepares a way out, and provides for him from
(sources) he never could imagine” [65:2-3]. Abt Dharr said that
when this verse was revealed the Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“Abii Dharr, if people acted upon this verse it would suffice
them.’””*’ Allah does show to the pious a way out in matters that are
not easy for others, and provides for them by means they could not
have thought of. He guards them against evil, brings them good,
reveals to them many things unknown, and grants them miracles.

(73) the most honored of them (the Believers) in the
sight of Allah are those who obey Him most and follow
the Qur’4n best.

The most honored Believers are those who carry out Allah’s
commands and follow the Qur’an best. They are the most God-
fearing and righteous, consequently, the most honorable. The
Qur’an has said, “The most honored of you in the sight of Allah is
he who is the most righteous of you” [49:13]. According to a hadith
in the Sunan collections, the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “The
Arab is not better than the non-Arab, nor the non-Arab better than
the Arab; the white is not better than the black, nor the black better
than the white, except on the grounds of piety (taqwa). All men are
from Adam and Adam was made of earth.’”*® Scholars have debated
whether one who 15 poor and patient is better or one who 15 rich and
thankful (to Allah). Some have exalted one, and some the other. The
truth is that the cause for honor is neither poverty nor affluence; it

426 Al-Bukhari, 6502; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 1248; Abt Nu‘aym, Hilyat al-
Awliya’, 1:4.

"Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd, 4220; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 2:492; Ad-Darimi, Sunan,
2:303. However, the chain of this hadith is broken for Abi As-Salil, who narrates
from Abi Dharr, who did not meet him. Even then, Al-Hakim considers the hadith to
be sahih, as the other narrators are reliable (thigat). Al-Albani declares it weak.
*8The hadith actually does not occur in any Sunan collection. It is only recorded by
Ahmad in his Musnad, 5:411, but its chain is sound (sahih).

31 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahdwiyyah

depends upon the work one does, the attitude one possesses, and
the feelings one experiences. As it has been posed, the question 5
invalid. Honor in the sight of Allah depends upon piety and faith,
and not poverty or prosperity. That it is why — and Allah knows best
— ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said, “Poverty and
prosperity are two camels to ride; it does not matter to me upon
which I ride.”” Poverty and prosperity are both tests that Allah has
set up for His servants. He has said, “As for man, when his Lord
tries him by giving him honor and prosperity, then (puffed up) he
says, ‘My Lord has honored me.’ But when he tries him by
restricting his substance for him, then he says (in despair): ‘My
Lord has humiliated me!’” [89: 15- 16]. If the grateful rich and the
patient poor are equal in piety they are equal in status; but if one is
more pious, then he is more honored in the sight of Allah.
Prosperity and poverty have no weight, but patience and gratitude
do.

Some people look at the issue in a different way. They say that
faith (imdn) is half patience (sabr) and half gratitude (shukr),
therefore, everyone must be both patient and grateful. But people
pick up one half or the other, patience or gratitude, and then ask
which is better. First they think of a rich man in the abstract who
spends his money in ways pleasing to Allah and is grateful to Him,
and of a poor man in the abstract who devotes himself to worship
and serves Allah bearing his poverty patiently, and then they say that
the more perfect of them is the more obedient to Allah, but when
they are equal in obedience they are equal in status. Allah knows
better. If abstractions were at all granted, it would make sense to ask
which of the two is better: a healthy man who is thankful or a sick
man who is patient, a master who is grateful or a servant who is
forbearing, one who is secure and grateful or one who is insecure
and steadfast, and so on.*

(74) Im@n is faith in Allah, His angels, His books, His
messengers, the Last Day, and that everything, good and
bad, pleasant and unpleasant, is ordained by Allah.

It has been mentioned earlier that these things are the
fundamentals of Islam. The Prophet (peace be on him) reiterated
them when Gabriel appeared to him in the form of a desert Arab and

**Ibn Taymiyyah has discussed the point at length; see his Majmi‘ al-Fatawa,
11:119-130. See also Ibn Al-Qayyim, ‘Uddat as-Sabirin wa Dhakhirat ash-Shakirin
(ed. Zakariyyah ‘Ali Yasuf; Beirut: Dar Al-Kutub Al-‘I!miyyah, n.d.) pp. 209-313.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 317

asked, “What is Islam?” the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Islam
is to witness that there is no god except Allah and that Muhammad is
His messenger, and to establish regular prayer, pay zakah, fast
during Ramadan, and make the hajj to Allah’s House if you have the
means.” Gabriel then asked, “What is imdn?” He replied, “It 15 to
believe in Allah, His angels, His Books, His messengers and the
Last Day, and that everything, good or bad, is ordained by Him.”
Gabriel next asked about ihsdn. The Prophet (peace be on him)
replied, “It is to worship and serve Allah as if you see Him, for even
if you cannot see Him, He sees you.’”’® This hadith is authentic
(sahih) in the judgment of Al-Bukhari as well as Muslim.

We also have in the Sahih collections that the Prophet (peace be
on him) would sometimes recite in the dawn prayer the sa#rahs Al-
Kafirtin (109) and Al-Ikhlas (112);*°’ sometimes he would recite the
verses of imdn and islam, verse 2:136, which says, “We believe in
Allah and in the revelation given to us, and to Abraham, Ishmael,
Isaac, Jacob and the Tribes, and that given to Moses and Jesus, and
that given to all prophets from their Lord: We make no difference
between one and another of them, and we submit to Allah alone,”
and verse 3:64, which reads, “Say: People of the Book! Come to
common terms as believers, us and you, that we worship none but
Allah, that we associate no partners with Him, that we erect not
from ourselves lords and patrons other than Allah. If then they turn
back, say: Bear witness that we (at least) are Muslims (bowing to
Allah’s will).”*°* When a delegation from the tribe of ‘Abdul-Qays
came to the Prophet (peace be on him) he addressed them and said,
“T ask you to believe in Allah alone. Do you know what belief
(imadn) in Allah means? It is to bear witness that there is no god
except Allah, the One without any partner, and to establish salah, to
pay zakah, and submit one fifth of the spoils of war (to ‏ون‎

It is obvious that he did not mean that these acts would form
imadn without the assent of the heart. On various occasions he
mentioned very explicitly that the assent of the heart is necessary.
We may conclude, therefore, that these things form imdn only when

**°Discussed earlier; it is recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

*'Muslim, Salat al-Musafirin, 726; Abu Dawid, 1256; An-Nasa’i, 2:155-156; Ibn
Majah, 1148. See also At-Tirmidhi, 417; Ibn Majah, 1149; An-Nasa’i, 2:170;
Ahmad, 2:94, 95, 99.

*?Muslim, 727; Abii Dawid, 1259; An-Nasa’i, 2:155; Ahmad, 1:230, 231.
*?3Discussed earlier; it is recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

F13 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI

316 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

they are accompanied by confession of the heart. We have discussed
this point earlier.

The Qur’an and the Sunnah abound in statements saying that one ~
does not have real imdn unless assent (tasdiq) is followed by action
(‘amal). This has been emphasized more than anything, even prayer
and zakah. The latter has been expounded mainly in the Sunnah, but
iman has been expounded in the Sunnah as well as the Qur’an. The
Qur’an, for example, says, “True Believers (mi’miniin) are those
who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their hearts, and,
when they hear His words rehearsed, find their faith strengthened
and put all their trust in their Lord” [8:2]; or “Only those are
Believers who have believed in Allah and His Messenger and have
never since doubted, but have striven with their belongings and their
persons in the cause of Allah” [49:15]; or “But no, by your Lord,
they can have no (real) faith until they make you judge i in all disputes
between them, and find in their souls no resistance against your
decisions, but accept them with the fullest conviction” [4:65]. The
Qur’an is, therefore, not prepared to call faith true faith unless the
things it has mentioned as its prerequisites are present. It has made
very clear that these things are necessary aspects of faith. One who
lacks them exposes himself to punishment in the Hereafter and does
not qualify for entry into Paradise.

There is no contradiction between what the Prophet (peace be on
him) said about imadn while answering Gabriel and what he said
about it to the delegation from the tribe of ‘Abdul-Qays. In the
former hadith he explained imdn after explaining islam. Hence imdn
included, along with faith in Allah, His angels, books, messengers
and the Last Day, all those actions which he had mentioned earlier
under islam, just as ihsdn included, along with what he said about
it, all those things which he had mentioned under 77107 and islam.
In the latter hadith, on the other hand, he explained imdn without
previously saying anything about is/4m. However, this explanation
that I have given here does not go along with what the author has
said regarding imdn. The hadith of the ‘Abdul-Qays poses a
problem for his way of thinking.

Some people raise an objection, saying that the things that are
actually obligatory are far more than the five acts which Gabriel’s
hadith mentions. How is it that this hadith limits them to five acts
only?*3* One answer that has been given is that these five things are
the most prominent symbols (sha‘a’ir) of Islam. Compliance with

***Ibn Taymiyyah has discussed the question in Majma‘ al-Fatadwa, 7:314-316.

Commentary on the Creed of At- 1 1 319

them is clear proof of our submission to Allah; similarly, their
evasion is a manifest proof of our defiance.

However, I will answer the objection in this way. It is true that
the Prophet (peace be on him) has defined religion (din) as
unqualified submission to the Lord. But that part of it which 15
incumbent on each and every individual and which he must fulfill as
far as possible in order to make his submission to Allah exclusive,
consists of these five things only. All other duties have been
obligated due to some benefit to the people, vary according to
individual conditions, and are not binding on everyone. These are
either collective duties, like jihdd, enjoining good and forbidding
evil or establishing institutions, such as government, administration,
justice, legislation, instruction in the Qur’an and hadith, and so on.
Or they are social obligations which we owe to fellow human
beings. These are rights for some and duties for others, and
terminate when they are fulfilled. These include, for example,
paying debts, returning deposits, restoring property wrongly
acquired, making amends for wrongs committed against life, |
property or honor, fulfilling duties towards one’s wife and children,
and doing good to one’s kin. All these duties vary from person to
person.

This is not the case with duties such as fasting during Ramadan,
making hajj, offering five daily prayers, or paying zakah. To be
sure, zakdh is a monetary duty; nonetheless it 15 a duty to Allah.
There are specific conditions for its discharge: it has to be disbursed
in eight specified channels, and with proper intention. It cannot be
paid on behalf of another without his consent, and it is not sought
from non-believers. These conditions are not required in social
duties. For example, intention is not required if one discharges a
social obligation on behalf of another without his consent or
knowledge - it will be discharged and the person will be absolved of
the responsibility. Further, faith is not a pre-condition; such nghts
are also demanded of infidels. But the duties that one owes to Allah,
such as atoning for a sin which one has committed and for which
one is liable to be punished or paying zakah, are enjoined only on
responsible adults. They are not enjoined, as Aba Hanifah and his
followers say, on children and the insane.

The author’s words, “Everything good and bad, pleasant and
unpleasant is ordained by Allah,” are derived from the hadith of
Gabriel mentioned before. This is also the burden of many verses of
the Qur’an, such as “Say: Nothing will happen to us except what
Allah has decreed for us” [9:51]; “If some good (hasanah) befalls
them, they say: ‘This is from Allah.’ But if some evil (sayyiyyah)
320 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

befalls them, they say: ‘This is from you (O Prophet!).’” Say: All
things are from Allah. What has happened to these people that they
fail to understand a single fact?” [4:78]; and “Whatever good
happens to you 15 from Allah; but whatever evil happens to you 5
from yourself’ [4:79]. One may wonder how to reconcile the words
“everything is from Allah” with the words “whatever evil happens to
you is from yourself’. Some people have suggested that the first
verse,, which says “everything is from Allah” refers to things like
good and bad crops, victory and defeat, which are all from Allah,
whereas the second verse, which says that “evil is from yourself,”
refers to the punishment of people for their evil deeds, as Allah has
said elsewhere, “Whatever misfortune happens to you is because of
the things that your hands have wrought” [42:39]. Ibn ‘Abbas made
the same point when commenting on the verse “whatever evil befalls
you js. rom yourself’ [4:79], when he said, “and is decreed by
e.”

The words hasanah and sayyiyyah in verse 4:78 mean good
fortune and misfortune. This is the best comment on the verse that I
know of. Another opinion is that they mean obedience and
disobedience. A third opinion is that hasanah refers to the victory of
the Muslims in the battle ‘of Badr, and sayyiyyah to their partial
defeat in the battle of Uhud. It is clear that the first meaning includes
the third, and the second meaning 15 inconceivable without the first.
Moreover, there is no contradiction in saying that evil deeds and
their evil consequences are both from oneself, even though
everything is predestined by Allah, for a succeeding evil may be a
punishment for a preceding evil one has committed, just as a
succeeding good may be the reward of a preceding good that one
has done. This is fully borne out by the Qur’an and the Sunnah.*”°

The free-willers (Qadariyyah) cite the words “from yourself’ in
support of their view of rejection of gadr. They say that these words
mean that all the acts of men, good or bad, proceed from themselves
and not from Allah. But they fail to distinguish what Allah has
distinguished when He has said, “Everything is from Allah,” that is,
both good and evil are from Allah. They refuse to extend this
statement to human acts and limit it to their recompense. Allah
continues by saying, “Whatever good (hasanah) happens to you is
from Allah, but whatever evil happens to you is from your own

*° As-Suyati, Ad-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 2, p. 185. See also Ibn Jarir, Jami‘ al-Bayan,
8:559.

*°°For a discussion of the point see Ibn Taymiyyah, A/-Hasanah wa as-Sayyiyyah (ed.
Muhammad Jamil Ghazi; Cairo: Matba‘at Al-Madani, 1391/1971), pp. 17-30.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 321

selves.” This means that He has distinguished between hasanah,
which is blessing, and sayyiyyah, which is misfortune, and said that
the first proceeds from Him and the second from man. Good is
ascribed to Allah, for it is He Who grants everything good and no
one else. Evil, on the other hand, is created for one purpose or
another; it is a means to some good. Never does Allah do anything
evil; all His acts are good.

For that reason, the Prophet (peace be on him) used to say in his
prayers, “O Allah! All good is in your hands, and evil is not
ascribed to you.’”°’ Allah does not create pure evil; everything that
He creates has wisdom. Evil, too, is good in this sense, even
though it may be harmful to some. All evil is partial and relative.
Total and absolute evil does not exist and is not Allah’s work, hence
it should not be attributed to Him. One can attribute it only by
implication as part of a general statement, such as “Allah is the
Creator of all things” [13:17], or “All things are from Allah’ [4:78].
Or one can attribute it indirectly as the effect of a cause created by
Allah, for example, the statement, “Say: I take shelter in the Lord of
creation from the evil of things He has created” [113:1-2]. One may
also put it in the passive, such as in the statement of the jinn, “And
we understand not whether evil is intended to those on earth or
whether their Lord intends to guide them to mght conduct”
[72:10].*°*°

It is not necessary that a thing which is harmful to one must not
contain any wisdom to it or should not be good for another. No one
can comprehend Allah’s wisdom and mercy in His creation. The evil
that we have in the world is only partial and relative; it is not
universal and absolute. In fact, universal things and general
phenomena such as rain and prophecy are good and beneficial for all
creation. This is also the reason that Allah does not support an
imposter with miracles as He did with the real prophets, for that
would be producing universal evil, misleading all mankind and
destroying their religion and their life here and Hereafter.

The case of an oppressive king is different, for Allah often
removes through him a greater evil than the one he does. There is a
saying that sixty years under an unjust ruler is better than one night
with no ruler. His atrocities may be multiple, but they often promote
the cause of religion just as natural calamities do. If people bear
them patiently and turn to Allah seeking forgiveness, their sins may
be forgiven; they may even be rewarded by Allah. This is why Allah

“’Muslim, 771; Abi Dawtid, 760; At-Tirmidhi, 3422; An-Nasa’i, 2:130.
*°°See Ibn Taymiyyah, Al-Hasanah wa as-Sayyiyyah, pp. 44-45.

322 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

sometimes lets a cruel ruler stay in power for a long time. But He
does not allow false prophets for long, and He destroys them
because their evil affects the entire life, here and Hereafter. He has
said, “And if the Messenger were to invent any sayings in Our
name, We should certainly seize him by his right hand, and then cut
off the artery of his heart’ [69:44-45].

The words, “it is from your own self,” in verse 4:79, are very
significant. They say that we must always be vigilant and never self-
complacent, for evil is there in ourselves attacking us from within.
Evil only comes from them. If people harm us we should not
indulge in accusing them, for that may be a punishment for our own
misdeeds. We should rather recall our misdeeds and seek Allah’s
protection from them and their evil consequences, and pray for His
help in carrying out His commands. This will bring us every good
and save us from every evil. This is the reason the prayer in the
١ opening sarah (Al-Fatihah) of the Qur’an is the best and the most
- Important prayer. It says, “Show us the Straight Way, the Way of
those on whom You have bestowed Your grace, those whose
(portion) is not wrath and who go not astray” [1:6-7]. If Allah
shows us the Way defined here, He actually helps us in carrying out
His will and refraining from violating it. No evil will therefore befall
us here or Hereafter.

Since sin is something within the soul of man, we need Allah’s
guidance every moment, and we need this guidance much more than
we need food and drink. Some commentators have said that since
Allah has already shown us the Way, one is not praying for
guidance; rather, one is only praying to be kept from swerving from
the Way or to be given further guidance. But this is not correct. We
very much need Allah to make us know in detail each and every day
what we should do and what we should not do, as well as to inspire
us to action. Knowledge is not enough, inspiration to do the work is
also necessary, otherwise knowledge will do us more harm than
good as it will be a proof against us. We also need Allah to give us
the ability to do what the good things we must 00.537 What we do
not know is far more than what we know, and what we do not
choose to do, due to ignorance or indolence, 15 either more than,
equal to or less than what we choose.

The same is the case with what we fail to do and what we
succeed in doing. Further, things that we know only in principle are
far more than those we know in detail. We need complete guidance
from Allah in all these things. Even when we get complete guidance,

“Ibid, pp. 83-84.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 323

we can pray to be kept along its path, which is the final stage of
guidance. The guidance which remains now is guidance into
Paradise in the Hereafter. Since the Fatihah 1s a prayer for this
comprehensive guidance, we have been instructed to recite it in
every prayer; there is nothing more that we need. We must know
that it is simply out of His mercy that Allah has given us this great
prayer and made it a means to secure all good and to avoid all evil.
The Qur’an has stated that evil comes from within oneself, even
though it 15 determined by Allah, but good is completely from Allah.
Since this 15 the case, one should be thankful to Allah, repent for
one’s sins and put all one’s trust in Him. And since none other than
He can bring us good, in Him alone must we put our faith and trust,
and to Him alone should one be thankful or look for forgiveness
from sins.

The Prophet (peace be on him) used to combine all these things
in the prayer. A hadith in the Sahih says that when he raised his
head from bowing in prayer (ruki’), he would say, “Our Lord, all
praise is for You, praise abundant, beautiful and ever increasing*”*° —
praise that fills the heavens, fills the earth and fills the space above.
Lord, all the greatness and all the glory is for You. This is the
greatest truth which any servant has ever said, and all of us are Your
servants.” This is praise and a statement of thanks to Allah. It also
shows that praises of Allah are the most truthful statements a person
can make. He would then add, “None can withhold what You give,
and none can release what you withhold, and no one is happy
against Your will’”*'

This is affirming Allah’s unity that He is the one and the only
Lord, that He creates and fore-ordains everything from eternity to
eternity, that He gives and takes, and that no one can give what He
gives or take what He takes. It is also affirming the oneness of
divinity that there is only one God, Who gives commands and Who
enjoins.and forbids, for although men are given riches, kingdoms,
glory, luck, power and miracles, no one can benefit anyone against

*°These words were said by a Companion praying behind the Prophet (peace be on
him) when the Prophet raised his head after ruku’ (bowing) and he said, “God has
heard (the words of) the person who praised Him.” the Prophet (peace be on him)
greatly approved of his saying that and said, “I saw more than thirty angels vying
with one another to be the first to write (your words).” See Al-Bukhari, 799; An-
Nasa’1, 2:196; Abii Dawitid, 770; Ahmad, 4:340. The remainder stated in the text is a
separate hadith.

**!Muslim, 447; Abi: Dawiid, 847; Ad-Darimi, 1:301; An-Nasa’i, 2:198-199; Ahmad,
3:87. See also Muslim, 476; Abu Dawid, 846; At-Tirmidhi, 3541; Ibn Majah, 878;
Ahmad, 4:353, 354, 356. |

003114 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Allah’s will or protect himself from Him. That it is why the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “/@ yanfa‘uhu minka” (‘no one can benefit
him against You’). He did not say, “/d yanfa‘uhu ‘indaka’ (‘no one
can help with You’), for if he had said that, it would have meant that
no one can help anyone come close to Allah.

These words fulfilled Allah’s unity, or established the meaning
of, “You only do we serve, and Your help only do we seek.” Since
no cause is sufficient to produce an effect unless Allah wills it, He
alone should be invoked and begged and beseeched for protection
and help. All praise is for Him, and all help comes from Him. There
15 nO power with anyone except Him. Every cause in the world is
insufficient; it needs the presence of other subsidiary causes and the
removal of opposing factors to produce an effect. Unless the
subsidiary causes are available and the opposing factors are removed
the effect cannot be produced. Take, for example, rain. By itself, it
cannot produce a crop unless there is soil, air and other things there.
Again, the crop cannot grow and ripen unless obstacles are
removed. Similarly, food and water cannot provide nutrition unless
the body has the ability to absorb them; moreover, all these things
will not be of avail unless obstructive factors are removed.

The person who gives you something or renders you help, apart
from the fact that his will, power and action are produced by Allah,
cannot achieve anything, however mighty he may be, unless a
number of factors beyond his control cooperate with him and others
do not obstruct him. Nothing is realized without the presence of
some factors and the absence of others. A particular thing is only
partly the cause, not the whole cause. If it 15 singled out as the cause
and others are named as conditions, it is only a matter of semantic
convenience. Actually there is nothing in the world that is a self-
sufficient cause necessarily productive of an effect. Once you realize
this truth, the door to the appreciation of Allah’s unity will open for
you. You will know that no one other than Allah should be invoked
for anything, let alone worshiped or trusted or beseeched.

(75) We believe in all these things. We _ never
discriminate between one messenger and another. We
also believe that whatever they have taught is true.

By “these things” the author is referring to everything that he has
mentioned so far that we must believe in. The rest of the text means
that we should not believe in some prophets and disbelieve in others;
we must believe in all of them and accept them all. Whoever accepts
some of them and rejects others, in reality rejects them all. Allah
says, “They say: ‘We believe in some but reject others and try to
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 325

take a course midway’ — they are in truth (equally) unbelievers”
[4:150-151]. This 1s because the grounds on which one believes in
some are also present in the case of others whom he rejects.
Moreover, the messenger in whom one believes testifies to the truth
of the other messengers. Hence, if he rejects the others, in fact he is
denying the one he claims to believe in. His messenger testifies to
the truth of the other messengers, and he is rejecting them. Hence,
in truth he is an unbeliever, even though he may claim that he is a
Believer. He is one of those whose deeds are wasted in this life even
though he thinks that he is doing good. He is the most wretched
loser of all.

(76) Those of the ummah of Muhammad, peace be upon
him, who commit grave sins (kaba’ir) will not stay in
Hell forever, even if they do not repent, provided they
die while Believers in Allah’s unity and meet Allah
knowing Him. They will be absolutely at His will and
judgment. He may forgive and pardon them out of His
mercy if He wills, as He has said in His book, “And He
will forgive anything other than it (shirk) to whom He
please” [4:48]. Or He may punish them in the Fire, as is
required by His justice, and then, out of pity and the
intercession of His obedient servants, take them out
thereof and put them in His Paradise. This is because
Allah is the Protector and Patron of those who know
Him. He never treats them in either of the two worlds
like those who deny Him and who are bereft of His
guidance and have failed to obtain His protection. O
Allah, Protector of Islam and the Muslims! Keep us in
Islam until we meet You.

The statement that of the ummah of Muhammad (peace be on
him) those who commit grave sins will not remain in Hell forever
provided they believed in the unity of Allah when they died is
directed against the Khawary and the Mu‘tazilah, who say that the
perpetrators of grave sins will remain in Hell forever. On this point
they are one; they only differ in the way they characterize these
people. The Khawarij say that they are disbelievers, while the
Mu‘tazilah say that they have left imdn but have not entered into
_kufr; they lie between the two. We have already mentioned this point
commenting on the author’s words, “We do not believe that any of
the ahl al-giblah becomes a disbeliever simply by committing sins,
unless he considers them to be lawful.”
326 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

The qualification, “of the ummah of Muhammad” may suggest
that people of other communities who committed grave sins before
their shari‘ah was abrogated will be treated differently. This is
debatable because the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “All those
who have even a grain of faith in their heart will be taken out from
the Fire.’”*** It is obvious that he has not limited this favor to his
own community; he mentioned faith in a general and unqualified
manner. It may also be noted that in some manuscripts the words

“of the ummah of Muhammad” do not occur.

His words, “in the Fire” are connected to ‘ ‘they will not remain
forever’ but he put these words for the sake of the speech rhythm
and not to make it a predicate for the words “the people who commit
great sins,” aS some commentators have mistakenly understood
them.

Opinions differ concerning major sins (kabd ir). Here are the
different opinions: (1) there are seven; (2) there are seventeen; (3)
they are what all the divine codes have agreed upon in forbidding;
(4) they are the actions that keep one from knowing Allah; (5) they
are the actions that destroy wealth and body; (6) they are called
major as a relative term in comparison to lesser sins; (7) they cannot
be known since we have not been informed of them, as we have not
been informed of the Night of Qadr, (8) there are closer to seventy;
(9) everything Allah has prohibited is a major sin; (10) they are the
actions that lead to prescribed punishments or promise of the Hell-
fire, or curse or anger, and this last statement is the best opinion.

Similarly, there are different opinions as to what minor sins
(saghd ir) are. Some people say that minor sins are those for which
no penalty here or in the Hereafter has been prescribed. Others say
that they are the ones that do not invite the curse or wrath of Allah,
or are not threatened with Hell; still others say that they are those for
which no specific punishment in this life has been enacted, nor
threatened (wa ‘d) in the next. And by wa ‘id they mean either the
threat of Hell or the curse or wrath of Allah. For, a specific wa ‘id in
the Hereafter is like a specific punishment in this life, and a
chastisement (fa ‘zir) in the world is like a chastisement in the
Hereafter short of burning in the Fire or the curse or wrath of Allah.

The definition that we have approved of is not subject to the
objections that apply to others. It encompasses all those sins that
have been mentioned as kabirah in the Qur’an and the Sunnah, such
as associating partners with Allah, murder, adultery, magic, slander

**“Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 327

against innocent Muslim women, flight from battle, squandering the
property of an orphan, devouring interest, disobeying parents,
taking a wrong oath, bearing false witness, and so on.

There are many reasons for accepting this view. First, it is
narrated from the Elders, such as Ibn ‘Abbas, Ibn ‘Uyanah, and Ibn
Hanbal, may Allah be pleased with them. Second, Allah has said,
“If you eschew the most heinous (kabd ir) of the things which you
are forbidden to do, We will expel out of you all the evil in you, and
admit you to a gate of great honor” [4:31]. Obviously, this promise
is not for those who incur the curse and wrath of Allah and deserve
Hell, nor for those who deserve to convicted and sentenced in this
life. Third, it is derived from the texts wherein Allah and the Prophet
(peace be on him) have mentioned various sins, so it 1s a definition
in agreement with the texts of the Qur’an and Sunnah.

Fourth, it provides a criterion to distinguish between major and
minor sins, which no other view does. For example, the view that
major sins are seven, seventeen or seventy is nothing more than a
claim. Similarly, the view which says that major sins are those that
have been forbidden in all divine codes, implies that many sins,
such as drinking wine, fleeing from the battle, marriage with women
with whom one may not marry either because of common descent or
because of common fostering are not major sins for they have been
forbidden in one code but not in another. On the other hand, it
includes in the major sins such actions as taking a small coin from
the money of an orphan or its theft, or telling once a small lie. The
view that major sins are those which close the door on Allah’s
knowledge, or cause the destruction of life and property, will
exclude drinking wine, eating pork and slandering innocent women;
however, that is wrong. Similarly, the view that major sins are
called so in comparison to minor sins implies that in themselves sins
are neither grave nor light, which is not correct. Moreover, it goes
against the texts which call some sins major and some sins minor.
Finally, those who say that we cannot know them only admit their
ignorance. This does not mean that they cannot really be known.**°
Allah knows best. |

The author has stated, “Even if they do not repent,” for there is ©
no question about those who repent. It is known that repentance
wipes out all sins. The question is only about those who do not
repent.

**3For a discussion on the point see Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmi‘ al-Fatawa, 11:650-657;
Ibn Al-Qayyim, Madarij as-Sdalikin, 1:315-27.

328 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

As for his words, “meet Allah knowing Him,” it would have
been better if he had said, “and believe in Him when they see Him.”
For one who knows Allah but does not believe in Him is an infidel.
No theologian except Jahm has said that faith is simply knowledge.
We have already exposed the error of this view; for example, we
have said that Iblis did know his Lord because he said, “My Lord!
Give me then respite until the Day the dead are raised” [15:36]; and
“Then, by Your Majesty, I will put them all in the wrong, except
Your servants among them who are sincere and purified” [38:82-
83]; but even then he was not a Believer. The same is true of
Pharaoh and most other infidels, for Allah has said about them, “If
you ask them who is that who created the heavens and the earth they
will certainly say ‘Allah’” [31:25]; and, “Say: Who is the Lord of
the seven heavens and the Lord of the Supreme Throne? They will
say: “They belong to Allah’” [23:86-87]. There are numerous other
verses of this nature.

It was as if the author had in mind that perfect knowledge of
Allah of which the people of the tarigah*** speak and which, of
necessity, leads its bearer onto the right path. To be sure, they are
not those who commit major sins. On the contrary, they are the best
and most eminent people. |

The words, “they are at the will of Allah and His judgment. He
may forgive them and may pardon them if He pleases,” are based on
verse 4:48, in which Allah has differentiated between shirk
(associating partners with Allah), which is the most heinous major
sin, aS the Prophet (peace be upon him) has stated, and all other
sins. He stated that He will not forgive shirk, though He may
forgive every other sin 11 He pleases. This means that other sins are
not unpardonable. Had they been so, He would not have
distinguished them from shirk. Further, He has made His pardoning
conditional on His pleasure. However, we know that minor and
major sins are definitely forgiven upon repentance. Allah has
Himself said, “My servants who have transgressed against their
souls, despair not of the mercy of Allah, for Allah forgives all sins;
He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful” [39:53]. It follows that the sins
about which He has said that He will forgive if He so pleases are the
ones, with the exception of shirk, which are not followed by
repentance.

*““Those meant by “people of the farigah” are the Companions and those who follow
their way.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 329

The words, “Allah is the Protector of those who know Him (ah/
al-ma ‘rifah)y’ are somewhat objectionable and we have already
referred to this point.

The words, “Allah, our Lord, the Protector of Islam and the
Muslims, keep us in Islam until we meet you,” are derived from the
following invocation of the Prophet (peace be on him), which
Shaykh al-Islam Abt Isma‘il Al-Ansari noted in his book, Al/-
Fariq, based on a report from Anas, “Protector of Islam and the
Muslims, keep me in Islam until I see You while following it.’”**°
There can be no better conclusion of the foregoing statements than
this invocation. The Prophet Joseph (peace be on him) prayed in the
same vein, “My Lord! You have indeed bestowed on me some
power and taught me something of the interpretation of dreams and
events. You, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, You are my
Protector in this world and in the Hereafter. Take You my soul (at
death) as one submitting to Your will (muslim) and unite me with
the righteous” [12:101]. In the same vein the magicians of the time
of Pharaoh invoked Allah when they believed in Moses, peace be
upon him and upon our Prophet, “Our Lord, pour out on us patience
and constancy, and take our souls unto You as Muslims” [7:126]. It
1s wrong to justify prayer for death on the basis of these two verses.
What has been prayed for in them 15 death in Islam, not simply death
or death at that moment. The difference between the two is clear.

(77) We believe that prayer may be offered behind any
person from among the ahi al-giblah, whether he is
righteous or impious. We also believe in performing the
funeral prayer over them upon their deaths.

The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Offer prayer behind
everyone, pious or impious.””*° This hadith has been narrated by
Makhil from Abt Hurayrah, may Allah be pleased with him. Ad-
Daraqutni recorded it and remarked that Makhul did not meet Abi
Hurayrah; moreover, among its narrators there is one Mu‘awiyah
Ibn Salih whose reliability is disputed. However, Muslim has relied

**° Al-Haythami has noted a slightly different wording of the hadith and said that it has
been recorded by At-Tabarani in his A/-Awsat, adding that its transmitters are reliable
(Majmu‘ az-Zawd’id, 10:176).

**° Ad-Daraqutni, Sunan, (ed. Abdullah Hashim Yamani Al-Madani; Cairo: Dar Al-
Mahasin, 1386/1966), vol. 2, p. 57; Al-Bayhaqi, As-Sunan Al-Kubra, (Hyderabad,
1352; reprint, Beirut: Dar Al-Ma‘rifah), vol. 4, ‏.م‎ 19. It is a weak hadith due to its
broken chain.

330 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

upon him and recorded in his Sahih some ahddith narrated by him.
Ad-Daraqutni and Abu Dawid have also recorded a hadith narrated
by Makhul from Abi Hurayrah that the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “You should offer prayer behind all Muslims, whether
righteous or wicked, even those who commit grave sins (kabd ir).
You must also carry on jihdd under a Muslim ruler whether he is
righteous or wicked or commits grave sins.’””*’

Al-Bukhari has recorded in his Sahih**® that ‘Abdullah Ibn
‘Umar used to offer prayer behind Al-Hajjaj Ibn Yusuf Ath-Thagafi,
as did Anas Ibn Malik, even though Al-Hajjaj was recalcitrant
(fdsiq) and an oppressor (zdlim). He has also recorded in his Sahih
that the Prophet (peace be on him) said about such leaders of prayer,
“They will lead your prayer. If they do it properly it is good for you
and for them; but if they do not do it improperly, it does not harm
you, it only harms them.””4°

‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar narrated that the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “Offer prayer behind anyone who says that there is no god
besides Allah; and offer prayer over anyone who dies who said that
there is no god besides Allah.” This hadith has been recorded by
Ad-Daraqutni with his comment that it is weak.*°°

Know that, may Allah have mercy on you and us, it is perfectly
correct for anyone to pray behind a man about whom one does not
know whether he indulges in unjustified innovations (bid ‘ah) or vice
(fisq). This is agreed upon by all the leading scholars. It is not
necessary for one to inquire about the beliefs of the person who
leads the prayer or question him before praying behind him. You
may pray behind one whose condition 15 not known to you.

You may also pray behind one who has erroneous views
(bid ‘ah), even preaches them, or commits wrong openly, if he has
been appointed to lead prayer and you have no option but to pray
behind him. You may do that in Friday prayers, the ‘Id prayers and
the prayer at ‘Arafah during the pilgrimage. There is no difference of
opinion here among most of the Elders or later scholars. According

**7Abi Dawid, 594, 2533; Ad-Daraqutni, Sunan, 2:56; Al-Bayhaqi, As-Sunan ‏له‎
‎Kubra, 3:121. This hadith is also weak due to its broken chain.

*“8The hadith does not occur in Al-Bukhari. Al-Bayhaqi recorded it in As-Sunan al-
Kubra, 3:122. Al-Albani observes that the hadith is sahih; see his Irwa al-Ghalil fi
Takhrij ahadith Manar as-Sabil (Beirut: Al-Maktabah Al-Islamiyyah, 1399/1979),
no. 525.

*’ Al-Bukhari, 694; Ahmad, 2:355, 357.

**" Ad-Daraqutni, Sunan, 2:56; At-Tabarani, A/-Kabir, 13622. The hadith is weak; see
Az-Zayla’1, Nasb ar-Rayah, 2:27-29.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 331

to most of them, to abstain from praying behind such imams is an
innovation. Pray behind them and do not repeat your prayer. The
Companions offered their daily prayers as well as the Friday prayers
behind wrongdoing leaders and did not repeat their prayers. We
have already mentioned that ‘Abdullah Ibn “Umar and Anas Ibn
Malik, may Allah be pleased with them, offered prayers behind Al-
Hajjaj Ibn Yusuf.

Similarly, ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘tid and other Companions also
prayed behind Al-Walid Ibn ‘Uqbah Ibn Abi Mu‘it who used to

drink wine. Once he prayed four rak ‘at in the dawn prayer and then
said to the people, “Would you like me to do some more?” Ibn
Mas‘tid said, “We have already prayed more behind you.’”*' It has
been recorded in the Sahih that when ‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan, may
Allah be pleased with him, was being besieged, someone led the
prayer in the mosque. A man said to ‘Uthman, “You are the 071
of the people, but who is the one who leads the prayer, an imdm of
the troublemakers?” ‘Uthman said, “Friend, prayer is the best thing
that people do. If they do it well, do it well with them; but if they
spoil it, stay away from their wrong.’”°”

The prayer of an evid-doer (/asiqg) and heretic (mubtadi‘) is valid
in itself. So when anyone prays behind him, his prayer 15 not
invalidated. Those people who do not like to offer prayer behind
such men, do so because enjoining good and forbidding evil is an
imperative; hence, one who openly professes his heresies or
indulges in evil should not be appointed an imam. In fact, he
deserves to be chastised until he recants. If it is possible to leave him
and offer prayer elsewhere until he recants it 15 definitely better. If
people do not pray behind him and pray behind another, it may
restrain him to some extent. Maybe he will recant or be removed;
that will certainly act as a deterrent. In either case, the purpose of the
Shari‘ah is served, and people will not miss the daily prayer in
assembly or the prayer in congregation on Fridays. But if by
avoiding prayer behind such an imam one missed the prayer in
assembly or the Friday prayers, he would be doing something
unjustified (bid ‘ah) and would be going against the practice of the
Companions.

*'Tbn ‘Abdul-Barr, Al-/sti‘db, vol. 3, pp. 596-597. See also Muslim, 1707; Ibn
Hajar, Al-Isabah fi Tamyiz as-Sahdbah (Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah Ash-Sharqiyyah,
1325/1907), vol. 3, ‏.م‎ 601; Ibn Al-Athir, Usud al-Ghdbah fi Ma‘rafat as-Sahabah
(Cairo: Al-Jami‘ah at-Ta‘awuniyyah li an-Nashr wa at-Tiba‘ah, 1384/1964), vol. 5,
pp. 451-453.

*5? Al-Bukhari, 695.

332 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Similarly when the government appoints the imams and they
lead the prayers, one would not be serving the purpose of the
Shari‘ah if he abstained from praying behind them; one must never
do that. The correct course is to pray behind them, as that 1s much
better. But if one can stop a person who openly indulges in evil
from leading the prayer, he should try that. However, if the 01
has been appointed by someone else and cannot be prevented from
leading the prayers at all, or can be prevented but only by causing
greater damage than that caused by his leading the prayer, it would
not be right to remove the lesser evil with a greater evil. Laws have
been enacted to secure greater good and eliminate or reduce evil as
much as possible. To ruin the regular prayers in assembly and on
Fridays is a greater evil than praying behind an evildoer, particularly
when it does not deter him from doing wrong. It would simply
mean foregoing good without removing evil.

However, when it is possible to offer regular prayer in assembly
and the Friday prayer in congregation behind a pious person, 1] 5
undoubtedly better than offering them behind a evildoer. If that
opportunity is available and a person still offers prayers behind an
evildoer without any proper excuse, will his prayer be deemed valid
or invalid, and will he be asked to repeat it? Opinions differ on this
question. Some say that he should repeat the prayer, while others
say he does not do so. We cannot, however, pursue the discussion
further. The reader is advised to consult the relevant works.

When an imam forgets something or makes a mistake and his
followers are not aware of it, they do not have to repeat the prayer.
This view is based on the hadith which says that once ‘Umar led the
prayer and did not realize that he was not clean and that he had to
bathe. He repeated the prayer but did not ask his followers to repeat
the prayer. Abii Hanifah, however, thinks that if one comes to know
after the prayer that the 1mam did not make ablution (wudi’), the
follower should repeat the prayer. Other scholars such as Malik,
Ash-Shafi‘i and Ahmad disagree with him. Opinions similarly differ
in cases where the imam does something which in the view of his
followers is not permitted in prayer. For details, one may refer to the
figh books. However, if one knows that the imam offers prayer
without ablution, one should not pray behind him, because he is not
praying, only playing.

The Qur’an, the Sunnah and the consensus of the Elders prove
that the ruler of a state, the imam of prayer, the governor of a
region, the commander of a battle, and the collector of zakah are to

be obeyed in cases of ijtihad. They are not required to submit to the
view of their people; quite the opposite, people have to submit and
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 333

give up their individual views in favor of such people of authority,
for the preservation of unity and solidarity of the community and the
avoidance of dissension and discord are far more important than
insistence on a secondary issue. This is also the reason one
government official should not annul the order of another official.
He can also offer prayer behind another official without impairing it.

Once Abii Yusuf was making hajj with Hartin Ar-Rashid, who
underwent a procedure of cupping and on the advice of Imam Malik
did not make ablution and lead the prayer. Abd Yisuf was asked if
he offered prayer behind the caliph. He said, “Glory to Allah! the
Amir al-Mu’minin (Commander of the Faithful) (was leading the
prayer).”” What he meant was that to avoid prayer behind the people
in authority (wuldat al-amr) is to follow the way of the misguided
innovators (ahl al-bid‘ah).

The hadith which Al-Bukhari recorded from Abi Hurayrah is
very clear on the subject. The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “If
they (in authority) lead the prayer properly, it is good for them and
for you; but if they make a mistake, they are responsible, but you
have done your duty.” This hadith clearly states that when the imam
makes a mistake, he will suffer for it and not those who pray behind
him. As for the mujtahid who tries to find out the correct view but
misses it, all that he does is that he misses a duty which he did not
consider to be a duty, or he does something forbidden which he
believed to be lawful. Hence, no one who believes in Allah and the
Last Day will go against this clear and authentic hadith after he has
come to know it. It contradicts all those Hanafis, Shafi‘is and
Hanbalis who say that if the imam does not do what a follower
thinks he should, the latter should not pray behind him. The unity
and solidarity of the community is something that must be
preserved, and discord and dissension must 526 3

The author’s words, “we believe that prayer should be said for
everyone who dies,” means that prayer should be said for everyone,
whether righteous or wicked. Some categories of people are,
however, excepted, such as rebels (bughat), plunderers (qutta‘ at-
tariq), those who commit suicide,*’* and martyrs, with the
difference of Abi’ Yusuf regarding those who commit suicide, and
of Malik and Ash-Shafi‘l regarding the martyrs, as described in their

*°3See Ibn Taymiyyah’s discussion on the point, Majmi‘ al-Fatdwa, 23:370-380.
*°“For the views on these questions see Al-Ayni, A/-Binayah fi Sharh al-Hiddyah, (ed.
Muhammad ‘Umar Ar-Rampuri; Beirut: Dar Al-Fikr, 1401/1981), vol. 2, pp. 1065-
1067; and Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmi‘ al-Fatadwa, vol. 24, pp. 285-289.

334 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

books. What the author wants to emphasize is that Muslims should
not abstain from praying for a dead person even if his beliefs and
practices were wrong. He does not, however, rule out exceptions.

Those who profess to be Muslims are of two kinds, sincerely
faithful and hypocritical. Those whose hypocrisy is well known, we
should not pray for at their funerals or ask forgiveness for them,*”°
but those whose hypocrisy is not known, we must pray for.
However, if someone is aware of a person’s hypocrisy, he should
abstain from praying for him. ‘Umar would abstain from praying
for any man for whom Hudhayfah did not pray, because in the
campaign of Tabuk the Prophet (peace be on him) had told
Hudhayfah who the hypocrites were.*”®

Allah forbade the Prophet (peace be on him) to pray for the
hypocrites and told him that He would not forgive them, even if the
Prophet (peace be on him) did pray for them, because they did not
have faith in Allah and the Prophet (peace be on him). It follows that
we should not abstain from praying for those who have faith in
Allah and His Prophet, no matter whether they have erroneous
beliefs or indulge in sinful acts. In fact, Allah has positively
commanded asking forgiveness for Believers. He said, “Know,
therefore, that there is no god but Allah, and ask forgiveness for
your fault, and for the men and women who believe” [47:19]. He
gave this command to His Prophet, and asked him to believe in His
unity and seek forgiveness from Him for his own shortcomings as
well as the shortcomings and sins of the believing men and women.
Belief in the unity of Allah is the basic principle of Islam, and its
perfection lies in seeking forgiveness for oneself and others. To
invoke Allah for pardon and mercy on the Believers as well as for
other good things is either a binding duty or a commendable act; and
in both cases it is either a general injunction or a special one. The
first is referred to in the verse mentioned above; by the second I
mean the funeral prayer. We have been commanded to pray for
every Muslim who dies, and pray for his forgiveness. Abi Dawtid
and Ibn Majah have recorded a hadith in their Sunans on the
authority of Abt: Hurayrah that the Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“When you pray for a dead person invoke Allah sincerely.’”””’

*°See Ibn Taymiyyah, Majma‘ al-Fatawa, 24:285-287.

*°°See Al-Bukhari, 374, and Al-Hakim, A/-Mustadrak, 3:381.

*’Aba Dawid, Al-Jand’iz, 3199; Ibn Majah, Al-Jand’iz, 1497; Al-Bayhaqi, Sunan,
4:40; Ibn Hibban, 757. Its chain is strong.

Commentary on the Creed of At- 12/111 335

(78) We do not “place” any one of them in Paradise or in
Hell.

What the author means is that we do not say about anyone of the
ahl al-qiblah that he will definitely go to Paradise or Hell, except for
those that the Honest One, the Prophet, said will go to Paradise such
as the ten Companions who were promised Paradise.*?* We only
say that those who commit grave sins and whom Allah would like to
send to Hell will go to Hell. He may later take them out on the
intercession of the people He permits. We say nothing about
particular persons. We neither say that this man will go to Paradise
and that one to Hell unless we have some knowledge of it, for we
do not know about anyone. Faith 15 an internal matter; what the state
of a person is when he dies is not fully known to us. We do,
however, hope for the righteous as we fear for the wrong-doers.

Can we witness about a person that he is one of the people of
Paradise? the Elders are divided into three stances on this issue. One
group says that we cannot witness about anyone except the
prophets. This has been reported from Muhammad Ibn AI-
Hanafiyyah and Al-Awza’1. Another group says that we can witness
about all those Believers who have been mentioned in any text. Most
of the leading scholars and the hadith scholars hold this view. The
third group goes beyond the second and claims that we can witness
about those whom the Believers in general bear witness for. In the
two Sahihs there is a hadith that states that once a funeral procession
passed by and the people praised the person who had died and said
good words about him. The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “It is to
be fulfilled.”” Then a second funeral procession passed by and the
people spoke ill of that deceased person. The Prophet (peace be on
him) then said, “It is to be fulfilled.” According to another version
of the hadith, the Prophet (peace be on him) repeated the words, “It
is to be fulfilled,” three times. Hearing that, ‘Umar asked the
Prophet (peace be on him), “What is to be fulfilled?’ He told him,
“You people spoke well of the first man and praised him,
whereupon it will be fulfilled to send him to Paradise. You spoke ill
of the second man, and it will be fulfilled to send him to Hell. You
are Allah’s witnesses on earth.’”*°? We have another hadith in which

**8’They are Abi’ Bakr As-Siddig, ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, ‘Uthman, ‘Ali, Talhah Ibn
‘Ubaydullah, Az-Zubayr Ibn Al-‘Awwam, ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf, Sa‘d Ibn Abi
Waqaas, Abt ‘Ubaydah ‘Amir Ibn Al-Jarrah, and Sa‘id Ibn Zayd.

*°? Al-Bukhari, 1367, 2642; Muslim, 949. See also An-Nasa’i, 4:49-50; Ahmad,
3:186; At-Tirmidhi, 1058; Ibn Majah, 1491.

336 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “You may know who 15 of
Paradise and who is of Hell.” the people asked, “How, Prophet of
Allah?” He said, “(You may know it) when one is praised and the
other is condemned.”™®° There are, therefore, grounds for knowing
who is of Paradise and who is of hell.

(79) Nor do we charge anyone with not having faith
١ (kufr) or shirk or hypocrisy (nifaq), as long as they do
not openly demonstrate anything of that nature. We
leave what they believe or do in private to Allah.

We have been instructed to form our judgment in the light of
people’s apparent behavior, and to refrain from conjecture or acting
upon what we have no knowledge of. Allah says, “You who
believe! Let not any men among you laugh at others; it may be that
the latter are better than the former” [49:11]; and “You who believe!
Avoid suspicions as much (as possible); for suspicion in some cases
is a sin” [49:12]; and “Pursue not that of which you have no
knowledge; for every act of hearing or of seeing or of (feeling in)
the heart will be inquired into (on the Day of Reckoning)” [17:36].

(80) We do not believe in taking up the sword against
any of the ummah of Muhammad, peace be upon him,
except upon those for whom it is obligatory.

In the Sahih, there 15 a hadith in which the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “The life of a Muslim who witnesses that there is no god
except Allah and that Iam His Messenger cannot be taken except in
three cases: when he commits adultery as an adult, or kills anybody,
or turns away from his religion and leaves his community.’

*°Tbn Majah, 4221; Ahmad, 3:416, 6:466. Al-Arnawit says its chain is good.

**! Al-Bukhari, 687; Muslim, 26, 1676; Abi Dawid, 4352 4353; At-Tirmidhi, 1402;
Ibn Majah, 2534; An-Nasa’i, 7:90, 91, 101, 102, 8:13, 23; Ahmad, 1:382, 428,
444, 465, 6:181

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 337

(81) We do not believe in revolt against our leaders and
rulers, even if they commit injustice, nor do we pray
against them or. defy their orders. On the contrary, we
believe that obedience to them is a duty and a part of our
obedience to Allah, so long as they do not order
anything sinful. We pray for their safety and piety.

Allah says, “You who believe! Obey Allah and obey the
Messenger, and those charged with authority among you” [4:59]. In
the Sahih, it is recorded that he Prophet, peace be upon him, said,
“Whoever obeys me obeys Allah; whoever obeys the ruler obeys
me; and whoever disobeys the ruler, disobeys me.’”*® Abi Dharr,
may Allah be pleased with him, says that his friend (the Prophet)
asked him to hear and obey even if (the ruler) happens to be a
Ethiopian slave with mutilated fingers.*®* In Al-Bukhari’s version of
the hadith the last words are, “Even if he is an Ethiopian man with a
head as small as a raisin.”*® the two Sahihs also have the hadith that
the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “It is the duty of every Muslim
to hear and obey, whether he likes it or not, except when he is asked
. to do something sinful. In that case he should not hear or obey.””®”

Hudhayfah Ibn Al-Yaman said that people inquired about good
things but he inquired about evils, so that he might not be caught in
them. Once he asked, “Messenger of Allah, we lived in evil and
ignorance, then Allah brought us this good. Will evil come after this
good?” the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Yes.” He asked, “Will
there be good after that evil?” He replied, “Yes, but it will be
polluted.” Hudhayfah asked, “How will it be polluted?” He said,
“There will be people whose ways will differ from my ways, and
who will live a life different from that of mine, some of their deeds
will be correct and some wrong.” Hudhayfah asked, “Will there be
an evil after that good?” the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Yes,
there will be preachers at the gates of Hell. Whoever responds to
their call will be thrown into it.” He requested, “Messenger of Allah,
please tell me about them.” the Prophet (peace be on him) said,
“Certainly. They will have skin like ours, and they will speak our
language.” Hudhayfah asked, “Messenger of Allah, what would

*°* Al-Bukhari, 7137; Muslim, Al-Imdrah, 1835; Ibn Majah, Al-Jihdd, 2589; An-
Nasa’l, Al-Bay‘ah, 7: 154; Ahmad, 2:252-253, 270, 313, 511.

**°Muslim, 240, 648, 1837; Ibn Majah, A/-Jihad, 2862; Ahmad, 5:161, 171.

*** Al-Bukhari, 693, 696, 7142; Ibn Majah, Al-Jihadd, 2860; Ahmad, 3:114, 171.

165 Al-Bukhari, 2955, 7144; Muslim, Al-Imdrah, 1839; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Jihad, 2864;
An-Nasa’i, Al-Bay‘ah, 7:160; Ahmad, 1:17, 142.

338 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

you like me to do if it happens in my lifetime?” He said, “Stick to
the party (jamd‘ah) of the Muslims and their imam.” Hudhayfah
said, “Suppose they have no (united) party and no imam.” the
Prophet (peace be on him) then said, “Then keep away from all
those groups, even if you have to eat the roots of trees, until you
meet death and you are in that manner.’”°

Ibn ‘Abbas narrated that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “If
any of you finds something in your ruler that you do not approve of,
you should bear it patiently, for one who moves a span’s length
from the jamd ‘ah and dies, dies the death of the Days of Ignorance
(jahiliyyah).”°' In another version, the words are, “he has thrown
away his allegiance to Islam.’”°* Abi Sa‘id narrated that the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “When two caliphs are sworn allegiance to
(bay‘ah) kill the one that secured it later.”“° ‘Awf Ibn Malik
reported that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “The best of your
leaders (a ’immah) are those whom you love and who love you, and
for whom you pray and who pray for you. The worst of your
leaders are those whom you hate and who hate you, and whom you
curse and who curse you.” ‘Awf asked, “Should we not take up the
sword and fight them in such a situation, Messenger of Allah?”
“No,” he said, “not as long as they establish prayer among you.
Listen: if you have a ruler over you and you see that he is doing
something sinful, you should hate his sin, but should not defy his
commands.”™”°

The Book and the Sunnah prove that obedience to those in
authority (uli al-amr) is obligatory so long as they do not command
anything unlawful. Allah has said, “Obey Allah, and obey His
Messenger and those in authority among you” [4:59]. Look at these
words. He said, “Obey the Messenger,” but he did not say, “Obey
those in authority from among you,” because they do not command
independent obedience. They are to be obeyed only in what is
obedience to Allah and His Messenger. Allah has repeated the word
“obey” in the case of the Messenger (peace be on him), because one
who obeys him obeys Allah, since he never commands what is
against obedience to Allah. In fact, he never gives a wrong

466 Al-Bukhari, 3606, 7084; Muslim, A/-Imdrah, 1847; Abi Dawid, Al-Fitan, 4246.
*°7 Al-Bukhari, 7053, 7054, 7143; Muslim, Al-Jmdrah, 1849; Ahmad, 1:275, 297,
310.

*°8Part of a long hadith, At-Tirmidhi, 2863; Ahmad, 4:130, 202, 5:344; Abu Dawid,
4758; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 1:59, 117. It is also an authentic narration.

16” Muslim, 1853; Al-Bayhaqi, Sunan, 8:144.

*Muslim, 1855; Ahmad, 6:24, 28; Ad-Darimi, 2:324; Al-Bayhagqi, 8:158.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 339

command, he is protected from doing such at thing. But those in
authority may order what goes against Allah’s commands, hence
obedience to them 1 is conditional upon their obedience to Allah and
His Messenger.*’

As to the rule that we should obey those in authority even if they
are unjust, it is because the evil that would result from revolting
against them would be many times worse than the evil which
resulted from their injustice. In fact, by patiently bearing their
injustice we atone for many of our misdeeds and add to our
rewards, for Allah has only inflicted them upon us on account of our
misdeeds. The rule is that the recompense of an act is in accordance
with the act itself. Hence our duty in such situations is to strive in
repenting, seeking forgiveness and rectifying our behavior. Allah
says, “Whatever misfortune happens to you is because of the things
your hands have wrought, and for many of them He grants
forgiveness” [42:30]; “What! When a single disaster smites you,
although you smote (your enemies) with one twice as great, do you
say: ‘Whence is this?’ Say to them: It is from yourselves” [3:165];
“Whatever good happens to you is from Allah: but whatever evil
happens to you, is from your (own) selves” [4:79]; and, “Thus do
We make the wrongdoers turn to each other, because of what they
earn’ [6:129]. Hence, if the people want to get rid of the injustice of
an unjust ruling, they should themselves abstain from doing wrong.

Malik Ibn Dinar said that in some of the heavenly books it states
that Allah has said, “I am Allah, the Owner of the Kingdom. The
hearts of the kings are in My hands. I make them a blessing for
those who obey Me, and a curse for those who disobey Me. So do
not worry about kings. Repent, I will make them merciful over

99472
you.

(82) We follow the Sunnah and the jama‘ah, and avoid
disagreement, dissension and sectarianism.

Sunnah means the way of the Messenger (peace be on him) and
jama@‘ah means the congregation of the Muslims, that is, the
Companions and their mghteous followers until the Day of
Judgment. To follow them is to follow the correct path, and to differ

*"'See the discussion on this point in Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmi‘ al-Fatawa, 35:5-17.

*”? Al-Haythami noted that At-Tabarani recorded this as a hadith of the Prophet (peace
be upon him) in his 4/-Mu jam al-Awsat on the authority of Aba: Ad-Darda’ but one of
its transmitters is such that the hadith scholars do not accept his reports. See Majmi‘
al-Fawa’id, 5:249. |

340 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

from them is to go astray. Allah has emphasized this fact many
times, for example, Allah says, “(O Prophet!) Say: If you love
Allah, follow me; Allah will love you and forgive your sins for you,
and Allah is Forgiving Merciful.” [3:31]; “If anyone contends with
the Messenger, even after guidance has been plainly conveyed to
him, and follows a path other than that of the Believers, We will
leave him in the path he has chosen and land him in Hell. And what
an evil refuge!” [4:115]; “Say: Obey Allah and obey the Messenger:
but if you turn away, he is only responsible for the duty placed on
him, and you are responsible for that placed on you. If you obey
him, you will be on right guidance. The Messenger’s duty is only to
preach the clear message” [24:54]; “Verily, this is my way, leading
straight; follow it. Follow not other paths; they will scatter you
about from His (great) path. Thus does He command you that you
may be righteous” [6:153]; “Be not like those who divided among
themselves and fell into disputation after receiving clear signs, for
them is a dreadful penalty” [3:105]; also, “As for those who divide
their religion and break up into sects, you have no part in them in the
least. Their affair is with Allah. He will in the end tell them the truth
of all that they had been doing” [6:150].

In the Sunan collections is the following hadith which ‘Irbad Ibn
Sartyyah narrated and which At-Tirmidhi evaluated as authentic:
‘Irbad narrated: “One day the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him)
delivered a very moving sermon which made us weep and tremble
with fear. One of us said, ‘Messenger of Allah! This seems to be the
farewell sermon. What do you advise us?’ He said, ‘I advise you to
listen to and obey (your leaders). Verily those of you who live after
me will see a lot of disputes. You must follow my way (Sunnah)
and the way (sunnah) of the right-principled and nghtly guided
caliphs (Ahulafa’ ar-rashidin al-mahdiyyiin). Stick to it and hold
strongly to it (like biting on it) with your molars. Avoid new ways,
for every innovation (bid‘ah) is misguidance.’”’? He (peace be on
him) also said in another hadith, “The people of the two earlier
books each broke up into seventy-two sects (millah) on matters of
religion, and this ummah will divide into seventy-three sects, all of
which will go to Hell except one, which is the jamd‘ah’”""™ Millah,
as the reporter explains, means here a group of people who expound
wishful ideas (ahwda’). In another version, it is reported that the

411 At-Tirmidhi, 2676; Abt Dawid, 4603; Ibn Majah, 42; Ad-Darimi, Sunan, 1:44-45;
Ahmad, 4 126-127; Ibn Hibban, 5; Al-Hakim, A/-Mustadrak, 1:95. It is authentic.
*”*Discussed earlier; it is a good (hasan) hadith.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 341

Prophet (peace be on him) was asked what the jamd ‘ah. Is. He said,
“It is the way which my Companions and I are treading.””’? He thus
made it clear that all those who expound different views will be, in
general, doomed, except the people of the Sunnah and jamd ‘ah.

‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘td, may Allah be pleased with him, has
excellently stated, “If you want to follow a way, follow the way of
those who have died, for there is no guarantee that those who are
alive will be safe from temptation (fitnah). (I am referring to)
following the Companions of Muhammad, peace be upon him. They
are the best of this nation, most pious, most knowledgeable and
least complicated. They are the people whom Allah chose to
accompany His Prophet, and to establish His religion. Respect their
position, follow their way, and imitate their virtues and practices; for
they were definitely on the right path.’””°

We will elaborate this point further when we comment on the
author’s words, “We believe that the jamd‘ah is on the right path
and deviation from it is erroneous and accursed.”

(83) We love those who are just and the honest, and we
hate those who are unjust and dishonest.

This is from the perfection of imdn (faith) and ‘ubidiyyah
(reverential submission). ‘[bddah entails perfect and utmost love and
complete and utmost submission. Hence, love for the messengers,
prophets, and the faithful servants of Allah is a part of one’s love for
Allah. However, the love that is for Allah cannot be shared by
anyone else. Others are loved for Allah’s sake, not along with Allah.
A lover of Allah loves what his beloved Allah loves, hates what his
beloved hates, befriends whom his Beloved befriends, and
considers him an enemy whom his Beloved considers an enemy. He
is pleased with what pleases Him, and annoyed by what annoys
Him. He enjoins what his Beloved enjoins, and forbids what He |
forbids. In short, his will agrees with the will of Allah on every
occasion.

Allah loves all those who are righteous, pious, ever-repentant
and pure. And we love whom Allah loves. Since Allah does not love

*7> At-Tirmidhi, Al-Imdn, 2641.

*”°lbn ‘Abdul-Barr has noted these words in his Jami‘ Baydn al-‘Ilm wa Fadlihi (ed.
‘Abdul-Karim Al-Khatib and ‘Abdur-Rahman Hassan Mahmid; Cairo: Dar Al-Kutub
Al-Hadithah, 1395/1975). Abt: Nu‘aym has recorded a somewhat similar saying of
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar in his Hilyat al-Awliya’, 1:305.

342 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

those who are dishonest, mischievous and haughty, we also do not
love them; we rather hate them just as Allah hates them.

The Sahihs of Al-Bukhart and Muslim record the hadith in
which the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Whoever has three
things has found the sweetness of imdn: that he loves Allah and the
Messenger more than anything else; that he loves nobody except for
the sake of Allah; and that he hates to lapse into not having faith after
Allah has rescued him from it, as much as he hates to be thrown into
fire.’

Thus perfect love requires complete identification of will with
the will of the Beloved regarding everything He likes or dislikes,
loves or hates, and regarding everyone whom He considers friend
or enemy. We all know that if one loves Allah as one should, one
must hate His enemies, love His friends, and struggle in His way.
Allah has himself said, “Verily Allah loves those who fight in His
cause in battle array as if they were a solid, cemented structure”
[61:4].

One loves or hates a person for his good or bad qualities. But it
sometimes happens that a person has qualities, some of which call
for love and others that call for hatred. He is, therefore, loved for
one thing and hated for another, and which of the two is stronger
takes the upper-hand. The same is true in Allah’s sight. Sometimes
He loves a thing for one reason, and hates it for another. The
Prophet (peace be on him) has quoted Allah as saying, “I never
hesitate in doing a thing that I want to do, but I hesitate to take the
life of a faithful servant of Mine. He does not like to die and I do not
like to displease him, but it must be done.’*”* Allah hesitates
because there is a conflict of two wills. On the one hand, He likes
what His faithful servant likes and dislikes what he dislikes, namely
death. He says, “I do not like to displease him.” On the other hand,
He has decided on his death and intends it. This is called hesitation,
but there is no alternative, as He has made clear. But this will also
lead to something that the servant likes even better.*””

477 Al-Bukhari, 16, 21, 6041, 6941; Muslim, Al-Imdn, 43; At-Tirmidhi, Al-Jman,
2626; Ibn Majah, Al-Fitan, 4033; An-Nasa’i, 8:94, 96; Ahmad, 3:103, 172, 174,
230, 248, 275, 288.

*”8Mentioned earlier, it is authentic. The last sentence, “But it must be done,” though,
is not part of the hadith.

*See Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmi ‘ al-Fatawa, 18: 129-135.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 343

(84) Whenever something is not clear to us we say Allah
knows better.

The author has stated earlier that no one secures his religion
unless he submits to Allah and His Messenger, and leaves the
knowledge of a thing not clear to him to one who knows it.

When one speaks on a matter without knowledge, one 15 simply
pursuing one’s fancies or desires. Allah has warned, “Who is more
astray than one who follows his own fancies, devoid of guidance
from Allah?” [28:5]. He has also said, “And yet among men there
are such as dispute about Allah, without knowledge and follow
every satanic one obstinate in rebellion. About the Evil One it 1s
decreed that whoever turns to him for friendship, he will lead him
astray, and guide him to the penalty of the Fire” [22:3-4]; “Such as
dispute about the signs of Allah without any authority that has
reached them, grievous and odious is such conduct in the sight of
Allah and the Believers. Thus does Allah seal up the heart of every
arrogant and obstinate transgressor” [40:35]; “Say: The things that
my Lord has indeed forbidden are shameful deeds, whether open or
secret; sins and trespasses against truth; assigning of partners to
Allah, for which he has given no authority; and saying things about
Allah of which you have no knowledge” [7:33]. He has commanded
His Prophet (peace be on him) to leave the knowledge of things to
Allah which he does not know: “Say: Allah knows best how long
they stayed. With him is the knowledge of the secrets of the heavens
and the earth” [18:26]; and, “Say: My Lord knows best their
number” [18:22]. When the Prophet (peace be on him) was asked
about the children of those who assign partners to Allah, he said,
“Allah knows best what they have been doing.””*"

“Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, said, “In matters of
religion do not rely upon your reason. Had I relied upon my reason
on the day Abi Jandal was presented (in chains) I would have
opposed the command of the Prophet (peace be on him). I pondered
the matter. The agreement was to be written. The Prophet (peace be
upon him), said, ‘Write: “In the name of Allah, the Beneficient, the
Merciful.” the Makkans insisted that it should begin simply with ‘In
the name of Allah.” The Prophet (peace be on him) agreed, and the
agreement was completed, but I refused to accept it.” The Prophet
(peace be on him) said to him, “‘Umar, you see that I have accepted;

*8°A1-Bukhari, 1384, 6599, 6600 and 1383, 6597; Muslim, 2639, 2660; Aba Dawid,
4711; An-Nasa’1, 2:58, 59; Ahmad, 2:266, 393, 471, 518.

344 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

even so you refuse!’”®' On another occasion, ‘Umar said, “The
Sunnah is what Allah and His Messenger have ordained. Do not
make your wrong ideas sunnah for the ummah.’*** Abii Bakr stated,
‘What earth will hold me, and what heaven will protect me if I speak
about a verse of Allah’s Book when I have no knowledge of it,
simply on the basis of my opinion!’”**°

Al-Hassan Ibn Al-Hulwani has reported from ‘Arim, from
Hammad Ibn Zayd, from Sa‘id Ibn Abi Sadagah, that Ibn Sirin said,
“No one was more diffident in speaking about what he did not know
than Abu Bakr, and after him no one was more diffident than
‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with them. When Abd Bakr faced a
problem and could not find anything in the Qur’an and the Sunnah
that bore upon it, then and only then would he say something in the
light of his reason, and that, too, with this reservation, ‘This is my
view: If it is right it is from Allah; but if it is wrong it is from me,
and I pray to Allah to forgive me.’”

(85) We believe that it is correct to wipe over leather
socks, whether one is traveling or resident, as has been
mentioned in the hadith.

It has been transmitted in mutawatir form that the Prophet (peace
be on him) wiped over leather socks, and that he also washed his
feet as part of ablution (wudi’). The Rafidah reject this established
practice (sunnah). We may point out to them that those who learned
wudu’ from the Prophet (peace be on him) and did it in his presence
and with his approval, and passed on the practice to those who
followed them, are far more than those who passed on the Qur’anic
verse referring to wudi’ (5:6). All the Muslims performed ablution
in his time and learned it from none but him, as this practice was not
known before Islam. Innumerable people watched the Prophet
(peace be on him) making ablution and saw him washing his feet,
and reported it in various ahddith. Hadith scholars have recorded, in
the Sahih and other collections, the hadith which originates from
different reporters and is transmitted through various channels that
the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Woe to the heels and the soles

*8! At-Tabarani, Al-Kabir, 82; Ibn Hazm, Al-Ihkam ffi Usil al-Ahkam (ed. Ahmad
Muhammad Shakir; Beirut: Dar Al-Afaq Al-Jadidah, 1402/1983) vol. 6, ‏.م‎ 46. The
narrators of this hadith are all trustworthy.

452 ‏و5[‎ ‘Abdul-Barr, Jami‘ Bayan al-‘Ilm, 2:136; Ibn Hazm, Al-Ihkam, 6:51.

*83See Ibn Kathir, Tafsir al-Qur’dn al-‘Azim, 4:473; Tafsir At-Tabari, 78, 79.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 345

of the feet (as I am afraid) they might be burned in the Fire.”***
Although the obligation in wiping is simply the top of the feet and in
the washing it is all of them, this 15 not something one 15 naturally
drawn to, as one may be drawn to seeking wealth and power.
Furthermore, if anybody doubts that the ahddith descnbing
ablution have not been reported in mutawd@tir nature, he should even
more so doubt that the verse about ablution has been transmitted by
mutawatir transmission. But when they admit that the verse has
been passed on by mutawdatir transmission such that its authenticity
is beyond all doubt, they should all the more admit that the ahddith
conceming ablution have been passed on by _ mutawéatir
transmission. Moreover, there is no conflict between the verse of the
Qur’an and the ahddith that have been transmitted in mutawdatir
form, for the word msh (used in the Qur’a4n) sometimes means
‘wipe’ and sometimes ‘wash’, since the (desert) Arabs say,
“tamassahtu li as-salah” - ‘I washed for prayer’.**’ There is also an
indication in the verse that what is meant by m-s-h of the feet is not
the m-s-h that is an alternative to washing but m-s-h in the sense of
washing. The verse says, “up to the two ankles (id al-ka‘bayny’
and does not say, “up to the ankles’’, though prior to it it states “up
to the elbows” (ila al-mardfiq). This is because the foot has two
“ankles’,*®° but the arm has only one elbow (mirfaq). Hence when
Allah said, “up to the two ankles” this can only mean that He has
commanded the washing up to the two protruding bones in the
ankle. This, though, 15 done only in washing and not in wiping,
which is confined to the upper surface of the feet. On the other
hand, the ankles have been made the limits of the washing. Thus,
the view that what is obligatory in ablution 15 wiping the feet rather
than washing them is repudiated both by the Qur’an and the Sunnah.
This verse has two well-known readings, the subjunctive mood
and the genitive case. Its parsing is discussed in the proper places.
The subjunctive reading is a clear text pointing to the obligation of
washing the feet. Conjunction with the grammatical structure can
only take place if the meaning is the same, as 1n the statement, “We

are not mountains or iron.’”®

“84 Ahmad, 4:191. It is authentic.

*8°See Al-Qurtubi, Al-Jami‘ li Ahkam al-Qur’an, 6:92.

***Obviously, this is true in Arabic, but not necessarily in English.

*S’Here he is basically saying that since the conjunction has been with the previous
grammatical structure (this is known because the word is not *arjulikum), it must
belong to the earlier command to wash and not the later command to wipe.

346 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

The meaning of the words masahtu bi ra’si wa rijli is not the same as
masahtu ra’si wa rijli (‘I wiped my head and feet’), as the presence
of ba implies an additional meaning to the meaning of wipe, that is,
to wipe the head with water. Therefore, the conjunction must be
related to, “and your arms”. The mutawdtir sunnah overrules what
is understood by some people as the apparent meaning of the verse
as the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) explained the wording
as well as the meaning of the Qur’an to the people. Aba ‘Abdur-
Rahman As-Sulami said, “Those who used to recite the Qur’an to
us, ‘Uthman Ibn ‘Affan, ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘td and others, told us
that when they learned ten verses from the Prophet (peace be on
him), they would not go beyond them until they learned their
meanings.”

The word m-s-h (wipe) is mentioned in particular reference to
the feet to imply that not much water is to be used for the feet, as
that is the place where customarily people use more water than is
necessary. This topic 15 well-known and is discussed in the relevant
places of the books of figh.

(86) Hajj and jihad shall continue until the Last Day
under all Muslim authorities (uli al-amr), 010115 or
impious. They shall never be suspended or abrogated.

The author is here refuting the Rafidah, who say that there will
be no jihdd for the cause of Allah until the time that, from among the
descendants of Muhammad (peace be on him), one named Ar-Rida
appears and a voice comes from Heaven saying, “Follow him.” This
is obviously false and needs no refutation. The Rafidah claim that
the imam under whose leadership these acts are to be conducted
must be innocent, free of sin. This has no basis. It is contradicted by
the hadith which Muslim has recorded in his Sahih on the authority
of ‘Awf Ibn Malik Al-Ashja’1, who said that the Prophet (peace be
on him) said, “Your best rulers are those whom you love and who
love you, whom you pray for and who pray for you. And your
worst rulers are those whom you hate and who hate you, whom you
curse and who curse you.” Hearing that, ‘Awf said, “Messenger of
Allah, should we not then fight them with our swords?” the Prophet
said, “No, not as long as they establish the prayer in your
community. Know that if you have a ruler (wali) who you see
commits a sin against Allah, you should hate his sin but should not
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 347

abstain from obeying him.’”*® We have cited other ahddith on the
subject while discussing the question of imadmah.

There 15 no hadith that says that the ima@m must be innocent and
infallible; the Rafidah are absolutely wrong. Their infallible and
innocent imdm is only a myth, of no use here or in the Hereafter. He
is in hiding, they claim. His name is Muhammad Ibn AI-Hassan AI-
‘Askari. They believe that he went underground around the year 260
A.H. at Samarra. They keep a mule or a horse always ready for him
to ride when he comes out. They also keep men there to call at some
fixed hours, “Master, Come out! Master, Come out!” These people
are fully armed, though there is no one there to fight. They do many
other things that make them only laughing stocks.

The author has put in the words “whether pious or impious” in
order to emphasize the fact that hajj and jihdd are duties related to
traveling. A leader is needed to organize them or to make war
against an enemy, and this can be done by any imdm, be he
righteous or not.

(87) We believe in the honorable angels that note down
(our deeds). Allah has appointed them to keep watch
over us.

Allah has referred to these angels in various verses, for example,
“But verily over you (are appointed angels) to protect you, kind and
honorable, writing down (your deeds). They know (and
understand) all that you do” [82:10-12]; “Behold two (guardian
angels) appointed to note (his doings) watch and note (them), one |
sitting on the right and one on the left. Not a word does he utter but
there is a sentinel by him ready (to note it)” [50:17-18]; “For each
(such person) there are (angels) in succession, before and behind
him. They guard him by command of Allah” 13: 11]; “Or do they
think that We hear not their secrets and their private counsels?
Indeed (We do) and our messengers are by them to record” [43:80]’;
“This Our Record speaks about you with truth, for We were wont to
put on record all that you did” [45:59]; “Verily, Our messengers
record all the plots that you make” [10:21].

The Prophet (peace be on him) has also spoken about them. In
the Sahih, it is recorded that he said, “The angels of the day and the
angels of the night watch you, one group after the other. They meet |
at the dawn prayer and the afternoon prayer, then those who were
346 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

with you go up to Allah. He asks them how they found His
servants, even though He is well aware of them. They say that when
they went to them they were engaged in prayer and when they left
them they were also engaged in prayer.’**’ On another occasion he
said, “There are some that are always with you except when you
relieve yourselves or are intimate with your wives. Be shy with
respect to them, and do respect them.’”””°

Commentators of the Qur’4n have written that two angels at the
right and two at the left of every person are engaged in noting down
his deeds. Those on the right note the good deeds, and those on the
left note the evil deeds. Two other angels keep guard, one from —
behind and one in front. Everyone is thus under four guardian
angels during the day and four others during the night, two of them
keeping guard and the other two noting down. ‘Ikrimah said that Ibn
‘Abbas, commenting on the verse, “they guard him by command of
Allah” [13:11], said, “There are angels that guard him in front and
from behind. But when his death comes they leave him.’”’' Both
Muslim and Ahmad have recorded from ‘Abdullah that the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “There is no one among you with whom one
of the jinns and one of the angels is not associated.” Someone asked
him, “With you, too, Messenger of Allah?” “With me too!” he
replied, “But Allah has helped me overcome the one of the jinns,
and he has submitted. Now he does not suggest except what is
good.”””* This hadith is narrated with the word aslama. Those who
narrated it as/4mu have distorted its meaning. Its meaning 1s that the
jinn has submitted and obeys the Prophet (peace be on him). This is
the stronger opinion, for that reason, he said, “Therefore, he does
not command me to do but good.” Those who say that it means that
the devil became a Believer have distorted the meaning because
devils never become Believers.

The meaning of “who guard by Allah’s command” [13:11],
according to some, is that they guard him by the command of Allah.
That is, Allah has commanded them to do so. This is supported by
those who recited the verse with the words bi-amri Allah instead of
min amri Allah.

These texts prove that the angels note down our words and
deeds, and intentions, which are the acts of our hearts. Intentions
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 349

are covered in the verse, “They know all that you do” [82:12]. They
are also referred to in the words the Prophet (peace be on him) has
quoted Allah as saying to the angels, “When My servant intends to
do some evil, do not record it unless he does it, and then write only
one bad deed. But when My servant intends to do some good but
fails to do it, credit to his account one good deed; but when he does
it, note down ten good deeds to his account.’”?? The Prophet (peace
be on him) has also said that the angels say to Allah - and he is more
knowledgeable of Him - “This servant of Yours wants to do evil
while he knows it 15 evil,” and Allah instructs them, ‘Watch him. If
he does it, note down one bad deed equal to his act. But if he
refrains from doing it, note down one good deed in your records,
for he has left it for My sake.’” These two ahddith have been
recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim in their Sahih collections. The
wording noted here is from Muslim.*”*

(88) We believe in the Angel of Death, who has been
charged with taking out the souls of the people.

Allah has said, “Say: The Angel of Death put in charge of you
will (duly) take your souls; then will you be brought back to your
Lord” [32:11]. This verse 15 not in conflict with the verse, “When
death approaches one of you, Our angels take his soul, and they
never fail in their duty” [6:61], or the verse, “It is Allah Who takes
the souls (of men) at death; and those that die not He takes during
their sleep. Those on whom He has passed the decree of death, He
keeps back (from returning to life), but the rest He sends (to their
bodies) for an appointed term” [39:42]. The Angel of Death is in
charge of taking souls, and when he takes a soul out, the angels of
mercy or the angels of torture take charge of it. All this happens
according to Allah’s decree and by His command. Hence, death may
be attributed to each of them according to his part in it.

People have different views on the nature of the soul (nafs). Is it
a part of the body or one of its incidents? Or is it a body placed in
another body where it resides, or is it a pure substance? Again, is it
the same as spirit (7ih) or different from it? Are there three souls,
namely one inciting to evil (al-ammdrah bi as-sii’), a second
admonishing (al-lawwamah), and a third tranquil (al-mutma ‘innah),

F14 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI
350 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

or just one soul? Does the spirit (rh) die, or is it the body alone that
dies?*”? These issues would require a separate volume. I will,
however, confine myself to a few remarks, God willing.

Some people say that the spirit 1s eternal. However, the prophets
of Allah are agreed that it 15 a contingent being, created, fashioned,
controlled and nourished by Allah. One of the basic principles of all
prophetic religions is that the world is contingent. This is also the
belief of the Companions and their Successors. After them, some
people who had little knowledge of the Qur’an and the Sunnah
began to claim that the spirit is eternal. They said that the spirit 15 an
‘amr’ (command) of Allah and therefore uncreated. They argued
from the verses in which Allah has ascribed the spirit to Himself,
such as, “Say the spirit is out of my Lord’s command” [17:85], and
“T breathed into him of My spirit” [15:29]. They say that Allah has
ascribed the spirit to Himself just as He has ascribed knowledge,
power, hearing, seeing, and hands to Himself. There are others who
are not able to form any opinion on the subject.

The Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah are all agreed that the spirit is
created. Their consensus on this point has been reported by
Muhammad Ibn Nasr Al-Marwazi, Ibn Qutaybah and others.

Of the proofs that the spirit 1s created, one is the verse, “Allah is
the Creator of all things” [13:16; 39:62]. This is an unqualified,
general statement that is not particularized in any fashion. It applies,
among other things, to the spirit. One cannot counter it by saying
that it should then apply to the divine attributes also, for the
attributes of Allah are part of His Being. Allah is Allah, qualified
with all the attributes of perfection. His knowledge, His power, His
life, His hearing, His seeing, and all His attributes are part of His
Being. His Essence qualified with His attributes is the Creator; all
else 15 created. It is known with certainty that the spirit 1s neither
Allah nor one of His attributes; it is only one of His created things.

Another argument that the spirit 15 a created being 15 the verse,
“Has there not been over man a long period of time when he was
nothing (not even mentioned)” [76:1], and the verse which Allah
addressed to Zachariah, “I did indeed create you before when you
had been nothing” [19:9]. Since man is both spint and body, the
address to Zachariah is an address to his body as well as his soul.
The spirit is also characterized by death. Further, the spirit has been
said to be taken and to be returned. This is another argument that it
is a created object.

For a fuller discussion of these points, see Ibn Taymiyyah, Majma‘ al-Fatdwa,
4:416-431; and Ibn Al-Qayyim, Ar-Rih, 237-290.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 351

| The view that the spirit is uncreated can derive no support from

the verse, “The spirit is of My Lord’s command.” Amr here does
not mean command but a thing commanded (ma ’mir). This use of a
verbal noun in the sense of object of the verb 15 quite common in the
language.

The other argument, which draws upon the fact that Allah has
ascribed the spirit to Himself, 1s also not valid. Things that have
been ascribed to Allah are of two kinds. First is attributes that do not
exist by themselves, such as knowledge, power, speech, hearing,
seeing and so on. These things are ascribed to Allah as an attribute is
ascribed to its subject. Second are objects that exist in themselves
separately from Allah, such as house (bayt), she-camel (ndqah),
servant (‘abd), messenger (rasul) and spirit (ruh). These things are
ascribed to Him as created objects are ascribed to their Creator. The
ascription only underscores the importance and honor of the thing
ascribed and distinguishes it from other things of its kind. |

There is also a difference of opinion about the spirit: is it created
before the body or after it? This was mentioned earlier when the
“covenant” was discussed.

There 15 also a difference of opinion about the essential nature of
the spirit. Some say it is a body; some say it is an incident; others
say that they do not know what it is, whether a physical entity or an
incident. Some say that the spirit is nothing but the four natural
elements.*”° Some say that it is the pure blood, free of any odor or
odorous impurities. Some say that it 15 the natural heat, which 15 life
itself. Some say that it is a non-composite, physical entity that 1s
spread throughout the animal world that drives that world and is not
divided into essence and body, and that all in the animal world
possess the same kind of spirit. Others say it is the breath that 5
breathed in and out. And there are still other opinions.

With respect to the word “human”, does it refer to the spirit
only, the spirit and the body, both of them together, or either one of
them? the same questions are asked concerning Allah’s speech: 15 it
the words only, is it the meaning only, it is both of them together, or
either of them? The difference is between the speaker and what he
speaks. The truth is that the word human applies to both of them and
can also apply to one of them depending on the context. The same 5
true for speech.

What is proven by the Qur’an, the Sunnah, the consensus of the
Companions and rational thought is that the soul is a body of a

*°°In Greek and Arab medicine, the human body was considered to be composed of four
natural elements. When they were out of balance, the body did not function properly.

352 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tah@wiyyah

different essence from the physical body that is seen. It is a body
from light and a higher source. It is very light, living and moving. It
is implemented through the physical limbs. It spreads through them
as water spreads through a watering place, or as olive oil spreads
through an olive tree or like fire in a coal. As long as the limbs are
healthy enough to accept the effects of that light body (the soul), the
soul remains in that body and drives that physical body’s feelings,
movements and volitions. But if it becomes bad, the mixture of the
compounds becomes bad, and it no longer accepts that effect, the
spirit leaves the body and goes to the world of the spirits.

The evidence for that is Allah’s statement, “Allah receives
(people’s) souls at the time of their death” [39:42]. This states that
the souls are given death, kept and sent. Allah also says, “If you
could see, when the wrongdoers reach the pangs of death and the
angels stretch out their hands, saying: “Deliver up your souls’”
[6:93]. This states that the angels stretch out their hands to grasp the
souls. It describes the soul as coming out. It also shows that the
soul is punished on that day, and it goes to its Lord. Furthermore,
Allah says, “He it is Who gathers your soul at night and knows
what you commit by day. Then He raises you again to life therein”
[6:60]. This states that the souls are taken by night and then returned
to their bodies during the day. And the angels take them at death.
Allah also says, “But ah! you soul at peace! Return unto your Lord,
content in His good pleasure. Enter among My bondsmen. Enter My
garden” [89:27-30]. Here the soul is described as returning, entering
and being pleased.

The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “When the soul 15 seized,
the eyes see it.”’’’ This describes the soul as being seized and the
eyesight seeing it. In the hadith of Bilal, it says, “The souls are
seized whenever He wishes and returned to you whenever He
wishes.””’* The Prophet (peace be on him) also said, “The soul of a
Believer is a bird clinging to the trees of Paradise.’””’

When the punishment of the grave is discussed, God willing,
_ considerable evidence will be presented: the Angel of Death speaks
to the soul; it comes out in a drop-like fashion like water drops from
the mouth of a waterskin; it will ascend, from the Believer, a good
smell emanating from it, while from a disbeliever a bad smell will
exude from it.

*7’Muslim, 920; Ibn Majah, 1454; Ahmad, 6:297.
*98 Al-Bukhari, 595, 7471; Abii Dawiid, 439; An-Nasa’i, 2:106, Ahmad, 5:307.
9 An-Nasa’l, 4:108; Ibn Majah, 4271; Malik, 1:240; Ahmad, 3:455, 456, 460.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 353

This is what the Elders have agreed upon and it is also what
rational thought leads one to. Those who have differing opinions
only follow false suppositions and invalid misconceptions that
cannot, in any way, be taken in opposition to what is stated in the
texts of revelation and sound reasoning.

As for the question whether soul (nafs) and spirit (rah) are two
different things or the same thing, the correct view is that the words
mean different things, some of which are the same and some that
differ. Take, for example, nafs. Sometimes it refers to rah (spirit);
sometimes it refers to something which is associated with the body.
Hence, when we want to refer to something isolated from the body,
we use the term riih. Second, nafs may mean blood. A hadith says,
“That which does not have flowing blood (nafs sa@’ilah) does not
make the water it dies in impure.””°” Third, nafs may refer to the evil
eye. It is said, “He has been stricken by a nafs,” that is, by an evil
eye.’”' Finally, nafs means a thing itself. In the Qur’4n, it states,
“Salute yourselves (anfusukum)” [24:61], and “Do not kill
yourselves (anfusukum)” [4:28].

As for rih, it does not refer to the body, neither by itself nor in
combination with nafs. It has been used for the Qur’an in the verse,
“And thus We by Our Command sent down inspiration (riih) to
you” [42:52]; and for Gabriel in the verse, “With ‏غ1‎ came down the
Spirit of Faith and Truth (ar-rih al-amin)” [26:193]. Riih may also
refer to the air that moves in the human body. Again, the 7117 by
which Allah helps His friends 15 still another thing. He has said,
“For such He has written faith in their hearts and strengthened them
with a spirit (rah) from Himself’ [58:22]. It may also mean a faculty
of the body. People say ar-rih al-basir (the seeing faculty), Ar-rith
as-sami ‘ (the hearing faculty) and ar-rih ash-shamm (the smelling
faculty). It may also refer to something even more particular than all
of the above, I mean the power of knowing Allah, submitting to
Him, loving Him and longing for Him. This relation of this rith is to
the spirit (rih) as the spirit 15 to the body. Hence, knowledge has
rih, ihsan has rih, love has ruh, and honesty has rih. People are
not equal with respect to these powers. There are some in whom

*°°These words are not mentioned in any hadith. But Ad-Daraqutni in his Sunan (vol.
1, p. 37) and Al-Bayhagi in his As-Sunan al-Kubra (vol. 2, ‏.م‎ 253) have recorded a
hadith from Salman Al-Farsi that conveys the same meaning; however, this hadith 5
weak. |

301 Al-Jawhari, As-Sihah, (ed. Ahmad ‘Abdul-Ghaftr ‘Attar; Beirut: Dar Al-Malayin,
2nd ed. 1399/1979), vol. 6, p. 2170-2172.

354 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

these powers are strong; they are people who are spiritually inclined.
On the other hand, there are those who lack all of them or most of
them. There are others wherein these spirits are very weak; they are
the earth-bound beast. |

It is commonly said that there are three souls (anfus) in man: the
satisfied and tranquil one at peace (al-mutma‘innah), _ the
admonishing (al-lawwadmah) and the evil-inspiring (al-ammarah),
and that in different men one or the other of the three is
predominant.””’ Allah has referred to these souls in verses 89:27,
75:2 and 12:53. The truth is that there is a single soul with three
different attributes. It inspires evil, but when faith opposes it, it
begins reproaching. It first commits sin, then turns on itself with
reproach. For a time, it swings from one to the other, until its faith
is strengthened and it settles down and feels satisfied. The Prophet
(peace be on him) referred to this state when he said, “One who
feels happy when he does good, and unhappy when he does evil, is
a true Believer,””’’ while he also said, “An adulterer is not a
Believer while he 15 committing adultery...”

As to the question whether the spint (rah) is mortal or not,
people have different views.”°* Some say that it is mortal, for it is a
soul (nafs) and every soul is to die. Allah has said, “All that is on
earth will perish, but will abide (forever) the countenance of your
Lord, Full of Majesty, Bounty and Honor” [55:26-27]; and,
“Everything (that exists) will perish except his own countenance”
[28:88]. These people say that when even angels perish, the souls of
men will certainly also perish. Others say that the spirits do not
perish, because they have been created to abide forever; only the
bodies perish. In support, they cite those ahddith which speak of the
pleasure and pain that spirits will suffer after they leave their bodies
until Allah gives them new bodies.

_ The correct view on the issue may be stated like this. One may
understand the death of the soul to mean its departure from the
body, not its destruction. In this sense, the soul is mortal. But if one
means that it perishes and disappears completely, then it 15 not
mortal in that sense; it continues to live after death, and has pleasure
or pain. We will discuss this point later, God willing.

Allah states about the inhabitants of Paradise, “They taste not
death therein, save the first death” [44:56]. That death 15 in reference

See Ibn Al-Qayyim, Ar-Rih, pp. 294-305.

Part of a hadith, At-Tirmidhi, Al-Fitan, 2165; Ahmad, 1:18, 26; Al-Hakim, Al-
Mustadrak, 1:114. It is an authentic hadith. |

“See Ibn Al-Qayyim, Ar-Rih, pp. 49-54.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 355

to the spirit leaving the body. As for the inhabitants of Hell, Allah
says, “They say: Our Lord, twice have You made us die and twice
have You made us live” [40:11]; Allah also says, “How do you
disbelieve in Allah when you were dead and He gave life to you!
Then He will give you death, then life again” [2:28]. These verses
are referring to the first death, when people were a germ cell in the
loins of their fathers and in the wombs of their mothers. Allah then
gave them life after that and then caused them to die. He will then
give them life again on the Day of Resurrection. That is not in
reference to death of their spirits before the Day of Resurrection, as
in that case there would be three deaths.

Furthermore, the stupefaction that will occur to everyone upon
the Blowing of the Trumpet does not necessarily imply another
death, because the people will also fall into a swoon when Allah
comes to make His judgments and when He lights up the earth with
His light, but that is not death. God willing, that will be discussed
later. Similarly, Moses’ falling into a stupor was also not death, but
—and Allah knows best — the Blowing of the Trumpet will mean
death for all those creatures that will not yet have experienced death.
As for those who will have already experienced death and those for
whom death is not written, the houris and other inhabitants of

Paradise, the verse does not prove that they will experience another
death. But Allah knows best.

(89) We believe that some people may be punished in
their graves if they deserve it, and that Munkar and
Nakir will question people about their Lord, their
religion and their Prophet, as has been reported by the
Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) and the
Companions. We believe that the grave is either a garden
of Paradise or a pit of the Hell-fire.

Allah says, “But the brunt of the penalty encompassed on all
sides the people of Pharaoh. They will be brought before the Fire,
morning and evening. And when the Day of Judgment is established
(it will be said): Cast you the people of Pharaoh into the severest
penalty” [40:45-46]. He has also said, “So leave them alone until
they encounter that Day of theirs wherein they will (perforce) swoon
(with terror), the Day when their plotting will avail them nothing,
and no help will be given them. And verily for those who do wrong,
there is another punishment besides this. But most of them
understand not” [52:45-47]. This may refer to their slaughter by the
Believers in (various battles in) this life, or their punishment during
the interim between death and resurrection (al-barzakh). The second
306 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahawiyyah

meaning is preferred because it is a fact that a number of these
people die and are not punished in this world, which the verse
would then require.

Al-Bara’ Ibn ‘Azib, may Allah be pleased with him, said: “I and
some others were at the funeral of a person in the cemetery of
Gargad when the Prophet (peace be on him) came and sat down. We
sat down around him. We were completely silent as if birds had
perched on our heads. When the body was interred in the grave the
Prophet (peace be on him) said, ‘I seek refuge in Allah from the
torture of the grave,’ and he repeated these words three times. Then
he said, ‘When a believing person proceeds towards the next life
and leaves this life, angels come down to him with faces bright like
the sun. They have with them a shroud from the shrouds of
Paradise, as well as some of its sweet-smelling herbs. They sit
down at the distance of his eyesight. The angel of death then comes
and sits down at his head and says, “Good soul, come out to the
pardon and the pleasure of Allah,’ whereupon the soul comes out as
smoothly as a drop of water trickles down from the mouth of a
waterskin. The angel takes it, and as soon as he takes it in his hand,
other angels put it in the shroud and the sweet-smelling herbs they
had brought with them. A sweet smell like the best musk of this
world comes from it.

“Then they ascend with it. Whenever they pass by other angels,
they are questioned about the soul, “What is that good soul?” They
will say, “So-and-so son of So-and-so.” They will call him by the
best names by which he was known in this life. This happens until
they reach the heavens. They will ask for its doors to open. Its
doors are opened and they enter. The angels that are there flock
around it and greet it. The same happens at all the heavens until they
reach the seventh heaven. Allah then says, “Put the records of My
servant in the i//iyin and return him to the earth. I have created them
from the earth, and to it they will be returned, and from it I will take
them out again.” ‘At that time his soul will be returned to his
body. Two angels will come to him, seat him, and question him,
“Who is your Lord?” He will say, “My Lord is Allah.” They will
then ask, “What is your religion?” He will say, “My religion is
Islam.” Their next question will be, “Who is this man who was sent
to you?” He will say, “He is the Messenger of Allah.” They will
ask, “How did you know that?” He will answer, “I read the Book of
Allah, and I believed in him, and proclaimed that he was true.”
Thereupon a voice will come from the heaven, “My servant has
spoken the truth. Give him a bed from Paradise, and open one of its
doors towards him.” He will then breathe the good scent of
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 7 357

Paradise. His grave will be expanded until the reach of his eyes.
Then a handsome figure neatly dressed and smelling good will come
to him and say, “Welcome. May you be as happy as you have been
promised.” He will ask, “Who are you?” He will answer, “I am
your good deeds.” Then the man will exclaim, “Lord, let the Hour
come, that I may see my family and my wealth.” ‘But when an
infidel,’ the Prophet continued, ‘leaves this life and proceeds to the
next, angels with black faces come down from the heaven. They
have a coarse black shroud with them, and take their seat at the
distance of his eyes. Then the angel of death comes, sits at his head,
and says, “Evil soul, get out and move to the wrath of Allah.” The
soul runs here and there in the body, so the angel pulls it out just as
you remove a spit from a wet quilt. As soon as he takes it out, other
angels put it in the black shroud that smells fouler than the foulest
thing on the earth. They ascend with it. Whenever they pass by a
group of angels they are asked, “What is this evil soul?’ They
answer, “So-and-so, son of So-and-so,” and they will call him by
the worst names that he had in this world.

“When they reach the lowest heaven, they seek permission to
enter, but are refused.’ At this moment, the Prophet (peace be on
him) recited the Qur’anic verse, “The gates of Heaven will not be
opened, nor will they enter into Paradise until a camel can pass
through the eye of a needle’ [7:40]. The Prophet (peace be on him)
continued, ‘Allah will then command, “Put down his records in the
sijjin, in the lowest depths of the earth. Then his soul will be thrown
down.” The Prophet (peace be on him) at that moment recited the
verse, ‘If anyone assigns partners to Allah he is as if he had fallen
from heaven and been snatched up by birds, or the wind had
swooped (like a bird on its prey) and thrown him into a far distant
place’ [22:31]. |

The Prophet (peace be on him) continued, ‘His soul will be put
back into his body. Then two angels will come and sit down with
him and ask, “Who is your Lord?” He will say, “Oh! Oh! I don’t
know.” They will say to him, “Who is this man who was sent to
you?” He will say, “Oh! Oh! I don’t know!” A voice will come from
the heaven, “He 15 a liar. Prepare for him a bed of fire and open a
door of Hell towards him.” He will suffer its heat, and get its
scorching wind. His grave will squeeze him until his nbs break.
Then a man with an ugly face and in shabby clothes and with the
foulest smell will come to him and say, “Woe to you! This is the day
that you were promised.” He will ask, “Who are you with such an
evil and ominous face?” He will say, “I am your evil deeds.” He
will plead, “Lord, postpone the Judgment, I beg you.”””” Ahmad and
Abt: Dawid have recorded this hadith in full and Al-Nasa’iI and Ibn
358 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

Majah have recorded its first part. Al-Hakim and Abid ‘Awanah AI-
Isfra’Ini have also recorded it in their Sahihs and Ibn Hibban in his
‏ا‎

All the scholars of Sunnah and hadith believe in what this hadith
states. There are also some supporting ahddith in the Sahih
collections. Al-Bukhari, for example, records a hadith transmitted
by Sa‘id, from Qatadah, from Anas, that the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “When a person is put in the grave and his companions
depart he hears the sounds of their footsteps. Two angels come and
make him sit up. Then they ask him, ‘What do you say about this
man, Muhammad?’ If he is a Believer he says, ‘I witness that he is a
servant of Allah and his Messenger.’ They say, “Look at your seat
that was in the Fire. Allah has replaced it with one in Paradise.’ He
will cast a look at both of them.” Qatadah says that it was narrated
that, “His grave will be expanded.”

Another hadith in the two Sahihs reported by Ibn ‘Abbas states
that the Prophet (peace be on him) passed by two graves and said,
“The men in these graves are being punished but not for something
big. One did not protect himself from urine and the other went on
slandering people.” He then asked for a green branch of a date palm,
divided it into two and put one part on each grave saying, “I hope
these will bring some relief to them until they dry.””’

Abi Hatim (Ibn Hibban) has recorded a hadith in his Sahih on
the authority of Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “When any one of you is interred in the grave two angels, both
black and blue, come to him. One is called Munkar and the other
Nakir...”°°> Abi Hatim has recorded the hadith in its entirety.

The ahddith from the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) that
speak of the suffering of the people or their joys and their
questioning by the two angels in the graves reach the level of
mutawatir. We must believe in them and believe that the things they
say are true, and abstain from asking about their modalities. We
have not seen anything like them in this life, and cannot therefore
understand them with our reason. There is nothing in the Islamic

* Aba Dawid, As-Sunnah, 4753; An-Nasa’l, Al-Jand'iz, 4:101; Ahmad, 4:287, 295,
296; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 1:87-40. The hadith is sahih.

°° Al-Bukhari, 1338, 1374; Muslim, Al/-Jannah, 2870; An-Nasa’1, 4:97-99; Ahmad,
3:126; Al-Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, 1522.

°° Al-Bukhari, 216, 218, 1361, 1378, 6052, 6055; Muslim, At-Tahdrah, 292; At-
Tirmidhi, At-Tahdrah, 70; Abi Dawid, At-Tahdrah, 20; An-Nasa’i, 1:28-30; Ahmad,
1:225.

305 ‏ع‎ At-Tirmidhi, Al/-Jand’iz, 1071; Ibn Hibban, 780. It is an authentic hadith.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 359

texts that reason may consider to be impossible, although it does
refer to matters that are difficult to comprehend. The soul will not be
returned, for example, to the body in the way we are aware of in this
world. That will occur in a completely different way.

There are five types of relationships between the spirit and the
body and they have different circumstances. They are: (1) the
connection between them while the person is a fetus in the mother’s
womb; (2) the connection between them after the person is born; (3)
the connection between them while the person is asleep, they are
connected to each other in one way and not in another way; (4) the
connection between them in al-barzakh (between death and
resurrection). Although the spirit is separated from the body it is not
a complete separation such that there is no longer any connection
between them, as it is related that the soul 15 returned to the body
any time a Muslim sends his greetings.” It is also recorded that he
hears their footsteps when the people walk away from him. This is a
special kind of returning to the body that does not imply that the
body has any life in it before the Day of Resurrection; (5) the
connection between them on the Day the bodies are resurrected. This
will be the most complete connection with the body, which has no
relation to the previously mentioned type of connections between the
two, as it is a connection in which the body will not face with it any
death, sleep or spoilage. Truly, sleep is the brother of death.°'° If
you ponder that, it will remove many points of confusion.

The questioning in the grave is not just directed to the spirit, as
Ibn Hazm and others say. An even more preposterous statement is
to say that it is for the body only without the spirit. The authentic
ahddith refute both of these views.

Therefore, the punishment in the grave is for both the body and
the soul, according to the agreement of the Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-
Jama‘ah. The soul feels pain and pleasure in conjunction with, and
while separate from, the body.

The punishment of the grave is the same thing as the punishment
of al-barzakh. Everyone who dies and is deserving of punishment
receives his share of it, whether he 15 buried in a grave or not. If an
animal eats him, he is burned to a crisp, scattered by a windstorm,
crucified, or drowns in a boat, the punishment of the spirit and body
will reach him in the same way that it reaches those in the grave.

As for what is related concerning his sitting and differences
concerning their chests, they must be understood from the

°”” Aba Dawid, 2041.
*!Al-Bukhari, 1338, 1346; Muslim, 2870.

360 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) in the way he meant them,
without exaggeration or understatement. His words cannot be
interpreted in a manner that is not consistent with what he said.
Neither should one minimize the words he said as part of guidance.
Whenever that occurs, it usually leads to misguidance. One turns
away from the truth that only Allah can know. In fact, improper
understanding of Allah and His Messenger is the source of all the
heresies and misguidance that have cropped up in the history of
Islam. It 15 the source of mistakes in both the essential and
secondary matters of the religion. This 15 particular the case when it
is combined with bad intentions.

In sum, there are three worlds: the world of this life, the world
of al-barzakh and the everlasting world. Allah has made for every
world laws that are particular to it. He has made human beings with
both bodies and souls and the rulings of this world apply to the
bodies with the souls following suit. In al-barzakh, the judgment is
based on the souls with the bodies following suit. On the Day the
bodies are resurrected from their graves, the judgment, pleasures
and punishments will be for the spirits and bodies together. If this 5
pondered and understood properly, it will become clear how the
grave is either a garden of Paradise or a ditch from the Fire. This 1s,
therefore, the truth without any question. By this, the Believer in the
Unseen is distinguished from others.

One must also realize that the fire and the pleasure that are in the
grave are not of the same variety as the fires and pleasures of this
world. Allah heats up the soil and stones that are above and below
the person until 1t becomes a fire much greater than the coals of this
world. But if the people of this world touch it, they do not feel it.
Even more amazing than that is that two people can be buried next to
each other and one of them is in a ditch of the Hell-fire and the other
is in a garden of Paradise. The heat of the fire of one does not reach
the other; nor do the bounties of the latter reach the former. Allah’s
power is even greater and more than magnificent than that. But souls
are passionately in love with denial and rejection of anything they do
not have knowledge of. However, Allah has, in fact, shown us
things in this world that demonstrate His magnificent powers, which
are much greater than what was described above. He allows those of
His servants to see them as He wishes and He keeps others blind to
them. If Allah were to show them to all His servants, human
responsibility and belief in the Unseen would become meaningless.

An example is the burying of souls. In the Sahih it states that the
Prophet (peace be on him) said, “If it were not for the fact that you
would no longer bury people, I would ask Allah to allow you to
hear the sounds of the punishment in the grave that I hear.” Since
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 361

there is no benefit in hiding it from the animals, they are allowed to
hear such sounds. |

Is the questioning by Munkar and Nakir something exclusive to
this ummah? There are three opinions on this question. The third
opinion is not to give any definite answer. This was the stance of a
number of scholars, including Abt ‘Amr Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr. He said,
“In the hadith of Zayd Ibn Thabit it is stated that the Prophet (peace
be on him) said, ‘This uwmmah will be tested in the grave.’ Some
people narrate it with the word “questioned” (in the grave). Based
on this wording, it seems that this is something particular to this
ummah. This is something that cannot be stated definitively, as it
could also be that it is not something particular. Allah knows best.

Similarly, there is a difference of opinion over whether children
will be questioned.

Another question is whether the punishment of the grave will be
something continual or will come to an end. The response to this is
that there are two types of punishments in the grave, one being
continual. Allah has said, “The Fire: they are exposed to it morning
and evening; and on the Day when the Hour apprises (it is said):
Cause Pharaoh’s folk to enter the most awful doom” [40:46]. Also,
in the hadith of Al-Bara’ Ibn ‘Azib, it mentions the plight of the
disbeliever: “Then the gates to the Hell-fire are opened and he looks
at his place therein until the Hour” [recorded by Ahmad in some of
the narrations].°"!

The second type is a temporary form. It will continue for some
time and then stop. This is the punishment for sinners whose sins
were light. They will be punished to the extent of their sins and then
they will be relieved of the punishment, as was discussed earlier.

There 15 also a difference of opinion concerning where the spirits
reside during the time between death and the Day of Judgment.
Some say that the souls of the Believers are in Paradise and the
souls of the disbelievers are in Hell. Some say that the souls of the
Believers are at the outskirts of Paradise, at its gates, where they
receive its scent, bounties and sustenance. Some say that they are at
the open spaces of their graves. Malik said, “It has been told to me
that the spirits are free; they go wherever they wish.” Some say that
the souls of the Believers are with Allah and they do not add
anything to that. Some have even said that the souls of the Believers
are close to Damascus, while those of the disbelievers are in the
Barhut well in Hadhramaut. Ka‘b said, “The souls of the Believers
are in the illiyin in the seventh heaven; the souls of the disbelievers

>! Discussed earlier, it is authentic.

362 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

are in the sijjin in the seventh earth under the cheek of Iblis.”” Some
say that the souls of the Believers are at the well of Zamzam and
those of the disbelievers are in the well of Barhut. Others say that
the souls of the Believers are on the right side of Adam while those
of the disbelievers are on his left. Ibn Hazm and others said that they
reside wherever they existed before their bodies were created. Abt
‘Amr Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr said, “The souls of the martyrs are in
Paradise. The souls of the rest of the Believers are in the open
spaces of their graves.”

It is related that Ibn Shihab said, “I have been informed that the
souls of the martyrs are like green birds perched on the Throne.
They go back and forth in the gardens of Paradise, and their Lord
comes to them every day to greet them.” One sect says that they are
in pure nothingness. This is the statement of those who say that
one’s soul is an incident of the incidents of the body, like his life.
This statement contradicts the Qur’4n and Sunnah. Another sect
states that they reside after death in new bodies that are the results of
the character and attributes the person achieved in his life. Every
soul is transformed into an animal that is similar to that soul. This 5
the statement of those who believe in reincarnation and reject the
notion of resurrection. It is a statement that falls completely outside
the realm of Islam. This short treatise 15 not the place to discuss the
evidence for all of the above opinions.

One can conclude that the souls in al-barzakh are at very
different levels. Some of them are in the highest ranks of the ‘illiyin
among the highest Companions, that is, the prophets, and they also
are of different ranks in their places.

Some souls are in green birds that fly wherever they wish in
Paradise. These are the souls of some of the martyrs, but not all of
the martyrs. Some of their souls have been held back on account of
debts that they owed at the time of the their deaths. In the Musnad it
is recorded from Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Jahsh that a man
came to the Prophet (peace be on him) and said, “Messenger of
Allah, what will be my (portion) 11 I die in Allah’s path?’ He
answered, “Paradise.” When he turned away, the Prophet (peace be
on him) said, “Except in the case of debt. Gabriel just came to me to
inform me 260111

Some souls are confined at the gate of Paradise. This is stated in
the hadith in which the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) said,

>I? Ahmad, 4:350; An-Nasa’i, 7:314-315; At-Tabarani, Al/-Kabir, 19:556, 557, 558,
559, 560. It is authentic.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 363

“I saw your companion confined at the gate of Paradise.””'’ Some
are confined in their graves; others are confined on earth. Some
souls are being burned in a baking oven — those who committed
adultery, in a river of blood or being pelted with rocks. All of those
things are mentioned in the ahddith.’'* But Allah knows best.

As for the special life reserved for the martyrs, it has some
characteristics that distinguish it from others. Allah says, “Think not
of those slain in the way of Allah as dead. Nay, they are living; with
their Lord they have provision” [3:169]. He also said, “And call not
those slain in the way of Allah dead. Nay, they are living, only you
perceive not” [2:154]. Allah has put their souls in the stomachs of
green birds, as 15 stated in the hadith of ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas in
which the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) said, “As for what
has happened to your companions who died during the battle of
Uhud, Allah has put their souls in the bellies of green birds among
the rivers of Paradise, eating from its fruits, they get shelter in the
candelabra of gold, being shaded in the shade of the Throne.” This
was recorded by Ahmad and Abu Dawid. Muslim has something
- similar from Ibn Mas‘iid.°'” Since they sacrificed their bodies for the
sake of Allah until their enemies killed them, Allah gave them a
much better body in al-barzakh. They will remain in that body until
the Day of Judgment. The pleasures they receive through that body
will be greater than the pleasures that the souls devoid of any bodies
will receive.

This is why the souls of the Believers will be in the shapes of
birds or like birds, and the souls of the martyrs will be in the bellies
of the birds. Ponder what these two ahddith say. In the Muwaitta it is
recorded that Ka‘b Ibn Malik narrated from the Messenger of Allah
(peace be on him), who said, “The soul of a Believer is a green bird
that sits in the trees of the Garden until Allah returns it to his body
on the Day of Resurrection.””'® The souls of the Believers includes
both the martyrs and others. But in particular, the martyrs are in the
stomachs of birds. If they are in the stomachs of birds, it 1s correct
to say they are birds. Therefore, in that sense, they are included in
the hadith just mentioned. Their portion of pleasures in a/-barzakh,
then, is greater than the portion of those who died in their beds (and
not in jihad), even though many of those who died in their beds may

311 Ahmad, 4:136, 5:7; Ibn Majah, 2423. It is also authentic.

*!See the lengthy hadith of Samura, Al-Bukhari, 7047.

*'> Ahmad 1:266; the hadith of Ibn Mas‘id is in Muslim, 1887, At-Tirmidhi, 3014,
Ibn Majah, 2801.

*!1Discussed earlier; it is authentic.

364 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

be of higher rank, but the martyrs have a special pleasure that no one
shares with them. Allah knows best.

Allah has forbidden the earth to devour the bodies of the
prophets, as has been narrated in the Sunan works.’'’ As for the
martyrs, many have been witnessed some time after their burial and
itis as if their bodies have not changed. Therefore, it could be that
their bodies are also preserved in the soil until the Day they are
resurrected. Or, it could be that the earth will devour them after
some time. Allah knows best. It could be — and Allah knows best —
since martyrdom is greater and the martyr is more virtuous, his body
will be preserved longer.

(90) We believe in resurrection after death and in
recompense of deeds on the Day of Judgment. People
will be have their 06605 presented and will be
accountable for them. They will be given their records to
read, and will be rewarded or punished. (We also
believe) in the Bridge (sirat) and the Balance (mizan).

Faith in resurrection is based on the Qur’an, the Sunnah, reason
and unadulterated human nature. Allah has discussed it in His
Sacred Book, and in most of its chapters, giving arguments for its
reality and refuting those who deny it.

All the prophets without exception have called for belief in the
Hereafter. Belief in the Lord, however, 15 a truth that is ingrained in
human nature. Faith in Allah is something natural, and all human
beings believe in it, except people like Pharaoh, who deny it for
some ulterior reason. But the case of belief in the Hereafter is
different. Many people have denied it. Since Muhammad, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, is the last of the prophets, and since
he is the harbinger of the Last Day,°'® he has described it in a detail
not found in earlier prophetic books. This has lead some
philosophers and scholars to think that no one ever spoke about the
resurrection of the body except Muhammad (peace be on him), and
that his talk about it 15 merely allegorical and speech for the masses.

The Qur’an frequently speaks of reclaiming the soul at death and
the resurrection of the body on the Day of the Great Resurrection.
Some people deny it and say that no one except Muhammad has
discussed them and that all that he has said is merely imaginary.

>!’ Ahmad, 4:8; Aba: Dawid, 1047; An-Nasa’i, 3:91-92, Ibn Majah, 1085, 1636. This
is authentic.
*'8See Al-Bukhari, 4896; Muslim, 2354.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 365

They are wrong. Faith in the Great Resurrection is common to all
the prophets, from Adam to Noah, to Abraham, Moses and Jesus,
peace be upon them all.

When Allah sent Adam down to earth He told him, “Get you
down with enmity between yourselves. On earth will be your
dwelling place and your means of livelihood for a time” [7:24]. And
when Iblis, curses be upon him, said, “My Lord! Give me then
respite until the Day the dead are raised. He said: Respite then is
granted to you until the Day of the Time Appointed.” [38:79-81].
And Noah said to his people, “Allah has produced you from the
earth, growing (gradually), and in the end He will return you in the
earth and raise you forth again” [71:17-18]. Abraham exclaimed,
“And Who, I hope, will forgive me my faults on the Day of
Judgment...” [26:82]. He also said, “Our Lord! Cover us with Your
forgiveness — me, my parents and all the Believers on the Day the
Reckoning will be established” [14:41]; and, “My Lord! Show me
how You give life to the dead” [2:260].

As for Moses, Allah said to him when He talked to him, “Verily
the Hour is coming; My design 15 to keep it hidden for every soul to
receive its reward by the measure of its endeavor. Therefore, let not
such as believe not therein but follow their own lusts, divert you
therefrom, lest you perish” [20:15-16]. And the person from the
community of Pharaoh who believed in Moses warned them, ““‘My
people! I fear for you a Day when there will be mutual calling (and
waiting), a Day when you will turn your backs and flee. No
defender will you have from Allah, and whom Allah leaves to stray
there is none to guide... My people! This life of the present is
nothing but (temporary) convenience. It is the Hereafter that is the
Home that will last... And, my people! How strange it is for me to
call you to salvation while you call me to the Fire...” Then Allah
saved him from (every) ill that they plotted (against him), but the
brunt of the penalty encompassed on all sides the people of Pharaoh.
Before the Fire will they be brought morning and evening. And (the
sentence will be) on the Day that Judgment will be established. Cast
you the people of Pharaoh into the severest penalty” [40:32-36].
Moses himself prayed, “And ordain for us what is good in this life
and in the Hereafter: for we have turned unto You” [7:156]. And
Allah proclaimed, “So We said: Strike the (body) with a piece of the
(heifer). Thus Allah brings the dead to life and show you His signs,
perchance you may understand” [2:73].

The Qur’an repeatedly states that Allah has sent messengers to
give good tidings to people and to deliver warnings. The Inspectors
of the Fire, it says, will ask its inhabitants, ““Did not messengers
come to you from among yourselves rehearsing to you the verses of
306 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

your Lord, and warning you of the meeting of this Day of yours?’
They will answer: ‘This is true. But the decree of punishment has
been proved true against the unbelievers!’” [39:71]. This admission
of the people of the Fire proves that all the messengers (of Allah)
have warned their peoples against punishment in this life and the
next, just as the last messenger warned his people. The Qur’an is
full of promises of rewards and threats of punishment in the present
life and the life to come.

In fact, the prophets have been asked to swear by it: “The
unbelievers say: ‘Never to us will come the hour.’ Say: Nay! But
most surely, by my Lord, it will come upon you” [34:3]. And,
“They seek to be informed by you: ‘Is that true?’ say: Aye, by my
Lord! It 15 the very truth! And you cannot frustrate it’” [10:53]; ““The
unbelievers think that they will not be raised up (for Judgment).
Say: Yea, by my Lord, you will surely be raised up. Then will you
be told (the truth) of all that you did. And that is easy for Allah”
[64:7].

That the Hour of Judgment is near has been repeatedly
emphasized, for example, “The Hour (of Judgment) is nigh, and the
moon is cleft asunder” [54:1]; “Closer and closer to mankind comes
their reckoning. Yet they heed not and they turn away” [21:1]; “A
questioner asked about a penalty to befall the unbelievers, the one
there is none to ward off... They see the Day indeed as a far-off
(event). But we see it (quite) near” [70:1-7].

Those who deny it have been condemned: “Assuredly those will
be lost who denied the meeting with Allah and refused to receive the
true guidance” [19:45]; “Until on a sudden the Hour is on them,
they will say: ‘Ah! woe unto us that we took no heed of it’” [6:31];
“Behold! Verily those that dispute concerning the Hour are far
astray” [42:18]; “Still less can their knowledge comprehend the
Hereafter. Nay, they are in doubt and uncertainty thereat. Nay, they
are blind thereunto!” [27:66]; “They swear their strongest oaths by
God, that Allah will not raise up those who die. Nay, but it is a
promise (binding) on Him in truth...that the rejecters of Truth may
realize that they had indeed (surrendered to) falsehood” [16:38-39];
“The hour will certainly come. Therein is no doubt. Yet most men
believe not’ [40:59]; “On the Day of Judgment We will gather them
together prone on their faces, blind, dumb and deaf; their abode will
be Hell. Every time it shows abatement We will increase for them
the fierceness of the Fire. That is their recompense, because they
rejected Our signs and said: ‘When we are reduced to bones and
broken dust shall we really be raised up (to be) a new creation!’ Do
they not see that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, has
power to create the like of them (anew)? Only He has decreed a term
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 367

appointed of which there is no doubt. But the unjust refuse (to
receive it) except with ingratitude” [17:97-99]; “They say: ‘What!
When we are reduced to bones and dust, shall we be really raised up
(to be) a new creation?’ Say: Nay: be you stones or iron, or any
created matter which in your mind is hardest (to be raised up), yet
you will be raised up! Then will they say: ‘Who will cause us to
return?’ Say: He Who created you first! Then they will wag their
heads towards you, and say: ‘When will that be?’ Say: May be it
will be quite soon! It will be on a Day when He will call you, and
you will answer His call with (words of) His praise, and you will
think you tarried but a little while!” [17:49-52]

Think over this last verse, how it answers all their questions in
detail. They asked, “What! When we are reduced to bones and dust,
shall we be really raised up (to be) a new creation?” They were told
that if there were no Creator or Lord for them, as they claimed, how
is it that they were not like stone, iron or something harder than they
which death could not touch. If they say that they have not been
created to abide forever, why do they rule out that their Creator can
create them again? The argument can be understood in a different
way. It may be taken to mean that had they been stone, iron or any
harder thing, even then it would not be difficult for Allah to destroy
them and create them again. And if Allah can do that with such
things, He can do it with men much more easily. Their next question
was who will recreate them when their bodies perish and
disintegrate. They were told that He Who created them first will
create them again. When they were beaten on all these counts they
asked when it would come. They were told it may come soon!

Similar arguments have been advanced elsewhere in the Qur’an,
for example, “And (man) makes comparisons for us, and forgets his
own creation. He says, ‘Who can give life to (dry) bones when they
are decomposed?’ Say, He will give them life Who created them the
first time! For He is well-versed in every kind of creation — the same
Who produces for you fire out of the green tree, so that lo! you
kindle with it (your own fires)! Is not He Who created the heavens
and the earth able to create the like thereof? Yea, indeed! For He is
the Creator Supreme, of skill and knowledge infinite! Verily, when
He intends a thing, His command is, ‘Be,’ and it is! So glory to
Him in Whose hands is the dominion of all things. And to Him will
you be all brought back” [36:78-83].

The most learned and the most competent man on earth,
however he tries, cannot put forward an argument better or even as
good, as this is language so precise and clear. Look at it. Before
beginning the argument Allah makes the remark: how is it that one
doubts His power to revive the dead and “forgets his own creation”.
368 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

He then states the argument, “Say: He will raise it up Who created it
for the first time.” He holds up the first creation as proof of the
second creation. Everyone would accept that whoever did the first
can do the second, and if he were not able to do the former would |
not be able to do the latter. And since creation requires that the
Creator have the power as well as the knowledge of the things He
wants to create, He said, “He is well-versed in every kind of
creation” [36:79]. That is, He knows each and every detail of the
first creation concerning its form as well as matter. He also knows
all the details of the second creation. No one who knows everything
in detail, and has all powers in his hand, would find it difficult to
revive the dry bones.

Another undefeatable proof is given after that. Another objection
from another atheist is visualized. When bones decompose they are
cold and dry, but for life to appear, the material has to be warm and
moist. This objection is refuted in the next verse, “One Who
produces for you fire out of the green tree when you kindle
therewith (your own fires)” [36:86]. That 1s, One Who can produce
such a hot and dry thing as fire from a thing which is diametrically
opposite to it, namely a green plant, wet and cold, and has full
control over the material, will have no difficulty in raising to life
bones that have decomposed.

This point is reinforced by the next argument, which draws
upon the fact that Allah has created things that are far greater than
man. The One Who has created things greater than man will find it
easier to create man. One who can carry heaps of gold will find a
small penny far easier to carry. He said, “Is not He Who created the
heavens and the earth able to create the like thereof?” [36:81]. That
is, Allah has created the heavens and the earth which are so big, so
vast and so wonderful, it will be certainly far easier for Him to bring
to life a few bones that are decomposed, and recreate man. He has
made the same point elsewhere: “Assuredly the creation of the
heavens and the earth is a greater matter than the creation of men.
Yet most men understand not” [40:57]. Also, “Have they not seen
that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth and was not
wearied by their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Aye, He 1s
verily able to do all things” [46:33]. Then He emphasizes the
matter. His actions are not like the actions of others. To do
anything, man needs various tools and instruments, helpers and
assistants; in addition, they also have themselves to work very hard.
Without these they cannot produce anything. But Allah needs none
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 369

of these things. When He wants to create anything, He 15 simply to
will it and say, “Be,” and it comes into being as He wills.°’”

Then Allah concludes the argument by saying that everything 1s
absolutely under His control, He does what He wills. Therefore,
“You will be returned to Him” [36:83]. This point He has elaborated
at other places, for example, “Does man think that he will be left
uncontrolled (without purpose)? Was he not a drop of sperm emitted
(in lowly form)? Then he became a leech-like clot. Then Allah made
and fashioned him in due proportion, and made of him two sexes,
male and female. Has not He (the same) the power to give life to the
dead?” [75:36-40]. He has made it clear that He cannot let man be
without rules and laws, and without rewarding or punishing him on
account of his obedience or violation. His wisdom and power just
cannot allow it, as He has said, “Did you then think that We had
created you in jest, and that you will not be brought back to us (for
account)...?” [23:115]. That is, when He has created man in so
many stages, a drop of liquid, then a clot of coagulated blood, then a
(fetus) lump; then formed his ears and eyes, senses and faculties,
bones and arteries, muscles and nerves, and fashioned him into
perfect shape, and brought him out in a beautiful form — how will
_ He not be able to recreate him and raise him to life again? How will
His wisdom and providence leave Him without taking account of
His deeds? Certainly, it would not be in accord with His wisdom
and power. Look at this wonderful argument, how concisely and
clearly it has been stated! It could not be stated in a more concise
fashion, nor could anyone imagine anything clearer.

There are many more statements in the Qur’an in the same vein,
for example, “Mankind! If you have a doubt about the resurrection,
consider that We created you out of dust, then out of sperm, then
out of a leech-like clot, then out of a lump of flesh partly formed and
partly unformed... Verily the Hour will come; there can be no doubt
about it, and Allah will raise up all who are in the graves” [22:5-7].
Or, “We did create man from a quintessence (of clay); then we
placed him as (a drop of) sperm in a place of rest, firmly fixed; then
We made the sperm into a clot of congealed blood, then of that clot
We made a (fetus) lump, then We made out of that lump bones, and
clothed the bones with flesh; then We developed out of it another
creature. So blessed be Allah, the Best to create! After that, at length
you will die. Again, on the Day of Judgment, you will be raised up”
[23:12-16]. And, telling how He maintained the people of the cave

>See also Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmia‘ al-Fatawa, 17:241-261; Ibn Taymiyyah, Dar
Ta‘arud al-‘Aql wa an-Nagl, vol. 1, pp. 30-35.

