COMMENTARY
ON THE

CREED OF AT-TAHAWI
BY
IBN ABI AL -IZZ

SHARH AL -‘AQIDAH AT - TAHAWIYYAH

TRANSLATED BY
MUHAMMAD ‘ABDUL-HAQQ ANSARI
KINGDOM OF SAUDI ARABIA
Ministry of Higher Education
Al-Imam Muhammad ibn Saud Islamic
University
Deanery of Academic Research

COMMENTARY
ON THE

CREED OF AT-TAHAWI
BY
IBN ABI AL -’IZZ

SHARH AL -’AQIDAH AT - TAHAWIYYAH

TRANSLATED BY
MUHAMMAD *ABDUL-HAQQO ANSARI

AL-IMAM MUHAMMAD IBN SA’UD ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY
2 IMADAT AL-BAHTH AL-’ILMI
RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA
INSTITUTE OF ISLAMIC AND ARABIC SCIENCES IN AMERICA
1421 A.H.-2000 CE.
IN THE NAME OF ALLAH
THE COMPASSIONATE THE MERCIFUL
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
1421 A.H.-2000 A.D.
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction XVii
Translator’s Preface xix
Commentator’s Preface xIvii
The Creed of At-Tahawi Ivii
The Creed and its Commentary 1
Tawhid: Affirming God’s Unity 1

Two aspects of tawhid:
tawhid al-ilahiyyah, and tawhid al-rubitbiyyah
Tawhid 15 inherent in man
The Qur’an expounds on and argues for God’s unity
Tawhid in faith and in action
The prophets’ tawhid was the most perfect
Criticism of the mystical view of tawhid

God is unlike anything 23
To affirm attributes of God 1s not to liken Him

with His creatures (tashbih)
Words common between the Creator and the created

denote nothing real

Nothing is impossible for God 31

The Qur’an mentions God’s positive attributes in detail,
and negative attributes in brief
Mutukallimiin do just the reverse

God is Eternal and Everlasting 35
The Qur’an uses the words: the First and the Last
Mutakallimiin use the word Al-Qadim,

which is not a happy choice
38

41

45

49

66

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Nothing comes into existence except what
God wills

Two kinds of Divine will: creative and prescriptive

Creative will does not necessarily imply that God
approves of the object He creates

Prescriptive will implies that God approves of
the object He commands men to do

Both the wills have some purpose which may concern
man, God or both

It is not necessary that God should help one to do
what He asks him to do

God is beyond understanding and imagination
The Jahmiyyah are wrong 12 saying that to affirm
attributes of God is to anthropomorphize Him
Theological discussion does not admit of syllogistic
or analogical argument; it admits only the
argument of priority

God is Living and All-Sustaining
He is the Creator and the Provident
He causes death and shall raise again

All the attributes of God are eternal

This is true of essential attributes, such as
knowledge and power,

Of active attributes such as creation, and

Of voluntary attributes such as coming, descending,
mounting, anger and pleasure

The meaning of coming, mounting, anger etc.,
is known to us; what is not known is their modality

Do things happen to God?

Essence and attributes, whether one or different?

Name and the Named

Events as a class have no beginning and God
is active from eternity

God is Creator, Originator, Lord, Reviver, etc.,
from eternity

God has power over all things; the impossible in
itself is nothing

God has created things with knowledge

He Ordained them in due measures, and fixed their terms

V1
Commentary on the Creed of 41-1 01 ‏آنه‎

He knew what people would do even before
He created them

Things happen as He ordains and wills

This does not mean that He approves of everything
people do

Nor does pre-ordination offer any Justification
for doing evil

His guidance and protection 15 a favor from him

Refutation of the view that God must do
what is best for man

His decision is not reversed, resisted or frustrated

Prophecy of Muhammad (pbuh) 76
Muhammad is a servant of God, and the most perfect
man is the most perfect servant of God
Miracle is a proof among other proofs of prophecy
Other proofs are: the message, teachings, life
and conduct, works and achievements of the prophet
It is on these grounds that Negus of Abyssinia and
Heraclius of Syria testified to Muhammad’s prophecy
The difference between nabi and rasil
Muhammad 1s the seal of the prophets
ahddith on the subject
He is the leader of the pious
He is the chief of the apostles
He is the best of all the prophets, but this should not
be said to degrade other prophets
He is very dear to God
Grades of love
Every claim to prophecy after him 15 false
He is sent to men as well as to jinns

The Qur’an | 96
The Qur’an 15 the word of God
It has proceeded from Him in an unknown manner
as articulated speech
To say that it is spoken by God is not to
anthropomorphize him
Verses and ahddith saying that God speaks;
the meaning of His speech
The Qur’an is an attribute of God, not something created

Vil
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

It has been brought down to Muhammad by Gabriel,
acting simply as a messenger

It is not the word of a human being, one who says
that is a kafir

Speech 15 an attribute of God, and He has been speaking
from eternity as and when He has willed

His speech as a class 1s eternal

Refuting the objection that God shall then be
the locus of contigent events

The Qur’an is the word of God whether recited,
written or remembered; and it 1s uncreated

However, our reciting, writing, or remembering 5
our act, and is contigent, as is the voice or the ink
involved in the process

This is the view of Abu Hanifah and the ‏أطخ‎ al-Sunnah

The view of later Hanafis on the subject 15 not correct

The view that God’s speech 1s a simple inaudible idea,
and what is recited 15 its interpretation 1s wrong

Beatific Vision 119
People will see God in Paradise in an unknown manner
and without encompassing Him
Verses referring to it must not be interpreted allegorically
Refutation of the arguments advanced by the Mu‘tazilah
Ahddith on the subject are very clear
However, no one has seen or can see God in this life
Did the Prophet see God in his life?
Mu‘tazili interpretation of texts is not correct
Tawhid is to believe in what has come down from
the Prophet authentically

Islam is to believe, submit, and refrain
from misinterpreting texts 136
Three kinds of people destroy religion:
Rulers pursuing policies opposed to the Shar‘
511115 following kashf and experience
Mutakallimin arguing from reason alone
Al-Ghazali on the inadequacy of kalam
The reason the Salaf condemned kalam
The root cause of error is lack of reflection on
the Qur’an and the Sunnah

VIil
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

Philosophers and theologians speak about the
limitation of philosophy and kalam
Meaning of ta’wil
Ta’wil in the Qur’an and Sunnah
Ta’wil in early commentaries
Ta’wil in the works of later jurists and mutakallimin
Interpreting divine names:
Avoid both negation and anthropomorphization
God’s hands, face, eyes

God and space (jihah)
Ascension of the Prophet | 162
His Fountain 167
His Intercession 170

Intercession by other prophets, ‘u/amda’ and martyrs
Praying in the name of someone
Tawassul

God’s Covenant with Mankind 182
Tawhid is inherent in man
Shirk is alien to human nature

Fore-ordainment 191]

God knows from eternity who will go to Paradise and
who will go to Hell, as well as their deeds leading
them to their destination

Everyone gets the opportunity to do what he or she
has been created for

Fore-ordainment is a secret of God;
one should not delve into it

Everything good and bad is brought out by God’s
creative will, which does not necessarily imply
His approval

However, God does not will pure evil

God may not help one do what He approves of

Fore-ordainment and repentence

Fore-ordainment and resignation (rida@’)

We are not required to resign to everything decreed
210

223

242
246

261

266

Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

The Pen and the Tablet

What shall come into existence till the Last Day
has been written down

No one can change what has been written

Earning is not opposed to trust

There is no change in God’s fore-knowledge

Faith in fore-ordainment is necessary

What gadr implies

Questioning gadr is a disease —

The Throne and the Footstool

The Throne and the Footstool are real

But God does not need the Throne

He encompasses all and is above all

Verses and ahddith that speak of His being above
the world (fawgiyyah)

Twenty reasons for His fawqiyyah

Sayings of Abu Hanifah on the subject

‘Uli and fawgiyyah

The knowledge that God 15 above the world is inherent
in human nature

God took Abraham as friend

Angels, Prophets and Heavenly Books

Angels, their grades and functions

We must believe in all the prophets of God and in
all His books

As for Muhammad (pbuh), we must believe in him
as well as follow his teachings

One is muslim and mu’min so long as one

witnesses to what the Prophet has brought

The Qur’an may be read in all the seven established ways

The Faithful Spirit has brought down the Qur’an and
conveyed it to Muhammad (pbuh)

Sin, Faith and Salvation |

No Muslim becomes kGfir by committing a sin unless
he or she thinks it to be lawful

To deny what the Prophet has affirmed, affirm what
he has denied, legalize what he has prohibited, or
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

prohibit what he has legalized 15 kufr; and whoever
does so is a kafir

However, one should refrain from calling a particular
person kafir, for he may be mistaken or may not be
aware of relevant texts

The Ahi al-Sunnah do not excommunicate on
grounds of bid ‘ah

Kufr as used in the Qur’an and Sunnah is of varying
degrees: one justifies excommunication (takfir),
another does not

Sin exposes one to God’s punishment

We hope that God will forgive nghteous Muslims and
put them in Paradise, but we cannot be sure

Similarly, we fear about the sinners, but they should not
lose hope

Punishment for sins 1s waved for ten reasons

Complacence and disappointment both are wrong;
the right course is in between

One goes out of imdn only by repudiating what has
brought him into it

Iman and Islam 283
Does imdn include works or not?
Many scholars of hadith and jurists say that it does.
Abu Hanifah and his followers say that it does not;
however, the difference is not important.
Does imdn increase or decrease?
Arguments of the ahi al-hadith
Arguments of the Hanafi School,
and comments on them
Ahdadith telling that works are parts of 701
Verses and ahddith that imdn increases and decreases
Sayings of the Companions on the subject
Iman and islam mean the same when mentioned singly,
but mentioned together they mean different things
All that has authentically come down from
the Prophet is true
The Ahl as-Sunnah do not ignore texts or oppose
to it their reason or the word of any person.
A one-man hadith which is accepted by the ummah
provides knowledge

XI
313

317

326

330

336

349

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

All Believers are friends (awliya’) of God
Meaning of waldyah

Waldyah and taqwa

Grades of awliya’

The most perfect awliya’ are those who are most
obedient to God

Articles of Faith

God, Angels, Heavenly Books, Prophets, Last Day,
Fore-ordainment

Every hasanah and sayyiyyah is from God

God does not create pure evil

Supplication 15 worship

Faith in all the prophets without discrimination

Those who commit grave sins (kaba’ir)

God may forgive them,

Or punish them in Hell for a time

However, they will not stay there for ever,
even if they do not repent

What is kabirah?

Salah may be offered behind a sinner
and behind one guilty of bid ‘ah

Salah should be offered at the funeral of every Muslim,

except an open hypocrite

We do not send anyone to Paradise or Hell
Nor do we charge anyone with kufr or shirk
or 21/60 unless he 15 guilty of it openly
We do not take up sword against anyone
unless it is necessary
We do not revolt against our leaders and rulers
even if they are unjust, nor defy their orders
unless they order something sinful

We follow the Sunnah and the Jama‘ah,
and avoid dissension
We love the just and the honest
When something is unclear, we say God knows better
Wiping on leather socks (in wud’) 1s right
Hajj and Jihdd shall continue under all Muslim

01
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

authorities, 210115 or impious

Akhirah: Life after Death 348

Angels that note down our deeds

Angels of Death

Spirit (ar-riih) 15 created

An-nafs and ar-rith

Is spirit mortal?

Angels that visit in the grave

Reward and punishment in the grave

Resurrection, Judgement, reward and punishment,

Bridge and Balance

Paradise and Hell exist at the present

Most Salaf and khalaf believe that Paradise shall last

forever, but Hell will disappear in the end

God has created some people for each; whom He has
allotted for Paradise He has allotted as a favor,
and whom He has allotted for Hell He has done so
because His justice demanded it

Power and Responsibility 392
Power is of two kinds: before and at the time of action
The former 15 the basis of obligation,
but it is not sufficient to produce action
Thus, the power concomitant to action is created
Human actions are created by God and acquired by men
Criticism of the Mu‘tazili view
How 1s it that God should punish man for actions
He has created?
God does not charge man except what he can do
Everything happens as He wills, knows and decrees
However, God does no injustice; in fact He has
prescribed mercy on Himself

Benefits to the Dead 414
Funeral prayer

Prayer at the grave

Charity

Fasting, hajj, reciting the Qur’an

God responds to prayer and grants it

God’s Anger and Pleasure | 426
God gets angry and is pleased as and when He likes

011
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

To interpret God’s anger and pleasure allegorically
is incorrect

Companions of the Prophet and Khulafa’ 430
We love all the companions, but not anyone to excess
Nor do we disown anyone
Love for them is part of imdn, and hatred for them 1s
kufr and nifag
After the Prophet the first rightful Ahalifah was
Abu Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Uthman, then ‘Ali
The order of their khiladfah 15 the order of their honor
Besides these four, there are six more to whom
the Prophet gave the good tidings of entering Paradise
Whoever speaks well of the Prophet’s companions and
his wives is free from hypocrisy

‘Ulama’ and Awliya’ 458
‘Ulama’ of the Ummah should be honored

No friend (wali) of God should be exalted over a prophet

One prophet is better than all the awliya’ combined

Criticism of Ibn ‘Arabi

Miracles are true, and when ascertained should be believed

Kinds of miracles: effective and cognitive

Miracles are an honor only when they serve religion

Insight (firdsah) and its kinds

Signs of the Hour 468

Diviners, Fortune Tellers 470
We do not believe in them

Nor in the astrologers

Magic and its kinds

Sifis

Rijal al-Ghayb

Mystical experience

The Malamatiyyah

Sima‘ and spiritual excercises

The story of Moses and Khidr

Unity of the Jama‘ah, differences and sects 479
Preservation of the unity of the jamd ‘ah

X1V
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

Differences should be referred to the Qur’4n and Sunnah
Differences are of two kinds:
Difference of variation
Difference of contradiction
God’s religion is one, and it is Islam
Islam is between excess and negligence
between tashbth and negation,
between coercionism and libertarianism,
between complacency and pessimism
Review of heretical sects
Mushabbihah, Mu‘tuzilah, Jahmiyyah,
Jabariyyah, Qadariyyah
Heretical sects treat revelation in two ways:
Some alter the meaning of text,
Others charge the prophets with ignorance

Biographical Sketches 499
Bibliography 521

XV
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

INTRODUCTION

All praise and thanks belong to Allah, and may peace be upon
His chosen servants. ‏ظ‎

The religion of Islam is characterized by and distinguished
from all other religions by its many ordinances, rules and systems
of life. The concept that comes in the forefront of these ordinances
and systems is the Islamic creed (‘agidah). This is from the
viewpoint that belief is the fundamental principle for action and
from it emanates the philosophy of life and the view of the creation
and the Creator.

The Salaf (Pious Predecessors) of the nation of Muhammad
(may peace and blessings be upon him) have placed considerable
emphasis on this concept on practical and theoretical grounds.
Practically, the pure Islamic ‘agidah (creed), the one that is free
from. all superstition and innovation, far from false interpretation
and denial, was their methodology of life and their guide to
contemplation and thought. Theoretically, this Islamic ‘agidah
received immense care and attention in its presentation and
explanation, as well as in defense of its sacred domain, regardless
of whether they did so by way of education, authorship, dialogue,
or debate.

Among the valuable books on this subject is The Creed of At-
Tahawi of Imam Abt Ja‘far Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Al]-Azdi At-
Tahawi (d. 321 A.H.). It is a very accurate and precise text for its
small size. It includes the fundamental principles of belief and its
most important issues. One scholar was destined for its
explanation and presentation. He was ‘Ali Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz
Al-Dimashdi (d. 792 A.H.). His explanation is adequate and in an
easy to understand language.

This book has obtained high stature at this University since the
time it was founded. It has been the main reference book for the
‘aqidah curriculum of university-level studies. In fact, even before
that 1t had received special attention from the scholars and leaders
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. That is because it encompasses
the true creed of the Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah and is the
methodology upon which this country (may Allah fortify and
honor it) has stood since its founding.

Therefore, due to the importance of this book and the immense
need for it and its like, the University took on the task of
translating it into English in hopes that those who speak English

XVI
Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

may benefit from it. The task of this translation was entrusted to a
qualified professor who is fluent in both Arabic and English, Dr.
Muhammad ‘Abdul-Haqq Ansari, researcher in the Deanery of
Academic Research. Dr. Muhammad took on this task and put
forth an effort to be thanked, and one deserving of our prayers and
praise.

Then the University entrusted the printing and publication of
this book, including review and editing by various specialists, to
the Institute of Islamic and Arabic Sciences in America, a branch
of the University. The director and those with him at the Institute
have put forth constant efforts to publish this book and we thank
them for that.

1 ask Allah to make this work a benefit and source of good for
the nation of Muhammad (may the peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him). Allah is the Giver of success.

Dr. Muhammad Ibn Sa‘ad Al-Salem , Rector ,
Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn 53110 Islamic University

XVII
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

This work is important for two reasons. One, the Creed which 1s
commented upon here is most probably the first authentic statement
of faith that we possess of the Ahl as-Sunnah as understood and
practiced by Imam Abt Hanifah (d. 150/767) and his disciples. It
was written by a great and distinguished scholar of figh, as well as
no less a distinguished scholar of hadith, Imam Abt Ja‘far At-
Tahawi (d. 321/933) who was ranked as a mujtahid in Hanafi.figh
and held to be the leader of the Hanafi jurists in Egypt. Aba Hanifah
has long been credited with writing a creed, Al-Figh al-Akbar, and
dictating a testament, A/-Wasiyyah, on the subject of belief. But it 1s
now generally accepted that he was not the author of those two
works; rather, those works were composed in later days by
unknown authors belonging to his school.’ Another work of creed
is attributed to Abi Hanifah’s student, Imam Muhammad Ash-
Shaybani (d. 189/804), but its authenticity is even more doubtful.’ .

The only other credal statement which may be compared with
this Creed is the [bdnah by At-Tahawi’s illustrious contemporary
Abi Al-Hassan ‘Ali Al-Ash‘ari (d. 324/935). Whether this work
was written by Al-Ash‘ari in the early years of his career when he
broke with the Mu‘tazilah or at the end of his career, and whether
some parts were written by him at all has been controversial.’
Whatever may be the case, it cannot be said that it was written earlier
than the Creed of At-Tahawi. There 15 much that is common between
the two creeds, but they do differ on certain issues. A close look
will also reveal that At-Tahawi’s Creed is more comprehensive and
elaborate than the Creed of Al-Ash‘ari. Abi: Manstr Al-Maturidi (d.
333/944), another contemporary of At-Tahawi (although a younger
one), who developed Hanafi ka/am in Central Asia, 15 also listed as

' For a discussion of these writings, see A. J. Wensinck, Muslim Creed (London:
Frank Cass & Co., 1965), pp. 102-124; Muhammad Abit Zahrah, Aba Hanifah:
Hayatuhu wa Asruhu wa Ard ‘uhu wa Fighuhu (Cairo: Dar al-Fikr al-‘Arabi, 1947), pp.

168-183.
* See Fiiwad Sezgin, Tarikh at-Turdth al-‘Arabi (Arabic translation of Geschichte Des

Arabisches Schrifttums) (Lieden: Brill, 1967 and Imam Muhammad Ibn Sa‘id Islamic
Univ., 1403/1983), vol. I, part III, p. 73.

3 See Richard J. McCarthy, S.J., The Theology of Al-Ash ‘ari (Beirut: 1953), pp. 231-
2; ‘Abdur-Rahman Badawi, Madhahib al-Islamivyin (Beirut: Dar al-Malayin, 1971),
pp. 515-518.

X1X

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

having written a Creed (‘agidah) which is still unpublished. It
appears, however, that his Creed did not become popular; only one
scholar, Taj ad-Din As-Subki (d. 771/1370) is recorded as having ©
commented upon it.* At-Tahawi’s Creed, on the other hand, enjoyed
great popularity. Some fifteen scholars from different periods of
time and different parts of the Islamic world, as we shall see, have
written small or large commentaries on it.

The second important feature of this work is the approach of the
commentator. Although he was brought up and educated in a Hanafi
family, worked as a Hanafi judge (gddi), and was fully aware of
later developments in Hanafi kaladm, Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz abhorred the
kalami method which almost all the other commentators on the
Creed followed. Instead, Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz pursued the Salafi method,
particularly as it was developed by Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah
(d. 728/326) and his disciple, Ibn Al-Qayyim (d. 751/1350). At
places in his commentary, Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz dissociates himself from
Abt Mansir Al-Maturidi (d. 333/944), as well as from later Hanafi
theologians, and adopts the views of the hadith scholars and he
defends them as well. On many occasions he quotes from Al-Figh
al-Akbar to show that he has Abt Hantfah, if not later Hanafis, on
his side. At times, where Abt’ Hanifah’s views differ from the
views of the hadith scholars, such as, for example, on the question
of imdn, he states both views and painstakingly shows that the
difference between them is not substantial. The commentary may
therefore be taken as both a Hanafi and a Salafi exposition of the
Islamic faith; Hanafi in the sense of early Hanafism, and Salafi in
the sense that it was developed by Ibn Taymiyyah and his school.

In the following pages I will discuss the life and work of the
author and those of the commentator. I shall make a few
observations on the text and elucidate some features of the method
that the commentator follows. I will also underline some ideas of the
commentary. Finally, I will conclude this section with a few words

regarding the translation and the notes that I have added throughout
the work.

* See Fiwad Sezgin, Tarikh at-Turdath al-‘Arabi, vol. 1, part IV, p. 42.

XX

Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

At-Tahawi’s Life and Work

Abt Ja‘far Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Salamah Ibn ‘Abdul-
Malik At-Tahawi? was born on Rabi‘ al-Awwal 11, 239 A.H./
August 9, 853 C.E., in Taha, a town in Upper Egypt, to an Arab
family from the Hajr branch of the Qahtani tribe of Azd. His father
was a hadith and literature scholar. His mother, too, was learned.
Both his parents used to attend the lectures of Imam Ash-Shafi‘l (d.
204/820). Aba Ja‘far first learned from the members of his family
and then he attended the classes of Abti Zakariyya Ibn Muhammad
on the Qur’an in the mosque of ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘As. At that time, he
memorized the entire Qur’an.

Abit Ja‘far received his first lessons in hadith from his father.
After that, he pursued the study of hadith from his maternal uncle,
Isma‘il Ibn Yahya Al-Muzani (d. 264/877), an eminent disciple of
Imam Ash-Shafi‘t. By the time he was thirteen he had finished Ash-
Shafi‘i’s Musnad. This was, however, only a beginning. Abt Ja‘far
continued his study of hadith. He made it a point to meet. every
scholar that went to Egypt from any part of the Islamic world and he
learned the hadith that they taught. This is testified to by the list of

> For At-Tahawi’s life and works, see Ibn Khallikan, Wafaydt al-A ‘yan, ed. by Dr.
Ihsan “Abbas (Beirut: Dar Sadir, 1398/1978), vol. I, pp. 71-72; As-Safadi, Al-Wafi
bi al-Wafaydt (Wiesbaden, 1971), vol. 8, ‏.م‎ 9; Adh-Dhahabi, Siyar A‘lam an-
Nubala’, ed. by Shu‘ayb Al-Arnawit and Hussayn Al-Asad (Beirut: Mu/’assasat ar-
Risalah, 1401/1981), vol. 15, pp. 27-33; Ibn Hajar, Lisdn al-Mizdn, (Hyderabad,
1329 A.H.), vol. 1, pp. 274-282; Al-Qarshi, Al-Jawdadhir al-Mudi‘ah, ed. by ‘Abdul-
Fattah Al-Hilwa (Cairo: ‘Isa Al-Halabi, 1398,1978), vol. I, pp. 271-277; Abt Ishaq
Ash-Shirazi, Tabaqat al-Fuqahda’, ed. by Ihsan ‘Abbas (Beirut, 1978), ‏.م‎ 142; Ibn An-
Nadim, A/-Fihrist (Cairo: Al-Maktabah at-Tajariyyah, 1348 A.H.), ‏.م‎ 292; Ibn
Kathir, Al-Biddyah wa an-Nihayah (Cairo: Matba‘at as-Sa‘adah), vol. 11, ‏.م‎ 174; Ibn
Al-‘Imad, Shadharat ad-Dhahab (Cairo: Matba‘at al-Qudsi, 1350 A.H.), vol. II, p.
288; Al-Yafi‘l, Mir‘at al-Jinan (Hyderabad, 1337), vol. I, ‏.م‎ 281; Haji Khalifah,
Kashf az-Zunin (Istanbul, 1362/1943), vol. II, ‏.م‎ 143; Ibn Al-Jawzi, Muntazam
(Hyderabad, 1357 A.H.), vol. 6, ‏.م‎ 250; .As-Sam‘ani, Al-Ansab, ed. by M. AI-
‘Awwamah (Beirut: n.d.), vol. 8, ‏.م‎ 218; Ibn Al-Athir, A/-Lubab (Cairo: Matba‘at al- —
Qudsi, 1367-59 A.H.), vol. II, ‏.م‎ 276; Ad-Dawiidi, Tabagat al-Mufassirin (Beirut: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘IImityyah, 1403/1983), vol. I, ‏.م‎ 74; As-Suytitt, Tabagdt al-Huffaz, ed.
by ‘Ali M. ‘Umar (Cairo: Maktabah Wahbah, 1393/1973), p. 337; Isma‘il Basha,
Hadyat al-‘Arifin (Istanbul, 1951); Tash Kubri Zadah, Tabagdat al-Fugaha’ (Al-Musal:
Mataba‘at az-Zahrah, 1961), 2nd edition, ‏.م‎ 58); Sh. M. Zahid Al-Kawthari, A/-Hawi
fi Strat al-Imam Abi Ja ‘far At-Tahawi (Cairo: Al-Anwar Press, 1368 A.H.).

XX1

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

the teachers of hadith that he mentions in his works. They come
from Syria, Basrah, Kufah, the Hijaz, Yemen, Khurasan in the East
and Morocco in the West. The list includes such renowned scholars
as Al-Hafiz Aba ‘Abdur-Rahman Ahmad Ibn Sht‘ayb An-Nasa’i
(d. 303/915), Abu Zur’ah ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Amr Ad-Dimashai
(d. 281/894), ‘Ali Ibn ‘Abdul-*Aziz Al-Baghawi (d. 280/893), and
Abit Bishr Muhammad Ibn Sa’id Ad-Dilabi (d. 310/922). Among
his students who narrated ahdadith from him, on the other hand, are
such outstanding scholars of hadith as Al-Hafiz Abt Al-Qasim
Sulayman Ibn Ahmad At-Tabarani (d. 360/971) and the great critic
of hadith, Abt Ahmad ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Adiy (d. 365/975).

Abt Ja‘far was brought up in a Shafi‘i family. His first teacher
of figh was no less than Imam Ash-Shafi‘i’s great disciple Al-
Muzani, about whose Jjuristic ability the imam had a very high
opinion and whom he called the defender of his school.° Abi Ja‘far
studied Al-Muzani’s famous Mukhtasar, the first compendium of
Shafi‘l figh, with Al-Muzani himself. He did not, however, limit
himself to just that school; he also attended lectures on Hanafi figh,
which were held at the Mosque of ‘Amr Ibn Al-‘As and he studied
Hanafi works, a number of which his uncle had in his library and to
which he often referred.’

Abi Ja‘far’s interest in Hanafi figh kept growing. The process
was accelerated when he came into contact with two Hanafi judges
of Egypt, Bakkar Ibn Qutaybah (d. 270/833) and Ahmad Ibn Abi
‘Imran Al-Baghdadi (d. 280/893).° With these two, he increased his
study of Hanafi figh. He once said, “At first I used to write hadith
from Al-Muzani and follow the views of Ash-Shafi‘i. But after
some time, when Ahmad Ibn Abi ‘Imran came and took over as
judge of Egypt, I kept company with him and followed his

opinions.”

Most probably it was at that time that his uncle called him aside
and rebuked him for not having produced anything worthwhile up to
that time. Abii Ja‘far got angry at this and broke off from him.

Later, when he wrote his Mukhtasar in Hanafi figh on the lines of

5 Az-Zarkali, Al-A ‘dm (Beirut: Dar al-Malayin, 1980), vol. I, p. 329.

"Ibn Khallikan, Wafayat al-A ‘van, vol. 1, ‏.م‎ 72; Al-Yafi‘i, Mir’at al-Jindn, op cit.,
vol. I, p. 281.

* Adh-Dhahabi, Sivyar A ‘lam an-Nubald’, vol. 15, ‏.م‎ 27; Al-Qarshi, Al-Jawdhir ‏عله‎
‎Mudi’ah, vol. 1, ‏.م‎

” Adh-Dhahabi, Sivar A ‘lam an-Nubald’, vol. 15, p. 30.

01

Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahadwi

Al-Muzani’s Mukhtasar in Shafi‘i figh, he said that had his uncle
been alive he would have regretted his earlier remarks.'°

It is not unlikely that, due to his contacts with the judges of
Egypt, Abt Ja‘far had access to court papers. In 268/881 it
happened that he objected to a court order and sent his observations
on it to the governor, Ibn Tultin, who sent him to Syria to inquire
into the matter. In Syria, he came into contact with the famous
Hanafi judge, Abi Hazim ‘Abdul-Hamid (d. 292/904), a disciple of
a disciple of Abt Hanifah’s great student, Muhammad Ibn AI-
Hassan Ash-Shaybani (d. 189/804). He went even deeper into
Hanafi figh with this judge. During the year and a half that he spent
in Syria, he visited Gaza, Ashkelon, Tiberias and Jerusalem.

When Abi Ja‘far returned to Egypt, Judge Muhammad Ibn
‘Abdah appointed him his secretary. Many times, when the judge
was absent, Abu Ja‘far worked as his deputy. In 292/904, he was
given the coveted post of “witness before the judge”.'' He held that
post until his death in 321/933. He was put to rest in the graveyard
of Banu Ash‘ath Al-Qurayfah.

At-Tahawi was first and foremost a jurist, but he also an equally
eminent scholar of hadith. A number of writers have spoken of his
erudition and scholarship. Ibn Kathir (d. 774/1371) wrote, “He was
a most reliable and correct narrator of hadith and one of the great
scholars of hadith (al-huffaz al-jahabidhah).”'* Yon Hajar (d.
852/1440) quoted the remark of the famous Spanish scholar,
Maslamah Ibn Qasim, “He was a reliable narrator, a great scholar, a
famous jurist, very knowledgeable concerning the controversies of
the jurists, and a man of keen insight.”'*? Adh-Dhahabi (d.
748/1348) wrote, “He was the muhaddith and fagih of Egypt,
equally distinguished in hadith and in figh.. Whoever reads the
works of this imam is sure to acknowledge his erudition and width
of vision.”'* Abi Ishaq Ash-Shirazi (d. 476/1083) remarked, “The
leadership of Hanafi figh in Egypt undoubtedly goes to him.”!”

١" ‏م5[‎ Kathir, Al-Biddvah wa an-Nihavah, vol. li, ‏.م‎ 174; al-Yafi‘l, Mir‘at al-Jinan,
vol. I, ‏.م‎ 281.
'' Ibn Khallikan, Wafayat al-A ‘ydn, vol. I, p. 72.
'* Ibn Kathir, A/-Bidayah wa an-Nihayah, op cit., vol. II, ‏.م‎ 174.
‏ذا‎ Ibn Hajar, Lisdn al-Mizdn, (Hyderabad, 1329 -A.H.; reprint Beirut, 1390/1971),
vol. I, p. 276.
'* Adh-Dhahabi, Siyar A ‘lam an-Nubald’, vol. 15, pp. 29-30.
'* Aba Ishaq Ash-Shirazi, Tabagdt al-Fugahd’, p. 142.

0011

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Regarding his position in the Hanafi school, Tash Kubri Zadah (d.
968/1561) observed, “He was an imdm and mujtahid in the category
of the mujtahidin fi al-masa’il”'® And As-Sam‘ani (d. 562/1167)
noted, “Without a doubt, he was an imdm [in figh], reliable and
trustworthy [in hadith] and no one came after him who could rise to
his level in figh and scholarship.”"’

At-Tahawi’s first work on hadith, Sharh Ma‘Gni al-Athar, is a
unique work. It discusses different views on one subject, points out
their merits and flaws, and defends the view which he prefers. It 1s
extremely helpful for getting insight into figh. Three scholars, the
great commentator of Al-Bukhari’s Sahih, Al-Badar Al-‘Ayni (d.
855/1451), the famous Maliki scholar, Ibn ‘Abdul-Barr (d.
463/1071) and the renowned Hanafi scholar, Jamal ad-Din Az-
Zayla’i (d. 762/1361), have commented on the work. In his second
work, Sharh Mushkil al-Athar, At-Tahawi highlights those facets of
hadith which are not normally noticed by common people. The
famous Maliki jurist and philosopher, Ibn Rushd (d. 598/1198)
abridged the work. Two other scholars, Abii Al-Walid Sulayman
Ibn Khalaf Al-Baji (d. 474/1031) and Qddi al-Qudat Jamal ad-Din
Misa Al-Maliki'® (d. 803/1460), produced abridged editions. In his
Sunan Ash-Shafi‘1, At-Tahawi collected the ahddith which he heard
from his uncle, Al-Muzani. This work was published in Cairo
(1315/1877) as well as in Beirut (1406/1985). At-Taswiyyah bayn
Haddathana wa Akhbarand 15 another work listed in his writings on
hadith.

Most of At-Tahawi’s writings were in the field of figh. We have
already referred to his Mukhtasar. It is the first compendium of figh
written according to the Hanafi school. It was edited by Abt ‏علخ‎
‎Wafa Al-Afghani and published by Dar al-Kutub al-‘Arabiyyah in
Cairo (1370/1950). Another work, Ash-Shurit as-Saghir, which
deals with the rules of trade, wages, pre-emption, endowments and
charity, has been published in Baghdad (1394/1974) in two
volumes. A part of a larger work of his, Ash-Shurit al-Kabir, has
been published by Joseph Schacht in Heidelberg (1346/1927) under
the title Kitab Adhkar al-Huqiiq wa al-Ruhan. A facsimile edition of
a much more important work, [khtilaf al-Fiugahdad’, was first
produced by Fredrick Cohn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘I!miyyah,

١6 Tash Kubri Zadah, Tabagat al-Fugaha’, p. 58.

'’ As-Sam‘ani, A/-Ansab, vol. 8, ‏.م‎ 218.
'* See Muhammad Saghir Hassan Ma‘sumi, op cit., p. 39.

XX1V

Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

1320/1902), and later by Dr. Saghir Hassan Mastimi, published it in
Islamabad (Institute of Islamic Studies, 1391/1971) with a detailed
introduction. The authors of Al-Fihrist and Al-Juwahir al-Mudi‘ah
have mentioned many other writings of At- Tahawi in figh. The
reader may refer to these two works.

Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

This work has been referred to by the following names in
different manuscripts: (1) Risdlah fi Usil ad-Din, (2) ‘Agidah Ahl
as-Sunnah wa al-Jamda ‘ah, (3) Bayn as-Sunnah wa al-Jamd‘ah, and
(4) Bayn as-Sunnah wa Rijab.’° (This last title seems to be a
misspelling). It was first published with the third title in Aleppo in
1344/1925. The same title was put on the commentary on the creed
by “Abdul-Ghani Al-Maydani that was published by Muhammad
Muti‘ Al-Hafiz and Muhammad Riyad Al-Malih from Maktabat An-
Nari, Damascus (1390/1970). Under the second title it was
published in Riyadh (without mention of its date) with notes by
Muhammad Ibn Mani‘ and by Al-Maktab al-Islami in Beirut (1397
A.H.).

Commentaries on the ‘Agidah

A number of commentators, beginning in the 7th Century Hiri
and continuing until the last century, have written on the ‘Agidah.
The following is a list of the commentators that were mentioned by
Dr. Fiwad Sezgin in his 7arikh at Turath al- ‘Arabi:

1) Isma‘il Ibn Ibrahim Ibn Ahmad Ash-Shaybani*! (504/1110-
629/1231), a Hanafi jurist commonly known as Ibn Musali. He was
born in Basrah and at times acted as the deputy to the judge in
Damascus.

١!" Ibn An-Nadim, A/-Fihrist, ‏.م‎ 292; Al-Qarshi, Al-Jawahir al-Mudi‘ah, vol. |,

pp. 275-77.

*” See Brockelman, Geschichte der Arabisches Litteratur (Leiden, 1937-49), vol. I,
Pp. 293-94.

*' For more about Isma‘il Ash- Shaybani, see Ibn Kathir, A/- Bidayah wa an-Nihdayah,

vol. 13, ‏.م‎ 136; Al-Qarshi, Al-Jawahir al-Mudi‘ah, vol. I, ‏.م‎ 144; Ibn Al-‘Imad,
Shadharat ad-Dhahab, vol. 5, pp. 129f; Abt Al-Fath Al-Yanini, Mir ‘at az-Zaman
(Hyderabad, 1380/1960), vol. 8, p. 674.

XXV

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

2) Najm ad-Din Manjubars’’ (d. 652/1254), a Turkish jurist.
His commentary bears the title An-Nar al-Lami‘ wa al-Burhan as-
Sati’. A copy of it, penned in 714 A.H., consists of 75 folios.

3) Hibatullah Ibn Ahmad Ibn Mu‘alla’’ (d. 732/1331), a Hanafi
jurist and usié/i from At-Tiraz in Turkistan. His commentary is in
149 folios and 1s detailed.

4) Mahmid Ibn Ahmad Ibn Mas‘iid Al-Qunawi™* (d. 771/1369),
a jurist and mutakallim from Damascus, commonly known as Ibn
As-Sarraj. His commentary is entitled Al-Qala’id fi Sharh al-
‘Aq@ id. It was published in 1311 A.H. in Qazan.

5) Siraj ad-Din ‘Umar Ibn Ishag Al-Marghinani’’ (d. 773/1372),
a renowned Hanafi scholar and a prolific writer. He added a detailed
introduction and an epilogue to his commentary.

6) Muhammad [bn Muhammad Ibn Mahmiid Akmal ad-Din AI-
Babarti’® (d. 786/1384), a staunch defender of Hanafi views, and a
contemporary to our commentator [bn Abr Al-‘Izz. The latter
criticized some of his views in his book 41-1112“.

7) Sadr ad-Din Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz (d. 792/1390), our commentator,

whose works have been translated here. We will discuss him in
more detail later.

*- For more about Najm ad-Din Manjubars, see Isma‘il Basha, Hadayat al-Arifin, vol.
1, p. 233.

23 For more about Hibatullah, see Al-Qarshi, A/-Jawahir al-Mudi‘ah, vol. Il, pp. 204f.
** For more on Mahmiid Al-Qunawi, see Al-Qarshi, Al-Jawahir al-Mudi’ah, vol. II,
pp. 1561: Ibn Hajar, Ad-Durar al-Kaminah (Hyderabad, 1360/1931), vol. IV, pp.
3221: Ibn Talan, Qudat Dimishq, ed. by Salah ad-Din Al-Munayid (Damascus, 1956),
p. 200. |

235 For more on Siraj ad-Din ‘Umar Al-Marghinani, see Ibn Hajar, Ad-Durar al-
Kaminah, vol. Ill, pp. 154ff; Ibn Taghri Bardi, An-Nujiim az-Zahirah (Cairo,
1383/1969), vol. I, pp. 1201: Ibn Al-‘Imad, Shadhardt ad-Dhahab, vol. 6, pp. 228f;
As-Suyiti, Husn al-Muhddarah, ed. by M. Aba Al-Fad! Ibrahim (Cairo: Al-Halab1,
1387/1967), vol. I, ‏.م‎ 268; Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ash-Shawkani, Al-Badr at-Tali‘
(Cairo: Matba‘at as-Sa‘ddah, 1348/1929), vol. 1, p. 505.

26 For more on Muhammad AlI-Babarti, see Ibn Hajar, Anbd al-Ghumar bi Abna’ al-
‘Umar (Hyderabad, 1388/1968), vol. III, pp. 17911: Ibn Hajar, Ad-Durar al-Kaminah,
vol. [V, pp. 2501: Ibn Al-‘Imad, Shadharat ad-Dhahab, vol. VI, pp, 293f; Jalal ad-Din
As-Suyiti, Bughvat al-Wu'at, ed. by Abu Al-Fadl Ibrahim (Cairo: Al-Halabi,
1384/1964), vol. 1, p. 239.

XXV1

Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

8) Kafi Hassan Afandi Al-Ighisari’’ (d. 1025/1616). He
completed his commentary in 1014 A.H. and gave it the name Nur
al-Yagin fi Usul ad-Din.

9, 10, 11, 12) Four more commentaries have been noted by Dr.
Sezgin but it is not known who wrote them.

Three more writers, not mentioned by Dr. Sezgin, also
commented on the ‘Agidah:

13) Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr Al-Ghazzi,"® commonly known as
Ibn Bint Al-Himyari, a disciple of Hafiz As-Sakhawi (d. 902/1497),
wrote a short commentary in 881 A.H. A copy of this work is
preserved in Al-Ajiriyyah Library in Damascus.

14) Abt ‘Abdullah Mahmitd Ibn Muhammad Ibn Abi Ishaq’’ (d.
916/1510), a Hanafi jurist from Constantinople. According to the
author of Kashf az-Zunin, he completed his commentary in 916
A.H.

15) And, finally, ‘Abdul-Ghani [bn Talib Ibn Hammadah AIl-
Ghanimi Al-Maydani’® (d. 1298/1881), a Hanafi scholar and writer,
he composed a commentary which has been edited by Muhammad
Muti‘ Al-Hafiz and Muhammad Riyad Al-Malih and published by
Maktabah an-Nuri (Damascus) in 1390/1970. The editors based
their editions on three manuscripts, one written in 1295 A.H.,
another in 1258 A.H., two years after the composition of the work,
and a third written in 1340 A.H. The editors have also compared the
text of the ‘Agidah with a manuscript penned in 732/1331.

*’ For more on Kafi Hassan Al-Ighisari, see Haji Khalifah, Kashf az-Zunin, pp. 113f,
1002, 1143 and 1802; Isma‘il Basha, Hadvat al-‘Arifin, vol. 1, pp. 2915 ‘Umar Al-
Kahalah, Mu ‘jam al-Mu’‘allifin (Beirut: Dar Ihya at-Turath al-‘Arabi, n.d.), vol. 3, ‏م‎
‎233; Az-Zarkali, Al- ‘Alam, vol. II, ‏.م‎ 194.

** See ‘Abdullah At-Turki and Shu‘ayb Al-Arnawit, eds., Sharh. al-‘Agidah At-
Tahawivvah (Beirut: Mu/’assasat ar-Risalah, 1408/1987), vol. 1, p. 50.

*” Haji Khalifah, Kashf az-Zunan, p. 1143.

* For more on ‘Abdul-Ghani Al-Maydani, see ‘Abdul-Razzaq Al-Baytar, Hilyat al-
Bashar fi Tarikh al-Qarn ath-Thalith ‘Ashar, ed. by M. Bahjat Al-Baytaér (Damascus:
Al-Majma‘ al-Islami al-‘Arabi, 1382/1963), vol. I], ‏.م‎ 867; Muhammad Jamil Ash-
Shatti, Rawd al-Bashar fi A‘van Dimishg fi al-Qarn at-Thalith ‘Ashar (Damascus: Dar
al-Yaqzah al-‘Arabiyyah li at-Talif wa an-Nashr, 1365/9145), ‏.م‎ 152; Muhammad
Kurd ‘Ali, Kuniz al-Ajdad (Damascus: Al-Majma‘ _ al-Islami * al-‘Arabi,
1370/1950), p. 5.

XXVII

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz’s Life and Work

The name of our commentator is Sadr ad-Din Abt Al-Hassan
‘Ali Ibn ‘Ala ad-Din ‘Ali Ibn Shams ad-Din Abi ‘Abdullah
Muhammad Ibn Sharf ad-Din Abi Al-Barakat Muhammad Ibn ‘Izz
ad-Din Abi Al-‘Izz Salih, commonly known as Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz.*’
Originally his family lived in Adhru‘at, today called Dir‘a, some
seventy miles south of Damascus. From there they moved to
Damascus, where the commentator’s great grandfather, Muhammad
Ibn Abr Al-*Izz was born in 645/1249.

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz’s father, ‘Ala ad-Din (d. 946/1345), was a
scholar of Hanafi figh. He delivered sermons at the Mosque of ‏لذ‎
‎Afram, taught at the school of Mu‘azzamiyyah, and served as a
judge assisting the chief judge (qddi al-quddat) ‘Imad ad-Din At-
Tartusi. His grandfather, Shams ad-Din (d. 722/1322) was a very
distinguished Hanafi jurist and served as chief judge. And his great
grandfather, Muhammad Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz, taught at the school of Al-
Murshidiyyah. His uncle, Sadr ad-Din Sulayman Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz (d.
677/1278), was also a great Hanafi scholar and writer, and served
as chief judge in Syria and Egypt. Sulayman’s descendants also
_distinguished themselves as judges, muftis and professors.

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz was born into this distinguished family of
scholars and judges on Dhul-Hiyjah 22, 731 A.H./September 25,
1331 C.E. Naturally, he had learned first from his family and seems
to have completed his studies with them at an early age. Ibn Qadi
Shuhbah said that he started teaching at Qimaziyyah School at the
age of seventeen in the year 748. This school had been built by
Sarim ad-Din Qa’imaz, one of the descendants of Salah ad-Din ‏لذ‎
‎Ayyubi, for teaching Hanafi figh. In 771/1369, Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz
moved to the Rukniyyah School, which was founded in 621 A.H.
by Amir Rukn ad-Din Mankiras. In 784/1382, he started teaching at

*' For more on Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz, see Taqi ad-Din Ibn Qadi Shuhbah, Tarikh Ibn Qddi
Shuhbah, ed. by ‘Adnan Durwaysh (Damascus, 1977), vol. I, pp. 22, 82-91, 105,
139, 271 and 358-359; Ibn Hajar, Anba’ al-Ghumar, vol. Il, pp. 95-98 and vol. III, p.
50; [bn Taghri, Ad-Dalil ash-Shdafi' ‘ala al-Manhal as-Sdfi, ed. by Fahim Muhammad
Shaltit (Cairo: Maktabat al-Khanji, n.d.), vol, I, ‏.م‎ 465; Ibn Taltin, Qudat Dimishq,
p. 201; As-Suyiti, Husn al-Muhddarat, vol. Il, ‏.م‎ 185; Ibn Al-‘Imad, Shadharat ad-
Dhahab, vol. VI, ‏.م‎ 326; Isma‘il Basha, Hadyat al-‘Arifin (Istanbul, 1955), vol. I, ‏.م‎
‎726; Haji Khalifah, Kashf az-Zunin, p. 1143.

XXVIII

Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

the ‘Izziyyah School, founded by Abi Al-Fadl ‘Izz ad-Din Aybak
(d. 645/1249), replacing Qadi Al-Hammam after the qadi’s death.

Along with teaching, Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz also delivered sermons at
the Afram Mosque (west of As-Salihtyyah) founded by Amir Jamal
ad-Din Aqush Al-Afram in 720/1320, as well as at Al-Husban.
Towards the end of 776/1374, he was appointed judge in Damascus
in place of Qadi Najm ad-Din, his cousin, upon the latter’s transfer
to Egypt. But Najym ad-Din resigned three months later and returned
to his previous post in Damascus. Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz then took over as
judge in Egypt, but he also resigned from that post after just two
months. Upon returning to Damascus, he resumed teaching at
Qimaziyyah and also took classes at the Jawhariyyah School.

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz was born and bred in a family of Hanafi scholars
and judges. All of the schools wherein he taught were dedicated to
the teaching of Hanafi figh, and the judgeship he served was also
that of a Hanafi judge. Despite all of that, he was not a blind
follower of the Hanafi school; in fact, he was opposed to following
one imdm exclusively or defending the views of one school
uncritically. Absolute faith and obedience, he said, is due to the
Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the Prophet (peace be on him). No
one is above criticism; everyone’s views are to be examined based
on the criteria of the Qur’4n and Sunnah; if they agree with them,
they should be accepted; if they disagree, they are to be rejected.
This is the burden of one of his tracts, Al-/ttibd ‘. In it, he reviewed
a letter which a contemporary Hanafi scholar, Akmal ad-Din
Muhammad Ibn Mahmid (d. 786/1384) had written, in which he
had pleaded for the exclusive following of the Hanafi school.
Besides objecting, in principle, to this point of view, Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz
also noted his observations on various issues which the author
discussed. He concluded his discussion by saying:

The correct course for a student is to memorize Allah’s
Book and ponder it. Similarly, he should memorize the 7
of the Prophet (peace be on him), as much as he can, and
reflect upon them. Furthermore, he should learn Arabic and
grammar to the extent that he can express himself correctly and
understand the Qur’an and Sunnah well as also the writings of
the Salaf. After this, he should study the views of different
scholars, starting with the Companions and then those who
came after them, without making any discrimination between
them. When they agree on a point, he should stick to it; but

XX1X
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

when they differ, he should study all the views with an open
mind and examine their arguments. Whoever Allah guides is
on the right path and whoever He leaves wandering cannot see
the light.”

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz was very critical of the practice of establishing
schools and colleges and dedicating them to the study of a particular
school of figh. It then became the duty of the teachers, he observed,
to defend each and every view of that school. The students, too,
developed the same attitude and bias. Unfortunately, most of the
donors whose contributions led to the establishment of those
schools had little knowledge and would explicitly leave conditions in
their wills or deeds that would restrict the free exercise of intellect
and open pursuit of knowledge. Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz was of the opinion
that such conditions should not be honored*® since they violate the
spirit of the Qur’an and Sunnah. It was against some similar
conditions that the Prophet (peace be on him) once said, “What has
happened to the people that they come up with conditions that are
not mentioned in the Book of Allah! Know that all the conditions not
found in the Book of Allah, even if they be a hundred conditions,
are absolutely null and 77010.34 Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz also denounced the
practice that restricted judges to making rulings only according to a
particular figh. The tradition, too, of appointing four imams, one
from each school of figh, to lead the prayer in the House of Allah at
Makkah, he stated, should be discontinued. There should be, he
argued, one imdm, and everyone, irrespective of the figh school he
followed, should pray behind him.*°

Damascus in Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz’s time resounded with the ideas
which Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728/1328) had expounded a few decades
earlier and which his great disciples, like Muhammad Ibn ‘Uthman
Adh-Dhahabi (d. 738/1337), Ibn Al-Qayyim (d. 751/1350) and Ibn
Kathir (d. 774/1372) had elaborated and defended. Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz

was deeply influenced by this great upsurge of Salafi thought. This
is clear from many things, from the terms he used in his
commentary, the concepts he elaborated upon, the method he
followed and the scholars he quoted from. Most of the scholars he

*° Tbn Abi Al-‘Izz, Al-/ttiba ' (Lahore: Al-Maktabah as-Salafiyyah, 1401 A.H.), ‏.م‎ 72.
33 Ibid., pp. 73f. |

34 This is part of a hadith found in Al-Bukhari, Sahih, nos. 2168, 2560, 2561 and
2563; Ahmad, Musnad, Vol. 6, pp. 82, 183 and 213.

35 Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz, Al-Ittiba’. pp. 74f.

XXX

Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

quoted from belonged to this school. (We will discuss this point in
greater detail later.) |

In the year 784/1382, ‘Ali Ibn Aybak*® (d. 801/1398-9), a
regular poet of Damascus, wrote an ode in praise of the Prophet
(peace be on him) in the same meter in which the famous ode “Bdnat
Su 60... was written by Ka‘b Ibn Zuhayr. It was a beautiful poem
and received general appreciation. It happened that Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz
read it and wrote a letter to the poet stating his appreciation of the
literary aspect of the ode. In a separate paper, however, he also
noted down his remarks about some of its ideas. Some people
objected to this note and raised their voices against Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz.
Ibn Aybak referred the note to some jurists who objected to Ibn Abi
Al-‘Izz’s remarks. The case was brought to the Sultan, who formed
a council of scholars and jurists belonging to the different schools
and asked for their opinion. The council held many sessions during
which it questioned Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz and discussed the issue at
length. At the end of the fifth session, the council, led by a Shafi‘l
judge, convicted Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz for his views, consigned him to
jail, removed him from his post, and fined him. The fine was later
withdrawn but he had to spend fourteen months in jail.*’

In all there were eight issues on which Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz was
convicted. He was accused, for example, of believing that angels are
better than prophets. He discussed this issue at length in this
Commentary. He opened his discussion of this topic with the
following words:

People have debated the question as to which is superior:
angels or human beings that are pious. It is said that the Ah/
as-Sunnah believe that pious men, or at least the prophets
among them, are superior to the angels. The Mu‘tazilah, on
the contrary, believe in the superiority of the angels. This
opinion is also held by a group of the Ahl as-Sunnah and the
Sufis. As for the Ash‘aris, some have no opinion on this issue
and others are inclined to believe in the superiority of the
angels. Shi‘ah scholars say that all the imams are superior to
the angels, and exalted some categories of men over some
categories of angels, and vice-versa. However, no one worth

316 For more about ‘Ali Ibn Aybak Ibn ‘Abdullah (d. 801/1398-9), see Ibn Al-‘Imad,
Shadharat ad-Dhahab, vol. 7, pp. 8f; Ibn Taghri, Ad-Dalil ash-Shafi, vol. 1, ‏.م‎
‎37 ‏م5[‎ Qadi Shuhbah, Tarikh, ‏.م‎ 105; Ibn Hajar, Anba’ al-Ghumar bi Abna’ al-‘Umar,
vol. II, pp. 95-98.

XXX]

Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahawiyyah

mention has said that the angels are superior to some prophets
rather than others.

He then goes on to say:

I was very reluctant to discuss this issue, for it does not
avail much and is quite insignificant... Moreover, the Sh. [At-
Tahawi] has not touched upon it, either negatively or
positively. Probably he deliberately refrained from entering
into its discussion. Imam Abi Hanifah, too, kept silent when
he was asked about it... Our duty is only to believe in the
angels and the prophets. We are not required to believe that one
of them is superior to the other. Had it been a duty, there must
have been some text to guide us on this issue.

However, he does enter into a discussion, cites the arguments of
those who exalt the angels and of those who exalt the prophets and
then concludes, “In short, this is an unimportant issue and that is
why most of the writers on the subject have not discussed it; and
Abi Hanifah kept silent concerning it, as we have said before. 38

The second issue concerning which he was accused dealt with
the possibility of the prophets’ committing minor sins. All scholars
are agreed that the prophets committed no mistakes with respect to
communicating to their people what God revealed to them.
Similarly, they are agreed that prophets did not commit grave sins.
But they differ on the question of whether prophets may commit a
small sin sometimes. Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz has not discussed this issue in
his Commentary. In the note which he wrote on the ode of Ibn
Aybak, he upheld the possibility of prophets sometimes committing
minor sins by mistake. It seems that those who indicted him even
negated this possibility. If that was the case, they were going against
the majority opinion. Ibn Taymiyyah wrote:

The view that the prophets do not commit grave sins and
that they may commit small sins 1s the view of most scholars
of Islam and most of their followers. One can say that this is
the view of the majority of the theologians. Abii Al-Hassan
Al-Amidi has noted that this is the view of the majority of the
Ash‘ari theologians as well as the majority of the scholars of
Qur’anic exegesis, hadith and figh. What has come down from

** ‏م5[‎ Abi Al-‘Izz, Sharh al-'Agidah At-Tahadwivyah, ed. by Dr. ‘Abdullah ‘Abdul-
Muhsin At-Turki and Shu‘ayb Al-Arnawit, vol. 1, pp. 410-423.

XXXII

Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahdwi

the Salaf, the imams, the Companions, the Successors and
their successors, is not different from this view.°”

Qadi ‘Ayad, the famous Ash‘ari theologian and Maliki jurist,
wrote in his renowned work, Ash-Shifa ‘:

As for small sins, a group of the Salaf as well as others
uphold its possibility. This is also the view of Abi Ja‘far At-
Tabari and other scholars of figh, hadith and kalam... Another
group has refrained from saying anything positive on this
issue. Rationally, it cannot be ruled out that they might
commit small sins, but as for textual sources, there is nothing
definitive either way. A third group of jurists and theologians
uphold their absolute infallibility.”°

It seems that those who indicted Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz on this issue
belonged to this third group.

The other points on which Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz was indicted were
problems such as whether it is correct to say, “The Prophet is
sufficient for me,” “Prophet, intercede on my behalf,” or “Had the
Prophet not been created, the heavens would not have been brought
into being.” Concerning the first statement, [bn Abi Al-*Izz seems to
have been inspired by what Ibn Al-Qayyim wrote on this issue in
Zad al-Ma‘ad.*' The second point has been taken up in the
Commentary under the discussion of intercession. As for the third
statement, [bn Abi Al-‘Izz pointed out that such statements can only
be made on the basis of textual sources, and since there were no
relevant texts, one should refrain from making such statements.

Some time after Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz was released from prison, one
of his well-wishers pleaded with the emir, Sayf ad-Din Balghuk Ibn
‘Abdullah An-Nasiri, to reinstate him in his position and to restore

* ‏م5[‎ Taymiyyah, Majma‘ Fatawa Shaykh al-Islam, ed. by ‘Abdul-Rahman Ibn
Qasim and his son Muhammad (Riyadh, 1398 A.H.), vol. IV, p. 319.

1" Qadi ‘Ayad, Ash-Shifa‘ fi Ta‘rif ‏.م ,بوط‎ 144. Also see Al-Amidi, Al-Ihkdm fi
Usual al-Ahkdm (Cairo: Dar al-Ma‘arif, 1332/1914), vol. 1, ‏.م‎ 244; Ibn Amir Al-Hajj,
At-Tagrir wa at-Tahbir (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyyah, 1403/1983), vol. II, ‏.م‎
‎224; Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ash-Shawkani, /rshdd al-Fuhil (Cairo: Al-Halabi, 1356
A.H.), pp. 33ff.

*" Ton Al-Qayyim, 2700 al-Ma‘dd, ed. by Shu‘ayb Al-Arnawit and ‘Abdul-Qadir Al-
Arnawtt (Beirut: Mu’assasat Ar-Risalah, 1399/1979), vol. I, pp. 35ff. The reader may
refer to it for details.

XXXII F2 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

his stipend. The emir agreed and issued the relevant orders. Ibn Abi
Al-‘Izz resumed teaching at Jawhariyyah and delivered sermons in
the Mosque of Afram in the month of Rabi‘ al-Awwal in 791/1389.
But this occupation proved to be short-lived. The following year, in
the month of Dhul-Qi‘dah, death overtook him and he met his Lord.
He was buried in the cemetery of Qasiyin. May Allah have mercy
on him and shower His blessings on him.

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz did not write much. Besides the Commentary,
which was his magnum opus and which we shall introduce shortly,
he is said to have discussed, in a book entitled At-Tanbih ‘ald
Mushkilat al-Hidayah, some of the difficult issues of the famous
work of Hanafi figh, Al-Hiddyah by Abt Bakr Burhan ad-Din ‘Ali
Al-Marghinani (d. 593/1197). No manuscript of this book seems to
be extant at the present time. Another tract, Sihhat al-Iqtida’ bi al-
Mukhalif, was written to defend the practice of offering prayers
behind an imdm of a different school. A manuscript of this tract is
preserved in the Tatwan Library in Morocco, and a photocopy of it
may also be found in the library of Shaykh Hammad Al-Ansari of
Madinah. Our sources** also mention another book which is no
longer present, An-Nur al-Lami‘ fi ma yu‘malu bihi fi al-Jami’. The
title implies that the book 1s about what one should do in the Mosque
of Bani Umayyah in Damascus. Finally, we have already
mentioned his small but fine book, A/-/ttibd‘. This was. first
published in Lahore in 1401 A.H. and then in Oman in 1405 A.H.

The Creed

In his work, Dr. Szegin listed some thirty-two extant
manuscripts of the Creed which were penned in different periods of
time. The earliest one, which is preserved in Alexandra, was
written in 783 A.H. It consists of six folios.*’ The editors of the
commentary written by ‘Abdul-Ghani Al-Maydani referred to
earlier, stated that they have compared the text of the Creed with a
manuscript written even earlier, in 732 A.H.** The earliest extant

commentary on the Creed, by Najm ad-Din At-Turki, was written in
646 A.H.*

43 See Isma‘il Basha, Hadyat al-‘Arifin, vol. 1, p. 726.

43 Fawad Sezgin, 7arikh at-Tardath al- ‘Arabi, vol. 1, part Ill, p. 96.
14١ Abdul-Ghani Al-Maydani, Sharh al-‘Agidah At-Tahawivyah, p. 10.
45 Fowad Sezgin, op. cit., p. 97.

XXX1V

Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

From whatever angle one looks at the Creed - format, language,
ideas covered - it is definitely an authentic product of the late 3rd/9th
or early 4th/10th century. The author begins with a statement on
tawhid that Allah 15 One without a partner, All-Powerful, Eternal
and Everlasting, unlike anything, beyond understanding and
imagination, Ever-Living and All-Sustaining, Creator and Lord; He
is qualified with attributes, essential and active, from eternity; what
He wills happens and what He does not will does not happen; He
has pre-ordained all things and they happen as He ordained them;
and He guides whom He wills and He leaves astray whom He wills.
Then he discusses the prophecy of Muhammad (peace be on him),
the Qur’an, Beatific Vision, and he elaborates the point that Islam is
to believe in the revelation and to submit to it. After this he returns to
the Prophet’s ascension, his fountain and his intercession. He had
introduced fore-ordainment in the course of his statements on
tawhid; here he resumes the discussion and goes into detail; he will
also return to it a third time while discussing free will and
responsibility. This feature, treating subjects in sections, was
lamented by the commentator. Unfortunately, this style did not
occur on just one issue. The question of God’s attributes is also
treated in the same way; some of His attributes are discussed in the
beginning and some, like transcendence (fawqiyyah), ascending the
Throne, descending to the lower heaven, hands, face and eyes, are
discussed towards the end. This practice, however, was not peculiar
to At-Tahawi. Al-Ash‘ari also touched on certain themes more than
once in his [bdnah.

At-Tahawi discusses at length issues regarding sin, faith and
salvation. Then he mentions some practical issues, such as prayer
behind a Muslim who 15 not pious or who has heretical views, or
pilgrimage and jihad under an unjust ruler. In the end, he discusses
things concerning life after death, the beliefs about the Companions
of the Prophet, the question of imdmah, the place of saints and
miracles. Finally, he ends with the affirmation that God’s religion in
all ages is one which must be followed and dissension must be
avoided.

Issues which came up for discussion in later ages, such as the
infallibility of the prophets, do not occur in either the text or the
commentary. The text is completely free from any anachronism. On
the other hand, practical issues, like wiping during ablution the back
of the foot while wearing leather socks, which are subjects of figh
not theology but which were debated at that time, are mentioned in
the Creed, as they are mentioned in the [bdnah of Al-Ash‘ari.

XXXV
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

The language of the Creed is not the technical language of
kalam. It is, as the commentator observed, a flowery language
suitable for sermons. In this respect too, At-Tahawi’s Creed
resembles the Creed of Al-Ash‘ari, although the latter 15
comparatively more technical. |

The Commentary

The commentator has divided the text into section. Most of these
sections form a separate article of the Creed while some do not,
being mere elaborations of preceding articles. This is why the
sections have not been numbered in most editions of the book. We,
on the other hand, have numbered the sections simply for the sake
of reference; they should not be understood as delineating separate
articles.

Commentary follows each section of the Creed. This method
gives the commentator greater freedom for comment and
elaboration, and he has fully utilized that freedom and presented a
sizable commentary, larger perhaps than any other. At times,
however, the text is very clear and the commentator has simply
noted that it needs no comment or further elaboration.

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz wrote his commentary some five hundred years
after the Creed was composed. A lot of water had flowed under the
bridge during the intervening centuries. Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz took due
notice of all the developments in religious sciences and kalam which
had taken place during that period. He also touched upon issues
which Sufi thought and experience had raised and concerning which
Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn Al-Qayyim had addressed in their writings.
The theological views that Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz usually reacts to are those
of the main Muslim sects: the Jahmiyyah, the Mu‘tazilah, the
Qadariyyah, the Jabriyyah and the Rafidah. He also comments on
the Ash‘aris and later Hanafis, whom he claims diverged from the
path of the Salaf. Concerning religions other than Islam, he has very
little comment.

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz was very critical of kaldm and he tried to keep
his commentary free from its evil influence. His basic objection to
kalam was that it did not give the priority to revelation which
revelation deserves. Instead of deriving its basic premises, concepts
and arguments from the Qur’an and Sunnah, kalam derives them
from reason. This criticism is primarily directed towards the
Jahmiyyah and the Mu‘tazilah, who worked out a rationalistic
doctrine of unity and, as a consequence, negated God’s attributes.

XXXVI
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

On a lower level, however, this criticism also applies to the Ash‘aris
and other mutakallimin who first formed an imaginary idea of
transcendence (tanzih) and then denied the reality of a part of divine
attributes. Some theologians rejected outright some concepts that are
clearly and unequivocally stated in the texts; others took them as
symbolic and interpreted them metaphorically. The Mu‘tazilah, for
example, rejected the possibility of God’s vision in the Hereafter,
and the Ash‘aris treated God’s ascension on the Throne as symbolic
of His authority. |

The mutakallimiin also formed ideas that conflict with common
sense and reason. An example is the Ash‘ari doctrine regarding
knowledge of the morally good and right. They deny that we can
know these common truths with our reason; the only way to know
them, they say, 15 revelation. But this view conflicts not only with
common sense but also with many statements of the Qur’an and
Sunnah. The doctrine also deprives human beings, to note just one
consequence, of any criterion to determine the veracity of a prophet
except by his miracles. We are left with nothing to judge whether his
message is good and acceptable or whether his life is noble and
worthy of imitation.

Mutakallimiin mostly treat the Qur’an as a book that states faith
and gives rhetorical arguments in its support. As for demonstrative
proofs, one has to look for them in their kalam. This is not true. The
Qur’an does offer rational arguments and convincing proofs, but the
theologians do not reflect on them and rarely appreciate them. On the
other hand, the arguments which they offer turn out, on close
examination, to be hardly conclusive. This fact has been admitted by
a number of their own leaders.*°

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz does not denounce all kalam. He only rejects
that kKalam which contradicts revelation or reason. Nor does he
oppose new terms, concepts and arguments which ka/adm took either
from the natural sciences or philosophy, or developed by itself, such
as body, substance and accident. One should first study such new
terms, he says, determine what they mean, and then see whether
they may be accepted or must be rejected.*’

In commenting on At-Tahawi’s Creed, Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz makes it
a point to follow the method of the Salaf. This means, first, that in
every issue that he faces he first turns to the Qur’4n and Sunnah and
follows what they state, rather than first following reason. In

*° See infra, pp. 148-154.
*” See infra, pp. 57f, 168.

XXXVII

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

speaking about God, for instance, he asserts about Him what He or
His Prophet said about Him, and negates about Him what He or His
Prophet negated about Him. He does not predicate anything of God
simply on the basis of reason, nor does he prefer any term to
describe Him if there is a term already stated in the revelation for the
same purpose. To give an example, theologians use the term gadim
to describe God’s eternity. This is not a pleasing term for it merely
means old and ancient, something that precedes another thing, but
not that which precedes all things. The Qur’an, on the other hand,
uses the word Al-Awwal, the First, which means the One That
precedes all and to Whom everything returns.*® Hence, one should
adhere to what the Qur’an and the Prophet say about God.

Again, when the Qur’an speaks about Allah, it describes in detail
His positive attributes, that He is Living, Knowing, Powerful,
Seeing, Hearing, and so on. But in describing Him negatively, the
٠. Qur’an is brief; it simply says, “Nothing is like Him.” This is in
clear contrast to the way of the mutakallimin who never tire of
saying that God is not this, nor 15 He that, and so on, trying to
reduce His positive attributes to a minimum. The truth of this
statement may be confirmed by referring to the Mu‘tazili description
of Allah’s attributes that Al-Ash‘ari reproduced in his Magadlat al-
Islamiyyin.” |

Like the Salaf, Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz takes the texts of the Qur’an. and
the Sunnah at their face or literal value and he avoids interpreting
them symbolically. He takes God’s descent to the lower heaven or
ascent to the Throne at face value. Similarly, he takes God’s hand,
face and eyes literally and avoids interpreting them metaphorically as
the mutakallimiin do. However, to say that these attributes are real is
not to say that they resemble the attributes of the creatures. Allah
descends and ascends but not as humans do. Similarly, He has
hands and eyes but not as humans have. To assert the reality of
these attributes is not to anthropomorphize God. If to assert
knowledge or will to God is not to liken Him with any creature,
why should asserting hands and eyes to him be likening Him to
man? In either case, we add the qualification that one attribute is not
the like the other attribute.

This has been stated by the Salaf from the beginning, by
scholars of hadith as well as figh, by Imams Malik and Ahmad as

** See infra, pp. 36-39.
*” Al-Ash‘arl, Magadldt al-Islamiyyin, ed. by Helmut Ritter (Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner
Verlag, 1980), pp. 155f.

XXXVI

Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

well as Imam Abi Hanifah. But Ibn Taymiyyah added a new
dimension to it when he said that general predicates, or universals,
are mere concepts in the mind; they do not refer to any external
reality. What exists in reality is something particular. There is no
will, knowledge, hand or eye as such; what exists out there is this
will or that will, this knowledge or that knowledge, this hand or that
hand, and so on. No one will is the same as another will, and no
one hand is the same as another hand. Hence, to say that Allah has
will, knowledge, a hand or eye is not to anthropomorphize these
attributes; Allah’s will is Allah’s will, and man’s will is man’s will;
they are not alike. Similarly, Allah’s hand is Allah’s hand and man’s
hand 15 man’s hand and they are not the same. There is nothing out
there in which the divine and the human share.’ This nominalism is
the contribution of Ibn Taymiyyah to the thought of the Salaf and it
was wholeheartedly endorsed by Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz.”'

In understanding the text of the Qur’an and Sunnah, Ibn Abi ‏لذ‎
‎‘Izz adheres to what the Salaf (the Companions, their Successors
and the recognized imams) have stated. For instance, the Salaf have
understood the texts which say that Allah is above the world, above
the heavens, and above the Throne to mean that Allah is not in the
world, but above and beyond the world. On the other hand, they
have understood the texts which say that Allah is with us and that
He is nearer to us than our jugular vein to mean that He 15 with us in
knowledge, not in being. He knows us intimately. Both
understandings are real; the latter may appear to be a metaphorical
interpretation, but it is not. It 15 yust the face meaning (az-zahir) of
the text.°* We have to go by the Salaf’s understanding of the texts
for they knew and understood them better than we. The principle of
following the understanding of the Salaf is not confined to the
interpretation of texts; it extends to the understanding of the values
and norms of Islamic life, as well as the conduct (suluk) of the
individual. Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz’s comments on mystical experience and
Sufi tarigah illustrate this point.*°

We observed earlier that one of the weaknesses of kalam was
that it developed ideas that conflicted not only with revelation but

37 Ibn Taymiyyah elaborated this view at various places in his writings. For example,
Majmu ‘at al-Rasa’il wa al-Masda’il, ed. by Rashid Rida (Cairo, n.d.), vol. IV, pp. 15-
22; Ar-Risalah at-Tadmuriyyah (Riyadh: Imam Muhammad Ibn Sa‘iid Islamic
University Press, 1403 A.H.), pp. 79f.

*' See infra, pp. 28f.

* See infra, ‏.م‎ 234.

33 See infra, pp. 21-23, 446ff.

XXX1X

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

also with reason and human nature. As an example, we cited the
Ash‘ari view regarding ethical knowledge. There are other cases
also: the Ash‘ari view that there is nothing obligatory on God; that
His acts have no purpose or end; that nothing causes anything; that
human will is absolutely ineffective; and that every act is done by
God. Ibn Taymiyyah and his school criticized all these ideas on
grounds of reason as well as revelation. They maintained that there
is no contradiction between authentic tradition and clear reason. If
there arises an apparent conflict, it may be due to the tradition not
being authentic or what is believed to be rational not being
something established but something merely believed to be so. This
led the school of Ibn Taymiyyah to thoroughly examine rational
statements as well as to closely scrutinize tradition. Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz
followed this practice in his commentary, although it must be
admitted that at times he quotes ahddith which are weak and
unauthentic. (We have pointed out such ahddith in our notes.)

Tawhid for kaldm is an issue concerning how to maintain
Allah’s unity in view of the plurality of His attributes. Ibn Abr ‏لذ‎
‎‘Izz addresses this issue and goes into the relation between essence
and attributes.* But, he points out, the tawhid that the Qur’an
expounds is not of this nature. Qur’anic tawhid is to affirm in belief
and in action that Allah is the only object of worship, prayer,
reverence, love, submission and obedience. No one else can
command total submission, absolute obedience, extreme reverence
and profound love. This unity of Godhead (tawhid al-ilahiyyah), the
Qur’an maintains, follows from the unity of the Creator and Lord
(tawhid al-rububiyyah), which is part of the natural endowment
(fitrah) of man. It is not something to be argued but to be
discovered. Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz elaborates on the concept of fitrah very
cogently. Of course, he has taken his ideas from Ibn Taymiyyah,
but Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz develops them further.

Prophets and, above all, Prophet Muhammad (peace be on them
all) realized most perfectly the tawhid al-ilahiyyah in their lives. But
the tawhid which the Sufis try to experience is tawhid al-
rubiibiyyah. This is not the end, they should know, which Allah’s
revelation expounds or His prophets preach. In fact, mere
recognition that the Creator and the Lord is one, without accepting

34 See infra, pp. 53ff.

xl

Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

Him as God and submitting to Him, does not qualify a person as a
believer or faithful, not to speak of as a wali or saint.°”

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz does not distinguish between the essential and
active attributes of Allah; all His attributes are eternal. He is not only
Living, Knowing and Powerful from eternity, but He is also
creating things and providing for them from eternity. This is the
belief of the Salaf, the scholars of hadith as well as Abt Hanifah
and his colleagues. To the objection that this would then imply the
eternity of the world, Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz’s answer is that 1t only implies
the eternity of things as a class, not of any particular thing or things.
Moreover, it does not violate the truth that Allah 1s the First.

Speech, too, is an eternal attribute of Allah. He has been
speaking from eternity, but not as the Ash‘aris and Maturidtyyah
believe. For the latter, Allah’s speech is one eternal idea within Him,
an inner speech (kaladm nafsi) of which the Torah, Gospel and
Qur’an are interpretations in Hebrew, Syriac and Arabic. Hence, for
them the Qur’an is Allah’s word, not in the sense that He has
spoken it but in the sense that it is the interpretation of His eternal
speech. His eternal speech is uncreated but its interpretation in
different languages is created.”° For Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz, on the other
hand, the Qur’an is really the word of Allah, not its interpretation.
He is the One Who has spoken and articulated it; and it 15 this
articulated speech which Gabriel heard from Allah and
communicated to the Prophet (peace be on him). And although
Allah’s speech is an expression of His will, that is, He speaks when
and as He likes, His speech is not part of the created world; it 1s not
something created. It stands with Him in a special relation: in one
respect it is with Him, which 15 why the Prophet (peace be on him)
sought shelter in Allah’s words while no Muslim may seek
protection in anything non-divine; on the other hand, it is the
expression of Allah’s will. In view of this dual relation, the Salaf
have defined that the Qur’4n is uncreated but declined to say that it 5
eternal. Although the Qur’4n is uncreated, our recitation of it and our
writing it are our actions and are created, like we are.

35 See infra, pp. 16, 21ff.

36 This is a rather simple statement of a more complicated position. For details, see
Al-Maturidi, Kitab at-Tawhid, ed. by Fathullah Khulayf (Alexandria: Dar al-Jami‘at al-
Misriyyah), pp. 58f, XXI-II; Abi ‘Adhbah, Ar-Rawdah al-Bahiyyah (Hyderabad, 1322
A.H.), pp. 43-54; Al-Juwayni, Kitdb al-Irshdd, ed. by M. Yisuf Misa ‘Ali ‘Abdul-
Mun‘im (Cairo: Al-Khanji, 1950), pp. 99-129; Al-‘lji, Al-Mawadgqif (Beirut: ‘Alam al-
Kutub, n.d.), pp. 293f.

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz distinguishes between the creative and the
prescriptive will of Allah. The former is meant in the sentence,
“What God wills happens and what He does not will, does not
happen.” The latter is meant in the sentence, “God wills that we
should worship and obey Him.” In the case of the former, it 1s Allah
Who acts; in the latter case, He asks someone else to act. Again, the
object of the former may be good or evil, while the object of the
latter is always good. In other words, creative will does not
necessarily imply that God must like and approve of its object;
prescriptive will, on the other hand, does. That is, God likes and
approves of what He asks anyone to do. In light of this clarification,
it would not be difficult to affirm that evil is also from God, that it is
He Who creates it, but it does not then follow that He approves of it.
God does not create absolute evil. Every evil that He brings into
existence is a condition or a means to something good. No evil is an
end in itself.”’

It is also necessary to see that when God wills man to do an act,
it is not necessary that He also help him do it. If He helps him, that
will be a favor from Him, but if he does not, and lets him defy Him
and do evil, He does him no injustice. He has created man, given
him power, shown him the right path and asked him to submit; it is
then for man to submit or defy. If Allah does not further help him in
carrying out His command, it is no injustice on His part. But if He
does help him, it 1s a favor and a blessing from Him.

Allah has power over everything, but this does not negate, says
Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz, causality between things or the efficacy of human
will. He has made one thing the cause of another thing, not only in
the sense the Ash‘aris allow, that one thing is the condition for
another thing, but also in the sense that one thing produces another
thing. Similarly, He has given power to human will. Those who
deny this power or negate causality do not do justice with the texts
of the Qur’an and Sunnah. Ibn Abr Al-‘Izz further distinguishes
between a power that precedes an action and is the basis for God’s
commandment and a power in the form of will and determination
that coexists with an action. It is in light of this distinction that he
explains the texts related to this subject.”

On the question regarding the order of distinction between the
first four nghtly-guided caliphs, Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman and
‘Ali, At-Tahawi mentions that the order of their caliphates is the
order of their honor or distinction. Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz has endorsed this

17 See infra, ‏.م‎ 204.
38 See infra, pp. 378f.

xl

Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

view, noting that it is the view of the Salaf in general. This implies
that ‘Uthman is superior to ‘Ali. However, Abt Hanifah, as it
appears in the Mandqib literature on him, exalted ‘Ali over
‘Uthman.°’ One may ask how it is that At-Tahawi opposed Abi
Hanifah on this point. The answer may be that probably the leaders
of Abt Hanifah’s school differed from him on this point and sided
~ with the majority of the Salaf with At-Tahawi following suit. The
writers of Al-Figh al-Akbar went a step further when they attributed
this view to Abi Hanifah himself.°° Since Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz had no
doubt about the authenticity of this Creed, he was satisfied that he
also had Abt Hanifah on his side.

Text of the Commentary and its Translation

Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz’s commentary on the Creed of At-Tahaéwi was
first published in 1349/1930 by Al-Matba‘ah as-Salafiyyah in
Makkah on the basis of a single manuscript which was full of
mistakes. Sh. ‘Abdullah Ibn Hassan Al Ash-Shaykh, by whose
efforts the book was published, formed a committee of scholars
who went through the text and corrected its mistakes. The renowned
Egyptian hadith scholar, Sh. Ahmad Muhammad Shakir, revised
this edition and published the book through Dar al-Ma‘arif in Cairo
in 1373/1953. However, he did not have any new manuscript to
refer to. In 1381/1961, a group of scholars from Syria produced a
third edition of the Commentary based on a manuscript written in
1322 A.H. which was no less faulty. In correcting it, the group
referred to the edition of Ahmad Muhammad Shakir. They
published the book with brief notes by Sh. Nasir ad-Din Al-Albani
concerning the ahdadith mentioned in the Commentary. Sh. Shu‘ayb
Al-Armawit, a Syrian hadith scholar, produced another edition from
Syria in 1401/1981.

Since he did not have access to any new manuscripts, he relied
on the edition of Anmad Muhammad Shakir. However, he corrected
some of the earlier mistakes and commented in some detail on the
ahadith of the book in footnotes. A year later, Dr. ‘Abdul-Rahman
“Umayrah produced the fifth edition of the book from Cairo. In
preparing this edition, he referred to a manuscript preserved in the
library of the famous 9th/15th century scholar, Jalal ad-Din As-

37 See Abii Zahrah, Aba Hanifah, p. 169.
°° See Mullah ‘Ali Al-Qari, Sharh al-Figh al-Akbar (Beirut, 1404/1984), ‏.م‎ 98.

xl

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Suyuti in Egypt, along with the earlier editions of the work. For
some unstated reasons, however, he did not base his edition on that
manuscript. A sixth edition of the book was published in Beirut in
1405/1984-5 with notes and references regarding ahdadith by Bashir
Muhammad ‘Uyun. He based his edition on the earlier editions and
barely added anything new.

The best and most correct edition of the Commentary is the one
which Dr. ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Abdul-Muhsin At-Turki, Rector of Imam
Muhammad Ibn Sa‘tid Islamic University in Riyadh, and Sh.
Shu’ayb Al-Arnawit, the editor of the fourth edition mentioned
above, collaborated on and published in two volumes through the
Mu assasat ar-Risdlah in Beirut in 1988. Their work is based on
four manuscripts of the Commentary: one written in 782 A.H.
during the lifetime of the commentator and compared with the
original manuscript; another written in 883 A.H. and also compared
with the original manuscript; the third was a photocopy of a
manuscript written in 1217 A.H.; and the fourth was also written in
the same year. In their introduction, the editors discussed at length
the life and work of the author and the commentator, whereas the
editors of the earlier editions had only briefly touched upon these
subjects. Another distinction of this edition is that ‏غ1‎ contains full and
detailed comments on the ahddith and traditions which occur in the
Commentary.

In this regard, Sh. Shi‘ayb Al-Arnawit greatly improved upon
his own comments in his earlier edition. Finally, the editors noted in
the footnotes the works of Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah and his
disciple, [bn al-Qayyim, mentioning the pages where they dealt with
the issues which the commentator discusses. In places they have
also pointed out the passages which the commentator has
reproduced or abridged.

In translating the Commentary, I had the editions of Ahmad
Muhammad Shakir, Sh. Shi‘ayb Al-Armawut and Nasir ad-Din Al-
Albani before me. The edition of Dr. ‘Abdullah At-Turki and
Sht‘ayb Al-Arnawit had not appeared by that time; I received it
when I had almost finished the first draft of the translation.
However, in revising the draft I did refer to their edition on many
occasions. But except in a few places, the differences between theirs
and other editions were not of much significance.

In preparing the references to the ahddith, | have relied mainly
upon the edition of Dr. ‘Abdullah At-Turki and Sh. Shi‘ayb AI-
Arnawiut. In general, I retained the references to better known works

Xliv
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

and dropped the references to lesser known works, unless such
references were indispensable. I have also summarized their detailed
observations. For convenience of reference, I have often mentioned
sections and chapters of different hadith collections along with the
numbers of the ahddith which they have given. I also noted the
works of Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn Al-Qayyim which deal with the
issues that Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz discussed.

Concerning the personalities and scholars mentioned in the
Commentary, the authors of the various editions have had little
comment. Dr. ‘Abdullah At-Turki and Sh. Shi‘ayb Al-Arnawut
introduced them very briefly. I have written about them in more
detail, taking note also of what has appeared concerning them in
languages other than Arabic. As the translation 1s meant for readers
not necessarily aware of Islamic history and personalities, I have
also given biographies of a number of figures whom Dr. Turki and
Sh. Al-Arnawutt did not feel the need to discuss as their readers are
more or less conversant with Islamic history. In an appendix at the
end of the book, I have put together the different sections of the
Creed and indicated the pages where they occur in the translation. In
this manner, the reader may have a look at the Creed as a whole.

xlv
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

COMMENTATOR’S PREFACE

In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.

All praise is for Allah. We praise Him, seek His help, ask for His
forgiveness; and we seek refuge in Allah from the evil in our souls
and from the wrong of our deeds. Whomever Allah guides, there is
no one to misguide him; and whomever He leaves astray, there is
none to guide him. I bear witness that there is no god except Allah,
the One, with no partner. I also bear witness that our revered
Muhammad 15 His servant and messenger. May Allah bless him and
his family, his companions and his followers, and shower on them
peace and favors.

The science of the principles of faith (usual ad-din) is the noblest
of all the sciences, for the dignity of a science depends upon the
dignity of the subject it studies. It 15 the figh al-adkbar (higher
knowledge) in contrast to figh al-furu (knowledge of practical
rules). For this reason, Imam Abti Hanifah named what he stated
and gathered together in writing concerning the foundations of the
religion figh al-akbar. A person’s need for this understanding 5
greater than any other need. It 15 a greater necessity than any other
necessity, for there 15 no life, pleasure or tranquility for hearts
except by knowing their Lord, object of adoration and Creator, by
His names, attributes and acts. In knowing that, he will love Him
above everything, and he will seek all that brings him close to Him
and he will not pursue anything else of His creation.

It 15 impossible for unaided human reason to know all of the
above and to realize it in detail. Therefore, the mercy of the Merciful
led Him to send messengers to teach about Him and to call people to
belief in Him. Whoever responded (positively) to them received
good tidings from the prophets, and whoever opposed them
received warnings from them. The key and essence of their missions
was to impart knowledge of the Adored, may He be glorified,
through His names, attributes and actions. From beginning to end,
the goal of their prophecies was built upon this knowledge.

This is thus followed by two important principles. First is the
knowledge of the way to Allah and that way is His Shari‘ah, which
consists of His commands and prohibitions. Second 15 the
knowledge of the happiness and bounties which are reserved for
those who come to Allah by following the proper way.

Those who know Allah best are the best followers of the path to
Him and the most knowledgeable of the life that awaits them when
they come to Him. For this reason, Allah called what He revealed to

xlvil
Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

His messengers rih, or ‘spirit’, because the real life 15 dependent on
it. He also called it light (muir) because guidance 15 dependent upon
it. Allah, the Most High, says, “By His command He sends the
spirit to any of His servants He pleases” [40:15], and “Thus We
have sent, by Our command, the spirit to you. You knew not before
what was Revelation and what was Faith. But We have made it (the
Qur’an) a light, wherewith We guide such of Our servants as We
will. And you guide (men) to the Straight Path, the Way of Allah to
Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth.
Behold all affairs tend towards Allah’ [42:52-53]. There is no life
except through what the Messenger brought and there is no light
except what is lit by it. It 15 the cure and healing, as Allah says,
“Say: it is a guide and healing for the Believers” [41:44]. Although it
is a cure and healing for anyone, since only the Believers benefit
from it, they are specifically mentioned.

Allah sent His messengers with guidance and the true religion.
Aside from what they brought, there 15 no true guidance. There is no
doubt that it is obligatory upon every individual to believe in what
the Messenger brought in general. There is also no doubt that to
know the detailed matters of what the Messenger brought is an
obligation upon the community as a whole (fard kifayah). This
detailed knowledge make up part of the knowledge which 5
required for preaching the revelation, for elaborating on the Qur’an,
for teaching the Book and the Sunnah, for guarding the message
against corruption, for disseminating its ideas, for enjoining good
and forbidding evil, for calling men to the Way of the Lord with
wisdom, effective persuasion and cogent argument, and for many
other things which Allah has made incumbent upon the Believers.
Therefore, it 15 their collective responsibility (to know and
understand what the Prophet brought in detail).

As for individuals themselves, the obligation upon them varies
according to their talents, abilities, knowledge and what they have
been specifically commanded to do. The responsibility of one who
is incapable of understanding a particular idea or enter into its depths
is not the same as the responsibility of one who has such a
capability. The responsibility of one who hears a particular text or
who can explain a text and work out its implications is not the same
as the responsibility of one who has not heard such a text or who
does not understand it. Obviously, the responsibilities of a jurist,
scholar of hadith, or ruler differ from the responsibilities of those
who do not hold such positions.

One must realize that the majority of those who strayed
concerning this topic or those who failed to recognize the truth have

xlvil
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahadwi

done so because they have not paid due attention to following what
the Messenger brought, or they did not ponder it or appreciate its
arguments that lead to this knowledge. Once they turned away from
the Book of Allah, they went astray. As Allah states, “But whenever
My guidance comes to you, whoever follows My guidance will not
go astray or be distressed. As for him who turns his face away from
My message, his living will become straitened, and on the Day of
Resurrection, We will raise him sightless. He will say, ‘My Lord! .
Why have You raised me blind when I had been able to see?’ He
will reply, So will it be. My signs and messages came to you, but
you forgot them all. So will you be forgotten this day.” [20:123-
126]

Ibn ‘Abbas said, “Allah has guaranteed that whoever reads the
Qur’an and acts upon it will never go astray in this life, nor will he
suffer misery in the next,” and then he recited the above verses. At-
Tirmidhi and other compilers of hadith reported on the authority of
‘Ali that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “There will be trials and
tribulations.” The people asked, “How will we save ourselves?” He
replied, “Adhere to the Book of Allah, which speaks of those who
have gone before, as well as of those who will come later, and tells
the truth in clear and definite terms in matters concerning which you
disagree. Whoever neglects it out of conceit will be humiliated by’
Allah. Whoever looks for guidance elsewhere will be misled by
Allah. It 1s the cord of Allah, which will never break, the Wise
Message and the Right Path, which will never be distorted by evil
minds or corrupted by wicked tongues. Its mysteries will never end,
nor will scholars ever be satisfied by what they know of it. Whoever
speaks according to it has spoken the truth; whoever acts upon it
will be rewarded; whoever rules according to it does justice; and
whoever calls to it invites to the Straight Path.”°' There are many
more verses and ahddith of similar meaning.

Allah does not accept any way of life from the first or last of
mankind unless it is in accordance with the way of life prescribed

6١ At-Tirmidhi, Sunan (the edition referred to here is the one edited by Muhammad
Fiwad ‘Abdul-Baqi, Cairo: Maktabat Al-Halabi and Sons, 1388/1968, second edition;
henceforth referred to as At-Tirmidht), hadith no. 2908; Ad-Darimi, Sunan (Beirut:
Dar Al-Kutub Al-‘IImiyyah; henceforth referred to as Ad-Darimi), vol. 2, ‏.م‎ 435; Al-
Baghawi, Sharh as-Sunnah, ed. by Shu‘ayb Al-Arnawtt and Muhammad Ash-Shawish
(Beirut: Al-Maktab al-Islami, 1390/1971; henceforth referred to as Al-Baghawi),
hadith no. 1181. Ibn Kathir discussed this hadith in his Fadd’il al-Qur’dan (Beirut: Dar
Al-Andulus, 1403/1983), p. 10, and said that it is the statement of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib
and not that of the Prophet (peace be on him).

xlix

Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

through the tongues of His messengers. He has declared that He
rejects all that people ascribe to Him except what the prophets stated
about Him. He states, “Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Honor
and Power. He is free from what they ascribe to Him. And peace be
on the messengers. And praise be to Allah, the Lord and Cherisher
of the Worlds” [37:180-182]. He has thus exalted Himself above the
unbecoming attributes the unbelievers ascribed to Him. Then He
blessed the prophets because they did not ascribe any shortcoming
or defect to Him. Then He praised Himself because of His unique
attributes that entitle Him to complete praise.

The best people of all generations, the Companions of the
Prophet (peace be on him) and their righteous Successors, followed
the way which the Prophet (peace be on him) had shown. The
Companions taught it to the Successors and the Successors followed
the Companions. They thus walked on the path the Prophet (peace
be on him) blazed. As Allah says in His Noble Book, “Say: This 1s
my way; I do call to God with full knowledge, I and those who
follow me” [12:108]. (By the Arabic structure of the verse,) “those
who follow me” could relate back to “I do call to God,” [meaning, ‘I
call to God as do those who follow me,’) which is evidence that
those who follow him are the real callers to the way of Allah. Or, it
could be referring to “with full knowledge,” thus stating clearly that
those who follow him are those with full knowledge of what he
brought as opposed to others (who do not have such knowledge).
Both meanings are sound.

The Prophet (peace be on him) delivered the message clearly and
explained it for those who seek the truth. The best generations
followed his path and way. Then came generations afterwards who
followed their lusts and divided into sects. But then Allah raised for
this nation people who protected and restated the foundations and
principles of its religion, as the Prophet (peace be on him) stated,
“There will always be a group of my nation that will defend the
truth. Those who forsake them will not harm them.”

*°Muslim, Sahih, ed. by Muhammad Fiwad ‘Abdul-Baqi (Beirut: Dar Ihya at-Turath al-
‘Arabi, first edition, 1375/1965, henceforth referred to as Muslim), hadith no. 1920;
At-Tirmidhi, 2230; Ibn Majah, Sunan, ed. by Muhammad Fiiwad ‘Abdul-Baqi (Beirut:
Dar Ihya at-Turath al-* Arabi; henceforth referred to as Ibn Majah), hadith no. 10. The
hadith, with some change in wording and with different chains, was also recorded by
Ahmad, Musnad (Beirut: Al-Maktab al-Islami, 1398/1978; henceforth referred to as
Ahmad), vol. 4, ‏.م‎ 244, 248 and 252; Al-Bukhari, Sahih, ed. by Muhibb ad-Din AI-
Khatib and Muhammad Fiwad ‘Abdul-Baqi (Al-Matba‘ah as-Salafiyyah, 1400 A.H.;
henceforth referred to as Al-Bukhari), hadith number 3640, 3641, 7311, 7312 and

Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahadwi

One of the Muslim scholars who fulfilled that obligation was
Imam Abii Ja‘far Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Salamah Al-Azdi At-
Tahawi, may Allah immerse him in His mercy. He lived during the
third century after the Hijrah; he was born in 239 A.H. and died in
321 A.H. He reported what the Elders (Salaf) followed. He quoted
from Imam Abt Hanifah An-Nu‘man Ibn Thabit Al-Ktfi and his
_ two colleagues, Abu Yasuf Ya‘qib Ibn Ibrahim Al-Himyari Al-
Ansari and Muhammad Ibn Hassan Ash-Shaybani, the principles of
faith they believed in to please their Lord. May Allah bless them.

As time passed on, heresies and deviations - what their
proponents (deceivingly) called ta’wil (‘correct interpretation’) in
order for it to be accepted - began to appear. Very few could
distinguish between correct interpretation and wrong, deviant
interpretations. Ta’wil, as they understood it, was to discard the
plain meaning of the text and understand it in a sense different from
what its words implied, even though there was nothing in the words
to suggest that meaning. This was a source of evil. Since they called
it ta wil, and as people began using the term in that sense, it became
difficult to distinguish correct interpretation from misinterpretation.

After that began, the Believers came to be in need of clear
expositions and refutations of the misconceptions presented. This
led to a lot of discussion and discord. The cause for that was the
people’s inclining to the misconceptions and doubts the heretics had
raised and their entering into blameworthy philosophical discussions
that the Elders had discouraged. The Elders prohibited studying,
preoccupation with, or leaning towards such philosophy or
scholasticism. This was in compliance with their Lord’s command,
Who said, “When you see men engaged in vain discourse about Our
words, turn away from them unless they turn to a different topic.”
[6:68] The meaning of this verse clearly applies to them.

Misinterpretation of the text and deviation from the truth are of
varying degrees: some are infidelity (kufr), some are’ intransigence
(fisq), some are sin (ma‘siyyah) and some are simply mistakes
(kha’t).

It is necessary to follow the messengers strictly and adhere to
what Allah revealed to them. Prophecy ended with Muhammad
(peace be on him). He was made the final prophet; his Book was

elsewhere; At-Tirmidhi, 2192; Abt Dawid, Sunan, ed. by Muhammad Muhiy ad-Din
*Abdul-Hamid (Beirut: Dar al-Ihya as-Sunnah an-Nubuwiyyah/Dar at-Turath al-‘ Arabi;
henceforth referred to as Abi Dawid), hadith no. 2484.

Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

made the judge over all the books revealed before; he was given the
Book and the Sunnah; and his message was for all responsible
creatures — both men and jinns — for all times, until the Day of
Resurrection. Through him, Allah has established the truth,
explained everything people need, and completed his religion for
him and his nation. He has declared that obedience to the Prophet 5
obedience to Allah and disobedience to the Prophet is disobedience
to Allah. Furthermore, He swore by Himself that people will not be
true Believers unless they submit to the Prophet’s verdict on
differences that may arise between them. He also stated that only
hypocrites would ignore the Prophet and take their disputes to others
for judgment. When they are called to Allah and the Messenger (to
judge between them) — that is, to the Book of Allah and the Sunnah
of His Messenger — they oppose it completely and claim that they
simply want what is best and blessed.

And many of the dialecticians, philosophers and others say the
same, “We want to know things as they really are. And we want to
reconcile the rational evidence — what they call rational evidence
which is actually ignorant evidence — and the reported statements
from the Messenger.” Or, “We want to bring the Shari‘ah and
philosophy into agreement.”

Or as many of the heretics among the ascetics and 50115 say,
“We want the best life by bringing together the Shari‘ah and the
falseness that they call reality.” This 15 ignorance and misguidance.
Similarly, many who have by any means grabbed power claim, “We
want to improve the conditions of the people and reconcile their
principles of government and the Shari‘ah,” and so on.

Whoever intends to establish anything in religion besides what
the Prophet (peace be upon him) taught, and believes that it is good
and that combines what the Prophet had with what contradicts it will
only get the latter, for what the Prophet brought is sufficient and
perfect. Every truth is part of it. Shortcomings and errors only come
from the many Muslims themselves who actually do not know what
the Prophet stated in matters related to theology, in matters related to
different aspects of worship or in matters related to governmental
affairs. Or they ascribe to the Shari‘ah of the Messenger, because of
their suppositions and customs, things that are not part of it and they
discard many things which are part of that Shari‘ah. As a result of
the ignorance and error of some, and the intransigence and
hypocrisy of others, the knowledge of the Prophet’s teachings is on
the decline and hypocrisy is on the rise.

Jt is necessary that we acquaint ourselves completely with what
the Messenger (peace be on him) taught, reflect deeply on it and

li
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

apply it to all that we know and believe. We must apply it both
exoterically and esoterically. In that way, we will do justice to the
Book and will not discard anything of it.

If someone is not able to know or act upon all of that
knowledge, he should not oppose what he cannot comprehend of
what the Prophet (peace be upon him) brought. It is sufficient for
him that he 15 not to be blamed for his inability. But he should be
happy that someone else is able to do what he cannot. It should
please him. He should wish that he could do the same. He should
not believe in some parts of the revelation and not in others, but he
must believe in all of the Book. He must also refrain from putting
into it what does not belong to it, even if it be something passed on
from earlier people or opinion, and refrain from following anything,
in belief or actions, that is not from Allah. As Allah, the Most High,
has said, “Do not confuse the truth with falsehood, nor hide the
truth knowingly.” [2:42]

This was the way of the earliest generation of Elders (Salaf),
those who followed them in good, the leaders of the religion
(a ‘immat ad-din) whom the entire Muslim nation accepts, and those
who follow them until the Day of Resurrection. Abt’ Yusuf, may
Allah have mercy on him, said to Bishr Al-Marisi, “Knowledge of
kaldm 15 ignorance, and ignorance of kalam is knowledge. Whoever
masters kalam should be called or accused of being a heretic-
hypocrite (zindiq).” By “ignorance of kalam” he meant the belief
that it 15 not true, that it by itself 1s beneficial knowledge, or he
meant by that refraining from kalam and avoiding studying it. That it
will protect a person’s knowledge and intellect and is part of
knowledge itself. Allah knows best. He also said, “Whoever seeks
knowledge through kalam becomes a heretic-hypocrite. Whoever
seeks wealth by alchemy will become penniless. Whoever runs after
lone (gharib) hadith falls into falsehood.”

Imam Ash-Shafi‘i (may Allah have mercy on him) said, “My
judgment concerning the people engaged in kaldm 15 that they
should be flogged with palm branches and shoes and taken round
and displayed before the tribes and clans.” And he stated, “This 1s
the punishment for those who ignore the Qur’an and Sunnah and
instead engage in kalam.” He also stated, in lines of poetry, “Every
knowledge except the Qur’an 15 diversion except (also) hadith and
figh in religion. Knowledge 15 found there. What He related to us 5
stated; beyond that is only what has been whispered by Satan.”
What the companions (of Ash-Shafi‘l) mentioned in their legal
rulings, he would advise the scholars of his land, “Do not let the

li
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

scholastic theologians (mutakillimiin) be among you.” The Elders
said that if a man willed to have his books left as a religious
endowment, the books of kalam among his books should be sold
(and not kept as part of the religious endowment). That has been
stated in Al-Fatawa adh-Dhahiriyyah.

How can one wish to attain the knowledge of the foundations or
principle aspects without following what the Messenger brought?
What an excellent statement was made by the one who said in
poetry, “You who go out in search of knowledge, all knowledge is
subservient to the knowledge of the Messenger. Do you seek the
fine details to correct the foundation, and you have forgotten the
foundation of the foundations?”

The Prophet was given full control over language. He knew
how to begin a speech, how to conclude it, and how to put many
ideas in few words. He was sent with general principles and the |
knowledge of the matters of this world as well as the next. Later it
happened that whenever anyone came with an innovation, people
took it and wrote volumes to respond to it, although such deeds
contain few blessings. The Elders, on the other hand, used to speak
and write little, but what they said was very useful and full of
blessings. It is not as the straying scholastic theologians say, “The
method of those people was safer but ours is wiser and more
erudite.” Or as those who have no ability to reflect in matters of
figh, “(the Elders) did not formulate or define the principles, as they
were busy with other matters. We devoted ourselves to these things
So we are more knowledgeable than they.”

All those people are ignorant of the greatness of the Elders and
their profound knowledge, deep insight and unassuming style. By
Allah, the later writers only distinguished themselves by writing on
marginal issues, whereas the Elders were concerned with the
fundamentals. They laid down the basic rules, defined the principles
and were interested in major issues and problems of real importance.
The later writers were concerned about one thing while the Elders
were concerned with something completely different. And Allah has
decreed for everything its measure.

Many scholars have commented on this creed, but I have noticed
that these commentators have inclined to the way of the unacceptable
kalam, based their arguments upon them and spoken according to
their terms.

The Elders did not disapprove of new terms like substance,
body, accident, and so on, just because they were new terms trying
to convey true ideas. In fact, they never objected to the terms which
the new sciences employed. Nor did they oppose any effort to

liv
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

establish the truth and refute the objections which heretics and non-
Muslims raised. They disapproved only of those new terms which
conveyed wrong ideas opposed to the Qur’an and the Sunnah. This
is why the exponents of these (heretical) ideas lack the conviction
which an ordinary Muslim has, not to speak of the scholars among
the Elders.

Since their premises contained both truth 320 untruth,
differences arose and controversies multiplied, and ideas conflicting
with the authentic Shari‘ah and clear reason were put forward. This
is not the place to enter into such a discussion; we will discuss the
matter further while commenting on the author’s words, “Whoever
seeks knowledge that has been withheld from him...”

I desired to comment on it following the way of the Elders. I
have benefited from their writings and built upon their ideas. I hope
to be counted among their followers and to be resurrected with them
in the Hereafter, “...with those upon whom 15 the grace of Allah: the
prophets, the sincere lovers of truth, the witnesses thereto, and the
righteous — what a beautiful fellowship!” [4:49]

Since people do not like lengthy expositions, I have tried to be
brief in my comments. “My success in the task can only come from
Allah; in Him I trust and unto Him I turn” [11:88], and, “He is
sufficient for us; and what a good disposer of affairs.” [3:173]

lv
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

THE CREED OF AT-TAHAWI

(1) We say about the Unity of Allah - with Allah’s help - that Allah
is one, without any partners.

(2) There is nothing like Him.

(3) Nothing 15 impossible for Him.

(4) There is no god other than He.

(5) He is Eternal without a beginning, Everlasting without an end. |
(6) He does not perish (yafnd) or pass away (yabid).

(7) Nothing comes into being except what He wills.

(8) No imagination (wahm) can conceive of Him, and no
understanding (fahm) can fathom Him.

(9) He does not resemble mankind.

(10) He is Living and will never die. He is All-Sustaining and
never Sleeps.

(11) He creates without being in need to do so, and provides for
His creation without any trouble (bila mw’unah).

(12) He causes death without fear, and He resurrects (the dead)
with no effort.

(13) He has always existed with His attributes, even before the
creation of the world, which did not add anything to His attributes
that were not already present. Just as He is Eternal along with His
attributes, so He is Everlasting along with them.

(14) It is not the case that He acquired the name Creator (AI-

Khaliq) only after He created, or the name Originator (Al-Bari)
only after He originated (something).

lvii
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

(15) He was qualified with Lordship (rubabiyyah) even when there
was nothing to lord over. And He was the Creator even when there
was nothing created.

(16) In the same way that He is the “Reviver of life to the Dead’’,
after He has given them life a first time, He deserves this name
before bringing them to life; so, too, He deserves the name Creator
before He actually created them.

(17) This is because He has power over all things (kulli shayy). All
things depend on Him and are easy for Him. He is not in need of
anything. Nothing is like Him. He is the All-Hearing, the AlIl-
Seeing.

(18) He created (khalaqa) the creation (khdlg) with His Knowledge
(bi-‘ilmihi).

(19) He has ordained all things in due measure.
(20) He has fixed their terms.

(21) Nothing about them was hidden from Him before He created
them. And He knew everything they would do before He created
them.

(22) He has commanded them to obey Him and He has forbidden
them to disobey Him.

(23) Things occur as He ordains and wills them. His will is always
carried out. There is no will for His servants except for what He
wills for them. Whatever He wills for them happens and what He
does not will for them does not happen.

(24) He gives guidance to whomever He wills, protects them and
keeps them safe from harm as an act of grace. And He leads astray
whomever He wills, abases them and afflicts them out of His justice.

(25) All of them are subject to His will, between either His grace or
His justice.

(26) He is exalted above having opponents (add@d) or equals
(anddad).

lviii
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

(27) His decision is never reversed; His command is never resisted;
His will is never frustrated.

(28) We believe in all of these things, and We are certain that
everything comes from Him.

(29) (And we believe and are certain) that Muhammad is His chosen
Servant (‘abd), His elect Prophet (nabi) and His Messenger (rasil),
with whom He is well-pleased.

(30) And he is the seal of the prophets.

(31) He is Leader (imam) of the Pious.

(32) He is Chief of the Messengers.

(33) He is very dear to the Lord of the Worlds.

(34) All claims to prophecy after him are false (ghayy) and fanciful
(hawa).

(35) He has been sent to all jinns and all mankind with truth,
guidance, light and illumination.

(36) The Qur’an is the word of Allah.
(37) Anyone who attributes something human to Allah is an infidel. —

(38) The seeing of Allah by the people of Paradise is factual,
without their vision being all-encompassing and without the manner
of their vision being known.

(39) The foundation of Islam is not made firm except with the
support of unreserved assent and submission to Allah.

(40) He Who seeks knowledge that has been barred from him, and
whose intellect is not prepared to surrender, will be veiled from a

pure understanding of Allah’s unity, clear knowledge and correct
faith.

(41) He sways (yatadhabdhab) between faith and disbelief,
confirmation and denial, and acceptance and rejection. He will be

lix
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

subject to vain suggestions, perplexed and lost, neither a sincere
Believer nor an open denier.

(42) The belief of a person in the seeing of Allah by the people of
Paradise is not correct if that person tries to imagine what it is like or
if he tries to interpret it according to his own understanding, since
the interpretation of this seeing or the meaning of any of the subtle
phenomena which are in the realm of Lordship, is by avoiding its
interpretation and strictly adhering to submission. This is the faith of
Islam. Those who do not refrain from negating Allah’s attributes or
conceiving them on human patterns are surely mistaken, they are
unable to glorify Allah properly.

(43) Those who do not refrain from nafi (negating the attributes of
Allah) and tashbih (imagining Allah’s attributes to be like human
attributes) go astray and fail to glorify Allah properly.

(44) For our Lord is qualified with the attributes (sifdt) of
uniqueness (wahddGniyyah) and the characteristics (nu‘iut) of absolute
singularity (fardaniyyah). No created being shares with Him these
attributes.

(45) Allah is supremely exalted from definition of Him or from
being restricted, or from needing any parts, limbs or instruments. He
is not bound by the six directions of space as all created beings are.

(46) The ascension (mi‘rdj) of the Prophet (peace be on him) 15 a
fact. He was taken in person for a journey by night, and lifted awake
and in body to the heavens, and from there to such heights as Allah
pleased. Allah showered upon him His favors as He pleased and
revealed to him what He liked. His heart did not falsify what his
eyes saw. Blessed is he in this life and in the Hereafter.

(47) Al-Hawd (the Fountain), which Allah will grant the Prophet
(peace be upon him) as an honor to quench the thirst of his nation, is
factual.

(48) Ash-Shifa‘ah (intercession) that has been prepared on their (the
Muslims’) behalf is also a fact, as has been reported in the ahadith.

(49) The covenant that Allah made with Adam and his descendants
15 a fact.

Ix
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

(50) Allah knows from eternity and knows in an instant the number
of people who will go to Paradise and the number that will go to
Hell. They will neither be increased or decreased (from what He
knows). Similarly, He knows the acts which anyone will do.

(51) Everyone is eased to what he was created for, and it is the
action with which a man’s life is sealed which dictates his fate.
Those who are fortunate are fortunate by the decree of Allah.
Likewise, those who are wretched are wretched by the decree of
Allah.

(52) The exact nature of Allah’s decree is Allah’s secret in His
creation. Neither any angel near the Throne nor any sent messenger
has been given any knowledge of it. To delve into it or reflect too
much about it only leads to destruction and loss, and results in
rebelliousness. One should take every precaution concerning such
investigation, thought, and allowing of doubts to appear. Verily,
Allah has withheld the knowledge of gadr from His creatures and
He has prohibited them from seeking it. Allah says in His Book,
“He is not questioned for His acts, but they are questioned” [21:23].
Therefore, if one asks, why He did that, he has rejected the
command of the Book, and whoever rejects the command of the
Book becomes an infidel.

(53) This is all that people with enlightened hearts need to know,
people who are devoted servants of Allah, and constitutes the degree
of those firmly grounded in knowledge. Verily, knowledge is of two
types: one existent (or accessible) in creation and one inaccessible in —
creation. To deny the knowledge that is existent is infidelity; to claim
the knowledge that is inaccessible is also infidelity. Faith is not
confirmed until a person accepts the knowledge that is existent and
abandons seeking the knowledge which is inaccessible.

(54) We believe in the Pen, the Tablet and all that 15 written on it.

(55) If all creation gathered together to prevent something that Allah
has decreed will occur, they would not be able to prevent it. And if
they all gathered together to have something done that Allah has
decreed will not occur, they would not be able to do it. The Pen has
finished writing whatever will occur until the Last Day.

(56) What has missed someone was not to befall him, and what has
befallen him was not to miss him.

Ixi
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

(57) Everyone must know that Allah already knows everything that
is going to happen in His creation and has fixed their measures
definitively and irrevocably. There is nothing He has created in
either the heavens or the earth that can contradict it, add to it, erase it,
change it, decrease or increase it in any way.

(58) This is a fundamental aspect of faith, a necessary aspect of
knowledge and of our realizing Allah’s Oneness and Lordship. As
Allah has said, “He created all things and ordained them in due
measures” [25:2]; and, “Allah’s command is always a decided
decree” [33:38].

(59) So woe to those who quarrel about fore-ordainment, who delve
into it with a diseased heart, trying to unravel its profound mysteries
through delusions, and who land themselves deep in sin by their
baseless, lying conjectures. ;

(60) The Throne and the Footstool are realities.

(61) Allah is not in need of the Throne and what is beneath it. He
encompasses all and is above everything. His creation is not able to
encompass Him.

(62) We say with faith, affirmation and submission that Allah took
Abraham as an intimate friend and that He spoke directly to Moses.

(63) We believe in the angels, the prophets and the books that were
sent down to the messengers. We bear witness that they were all
following the path of manifest truth.

(64) As for all those who face our giblah (ahl qiblatind), we call
them muslim and mu’min, so long as they profess what the Prophet
(peace be upon him) taught, and believe in whatever he said or
enjoined.

(65) We neither enter into vain talk about Allah nor do we dispute
obstinately on the matters of His religion.

(66) We do not dispute about the Qur’an. We bear witness that it is
the speech of the Lord of the Worlds, which the faithful spirit
brought down and communicated to Muhammad, the leader of the
messengers (may Allah’s blessings be upon him and all of his

Ixit
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

family). It is the speech of Allah, the Most High, which no speech
of any created being can match. We do not believe that it was
created, and we avoid going against the belief of the Muslim
community. |

(67) We do not charge anyone of the ahl al-giblah with being an
infidel (kafir) for committing a sin, unless he considers it to be
lawful. Nor do we say that sin will not harm the sinner merely
because he has faith.

(68) We hope that the righteous among the Believers will receive
Allah’s pardon and be sent to Paradise through His mercy, but we
cannot be certain about them. We cannot testify that they will
certainly go to Paradise. As for wrongdoers, we pray to Allah to
forgive them. Although we do fear for them, we are not in despair
for them.

(69) Anyone who feels secure (from Allah’s punishment) or who
loses hope (in His mercy) falls outside the realm of Islam. The
correct course for the ahi al-giblah lies in between these two ways.

(70) One does not leave the realm of imdn except by repudiating
what brought him into it. |

(71) Iman (faith) is to profess with the tongue and believe in the
heart that all that the Prophet (peace be on him) is authentically
known to have said or enjoined is true. Iman is one, and with regard
to its essence all Believers are equal. They differ only with respect to
their fear of Allah and piety, abstention from following evil desires
and pursuance of what is best.

(72) All Believers are friends (awiliya’) of Allah, the All-Merciful.

(73) the most honored of them (the Believers) in the sight of Allah
are those who obey Him most and follow the Qur’an best.

(74) Iman is faith in Allah, His angels, His books, His messengers,
the Last Day, and that everything, good and bad, pleasant and
unpleasant, is ordained by Allah.

(75) We believe in all these things. We never discriminate between

one messenger and another. We also believe that whatever they have
taught is true.

[xi
Sharh AIl-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

(76) Those of the ummah of Muhammad, peace be upon him, who
commit grave sins (kabd@’ir) will not stay in Hell forever, even if
they do not repent, provided they die while Believers in Allah’s
unity and meet Allah knowing Him. They will be absolutely at His
will and judgment. He may forgive and pardon them out of His
mercy if He wills, as He has said in His book, “And He will forgive
anything other than it (shirk) to whom He please” [4:48]. Or He
may punish them in the Fire, as is required by His justice, and then,
out of pity and the intercession of His obedient servants, take them
out thereof and put them in His Paradise. This is because Allah is
the Protector and Patron of those who know Him. He never treats
them in either of the two worlds like those who deny Him and who
are bereft of His guidance and have failed to obtain His protection.
O Allah, Protector of Islam and the Muslims! Keep us in Islam until
we meet You.

(77) We believe that prayer may be offered behind any person from
among the ahl al-giblah, whether he is righteous or impious. We
also believe in performing the funeral prayer over them upon their
deaths.

(78) We do not “place” any one of them in Paradise or in Hell.

(79) Nor do we charge anyone with not having faith (kufr) or shirk
or hypocrisy (nifdq), as long as they do not openly demonstrate
anything of that nature. We leave what they believe or do in private
to Allah.

(80) We do not believe in taking up the sword against any of the
ummah of Muhammad, peace be upon him, except upon those for
whom it is obligatory.

(81) We do not believe in revolt against our leaders and rulers, even
if they commit injustice, nor do we pray against them or defy their
orders. On the contrary, we believe that obedience to them is a duty
and a part of our obedience to Allah, so long as they do not order
anything sinful. We pray for their safety and piety.

(82) We follow the Sunnah and the jamda‘ah, and avoid
disagreement, dissension and sectarianism.

Ixiv
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

(83) We love those who are just and the honest, and we hate those
who are unjust and dishonest.

(84) Whenever something is not clear to us we say Allah knows
better.

(85) We believe that it is correct to wipe over leather socks, whether
one is traveling or resident, as has been mentioned in the hadith.

(86) Hajj and jihad will continue until the Last Day under all
Muslim authorities (u/i al-amr), pious or impious. They will never
be suspended or abrogated.

(87) We believe in the honorable angels that note down (our deeds).
Allah has appointed them to keep watch over us.

(88) We believe in the Angel of Death, who has been charged with
taking out the souls of the people.

(89) We believe that some people may be punished in their graves if
they deserve it, and that Munkar and Nakir will question people
about their Lord, their religion and their Prophet, as has been
reported by the Messenger of Allah (peace be on him) and the
Companions. We believe that the grave is either a garden of Paradise
or a pit of the Hell-fire.

(90) We believe in resurrection after death and in recompense of
deeds on the Day of Judgment. People will be have their deeds
presented and will be accountable for them. They will be given their
records to read, and will be rewarded or punished. (We also believe)
in the Bridge (si7dt) and the Balance (mizdn).

(91) Paradise and Hell have been created and will never perish or
pass away. Allah created them before the world. He allotted some
people for each. Those whom He allotted for Paradise, He did so out
of His bounty for them. And those whom He allotted for Hell, He
allotted because it was required by His justice. Everyone will do
what has been chosen for him, and will go to the place for which he
has been created. Good and evil both have been determined for each
and every person.

(92) The power needed to perform a duty is a gift from Allah, not an
attribute possessed by man, and exists only with the action.

Ixv - 3
F3 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

However, power in the sense of health, potential, ability and fitness
of the organs is prior to action and is the basis of obligation. “Allah

does not place on any person a burden greater than he can bear”’
[2:286].

(93) Human actions are created by Allah, although they are acquired
by man.

(94) Allah does not impose actions upon human beings except what
they can do, and they are only able to do what He has imposed upon
them. This is the meaning of the Prophet’s words, “There is no
power and no strength save in Allah.” We believe that no one can do
anything or move anything, or abstain from any sin except with the
help of Allah, nor can anyone obey His command and persevere in
obedience except by His grace. Everything happens according to His
will, knowledge, decree and planning. His will rules over all wills
and His decree prevails over all planning. He does what He pleases
and He never commits injustice. “He is not to be questioned for His
acts, but they will be questioned (for theirs)” [21:23].

(95) We believe that the dead benefit from the prayers and charities
offered by the living on their behalf.

(96) Allah answers prayers and fulfills needs.

(97) He controls everything, and nothing controls Him. Without
Him nothing can survive for an instant. Whoever turns away from
Him, even for the blinking of an eye, is ungrateful and courts His
doom (hayn).

(98) Allah becomes angry and pleased, but not like any created
being.

(99) We love all the Companions of the Prophet (peace be on him),
but we do not love any one of them to excess, nor do we disown
any of them. We hate those who hate them or speak ill of them. We
always mention them in positive terms, and believe that to love them
is part of the religion, part of imdn and ihs@n; and that to hate them
is infidelity, hypocrisy and transgression.

(100) We affirm that, after the Prophet (peace be on him), the first

rightful heir to the khiladfah was Abit Bakr, on the grounds that he
was the best and the most eminent of all the ummah.

IXvi
Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi

(101) The second heir to the khilafah was ‘Umar, may Allah be
pleased with him. |

(102) The third heir to the khilafah was ‘Uthman, may Allah be
pleased with him.

(103) The fourth heir to the khilafah was ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased
with him. |

(104) They are the right-principled caliphs and the rightly guided

~ ymams.

(105) We believe that the ten Companions, those whom the Prophet
(peace be on him) named and gave the glad tidings that they would
go to Paradise, will go to Paradise, as he said, and what he said is
true. Those Companions are: Abi’ Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, ‘Alli,
Talhah, Az-Zubayr, Sa‘d, Sa‘id, ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf and Abu
‘Ubaydah Ibn Al-Jarrah, “the trustee of this ummah’’. May Allah be
pleased with them all.

(106) Whoever speaks well of the Prophet’s Companions, his pure
and pious wives - free from any impurity - and his noble and
righteous descendants - free from any impurity - is free from
hypocrisy.

(107) The scholars of the Elders and their successors, whether they
are hadith and tradition scholars or scholars of figh and rational
sciences, should not be mentioned except in good terms. Whoever
speaks ill of them is not on the right path.

(108) We do not exalt any friend (wali) of Allah over any one of His
prophets, peace and blessings be upon them. On the contrary, we
believe that a single prophet (nabi) is greater than all the walis
combined.

(109) We believe in the miracles (kKaramat) that have proceeded
from them and have been reported by reliable reporters.

(110) We believe in the signs of the Hour, such as the emergence of
the Great Liar (ad-Dajjal), the descent of Jesus son of Mary from
Heaven, and we believe in the rising of the sun from the west, and
the appearance of the Beast of the Earth from its place.

Ixvil
Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

(111) We do not believe in diviners and fortune-tellers, nor do we
believe in those who expound ideas incompatible with the Qur’an,
the Sunnah and the consensus of the ummah.

(112) We believe that keeping together (GJamd‘ah) is the true and
correct path, and that disunity leads to deviation and torment.

(113) the religion of Allah in the heavens and on the earth is one,
and it is the din of Islam. Allah has said, “Verily the religion before
Allah is Islam” [5:3]; and, ‘(Allah) has chosen for you as your
religion Islam” [5:3]. Islam steers a course between excess and
negligence, between anthropomorphism and negation, between
coercionism and libertarianism, between complacency and despair.

(114) This is our faith and our religion in form and spirit. We have
nothing to do with those who differ from what we have said and
elaborated. We pray to Allah that He may confirm us in faith, let us
die upon it, save us from erroneous ideas and heretical doctrines
such as those advanced by the anthropomorphists (mushabbihah),
Muttazilah, Jahmiyyah, determinists (jabariyyah), free-willers
(gadariyyah), and others who have differed from the Ahl as-Sunnah
wa al-Jama‘ah and fallen into error. We have nothing to do with
them. In our view, they are astray in their thinking and wrongdoers.
And to Allah we turn for guidance and safety.

الوم
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 1

The Creed and its Commentary

(1) We say about the Unity of Allah — with Allah’s help
— that Allah is one, without any partners.

One must know that tawhid is the first matter the prophets
preached. It is the first step on the path and the first stage of the
journey to Allah. Allah stated, “We sent Noah to his people and he
said, ‘My people, serve Allah; you have no other god than He”
[7:59]. Hud said similar words to his people, “Serve Allah, there 5
no god for you but He” [7:65]. Salih said to his people, “Worship
Allah as you have no god but He” [7:73]. Shu‘ayb said to his
people, “Worship Allah; you have no god but He” [7:85]. Allah also
says, “We sent to every community a prophet saying, ‘Worship
Allah and avoid false gods” [16:36], and, “Not a messenger did We
send before you (Muhammad) without Our. revealing to him that
there is no god but I, so worship and serve Me” [21:25]. The
_ Prophet (peace be on him) also stated, “I have been commanded to
fight people until they accept that there is no god but Allah and that
Muhammad is His prophet.””

Therefore, it is correct to say that the first obligation upon a
person is to witness that there is no god except Allah. He is not
required to reflect, to intend to reflect or to be skeptical at first, as
the leaders of the censured kalam have stated. In fact, all the leaders
of the Elders agree that the first thing one must do is witness to the
unity of Allah and the prophethood of Muhammad (peace be on
him). They also agree that if a child did that before he reached the
age of puberty, he is not commanded to repeat the witnessing after
attaining puberty. Instead, he is commanded to niually purify
himself and pray when he reaches puberty or is able to ascertain
things, according to those who hold this latter opinion. None of
them requires his guardian to address him at that time and tell him to
repeat his act of witnessing to the faith, even though that 1s the first
duty of a Muslim and a necessary condition for performing the
prayer. But he, in fact, has already fulfilled that obligation.

'Al-Bukhari, 25; Muslim, 22; At-Tirmidhi, 2606; Abi Dawid, 2640; An-Nasa’i,
Sunan (with commentary by Jalal ad-Din As-Suyitti and gloss by As-Sindi; Beirut: Dar
Ihya at-Turath al-Islami, 1384/1930; henceforth referred to as An-Nasa’i), Chapter
Zakah, vol. 5, p. 14. ْ

2 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

The jurists have also discussed the case of the person who prays
but has not made the testimony of faith (the two shahddahs) or
performs some aspect of Islam without the testimony. Is such a
person a Muslim? The correct opinion is that he becomes a Muslim
by fulfilling all the deeds that are particular to Islam.

With tawhid one enters into Islam, and with it one will depart
from this world. The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “He whose
last words are ‘There is no god except Allah,’ will enter Paradise.”
It is, therefore, the first duty and the last duty.

tawhid is, then, the beginning of the matter and its end. What is
meant by this is tawhid al-ilahiyyah, or the belief in the unity of God
(as the only object of worship). For tawhid has three dimensions to
it: first, matters concerning the attributes of Allah; second, tawhid
ar-rubibiyyah (the oneness of His Lordship), which states that
Allah alone created everything; and third, tawhid al-ilahiyyah or the
oneness of His Godhead, that Allah alone is to be worshiped and
served without associating any partner to Him.

The first category of tawhid concerns the attributes of Allah.
Those who deny the attributes include the denial of attributes as part
of what they call tawhid. Jahm Ibn Safwan and those who agree
with him say that affirming the attributes requires more than one
necessary being. Such a statement is known to be obviously and
blatantly wrong, for a being devoid of all attributes cannot have a
real existence. It is an impossibility, a mere fancy of mind, an
absolute void. This view of tawhid led some people to the doctrine
of incarnation (Au/a/) and union (ittihdd), which 15 far worse than
the heresy of the Christians. The Christians at least limit the divinity
to Christ, while these people extend it to all of creation.

A number of evil consequences follow from this false
understanding of tawhid. For example, Pharaoh and his followers
become perfect Believers and the best gnostics of the truth of Allah.
The idol worshipers are also considered correct and faithful since
they were actually worshiping Allah and no one else. Similarly,
there is no longer any difference between the lawful and _ the
unlawful, between (marrying or having intercourse with) a mother
or sister and a non-related woman; there is no difference between
water and alcohol nor between adultery and marriage. They are all
from one and the same essence. In fact, they are all one and the

*Abai Dawid, 3116; Ahmad, 5:223, 247; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, ed. by ‘Abdur-Rahman
Muhammad ‘Uthman and Muhammad ‘Abdul-Muhsin Al-Kutubi (Madinah: Al-Maktab
as-Salafiyyah, 1390/1970; henceforth referred to as Ibn Hibban), hadith no. 719.

Commentary on the Creed of At- 1 ‏1ه‎ 1 3

same Being. This doctrine also finds fault with the prophets, since
they curtailed the freedom of the people and made things difficult for
them. Exalted is Allah high above what they say.

The second category of tawhid, tawhid ar-rubibiyyah, 15 to
believe that He alone is the Creator of everything. There are not two
creators equal in attributes and actions. This tawhid 15 definitely true
without any doubt. It is the goal (or final belief) of many
philosophers, theologians, and some 511115. No known people have
ever denied the truthfulness of this kind of tawhid. In fact, hearts
have an inherent tendency to believe in it, more so than for any other
truth or existence. The messengers, as Allah mentions, questioned
their people about this belief in the following manner, “Is there any
doubt about the existence of Allah, the Onginator of the Heavens
and the Earth?’ [14:10]

The person most famous for claiming his ignorance or rejection
of the existence of the Creator was Pharaoh. But in his inner soul,
he was actually sure of it. Moses said to him, “You do know that
none but the Lord of the heavens and the earth has sent down these
[signs] as eye-openers” [17:102]. And Allah stated the following
about Pharaoh and his people, “Their hearts were convinced of it,
but they denied it arrogantly and unjustly” [27:14]. That is why,
when Pharaoh said, “‘Who is the Lord of the Worlds?’” as if
rejecting it, he was actually aware of Him, so Moses said to him,
“(He is) the Lord and Cherisher of the Heavens and the Earth and
all that 15 between them, if you want to believe.’ (Thereupon
Pharaoh) said to those around him, ‘Do you hear what he says?’
(Moses) said, ‘(He is) your Lord and the Lord of your fathers and
your forefathers.’ (Pharaoh) said, ‘Your messenger who has been
sent to you 1s certainly crazed.’ (Moses) said, ‘Lord of the East and
the West and all in between, if you want to understand.’” [26:24-28]

Some people claim that Pharaoh asked Moses about the nature of —
Allah and since one cannot talk about His nature, Moses could not
answer his question. This is wrong. Pharaoh did not put the -
question to Moses to elicit any information about God, but only to
deny His existence. The other verses of the Qur’an show that
Pharaoh was denying or refusing to admit God’s existence. It is not
true that he confessed to God’s existence and only wanted to know
more about Him. This is why Moses, in his answer, assumed that
God was known to him and he did not try to prove His existence, as
the signs of God’s existence and the proofs of His Lordship are so
obvious that no one would ask about who He is. His existence is
too well-known, clear and obvious for anyone to be ignorant of
Him. The knowledge of His existence is inherent in man more than
any other truth.
4 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

We know of no people who have ever said that there are two
creators of the world equal in attributes and actions. Even the dualist
Magians and Manichaeists, who affirm two principles, light and
darkness and believe that the world has proceeded from them, agree
that light is better than darkness; it is the praiseworthy god, while
darkness is evil. They dispute over whether darkness is eternal or
contingent. Therefore, they do not affirm two equal lords.

As for the Christians, who believe in the Trinity, they do not
affirm three separate lords for the world. Rather, they agree that the
creator of the world 15 one and they say, “In the name of the Father,
the Son and the Holy Ghost” as one God. But this belief in the
triune God is self-contradictory, and their belief in incarnation is
even worse. That is why they have great differences regarding its
interpretation. No one has been able to produce an intelligible view,
and no two views agree with each other. They believe that He is one
as essence, three as hypostases; but then they differ about the nature
of the hypostases. Some conceive them as properties, others as
qualities, and still others as persons. Every human being knows in
the light of his natural reason that this is false. In any case, they do
not say that there are two Creators similar to one another.

‘The point here 15 that there have never been any people who
have affirmed the existence of two equal creators. In spite of all that,
many theologians and philosophers have tired themselves out trying
to prove the fact that there is only one Creator. Some of them have
admitted that it cannot be proven by rational argument and claim that
it is something that is known only through revelation.

The most common argument they advance is known as the
argument of exclusion. This argument runs like this. If there were
two creators and they disagreed about something, such as one
wanted to move X, whereas the other did not want it to be moved,
or one wanted to make Y a living being, whereas the other wanted to
make it lifeless, then, logically speaking, there are only three
possibilities. First, the wills of the two are both carried out; second,
only the will of one of them is carried out; third, the will of neither
of them is carried out. The first case is not possible because it
requires the existence of contraries. The third possibility is also
ruled out because it would imply that a body is neither moving nor
not moving and this is impossible. This would also imply that both
of them are incapable of carrying out their wills, which would
disqualify them from being God. Finally, if the will of one is
realized and not that of the other, he alone will deserve to be God
and the one whose will is not realized cannot be considered God.

For a fuller treatment of this argument, one may consult the relevant
books. oh
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 5

Many people think that this argument is implied in the verse,
“Had there been gods other than Allah, the Heavens and the Earth
would have collapsed” [21:22]. The cause of their misunderstanding
is their belief that the unity of lordship (tawhid ar-rubibiyyah)
which they try to prove is the same as the unity of Godhead (tawhid
al-ilahiyyah) which the Qur’an states and which the prophets
preached. But this is not so. The tawhid which the prophets
preached and which their books teach is the tawhid al-ilahiyyah,
which encompasses or includes the tawhid ar-rubibiyyah. It means
to worship and to serve Allah without ascribing any partner to Him.
The Arab polytheists and pagans affirmed the notion of tawhid ar-
rubibiyyah and that the Creator of the heavens and the earth is one.
Allah states about them, “If you ask them who created the heavens
and the earth, they will say, ‘Allah’”’ [31:25], and “Say (to them):
To whom does the earth and all upon it belong, if you truly know?
They will say, ‘To Allah.’ Say (to them then): Will you not then
receive admonition?” [23:84-85]. There are many verses of this
nature in the Qur’an.

They did not believe about their idols that they participated with
Allah in the creation of the world. Their beliefs were the same as
those of the other polytheists of the world, the Indians, Turks,
Berbers and others. Sometimes they believed that their idols
represented some pious men, prophets or saints who would
intercede for them with Allah and bring them closer to Allah. This
was the root of the polytheism of the Arabs. In talking about the
people of Noah, Allah states, “They said: ‘Do not abandon your
gods; abandon not Wadd, nor Suwa’s, nor Yaghuth, nor Ya‘ugq, nor
Nasr” [71:23]. It is confirmed in the Sahih of Al-Bukhar1, the books
of Qur’anic commentary, narratives of the prophets and elsewhere,
from Ibn ‘Abbas and other Elders, that those were the names of
some pious people among the people of Noah. When they died, the
people gathered over their graves, then put up their statues and after
a period of time they began to worship them. And these particular
idols were passed on to the Arab tribes. Ibn ‘Abbas mentions where
they went to tribe by tribe.”

It is confirmed in Sahih Muslim on the authority of Abu Al-
Hayyay Al-Asadi that ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib said to him, “Shall I send
you on a mission like the mission the Messenger of Allah (peace be
on him) sent me on? He commanded me not to leave any elevated

*Al-Bukhari, Tafsir, 4920; Jawwad ‘Ali, Tarikh al-‘Arab gabl al-Islam (Beirut: Dar Al-
Malayin and Baghdad: Maktabat an-Nahdah, 1976), vol. VI, pp. 227-235.

6 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahdwiyyah

grave but to raze it to the ground, and not to leave any idol except to
demolish it.”

In the Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim it is also recorded that
the Prophet (peace be on him) said during his fatal illness, “May
Allah curse the Jews and Christians who took the grave sites of their
prophets as places of worship.” He was warming against what they
had done. Commenting on this hadith, ‘A’ishah said, “If the
Prophet had not warned us against this, his grave would have been
elevated, but he abhorred that his grave should be made a place of

worship. 75

| In the Sahihs of Al- Bukhari and Muslim it is also recorded that
while on his deathbed, someone mentioned to the Prophet (peace be
on him) some church in Abyssinia and described its beauty and
icons. He (peace be on him) said, “Whenever a pious person died in
their community they erected a church on his grave and decorated it
with icons. They will be the worst people in Allah’s sight on the
Day of Judgment.”

In Sahih Muslim it is recorded that the Prophet (peace be on him)
stated, some five days before he died, “Beware! The people before
you used to make the graves of their prophets and pious people a
worshiping ground. Beware! Do not make graves into mosques. 1
strictly forbid you to do so.”

Another cause of shirk (associating partners with Allah) is the
worship of the stars. People build idols symbolizing their properties
and then worship them. It is said that the shirk of the people of
Abraham was of this nature. Similarly, there 15 associating partners
with Allah by (taking) angels and jinns (as Allah’s partners) and
using idols to worship them.

Such people affirmed the existence of the Creator and did not
claim that there were two creators for this world. But they took these
idols as intermediaries to intercede for them. Allah Himself said
about such people, “Those who take as protectors other than Allah
say that they only worship them in order that they might bring them

*Muslim, Jand’iz, 969; Aba Dawid, Jand’iz, 3218; At-Tirmidhi, Jand’iz, 1049; An-
Nasa’i, Jand’iz, 4:88, 89; Ahmad, 1: 96, 129. ‏ش‎
‎°Al-Bukhari, 1330, 1390; Muslim, Masdjid, 529; Abi Dawid, Jana’iz, 3227; An-
Nasa’i, 4:95-96; Ahmad 6:80, 121, 146, 252.

°Al-Bukhari, 427, 434; Muslim, Masdjid, 528; An-Nasa’i, Masajid, 2:41-42; Ahmad,
6:51.

"Muslim, Masdjid, 532; At-Tabarani, Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, ed. by ‘Abdul-Hamid As-
Salafi (Baghdad: [hya li at-Turath al-Islami and Dar al-‘Arabiyyah, first edition,
1398/1978; henceforth referred to as At-Tabarani, A/-Kabir hadith no. 1686.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 14

nearer to God” [39:3]. He also says, “They serve besides Allah
things that neither hurt them nor profit them and say: ‘These are our
intercessors with Allah.’ Say: Do you indeed inform Allah of
something He knows not in the heavens or on earth? Glory to Him,
and far is He above the partners they ascribe to Him” [10:18].

Similar was the case with the previous polytheistic nations who
denied the messengers. Concerning the story of Salih, Allah states
that the nine groups of people swore by Allah that they would attack
Salih and his family at night. Those evil-doing polytheists swore by
Allah that they would kill their prophet and his family, thus
establishing that they believed in Allah — (but a belief in the manner)
of polytheists.

It is clear, therefore, that the tawhid which 15 desired or which is
the goal 15 tawhid al-ilahiyyah,which encompasses and_ includes
tawhid ar-rubibiyyah. Allah has stated, “Therefore turn your face
resolutely toward the Faith, the handiwork of Allah, on whose
pattern He created mankind. (There can be) no changing the creation
brought about by Allah. This is the Way of life, straight and upright.
Yet most people do not know. Turn back in repentance to Him and
fear Him. Establish regular prayers and be not among those who
join gods with Allah, Who split up their religion and become mere
sects — each party rejoicing in what is with itself. When trouble
touches men, they cry to their Lord, turning back to Him in
repentance. But when He gives them a taste of mercy as from
Himself, behold, some of them pay part worship to other gods
besides their Lord, as if to show their ingratitude for the favors We
have bestowed on them. Then enjoy (your brief day). Soon will you
know your folly. Have We sent down an authority to them which
calls upon them to set up associates (with God)? When We give the
people a taste of mercy they rejoice in it; but when adversity strikes
them due to the consequences of their deeds, then they fall into
despair” [30:30-36]. Allah also says, “Is there any doubt about the
existence of Allah, the Originator of the Heavens and the Earth?’
[14:10]

The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Every child is born with
fitrah (the natural way, the religion of Islam). Thereafter, his parents
make him a Jew or a Christian or a Magian.’’® This hadith does not
mean that a child is born like a clean slate, completely unaware of

tawhid or shirk, as some people say. The verses above negate this
claim (as they show that the natural religion that the child 15 born

8Al-Bukhari, 1358, 1359; Muslim, A/-Oadr, 2658; Ahmad, 2:233, 275, 393, 410,
481; At-Tirmidhi, 2138.

8 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

with is Islam). Furthermore, the Prophet (peace be on him) narrated
from Allah, “I created My servants with a mind to serve none but
Me. Thereafter, the devils grab them....”” The same idea is alluded
to in the previously quoted hadith. For along with the words, “Then
they make him a Jew or a Christian or a Magian,” the Prophet (peace
be on him) did not say, “or a Muslim’. In other narrations of the
hadith, it states, “is born in the millah” or “or in this millah,”'° that
means faith.

What the Prophet (peace be on him) stated 15 also supported by
sound rational arguments.

(From among those sound rational arguments) i is the following.
It is stated that man has beliefs and volitions that are sometimes true
and sometimes wrong. He is moved by will or volition. Therefore,
he must have at least one of them and he must have some way of
deciding on one over the other. We know that if you give a choice to
anyone to be truthful and beneficent or lying and harmful he will
incline by his nature to being truthful and beneficent. Therefore,
recognition of the Creator and belief in Him is truth or its opposite 5
truth. The latter 1s definitely not the case; the former must be true.
Therefore, there must be something in the person’s nature that
requires him to know the Creator and believe in Him. Furthermore,
it must be the case that having love for Him, the Creator, is either
beneficent to the servant or not. The second 15 definitely not true. It
must be the case that he has in his nature a love for what benefits
him.

(Another rational argument) is that the person is by nature driven
to seek benefit and ward off harm by his senses. Even if not
everyone’s soul by itself is sufficient to achieve that, but instead he
needs some assistance for his natural endowment, such as teaching,
then if this condition is met and obstacles are not present, the soul
will respond, due to the built-in forces it has.

Similarly, one could say that it 1s known that every soul is
capable of receiving knowledge and yearning for truth. But just
teaching and exhortation by themselves do not necessitate
knowledge or will unless the soul has the power to accept it. If
someone teaches ignorant people or animals and exhorts them, they
will not respond. It is also known that the soul, without any external
influence, can believe in the possibility of a creator. The soul 5
sufficient for that. If that driving force is present in the soul and we

"Muslim, Al-Jannah, 2867; Ahmad, 4:162, 163, 266; At-Tabarani, A/-Kabir,
987-996.
‘These words occur in the hadith of Muslim referred to in the previous footnote.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 9

assume that there is no obstacle, then the driving force which is
presented with no obstacles will bring about its goal. Therefore, it is
concluded that the pure soul or pure human endowment, if met with
nothing that corrupts it, will affirm the existence of a creator and will
be a servant to Him.

As a corollary to the above, one can argue that if the natural
human endowment does not meet with any positive or negative
external factors, the natural disposition will drive him to what is
good, as the built-in force that allows him to accept knowledge and
will is present, while the obstacles are not present.

It is said of Abu Hanifah that a group of the people of kalam
came to him to discuss the unity of the Creator and the Lord (tawhid
ar-rubibiyyah). He said to them, “Before we enter into a discussion
on this question, tell me what you think of a boat in the Euphrates
which goes to shore, loads itself with food and other things, then
returns, anchors and unloads all by itself without anyone Sailing or
controlling it?” They said, “That it is impossible; it could never
happen.” Thereupon he said to them, “If it is impossible with
respect to a ship, how is it possible for this whole world, with all its
vastness, to move by itself?” This story has also been narrated from
people other than Abt Hanifah.

However, if anyone believes in the unity of the Creator-Lord
(tawhid ar-rubiibiyyah) which theologians and _ philosophers
expound, and in whose ecstatic experience many Sifis try to lose
their self-consciousness, considering it to be the end of their pursuit,
as the author of Mandzil as-Sa’irin and others have stated, but, if at
the same time he does not serve Allah alone and eschew the worship
of anything else, then he 15 a polytheist like any other polytheist.

The Qur’an abounds with statements and parables concerning
this type of tawhid. It first affirms the tawhid ar-rubibiyyah, that
there is no Creator other than Allah. That requires or necessitates
that no one should be worshiped except Allah. It takes the first
proposition as evidence for the second proposition. The Arabs
believed in the first proposition and disputed the second. Allah then
made it clear to them: Since you know that there is no creator except
Allah, and that He is the One Who can give a person what benefits
him or keep away from him what harms him, and He has no partner
in those acts, then how can you worship others besides Him and
associate partners with Him in His Godhead?

For example, Allah says in the Qur’an, “Say: Praise be to Allah
and peace be on His servants whom He has chosen (for His
message). Who 15 better: God, or the false gods they associate with
Him? Or who has created the heavens and the earth, and who sends
10 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

you down rain from the sky with which He brings forth beautiful
gardens? It is not in your power to cause the growth of the trees in
them. Can there be another god besides Allah? Yet they are a people
who assign equals (to Him)” [27:59-60].

At the end of other, similar verses, Allah states, “Can there by
another god besides Allah?” [21:6, 63 and 64]. This is a rhetorical
question whose answer 15 definitely in the negative. They accepted
the notion that no one but Allah does such things. Allah used that as
a proof against them. It does not mean to ask if there is another god
besides Allah, as some have claimed. Such a meaning 1s inconsistent
with the context of the verses and since the people actually used to
take other gods alongside Allah. As Allah says, “Can you possibly
bear witness that besides Allah there 15 another god? Say: I witness
it not’ [6:19]. And they used to say (about the Prophet), “Does he
make all the gods one? That is truly a strange thing” [38:5]. But they
would never say that there was another god (with Allah) that would
“make the earth a fixed abode, place rivers in its fold, and place firm
hills therein’ [16:61]. They accepted the fact that only Allah did all
those things. Therefore, Allah says, “People, adore your Guardian-
Lord, Who created you and those who went before you that you
may learn to be righteous” [2:21], and “Say: Think, if Allah took
away your hearing and your sight and sealed up your hearts, who, a
. 500 other than Allah, could restore them to you?” [6:46]. And there
are similar other verses. 3

Since tawhid ar-rubibiyyah, which the theologians and those
Sufis who are in agreement with them consider to be the end-all and
goal of their endeavor, is part of the tawhid which the prophets
preached and the heavenly books teach, various evidence exists that
point to it, such as other evidence that prove the existence of the
Creator and the truthfulness of the Prophet. By Allah’s mercy to His
creation, the truths that are most important and most needed have the
most evident proofs.

Allah has given parables of every kind that contain rational
arguments and promote faith. He has narrated stories which teach
and discuss signs and proofs. And what is other than truth except
error? The Qur’4n makes the truth clear with evidence. However,
those premises that are well known and agreed upon are built upon
without any need for proving them. The most correct form of
exposition in language is that of ellipsis and that is the manner used
in the Qur’an, as opposed to what the ignorant say claiming that
there are no demonstrative arguments in the Qur’an. The Qur’&n,
though, does state all the premises when they are not clear or when
_ there is some dispute about them.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 17

Since associating partners with Allah in His Lordship 15
impossible, according to all peoples, that is, the confirmation of two
creators similar in attributes and actions, some of the polytheists
advanced the claim that there 1s another creator that created part of
this world. This is what the dualists say concerning “darkness”,
what the Qadariyyah say about the actions of animals and what the
naturalist philosophers say about the movement of the planets, souls
and physical bodies. All of them posit events that are not brought
into existence by Allah, and associate partners with Him in the act of
creation. They are polytheists in some aspects of rububiyyah. In
fact, many of the Arab polytheists and others thought that their idols
could bring about some good or cause some harm even if Allah did
not bring such good or harm into existence.

Since that type of shirk was found among the people, the Qur’an
makes clear its falsehood. Allah says, “No son did Allah beget, nor
is there any god along with Him. If there were many gods, each
would have taken away what he had created, and some would have
lorded it over others” [23:92]. Reflect on this wonderful argument
so briefly and clearly stated: The true God has to be the Creator and
the Actor, causing good and warding off evil from His creatures. If
there were another god besides Him, sharing in His powers, that
other god would also create and act, and he would not be pleased
with that partnership. In fact, if he could dominate and subjugate the
partner and bring everything under his control, he would have done
so. If he were not able to do that, he would have created things by
himself and kept all his creation to himself, as the kings of the world
keep their kingdoms to themselves when they are not able to
subjugate others. Therefore, one of three situations must exist: first,
every god keeps his creation and kingdom to himself; second, some
dominate others; third, they are all subjugated by the All-Powerful
Lord, Who deals with them as He pleases. They are not able to defy
Him but must, instead, simply submit to His authority and carry out
His command. Therefore, they will actually simply be His servants
and bondsmen and He will be the one and only one true God.

The order of the world and its perfect rule is the best argument
that its Ruler is only one God, the one King and the one Lord, and
that there is no god and no lord of creation other than He. The
argument of exclusion says not only that the Creator of the world 5
only one, but also that He alone is the Lord and God and no one
else. Exclusion applies to creation and action as well as to lordship
and divinity. In the same way, if it is not possible for there to be two
equal lords and creators, it is also not possible for there to be two
gods and two beings deserving worship.
12 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

The knowledge that there cannot be two equal creators is part of
the natural endowment of man, self-evident to his reason. Human
nature similarly rejects the idea of two gods. Hence the verdict of the
Qur’an and the verdict of human nature are one regarding the unity
of the Creator-Lord that implies and necessitates the unity of
Divinity.

Close in meaning to the above verse is Allah’s statement, “If
there were many gods therein (that is, in the heavens and the earth)
besides Allah, they would have surely fallen into chaos” [21:22].
Some people think that this verse states the above-mentioned
argument of exclusion, “If there were two creators...”, but they fail
to note that the verse refers to gods (alihah) and not to creator-lords
(arbab); furthermore, the verse speaks about the world after its
creation. It says that if there were many gods in the world, the
heavens and the earth would be destroyed. It also states, “it would
fall into chaos” and that refers to after its existence. So the verse
argues that there cannot be more than one God, that He cannot be
other than Allah, and that the destruction of the heavens and the
earth would be bound to follow if gods were many or if the one God
were other than Allah, and that the order in which we find the
heavens and the earth is because there is only one God, Allah. If
there were another god besides Him, the heavens and earth would
have disintegrated because their survival depends on the justice on
which their foundation has been laid, and the greatest form of
injustice is polytheism (shirk) and the greatest form of justice 5
tawhid.

Tawhid al-ilahiyyah implies tawhid ar-rubibiyyah but not vice-
versa. One who cannot create is incompetent and one who is
incompetent is not deserving of divinity and worship — of being
God. Allah says, “Do they associate with Allah those who cannot
create anything and who are themselves created” [7:191], “Can the
One Who creates and the one who cannot create be equal? Do you
not learn the lesson?” [16:17]; and, “If those were gods besides
Allah as they claim, they would have tried to reach the Lord of the
Throne” [17:42]. Later scholars differ regarding the meaning of the
last verse quoted. Some think that 1t means that if there were gods
besides Allah, the Lord of the Throne, they would try to dominate
Him.

The second interpretation, which is the correct interpretation
coming from the Elders, such as Qatadah and others, and the only
interpretation mentioned by Ibn Jarir At-Tabari, is that the other
gods would try to seek His favor. It 15 similar to another verse in the
Qur’an, “Lo, this is an admonition that whosoever will may choose
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 13

a way to his Lord” [76:29]. And He says, “If those were gods
besides Allah as they claim...” While such people did not claim that
there were two creators they instead took other gods as intercessors
with Allah and said, “We worship them only so they may bring us
near to Allah” [39:3], which is different from what is stated in the
first verse. |

The tawhid which the prophets preached and the heavenly books
taught are of two kinds: tawhid in knowledge and recognition and
tawhid in will and intention. The first is to affirm that God is unique
in His essence, attributes, names and acts; that there 1s nothing like
Him in any respect; and that He is as He has said about Himself or
as His Prophet (peace be on him) has said about Him. The Qur’an
has expounded this type of tawhid in the clearest fashion, as may be
found in the beginning of Strat Al-Hadid (Chapter 57), Ta Ha
(Chapter 20), the end of Al-Hashr (Chapter 59), the beginning of
As-Sajdah (Chapter 32), the beginning of Ali ‘Imran (Chapter 3), all
of Al-Ikhlas (Chapter 112), and so on.

The second type of tawhid, tawhid in actions and intention, is
described in Al-Kafirtin (Chapter 109), in the verse, “Say: People of
the Book, let us agree to a statement common between you and
us...” [3:64], in the first and last parts of Az-Zumar (Chapter 39), in
the beginning, middle and end of Yunus (Chapter 10), in the
beginning and end of Al-‘Araf (Chapter 7), and the whole of Al-
An‘am (Chapter 6).

Most of the Qur’an - actually all of it - refers to these two kinds
of tawhid. For the Qur’an either speaks about Allah, His names,
attributes and actions, and this is part of tawhid in knowledge and
affirmation, or it calls people to His worship alone, without
ascribing any partners to Him and leaving everything that 15
worshiped other than Him, and this 15 tawhid of intention and
action. Or it commands, forbids and requires obedience to Him, and
this is all part of the mghts or implications of tawhid and its
completion. Concerning what is stated of how Allah honors those
who believe in tawhid and how He treats them in this world and
what He honors them with in the Hereafter, all of this is the reward
for tawhid. Concerning what is stated about those who have
associated partners with Allah and whom He has punished in this
life or will punish in the next, this is the just reward of those who
abandon tawhid. _

Thus, the entire Qur’an is about tawhid, its consequences and
the reward for it, as well as shirk, those who commit it and the
punishment they will suffer for it. (The opening verses of the first
14 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

chapter of the Qur’an), “Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds”
is tawhid; “the Most-Compassionate, the Most-Merciful” 1s tawhid;
“Master of the Day of Judgment” is tawhid; “You only do we
worship, and in You only do we seek help” is tawhid; “Guide us to
the Straight Path” 15 tawhid, as it is a request to be guided to the path
of the people of tawhid, those whom Allah has blessed, “Not those
who have earned the wrath of Allah, nor those who have gone
astray” or, in other words, those who have forsaken tawhid.

Furthermore, Allah has himself witnessed to His tawhid and
unity; and His angels, prophets and messengers have witnessed to
His unity. Allah says, “There is no god but He. That it is the
witness of Allah, His angels and those endowed with knowledge,
standing firm on justice. There is no god but He, the Exalted in
power, the Wise. Truly, the religion before Allah is Islam
(submission to His will)’ [3:18-19]. This verse underlines the
essence of tawhid and refutes all those who have wrong beliefs. It
mentions the greatest, finest and most truthful testimony from the
greatest beings to the greatest reality.

The use by the Elders of the word shdahida (‘bearing witness’)
revolves around judgment, ruling, informing, clarifying and
reporting. All those uses are correct and there is no contradiction
between them. For the word shahddah encompasses the statement of
the witness as well as his report; but it also encompasses his
informing, reporting and clarifying. It has four aspects to it: first,
knowledge, understanding and belief in the soundness of what is
being witnessed to and confirmed; second, speaking or enunciation
_ about what has been witnessed, for even if he does not tell anyone
else about it, he mentions it to himself and remembers it or records
it; third, to inform others of it, inform them and clarify the matter to
them; fourth, that he complies with what it entails and commands
him to do.

Allah’s testifying to His own Unity and standing firm on justice
involves all four aspects: His knowledge of it, His speaking about
it, His informing and telling His creation about it and His
commanding them to abide and live by it. As for the aspect of
knowledge, the testimony, as a must, definitely includes it.
Otherwise it would be a testimony without knowledge of what one
is testifying to. Allah says, “Except those who bear witness to the
truth and are knowledgeable thereof’ [43:86]. And the Prophet
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 15

(peace be on him) said, “And similarly I bear witness” and he
pointed to the sun.

As for the aspect of speaking it, Allah says, “They make the
angels, those servants of the Most Merciful, female. Did they
witness their creation? Surely their testimony will be recorded and
they will be questioned” [43:19]. Allah has stated that to be a
testimony from them, even if they did not state it in the form of
testimony and even if they did not pass it on to others.

As for the aspect of informing and reporting to others, there are
two types, informing by speech and informing by action. That is the
case with everyone who wants to inform someone else of
something: sometimes he tells him by his speech and sometimes he
tells him by his action. For example, the one who designates his
house a mosque, opens its doors wide, clears the way to it and
allows people to enter it and pray in it, has actually declared that it is
a religious endowment (wagqf), even though he did not say so in
words. Similarly, the one who tries to get closer to another by
various avenues announces to him and to others that he loves that
person, even though he did not say so, and vice-versa.

Such is the case with Allah’s testimony and His expounding and
announcing it. Sometimes He does this by speech and sometimes by
action. As for speech, it includes what He sent with messengers and
revealed with books. As for His exposition and announcing by His
actions, as Ibn Kaysan mentioned, Allah witnesses to it with His
marvelous control and order of His creation. This leads to the
conclusion that there is no god except He. Another person said in
lines of poetry,

“ In everything there 15 a sign of Him/
That points to Him being only One.

What points to testimony also possibly being in actions is the
verse in the Qur’an, “It is not for the idolaters to control maintenance
of Allah’s houses of worship when they bear witness to their own
disbelief” [9:17]. That is, testimony against themselves is found in
their actions. The point is that Allah testifies with His created signs
that point to His existence, and the evidence is in their being His
creation.

''This is part of a hadith in which a person asked the Prophet (peace be upon him)
about the shahddah (testimony of faith) and he said, “Do you see the sun?” He said,

“Yes.” The Prophet then told him, “Either bear witness similar to that witnessing, or
simply leave it.” This hadith was recorded by Al-Hakim, vol. 4, p. 95, and others. In

its chain is Muhammad Ibn Sulayman Al-Masmiili, who is weak.

16 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahadwiyyah

Concerning being obligated to and following what has been
testified to — which is not a necessary component of a simple
witnessing per se, but in this case it does point to it and includes it —
Allah witnesses to His unity a type of testimony that necessitates that
people are ruled by it and He decreed to, commanded and required
His servants to abide by it. As Allah states in the Qur’an, “Your
Lord has decreed that you must not worship anyone but Him”
[17:23]. He also says, “And Allah has declared: Do not worship two
gods” [16:51]; and, “They are commanded naught else than to serve
Allah” [98:5]; also, “Assign no other god with Allah” [17:39]; and
again, “And never call upon any god besides Allah” [28:88]. In fact,
all of the Qur’an bears testimony to that.

That it is obligatory to obey and follow His testimony can be
seen in the following arguments. When He testifies that there is no
god but He, He is enunciating, clarifying, instructing, judging and
decreeing that nothing besides Him is a god, and that anything taken
as god other than Him 15 false. This means that nothing 1s deserving
of worship other than He, in the same way that no other thing 5
worthy of being divine. Therefore, that necessitates the command to
take only Him as God, and the prohibition against taking anything
with Him as a god. This is what the addressee understands from that
form of negation and confirmation.

In the same manner, 11 you saw someone asking another person
for a religious verdict, or calling upon a specific person to be a
witness, or referring to someone for medical advice and these people
were not qualified for those jobs and the persons who were qualified
were ignored, you would say, “That person is not a jurist; that
person cannot be a witness; and that other person is not a doctor.
But so-and-so 15 qualified as a jurist, and so-and-so is qualified as a
witness, and so-and-so is qualified as a doctor.” This is, in reality, a
command from Him and a prohibition.

Sumilarly, the verses point to Him being the only One deserving
of worship. When He enunciates that He 15 the only One worthy of
worship, it follows that this enunciation is a command to the
servants to fulfill the statement and worship Him in the manner that
He deserves and to fulfill that command solely and sincerely for
Him as is His right upon them.

Furthermore, the words “judgment” and “decree” are used in
declarative sentences. In such sentences one says, “decree” and
“judgment”. Allah says, “Beware! It is their own lie that they assert,
‘Allah has begotten offspring.’ They are certainly liars. Has he
chosen daughters in preference to sons? What is the matter with
you? How you judge!” [37:151-154]. Allah declared their plain
statement as a judgment. Allah also said, “Will we treat those who
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 17

submit to Allah like the sinful? What has come over you that you
form such a judgment!” [68:35-36]. However, that judgment has
nothing making it obligatory to be implemented; but the judgment
and decree that there is no god but He includes such.an obligation.

If (the shahddah) were simply meant to be a declaration, they
would not be able to know the meaning of it or benefit from it, nor
would the shahddah be a proof against them. But the shaha@dah does
encompass a declaration for the servants and evidence and
clarification of what he is witnessing to. Like the case of a human
witness who has testimony but does not declare or divulge it, but
instead conceals it, nobody would benefit from it and no proof
would be based upon his witness.

If it cannot be benefited from except through declaring and
clarifying it, then Allah has made a complete exposition and
declaration by three means: hearing, seeing and reason.

As for hearing, it is through hearing His verses that are recited
and are clear that we know of His perfect attributes, of His unity and
of other matters in the clearest fashion. It is not the case, as the
Jahmiyyah and those who agree with them of the Mu‘tazilah claim,
that one should deny some of His attributes, claiming that they may
lead to confusion and loss, as this denies the clarity of Allah’s
Book, which Allah has described as clear, and of that of His
Messenger. Allah says, “Ha Mim. By the book that makes things
clear” [43:1-2]. “Alif Lam Rd. These are the verses of the clear
book” [12:1]. “Alif Lam Ra. These are the verses of the Book and a
clear reading” [15:1]. “This is a clear declaration to all of mankind
and guidance and admonition for the God-conscious” [3:138].
“Know that the obligation on Our Messenger is simply plain
conveyance (of the Message)” [5:92]. ““We have revealed to you the
Reminder for you to explain to mankind what has been revealed for
them. Perhaps they will reflect” [16:44].

Similarly, the Sunnah of the Prophet (peace be on him) is filled
with statements that explain or concur with what the Qur’4n states.
When it comes to matters related to the foundations of our religion,
Allah has never made it necessary for us to turn to the personal
opinions, intuition or instincts of any human being.

That is why we find that those who differ from the Book and
Sunnah are always in confused disagreement. In fact, Allah has
stated, “This day have I perfected your religion for you, completed
my favor upon you, and granted my pleasure to Islam as the religion
for you” [5:3]. Therefore, it is not necessary to complete or
complement the religion with anything that comes from outside the
Book and the Sunnah.
18 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

That is the meaning that Sheikh Abd Ja‘far At-Tahawi, may
Allah have mercy on Him, was alluding to in his coming statement,
“We do not interpret His words according to our fancy, for no one
can secure his faith unless he submits to God and His Prophet
completely.” |

As for His created, witnessed signs, one can look at them and
infer from them the same that can be inferred from His signs that are
stated and passed on (that is, verses of the Qur’an and hadith of the
Prophet, peace be on him. Reason combines both of them and
declares definitively the correctness of what the messengers
brought. Therefore, the witness of hearing, sight, reason and natural
endowment are all in agreement.

Due to His complete justice, mercy, goodness, witness, love for
vindication and establishment of the proof and truth, He did not
send any messenger without signs that pointed to his truthfulness
concerning what he stated about His Lord. Allah says, “We truly
sent Our messengers with clear proofs, and revealed with them the
Scripture and the Balance, that mankind may observe justice”
[57:25]; and, “And We sent not before you other than men whom
We inspired — ask the followers of the remembrance if you know
not — with clear proofs and writings” [16:43-44]; “Say: Messengers
came to you before me with clear signs and what you are now
asking for’ [3:183]. And Allah says, “And if they deny you, even
so did they deny messengers who were before you who came with
miracles and with the Psalms and with the Scripture giving light”
[3:184].

Allah also says, “Allah it is Who revealed the Scripture with
Truth and the Balance” [42:17]. Even the most indistinct sign of any
messenger, that of Hid, whose people said to him, “You have not
brought us any clear proof’ [11:53], was a very clear sign for
anyone Allah allowed to ponder it. Allah alludes to it in these words,
“T (Htid) call Allah to witness, and do you also bear witness, that I
am innocent of all that you ascribe as partners beside Him. So (try
to) circumvent me, all of you, and give me no respite. Lo! I have put
my trust in Allah, my Lord and your Lord. Not an animal is there
but He does grasp it by the forelock. Lo! my Lord is on the Straight
Path” [11:54-56]. That 15 the greatest of signs: that a single
individual could address a great nation with that speech without any
fear, apprehension or anguish. In fact, he was fully confident and
certain of what he was saying. First, he took Allah as a witness that
he was innocent of their religion and what they were following. It
was the type of testimony that he could be certain of and could rely
upon. He informed his people that Allah was his friend and
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 19

supporter and that He would not allow them to gain control over
him. ‏ظ‎

Then he testified to them in frank testimony that he had nothing
to do with their religion and the gods that they aligned themselves
with and who they would oppose others for and would sacrifice
their blood and wealth on behalf of. Then he stressed that upon them
by showing disdain for their idols, and he looked down upon them
with contempt. If they all worked together against him to relieve
themselves of him, that would not slow him down. Then he clearly
explained to them his message. He made it clear to them that His
Lord and their Lord, in Whose hand was everybody’s forelock, was
his helper and protector Who supported him and aided him, and that
he was along the straight path, and that He would not leave anyone
who put his trust in Him and believed in Him. And He would not let
his enemies rejoice at his misfortune.

What sign or proof is better than those of the prophets and their
proofs and evidence? They are testimonials from Allah for them and
He made it clear as clear as could be for His servants.

One of the names of Allah is Al-Mu’min. And, according to one
explanation of its meaning, it means that He is the One Who proves
the veracity of the truthful by doing the things that bear testimony to
their truthfulness. He shows mankind, for example, signs on the
horizons and in their own selves that make it clear to them that the
revelation that the messengers conveyed is true. Allah says, “We
will show them Our signs on the horizons and within themselves
until it will be manifest to them that it is the truth” [41:53], that is,
that the Qur’an is true. It is what is referred to in the verse previous
to it, “Bethink you: if it 15 from Allah...” [41:52]. And then He
says, “Does not your Lord suffice, since He is witness over all
things?” [41:52]. Allah testifies for His Messenger by His statement
that what He brought is the truth and by promising to show mankind
created signs that also witness to that. Then Allah mentions what is
even greater and more profound than all of that and that is His
witness of everything.

Another of His names is Ash-Shahid, which means the One
from Whom nothing is hidden or escapes. He sees and observes
everything and is knowledgeable of its details. This 15 a proof from
His names and attributes. The first is a proof from His words and
speech. And proof by His signs in the horizons and 12 the souls 5
an inference from His actions and creation.

If you ask how one can infer from His names and attributes, as
using them as inference never occurred in terminology, the response
to that is that Allah placed in human disposition (fitrah), when it is
not defiled by denial or rejection, or by anthropomorphism, that
20 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Allah is complete and perfect in His names and attributes. He is as
He has been described by Himself or by His messengers. What is
hidden of His perfection is greater (than what 15 known) and is
greater than what is known from Him.

And from His holy perfection is His witnessing and observing
everything, such that not an iota, hidden or apparent, in the heavens
or the earth is hidden from Him. From this characteristic of His,
how can human beings ascribe partners to him, worship others
besides Him and take other gods? How can He, with His perfection,
allow anyone to commit the greatest falsehood against Him and
report something about Him contrary to what He has commanded
and then, beyond that, even help that liar, support him, raise his
position, respond to his call, destroy his enemy and show through
him signs and evidence that other strong human beings would not be
capable of, and, given all of that, that person is a liar and forger? It
is well-known that His being a witness of everything, His ability,
His wisdom, His honor and holy perfection would not allow that.
Whoever would say that such is permissible is a person furthest
away from actually knowing Him.

The Qur’an is filled with this type of argument. It is the
approach of those well-grounded in knowledge. They argue
concerning Allah by His actions and what actions are fit for Him to
do or not to do. Allah says in the Qur’&n, “And if he had invented
false sayings concerning Us, We assuredly would have taken him
by the right hand and then severed his life-artery. And not one of
you could have held Us off from him” [69:44-47]. This will be
discussed in more detail later, God willing.

His names and attributes are also used as evidence of His unity
and the falsehood of polytheism. Note the verse, “He is Allah. |
There is no god but He, the Sovereign-Lord, the Holy One, the ~
Fountain of Peace, the Preserver of Security, the Protecting
Guardian, the Exalted in Power, the Dominant, the Great Supreme.
Glorified be Allah above all that they associated with Him” [59:23].
This (kind of argument) can be found many times in the Qur’an.

This approach, though, is followed by a very few; only the
elect, well-grounded in knowledge, are guided to it. The majority of
people use as proof the signs that can be witnessed, as they are
easier to convey and more encompassing. And Allah exalts some of
His creation over others.

The Qur’an has combined some aspects that are not combined
elsewhere. It is both the evidence and what is being proved, as well
as the witness and what is being witnessed to. Allah says in the

Qur’an to anyone who is seeking evidence that His messenger is
truthful, “Is it not enough for them that We have sent down to you
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 21

this Book which is rehearsed to them? In this is surely a mercy and a
reminder for the people who believe...” [29:51].

Now that it is established that tawhid al-ilahiyyah is what the
prophets preached and what the heavenly books taught, as has been
pointed out, one should not heed the statement of those who divide
tawhid into three types (as in the following manner). This first type
of tawhid, they say, is the tawhid of the common people. The
second type is the tawhid of the elect, which, they say, is the tawhid
_ that is realized in mystical experience. The third is the tawhid of the
elect of the elect. This tawhid, they believe, is affirmed by the
Eternal Being Himself. However, one should not heed these
statements, for the people who were most perfect in tawhid were the
prophets (peace be on them all).

The messengers were even greater than they, especially those of
resolute purpose, namely Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and
Muhammad (peace be on them all). Of these, two - the most beloved
of Allah - Abraham and Muhammad, were the most complete in
tawhid for they fulfilled the demands of tawhid more than anyone
else — demands regarding faith, knowledge, experience, calling men
to it and striving for its cause. No tawhid can be more complete than
the tawhid which the messengers stated, preached and struggled for.
That is why Allah commanded His Prophet (peace be on him) to
follow in their footsteps. After describing Abraham’s argument with
his people in support of zawhid and his denunciation of shirk, and
after mentioning other prophets among his descendants, Allah says,
“Those were the ones who received Allah’s guidance; follow then
their way” [6:90]. No one can be more complete in tawhid than
those whom the Prophet (peace be upon him) was.told to follow.

The Prophet (peace be on him) used to teach his companions that
they should say in the morning, “We begin our day on the pattern
(fitrah) of Islam. The statement of sincerity, the religion of our
Prophet, Muhammad, and the faith (millah) of our forefather,
Abraham, who submitted himself sincerely to Allah and did not
associate anyone with Him.”’* The millah of Abraham. is: tawhid.
The religion of Muhammad is every statement, action, and belief
that He brought from Allah. The statement of sincerity 15 the
testimony that there is no god but Allah. The fitrah of Islam is the
natural disposition man has been given to love and worship only
Allah, without ascribing any partner to Him, and submitting to Him
with ‘complete servitude, humility and reverence. | |

"Ahmad, 3:406, 407; Ad-Darimi, 2:292. Its chain is sahih. oe

22 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

This is the tawhid of the most elite or dear from among the
chosen ones of Allah. Whoever turns away from it is the fool of all
fools. Allah has Himself said, “Who turns away from the faith of
Abraham but such as debase their souls with folly? Him We chose
and rendered pure in this world, and he will be in the Hereafter in
the ranks of the righteous. Behold! His Lord said to him, ‘Submit to
me, (and) he said, ‘I submit to the Lord and Cherisher of the
Universe’” [2:130-131].

The one with intelligence and sense is not in need of the
arguments of the dialectitians and the theologians or their terms and
methods. In fact, they may only lead him to doubts that will further
lead him to confusion, bewilderment and misbelief. Truly, tawhid is
beneficial when the heart is free of all of those (diseases), that is, the
sound heart, concerning which no one will prosper unless he
approaches Allah with such a heart.

The second and third types of tawhid, which have been called
the tawhid of the elect and that of the elect of the elect, culminate in
the passing away of the self (fana) which most 510115 strive for. It is
a dangerous alley which leads to (the concept of) union (ittihad].
Read these lines which Sheikh Al-Islam Abu Isma‘il Al-Ansari ‏لذ‎

Harwi, may Allah have mercy on him, composed,’°

No one affirms the unity of the One

for whoever affirms His unity denies it.

Whoever describes Him, His description of Unity
is void and unacceptable to the One.

The real affirmation of His unity

is what the One Himself does, and

whoever tries to describe Him is a heretic.

Although the author of these lines did not mean to imply union
(ittihad), he has used vague words which an proponent of union is
likely to interpret on his lines and think that the author belongs to his
way of thinking. Had he used the words which the Shari‘ah uses
and which are clear and non-misleading, it would have been more

‎a review and criticism of Al-Ansari’s views expressed in these lines of poetry,‏ رمن ذا
‎see Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyyah (also know as Ibn Al-Qayyim), Madarij as-Sdalikin, ed.‏
‎by Muhammad Hamid AIl-Figi (Cairo: Al-Matba‘ah al-Muhammadiyyah, 1375/1976),‏
‎Ibn Al-Qayyim makes the point that in various verses of the Qur’an,‏ .518 .م ,3 ‎vol.‏
‎Allah has testified that His angels, His prophets, and their followers who have‏
‎knowledge affirm and expound His unity. It is not, therefore, correct for anyone to‏
‎say that no one has truly affirmed God’s unity and that those who have ventured so‏
‎have been guilty of heresy.‏ _

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 23

correct. Had we been required to believe in what these lines suggest,
the Prophet (peace be upon him) would have mentioned it, invited
people to believe in it, and explained it at length. But there is no
proof that he ever distinguished between a tawhid of the commoner,
a tawhid of the elect and a tawhid of the elect of the elect. There is
absolutely no allusion to it anywhere. In fact, there is nothing even
close to it.

Here is the Book of Allah, the hadith of the Prophet (peace be
on him), the traditions of the best people of all ages after the age of
the Prophet, and the works of the leading scholars. Is there any
mention of fana in any of them? Has any one of them talked about
these levels of tawhid? In fact, this concept developed later, when
some people became excessive with respect to some parts of the
religion, just as the Khawar1 did earlier in Islam or the Christians
did in their religion. Allah has condemned all excesses in religion
_ and has strictly prohibited them. Allah states, “People of the Book!
Commit not excesses in your religion; nor say aught of Allah except
the truth” [4:171]. And also, “Say: People of the Book! Exceed not
in your religion the bounds (of what is proper), trespassing beyond
truth, nor follow the vain desires of people who went wrong in
times gone by, who mislead many and strayed themselves from the
even way” [5:77].

The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Do not commit excess and
make things difficult for yourselves, for Allah will then make things
difficult for you. From among those who came before you were
people who went to excesses, and Allah made things difficult for
them. It is their remnants that you see in the cloisters and
monasteries. ‘They invented monasticism. We did not prescribe it
for them’ [57:27].”'* Abia. Dawid recorded this hadith.

(2) There is nothing like Him.

The Ahl as-Sunnah are agreed that nothing 15 like Allah, not in
His essence, attributes or acts. However, the word tashbih (‘to
liken’) as people have come to use it, is rather vague. It has its
proper sense, which is what the Qur’an denies (concerning Allah)
and which agrees with reason. It means that the attributes
characteristic of Allah cannot be ascribed to created beings, for
nothing 15 like Allah in any of His attributes, “Nothing is like Him”

'*Abi Dawiid, Al-Adab, 4904; Abia Ya‘la, Musnad, ed. by Hussayn Salam Asad
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamin li at-Turath, 1406/1986), hadith no. 3694. Al-Albani has
stated that this hadith is weak.

24 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahdwiyyah

[42:11]. It refutes those who set up a comparison or a resemblance
of anything with God. On the other hand, when it says, “And He is
All-Hearing and All-Seeing” [42:11], it censures those who would
strip Allah of His attributes and negate them. One who likens the
attributes of Allah with those of the created beings is an
anthropomorphist (mushdbbih), and should be censured and
condemned. Similarly, one who conceives the attributes of the
created beings on the pattern of Allah’s attributes is guilty of the
blasphemy which the Christians commit.

Some people use the word tashbih in a different sense and, on
that account, they refrain from affirming the attributes of Allah.
They say that Allah cannot be said to have power, knowledge or
life, because these are attributable to humans. It follows from this
view that we cannot call Allah Living, Knowing or Powerful,
because these names are also used to describe human beings. The
same applies to Allah’s speech, hearing, seeing and will. However,
these people agree with the Ahl as-Sunnah that Allah exists, that He
is Knowing, Powerful and Living, and that created beings can also
be said to be existing, knowing and powerful. They also agree that
this is not the kind of tashbih that is to be negated. This is also
upheld by the Qur’an and Sunnah, as well as by clear reasoning. No
reasonable person would dispute it.

Allah has called Himself by certain names and He also called
some of His servants by the same names. He has also qualified
Himself with certain attributes and, at the same time qualified
different beings that He created with the same attributes. But neither
one named is the same as the other named, nor is one attribute the
same as the other attribute. He has called Himself Living, Knowing,
Powerful, Compassionate, Merciful, Mighty, Wise, Hearing,
Seeing, King, Guardian (Al-Mu’min), Irresistible (Al-Jabbar),
Justly Proud (Al-Mustakbir), and He has called many of His
servants by these same names. For example, He has said, “He
brings out the living from the. dead” [6:95; 30:19]; “They gave him
the good news that he would have a knowledgeable son” [31:28];

“(The Prophet) is compassionate and merciful to the Believers”
[9:128]; “We made (man) a hearing and seeing being” [76:2]; “The
wife of the mighty officer said...” [12:51]; “There was a king after
him” [18:79]; “One who is a Believer (mi’min)” [32:18]; and,

“Allah seals the heart of every arrogant (mustakbir) and obstinate
transgressor (jabbary’ [40:35]. But we know that the One Living
Being is not like the other living being, the One Knowing Being is
not like the other knowing being, and the Mighty One is not like the
other mighty, and so on with respect to the other names.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 25

And Allah has also said, “They would not encompass aught of
His knowledge” [2:255]; “He has sent it from His own knowledge”’
[4:166]; “No woman conceives or gives birth without. His
knowledge” [35:11]; “Allah is the One Who gives sustenance, Lord
of unbreakable power” [51:58]; and, “Did they not see that Allah
created them and that He is more powerful than they” [41:15].

Jabir narrated that the Prophet (peace be on him) used to teach
the Companions (the supplication of) istikharah in the same way that
he would teach them a chapter of the Qur’an. He said, “When you
face a situation or problem, offer two rak‘at of prayer other than the
obligatory ones and say, ‘O Allah, I appeal to your knowledge to let |
me know what is good for me, and I appeal to your power to enable
me to do it, and I pray for one of Your great blessings. For You can
do anything but I cannot. You know everything and I do not. O
Allah, You are aware of all hidden things. If You know that this
thing is good for me, for my religion and my life in this world and
the next (or here and hereafter), then grant it to me, make it easy for
me and bless it. If you know that this deed is bad for me in my
religion and my life in this world and the next (or here and
hereafter), then turn it from me and provide for me good, wherever
it is.” After this, the Prophet (peace be upon him) said, the person
should state whatever he wants.’” This hadith was recorded by Al-
Bukhari.

An-Nasa’i and others recorded a hadith narrated by Ammar Ibn
Yasir that the Prophet (peace be on him) used to invoke Allah in
these words, “O Allah, I appeal to Your knowledge of things unseen
and to Your power over creation. Let me live as long as living is
good for me. Let me die when death is good for me. O Allah, help
me fear you in public and in secret. Help me tell the truth in anger
and in joy. Let me follow the middle course in prosperity as well as
in adversity. Grant me the blessing that has no end and the
happiness that lasts forever. Let me submit to Your decree without a
murmur, and let me have a good life after death. O Allah, grant me
the joy of seeing Your face and the love for meeting You, and save
me from the harm it might cause and the trouble it might lead to. O
Allah, 3 adorn us with faith and help us guide people to the night
path.”

(It is clear from the above Qur’anic verses and hadith) that Allah
and His Prophet (peace be on him) have ascribed various attributes

5)|-Bukhari, 1162, 6382, 7390: Aba Dawid, As-Salah, 1538; At-Tirmidhi, As-
Salah,. 480; An-Nasa7i, An-Nikah, 6:80-81; Ibn Majah, 1383; Ahmad, 3:344.
'©An-Nasa’i, As-Sahw, 3:54-55; Ahmad, 4:264. Its chain is sahih.

26 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

to Allah, such as knowledge, power and might. Allah, for example,
says, “He gave power to man after he was weak’ [30:54], and,
“ ‏عط...‎ possesses knowledge since We have given it to him” [12:68].
Everyone knows that one knowledge is not like the other
knowledge, and one power is not like the other power. There are
many more verses and ahddith of this nature that underscore the
truth for one who would reflect.

Whoever negates attributes like pleasure (rida), anger (ghadab),
love (hubb), and hate (baghd) which Allah has affirmed of Himself,
because in their view it means comparing Allah with His creatures
(tashbih) and ascribing to Him a body (tajsim), may be told that you
yourselves do affirm attributes like Allah’s will, speech, hearing and
seeing, and simply qualify them by saying, “They are not like the
attributes of the creatures. So why should yout not make the same
qualification with regard to these attributes and affirm them of Allah,
as He and His Prophet have done? There is no difference between
these two kinds of attributes.”

If he says, “I do not affirm any of the attributes of Allah,” say to
him, “You affirm that He has the Most Beautiful Names, such as
Living, Knowing and Powerful. But human beings are also called
by these names, although to avoid misunderstanding you add that
divine names are not like human names. The question is why don’t
you say the same thing about Allah’s attributes? Affirm them of
Allah and add that they are not like human attributes.”

If he says, “I do not affirm that He has the Most Beautiful
Names, but I say that they are simply allegorical or metaphorical,”
that is the view of the extremists among the esoterics (bdtiniyyah)
and the philosophers. Say to him, “You must believe that He is
there, that He is real, existing of Himself, and that there are also
bodies there existing in themselves; but Allah is not like them.
(Don’t you then contradict yourself?)”

If he says, “I do not affirm anything. In fact, I deny the
existence of the Necessary Being.” Then say to him, “It is well
known by sound reasoning that whatever exists either exists
necessarily by itself or does not exist by itself. It is either eternal and
without a beginning, or contingent, coming into existence after a
time when it was not there. It is either created and produced by a
creator or uncreated, needing no creator. It is either dependent on
something else or it is self-sufficient. Obviously, what is not
necessary by itself needs, in order to exist, something that is
necessary by itself. A contingent being needs an eternal being; a
created being needs a creator; a dependent being needs a being that is
self-sufficient. Since one of the contraries exists, it follows that
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 2/

there must be a Being there, existing necessarily by Itself, Eternal
and Beginningless, Creator, Self-Sufficient and Independent of all.
It also follows that all other beings must be just the opposite.

We certainly know by our senses and self-evident reasoning that
there are contingent things that have come into existence after they
were non-existent. We also know that a contingent being cannot
exist by itself, nor can it exist eternally without a beginning, nor can
it create other things by itself and be self-sufficient and independent.
This means that there must be, of necessity, two existences: one
necessary and the other possible; one eternal and the other
contingent; one self-sufficient and the other dependent; one Creator
and the other created; even though both exist and exist in
themselves.

We also know that one is not like the other in its essence,
because if they were alike in everything, in necessity, possibility or
impossibility, one would have to be necessary and eternal, existing
by itself, and the other would have to be possible and existing by
itself; one would have to be the Creator and the other would have to
be created; one would have to be self-sufficient and the other
dependent. Had they been alike, each would have been necessarily
eternal as well as non-eternal, existing by itself as well as not
existing by itself, creator as well as created, self-sufficient as well as
dependent. That would mean the co-existence of contraries, which is
ruled out. Thus reason upholds what the Shari‘ah says: the two
cannot be alike.

It is clear from the above arguments that the Creator and the
created are similar in some respects and differ in others. Hence, one
who denies what is common between them 15 a negator (of divine
attributes) and is surely mistaken. On the other hand, one who
makes them alike anthropomorphizes Allah and is equally mistaken.
And Allah knows best. That is because, even though they are called
by the same names, they are not identical: Allah has His own
existence, knowledge, power and all other attributes in which man
cannot participate. Similarly, man has his existence, knowledge and
power, and Allah is too exalted to participate in what 15 particular to
man. That which is common between them - existence, knowledge,
power, and so on - is nothing more than a general concept, simply a
mental concept that does not really exist out there in reality. What
exists out there 1s specific to each, without the one participating in
the other.

Many thinkers are confused on this point. Some think that, since
the Creator and created share in what these things connote, the
existence of God should be like the existence of men. Others, on the
contrary, think that the term existence (wujud) has no common
28 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

connotation, but this contradicts reason. The fact is that these terms
are general and may be divided into categories. As was said, for
example, existence may be divided into necessary or possible,
eternal or contingent. The term existence that is divided is common
between the two. This is in contrast to such common words as
mushtari, which means a buyer as well as the planet Jupiter. They
have no common divisible connotation; we can only say that
mushtarl sometimes designates one thing and sometimes the other.
The reader may seek a detailed discussion of this point in the
relevant works.

The root cause of the error is the common belief that what is
designated by these general terms is something universal and that it
exists in one particular individual or another; but this is not the case,
for what exists out there (as a rational concept) does not exist as an
absolute universal, but only as a determinate particular. When these
terms are used in reference to Allah, they connote something specific
to Him; and when they are used in reference to human beings, they
connote something specific to them. Hence, nothing shares with
Allah in His existence or life. In fact, nothing or no one shares in the
existence of anything or anyone else. If that is true, how can
anything partake in the existence of the Creator? Don’t you see that
when you say, “this” or “that”, you point to one and the same thing
but from two different angles? |

From this and similar arguments it should be ‘clear that the
anthropomorphists refer to tashbih and add to it what is not true.
They certainly do go astray, therefore. On the other hand, the
negators of Allah’s attributes begin with negating similarity in one
aspect and then extend it to other aspects which are not true. They
also go astray, then. It is also clear that the Qur’an tells the pure
truth, which is also. upheld by unclouded reason and which is free
from every error.

The negators (of Allah’s attributes) do well in putting Allah
beyond all likeness to His creatures, but they do wrong when they at
the same time negate ideas which are true of Allah. The
anthropomorphists, on the other hand, do well in their endeavor to
affirm Allah’s attributes, but they do wrong when they conceive of
them as on the pattern of human attributes. ‏ظ‎

One should realize that one cannot teach another the meaning of
a word unless that person knows the object it refers to, knows
something which is similar to it, or has some features in common
with it; without that he cannot understand the meaning of the word.
When you teach the meaning of a sentence, you begin by’ telling the
meaning of the individual words, and when you teach a child how to
talk, you say a word and point to the object it refers to, if it is
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 29

something physical. You say, for example, milk, bread, mother,
father, sky, earth, sun, moon, water, and so on, and point along
with that to the objects you name; otherwise you cannot teach the
meaning of any word or convey any idea. No human being can
dispense with auditory learning.'’ Adam, the father of mankind,
first learned things through hearing, when Allah “taught him all the
names,”'® spoke to him and revealed to him all that he could not
learn simply by reasoning.

Hence, a word comes to mean something because it refers to
what the speaker wants and intends in his heart to convey. Since the
intention 15 a matter in one’s heart, the word cannot convey the
meaning just by itself. One cannot learn an idea without a word, but
one can also not learn it unless one knows what is intended by the
speaker. When one knows that, and then hears the word a second
time, one understands the meaning conveyed by the word even if the
speaker does not point it out. If the object referred to, though, is
something experienced internally, such as hunger, satiation, thirst,
quenching of thirst, sorrow or joy, no one can understand it unless
he experiences himself what the word stands for. Only after he has
experienced it will he understand the word when he hears it. Then
we may sometimes refer in such cases to his own feeling of hunger
or thirst. When, for example, he is hungry, we can say, “You are
hungry.” He will then hear the words and understand what we are
referring to by pointing it out or through circumstantial evidence.
For example, he will understand when he sees his mother looking at
him when he is hungry and infers from seeing her eyes or any other
of her gestures that she is referring to his hunger, or when he hears
some people referring through those means to the hunger of any
other person.

If that is comprehended, then when someone wants to teach
anything, there are the following possibilities. Either his listener will
comprehend him with his senses, observation or mind, or he will
not comprehend him. In the first two cases, it is only necessary that
he know the language, knowing the meaning of every word
individually and in a sentence. If he hears, for example, the verse,
“Have We not made for him a pair of eyes, and a tongue and a pair
of lips” [90:9], or the verse, “It is Allah Who brought you forth
from the wombs of your mothers when you knew nothing, and (He)
gave you hearing and sight, intelligence and affections, that you may
give thanks (to Allah)’ [16:78], he will understand them in the light

'” or, in the case of the deaf, an adequate substitute (ed.)
'SSee Qur’dnic verse 2:31.

F4 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI

30 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

of his sense experience. But if the meaning that one is trying to pass
on to him is not one that he can comprehend through what he senses
or witnesses, the only way to make him understand it is to explain it
through analogy, simile and allusion based upon the similarity or
resemblance the idea may have to objects he knows. The more
perfect the simile, the better it will describe the object and the more
conducive for understanding it will be.

When the Messenger (peace be on him) explained to us matters
that were not known before him, and there was no word that
particularly described it, he would use a term whose connotation
was closest to the concept he wanted to convey and he would call it
. by that term. Thus, there was something common between the
concept and the term. This is true of words like salah (prayer),
zakah (poor-due), sawm (fasting), iman (faith) and kufr (disbelief).
Similarly, when he wanted to inform them about matters related to
faith in Allah and the Last Day, they were actually unfamiliar with
such concepts before that time and did not have any terms that
referred to those concepts exactly, he used the words of their
language that were most suitable and that had some common
connotation between the unknown things that he was trying to
explain and the things that they were familiar with. He also used to
make some gestures or signs that helped people understand exactly
what he wanted to say, as one does when teaching a child. Rabi‘ah
Ibn ‘Abdur-Rahman said, “Common people are taught by scholars
in the same way children are taught by their parents.”

But when the Messenger spoke about unseen things, 1t was quite
possible that people had been aware of similar things in their
observation or thought. For example, when he said that the people
of ‘Ad were destroyed by a strong wind, there was nothing strange
in this to them. For the people of ‘Ad were human beings like
themselves and the wind, even though it was extremely violent, was
like the winds they were aware of. Similarly, there was nothing
strange to them in the drowning of Pharaoh in the sea or the
narratives of the other people of the past. And this 15 why their
narratives have a lesson for us, as Allah has said, “There is a lesson
for intelligent people in their stories” [12:111].

The Messenger (peace be on him) sometimes told of things the
likes of which, in every respect, people had never seen; however,
the elements that they consisted of may have resembled elements that
they were aware of. For example, when he spoke about things of
the Unseen, concerning Allah or the Hereafter, they must have been
aware of certain ideas common between the elements of the things
the Prophet spoke of and the elements of things in this life that they
knew through their senses and reason. But if they had. not
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 37

previously observed that visible object, and he wanted them to
perceive it and observe it thoroughly so they could know the thing
common between it and the object unseen, he would show them that
object or point to it or describe it in words so as to give a picture of
it to his audience. They then understood that the way to know things
that are unseen is through things that are visible.

There are then three steps that one must realize. First, perception
of visible objects; second, comprehension of general ‘ideas; and,
third, awareness of words that signify those sensible and rational
ideas. These three steps are involved in every speech act. When we
want to talk about unseen things, we have to point out the ideas that
are common between those things and the objects that we observe,
as well as underline their resemblance. We have to state that they
resemble visible objects and point out those objects. If they are like
them, we do not have to mention how they differ from those
objects, as was the case with the stories of the people of the past.
But if they are not that similar, we have to point out the difference.
We can say that one is not exactly like the other, or something
similar to that. If we deny likeness, that itself will suffice to
underline the difference. However, the denial of likeness does not
mean negation of the common element which 15 connoted by the
word common to them. This is how we can understand the unseen
things. Were there nothing in common, no one could talk about any
of the unseen things.

(3) Nothing is impossible for Him.

This is due to His complete Power. Allah says, “Truly Allah can
do anything” [2:20]; “Allah has power over all things” [18:45];
“Allah is never frustrated by anything whatsoever in the heavens and
the earth, for He is All-Knowing and All-Powerful” [35:44]; and,
“His Throne extends over the heavens and the earth, and He feels no
fatigue in preserving them, and He 15 the Most High, the Supreme
(in glory)” [2:255]. In the last verse, the words are 13 ya‘uduhi,
which means nothing causes Him any trouble or fatigue and nothing
is beyond His means. This negation is because the opposite attribute
of perfection has been established for Allah. In the Qur’an and
Sunnah, whenever anything is negated of Allah it is because Allah is
qualified with the opposite attribute of perfection. For example,
Allah’s statement, “Your Lord does not treat anyone with injustice”
[18:49], is true because He 15 completely just. Similarly, when He
says, “Not the least little atom in the heavens and on earth is hidden
from Him”’ [34:3], this is true because of His perfect knowledge. Or
when he says, “No fatigue overtook Us” [50:38], this 1s the case
32 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

because of His complete power. And “No slumber can seize Him
nor sleep” [2:255] is true because of His complete, living, unlimited
energy and complete power to control and sustain the world. The
verse, “No vision can grasp Him” [6:103], similarly asserts His
sublime majesty and glory. If this were not true there would have
been no benefit in simply negating something. Pure negation 15 not a
complement. Note the lines of the poet:

The small tribe does not violate any pact
Nor does it wrong anyone even the slightest amount.

When the denial of injustice and wrongdoing in that passage 5
looked at in its complete context and his use of the words, “small
tribe’, it becomes clear that he is referring to their weakness and
inability (to harm others) and not their complete power. Another
said: |

Although my tribe has many,
They do no evil, not even minute.

When he denies their evil in a way that is blaming them, it becomes
clear that he is referring to their weaknesses and inabilities.

That is why the Qur’an states the positive attnbutes of Allah in
detail and refers to the negative attributes in brief or in general. The
blameworthy theologians, on the other hand, followed the opposite
method. They discussed the negative attributes at length and
mentioned the positive attributes only briefly. They said, for
example, “Allah is neither a body nor a figure, neither matter or
form, nor has He flesh, blood, or personality; He is neither a
substance nor an accident; He has no smell, no color and no taste.
He is neither hot nor cold, neither wet nor dry. He has no length,
breadth or depth; He neither assembles nor disintegrates; He neither
moves nor is at rest; He 15 indivisible, having no parts, organs. or
members; He has no dimension, night, left, front, behind, above or
below; No space surrounds Him and no time limits Him; He neither
goes near a thing nor away from it, nor does He enter anything; no
attributes are to be ascribed to Him that also pertain to created
objects and suggest their contingency; He cannot be said to have an
end, a side or movement; He is not a finite being; He neither begets
nor is He begotten; He 15 above all determination and beyond all
limitation,’ and so on until the end of the statement that Abt AI-
Hassan Al-Ash‘ari recorded in describing the creed of the
Mu‘tazilah.
020771121114707 011 the Creed of At- Tahawi 33

This passage contains things that are night and things that are

wrong, and that is clear to anyone who 15 familiar with the Book and
the Sunnah. The presentation of pure negatives only, without any
laudatory statements, is indecorous and improper. If you were to
say to aruler, “You are not a garbage collector, or a barber, or a
weaver,” he would certainly censure you even though there 5
nothing false in what you said. But you would praise him if you
made the negations general and said, for example, “You are not like
anyone under your charge; you are superior, more honorable and
more esteemed than they.” If you are general in a negative statement,
you are being more courteous and mannerly.
The way of the Ahl as-Sunnah wa al-Jama‘ah is to describe
Allah in words which Allah has chosen to describe Himself or that
His prophet used for Him. Those who negate the attributes of Allah
neglect the words that Allah and His Prophet have used concerning
His names and attributes and they do not ponder the meanings of
such terms. They think that the concepts and the terms which they
have invented present the faith more faithfully and should be
accepted. The Ahl as-Sunnah, on the other hand, believe that the
words of Allah and His Prophet present the true faith and must be
adhered to. They either ignore what those others say, or judge their
terms at length in light of the Qur’an and Sunnah. But they never
judge the Qur’an and Sunnah in the light of what they say.

In short, the creed of such people consists mostly of negatives,
“He is not this, He is not that...” They rarely affirm anything of
Allah, except that He is Knowing, Powerful and Living. Most of the
negatives that they state are, in fact, not even derived from the Book
and the Sunnah, nor are they the result of rational arguments which
people who affirm Allah’s attributes have developed. Allah has said,
“There is nothing like unto Him; and He is All-Hearing and All-
Seeing” [42:11]. That verse states an affirmation that contains a
negative. It is understood to mean that none other than He 15
qualified with the attributes of perfection. He is qualified with the
attributes which He has mentioned of Himself or that His Prophet
(peace be on him) has mentioned of Him. There 15 nothing similar to
Him with respect to His attributes, names or actions that He has
mentioned. He also has attributes that none of His creatures know,
as His truthful Messenger (peace be on him) said in the supplication
for troubled times, “O Allah, I beseech You by all Your names that
You have given Yourself, or revealed in Your Book, or taught any
of Your creatures, or kept in the Unseen with Yourself, make this

Glorious Qur’an the joy of my heart, the light of my breast, dispel
34 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

through it my grief and remove my anxiety and worry.’ We will
return later to a detailed discussion of their wrong view of Allah’s
attributes, if Allah so wills.

The statement of the author (may Allah have mercy on him),
“Nothing is impossible for Him,” is not of the type of negative that
is disapproved of, because Allah Himself has said, “Allah is never
frustrated by anything whatsoever in the heavens and the earth, for
He is All-Knowing and All-Powerful” [35:44]. Allah points out, at
the end of the verse, what demonstrates why His will can never be
frustrated, and that is because He has complete knowledge and
power. One is frustrated (or incapacitated) either because he lacks
the power or the knowledge to do something. As for Allah, even the
minute atoms are in His knowledge and the largest things are within
His power. It is evident to rational thought and man’s instincts that
He has complete and perfect knowledge and power. Therefore, lack
of ability has been denied because it is contrary to being powerful.
The one who is incapable is not able to be god. May Allah be greatly
exalted above that.

(4) There is no god other than He.

As stated earlier, this 15 the tawhid to which all prophets called
their peoples. To state tawhid in this manner, that is, 10 negate
(divinity of anyone else) and to affirm (it of only Allah), is to clearly
limit divinity to Him. Only affirmation by itself 15 open to different
interpretations. That is why, Allah knows best, when Allah stated,
“Your God is one God” He said after it, “There is no god besides
Him, the Beneficent, the Merciful’ [2:163]. Otherwise, one may get
the superficial thought that we have one god and maybe others have
other gods, but this possibility is removed by His statement, “There
is no god but He.”

The author of Al-Muntakhab objects to the grammarians’
hypothesis concerning the statement, “There is no god but Allah.”
They say that it means that there is no god in existence except Allah.
He says that this denies the existence of any god. But, he says, for
pure tawhid, it is much stronger to deny the essence of another
being and not its existence. Therefore, the swords must be taken
literally and their hypothesis is to be rejected.2°

'?Ahmad, 1:391, 452; Ibn Hibban, 2372; Al-Hakim, 1:509. Its chain is sahih.

*” «Abdul-‘Aziz Ibn Baz has commented on this passage, stating that to deny the
existence of other gods — beings or objects that people worship — is incorrect, as the
Qur’an affirms it in many places. Hence, the statement, “There 1s no god but Allah”

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 35

Abu ‘Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Abu Al-Fadhl Al-Mursi

responded to this objection in Ray az-Zumdn by saying that this
opinion is from one who must not know Arabic. The word ilah is in
the place of the subject, according to Sibawayh, or it is the noun for
the word /a,”' according to others. In either case, there must be a
predicate for the subject. Therefore, what he said is incorrect.

As for his statement that if the hypothesis or assumption is not
made, it would then mean a denial of the essence, this is not a sound
statement. Denying the essence is the same thing as denying the
existence. One cannot imagine an essence without an existence. So
there is no difference between “no essence” and “no existence”. This
is the opinion of the Ahl as-Sunnah. On the other hand, the
Mu‘tazilah affirm an essence without an existence. The words,
“except Allah” are in the nominative and they are not the predicate of
/ nor of the nominative. And he gives evidence for that.

The purpose here is not to enter into a grammatical discussion. It
is meant to refute the misconception of the grammarians and to show
that the source for their mistake 15 the Mu‘tazilah. Their statement,
“in existence’’, 15 not constraining because non-existence is nothing.
Allah says, “Even as I created you before, when you were nothing”
[19:9]. Furthermore, one cannot say that the statement, “There is no
other god,” is the same as “There is no god except Allah,” as the
predicate in the former case is one. So I[ have now stated that
misconception and its reply.

(5) He is Eternal, without a beginning, Everlasting,
without an end.

Allah has said, “He is the First and the Last” [57:3]. And the
Prophet (peace be on him) stated, ““O Allah, You are the First, there
15 nothing before You. You are the Last, there 15 nothing after
You.”

As for the author’s words, “He is Eternal without a beginning,
Everlasting without an end,” they explain the meaning of the divine
names, the First and the Last.

The knowledge affirming these two attributes is ingrained in
human nature, for existing beings must have a beginning in One

must mean “There is no true god deserving of worship except of Allah.”

2! ‏ع[‎ was the basic subject of the sentence before the word /d was introduced.

Part of a hadith recorded by Muslim, Adh-Dhikr, 2713. Also see Abi Dawid, A/-
Adab, 5051; At-Tirmidhi, Ad-Da ‘wat, 3397; Ibn Mayjah, Ad-Du‘a’, 3873; Ahmad,
2:381, 404.

36 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Who necessarily exists by Himself in order to avoid an infinite
regress. We witness that animals, plants and minerals on the earth,
and clouds, rain, wind and other things in the atmosphere come into
existence at one time or another. We also know that these things are
not impossible, since the impossible cannot exist; nor do they exist
necessarily by themselves, because a necessary being existing by
itself can never be non-existent. These things were non-existent and
then they came to exist. Hence, they are neither necessary or
impossible. And what may both exist and not exist cannot exist by
itself. As Allah has said, “Were they created of nothing, or were
they themselves the creators?” [52:35]. That 15, were they brought
into existence by nothing, or did they bring themselves into
existence. We know that a contingent being does not bring itself into
existence. The possible thing that does not own its existence or non-
existence cannot come to exist by itself. It can come into existence
only when the cause of its existence is there. Everything that may
exist rather than not exist, or may not exist rather than exist, cannot
exist or not exist by itself.

If you consider the rational arguments which the scholastic
theologians (mutakallimin) and philosophers have advanced, those
that are sound simply reiterate the rational arguments which the
Qur’an has stated in very concise and clear words. In fact, the
Qur’an has better and more solid arguments than theirs. Allah has
nightly said, “And they bring you no similitude but We reveal to you
the Truth and the best explanation (thereof)” [25:33].

We do not say that abstruse premises and arguments are useless.
Abstruseness and clarity are relative terms. Something may be
abstruse to one but clear to another. In fact, the same person may
find something difficult to understand at one time and find the same
thing easy to understand at another time. But some people readily
grant abstruse premises and dispute clear ones. Again, some feel
more pleasure in going through a long process and arguments and
then discovering the truth than in getting to it in no time. The belief
that the world has been created and the Creator exists by Himself is
a part of the natural endowment and instincts of man, even though
some people may doubt it and take recourse to rational arguments.

Theologians have mentioned Al-Qadim as a name of Allah.
However, it is not one of the beautiful names. For gadim in the
Arabic language in which the Qur’an was revealed means ‘one
which is anterior to something else’. That which is old is called
gadim and what is new 15 called hadith. Qadim has always been
used for something that precedes something else, but never in the

sense of one preceded by nothing. The Qur’an states, “Until it (the
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 37

moon) returns like the old lower part of a date tree stalk (a/- ‘urjiin al-
gadim)” [36:39]. Al-‘urjiin al-gadim 15 what remains until another
‘urjun comes into being. When the new ‘urjiin appears, the first 5
called gadim. Another verse states, “When they could not get it, they
said, ‘This is an old (gadim) falsehood “ [46:11]. That 15, it is past
in time. A third verse reads, “Do you see whom you have been
worshiping, you and your fathers before you (al-agdamun)y’ [{26:75-
76]. Al-agdam is the comparative form of gadim and means earlier.
For example, one says, “The earlier opinion (al-gawl al-qadim) or
the later opinion (al-gaw/ al-jadid) of Imam Ash-Shafi‘l.” Allah also
says, “He will go before (yagdimu) his people on the Day of
Judgment and lead them into the Fire” [11:98]. Q-d-m is used as
both a transitive and an intransitive verb. It is said, “I took both the
old and the new (akhadhtu ma qaduma wa ma hadutha).” It is also
said, “This came before that (hadha gadama hadhd’’ It is on this
basis that the foot is called gadam, since it precedes the other parts
of the body.

As a name of Allah, Al-Qadim is well-known among most of the
theologians. Many of the Elders and later scholars, including Ibn
Hazm, objected to it. To be sure, gadim implies precedence, and one
who precedes everything deserves to be called al-gadim. But Allah’s
names must mean something praiseworthy and gadim does not
necessarily mean one who precedes everything, so it cannot be
included among His beautiful names. This is why in the revelation
one finds the word Al-Awwal (“the First’’) as it is better than Al-
Qadim as it suggests that whatever comes after Allah turns to Him
(a ‘il ilayhi), and is under His control. This sense is not conveyed by
al-gadim. Allah has the most beautiful names and not simply names
that are beautiful.

(6) He does not perish (yafna) or pass away (yabid).

This 15 to affirm that Allah 15 everlasting. He has said, “All that
is on earth will perish, but the countenance of your Lord will abide,
full of Majesty, Bounty and Honor” [55:27]. Fana (perish) and bayd
(pass away) are almost synonymous. The Author has put them
together for emphasis. And this statement also affirms and
emphasizes the statement, “Everlasting without an end” (discussed
earlier).
38 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

(7) Nothing comes into being except what He wills.

This is a refutation of the Mut‘tazilah and Qadariyyah. They
believe that Allah wills every person to have faith, but the infidels
will not have faith. This belief 15 wrong since it clearly goes against
the Qur’an, Sunnah and sound reason. It revolves around the well-
known question of gadr (predestination) that we will discuss in
detail later, if Allah wills.

(The group referred to) are called the Qadariyyah because they
deny gadr (predestination). Similarly, the Jabariyyah (‘the
determinists) are also called Qadariyyah since they build their
doctrine on the concept of gadr. However, the term is usually used
for the former group.

The Ahl as-Sunnah believe that Allah does will evil and sin, but
only in the sense that He decrees it, not that He approves of it or
enjoins it. Indeed, He hates, abhors and prohibits it. This is the
view of all of the Elders. They believed that what Allah wills
happens and what He does not will does not happen. For this
reason, all of the jurists are agreed that if a man takes an oath by
saying, “By Allah I will do such-and-such if Allah wills,” he does
not then break his oath if he does not perform that deed, regardless
of whether that action was an obligatory or recommended action.
But if he said, “If Allah loves it,” then he would be breaking his
oath by not performing if it were an obligatory or recommended act.

The scholars of the Ahl as-Sunnah say that the will (irddah) of
Allah, as it has been used in the Qur’an, is of two types. One is
deterministic, existential and creative (gadriyyah, kawniyyah,
khalgiyyah) and the other is religious, prescriptive and legislative
(diniyyah, amriyyah, shar ‘iyyah). Legislative will implies approval
and love by Allah (for the act). Existential will, on the other hand,
(does not imply that) as it applies to every event that occurs.

Examples of existential will are, “Him whom Allah wills to
guide, He opens his heart to Islam, and those whom He wills to
leave astray He makes their heart constricted and closed as if they
had to climb up to the skies” [6:125]; “Of no profit will be my (i.e.
Noah’s) counsel to you, much as | desire to give you good counsel,
if Allah wills to let you stray” [11:34]; “But Allah does what He
wills” [2:253].

Examples of the religious, prescriptive or legislative will are,
“Allah wishes (yuridu) ever facility for you; He does not want
(yuridu) to put you to difficulties’[2:185]; “Allah wishes (yuridu) to
make clear to you and to show you the ways of those who went
before; and He wishes to turn to you (in mercy). And Allah is All-
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 39

Knowing and All-Wise” [4:26]; “Allah wishes to turn to you (in
mercy), but the wish of those who follow their lust is that you
should turn away from Him. Allah wishes to lighten your (burden);
for man has been created weak” [4:27-28]; “Allah does not want to
put you in difficulty, but (He wants) to purify you and to complete
His favor for you” [5:7); “And Allah only wants to remove all
abomination from you, members of the family (of the Prophet), and
to make you pure and spotless” [33:33].

It is this will which people mean when they say about someone
who has performed an evil deed, “He has done something that Allah
did not desire,” that 1s, Allah does not love, approve of or
command. As for the existential will, it 15 what Muslims mean when
they say, “What Allah wills happens and what He does not will does
not happen.”

The difference between the two wills is clear. One is concerned
with something that Allah does Himself; the other is concerned with
something that He wants someone else to do. The first is the
Willer’s Own act, the second is that of another. This is clear to
everyone. Command is concerned with the second, not the first.
When Allah commands man to do something, He sometimes likes to
help him carry it out, but sometimes He does not, even though He
wants him to do it.

If we understand this point properly, the controversy over
whether or not Allah’s command (amr) implies that His will (irddah)
fades. Allah has sent down a Shari‘ah through His prophets, which
secures happiness and saves mankind from misery. But it is only a
part of mankind whose acts He wills to create; and when He wills,
He creates their acts and makes them their doers. There are others
whose acts He does not will to create. It is clear that His creation of
their acts, or the acts of other creatures, is something different from
His enjoining upon them the laws that will secure their well-being
and save them from misery.

When, for example, He commands Pharaoh, Abu Lahab, or
anyone else to believe in Him, He explains to them what course will
be beneficial and what course will be harmful to them. But this does
not mean that He will also help them carry out His commands. On
the contrary, when He creates any act of theirs or helps them to
effect it, it may involve something harmful to them. To be sure, all
that He creates has a purpose. But it 15 not necessary that what He
has commanded man to do and what is good for them when they
carry it out should also be good for Allah when He Himself does it
or makes them do it. The two aspects, the creative and the
prescriptive, are not one.
40 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

It happens that sometimes we ask a person to do or not to do
something and our intention is nothing but to do him good, which
we even explain to him; nevertheless we do not want to help him do
it. It is not necessary that if it is good for me to advise someone to
do something for his own good it would also be good for me to help
him do it. It may even be in my best interest to oppose the act. The
two aspects are quite different: to advise someone sincerely to do
something is one thing, and to do it oneself is another. Therefore, if
it is possible to distinguish between these two aspects in the human
context, it is much more possible and correct to make that distinction
in the divine context.

The Qadariyyah use the example of one person commanding
another to do something. According to them, the commander must
do the things that will lead the commanded to do the act. For
example, he should greet him with a smiling face, offer him a chair
and so on. But they fail to realize that there are two possibilities
here. In one case, the benefit of the work may go to the one who
commanded, such as when a king commands his army to wage a
war which consolidates his power, when a master asks his servant
to look after his property, or when one partner asks the other partner
to do what benefits both, and so on. In the second case, the
commander realizes that in helping the commanded there is some
benefit for himself also. An example of this nature is the Islamic
concept of “commanding good” or helping one’s brother in
righteous and pious deeds. In that case, the person knows that Allah
will reward him for helping another obey Allah, as Allah helps a
Muslim as long as that Muslim is helping his brother.

But it is also possible for the commander to command someone
to do something that is beneficial for the commanded and which
does not benefit the commander upon its action, such 15 the case
with the counsel of an advisor. It is also possible that if he helps the
commanded, it will not be to his benefit. It may even be possible
that the commanded action may be harmful for the commander, as
was the case in the story found in the Qur’4n where a man came
from the far end of a city to tell Moses, “The chiefs are taking
counsel together about you to slay you. So go away. I do give you
only sincere advice” [28:20]. It was in his interest to command
Moses to leave, though it was not in his interest to help him do so,
for if he had helped Moses escape, his people would have punished
him. In fact, one could produce many examples of this nature.

If Allah commands what is beneficial for men, it does not follow
necessarily that He should also help them do it. The Qadariyyah
actually believe that Allah cannot help anyone perform any act.
However, if one believes that the acts of Allah have wisdom to
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 41

them, which is the case even if we are not aware of the wisdom, it
does not follow that it should also be wise for Allah to help people
do what He commands them to do. On the contrary, His wisdom
may determine that it may be best not to help the one He
commanded. If we can imagine that one man may ask another man
to do something just because he thinks it would be good for the
latter, although 1t would not be good for the former to help him, then
that is even more possible and reasonable in the case of Allah.

In short, if it is correct that a wise man can ask someone to do
something but not help him in doing that deed, it 15 all the more
proper for Allah, according to His wisdom, to do the same. If He
commands someone to do something and helps him carry it out, He
will be both creating it and commanding it. It will be the object of
His creative will as well as His prescriptive will. But 11 He does not
help in the performance of the act, it will only be the object of His
command, not of creation. It will be wise not to create it; 1] may even
be wiser to create its opposite.

Obviously, the creation of one of the contraries rules out the
creation of the other. For example, if He creates an illness that leads
a person to submit to Him, repent for his sins and seek His
forgiveness, soften his heart, lower his vanity, do away with his
arrogance and rebellion, that would be in contradiction to the
creation of health which would not lead to all the good consequences
just mentioned. Similarly, the injustice that an oppressor creates may
often lead to similar results for the oppressed as those mentioned
above for the sick. Such results are not produced by justice when it
is created, even though it is (apparently) in man’s best interest to
have justice.

It is difficult or impossible for man to understand the wisdom
that lies behind Allah’s creation or His command. The Qadariyyah
attempted to understand it in an incorrect manner by conceiving
Allah on human patterns. This resulted in denying that His actions
may have some purpose that can be attributed to Him.

(8) No imagination (wahm) can conceive of Him, and no
understanding (fahm) can fathom Him.

Allah has said, “They comprehend Him not in knowledge”
[20:110]. In As-Sihah’’ it is stated that the meaning of tawahhum
means ‘to imagine or surmise’, while fahm means ‘to know, to

**The author of the Sikah is Abi Nasr Isma‘il Ibn Hammad At-Turki Al-Jawhari (d.
393/1003}).

42 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

understand’. What is meant here by the author, At-Tahawi, 15 that
neither can imagination conceive of Him nor can understanding
fathom Him. Some say that wahm means to envisage a thing, such
as thinking that it is like such-and-such. Fahm (understanding), on
the other hand, is what 15 comprehended through reason. No one
knows what Allah is like, except Allah Himself. We know Him
through His attributes. (We know) that He is Unique, Absolute, He
begets not, nor was He begotten, and there 15 none like unto Him.
(Similarly we know that He is) “Allah: there is no god but He. He 5
the Living, the Self-Subsisting and All-Sustaining. No slumber nor
sleep overtakes Him. His are all the things in the heavens and on
earth” [2:255]. And, “Allah is He, besides whom there 15 no other
god, the Sovereign, the Holy One, the Source of Peace, the
Guardian of the Path, the Preserver of Safety, Exalted in Might, the
Irresistible, the Supreme. Glory be to Allah. High 15 He above the
partners they attribute to Him. He is Allah, the Creator, the One
Who Evolves All Things, the Giver of Forms. To Him belong the
most beautiful names. Whatever is in the heavens and on earth
declares His praise and glory, and He is Exalted in Might and Wise”
[59:23-24].

(9) He does not resemble mankind.

This 15 a refutation of the view that conceives of the Creator in a
fashion analogous to the created. Allah has Himself said, “There is
nothing like unto Him; and He is All-Hearing and All-Seeing”
[42:11]. This verse does not mean to deny Allah’s attributes, as the
heretics argue. Abii Hanifah stated in Al-Figh al-Akbar, “Allah is
not like any of His creatures, nor is any creature like Him... His
attributes are different from their attributes. He knows but not as we
know; He acts but not as we act; and He sees but not as we ‏عع‎
‎Nu‘aym Ibn Hammad stated, “Whoever likens Allah to any of His
created beings is an infidel. Whoever negates the attributes which
Allah has affirmed of Himself is also an infidel. There is no
anthropomorphism (tashbih) in the attributes which Allah has
affirmed of Himself or which His Messenger has affirmed of Him.”
Ishaq Ibn Rahawayh’? stated, “Whoever describes Allah and likens
His attributes with the attributes of any one of His creatures has
denied (or disbelieved in) Allah, the Most High.”

**See Al-Figh al-Akbar with commentary by Mullah ‘Ali Al-Qari (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub
al-‘IImiyyah, 1404/1984), ‏.م‎ 24.

- *°For the words quoted here, see Al-Lalka’i, Sharh as-Sunnah, entry 937.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 43

He also said, “The mark of Jahm and his followers is their false
claim of anthropomorphism against the Ahl as-Sunnah. In fact, they
are the ones who deny the divine attributes.” Many of the leaders of
the Elders have stated that the mark of the Jahmiyyah is their calling
the Ahl as-Sunnah anthropomorphists. Actually, there has not been
anyone who negated any of the attributes of Allah except that he
called those who affirmed such attributes anthropomorphists. The
Qaramatah and philosophers who completely deny Allah’s
attributes, and say that we cannot call Him Knowing or Powerful,
dub anyone who calls Allah by these names an anthropomorphist. In
their opinion, participation in a name is also participation in its
connotation. And there are also the extreme Jahmis. They affirm
Allah’s names but they say they are simply metaphors. According to
them, if anyone says that Allah is really Knowing or Powerful, he is
an anthropomorphist.

Whoever denies Allah’s attributes, and claims that He has no
knowledge, power, speech or live, will call anyone who affirms
these aspects of Allah anthropomorphists (mushdabbihiin) or
corporealists (mujassimin). That is, the books of the Jahmiyyah,
Mu‘ tazilah and Rafidah, and all others who negate Allah’s attributes
always reiterate the charge that those who affirm said attributes are
anthropomorphists and corporealists. It is written in their books that
among the corporealists are “the people called the Malikis who
follow Malik Ibn ‘Anas and the people called the Shafi‘is who
follow Muhammad Ibn Idris.” Even their commentators on the
Qur’an, such as ‘Abdul-Jabbar and Az-Zamakhshari, have labeled
all those who affirm Allah’s attributes or believe in seeing Him as
anthropomorphists and corporealists. These terms became very
common in later works of such groups.

However, when the scholars of the Ahl as-Sunnah use such
terms they do not imply that negating tashbih means negating the
attributes of Allah. They do not use that term for the people who
affirm Allah’s attributes. Rather, what they say is that there can be
no comparison between Allah’s names, attributes and actions and
those of His creatures. In the quote above from Abt Hanifah, he
stated that His knowledge is not like our knowledge, His power is
not like our power, and His sight is not like our sight. That is the
meaning of the verse, “Nothing is like unto Him; and He is All-
Hearing and All-Seeing” [42:11]. What is negated is likeness and
what is affirmed is the attribute.

The author, At-Tahawi, himself later mentions the point that
negation of likeness does not necessarily mean the negation of
divine attributes.
44 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahadwiyyah

To clarify the matter further, in theology, it is not allowable to
use analogical arguments where the major and the minor terms are
equivalent, or syllogistic arguments where all the terms are of the
same category. Since nothing is like Allah, He cannot be conceived
as the analogy of anything; nor can He be brought with another
under one category and made the subject of a syllogism. This is the
reason the theologians and philosophers who employ these
arguments do not arrive at any certain truth: their propositions
contradict each other. And when they themselves see that their
arguments are equally inconclusive, they end in stupefaction and
confusion.

The argument that should be employed here is the argument of
priority (giyas al-awla), whether its form is syllogistic or analogical.
Allah states, “To Allah applies the highest similitude” [16:60]. The
argument of priority means that 11 a contingent or possible being is
qualified with an excellence which is flawless and positive,
unaffected by any non-being, then the Eternal and Necessary Being
should be all the more qualified with it. And if a species of that
excellence is found in the created beings, it must be derived from
God, its Creator, Lord and Controller, Who deserves its attribute
more than anyone else. On the other hand, when an imperfection or
a defect, which 15 the want of excellence, is negated of any created
being, possible or contingent, it must be negated of Allah in the first
place.’

It is very strange that the extreme negators of divine attributes
use the above verse [42:11] to deny Allah’s attributes and names.
They state that the Necessary Being cannot have this or that
attribute. They also state that the foundation of philosophy 15 to
resemble Allah as much as possible. For them, that 15 the
consummation of human perfection. Some scholars who use the
same phrase sympathize with them and they recount that the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “Cultivate in yourselves the virtues of
Allah.””’ But if they deny the attributes, what attributes are people
supposed to cultivate? Since Allah is not like any created being,
nothing created is like Allah. However, this fact is denied by the
Christians, incarnationists and monists, may the curse of Allah be
upon them.

**For a discussion of this point, see Ibn Al-Qayyim, As-Sawd’ig al-Mursalah ‘ald al-
Jahmiyyah wa al-Mu‘attilah, abridged by Muhammad Ibn Al-Musali (Beirut: Dar an-
Nadwa, 1405/1984), vol. 1, pp. 215-217.

*’This hadith is not found in any collection of hadith and is not to be ascribed to the
Prophet (peace be on him].

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi | 45

Since the denial of Allah’s likeness to created beings implies the
denial of likeness of created beings to Allah, the author has
contented himself with saying that Allah does not resemble human
beings (al-andm). Andm literally means mankind. Some say that it
includes all of creation, while others say it refers to all living
creatures. Some say it specifically refers to human beings and jinns.
But the apparent meaning of the verse, “He has made the earth for
al-anam’” [55:10] is stronger support for the first opinion than the
other opinions. And Allah knows best.

(10) He is Living and will never die. He is All-
Sustaining and never sleeps.

Allah has said, “Allah: there 15 no god but He, the Living, the
All-Sustaining. Slumber does not overtake Him, nor does sleep”
[2:255]. To negate slumber and sleep is to affirm perfect life and all-
sustaining power. Allah also says, “Alif Lam Mim. Allah: there 5
no god besides Him, the Living and the All-Sustaining” [3:1-3];
“And faces humble themselves before the Living, the All-
Sustaining” [20:111]; “Put your trust in Him Who lives and dies
not, and celebrate His praise” [25:58]; and, “He is the Living One,
there is no god but He” [40:65]. And the Prophet (peace be on him)
said, “Allah does not sleep, and it does not behoove Him to
sleep.””®

Having negated resemblance (tashbih), the author points out
what distinguishes Allah from His creatures. The first distinction is
that Allah is Living and will never die. The quality of everlasting life
is something exclusive to Him and does not pertain to His creatures;
they all will die. A second distinction is that He sustains everything
and never sleeps or tires. This characteristic distinguishes Him from
His creatures, as His creatures do sleep and get tired. The words of
the author imply that the negation of resemblance does not amount to
the negation of His attributes. On the contrary, Allah is qualified
with all the attributes of perfection, as He is the most perfect Being.

The everlasting life is not like the transitory life. That is why the
life of this world 15 pleasure, play and amusement. “But the home in
the Hereafter will be the life indeed” [29:64]. The worldly life is like
a sleep and the life of the Hereafter is like awakening. But one
cannot say that the life of the Hereafter is the perfect life, for it is the
life of a created being. Rather we say that the Living One is He

**This is part of a hadith recorded by Muslim, Al-Imdn, 179, 293. Also see Ibn
Majah, Al-Mugaddimah, 195, 196; Ibn Hibban, 266; Ahmad, 4:395, 401 and 405.

46 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Whose life is inseparable from His essence; He has it by Himself.
And it is He Who will grant eternal life to created beings. That 1s,
life is eternal because Allah makes it eternal, not because eternity is a
quality that is necessary to it. This differs from the life of the Lord,
as do all of His attributes (differ from the attributes of the created),
which 15 essential to Him. Hence His attributes are as they behoove
Him, and the attributes of the creatures are as they behoove them.

These two names of Allah, Al-Hayy and Al-Qayytim, are
mentioned together three times in the Qur’an, as was quoted above.
They are among the greatest names of Allah. Some even say that
they are (together) the gréatest and most majestic name of Allah.
(They are so considered) because they suggest the loftiest and most
perfect excellence of Allah. Al-Qayyim signifies eternity and
everlastingness, which Al-Qadim (discussed earlier) does not. It
also signifies that He exists by Himself. That is what is meant by the
term “the Necessary Being”. Al-Qayyiim is more intensive than Al-
Qayyam because the use of the letter wdw 15 stronger, or more
forceful, than the letter alif’ Furthermore, Al-Qayytim signifies that
He sustains Himself, as the scholars of 12/577 and language agree.
That is actually known by necessity.

Does it also imply that He sustains other things and takes care of
them? On this point there are two opinions. The strongest opinion is
that it also implies that. It also implies that He always sustains the
creation and His sustaining is perfect, since it is in the intensive
form. He is there eternally, never fails to exist, never loses sight of
things for a moment, never suffers loss or want, nor does He die or
perish. He is the Eternal, the Everlasting, Who will always be and
will always have the most perfect attributes.

Al-Qayyim is joined with Al-Hayy. This also necessitates that
Allah is qualified with all the perfect attributes. It also implies that
He has those attributes from eternity and will have them forever
without their undergoing any diminution or reduction. That is why
the verse, “Allah: there is no god but He, the Living (Al-Hayy), the
Necessary and All-Sustaining Being (Al-Qayyum)” [2:255], 15 the
greatest verse in the Qur’an, as is mentioned in the Sahih from the
Prophet (peace be on him).””

All of the beautiful names of Allah revolve around these two
names, and their meanings revert to these two. Life encompasses
and necessitates all of the perfect attributes of Allah. This is true

*’Muslim, Salat al-Musdfirin wa Qasriha, 810; Abu Dawid, As-Salah, 1460; Ahmad,
5:142.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 47

because the want of an attribute is due to the weakness of a life. But
Allah’s life is the most complete and perfect life. Hence, it is
qualified with the best attributes free from any defects. Al-Qayyiim,
on the other hand, implies Allah’s self-sufficiency, freedom from all
wants, and His perfect power. He sustains Himself and sustains all
others. Everything depends on Him and He depends on none.
Hence, these two names imply all the perfect names of Allah.

(11) He creates without being in need to do so, and

provides for His creation without any trouble (bila
mu’unah).

Allah says in the Qur’an, “I have only created jinns and mankind
that they may serve and worship Me. No sustenance do I require
from them, nor do I require that they should feed Me. For it is Allah
Who gives all sustenance, Lord of Power and Unbreakable Might”
[51:56-58]. He also says, “Mankind, it is you that have need of
Allah. But Allah is free from all wants, worthy of praise” [35:15].
Another verse reads, “Allah is free from all wants, and it 1s you that
are needy” [47:38]. Finally, Allah also says, “Say (Muhammad):
Will I take for my protector any other than Allah, the Maker of the
heavens and the earth? And He it is Who feeds but is not fed”
[6:14].

Abii Dharr reported that the Prophet (peace be on him) said (in a
narration from His Lord), “My servants! If all of you, the first and
last, men and jinns, were as pious as the most pious soul among
you, that would add nothing to My Kingdom. My servants! If all of
you, first and last, men and jinns, were as wicked as the most

wicked among you, that would not reduce My Kingdom in the least.

My servants! If all of you, first and last, men and jinns, were to
gather in one place and ask of Me, and I were to grant everyone his
request, that would not decrease what I have any more than a needle
decreases the water when it is dipped into the sea...” [recorded by
Muslim].°°

The author’s statement, 21/02 mu’unah means without any burden
or difficulty.

Muslim, 2577; At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Qiyamah, 2497; Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd, 4257;
Ahmad 5:154, 160, 177.

48 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

(12) He causes death without fear, and He resurrects
(the dead) with no effort.

Contrary to the belief of the philosophers and their followers,
death is an existential attribute. Allah says, “He Who created death
and life so that He might try which of you is best in deed” [67:2]. It
is plain that what is nothing cannot be said to have been created. A
hadith states, “Death will be brought on the Day of Judgment in the
form of a beautiful ram. And it will be slaughtered between Paradise
and Hell.’”' If death were an accident (aradh), Allah could make it a
substance or physical body. There are other instances, too, of such
metamorphosis or substantiation. For example, a hadith says that
“[glood deeds will come to their doer in the form of a handsome
young man, and bad deeds will appear in the ugliest form.”
Another hadith states about (unmindful reading of) the Qur’an, that
it will come in the form of a youth, emaciated and pale.*’ And about
human deeds, it is said that they “will be weighed in the balance.’”**
It is plain that things that are weighed are tangible objects, not
accidents. In yet another hadith it states that “the two sarahs, Al-
Bagarah and Ali-‘Imran, will, on the Day of Judgment, form a
shade over their reader, as if they were two clouds or two flocks of
birds spreading their wings in the air.”’? And also in the Sahih, it
states, “The deeds of human beings go up into Heaven.’”®

As for the discussion of resurrection, it will be taken up later.

>! Al-Bukhari, 4370; Muslim, Al-Jannah wa Sifat Na‘imihd, 2849; At-Tirmidhi, At-
Tafsir, 3155; Ad-Darimi, Ar-Rigdg, 2814; Ahmad, 2:377, 423, 513.

*°Part of a hadith in Ahmad, 4:287, 295, 296; Al-Hakim, 1:37, 40. Its chain is hasan.
Part of a hadith in Ahmad, 5:348, 352; Ibn Majah, A/-Adab, 3781; Al-Hakim,
1:256. According to Al-Arnawit, its chain is hasan.

“Part of a hadith in Ahmad, 2:213; At-Tirmidhi, A/-/mdn, 2641; Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd,
4300; Al-Hakim, A/-/mdn, 1:6; Ibn Hibban, Az-Zuhd, 2523. It is sahih.

> Ahmad, 5:348, 352; Ad-Darimi, 2:450, 451; Muslim, Salat al-Musafirin, 804.

°° Al-Bukhanl, Sifat as-Salat, 799; Abt} Dawid, As-Salah, 770; At-Tirmidhi, As-
Salah, 404; An-Nasa’1, Al-Iftitah, 2:196; Ahmad, 4:355, 356.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 49

(13) He has always existed with His attributes, even
before the creation of the world, which did not add
anything to His attributes that were not already present.
Just as He is Eternal along with His attributes, so He is
Everlasting along with them.

Allah is qualified from eternity with attributes of perfection, both
attributes of essence and action. It is not permissible to believe that
Allah acquired an attribute after He did not have it, because His
attributes are attributes of perfection, hence their absence would
imply imperfection. It is not conceivable that He was first imperfect
and then He became perfect. However, this is not cause to deny the
active or voluntary attributes of Allah, such as creating and forming,
causing life and death, expanding, contracting and _ folding,
ascending the Throne, coming and descending, being happy or
angry, and other similar attributes that He Himself or His Prophet
(peace be on him) have mentioned of Him, regardless of whether we
comprehend their meanings or not.

We do not delve into the meaning of these attributes, nor do we
interpret them according to our whims. But we are aware of their
basic meanings. As Imam Malik was asked about the verse, “He
then settled (istiwad) Himself on the Throne” [7:54], “How did He
settle Himself on the Throne?” He answered, “Jstiwd is known to
us, but its modality is not known.” We believe that the divine
attributes are eternal even though what they refer to may happen at
one time and not at another. For example, in the hadith on
intercession, the Prophet (peace be on him) stated, “Allah today
became so angry as He has never been before and will never be
again.””’ The possibility of such acts, in that manner, cannot be
ruled out. However, they are not to be generalized. We cannot say
that He came to be such-and-such after He was not such. One does
not say of a person, if he speaks today and was also speaking
yesterday, “He has now started speaking.” It also cannot be said that
perhaps before he could not speak because he was a baby or mute,
and then, when he spoke, one says, “Now he has spoken.” The one
who is silent not due to any obstacle to speech is still called a
speaker because he has the ability to speak, that is, he may speak if
and when he wishes. When he actually speaks, he is called a
speaker-in-action. Similarly, a scribe, when he is writing, is a

*’Part of a long hadith on intercession in Al-Bukhari, A/-Anbiya’, 3340, 3361;
Muslim, Al-Imdan, 194; At-Tirmidhi, Sifat al-Qiyamah, 2436; Ahmad, 2:435, 436.

50 Sharh Al-‘Aqgidah At-Tahawiyyah

writer-in-action but that does not mean that he 15 no longer a scribe
when he is not actually writing.

The concept of things occurring with respect to the Lord has
been denied by the blameworthy type of theology. But in the Qur’an
and Sunnah it is neither affirmed nor denied. There is ambiguity
surrounding this question. If one means by such negation that
nothing created happens to Allah or that He does not acquire an
attribute He did not have before, then the negation is correct. But if
one intends by that to deny the volitional attributes and imply that He
does not do what He wills, does not speak what and when He wills,
He is not pleased or angered in His own unique way, or denies the
attributes that He has used for Himself of descending, mounting and
coming in a way befitting His Majesty, then this negation is wrong.

When the exponents of the condemned dialectics deny without
qualification that things may happen to Allah, an ordinary Muslim
accepts their argument because he believes that they are denying
something that is not becoming to Allah. But if the Muslim accepts
that negation then he must, as a consequence, also negate the
volitional and active attributes of Allah and consider these non-
essential to Him. He 15 led to this conclusion because he accepted
the first premise of negation without actually realizing the details of
that premise. Had he analyzed it, he would have not fallen prey to
them.

The question of whether the attributes are over and above (za 10

‘ala) the essence is likewise ambiguous. The word “other” (ghayr) 5
also ambiguous. It can refer to what is not the essence itself, or it
can refer to what can be separated from the essence. This is why the
scholars of the Ahl as-Sunnah neither say without qualification that
the attributes of Allah are other than Allah, nor do they say without
qualification that they are not other than Allah. For to say without
qualification that they are other may suggest that they are separate
from His essence; similarly, to say that they are not other without
qualifying that statement may suggest that they are the same as His
essence. Since the word “other” (ghayr) is ambiguous, one should
avoid using it without defining its exact sense. For 11 one means by
it that there is an essence existing by itself separate from the
attributes which are over and above it, that is not correct.

If, though, it is used to mean that the attributes are over and
above the essence in the sense that we understand by the essence
something that we do not understand by an attribute, then it is
correct. But it is not the case that there is no essence existing out
there divested of all attributes. In reality, the essence qualified by the
attributes of perfection essential to it is inseparable from them. It is
only in the mind that the two are separated from each other and that
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 51

the two are imagined to exist by themselves. In reality, there is no
essence without an attribute; this is simply not possible. Even if
there were no attribute present except that of existence, even that
would not have been separate from the essence. But in one’s mind
they can be conceived of as an essence and an existence, each
separate from the other, though in reality they cannot be and are not
separate. :

Some of them say that the attribute is neither one with the
essence nor different from it. This statement is correct in one sense:
the attribute is neither the essence which it qualifies and which the
mind assumes to be without attributes, nor is it separate from the
essence; rather, the essence, along with the attributes that qualify it,
are one thing, single and non-multiple.

Therefore, one must distinguish between the statement, “The
attributes are aside from the essence” and the statement, “The
attributes of Allah are other than Allah.” The second statement is
erroneous because when one mentions Allah, this includes His
attributes, as opposed to when one mentions His essence, as this
does not include His attributes. What is meant 15 that the attributes
are over and above what is affirmed concerning the essence. Allah is
the essence that is qualified by His ever-present attributes. That 1s
why the author said, “He has always existed with His attributes.”
Note that he did not say, “He and His attributes are always existing”
because in this case the conjunction would permit the possibility of
difference between them. Similarly, while debating the Jahmiyyah,
Imam Ahmad said, “We do not say, ‘Allah and His knowledge,
Allah and His power, Allah and His light; we say, ‘Allah with His
knowledge, His power and His light. He is the only God, Glorified
and Exalted be He.”

When you say, “I seek refuge in Allah,” you are seeking refuge
in the holy essence that has the perfect, constant, holy attributes that
are absolutely inseparable from Him. But when you say, “I seek
refuge in the might of Allah,” you are seeking refuge in one of the
attributes of Allah, and you, furthermore, are not seeking refuge in
anything other than Allah.

This meaning is understood from the term essence (dhaz).
Originally the term was not used except as a noun in status
constructus. For example, one would say, “dhat wujud,” (‘one
having existence’), “dhat ‘izzah’’(‘one of power’), “dhat ‘ilm” (‘one
of knowledge’), and so on. Hence, dhat means ‘one having such-
and-such’. Actually, dhat is the feminine of dhu (‘one having such-
and-such’). This is the original meaning of the word. Therefore, it 5
clear that dhat cannot at all be conceived without an attribute, even
52 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

though the mind can imagine an essence stripped of all attributes, as
it can also imagine an impossibility.

This fact lies behind various invocations of the Prophet (peace
be on him) such as, “I seek the protection of Allah’s glory and
power from the evil that I am facing or might face.’”’* And, “I seek
protection in Allah’s perfect words from the evil of things He
created.””’ Obviously, the Prophet (peace be on him) never sought
the protection of anything other than Allah. Similarly, the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “O Allah, I seek protection in Your pleasure
against Your displeasure, and in Your forgiveness against Your
punishment, and in Yourself from You.’”® Also, “We seek refuge in
Your Majesty against assassination from behind.’”’ And, “I seek
refuge in the radiance of Your faith which lightens up all
darkness.”””

_ There is also their question, “Is a name the essence of the named
or not?” Many people have erred on this question. The correct view
is that the name sometimes means the object named and sometimes it
means the word that denotes the object. For example, when you
say, “Allah says such-and-such,” “Allah hears him who praises
Him,” and so on, you mean the named Himself. But when you say,
“Allah 15 an Arabic name, Ar-Rahman is an Arabic name, Ar-
Rahman is one of the beautiful names,” and so on, you are referring
to the name itself and not the named. Therefore, one cannot say
without qualification that the name is other than the named. For the
word “other”, again, is ambiguous. If you mean to say that the word

8Part of a hadith in Muslim, As-Salam, 2202; Aba Dawid, At-Tibb, 3891; At-
Tirmidhi, At-Tibb, 2081; Ibn Majah, At-Tibb, 3522; Ahmad, 4:217.

Part of a hadith in Muslim, Adh-Dhikr wa ad-Du‘a’ 2708; At-Tirmidhi, Ad-Da ‘wat,
3437; Ahmad, 6:377, 409.

Part of a hadith in Abi: Dawid, As-Salah, 1427; At-Tirmidhi, Ad-Da ‘wat, 3561; An-
Nasa’i, As-Salah, 3:248; Ibn Majah, Igamat as-Salah, 1179; Ahmad, 1:96, 118, 150;
Muslim, 486.

*'Part of a hadith in Ahmad, 2:125; Abia Dawid, Al-Adab, 5074; An-Nasa’l,
Isti ‘adhah, 8:282; Ibn Majah, Ad-Du ‘a’, 3871. Its chain is sahih.

*“This has been recorded by Ibn Hisham, As-Sirah an-Nabawiyyah, ed. by Mustafa As-
Saqqa and others (Cairo: Maktabah Mustafa Al-Halabi, 1375/1955), vol. 1, ‏.م‎ 420;
Ibn Jarir At-Tabari, Jami al-Baydn ‘an Tawil Ayi al-Qur’adn (Cairo: Matba‘at Mustafa
Al-Babi Al-Halabi and Sons, 1388/1968), 3rd edition, vol. I, ‏.م‎ 80; Az-Zurqani, in
his Commentary on Al-Mawahib al-Ladunniyyah of Al-Qastaldni (Beirut: Dar al-
Ma‘rifah, 1393/1973), 3rd edition, vol. 1, ‏.م‎ 305; and At-Tabarani, Al/-Mu ‘jam al-
Kabir, Ad-Du‘a’, on the authority of ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘far, with the remark that it is a
mursal hadith. \n his footnotes to the Commentary, Al-Albani called this hadith
weak.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 53

is not the same as what it means, that is true. But if you mean to say

that Allah was in the beginning without names, and then created

names for Himself or His creatures gave Him names of their

making, that is a completely false and blasphemous view of Allah’s
3

names.

٠ The author has alluded to this point in these words, “He is
qualified with His attributes eternally from before the creation of the
world.” He refutes the view of the Mu‘tazilah, Jahmiyyah and those
Shi‘ah who are in agreement with them. These people claim that
Allah did not at first have the power to act or to speak, and then He
came to have such powers. Action and speech became possible after
it was first impossible. The impossible changed into the possible.

Ibn Kullab, Al-Ash‘art and their followers put the point
somewhat differently. They say that action became possible for Him
after it was impossible from Him. As for speech, in their view, it is
not related to divine will and power; it 1s one single speech
necessary to His essence.

The source of this view is the Jahmiyyah. They said that events
cannot be eternal. They have to have a beginning, for an infinite
regress of events is impossible. Therefore, they claim, it is
impossible for Allah to have been acting or speaking of His free will
since eternity. Furthermore, it was impossible for Him to have the
power to do that because power to do something impossible is
impossible. But this is wrong. This implies that the world is not
contingent, even though it is in fact contingent. What comes into
existence after it did not exist must be possible. And possibility is
not confined to any particular time, because whatever time we think
of, the existence of that possible thing in that time cannot be ruled
out. Hence, there is no particular time for the possible to begin or to
take place; it is eternally possible. Therefore, Allah must have
always had the power from eternity to bring the possible into
existence. It also follows that a series of events in the past does not
have to have a beginning at a point.

The Jahmiyyah and those who agree with them say that they do
not accept the possibility of a series of events that has no beginning.
They concede it only on the condition that the series 15 preceded by
non-being. In their view, events as a class cannot be eternal; as a
class they have to be contingent, not eternal. However, they do not
believe that the events have to come into existence at a particular
time. In short, they allow the possibility of a beginning-less series

**For a detailed discussion of this point, see Ibn Taymiyyah, Majmi‘ al-Fatawa, vol.
6, pp. 185-212.

54 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

of events on the condition that they are preceded by non-being. But
they do not uphold that possibility regarding a class of events.

We would comment on this view as follows. You say that
events as a class should have a beginning. Now, 11 you believe that
things can become possible after they were not possible, that there is
no particular time for the realization of this possibility, and that for
any time we may think of, it can happen before that, then you are
forced to admit that this possibility is eternally there; otherwise you
will have to say that the impossible can become possible without
anything happening there or any cause coming into existence. We
know that the transformation of a contingency, as such, or of the
events as a class, or of things of a class, or of such similar things,
from impossibility to possibility — that they become possible after
they were impossible — without any cause happening, is completely
ruled out by reason. It would mean that the class that was essentially
impossible has become essentially possible, for in your view events
as a class become possible after being impossible.

Furthermore, this transformation is not tied to any particular
time, because whatever time we may think of, it can happen before
that. It follows that the transformation was always possible; hence,
the impossible was always possible. This is a more far-reaching
claim than our view that the contingent is eternally possible. This
means that they have to admit to more than what we were trying to
make them admit and which is what they were trying to avoid. One
can imagine (our view, which states) that a contingent thing 1s
possible and that this possibility is eternal. But one cannot imagine
(the conclusion they are forced into, which states) that an impossible
is possible. That, obviously, is a contradiction. That being so, what
can one say about the proposition that the impossible has always
been possible? This topic has been further elaborated in its proper
places.

In sum, concerning the question of whether events as a class are
unending in the future as well as in the past, or in neither, or only in
the future, or only in the past, there are three views among Muslim
and non-Muslim thinkers. The most untenable view is that it is
impossible to be unending, either in the future or in the past; this 1s
the view of Jahm Ibn Safwan and Abi Al-Hudhayl Al-‘Allaf. The
second view states that it can be unending only in the future and not
in the past. This is held by many theologians belong to various
schools, such as the Jahmiyyah, Mu‘tazilah, Karramiyyah, Ash‘aris
and Shi‘is, as well as some jurists and other scholars. The third
view is that it can be unending in both the past and the future. This
is the view of the leading scholars of hadith. In fact, this is one of
the more important doctrines. No one has stated the fourth
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 55

possibility, that it can be unending only in the past but not in the
future.

There is no doubt that the majority of the world from all different
peoples say that everything other than Allah is created. Everything
came into being after it was not existing. That is what all the
messengers and their followers of Muslims, Jews, Christians and
others believe in. It 15 known, by natural instinct, that it is
impossible for the act to co-exist with the Actor from eternity to
eternity. Since the existence of an endless series of events in the
future is not inconsistent with Allah being the Last, without anything
coming after Him, the existence of an endless series of events in the
past is not inconsistent with Allah being the First, without anything
going before Him. Allah is always there doing and speaking
whatever and whenever He wills from eternity to eternity. Allah
says in the Qur’an, “Thus Allah does whatever He wills” [3:40];
“But Allah does whatever He likes” [2:253]; “He is the Lord of the
Glorious Throne, and He does whatever He pleases” [85:15-16];
“And if all the trees on earth were pens, and oceans were ink, with
seven oceans behind it to add to its supply, yet the words of Allah
would not be exhausted (in the writing)” [31:27]; “Say: If the oceans
were ink wherewith to write out the words of my Lord, sooner
would the ocean be exhausted than would the words of my Lord,
even if we added another ocean like it for its aid” [18:109].

What is affirmed here is the perfection that can possibly exist.
Hence, if the class of acts is everlasting, it is possible and certainly
more perfect that He precedes every individual thing such that no
part of the world can co-exist with Him in any respect. As for
permanence of action, it is also perfection. Since action is an
attribute of perfection, its permanence will mean permanence of
perfection.

People say that regress (as in “infinite regression’) is an
ambiguous term, it is neither affirmed nor denied in the Book of
Allah or in the Sunnah,. hence, we are not bound to adhere to the
term. However, regress is of three types: necessary, impossible and
possible. In the case of infinite regression of causes, this is
impossible, for we cannot imagine that one cause derives its
causative power from another cause, and that from a third cause and
so on ad infinitum. The example of necessary regress is divine
action in the future. Both reason and revelation affirm that whenever
something in the use of the people of Paradise ends, Allah will
create another and then a third, and so on, ad infinitum. The same is
true about Allah’s action in the past, for every act of His is preceded
by another act. For example, He has been speaking since eternity
whenever He pleased; obviously, His attribute of speech is not
56 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

something that has happened to Him after a time. The same 15 true of
the other acts that are essential to His life, for every living being acts
and the difference between the living and dead is action. That is why
a number of the Elders stated, “Living 15 acting.” ‘Uthman Ibn Sa‘ed
said, “Every living thing acts. And our Lord has never been for a
- moment imperfect, without speaking, willing or acting.”

An example of possible regress 15 the things that Allah does, and
this regress may be both in the past and in the future. Since Allah is
Living, Powerful, Willing and Speaking from eternity — all this
being part of His essence — He would be doing one thing or another
according to these attributes. Action is more complete than inaction.
However, this does not necessitate that objects co-exist with Him.
Allah precedes every single object He creates and is not preceded by
any of them. Every created object has something first that went
before it, except the Creator, Who has no first before Him. He alone
is the Creator and everything else is created and comes into existence
after a time when it was non-existent.

Reason rejects every other view. All those who believe that
Allah has power to act from eternity must either believe that it was
possible for Him to act from eternity or that He has been acting from
eternity. Any other view would be inconsistent with their faith. For
example, there is the view that although Allah has power to act from
eternity, action itself is inconceivable, and were He to will it, it
would not happen. Another view is that He could not at all will it,
even though He had power over it. These views are self-
contradictory. In short, revelation and reason both uphold the view
that everything other than Allah is contingent, that it comes into
existence after it was not existing. As for the view that Allah was
inactive at first and then acted, it is supported neither by revelation
nor by reason. On the contrary, both uphold the opposite.

Abi Al-Ma‘ali, in his Al-Jrshad,” and many other thinkers have
objected to the concept of infinite regression in the past. They argue
that it is possible for you to say that you would give another person
a dollar following every dollar that you give. But it 15 not possible to
say that you would give a dollar only if you had given one before.
But this example is not relevant. The relevant example is to say that
you did not give a dollar unless you had given one before. That is,
you make one past act precede another past act, as you make one
future act follow another future act. The example that they give, on
the other hand, says that you would not give a dollar unless you had

“Kitab al-Irshad, ed. by Muhammad Yisuf Misa and ‘Ali ‘Abdul-Mun‘im ‘Abdul-
Hamid (Cairo: Maktabat al-Khanji, 1369/1950), pp. 26-27.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 57

given one before. This involves the negation of a future act until
something similar happens in the future and precedes it. It 15 the
negation of a future act before it happens, and that 15 ruled out. But
the negation of a past act unless another past act precedes it is
possible. A gift in the future is to come from one who offers the
gift. And an act of the future which has a beginning and an end
cannot be preceded by something that is endless, because nothing
that is endless can exist in something that ends.

(14) It is not the case that He acquired the name Creator
(Al-Khaliq) only after creating (something), or the name
Originator (AI-Barl) only after originating (something).

From these words it appears that the author denies an infinite
regression of events in the past. He does not, however, deny an
infinite chain of events in the future, as we will see in his words that
we will discuss later, “Paradise and Hell are something created, but
they will not perish or disappear.” This is also the view of the
majority of Muslim thinkers, as we stated earlier. However, it is not
correct to deny regress in the past or in the future. Jahm and his
followers have denied it. They say that Paradise and Hell will finally
disappear. We will discuss this view later and show that is wrong.

Those who uphold the possibility of an infinite series of
contingent events both in the past and in the future are closer to the
truth than those who uphold only one part of it. For Allah 15
eternally living, and activity is essential to life. Hence, He is doing
from eternity whatever He pleases as He has described Himself. He
has said, “He is the Lord of the Throne of Glory, the Doer of
whatever He wills” [85:15-16]. These verses prove the following
truths:

First, Allah acts as He wills and pleases.

Second, He has always done so. This is alluded to by the
description being a point of praise of Himself, a real excellence that
He cannot be thought of as losing at any time. He has said, “Is then
One Who creates like one who does not create? Will you not receive
admonition” [16:17]. Since this is an aspect of His perfection and
majesty, it cannot be that He acquired it after He did not have it.

Third, when He wills a thing, He does it. Since the particle ma,
rendered here as “whatever,” is a general relative pronoun, the verse
means that He does anything He wills. This concerns His will to do
something by Himself. As for His will regarding the acts of His
creatures, it is something different. If He wants (or commands) any
person to do something but does not want to help him and make him
do it, He does not create the act, even though the person may have
58 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

tried to do it. The act will not happen unless He wills to make him
do it. This point was not understood by the Free-willers —
(Qadriyyah), or by the determinists (Jabariyyah). Consequently,
they went astray on the issue of predestination (gadr). They failed to
distinguish between Allah’s will (or command) that man should do
an act and His will to make him do the act. We will take up this
issue of gadr later, God willing.

Fourth, Allah’s will and action necessitate each other. What He
wills He does, and what He does He has willed. This distinguishes
Him from creatures, who often will what they are not able to do and
do what they did not intend to do. There is none other than Allah,
Who does whatever He wills.

Fifth, the verses prove that Allah has numerous wills
corresponding to His acts, a separate will for each act. This is what
is known by natural instincts. Allah continues willing and doing
what He wills.

Sixth, whatever is proper for Allah to will 1s also permissible for
Him to do. If He wills to descend to the lowest heaven every night,
to come on the Day of Judgment for judgment, to be seen by His
servants, to appear to them as He wills, to address them, to smile at
them, and any other thing He so desires, nothing of that would be
impossible for Him, for He does whatever He wills. We confirmed
all of those actions based on the truthfulness of the one who
informed us (that is, the Prophet) of those actions. If the truthful one
stated it, we must believe in it. Also, He blots out or confirms
whatever He wills. He is engaged every day in one thing or the
other, Glorious and Exalted be He.

The view that contingents have a beginning implies that there
was a time when Allah was inactive, that in the beginning He was
not doing anything and then He started “doing” something.

But this does not imply that the world is eternal. Everything
other than Allah is contingent and possible and comes into being by
the creative act of Allah. By itself, it is nothing but non-being. Want
or need 15 an essential quality of things other than Allah, Who alone
exists necessarily by Himself, and is absolutely Self-sufficient. Self-
sufficiency is part of His essence.

People hold two views concerning the questions, “Was this
world created from matter or not? How did this world begin?”’ Allah
says in the Qur’an, “He it is Who created the heavens and the earth
in six days, and His Throne was over the waters” [11:17]. Al-
Bukhari and others recorded from ‘Imran Ibn Hussayn that the
people of Yemen asked the Prophet (peace be on him), “We have
come to you to learn the faith. We wish to ask you about this matter
(creation).” The Prophet (peace be on him) said, “(In the beginning)
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 59

there was only Allah, and nothing was before Him.” Another
narration of the hadith ends with, “And-there was nothing along
with Him.” A third version states, “And there was nothing other
than He.” The Prophet (peace be on him) then said, “His throne was
on the waters. And He recorded everything in adh-Dhikr, and He
created the heavens and the earth.” Another version ends with,
“Then He created the heavens and the earth.””° The Dhikr referred to
above is the Preserved Table (a/-Lawh al-Mahfiz), as 15 indicated in
the verse, “We wrote in the Books after the Dhikr: My righteous
servants will inherit the earth” [21:105]. What is written in the Dhikr
is referred to as dhikr (in Arabic) in the same way that what is
written in a book (kitab) is referred to as kitab.

People have interpreted the above hadith in two ways. Some say
that the Prophet (peace be on him) was stating that Allah has existed
all by Himself in eternity, and He continued to be like that for a
time, and then He began creating all things. Things, therefore, as
individual objects or as classes are preceded by non-being or being
nothing. Time, for example, began to exist in a non-temporal
setting. Allah became acting after He was not doing anything from
eternity until the time He started to act. And during that time of
inactivity, nothing was possible for Him.

The second opinion is that the Prophet (peace be on him) was
talking about the beginning of this witnessed world that Allah
created in six days, after which He ascended the Throne as the
Qur’an describes in many places. (For example, “He it 15 Who
created the heavens and the earth in six days, and His Throne was
over the waters” [11:7].] It 15 recorded in Sahih Muslim from
‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr that the Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Allah
fixed the measures of things fifty thousand years before the creation
of the heavens and the earth. And His throne was on the waters.’”°
The Prophet (peace be on him) thus stated that Allah ordained this
world, which He created in six days, fifty thousand years before He
created it and that His throne was on the water at that time.

The proofs for the correctness of the second opinion are:

**The words, “And nothing was before Him,” occur in Al-Bukhari, 7418 and 3191; Ibn
Khtzaymah, Kitab at-Tawhid, ed. by Dr. ‘Abdul-‘Aziz Ibn Ibrahim (Riyadh: Dar Ar-
Rushd, 1408/1988), Ist edition, ‏.م‎ 376; At-Tabarani, A/l-Kabir, 18:497, 498. The
words, “And there was nothing with Him (ma‘ahu),” which the commentator
mentioned, do not occur in any collection of Hadith, authentic or otherwise. However

the words, “And there was nothing other than He (ghayruhu),” which mean the same,
occur in Ahmad, 4:431, 432.

**Muslim, Al-Qadr, 2653; At-Tirmidhi, 2156; Ahmad, 2:169.

60 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

First, the people of Yemen (mentioned in the hadith) asked, “We
came to you to ask you about this thing (G@mr),” and this alludes to
the present existing world. Amr here means al-ma’miur or the object
that has been brought into existence by the dmr (command of Allah).
The Prophet (peace be on him) responded to their question by
talking about the being of this existing world and not about all
created things as a class, because they did not ask about that. He
informed them that the heavens and the earth were created while the
Throne was on the waters. He did not tell them about the creation of
the Throne as it was (obviously) created before the heavens and the
earth.

(Second,) the Prophet said, “There was Allah and nothing was
before Him,” and, in another narration, “...nothing was with Him.”
This was his speech in one setting. Therefore, he must have made
just one of those statements and some of the narrators simply stated
the meaning of the what he said (not the exact wording). The word
gabl (before) has been authentically narrated from the Prophet in
other ahddith. It is recorded in Sahih Muslim, on the authority of
Abt' Hurayrah, that the Prophet (peace be on him) used to
supplicate, “O Allah, You are the First and there was nothing before
You.’ The other two words (reported in the different narrations)
have not been reported in any other hadith. Therefore, many of the
scholars of hadith, such as Al-Humaydi, Al-Baghawi and Ibn Al-
Athir, have only recorded those ahddith in which the word “before”
occurs. If this is correct, then it would mean that there is no
reference in the hadith to the beginning of things or the first thing
created.

(Third,) the words (in the hadith are), “Allah was there and there
was nothing before him (or ‘with Him or ‘besides Him), and His
Throne was on the waters. And He wrote everything in the Register
(adh-Dhikr).” He mentioned those things using the conjunction
“and” between them. And “He created the heavens and the earth”
has been narrated with a conjunction (and) and also with “then”.
This shows that what he wants to tell them about is the beginning of
the heavens and the earth and the things between them — things that
were created in six days — and not the beginning of what Allah
created before the world. The mention of “the heavens and the earth”

*"Part of a hadith recorded by Muslim, Adh-Dhikr, 2713. Also see Aba Dawid, A/-
Adab, 5051; At-Tirmidhi, Ad-Da ‘wat, 3397; Ibn Majah, Ad-Du‘a’, 3873; Ahmad,
2:381, 404.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 617

also shows that they were created, but the reference to something
prior to them indicates it existed but it was not the first thing created.

(Fourth,) since the hadith has been narrated in two different
ways, we cannot say with certainty which is correct without some
(external) evidence. If one can be shown to be stronger, if someone
then claims that the Messenger certainly stated the other, he is
definitely wrong. There is nothing in the Book or the Sunnah to
support the other (weaker) meaning. It is not permissible to confirm
it according to what one thinks the meaning of the hadith should be.
It is not narrated unconditionally, “There was Allah and nothing was
with Him.” But it is only narrated in the specifically mentioned
context. One cannot, therefore, infer from them that Allah was doing
nothing before He created the heavens and the earth.

(Fifth,) the Prophet (peace be upon him) said, “Allah was there
and there was nothing before him (or with Him or besides Him),
and His Throne was on the waters.” It is not permissible to
understand those words as meaning that Allah was by Himself and
there was nothing whatsoever created with Him because the words,
“and His Throne was on the waters” negates that, because the
clause, “and His Throne was on the waters” is either a circumstantial
or a conjunctive clause. In both cases, a created object was existing
at that time. Hence, it must mean that there was nothing of this
witnessed world at that time.**

(15) He was qualified with Lordship (rubibiyyah) even
when there was nothing to lord over. And He was the
Creator even when there was nothing created.

That is, Allah had the quality of being Lord even before anything
was there to be lorded over. He also had the quality of being Creator
even before anything was created.

Some commentators have drawn attention to the author’s saying,
“He has been qualified with Lordship (rubiibiyyah) and has been the
Creator” rather than, “has been qualified with ‘'creatorship’.” This
is because the Creator is the One Who brings a thing from non-
existence into existence and it has no other meaning. But Ar-Rabb,
on the other hand, has many meanings to it. It means Lord,
Guardian, Provident and Cherisher, Who nourishes, develops and
leads a thing to its destined completion. It 15 to convey this nch

**For a detailed discussion of this point, see Ibn Taymiyyah, Majma‘ al-Fatawa, vol.
18, pp. 210-243.

F5 CREED OF AT - TAHAWI

62 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

sense that the author has chosen the word rubibiyyah. This ends
what they state.

There is some problem with that because Al-Khaliq not only
means the Creator Who brings into existence but also the One Who
ordains and determines.

(16) In the same way that He is the “Reviver of life to
the Dead”, after He has given them life a first time, He
deserves this name before bringing them to life; so, too,
He deserves the name Creator before He actually created
them. |

That is, since Allah is called the “Reviver of Life to the Dead”
before He has actually revived them, He should be called the Creator
before He actually created them. The author has directed these
words against the Mu‘tazilah and those who agree with their
opinion. We have already discussed them and we have concluded
that Allah has been doing from eternity whatever He has willed.

(17) This is because He has power over all things (kulli
Shayy). All things depend on Him and are easy for Him.
He is not in need of anything. Nothing is like Him. He
is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.

This suggests that Allah has attributes from eternity, even before
He created the world. However, the discussion of the word kull —
‘all’, and what it connotes and how the extent of its meaning varies
according to the context, will be taken up later, God willing, under
the discussion of the speech of Allah.

The Mu‘tazilah have distorted the meaning of the verse, “Allah
has power over all things” [2:284]. According to them, 1] means that
Allah has power over all things that are in His power. As for human
acts, He has no power over them. (This is agreed upon among
them.) They dispute, however, the question of whether He can
Himself do similar actions. If their interpretation of this verse were
correct, it would be similar to saying, “He is Knowing of everything
He knows, He creates all that He creates,’ and other useless
statements. In fact, they have denied that He has power over all
things.

According to the Ahl as-Sunnah, Allah has power over all things
and all possible things are in His power. As for the impossible in
itself, such as one and the same thing existing and not existing at
one time, it is actually a “nothing”; it is inconceivable. No
reasonable person would say that is a “thing”. The same 15 true for
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 63

the question of whether Allah can create one like Himself or whether
He can kill Himself and other impossibilities.

As for belief in Allah’s complete and total Lordship, a
fundamental belief, no one can believe that He 1s Lord of everything
unless he believes that He has power over those things.
Furthermore, no one believes in His complete and perfect Lordship
unless he believes that He has power over all things.

(On this point there is no difference among people.) The dispute
has occurred over the possible that does not yet exist: Is it a thing
(shayy) or not? In fact, the non-existent 15 not a thing in reality. But
Allah knows what will exist before it exists, and He records it. He
may mention and tell others about it, as in the verse, “The
convulsion of the last hour is a great thing” [22:1]. It 15 thus a

“thing” with respect to knowledge, mentioning and recording. But it
does not actually exist out there in reality. Or as Allah said, “Truly,
when He intends a thing, His command 15: ‘Be,’ and it is” [36:82],
and “I did indeed create you before, when you had been nothing”
[19:9]. That 15, man was nothing out there in reality, although he
was something in Allah’s knowledge. He also said, “Has there not
been over man a long period of time when he was nothing (to be)
mentioned?” [76:1]

The words, “There is nothing like Him,” refute the thesis of the
anthropomorphists (mushadbbihah), and the words, “He is All-
Hearing, All-Seeing,” refute the thesis of the negators of divine
attributes (al-mu ‘attilah). The truth is that Allah has all the attributes
of perfection, and there is nothing like Him in these attributes. As
for the created, although they have the attributes of hearing and
seeing, their hearing and seeing is not like the hearing and seeing of
the Lord. It 15 not necessary that affirming attributes also affirm
resemblance and similarity. The attributes of a created one are those
befitting him, and the attributes of the Creator are those befitting
Him.

We do not deny, concerning Allah, what He has given of
attributes of Himself or what the one who knows His Lord best
(Prophet Muhammad) has affirmed of Him. He knew what should
be ascribed to Him and what should not. He was eager to convey
what he knew to his people. Also, He had the most eloquent
language and was most able to convey what he intended. If you
deny any of those statements, you have disbelieved in what was
revealed to Muhammad (peace be on him).

When you describe Allah in terms in which He has described
Himself, do not liken Him to His creatures, because nothing is like
Him. If you liken Him to His creatures, you deny Him. AI-
Bukhari’s teacher, Nu‘aym Ibn Hamad Al-Khuza’i said, “Whoever
64 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

likens Allah to His creatures commits infidelity. And whoever
denies what Allah has ascribed to Himself also commits infidelity.
There is no anthropomorphism in what Allah has said of Himself or
in what His Prophet (peace be on him) has said of Him.” We will
return to this topic when commenting on the author’s words, “One
who does not avoid negation as well as anthropomorphism goes
astray and does not properly glonfy Allah.”

Allah has said about: Himself that to Him belongs the highest
- similitude. He has said, ““To those who believe not in the Hereafter,
applies the similitude of evil; to Allah applies the highest similitude”’
[16:60]; and, “To Him belongs the loftiest similitude in the heavens
and the earth: for He is Exalted in Might, Full of Wisdom” [30:27].
Thus, Allah has applied the evil similitude to the polytheists and
their idols, which implies shortcomings, defect and imperfection.
He has reserved the highest similitude, which involves all
excellences, for Himself. Those who deny the attributes of
perfection for Allah actually apply to Him an evil similitude. They
destroy His lofty similitude and sublime image which encompass all
positive attributes and noble qualities.

Since Allah is qualified with the most perfect attributes, He has
the highest similitude and He is more deserving of it than anyone
else. It is impossible for there to be two beings that have the highest
similitude, for if they were equal in all respects, neither one would
be higher and loftier than the other. And if they are not equal, then
the highest similitude will only apply to one of them. Hence it is
impossible for the One to Whom applies the highest similitude to
have an equal or anyone similar to Him.””

The scholars of Qur’anic exegesis differ about the connotation of
the “highest similitude’”. One who has been guided by Allah has
been able to reconcile their statements. Some say that the highest
similitude encompasses four concepts: (1) the highest, loftiest
attributes; (2) informing the creation about them; (3) knowing its
existence, informing about it, and mentioning it, and (4) the worship
of the Lord by means of the knowledge and cognizance that is in the
hearts of those who worship and remember him.

Therefore, there are four matters. First is affirmation of the
highest attributes of Allah, regardless of whether the servant actually
knows those attributes or not. This is the meaning for those who
interpret the phrase as referring to attributes.

“Ibn Al-Qayyim has discussed this point at length in Mukhtasar as-Sawd’ig al-
Mursalah, vol. 1, pp. 213f.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi | 65

Second is its existence in one’s knowledge and perceptions.
This is the meaning of both the early and later scholars’ statement
that is what is in the hearts of His servants, covering aspects of
knowledge, remembrance, love, honor, respect, fear, hope, trust
and turning to Him. That that is in the heart is the greatest similitude
that no one else could possibly share in. It is something special in
their hearts as it is something particular to His being. This is the
meaning given by those commentators who say that it refers to the
inhabitants of the heavens glorifying, loving and worshiping Him,
as well as those who inhabit the earth, regardless of those who
ascribe partners to Him, disobey Him or deny His attributes. The
inhabitants of the earth glorify Him, extol Him and humble
themselves to His greatness, submitting to His power and greatness.
Allah says, “Unto Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and in
the earth. All are obedient unto Him” [30:26].

Third is to mention His attributes, inform others about them and
glorify them by denying any kind of weakness, deficiency or
similarity for them.

Fourth refers to loving the One Who has those attributes,
affirming His oneness, having sincerity to Him, having trust in
Him, and turning to Him. Whenever belief in the attributes 1s more
complete and perfect, love and sincerity for Him is stronger. The
statements of the Elders all revolve around the above four meanings.

No one goes further astray than the one who puts verse 27 of
Surat Ar-Rtim and verse 11 of Strat Ash-Shutra in contention with
one another. They use the verse from Ash-Shura to deny Allah’s
attributes and they are blind to the remainder of the verse, which
says, “And He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.” This
misguidance even led one of them, Ahmad Ibn Abi Duwad AI-Qadi,
to advise the Caliph Al-Ma’miin to write on the covering of the
Ka‘bah, “There is nothing like unto Him, and He 15 the Strong, the
Wise,” attempting to distort the words of Allah in order to deny
Allah’s attributes of Seeing and Hearing. Similarly, another misled
person, Jahm Ibn Safwan, said, “I wish I could erase from the
Qur’an, “Then He settled over the Throne’ [7:54].”> We ask Allah,
the Great, the Hearing, the Seeing, to confirm us with the confirmed
saying (the testimony of faith) in both this life and the Hereafter by
His grace and mercy.

Concerning the grammatical parsing of ka-mithlihi, there are
different views. First, the ka is considered a non-restrictive relative
clause added for emphasis. ‘Aws Ibn Hajr has said:

There is no one like (ka-mith/) the young Zuhayr,

no one equivalent to him in behavior.
66 Sharh Al-‘Aqidah At-Tahawiyyah

Another said:

There exists no man of men similar to him (ka-mithlihim).
A third said:

Dead bodies like the (ka-mith/) trunk of the palm tree.

Therefore, mithl is the predicate of /aysa and its simple substantive
is shayy. This is a strong, good opinion. The Arabs know this
meaning in their dialects. It would not be obscure to them when they
hear it. An additional ka for emphasis can be found in Arabic in the
following statements, “What was left are the three stones under the
cooking pot, as they were (ka-kama) put,” and, “It became like the
remains of eaten-up crops.”

A second view is that mithl (like) is extraneous. That is, the
meaning 1s laysa ka-huwa shayy (‘there is nothing like him’). This
is far from the correct view. Mithl is a noun and the opinion that
states that an additional letter has been added for emphasis is much
more likely the opinion that states that an additional complete word
has been added extraneously.

The third view is that there is nothing augmentative in the
statement. It 1s similar to the statement, “Someone like you does not
do that,” which means: ‘You don’t do such a thing.’ The word
similar is used as exaggeration. That is, “If there were any kind of
similitude to Allah, it would not be similar to Him. So what about
the case when there 15 no such similitude?”’

Other opinions are given but the first view seems the most
apparent.

(18) He created (khalaga) the creation (khalq) with His
Knowledge (bi-‘ilmihi).

Khalaqa means to initiate, originate, and bring into existence. It
also means to determine and ordain (gadara). Khalgq 15 the infinitive
verbal noun, but here it means makhliig, ‘the created’. The word bi-
‘i/mihi functions as a hal, denotative of state, suggesting that Allah
created the world with full knowledge. He has said, “Should He not
know what He created, whereas He is the Most Subtle and Most
Aware?” [67:14]. And He has elaborated, “With Him are the keys to
the Unseen, the treasures that none knows but He. He knows
whatever there is on earth and in the sea. Not a leaf falls but with
His knowledge. There is not a grain in the darkness of the earth, nor
anything fresh or dry but is noted in a Clear Record. It is He Who
takes your souls by night and knows all that you do by day” [6:59-
60]. That verse contains a refutation of the Mu‘tazilah.
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 67

Imam ‘Abdul-‘Aziz Al-Makki, a student and friend of Imam
Ash-Shafi‘l, in his book Al-Hidah,° gave an account of a
discussion he had with Bishr Al-Marisi at the court of Al-Ma’min.
He questioned Bishr about the knowledge of Allah. Bishr replied,
“He is not ignorant.” ‘Abdul-‘Aziz kept on repeating the question to
him and he kept coming back with the same answer. He would not
admit that Allah knows by His knowledge. “Abdul-'Aziz then said,
“Denying His ignorance is not an act of praise. If I say, “This pillar
is not ignorant, it does not mean that it knows. Furthermore, Allah
has praised the prophets, angels and Believers because of their
knowledge, not because they were not ignorant. If knowledge is
confirmed, then ignorance is negated. But negating ignorance does
not affirm knowledge. And human beings must affirm of Allah what —
He has affirmed of Himself and negate what He has negated. And
furthermore, we must be quiet about what He has kept quiet about.”

The rational arguments proving that Allah is qualified with the
attribute of knowledge are as follows. First, it is not possible for
Allah to create things without knowing what they are. Creating
something means to bring that thing into existence by His will.
Willing implies that He conceptualizes what He wills. The
conception of what He wills is the knowledge of the willed thing.
Therefore, creation necessarily implies knowledge. Second, the
perfection and order that we see in the things of the world requires
that the One Who made them should know them thoroughly. A
perfect work cannot be expected of an ignorant being.

Third, among the beings of the world are those who have
knowledge. And since knowledge is an attribute of perfection, it is
inconceivable that their Creator should be without knowledge.

This argument may be elaborated in two ways. First, it is self-
evident that the Creator 15 more complete and perfect than the
creation, as the Necessary Being is more perfect than the possible. It
is also self-evident that, of two beings, one knowing and the other
not knowing, what is knowing is more perfect than what is not
knowing. Hence, if the Creator is not knowing, the possible being
would be more perfect than He, and this is an impossibility.
Second, whatever knowledge there is in the possible realm, which
are the created things, is from Him. Therefore, it is inconceivable
that the Creator and the Onginator of perfection should not be
perfect. On the contrary, He should be more perfect than the created
objects. Again, to Allah belongs the highest similitude. He and His
creatures are not equal, neither with respect to analogy or syllogistic

*° According to most scholars, it is not correct to attribute this book to Al-Makki.

68 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahadwiyyah

reasoning. Rather, every perfection that is affirmed of the created is
more substantiated of the Creator. Finally, every shortcoming that
the created are possibly free of, He is, in the first place, also free of
it.

(19) He has ordained all things in due measure.

Allah has said, “It is He Who created all things, and ordained
them in due proportions” [25:2]; “Truly, all things have We created
' In proportion and measure” [54:49); “And the command of Allah is
ordained according to a measure” [33:38]; and, “(He is the One)
Who has created and further given order and proportion, Who has
ordained laws and granted guidance” [87:2-3].

Muslim recorded from ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr that the Prophet
(peace be on him) said, “Allah ordained the measures of created
things fifty thousand years before He created the heavens and the
earth, and His throne was on the waters.””!

(20) He has fixed their terms.

That is, Allah has fixed the life-span of the creatures such that
when their time comes due, they are not able to postpone or advance
it a single moment. Allah says, “When their term is reached, not an
hour can they cause delay nor an hour can they advance it” [10:49].
Also, “Nor can a soul die except by Allah’s leave, the term being
fixed as by writing” [3:145]. Muslim recorded from ‘Abdullah Ibn
Mas‘tid that Umm Habibah, a wife of the Prophet (peace be on
him), once said in a prayer, “O Allah, benefit me by my husband,
the Messenger of Allah, by my father, Abu Sufyan, and by my
brother, Mu‘awiyah.” The Prophet (peace be on him) then said,
“You have asked of Allah about durations of life already set, and
length of days already allotted, and sustenance, the shares of which
have been fixed. Allah would not do anything before its due time,
and He would not delay anything beyond its due time. If you had
asked Allah to provide you refuge from the torment of the Hell-fire
or from the torment of the grave, it would have been better for you
and more excellent.”””

One who 1s killed dies, too, at his appointed time. Allah knows
things and fixes them. He determines that one man will die of
illness, another will be killed, a third will be buried under a falling

*'Muslim, Al-Qadr, 2653; At-Tirmidhi, 2156; Ahmad, 2:169.
*?Muslim, Al-Qadr, 2663, 32, 33; Ahmad, 1:390, 413, 433, 445, 446.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 69

wall, a fourth will be burned, a fifth drowned, and so on,
concerning all causes of death. Allah created death and life. He also
created the causes of death and life.

According to the Mu‘tazilah, the murdered has had his life-span
shortened. If he had not been killed, he would have lived to his
complete term; therefore, he actually has two terms. But this is
_ wrong. It is not conceivable to say of Allah that He created a term
for him that He knew he would not reach. Nor can one say that He
would make his term open to two cases, in the same manner that
Allah has commanded the guardian of a person who is murdered to
observe equality in avenging the murder or for the killer to pay a
ransom (if the guardian agreed) because he has committed what
Allah has prohibited and has used means which are forbidden.

In this meaning 15 the hadith, “Keeping the ties of kin extends
one’s life-span.’”’ That is, it is the cause of his prolonged life. Allah
has decreed that a specific person will do good to his kin, and
because of it he will live longer than he would have lived if he had
not done so. Allah has decreed that cause and fulfilled it. Similarly,
He has decreed that another person will not keep the ties of kin;
therefore, he will live to a specific span because of that. The same
kind of argument holds true for murder, death, and so on.

One may ask if good behavior towards one kin enhances the
span of life, then does supplication (du ‘d’) have the same effect?
The answer is that there is no necessary relation between the two.
_ This response 15 based on the above statement of the Prophet (peace
be on him) to Umm Habibah, “You have asked of Allah about
durations of life which have already been set.” One’s life-span is
determined and it is not confirmed in any text of the Shari‘ah that
supplication can make any change in that. This is different from the
case of being saved from punishment in the Hereafter. It is clear
from the texts that supplications can have a positive effect on that
matter. However, prayer for change in the term when it promotes
the good of the Hereafter has also been allowed.

An-Nasa’i recorded from ‘Ammar Ibn Yasir that the Prophet
(peace be on him) said in an invocation, “O Allah, by Your
knowledge of the Unseen and Your Power over the creation, give

*>Ash-Shihab Al-Quda’i, Musnad, ed. by Hamadi ‘Abdul-Majid As-Salafi (Beirut:
Mu’assasat ar-Risdlah, 1405/1985), hadith no. 100. The hadith with this wording is
rated weak because one of its transmitters, Nasr Ibn Hammad, is very unreliable.
However, the meaning of the hadith is supported by a number of other ahddith
reported in various collections. See Al-Bukhari, 2067, 5986; Muslim, 2557; Abt
Dawid, 1693; At-Tirmidhi, 1979; Ahmad, 3:156, 247, 266.

70 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

me life as long as life is good for me and cause me to die when death
is best for me...””* This is further supported by a hadith recorded by
Al-Hakim in his Sahih’? from Thawban, who narrated that the
Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Nothing can repulse predestination
except supplication. Also, nothing increases one’s lifespan except
piety, and a man is deprived of his sustenance because of the sins he
committed.”’® Making.a nadhar (oath that one would make an
offering if something is granted to him) is discouraged in hadith
because it neither wards off evil nor brings blessings. It is
confirmed in the two Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim that the
Prophet (peace be on him) forbade nadhar and said, “It does not do
any good except to take money from the pocket of a miser.””’

Supplication 15 correct and beneficial in some cases but not in all
cases. The same is true for nadhar. For that reason, Allah does not
love transgression in supplications. Imam Ahmad disapproved of
praying for a long life and he said, “That is a fait accompli that has
already been decided.”

As for the statement of Allah, “And no one grows old who
grows old nor is aught lessened of his life, but it 15 recorded in a
Book” [35:11]. There is a difference of opinion concerning what the
male indefinite pronoun in ‘wmrihi is referring to. Some say it 5
analogous to the statement, “I have a dollar and half of it,” meaning,
“T have a dollar and a half of another.” In this reading, the verse
would be, “Nor is a man grown old granted length of days, nor is a
part cut off from another’s life (‘umrihi), but it is in a Book
ordained.” :

Others say that refers to addition or deletion in the scrolls that are
in the possession of the angels. These people interpret the verses,
“For each period is an appointed writing. Allah does blot out or
confirm what He pleases. With Him is the Mother of the Book”
[13:38-39], as referring to Allah blotting out or confirming what is
recorded in the scrolls in the possession of the angels. And, “With
Him 15 the Mother of the Book” refers to the Preserved Tablet (al-

“Part of a hadith in An-Nasa’i, 3:54, 55. It was stated earlier.

*°The name of his work is Al-Mustadrak ‘ald as-Sahihayn and most scholars of hadith
do not refer to it as a Sahih because it contains many weak and fabricated ahadith.
**Ibn Majah, Al-Fitan, 4022; Ahmad, 5:277, 280, 282; Al-Hakim, A/-Mustadrak,
1:493. The first two clauses of this hadith are considered correct due to supporting
evidence for them. The last clause of the hadith has not been transmitted through
acceptable chains.

°7Al-Bukhari, 6668, 6692, 6693; Muslim, 1639; Aba Dawid, 3287; An-Nasa’i, An-
Nahi ‘an an-Nadhar, 7:15-16; Ahmad, 2:61, 86.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 71

Luh al-Mahfud). The context of the verse points 1© this
interpretation. The context is, “For each period is an appointed
writing,” and then Allah says, “Allah does blot out or confirm what
He pleases,” that is, from that writing, “And with Him 15 the Mother
of the Book,” that is, 115 source, which 15 the Preserved Tablet.

Others say that this verse means that Allah erases and abrogates
what He wishes of His laws and He affirms whichever of them He
wishes. The context points more to this interpretation. Allah says
(before the above-quoted part), “And it was never the part of a
messenger to bring a sign except as Allah permitted. For each period
there is an appointed writing.’ This means that the Messenger does
not produce a sign from himself but it is only from Allah. And then
Allah says, “For each period 15 an appointed writing. Allah does blot
out or confirm what He pleases. With Him is the Mother of the
Book.” That is, every divinely revealed code of law (shari‘ah) has
its appointed time and limit. Then Allah abrogates that legislation
with another legislation. Allah abrogates what He wills of those
laws when its time ends and He confirms whatever of those laws He
so desires.

There are also other interpretations given for this verse. Allah
knows best what 15 correct.

(21) Nothing about them was hidden from Him before
He created them. And He knew everything they would
do before He created them. |

Allah knows what has happened, what will happen, what did
not happen and, even were it to happen, (He knows) how it would
happen. As Allah says in the Qur’an, “If they were returned (to this
world), they would certainly commit again what they have been
forbidden” [6:28]. He knows that they will not be returned, but He
states that if they were to be returned, they would return to their old
misdeeds. Allah also says, “If Allah found in them any good, He
would have indeed made them listen (to the Guidance). As it is, if
He had made them listen, they would have turned back and declined
(faith)” [8:23]. This is a refutation of the Rafidah and Qadariyyah,
who say that Allah does not know something until He creates it and
brings it into existence. This is related to the question of
predestination (gadr) and, God willing, we will discuss it in greater
detail later. |
7/2 7 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

(22) He has commanded them to obey Him and He has
forbidden them to disobey Him.

After mentioning creation and predestination, the author
mentions command and prohibition, alluding to Allah’s creating of
the creation for the purpose of His worship. As Allah says, “I have
not created the jinns and mankind except that they should serve and
~ worship Me” [51:56]. He also said, “He created death and life that
He might try which of you is the best in deeds” [67:2].

(23) Things occur as He ordains and wills them. His
will is always carried out. There is no will for His
servants except for what He wills for them. Whatever
He wills for them happens and what He does not will for
them does not happen.

Allah has stated, “You do not will except as Allah wills; for
Allah is Knowing, Wise” [76:30]; “And you will not will except as
Allah wills — the Lord of the Worlds” [81:29]; “Even 11 We did send
angels unto them, and the dead would speak to them, and We
gathered together all things before their very eyes, they are not the .
ones to believe, unless it is in Allah’s plan” [6:111]. He has also
said, “If your Lord had so willed, they would not have done it”
(6:112], and “If it had been the will of your Lord, they would have
all believed, all who are on the earth” [10:99]. He has also said,
“Those whom Allah wills to guide, He opens their breasts to Islam;
(but) those whom He wills to leave astray, He makes their breast
close and constricted as if they had to climb up to the skies” [6:125].

And when quoting Noah’s statement to his people, Allah says,
“Of no profit will be my counsel to you, much as I desire to give
you good counsel, if it be that Allah wills to leave you astray”
[11:34]; and, “Whom Allah wills He leaves. to wander; whom He
wills, He places on the way that is straight” [6:39]. These and many
other similar verses prove that what Allah wills happens and what
He does not will does not happen. How can something happen in
His kingdom that He does not will? No belief is further astray than
the belief that Allah wills a non-believer to believe, but he does not
believe and his will prevails over the will of Allah. Far exalted 5
Allah above what these people allege.

One may object to our view and say that it 1s contradicted by the
following verses, “Those who ascribe partners (to Allah) will say:
‘If Allah had willed, we would not have ascribed partners to Him,
nor would our fathers’” [6:148]; “The worshipers of false gods say:
‘If Allah had so willed, we would not have worshiped anything but
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 73

Him, neither we nor our fathers’”’ [16:35); and, “They say: ‘If it had
been the will of Allah, Most Gracious, we would not have
worshiped such (deities).’ Of that they have no knowledge. They do
nothing but lie” [43:20]. But Allah is condemning them for their
ascribing their polytheism to the will of Allah. Similarly, He
censured Iblis for ascribing to Allah his misguidance, when he said,
““My Lord, because you have put me in the wrong, I will make
wrong seem right to them on the earth’” [15:39].

This objection has been answered in many ways, the best of
which are the following. Allah condemned them because they
thought that His creative will (mashi‘ah) implies His pleasure and
love for the act. They were actually saying, “If He disliked that act
and was angered by it, why did He will it?’ So they take His
creative will as evidence for His approval. Allah refutes them on this
point. Or He is censuring their belief that Allah’s creative will is
evidence that He commanded the act. Or Allah is rebuking them for
rejecting His Shari‘ah and His commands with which He sent His
messengers and concerning which He revealed His books by His
command and decree. Instead of obeying those commands, they
refer to Allah’s general will. Instead of them mentioning that from
the point of view of tawhid, they mention it to oppose His
commands and laws. This is what the zanadiqah and ignorant folk
do. When they are commanded to do or not to do something, they
excuse themselves on the plea of predestination. At the time of
‘Umar, a thief similarly justified his theft on the grounds of
predestination. ‘Umar chastised him and retorted, “I also amputate
your hands on the will and decree of Allah.” The verse, “Thus did
those before them make charges of falsehood” [6:148], supports this
view. It exposes such people and says that their intention is only to
evade the command of Allah. One may ask how they know that
Allah did not ordain it. Did they peek into the Unseen?

Some people argue from the hadith which mentions that Moses
charged Adam with bringing mankind out of Paradise, and Adam
rebutted the charge by saying, “Do you blame me for a thing Allah
had ordained for me forty years before I was created?”’ After relating
their discussion, the Prophet (peace be on him) commented that
Adam defeated Moses in the argument.”® This hadith is authentic;
therefore, we accept and submit to it. We do not try to find fault

with its transmitters or question its wording, as do the Qadariyyah.
Nor do we try to explain it away. The correct understanding of the

*8Al-Bukhari, 3409, 4736, 4738, 6614, 7515; Muslim, 2652; Aba Dawid, As-
Sunnah, 4701; At-Tirmidhi, A/-Qadr, 2135; Ibn Majah, Al-Mugaddamah, 80.

/4 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

hadith, though, is not that Adam excused his sin on the grounds of
predestination (gadr). He knew his Lord and his sin too well to offer
that excuse. How can one expect such a thing from a prophet which
one cannot expect from an ordinary Believer? Similarly, Moses
knew his father (Adam) and his sin better than to blame Adam for a
sin that he had repented of and that Allah had forgiven him, and he
had been chosen and guided. The thing for which Moses blamed
Adam was the affliction that mankind faced in being removed from
Paradise. Adam countered this charge by saying that the affliction
had already been ordained. Thus, he argued according to
predestination, not concerning the sin he committed, but concerning
the affliction that was the result of the sin. One can refer to
predestination concerning calamities and afflictions but not
concerning sins.

That is the best interpretation given for that hadith. What is
determined of calamities and afflictions must be submitted to and
accepted. This is part of the complete pleasure with Allah as Lord.
As for sins, one should not commit them. But if one does commit
sins, he must ask for forgiveness and repent. Therefore, one repents
of sins and patiently bears afflictions. Allah says, “Bear patiently,
for the promise of Allah is true; and ask forgiveness for your sin”
[40:55]; and, “If you are patient and fear Allah, their plotting will
not harm you in the least” [3:120].

As for the statement of Iblis, “‘Lord, because you have led me
astray...,"” Allah has condemned Him for justifying his act on the
basis of predestination. But he is not being blamed for his
recognition that what he did was preordained. Look at what Noah
(peace be on him) said, “Of no profit will be my counsel to you,
much as I desire to give you counsel, if it be that Allah wills to leave
you astray. He is your Lord, and to Him will you return” [11:34].
And how beautiful are these lines of a poet:

What You will happens,

even though I may not will it,
and what I will does not happen
if You do not will it.

Wahb Ibn Munabbih said, “I contemplated gadr and became
confused and lost. Again I contemplated gadr and became confused
and lost. Then I discovered that the people who understand gadr
best are those who do not discuss it; and the people most ignorant of
gadr are those who talk about it.”
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 75

(24) He gives guidance to whomever He wills, protects
them and keeps them safe from harm as an act of grace.
And He leads astray whomever He wills, abases them
and afflicts them out of His justice.

This is a refutation of the Mu‘tazili view that it 15 incumbent
upon Allah to do what is best for human beings. This topic is part of
a larger question on divine guidance and abandonment.

The Mu‘tazilah say, “Guidance from Allah is simply showing
the straight path. Misguidance (being led astray) means the He
pronounces that someone has strayed, or His judgment that
someone has strayed, when the servant himself creates an act of
misguidance.” This is all based on their wrong principle that human
beings create their own actions.

The evidence for what the author has said includes Allah’s
statement, “You cannot guide whom you like; it is Allah Who guides
whom He wills” [28:56]. If guidance were simply to show the
straight path, then how can that type of guidance be denied of the
Prophet (peace be on him)? He does show the straight path to
everyone, whether they accept it or reject it. And Allah says, “Had
We willed, We would have given everyone his guidance”’ [32:13],
and “He leaves astray whom He wills, and guides whom He wills”
[74:31]. If guidance from Allah were simply defining what is true, it
has been done for everyone, so how can it can it be qualified in
these verses by His will to do so? Allah also says, “Had it not been
for the grace of My Lord, I should have certainly have been among
those brought there (to Hell)” [37:57]. And finally, “Whom Allah
wills, He leaves to stray; whom He wills, He places on the Way that
15 straight” [6:39].

(25) All of them are subject to His will, between either
His grace or His justice.

This is true because they are as Allah has said of them, “It is He
Who has created you; and of you are some that are unbelievers and
some that are Believers” [64:2]. Hence, when He guides someone to
faith, it is an act of grace from Him and to Him belongs the praise
for that act. But when He leaves another to wander, it is His justice
and He is also deserving of praise for that.

We will discuss this topic in more detail later, God willing. This
is because the author did not put all of his statements concerning
gadr in one place. Therefore, we will follow his order.
/6 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

(26) He is exalted above having opponents (adad) or
equals (andad).

Didd means ‘opposite’ or ‘opponent’; nidd means ‘equal’. Allah
has no one to oppose Him; what He wills happens; what He does
not will does not happen; and there is none equal to or like Him. As
Allah has said, “There is none like unto Him” [112:4]. By denying
that Allah has an opponent or an equal, the author seems to be
censuring the Mu‘tazili view that man is the creator of his acts.

(27) His decision is never reversed; His command is
never resisted; His will is never frustrated.

That is to say, there 15 no one Who can force Him to change His
decision, delay its implementation, or frustrate its execution. He is
the One God, the Supreme, the Irresistible.

(28) We believe in all of these things, and We are
certain that everything comes from Him. |

Concerning imdn (faith), God willing, it will be discussed later.
As for al-igan, it means istigrar - ‘to settle’. For example, water
yagqina in the tank, that is, water settles in the tank. As for the tanwin
in kullan, it stands for the construct state, so it refers to everything
that happens. The sentence, therefore, means that we have a firm
and unshakable conviction that everything that happens is from
Allah. Everything is determined and ordained by Him. Everything is
created and brought into being by His will. We will return to this
point later, God willing.

(29) (And we believe and are certain) that Muhammad is
His chosen Servant (‘abd), His elect Prophet (nabi) and
His Messenger (rasiil), with whom He is well-pleased.

The words used by At-Tahawi for “chosen”, “elect’’ and “well-
pleased” are very similar in meaning.

Note that the completeness of human beings lies in the
actualization of the true worship of Allah. Whenever the human
being increases his actualization of that worship, he becomes more
complete and he ascends in degree. Anyone who thinks that human
beings may transcend the limits of worship, in any manner
whatsoever, and that this transcendence means greater perfection, 5
a most ignorant and deviant person. Allah has said, “They say that
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 77

the Most Gracious has begotten offspring — exalted 15 He above that.
They are but servants raised in honor” [21:26]. There are other
similar verses in the Qur’an. Allah describes His Prophet (peace be
on him) as ‘abd (servant) when mentioning his greatest event. While
discussing the Prophet’s ascension to heaven, He says, “Glory be to
Allah, Who took His servant (‘abd) for a journey by night” [17:1].
(He has referred to the Prophet in this manner in several other
verses. For example,) He has said, “Yet when the servant of Allah
stands forth to invoke Him” [72:19]; “He (Allah) conveyed the
inspiration to His servant what He meant to convey” [53:10]; and,
“If you are in doubt as to what We have revealed to Our servant...”
[2:23]. It is because of (his excellent servitude to Allah) that he
excelled everyone in this world and will surpass everyone in the
next. That is why Jesus will say on the Day of Judgment, when the
people come to him seeking his intercession on their behalf, “Go to
Muhammad; he is the servant ( ‘abd) who has had all of his early and
later faults forgiven. 57 He attained that great status through his
complete servitude of Allah.

The author has used a kasrah in the statement “inna
Muhammadan,” in conjunction with the words, “inna Allaha
wa@hidun....” It has to be in this manner because they are ruled by
the governing words, “And we say (naqul) about Allah’s
oneness..."

The well known approach of the theologians to prophethood 5
through demonstration of miracles. Many of them do not recognize
the prophethood of prophets except through miracles, and they
confirm them in strange ways. Many of them require the rejection of
supernatural events coming through anyone except prophets. They
even deny the wondrous acts that occur to the pious devotees of
Allah, the existence of magic, and so on.

There is no doubt that miracles constitute authentic evidence, but
miracles are not the only kind of evidence. Prophethood is claimed
either by the most honest person or the most dishonest person. It 5
not difficult for anyone except the most ignorant to ascertain which
is which. The situation and circumstances around them reveal who
is who. There are many ways to distinguish between the truthful and
the liars for people other than prophets; therefore, what about the
case of those who claim to be prophets? (There must also be many

*’Part of the hadith on intercession reported by Anas Ibn Malik and recorded in Al-
Bukhari, 4476, 6365, 7410, 7516; Muslim, 193, 322; Ibn Majah, Az-Zuhd, 4312;
Ahmad, 3:116, 244, 247, 248.

“This is a grammatical point that need not concern the English reader.

78 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

ways to determine if they are truthful.) As Hassan said about the
Prophet (peace be on him), “Had there been no other distinguishing
signs in him, his face would have been sufficient to tell you about
him.”

Whenever an imposter has claimed prophecy, his ignorance,
lies, wickedness and servility to Satan have been exhibited to
everyone who has the least bit of discernment. A messenger must
tell people things, command them to do specific things and perform
specific acts, all of which demonstrate his sincerity and truthfulness.
As for the imposter, the things he expounds, the rules he prescribes
and the deeds that he performs all contain things that expose his
falsehood in different ways. One is the opposite of the other. For
every two people who claim the same thing, one will be truthful and
the other a liar. It is inevitable that the veracity of the one and the
falsehood of the other become clear to the people, even if only after
some time. Truth leads to goodness and untruth must lead to evil.

In the Sahihs of Al-Bukhari and Muslim it is recorded that the
Prophet (peace be on him) said, “Be truthful, for truth leads to
righteousness and righteousness leads to Paradise. One keeps on
being truthful until Allah records him among the truthful. Refrain
from lying, for lying leads to wickedness and wickedness leads to
Hell. One goes on lying until his name is recorded among the
liars.”°' This is why Allah has said, “Shall I inform you on whom
the evil ones descend? They descend on every lying, wicked person, —
and pour hearsay vanities in their ears, and most of them are liars.
And the poets! It 15 those straying in evil who follow them. Do you
not see that they wander distracted in every valley? They say what
they do not practice?” [26:221-226].

Soothsayers, fortune-tellers and the like, although they
sometimes may turn out to be correct concerning something they
said about the Unseen, have enough lies and evil deeds that it
becomes clear that the source of their narrations 15 not an angel and
that they are not prophets. When the Prophet (peace be on him)
asked Ibn Sayyad to inform him what the Prophet had kept hidden
from him, he said, “Smoke.” Then the Prophet (peace be upon him)
said, “Down with you. You cannot be more than what you are,”
meaning: ‘you are nothing but a soothsayer.’ And he said to the
Prophet, “They (his visiting spirits) sometimes bring him the truth

°'Muslim, Al-Birr wa as-Salah, 2607; Abi Dawid, A/-Adab, 4989; At-Tirmidhi, A/-
Birr wa as-Salah, 1962; Ahmad, 1:384, 393. — |

®? Al-Bukhari, 1354, 3055, 6123, 6618; Muslim, A/-Fitan wa Ashrat as-Sa ‘ah, 2930;
Abt Dawid, Al-Malahim, 4329; At-Tirmidhi, A/-Fitan, 2250; Ahmad, 2:148, 149.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 79

and sometimes falsehood.’*’ He also said, “I see a throne on the
water.” And that was the throne of Satan. The Qur’4n makes it
clear that poets are only followed by those who wander astray,
indulging in their evil desires, even if it ruins their lives in the end.
One who recognizes the Prophet, his truthfulness, his keeping of his
word, his doing what he says, will be convinced that he was neither
a poet nor a soothsayer.

People have different ways of discriminating between a truthful
person and a liar. They use such means even for common people
like farmers, weavers, writers, grammarians, doctors, jurists, and
so on. (Similarly, there are ways to determine the veracity of a
prophet.) Prophecy encompasses concepts and precepts which are
the noblest of all truths and principles of conduct known to man. It
is necessary that the prophet set an example in everything. If this 1s
true, it is not difficult to ascertain who is a true prophet and who is
not.

The profound scholars state that 1f something 15 reported by one,
two or three persons, that is circumstantial evidence that leads the
report to be considered true by necessity. In the same way, one
person’s pleasure with another, or his love or hate, pleasure or
displeasure, may be noted from the expression on his face, even if
he is not able to convey it in words. Allah has said, “Had We so
willed, We could have shown them to you, and you would have
known them by their marks” [47:30]. Then Allah continues, “But
surely you will know them by the tone of their speech” [47:30]. And
there is a saying which goes, “When you conceal something in your
heart, Allah reveals it through your face and the slip of your
tongue.”

Just as one discovers a truthful report from a deceitful report
through circumstantial evidence, what about the case of one who
claims to be a prophet? How can the truthfulness of such be hidden
from his lies? How can it be that it is possible to distinguish between
the truthful claimant to prophecy from the lying claimant through
different evidence?

‎Al-Bukhari, 6273; Muslim, Al-Fitan, 2930.‏ ذه

‎Part of a hadith in Muslim, A/-Fitan, 2925, narrated by Abi Sa‘id Al-Khudri. The
hadith states, “Once the Prophet, Abi’ Bakr and ‘Umar met Abii ‘Ayyad. The Prophet
(peace be on him) said, ‘Will you bear witness that I am the Messenger of Allah? He
said, ‘Will you bear witness that I am the messenger of Allah? The Prophet (peace be
on him) said, ‘I believe in Allah, His angels, and His books.’ Then he asked him,
“What do you see?’ He said, ‘I see a throne on the waters.’ The Prophet (peace be on
him) then said, ‘You rather see the throne of Iblis on the waters...’” Also, see At-
Tirmidhi, 2248.

80 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

Khadijah, may Allah be pleased with her, knew that her husband
was honest and truthful. Therefore, when he received his first
revelation and he told her, “I fear for my life,” she said to him,
“Fear not. I swear by Allah, that Allah will never disgrace you. You
keep the ties of kinship, speak the truth, help the needy, honor the
guest, give to the poor and assist those in difficulty.’ Obviously,
the Prophet (peace be on him) was not fearful because he told lies;
he knew about himself that he did not lie. He feared, though, that
some evil might befall him. That is the second stage. Khadijah told
him what negated such a fear by reminding him of his virtues and
noble qualities. She knew that it is Allah’s way not to disgrace
people of that nature.

Similarly, when the Negus, the emperor of Abyssinia, enquired
about the teachings of the Prophet and the Muslim refugees from
Makkah recited a portion of the Qur’an to him, he told them, “This
and what Moses brought are two rays that shine from the same
source of light.’

When Khadijah took the Prophet (peace be on him) to her cousin
Waraqah Ibn Nawfal, who was a Christian and who used to write
the Gospel in Arabic, and asked him to listen to what had happened
to the Prophet (peace be on him), he responded, “This is the angel
(an-namiis) who used to visit Moses.’”’ |

When Heraclius, the king of the Byzantines, received the letter
from the Prophet (peace be on him) inviting him to Islam, he
inquired whether there were any Arabs in the city at that time. Abia
Sufyan and a trade caravan happened to be present. The king called
for him and asked Abt Sufyan about the Prophet (peace be on him).
He commanded the other Arabs (who were with Abt Sufyan) to
contradict him if he should lie. They ended up endorsing with their
silence all that he said. The king asked, “Were any of his forefathers
a king?” Abt Sufyan said no. The king asked, “Did anyone else
among you make the same statements before him?” Abt Sufyan
answered no. He then asked, “Does he come from a noble family?”
“Yes,” was Abti Sufyan’s answer.

Part of a hadith narrated by ‘A’ishah, recorded in Al-Bukhari, 3, 4935, 6982;
Muslim, Al-/mdn, 160; Ahmad, 6:153, 232.

**Part of a long hadith narrated by Umm Salamah, recorded in Ahmad, 1:201-203,
5:290-292; Ibn Hisham, As-Sirah an-Nabawiyyah, 1:334-337. Al-Arnawit says that
its chain is strong.

°’Part of the same hadith just mentioned, narrated by ‘A’ishah and recorded by Al-
Bukhari and others.

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 87

Then he asked, “Did you find him telling a lie before he said
what he is saying?” He answered, “No, we never experienced him
lying.” The king then asked, “Are his followers the weak or the
nobles?” He was told that the weak were following him. He then
asked, “Are they increasing or decreasing in number?’ He was told
that they were increasing. He then asked, “Did anyone turn from his
religion in anger with him after he had entered the religion?” They
said no. The king said, “Have you fought him?” They said yes. The
king asked about the fighting between them and they told him,
“Sometimes they win and sometimes we win.” The king asked,
“Has he ever betrayed anyone?” They told him that he had not. He
then asked, “What does he command?” They said, “He commands
us to worship only Allah, not ascribing any partners to Him. And he
forbids us what our fathers worshiped. He commands us to pray,
speak the truth, practice temperance and be kind to relatives.”

Those were more than ten questions. After asking them, the king
told them what they demonstrated, “I asked you if any of his
forefathers were king and you said no. If you had said that among
his forefathers was a king, I would have said that he is a person
who is seeking the kingdom of his father. And I asked you if
anyone among you had made the same statements he makes. You
answered no. I would have told you, if you had said that there was
such a person making the same statements, that he is simply
following in the footsteps of that person. Then I asked if you had
ever known him to lie before he started his claims. You answered in
the negative. I concluded that it was not possible for one who did
not lie in matters of man to lie while speaking about Allah. I asked
you if the weak or the nobles follow him and you told me that the
weak follow him. These are the people who follow the
messengers,” meaning in the beginning of their message.

Then he said, “I asked you if his followers were increasing or
decreasing, and you said they are certainly increasing. This 15 what
happens with true faith until it becomes dominant. And I asked you
if anyone had turned from his religion in anger with him after he had
entered the religion. You said no. That is the case with true faith.
When it enters the heart, no one can be displeased with it
afterwards.” This is one of the greatest signs of truth. On the other
hand, deception and falsehood must be exposed in the end. Those
who believed in such a false message end up denouncing it. Those
who remained away from it at the beginning never enter its fold.
Falsehood can prevail for a short time but then it becomes exposed.

Heraclius continued by saying, “I asked you about the fighting
between you and him and you said that sometimes you are
82 | Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahdwiyyah

victorious and sometimes he. That is the way with messengers.
They are tested but the final result is always for them. And I asked
you if he had ever betrayed anyone and you said no. That is the way
of the messengers; they never betray.” He was aware of the ways of
the messengers and how Allah dealt with them. He knew that
sometimes they are victorious and sometimes they are tested. He
knew that they never betray. He knew those were the signs of the
messengers and that it was the way of Allah to test the prophets and
Believers with both ease and hardship so they could attain gratitude
and patience. In the Sahih it is recorded that the Prophet (peace be on
him) said, “I swear by the One in Whose hand is my life, Allah
never decrees anything for a Believer except that 15 good for him.
And that is the case for no one else except the Believer. If comfort
comes to him he gives thanks and that is good for him. If hardship
comes to him he is patient and that is good for him.”°*

Allah has explained in the Qur’an the wisdom behind the
enemy’s victory over the Believers at Uhud. He says, “Lose not
heart, nor fall into despair, for you must gain mastery 11 you are true
in faith,” [3:139], and “Alif Lam Mim. Do men think that they will
be left alone on saying, ‘We believe,’ and they will not be tested?”
[29:1-2]. There are many verses and ahddith that tell how Allah acts
towards His creatures and what wisdom underlies His acts which
bedazzle the mind.

Heraclius continued, “I asked you about his teachings and you
said that he asked you to worship Allah alone without associating
anyone with Him, to offer prayer, abide by truth, practice
temperance and do good to kin, and that he forbade you to worship
the gods your fathers had been worshiping. This is what the
prophets preach. I knew that a prophet was to be born; however, I
did not expect that he would be from you. I wish I could accept him.
Were I not king, I would go to see him. If what you say is true, he
will conquer the ground on which I am standing.” Heraclius was
addressing Abt Sufyan Ibn Harb, who was at that time a disbeliever
and a staunch enemy of the Prophet (peace be on him). Aba Sufyan
himself stated, “When we left I told my companions, “The matter of
the son of Abt Kabshah (the Prophet) has become so strong that
even the king of the Romans fears it.” Since that time I was certain
that the Prophet’s religion would dominate until Allah forced me into
Islam, even though I disliked it.’

*’Muslim, Az-Zuhd wa ar-Rigdq, 2999; Ahmad, 4:332, 6:16.
°° Al-Bukhari, 7, 51, 2681, 2804, 2941, 2978, 3174, 4553, 5980, 6260, 7196,

Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahawi 83

One must realize that things that happen within the heart are
produced by a complexity of causes, none of which can be regarded
as sufficient in itself. Satiety, quenching of thirst, gratitude, joy and
sorrow, and other similar things are complex experiences which are
caused by a combination of factors, though each may have its own
effects. Similar is the case with knowledge that is based on reports.
One report generates some probability in the heart, a second report
strengthens it, and so on until it is transformed into definite
knowledge. The same is true of the arguments for the veracity or
otherwise of a claimant.

Furthermore, Allah has preserved some vestiges that point to the
favors He bestowed on His prophets and Believers, as well as what
punishment He meted out to those who denied the messengers.
Examples are the relics of the flood of Noah or of the drowning of
the Pharaoh and his army. Whenever Allah narrates the stories of the
successive prophets in Strat Ash-Shu‘ara, such as the stories of
Moses, Abraham, Noah and others after him, He stated at the end of
each story, “Truly in that is a sign, but most men do not believe.
And truly, your Lord is He, the Exalted in Might, Most Merciful”
[26:8-9, 68-69, 103-104, 121-122, 139-140, 158-159, 174-175
and 190-191].

In short, the knowledge that there have been people in the world
who claimed that they were messengers of Allah, that a section of
people followed them and others rejected them, that Allah helped the
prophets and their followers and made them victorious, and that He
punished their enemies — all of this is part of the most reliable and
most certain part of historical knowledge. This knowledge has been
transmitted in a far better and clearer manner than the knowledge
concerning the kings of Persia or the scholars of Greece, such as
Hippocrates, Galen, Ptolemy, Socrates, Plato and Aristotle.

Today, when we know about the prophets, as well as their
followers and enemies, through continuous transmission of reports,
we become certain, for various reasons, that they were true
prophets. First, they had told their people that Allah would
eventually help them and leave their opponents to perish. The final
matter would be in their favor. Second, it actually happened that
Allah gave them victory and destroyed their enemies. When we also
know how such occurred, for example how Pharaoh was drowned,
how the people of Noah perished i in the deluge and how Allah saved
him and his companions, we recognize the truthfulness of the
messengers. Third, if one is familiar with what the messengers

7541; Muslim, Al-Jihad, 1773; Ahmad, 1:262-263.

84 Sharh Al-‘Agidah At-Tahawiyyah

brought of laws and principles of life, it will be clear to him that they
were the most knowledgeable men and that what they said could not
have come from an ignorant liar. Furthermore, what they brought of
mercy, well-being, guidance, goodness, guiding mankind to what
benefits them and keeping them from what harms them is proof that
these things came from truly sincere and affectionate well-wishers of
mankind who wanted nothing but good and happiness for them.

This is not the place to mention the miracles of Prophet
Muhammad (peace be on him). One may consult the relevant books
on the subject, such as the work of Al-Bayhaqi and others.

To deny the prophethood of Muhammad (peace be on him) is to
challenge the wisdom of Allah and to accuse Him of being unjust
and unwise. In fact, it is to deny His Lordship (rububiyyah). Allah
is well exalted above such things.

Here is the explanation of that argument. Suppose Muhammad
were not a prophet, as they say, but simply an unjust ruler who
claimed to have been sent by Allah, enjoined some things and
forbade others, prescribed new rules and laws and abrogated earlier
ones, fought people and killed followers of former prophets, even
though they were not wrong, reduced their women to slaves, seized
their property, annexed their lands, and went on doing all of this
until he dominated the land. And during all of that, he claimed that
he was acting on the command of Allah and that Allah was blessing
him and was pleased with him. And suppose further that he
continued such lies for twenty-three years until Allah gave him
victory, helped him by supernatural means, responded to his
prayers, destroyed his enemies and gave him fame. If he did all of
these things out of evil, as they claim, then he must have been the
most wicked of men and the greatest liar ever. He would have also
been the destroyer of the prophetic religions and killer of the pious
friends of Allah. Despite all that, Allah kept helping him and
bestowing on him one success after another. And Allah never
thought for a moment to stop or destroy him. If (any people) believe
that, they must also believe that there is no Creator, Ruler or Lord of
the world, for if there were a Ruler of the world, powerful and
wise, He would have certainly stopped him, punished him severely
and made him a lesson for people who came afterwards. Nothing
short of this would be becoming to any human ruler, not to speak of
the Ruler of rulers and Judge of judges.

But, on the contrary, Allah increased his fame, made his religion
prevail and made a great many people in all parts of the world
believe in his prophecy and witness to his piety. We do not deny
that many people have falsely clazmed prophecy and enjoyed some
success for a time. But their successes were short-lived and their
Commentary on the Creed of At- Tahadwi 85

victories ephemeral. In fact, Allah made His true prophets and their
followers triumphant in the end over such liars. He annihilated the
latter completely. This is the way of Allah that He has been
following forever. Even the disbelievers are aware of this fact. Allah
says in the Qur’an, “Do they say: ‘A poet! We wait for him some
calamity (hatched) by time.’ Say: You wait. I, too, will wait along
with you” [52:30-31].

Don’t you see that He is stating that His perfection, wisdom and
power refuse to allow anyone who forges statements in His name to
remain unpunished? Indeed, He will certainly make such a person a
lesson for His servants, as His practice with the forgers in the past
has shown. He says, “What! Do they say: ‘He has forged a
falsehood against Allah?’ But if Allah willed, He could seal your
heart” [42:24]. This ends the reply to the condition and then Allah
makes a clear, unconditional statement that He wipes away what 1s
false and establishes what is true. He says, “No just estimate of
Allah do they make when they say: ‘Allah does not send anything to
man (by way of revelation)’ [6:91]. Allah has stated that anyone
who denies His sending of messengers and revelation does not have
the correct image of Allah.

People have distinguished between a prophet (nabi) and a
messenger (rasi/) in different ways. The best view on this question,
in my judgment, is that when Allah reveals about the Unseen to a
man and asks him to convey that to others, he is a prophet and a
messenger. But if He does not ask him to preach it to others, he 15 a
prophet and not a messenger. Hence, a messenger 15 a special kind
of prophet. It follows that every messenger is a prophet but not vice-
versa. The office of messenger is higher than the office of prophet
which it incorporates. On the other hand, the category of the
messengers is a smaller category (in number) than that of the
prophets, which includes the former and is wider than it. In short,
as a concept, the office of messenger is wider, but as regards the
number of its bearers, it is smaller.

The sending of messengers is one of the greatest blessings that
Allah has bestowed on mankind. This is especially true in the case
of Muhammad (peace be on him). Allah has said, “Allah did confer
a great favor on the Believers when He sent among them a
messenger from among themselves, rehearsing unto them the verses
of Allah, purifying them, and instructing them in scripture and
wisdom. while before that they had been in manifest error” [3:164};
also, “We sent you not but as a mercy for all creatures” [21:107].
