Explanation of a Summary of al‐‘Aqeedatul Hamawiyyah of ibn Taymiyyah
By Imaam Muhammad ibn Saalih al‐‘Uthaymeen
(We ask Allaah to forgive him, his parents and all the Muslims, Aameen)
Translated by Aboo az‐Zubayr ‘Abdur Rahmaan Harrison

Tables of Contents
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 1:
THE OBLIGATION UPON THE SERVANT REGARDING HIS RELIGION
CHAPTER 2:
THE PROPHETʹS MESSAGE INCLUDES THE TRUE EXPLANATION OF THE
FOUNDATIONS OF THE RELIGION & ITS DETAILED MATTERS
CHAPTER 3:
THE WAY OF AHLUS SUNNAH REGARDING ALLAAHʹS NAMES &
ATTRIBUTES
CHAPTERS 4:
EXPLANATION OF THE TERMINOLOGY (TAHREEF, TA’TEEL, TAKYEEF,
TAMTHEEL, TASHBEEH, & ILHAAD)
CHAPTER 5:
THE TRUTH OF THE METHODOLOGY OF THE SALAF AND THE
FALSEHOOD OF GIVING PRECEDENCE TO THE METHODOLOGY OF THE
KHALAF IN KNOWLEDGES & WISDOM
CHAPTER 6:
SOME STATEMENTS OF MODERN AUTHORS AGAINST THE
METHODOLOGY OF THE SALAF
CHAPTER 7:
CONCEALING THE TRUTH WITH FALSEHOOD BY SOME OF THE MODERN
AUTHORS
CHAPTER 8:
THE REPORTED STATEMENTS OF THE SALAF REGARDING THE
ATTRIBUTES
CHAPTER 9:
THE HIGHNESS (‘ULUWW) OF ALLAAH & ITS PROOFS

CHAPTER 10:
THE SENSE OF ‘POSITION’ AS IT PERTAINS TO ALLAAH
CHAPTER 11:
THE RISING OF ALLAAH (ISTIWAA) OVER HIS THRONE (‘ARSH)
• PART ONE
• PART TWO: THE THRONE (‘ARSH)
CHAPTER 12:
THE MA’IYYAH OF ALLAAH (BEING WITH HIS CREATION)
CHAPTER 13:
COMBINING BETWEEN THE TEXTS OF THE HIGHNESS (‘ULUWW) OF
ALLAAH ABOVE HIS CREATION AND THE MA’IYYAH OF ALLAAH
(BEING WITH HIS CREATION)
CHAPTER 14:
ALLAAHʹS DESCENDING TO THE HEAVEN OF THE DUNYAA
• PART ONE
• PART TWO: COMBINING BETWEEN THE TEXTS OF THE ‘ULUWW
(HIGHNESS) OF ALLAAH & HIS DESCENDING
CHAPTER 15:
AFFIRMING THE ATTRIBUTE OF ALLAAHʹS FACE
CHAPTER 16:
THE TWO HANDS OF ALLAAH
CHAPTER 17:
THE TWO EYES OF ALLAAH
CHAPTER 18:
THE FORMS IN WHICH THE ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAAHʹS TWO HANDS &
TWO EYES HAVE BEEN REPORTED
CHAPTER 19:
THE SPEECH OF ALLAAH
• PART ONE
• PART TWO: THE QUR’AAN IS THE SPEECH OF ALLAAH
• PART THREE: OUR RECITATION OF THE QUR’AAN

CHAPTER 20:
THE EMERGENCE OF TA’TEEL AND ITS ORIGINS
CHAPTER 21:
THE METHODOLOGY OF THOSE WHO DENY ALLAAH’S ATTRIBUTES
• PART ONE
• PART TWO: SOME OF THE FALSE ALLEGATIONS OF THIS
METHODOLOGY
• PART THREE: THE DOUBTS & FABRICATIONS THESE DENIERS RELY
UPON AS PROOF
CHAPTER 22:
EACH OF THE TWO GROUPS OF TA’TEEL & TAMTHEEL ACTUALLY
COMBINE BETWEEN BOTH TA’TEEL & TAMTHEEL
CHAPTER 23:
THE SALAFʹS WARNING AGAINST PHILOSOPHICAL SPEECH (‘ILM AL‐
KALAAM
CHAPTER 24:
THE CATEGORIES OF DEVIANT PEOPLE CONCERNING THE BELIEF IN
ALLAAH & THE LAST DAY
• PART ONE
• PART TWO: THE METHODOLOGY OF THE PEOPLE OF TA’WEEL
REGARDING THE AFTER LIFE
• PART THREE: THE PEOPLE OF TAJHEEL
• PART FOUR: THE TAFSEER OF THE QUR’AAN
CHAPTER 25:
THE DIVISION OF THE PEOPLE OF THE QIBLAH REGARDING THE
AAYAAT & AHAADEETH OF THE ATTRIBUTES
CHAPTER 26:
THE EVIL NAMES WITH WHICH THE PEOPLE OF INNOVATION REFER TO
THE PEOPLE OF THE SUNNAH
CHAPTER 27:
ISLAAM & EEMAAN
• PART ONE

•
•
•

PART TWO: THE INCREASING AND DECREASING OF EEMAAN
PART THREE: THE WAYS OF INCREASING & DECREASING EEMAAN
PART FOUR: ISTITHNAA REGARDING EEMAAN

Introduction
All praise and thanks are due to Allaah. We praise Him, seek His help and
His forgiveness. We seek refuge with Allaah from the evils of our own selves and
from our bad deeds. Whomever Allaah guides, none can misguide him and
whomever He misguides, there is no guide for him. I testify that nothing
deserves worship except Allaah alone, with no partner and I testify that
Muhammad is His servant and Messenger ‐ may Allaah send prayers upon him,
his family, and his companions.
As for the following:
) with guidance and the true
Allaah has sent Muhammad (
religion. He sent him as a mercy to the world, as an example for the workers, and
as a proof against all the servants. He (Muhammad) fulfilled the trust, conveyed
the message, advised the Ummah, and he clarified for the people all of what they
need regarding the foundations of their religion as well as its detailed matters.
He left no good except that he clarified it and encouraged it, and he left no evil
but that he warned the Ummah from it so much so that he left his Ummah upon
a clear, white path ‐ its night as clear as its day. His companions traversed this
path, shining and radiant. Afterwards, the best generations took it from them in
the same state until oppression frowned upon them with the darkness of various
innovations by which the innovators conspired against Islaam and its people.
The people then wandered in confusion purposelessly, and they began building
their ʹAqeedah beliefs upon a spiderʹs web. However, the Lord upholds His
religion with His close helpers upon whom He bestows Eemaan, knowledge, and
wisdom by which they prevent these enemies. They repel their plot back against
their own throats. So no one ever comes out with his innovation except that
Allaah ‐ and for this deserves praise and thanks ‐ destines to send someone from
Ahlus‐Sunnah who refutes and disproves his innovation and extinguishes it.
There was from the foremost of those who stood up against these
innovators ‐ Shaykh‐ul‐Islaam Taqiyy‐ud‐Deen Ahmad ibn ʹAbdul‐Haleem ibn
ʹAbdus‐Salaam ibn Taymiyyah al‐Haraanee, ad‐Dimashqee. He was born in
Haraan (in ʹIraaq) on Monday, the 10th of Rabeeʹ al‐Awwal in the Hijrah year of
661 and he died while imprisoned oppressively in the fortress of Damascus in
Dhul‐Qiʹdah in the Hijrah year 728 ‐ may Allaah have mercy on him.
He has many works on the clarification and explanation of the Sunnah,
the reinforcement of its pillars, and the destruction of innovations.

One of the works on this subject is his “al‐Fatwaa al‐Hamawiyyah” which
he wrote as an answer to a question presented to him in the Hijrah year of 698
from Hamaah, a place in ash‐Shaam. In it, he was asked what the scholars and
Imaams of the religion say concerning the Aayaat and the Ahaadeeth of the
Si/aat, or the attributes and characteristics of Allaah. So he answered in about 83
pages and due to which, he suffered trials and afflictions. May Allaah reward
him on behalf of Islaam and the Muslims with the best of rewards.
Due to the difficulty in understanding and comprehending this answer
from many readers, I wanted to summarize the most important points from it
along with some other needed additions. I have named it ʺFathu Rabb‐il‐
Bariyyah bi‐Talkhees al‐Hamawiyyah.ʺ
I first published it in the Hijrah year 1380. I am now publishing it a second
time and perhaps changing what I see beneficial of additions or deletions.
I ask Allaah to make our effort sincerely for His Face and as a benefit to
His servants, for indeed He is Generous and Kind.
‐The Author
(Muhammad ibn Saalih al‐‘Uthaymeen)

CHAPTER 1
The Obligation upon the Servant Regarding His Religion
The obligation on the servant concerning his religion is following what
) says, as well
Allaah says and what His Messenger Muhammad (
as the Rightly‐Guided Successors after him from the Companions, and those who
followed them in righteousness.
This is because Allaah sent Muhammad (
) with clarifications
and guidance and obligated upon all of the people to believe in him and follow
him outwardly and inwardly. He (
) said:

ۤ‫ض ﻻ‬
ِ ‫ﻷ ْر‬
َ ‫ت وَٱ‬
ِ ‫ﺴﻤَﺎوَا‬
‫ﻚ ٱﻟ ﱠ‬
ُ ‫ﺟﻤِﻴﻌًﺎ ٱﱠﻟﺬِي َﻟ ُﻪ ُﻣ ْﻠ‬
َ ‫ل ٱﻟﻠﱠﻪِ ِإَﻟ ْﻴ ُﻜ ْﻢ‬
ُ ‫س ِإﻧﱢﻲ َرﺳُﻮ‬
ُ ‫ﻞ ﻳٰﺄَ ﱡﻳﻬَﺎ ٱﻟﻨﱠﺎ‬
ْ ‫ُﻗ‬
ِ‫ﻦ ﺑِﭑﻟﻠﱠﻪ‬
ُ ‫ﻷﻣﱢﻲﱢ ٱﱠﻟﺬِي ُﻳ ْﺆ ِﻣ‬
ُ‫ﻲ ٱ‬
‫ﺖ ﻓَﺂ ِﻣﻨُﻮ ْا ﺑِﭑﻟﻠﱠﻪِ َو َرﺳُﻮِﻟ ِﻪ ٱﻟ ﱠﻨ ِﺒ ﱢ‬
ُ ‫ﺤﻴِـﻲ َو ُﻳﻤِﻴ‬
ْ ‫ﻻ ُه َﻮ ُﻳ‬
‫إِﻟَـٰ َﻪ ِإ ﱠ‬
‫ن‬
َ ‫َو َآِﻠﻤَﺎ ِﺗ ِﻪ وَٱ ﱠﺗ ِﺒﻌُﻮ ُﻩ َﻟ َﻌﱠﻠ ُﻜ ْﻢ َﺗ ْﻬ َﺘﺪُو‬
ʺSay: ʹOh mankind, indeed I am the Messenger of Allaah to you all,
[from Him] to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the
earth. There is no god but Him; He gives life and causes death.ʺ So
believe in Allaah and His Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, who
believes in Allaah and His Words, and follow him that you may be
guided.ʺ [Sooratul‐ʹAraaf, 7:158]
And the Prophet (

) said:

‫ وﻋﻀﻮا‬،‫ﻋﻠﻴﻜﻢ ﺑﺴﻨﺘﻲ وﺳﻨﺔ اﻟﺨﻠﻔﺎء اﻟﺮاﺷﺪﻳﻦ اﻟﻤﻬﺪﻳﻴﻦ ﻣﻦ ﺑﻌﺪي ﺗﻤﺴﻜﻮا ﺑﻬﺎ‬
‫ وآﻞ ﺑﺪﻋﺔ‬،‫ ﻓﺎن آﻞ ﻣﺤﺪﺛﺔ ﺑﺪﻋﺔ‬،‫ وإﻳﺎآﻢ وﻣﺤﺪﺛﺎت اﻷﻣﻮر‬،‫ﻋﻠﻴﻬﺎ ﺑﺎﻟﻨﻮاﺟﺬ‬
.‫ﺿﻼﻟﺖ‬
ʺIt is incumbent upon you (to follow) my Sunnah and the Sunnah of the
Rightly‐Guided Successors after me. Hold fast to it and bite onto it with
your molars. And beware of the newly‐invented matters, for every
newly‐invented matter is an innovation and every innovation is
misguidance.ʺ 1
Recorded by at‐Tirmidhee (2676) and he said it is Hasan Saheeh. Also recorded by Aboo
Daawood (4607), Ibn Maajah (42), and Ahmad (4/126). Ibn Hibbaan and al‐Haakim declared it to
be Saheeh.
1

The Rightly‐Guided Successors are those who came after and followed the
Prophet (
) in beneficial knowledge and righteous action. The most
deserving of people of this description are the Companions. Allaah chose them
) and the establishment of
for the companionship of His Prophet (
His Religion. And Allaah would not choose ‐ while He is the Most
Knowledgeable, the Most Wise ‐ for the companionship of His Prophet except
the most complete of people in Eemaan, the highest in intellect, the most
righteous in action, the most determined, and the closest guided to the path. So
they are the most deserving of people to be followed after their Prophet
(
), and after them are the Imaams of the religion, those who are
known for their guidance and well‐being.

CHAPTER 2
The Prophetʹs Message Includes the True Explanation of the Foundations of
the Religion & Its Detailed Matters
The message of the Prophet (
) is comprised of two things:
) said,
beneficial knowledge, and righteous action, just as Allaah (

‫ﻦ ُآﱢﻠ ِﻪ َوَﻟ ْﻮ َآ ِﺮ َﻩ‬
ِ ‫ﻋﻠَﻰ ٱﻟﺪﱢﻳ‬
َ ‫ﻈ ِﻬ َﺮ ُﻩ‬
ْ ‫ﻖ ِﻟ ُﻴ‬
‫ﺤﱢ‬
َ ‫ﻦ ٱ ْﻟ‬
ِ ‫ﻞ َرﺳُﻮَﻟ ُﻪ ﺑِﭑ ْﻟ ُﻬﺪَىٰ َودِﻳ‬
َ‫ﺳ‬
َ ‫ُه َﻮ ٱﱠﻟﺬِيۤ َأ ْر‬
‫ن‬
َ ‫ﺸ ِﺮآُﻮ‬
ْ ‫ٱ ْﻟ ُﻤ‬
ʺIt is He who has sent His Messenger with (1) guidance and (2) the
religion of truth to manifest it over all religions, although the
Mushrikoon hate it.ʺ [Sooratut‐Tawbah, 9:33]
The guidance is the beneficial knowledge, while the religion of truth is the
righteous action that is based upon sincerity to Allaah and following His
Messenger (
).
And beneficial knowledge includes any knowledge that contains a benefit
to the Ummah for its life in the Dunyaa and the Hereafter. The first of knowledge
that enters into that is the knowledge of Allaahʹs Names, His Characteristics and
Attributes, and His Actions. Knowing this is the most beneficial of all sciences
and it is the most superior of the divine message. It is the summarization of the
prophetic Da’wah. By it, the religion is established in statement, action and
belief.
For this reason, it is impossible to think the Prophet (
)
would neglect this knowledge and not completely explain it, leaving no doubts
regarding it and repelling all uncertainties. This is impossible from various
perspectives:
Firstly: The Prophet’s (
) message contains light and
guidance. Allaah sent him as a bringer of good news as well as a warner, as a
caller to Allaah by His permission and a shining lamp so much so that he left his
Ummah upon a clear, white path – its night as clear as its day. No one deviates
from it except that he becomes destroyed. And the greatest of lights and the
most significant is what the heart obtains from knowing Allaah, His Names,
Attributes and His Actions. Therefore, there is no way that the Prophet

(
) did not explain this knowledge with the most important of
explanations.
Secondly: The Prophet (
) taught his Ummah everything that
it needs from the affairs of the religion and the Dunyaa. He even taught the
manners of eating, drinking, sitting, sleeping, etc. Aboo Dharr (‫ )رﺿﻰ اﷲ ﻋﻨﻪ‬said,
) died and there is no bird that flaps its
ʺAllaahʹs Messenger (
wings except that he mentioned to us some knowledge about it.ʺ There is no
doubt that the knowledge of Allaah, His Names, Attributes, and Actions is
included under this general principle. Rather, it is the first and foremost due to
the extreme need for it and necessity of knowing it.
Thirdly: 2 Eemaan in Allaah, His Names, Attributes, and Actions is the
basis of the whole religion and the summarization of the call of the Messengers.
It is the most serious of obligations and the best of what the hearts gain, and the
best of what the intellects perceive. So how would the Prophet (
)
neglect it without teaching and explaining it while he taught what was of less
importance and virtue?!
Fourthly: The Prophet (
) was the most knowledgeable
person of his Lord. He was the most sincere adviser to the creation and the most
eloquent in conveying and explaining the message. Therefore, it is not possible,
with this complete conveyance, that he would leave explaining the issue of
Eemaan in Allaah, His Names and Attributes, leaving it unclear and
questionable.
Fifthly: The companions (‫ )رﺿﻰ اﷲ ﻋﻨﻬﻢ‬must have spoken correctly
concerning this issue (Allaahʹs Names, Attributes, and Actions) because the
opposite of this would either be (1) ‐ that they remained silent regarding it or (2) ‐
that they spoke falsely concerning it. Both of these are impossible regarding the
Companions.
1. As for the point that the Companions remained silent on the matter of
the ʹAqeedah of Allaahʹs Names and Attributes, then this is impossible due to the
following reasons. Either, their silence was due to their own ignorance of what
Allaah obligated regarding the Names and Attributes, and what He has made
Here, Shaykh ibn al‐ʹUthaymeen is still mentioning the various aspects that disprove the
assumption that the Prophet did not completely explain the issue of Eemaan in Allaahʹs Names,
Attributes, and Actions. (T.N.)
2

permissible and prohibited; or their silence was based upon a certain knowledge
they had regarding that, yet they concealed it. And both of these are also
impossible:
As for their remaining silent due to ignorance: Then there is no heart
with life, awareness, a search for knowledge, and a desire for worship except that
its greatest concern would be the search for Eemaan in Allaah, and knowing His
Names and Attributes, and actualizing that with certain knowledge and
ʹAqeedah. There is no doubt that the best generations ‐ the best of them being the
Companions ‐ were the most complete of people regarding the life of the hearts,
loving of good, and actualizing beneficial knowledge. For this, the Prophet
(
) said,

‫ ﺛﻢ اﻟﺬﻳﻦ ﻳﻠﻮﻧﻬﻢ‬،‫ ﺛﻢ اﻟﺬﻳﻦ ﻳﻠﻮﻧﻬﻢ‬،‫ﺧﻴﺮ اﻟﻨﺎس ﻗﺮﻧﻲ‬
ʺThe best of people are my generation, then those who follow after
them, and then those who follow after them.ʺ 3
This preference is general encompassing their virtue in everything that
brings one closer to Allaah from statements, actions, or beliefs.
In addition, if we assume that the Companions were ignorant of the truth
regarding this matter, then the ignorance of those who came after them would be
even more obvious. This is because knowing what is affirmed to Allaah of the
Names and Attributes, or what is negated from Him ‐ this is only learned by way
of Messengership and the Companions are the intermediary between the
) and the Ummah. So based upon this assumption, it
Messenger (
means that no one has any knowledge regarding this matter and this is obviously
unreasonable.
As for their remaining silent due to concealing the truth: Every
intelligent and just person who knows the situation of the Companions ( ‫رﺿﻰ اﷲ‬
‫ )ﻋﻨﻬﻢ‬and their concern with spreading the beneficial knowledge and conveying it
to the Ummah, would never accuse them of concealing the truth, especially not
in the most serious and obligated of all matters ‐ knowing Allaah, His Names
and Attributes.

3

Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (2652) and Muslim (2533).

In addition, there has already come from them many true statements
regarding this issue and anyone who seeks them and follows them would know
about this.
2. As for the point that the Companions spoke incorrectly on the matter of
the ʹAqeedah of Allaah’s Names and Attributes, then this is false for two reasons.
First: Speaking falsely about an issue would mean that it would not be
possible to base any sound proof upon such statements. Moreover, it is known
that the Companions (‫ )رﺿﻰ اﷲ ﻋﻨﻬﻢ‬are the farthest of people in speaking about a
matter upon which no sound proof could be based, especially if that matter is in
regards to Eemaan in Allaah and the affairs of the unseen. As so, they are the
first people to practice Allaahʹs command,

‫ﻞ‬
ْ‫ﻋ‬
ِ ‫ﻚ ِﺑ ِﻪ‬
َ ‫ﺲ َﻟ‬
َ ‫ﻒ ﻣَﺎ َﻟ ْﻴ‬
ُ ‫ﻻ َﺗ ْﻘ‬
َ ‫َو‬
ʺAnd donʹt pursue (say) that of which you have no knowledge (of).ʺ
[Sooratul‐Israa, 17:36]
And His statement:

‫ﻖ َوأَن‬
‫ﺤﱢ‬
َ ‫ﻲ ِﺑ َﻐ ْﻴ ِﺮ ا ْﻟ‬
َ ‫ﻹ ْﺛ َﻢ وَا ْﻟ َﺒ ْﻐ‬
ِ ‫ﻦ وَا‬
َ‫ﻄ‬
َ ‫ﻇ َﻬ َﺮ ﻣِ ْﻨﻬَﺎ وَﻣَﺎ َﺑ‬
َ ‫ﺶ ﻣَﺎ‬
َ ‫ﺣ‬
ِ ‫ﻲ ا ْﻟ َﻔﻮَا‬
َ ‫ﺣ ﱠﺮ َم َر ﱢﺑ‬
َ ‫ﻞ إِ ﱠﻧﻤَﺎ‬
ْ ‫ُﻗ‬
َ‫ﻻ ﺗَ ْﻌﻠَﻤُﻮن‬
َ ‫ﺳ ْﻠﻄَﺎﻧًﺎ َوأَن َﺗﻘُﻮﻟُﻮ ْا ﻋَﻠَﻰ اﻟﻠّﻪِ ﻣَﺎ‬
ُ ‫ل ِﺑ ِﻪ‬
ْ ‫ﺸ ِﺮآُﻮ ْا ﺑِﺎﻟﻠّﻪِ ﻣَﺎ َﻟ ْﻢ ُﻳ َﻨ ﱢﺰ‬
ْ ‫ُﺗ‬
Say: My Lord has indeed forbidden are immoralities ‐ whether
committed openly or secretly, sins (of all kinds), unrighteous
oppression, joining partners (in worship) with Allah for which He has
given no authority, and saying things about Allaah what you don’t
know.ʺ [Sooratul‐‘Araaf, 7:33]
Second: Speaking falsely about any matter has its origin based either
upon true ignorance of the truth, or upon a desire to misguide the creation (while
actually knowing the truth). Again, both of these are impossible pertaining to the
rights of the Companions (‫)رﺿﻰ اﷲ ﻋﻨﻬﻢ‬.
As for the impossibility of a true ignorance of the matter, then this has
already been explained.

As for the impossibility of a desire to misguide the creation, then this
would be a very evil objective. It is impractical to think this would come from the
Companions ‐ those who were known for their absolute advice and concern for
the well‐being and love of good for the Ummah.
In addition, if we hold that it is possible for them to have evil objectives
and intentions regarding this matter, then we must also hold the possibility that
they would likewise have evil intentions in what they said regarding all the other
subjects of knowledge and religion. In this case, placing trust upon their
statements and information about these subjects would vanish. Of course, this is
one of the falsest of accusations because it would constitute a slander against the
whole Shareeʹah.
Therefore, if it is clear that the Companions (‫ )رﺿﻰ اﷲ ﻋﻨﻬﻢ‬must have
spoken truthfully and correctly, regarding this matter; then they were speaking
either simply from their intellects or by way of revelation. The first is not
probable because the intellect cannot possibly perceive all of the details of what
Allaah has obligated regarding His Attributes of perfection. Therefore, the
second option is left, and that is that they learned this knowledge by way of the
message of the Prophet (
). If so, then that would necessitate that
the Prophet (
) explained the truth regarding Allaahʹs Names and
Attributes ‐ and this is the required belief.

CHAPTER 3
The Way of Ahlus‐Sunnah Regarding Allaahʹs Names & Attributes
Ahlus‐Sunnah wal‐]amaaʹah: They are the ones who have united upon
) and working according to it
taking the Sunnah of the Prophet (
outwardly and inwardly in speech, action, and beliefs. Their way of dealing with
the Names and Attributes of Allaah is as follows:
Firstly: Regarding Ithbaat (Affirmation) ‐ Affirming whatever Allaah has
affirmed for Himself in His Book, or upon the tongue of the Messenger of Allaah
(
) without making Tahreef, Taʹteel, Takyeef, nor Tamtheel. 4
Secondly: Regarding Nafee (Negation) ‐ Their approach is to negate
whatever Allaah has negated from Himself in His Book, or upon the tongue of
), while at the same time holding the ʹAqeedah of
His Messenger (
affirming the perfection of its opposite to Allaah.
Thirdly: In those issues in which no negation nor affirmation has been
reported, the issues that people have disputed about such as Allaahʹs body, or
Allaah occupying a certain space, or position, etc.; Ahlus‐Sunnah withhold from
speaking about it. They neither affirm nor negate these issues due to the fact that
nothing has come to us regarding them. As for the meanings of these, then they
seek more details. For example, if these issues intend evil and falsehood, then
they refute them and declare Allaah free from these imperfections. However, if
they intend the truth and they do not contradict Allaah, then they may accept
them.
This approach is the required path to take. It is the middle course between
the People of Taʹteel and the People of Tamtheel.
Both the intellect and what has been conveyed indicate the obligation of
this path in dealing with the Names and Attributes of Allaah.
As for the intellect: The proof of this is the fact that detailed statements
regarding what is obligatory, permissible, and prohibited regarding Allaah is not

Shaykh Ibn al‐ʹUthaymeen will explain all of these terms shortly. However, in order to fully
understand the information provided before their explanation, it may be preferable to skip ahead
to understand these terms and then come back to this point. This may help in a better
understanding of the points Shaykh Ibn al‐ʹUthaymeen is making, and Allaah knows best. (T.N.)
4

perceived except through what has been conveyed (through revelation).
Therefore, it is then necessary to follow whatever has been conveyed by
affirming whatever has been affirmed, negating whatever has been negated, and
remaining silent on what has not been mentioned.
As for what has been conveyed: From these proofs is the statement of
):
Allaah (

‫ن ﻣَﺎ‬
َ ‫ﺠ َﺰ ْو‬
ْ ‫ﺳ ُﻴ‬
َ ‫ﺳﻤَﺂ ِﺋ ِﻪ‬
ْ ‫ن ﻓِﻲ َأ‬
َ ‫ﺤﺪُو‬
ِ ‫ﻦ ُﻳ ْﻠ‬
َ ‫ﺴﻨَﻰ ﻓَﺎ ْدﻋُﻮ ُﻩ ﺑِﻬَﺎ َو َذرُو ْا اﱠﻟﺬِﻳ‬
ْ‫ﺤ‬
ُ ‫ﺳﻤَﺎء ا ْﻟ‬
ْ‫ﻷ‬
َ ‫َوِﻟّﻠ ِﻪ ا‬
‫ن‬
َ ‫آَﺎﻧُﻮ ْا َﻳ ْﻌ َﻤﻠُﻮ‬
ʺAnd to Allaah belong the best names, so call upon Him using them.
And leave those who deviate (make Ilhaad) concerning His Names.
They will be recompensed for what they have been doing.ʺ [Sooratul‐
ʹAraaf, 7:180]
And His statement,

‫ﺴﻤِﻴ ُﻊ اﻟ َﺒﺼِﻲ‬
‫ﻲ ٌء َو ُه َﻮ اﻟ ﱠ‬
ْ َ‫ﺲ َآ ِﻤ ْﺜِﻠ ِﻪ ﺷ‬
َ ‫َﻟ ْﻴ‬
ʺThere is nothing like Him, and He is the Hearing, the Seeing.ʺ
[Sooratush‐Shooraa, 42:11]
And His statement,

‫ﻞ‬
ْ‫ﻋ‬
ِ ‫ﻚ ِﺑ ِﻪ‬
َ ‫ﺲ َﻟ‬
َ ‫ﻒ ﻣَﺎ َﻟ ْﻴ‬
ُ ‫ﻻ َﺗ ْﻘ‬
َ ‫َو‬
ʺAnd donʹt pursue (say) that of which you have no knowledge (about).ʺ
[Sooratul‐Israa, 17:36]
The First Aayah proves the obligation of Ithbaat (Affirmation) without
making Tahreef or Taʹteel because both of these are a form of Ilhaad (Deviation).
The Second Aayah proves the obligation of negating any form of
Tamtheel.
The Third Aayah proves the negation of any form of Takyeef, as well as
withholding and remaining silent in regards to whatever neither Ithbaat
(Affirmation) nor Nafee (Negation) has been reported.

Everything that has been affirmed for Allaah of attributes, then they are
attributes and characteristics of perfection, upon which He is praised for and
there is no form of defect whatsoever with them. So all of the attributes of
perfection are affirmed for Allaah in their most complete forms.
Likewise, everything that Allaah has negated from Himself is an imperfect
or defective attribute that contradicts His perfection. Therefore, all attributes and
characteristics of imperfection are not to be associated with Allaah due to His
absolute perfection. Additionally, whatever Allaah negates from Himself, then
what is required is to negate that attribute as well as to affirm the opposite
attribute with perfection. This is because negation alone does not indicate
complete perfection unless and until it includes affirming a praiseworthy
attribute. Negation alone could be due to a reason such as inability or weakness
and therefore be a defect.
The reason for the negation of a certain characteristic could possibly be
due to a lack of capability (of having that characteristic). In that case, it would not
be praiseworthy, such as saying, ʺThe wall doesnʹt provide any shade.ʺ
If this is clear, then we say that whenever Allaah negates from Himself
oppression and injustice, 5 for example, then what is required is to negate that
particular attribute of oppression and injustice while also affirming the complete
opposite to Allaah, which is perfect justice and fairness. Similarly, when He
negates fatigue and tiredness from Himself, 6 then what is required is to, negate
the attribute of fatigue while also affirming its opposite, which is perfect
strength. This is the way in dealing with the rest of the attributes that Allaah
negates from Himself, and Allaah knows best.

Such as the Aayah, “And surely Allaah is not unjust to (His) servants.ʺ [Soorah Aali‐ʹImraan,
3:182]. (T.N.)
6 Such as the Aayah, ʺAnd indeed We created the heavens and the earth and all between them
in six days and nothing of fatigue touched Us.ʺ [Sooratul‐Qaaf, 50:38]. (T.N.)
5

Explanation of the Terminology
(Tahreef, Taʹteel, Takyeef, Tamtheel, Tashbeeh, & Ilhaad)
The Meaning of Tahreef
Linguistically: ʺChangingʺ
In Islaamic terminology: ʺChanging a text in wording or meaning.ʺ
Changing the word of a text may or may not also change the meaning
along with it. Tahreef is of three types:
1. Tahreef that changes the wording as well as the meaning ‐ such as the
Tahreef made by some (innovators) of Allaahʹs statement,

‫َو َآﱠﻠ َﻢ اﻟﻠّ ُﻪ ﻣُﻮﺳَﻰ َﺗ ْﻜﻠِﻴﻤ ًﺎ‬
ʺAnd Allaah spoke to Moosaa with (direct) speech.ʺ [Sooratun‐Nisaa,
4:164]
They change the text ʺAllaahʺ to make it in the accusative case (making it
the direct object) to mean that the speech was spoken by Moosaa to Allaah.
2. Tahreef that changes the wording but not the meaning ‐ such as
reciting ʺal‐Hamdu lillaah...ʺ in Soorah al‐Faatihah to ʺal‐Hamda lillaah...ʺ

‫ب ا ْﻟﻌَﺎَﻟﻤِﻲ‬
‫ﺤ ْﻤ ُﺪ ﻟّﻠ ِﻪ َر ﱢ‬
َ ‫ا ْﻟ‬
ʺAll praise and thanks are due to Allaah, the Lord of the Worldsʺ
[Sooratul‐Faatihah, 1:1] 7
Most of the time this occurs only from someone who is unaware (of the
correct pronunciation or by mistake) if he does not have a certain intention for
doing so.

Shaykh Ibn al‐ʹUthaymeen holds the opinion that this is the first actual Aayah of Soorah al‐
Faatihah and not the ʹBasmalahʹ as is written in most copies of the Qurʹaan. See Tafseer Juz
ʹAmma by the author or his Tafseer Sooratul‐Baqarah. (T.N.)
7

3. Tahreef that changes the meaning only ‐ such as changing the meaning
of a word from its apparent meaning with no proof. An example of this is
changing the meaning of the Two Hands when they are associated with Allaah to
mean ʺstrengthʺ or ʺblessingsʺ and whatever is similar to this.

The Meaning of Taʹteel
Linguistically: ʺStripping away, emptyingʺ
In Islaamic terminology: ʺDenying the Names and Attributes of Allaah, or
denying some of them.ʺ
Taʹteel is of two types:
1. Absolute Taʹteel‐ such as the Taʹteel made by the Jahmiyyah who deny
all of the Attributes while the extremely deviant ones among them even deny the
Names of Allaah as well.
2. Partial Taʹteel ‐ such as the Taʹteel made by the Ashaʹriyyah who deny
some of the Attributes while affirming others. The first person to be known for
making Taʹteel in this Ummah was al‐Jaʹd ibn Dirham.

The Meaning of Takyeef
Takyeef is to speak (or hold a belief) about ʺhowʺ an attribute is, such as
saying, ʺAllaahʹs Hands are like...ʺ or ʺHis descending to the heaven of the
Dunyaa is like...ʺ

The Meaning of Tamtheel and Tashbeeh
Tamtheel is to acknowledge that something is equal to something else.
Tashbeeh is to acknowledge that something is similar to something else.
Therefore, Tamtheel is to make a likeness between two things in all
perspectives, and Tashbeeh is to make a likeness between them in most of their

characteristics. Sometimes they are used interchangeably. The difference between
them (Tamtheel and Tashbeeh) and Takyeef is from two aspects:
1. Takyeef is to speak (hold a belief, or seek an understanding) about
ʺhowʺ something is with or without affirming something to be similar to it. As
for Tamtheel and Tashbeeh, they indicate a ʺhowʺ something is while affirming
equality or likeness with something else.
From this point of view, Takyeef is more general because everyone who
makes Tamtheel is also making Takyeef, but not the other way around.
2. Takyeef is specific to the Attributes of Allaah. However, Tamtheel could
be made concerning Qadr, the Attributes, and the Essence or Being (of Allaah).
From this point of view, Tamtheel is then more general due to its being
associated with the Self or Being, the & Attributes, or Qadr.
In addition, Tashbeeh, which has led many people astray, is of two types:
1. Making Tashbeeh by acknowledging that the creation is similar to the
Creator.
2. Making Tashbeeh by acknowledging that the Creator is similar to the
creation.
As for making Tashbeeh by making the creation similar to the Creator,
then this means affirming that the creation possesses something which is only
specific to the Creator from actions, rights, or attributes.
Tashbeeh in Action: An example of this would be what someone does
who makes Shirk with Allaah in His Ruboobiyyoh, such as claiming that there is
another creator along with Allaah.
Tashbeeh in Rights: An example of this would be what the Mushrikoon
do with their idols claiming that they have a right to be worshipped. Therefore,
they worshipped them along with Allaah.
Tashbeeh in Attributes: An example of this would be what the extremists
do concerning their praise of the Prophet (
) or others such as the
verse of poetry by the famous poet al‐Mutanabbee while he was praising

‘Abdullaah ibn Yahyaa al‐Buhtaree, ʺSo be as you are, oh one who has no
equal...ʺ
As for making Tashbeeh by making the Creator similar to the creation,
then this means affirming something of the Essence or Being of Allaah or His
Attributes from what is specific to the creation. An example would be saying that
the Hands of Allaah are like the hands of created beings, or that His rising over
His Throne is like the way a created being would rise over something.
It is said that the first person to be known for this type was Hishaam ibn
al‐Hakam the Raafidhee (the extremists of the Sheeʹah), and Allaah knows best.

The Meaning of Ilhaad
Linguistically: ʺDeviating, inclining away fromʺ
In Islaamic terminology: ʺDeviating away from what is required of
ʹAqeedah or actions.ʺ
It is of two types:
•

Firstly: Regarding the Names of Allaah.

•

Secondly: Regarding His Aayaat.

As for Ilhaad regarding the Names of Allaah, it is to deviate from the truth
that is required regarding them and it is of four types:
1. To deny something of the Names of Allaah, or denying something of
the Attributes that the Names indicate, as the Mua’ttilah (those who make
Taʹteel) do.
2. To make the Names indicate a similitude of Allaah with His creation, as
the Mushabbihah (those who make Tashbeeh) do.
3. To name Allaah with a name that He has not named Himself with. This
is because the Names of Allaah are only known by way of revelation. An
example of this type is the naming of Him ʺFatherʺ the Christians do or ʺCause
and Doerʺ as some of the as philosophers do.

4. To derive from His Names other names for idols such as deriving ʺal‐
Laatʺ from al‐Ilaah (The God) and ʺal‐Uzzaaʺ from al‐ʹAzeez (The Mighty).
As for Ilhaad regarding Allaahʹs Aayaat; it is in regards to the legislative
Aayaat ‐ what the Messengers brought of rules and information, as well as in
regards to the universal Aayaat ‐ anything Allaah has created in the heavens or
earth.
As for the Ilhaad regarding the legislative Aayaat; it is to make Tahreef of
them, deny the information contained within them, or to disobey their rulings.
As for Ilhaad regarding the universal Aayaat; it is to attribute and
associate them to other than Allaah or to believe there is with Allaah a partner or
helper regarding them.
In conclusion, Ilhaad in both its forms are forbidden due to Allaahʹs
statement threatening those who make Ilhaad:

َ‫ن ﻣَﺎ آَﺎﻧُﻮ ْا ﻳَ ْﻌﻤَﻠُﻮن‬
َ ‫ﺠ َﺰ ْو‬
ْ ‫ﺳ ُﻴ‬
َ ‫ﺳﻤَﺂ ِﺋ ِﻪ‬
ْ ‫ن ﻓِﻲ َأ‬
َ ‫ﺤﺪُو‬
ِ ‫ﻦ ُﻳ ْﻠ‬
َ ‫َو َذرُو ْا اﱠﻟﺬِﻳ‬
ʺAnd leave those who deviate (make Ilhaad) concerning His Names.
They will be recompensed for what they have been doing.ʺ [Sooratul‐
ʹAraaf, 7:180]
And His Statement

‫ن ﻋَﻠَ ْﻴﻨَﺎ َأ َﻓﻤَﻦ ُﻳ ْﻠﻘَﻰ ﻓِﻲ اﻟﻨﱠﺎ ِر ﺧَ ْﻴ ٌﺮ أَم ﻣﱠﻦ َﻳ ْﺄﺗِﻲ ﺁﻣِﻨًﺎ‬
َ ‫ﺨ َﻔ ْﻮ‬
ْ ‫ن ﻓِﻲ ﺁﻳَﺎﺗِﻨَﺎ ﻟَﺎ َﻳ‬
َ ‫ﺤﺪُو‬
ِ ‫ﻦ ُﻳ ْﻠ‬
َ ‫ن اﱠﻟﺬِﻳ‬
‫ِإ ﱠ‬
‫ﺷ ْﺌ ُﺘ ْﻢ ِإﻧﱠ ُﻪ ﺑِﻤَﺎ ﺗَ ْﻌﻤَﻠُﻮنَ ﺑَﺼِﻴ ٌﺮ‬
ِ ‫ﻋ َﻤﻠُﻮا ﻣَﺎ‬
ْ ‫َﻳ ْﻮ َم ا ْﻟ ِﻘﻴَﺎ َﻣ ِﺔ ا‬
ʺIndeed those who deviate (make Ilhaad) regarding Our Aayaat are not
hidden from Us. So is he who is thrown into the Fire better or he who
comes safe on the Day of Resurrection? Do what you want; indeed He is
the All‐Seer of what you do.ʺ [Sooratul‐Fussilat, 41:40]
In addition, some types of Ilhaad are Kufr (Disbelief) depending on the
texts of the Qurʹaan and the Sunnah.

CHAPTER 4
The Truth of the Methodology of the Salaf and the Falsehood of Giving
Precedence to the Methodology of the Khalaf in Knowledge Wisdom
The explanation of the path of the Salaf has already proceeded as has the
proofs of adhering to it. Here, would like to give the evidences that the
methodology of the Salaf is indeed the correct methodology. This is based upon
two reasons:
Firstly: The methodology of the Salaf has its proofs within the Qurʹaan
and the Sunnah. Therefore, whoever follows their way with knowledge and
honesty will no doubt find that it is consistent with the Qurʹaan and Sunnah, in
general and in detail. For Allaah revealed the Qurʹaan so that the people would
reflect upon its Aayaat ‐ acting according to them if they were rulings, and
believing in them, if they were information. Moreover, there is no doubt that the
closest people to understanding them, believing in them, and acting in
accordance with them are the Salaf. These Aayaat came in their own language
and in their own time‐period. Therefore, they are definitely the most
knowledgeable of people in comprehending them and the most upright in acting
by them.
Secondly: It can be said that the truth in this matter (the way of dealing
with Allaahʹs Names and Attributes) is either in what the Salaf have said or what
the Khalaf (the later generations, specifically those who have followed other than
the way of the Salaf) have said, second option is certainly untrue because it
would then mean that Allaah, His Messenger, the first and foremost from the
Muhaajiroon and Ansaar all spoke untruthfully outwardly and publicly and
didnʹt once speak correctly regarding the required ‘Aqeedah. This would thereby
make the existence of the Qurʹaan and Sunnah nothing but an absolute harm to
the foundation of the religion, and leaving the people without them would be
better for them and more appropriate. This is clearly wrong.
Some of the stupid ones have even said, ʺThe way of the Salaf is safer, yet
the way of the Khalaf is more knowledgeable and wiser.ʺ 8
This statement originates from two sources:

This is the famous false principle, ʺTareeqatus‐Salaf aslam, wa tareeqatul‐Khalaf aʹlam wa
ahkam!ʺ
8

1. The ʹAqeedah of the speaker, from what he has of corrupted doubts, is
that Allaah has no real attributes that are indicated by the texts.
2. The speakerʹs belief that the way of the Salaf is to have Eemaan only in
the actual words of the texts about the attributes without affirming any meanings
to them. Therefore, the issue is an endless circle between believing solely in the
useless, meaningless words ‐and this is the way of the Salaf as they claim, and
between affirming real meanings to the texts that may contradict their apparent
meanings, yet do affirm the Attributes of Allaah ‐ and this is the way of the
Khalaf. Undoubtedly, acknowledging the real meanings of the texts is better in
knowledge and wisdom than merely affirming useless, meaningless words. As a
result, this stupid person preferred the way of the Khalaf in knowledge and
wisdom to the way of the Salaf,
This foolʹs statement contains within it truth and falsehood. As for the
truth, it is his statement, ʺThe way of the Salaf is safer.ʺ And the falsehood is his
saying, ʺ...yet the way of the Khalaf is more knowledgeable and wiser.ʺ This is
false for many reasons.
Firstly: It contradicts his first statement, “The way of the Salaf is safer.”
For if the way of the Salaf is in fact safer, then it must be more knowledgeable
and wiser because there is no safety except with knowledge and wisdom ‐
knowledge of the means leading to this safety, and the wisdom to follow those
means. Therefore, it is clear that the way of the Salaf is safer, more
knowledgeable, and wiser. There is no way for this fool to deny this.
Secondly: The ‘Aqeedah that Allaah has no real attributes that are
indicated by the texts is a false ʹAqeedah because it is based upon corrupted
doubts. 9 The Attributes of perfection are affirmed for Allaah based on the
intellect, the senses, the Fitrah, and the legislation (the Shareeʹah).
As for the intellect proving the affirmation of Allaahʹs perfect
Attributes: Everything in existence has attributes and characteristics, either
attributes of perfection or attributes of deficiency. The latter is not to be
associated with the perfect Lord who deserves all worship. For this reason,
Allaah has proven the fallacy of the right of idols to be worshipped by describing
them with attributes of imperfection and deficiency in that they do not hear, see,
9

See Part 2 of the 20th chapter (page 114).

benefit, harm, nor create anything and they cannot grant any victory. Therefore,
if the latter is not true, then the first one must be ‐ the affirmation of the
Attributes of perfection to Allaah.
In addition, the senses and what we witness indicate that even the
creation possesses praiseworthy attributes. Allaah is the one who gave them to
the creation so the one who gives these praiseworthy attributes is more
deserving of being described with them (in their perfect form).
As for the Fitrah proving the affirmation of Allaahʹs perfect Attributes:
The sound, uncorrupted souls are naturally inclined to the love Allaah, the
glorifying of Him, and His worship. So would you love, glorify, and worship
anyone other than One you knew to be described with the attributes of
perfection?
As for the legislation (Shareeʹah) proving the affirmation of Allaahʹs
perfect Attributes: These proofs are too numerous to be counted, such as
Allaahʹs statement:

‫ﻦ اﻟ ﱠﺮﺣِﻲ‬
ُ ‫ﺣ َﻤ‬
ْ ‫ﺸﻬَﺎ َد ِة ُه َﻮ اﻟﺮﱠ‬
‫ﺐ وَاﻟ ﱠ‬
ِ ‫ُه َﻮ اﻟﻠﱠ ُﻪ اﱠﻟﺬِي ﻟَﺎ ِإَﻟ َﻪ إِﻟﱠﺎ ُه َﻮ ﻋَﺎﻟِ ُﻢ ا ْﻟ َﻐ ْﻴ‬
‫ﺠﺒﱠﺎ ُر‬
َ ‫ﻦ ا ْﻟ َﻌﺰِﻳ ُﺰ ا ْﻟ‬
ُ ‫ﻦ ا ْﻟ ُﻤ َﻬ ْﻴ ِﻤ‬
ُ ‫ﺴﻠَﺎ ُم ا ْﻟ ُﻤ ْﺆ ِﻣ‬
‫س اﻟ ﱠ‬
ُ ‫ﻚ ا ْﻟ ُﻘﺪﱡو‬
ُ ‫ُه َﻮ اﻟﻠﱠ ُﻪ اﱠﻟﺬِي ﻟَﺎ ِإَﻟ َﻪ ِإﻟﱠﺎ ُه َﻮ ا ْﻟ َﻤِﻠ‬
‫ن‬
َ ‫ﺸ ِﺮآُﻮ‬
ْ ‫ن اﻟﻠﱠﻪِ ﻋَﻤﱠﺎ ُﻳ‬
َ ‫ﺳ ْﺒﺤَﺎ‬
ُ ‫ا ْﻟ ُﻤ َﺘ َﻜ ﱢﺒ ُﺮ‬
‫ت‬
ِ ‫ﺴﻤَﺎوَا‬
‫ﺢ َﻟ ُﻪ ﻣَﺎ ﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱠ‬
ُ ‫ﺴﺒﱢ‬
َ ‫ﺴﻨَﻰ ُﻳ‬
ْ‫ﺤ‬
ُ ‫ﺳﻤَﺎء ا ْﻟ‬
ْ ‫ﺼﻮﱢ ُر َﻟ ُﻪ ا ْﻟَﺄ‬
َ ‫ئ ا ْﻟ ُﻤ‬
ُ ِ‫ﻖ ا ْﻟﺒَﺎر‬
ُ ‫ُه َﻮ اﻟﻠﱠ ُﻪ ا ْﻟﺨَﺎِﻟ‬
‫ﺤﻜِﻴ ُﻢ‬
َ ‫ض َو ُه َﻮ ا ْﻟ َﻌﺰِﻳ ُﺰ ا ْﻟ‬
ِ ‫وَا ْﻟَﺄ ْر‬
ʺHe is Allaah, other than whom there is no god (worthy of worship),
Knower of the unseen and the seen. He is the Merciful, the Bestower of
Mercy. He is Allaah, other than whom there is no god (worthy of
worship), the King, the Holy, the Perfect, the Reassurer, the Overseer,
the Mighty, the Compeller, the Superior. Exalted is Allaah above
whatever they associate with him. He is 34 Allaah, the Creator, the
Originator, the Fashioner; to Him belong the best names. Everything in
the heavens and earth exalt Him. And He is the Mighty, the Wise.ʺ 10
[Sooratul‐Hashr, 59:22‐24]

In order to fully understand the meanings of these Names of Allaah, one can refer to the Arabic
cassettes of Shaykh ibn al‐ʹUthaymeen entitled Sharh ʹAqeedah Ahlus‐Sunnah wal‐jamaaʹah,
cassette #2, side B. This is also online at: http://www.binothaimeen.com/sound/snd/A0002/A0002‐
2B.rm. (T.N.)

10

And His statement,

‫ض‬
ِ ‫ت وَا ْﻟَﺄ ْر‬
ِ ‫ﺴﻤَﺎوَا‬
‫ﻋﻠَﻰ ﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱠ‬
ْ ‫ﻞ ا ْﻟَﺄ‬
ُ ‫َوَﻟ ُﻪ ا ْﻟ َﻤ َﺜ‬
ʺAnd to Him belongs the highest description (Attribute) in the heavens
and earth.ʺ [Sooratur‐Room, 30:27]
And His (

) saying:

‫ﻻ ُه َﻮ‬
‫ﻻ إِﻟَـﻪَ ِإ ﱠ‬
َ ‫ت وَﻣَﺎ اﻟﻠّ ُﻪ‬
ِ ‫ﺴﻤَﺎوَا‬
‫ﻻ ﻧَ ْﻮ ٌم ﻟﱠ ُﻪ ﻣَﺎ ﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱠ‬
َ ‫ﺳ َﻨ ٌﺔ َو‬
ِ ‫ﺧ ُﺬ ُﻩ‬
ُ ‫ﻻ َﺗ ْﺄ‬
َ ‫ﻲ ا ْﻟ َﻘﻴﱡﻮ ُم‬
‫ﺤﱡ‬
َ ‫ﻓِﻲ ا ْﻟ‬
‫ﻦ‬
َ ‫ﻻ ِﺑِﺈ ْذ ِﻧ ِﻪ َﻳ ْﻌَﻠ ُﻢ ﻣَﺎ َﺑ ْﻴ‬
‫ﻋ ْﻨ َﺪ ُﻩ ِإ ﱠ‬
ِ ‫ﺸ َﻔ ُﻊ‬
ْ ‫ض ﻣَﻦ ذَا اﱠﻟﺬِي َﻳ‬
ِ ‫ﻷ ْر‬
َ‫ﻻ ا‬
َ ‫ﺧ ْﻠ َﻔ ُﻬ ْﻢ َو‬
َ ‫َأ ْﻳﺪِﻳ ِﻬ ْﻢ وَﻣَﺎ‬
‫ﻻ ﺑِﻤَﺎ‬
‫ﻋ ْﻠ ِﻤ ِﻪ ِإ ﱠ‬
ِ ‫ﻦ‬
ْ ‫ﻲ ٍء ﱢﻣ‬
ْ ‫ﺸ‬
َ ‫ن ِﺑ‬
َ ‫ﻻ َﻳﺆُو ُد ُﻩ ُﻳﺤِﻴﻄُﻮ‬
َ ‫ض َو‬
َ ‫ﻷ ْر‬
َ ‫ت وَا‬
ِ ‫ﺴﻤَﺎوَا‬
‫ﺳﻴﱡ ُﻪ اﻟ ﱠ‬
ِ ‫ﺳ َﻊ ُآ ْﺮ‬
ِ ‫ﺷَﺎء َو‬
‫ﻈ ُﻬﻤَﺎ‬
ُ ‫ﺣ ْﻔ‬
ِ ‫ﻲ ا ْﻟﻌَﻈِﻲ‬
‫َو ُه َﻮ ا ْﻟ َﻌِﻠ ﱡ‬
ʺAllaah, there is no god (worthy of worship) but Him, the Ever‐Living,
the Self‐Sustainer and Sustainer of all that exists. Neither drowsiness
nor sleep overtakes Him. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens or
and on the earth. Who can intercede with Him except with His
permission? He knows what is (presently) before them and what is after
them, and they do not encompass anything of His knowledge except for
what He wills. His Kursee extends over the heavens and earth, and
preserving them does not tire Him. And He is the Most High, the
Greatest.ʺ [Sooratul‐Baqarah, 2:255]
And the statement of the Messenger (

):

ʺOh people, be easy on yourselves. For you are not calling upon one
who is deaf or absent. Indeed, you are calling upon One who is Hearing,
Seeing, and Near. Indeed, the One you are calling upon is closer to one
of you than the neck of his riding animal.ʺ 11
Thirdly: 12 The belief that the way of the Salaf is nothing but having
Eemaan in the words alone without affirming any meanings to them is a false

Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (2992) and Muslim (2704).
Shaykh Ibn al‐ʹUthaymeen is still mentioning the reasons why the saying “The way of the Salaf
is safer, yet...” is a false principle. Refer back to page 32. (T.N.)
11
12

belief and a lie against the Salaf. The Salaf are the most knowledgeable of the
Ummah of the texts about the Attributes, their words and meanings. Moreover,
they are the best in affirming their meanings, which befit Allaah and are based
upon the intended meaning of Allaah and His Messenger.
Fourthly: The Salaf are the inheritors of the Prophets and Messengers.
They learned their knowledge directly from the spring of divine Messengership
and the actualities of Eemaan.
As for those Khalaf, they have learned what is with them from the Majoos
(Fire‐Worshippers), the Mushrikoon, and the misguided ones from the Jews and
Greeks. So how are the inheritors of the Majoos, Mushrikoon, the Jews and
Greeks and those who have germinated from them more knowledgeable and
wiser regarding the Names and Attributes of Allaah, than the inheritors of the
Prophets and Messengers?
Fifthly: Those of the Khalaf ‐ whom this stupid one (the one who says this
statement) prefers their way in knowledge and wisdom over the way of the Salaf
‐ were confused because of their abandoning what Allaah has sent Muhammad
(
) with of clear teachings and guidance. They (the Khalaf) have
sought their knowledge of knowing Allaah from those who donʹt even know
Him themselves based upon what they have put forth themselves as well as
what the Ummah have witnessed against them. Ar‐Raazee, one of their leaders,
said clarifying what all their knowledge finally leads to:
“The end result of giving precedence to the intellect is simply constraint
and most of the effort of the workers is nothing but misguidance. The souls
within our bodies are in emptiness and most of our Dunyaa is nothing but
harming and worry. We have not benefited from our lifelong research other than
we gathered together statements of meaningless talk.” 13
I have pondered over the ways of the rhetorical speakers and the
methodologies of the philosophers in what I thought would heal the sickness, yet
did not even quench the thirst. I have discovered that the closest of paths is the
way of the Qurʹaan. Read about the Ithbaat (Affirmation) (of the Attributes):

‫ﺳ َﺘﻮَى‬
ْ ‫شا‬
ِ ‫ﻋﻠَﻰ ا ْﻟ َﻌ ْﺮ‬
َ ‫ﻦ‬
ُ ‫ﺣ َﻤ‬
ْ ‫اﻟﺮﱠ‬
13

Ar‐Raazee actually said this part in poetry form. (T.N.)

ʺThe Most Merciful rose over the Throneʺ [Soorah Taa Haa, 20: 5]
And His saying,

‫ﺢ َﻳ ْﺮ َﻓ ُﻌ ُﻪ‬
ُ ‫ﻞ اﻟﺼﱠﺎِﻟ‬
ُ ‫ﺐ وَا ْﻟ َﻌ َﻤ‬
ُ ‫ﺼ َﻌ ُﺪ ا ْﻟ َﻜِﻠ ُﻢ اﻟﻄﱠﻴﱢ‬
ْ ‫ِإَﻟ ْﻴ ِﻪ َﻳ‬
ʺTo Him ascends good speech, and righteous work raises it.ʺ [Sooratul‐
Faatir, 35:10]
And read about the Nafee (Negation),

‫ﻲ ٌء‬
ْ َ‫ﺲ َآ ِﻤ ْﺜِﻠ ِﻪ ﺷ‬
َ ‫َﻟ ْﻴ‬
ʺThere is nothing like Him.ʺ [Sooratush‐Shooraa, 42:11]
And His saying,
ً‫ﻪ ﻋِﻠْﻤﺎ‬
ِ ‫ن ِﺑ‬
َ ‫َوﻟَﺎ ُﻳﺤِﻴﻄُﻮ‬
ʺAnd they will never encompass what He knows.ʺ [Soorah Taa Haa,
20:110]
And whoever experiences what I did will learn what I learned.ʺ 14
So would the way of these confused people, who have even confessed
against themselves of their misguidance and confusion, be more knowledgeable
and wiser than the way of the Salaf, who are the flag‐bearers of guidance and the
lamps within darkness? Allaah bestowed upon them of knowledge and wisdom
that surpassed even other followers of the Prophets. They comprehended the
actualities of Eemaan and knowledge and all of that which others gathered
would not even make them similar to those (the Salaf). So how would one
conclude that these (the others among the Khalaf) are superior to them?
With this, it is clear that the way of the Salaf is safer, more knowledgeable,
and wiser.

14

Al‐Majmooʹ al‐Fataawaa, (5/11).

CHAPTER 5
Some Statements of Modern Authors Against the Methodology of the Salaf
Some of the modern authors have said, ʺThe methodology of the Salaf
regarding the Attributes is taking the texts as they come, yet believing that their
apparent meanings are not actually intended.ʺ
This statement, if taken unconditionally, contains a point of scrutiny. The
wording, ʺtheir apparent meaningsʺ is somewhat vague and needs clarification.
If what is intended by ʺtheir apparent meaningsʺ is what is evident from the texts
of the attributes befitting Allaah without making Tashbeeh, then this is exactly
what is intended. Whoever says that this is not the intended meaning then he is
misguided if he actually believes that, and he is a liar or mistaken if he attributes
this meaning to the Salaf.
If what is intended by ʺtheir apparent meaningsʺ is what is evident to
some of the people in that the apparent meaning is to make Tashbeeh of Allaah
with His creation, then this is definitely not true and it is not the apparent
meaning of the texts because the similarity of Allaah to His creation is something
impossible. And, the apparent meaning of the Qurʹaan and Sunnah would never
be something impossible. Whoever thinks this is what is meant by ʺtheir
apparent meanings,ʺ then his mistake is to be clarified to him. It is to be clarified
that the apparent meaning as well as the detailed meaning is to affirm the
Attributes in a manner that befits Allaah and is specific to Him.
In this way, we would be giving the texts their rights in wording and
meaning, and Allaah knows best.

CHAPTER 6
Concealing the Truth with Falsehood by Some of the Modern Authors
Some of the later authors have said, ʺThere is no difference between the
methodology of the Salaf and the methodology of those who misinterpret
regarding the texts of the Attributes. Both of them agree that the Aayaat and
Ahaadeeth do not actually confirm the Attributes of Allaah. However, the
misinterpreters saw a benefit by their interpretations and a dire need for them so
they specified a certain meaning for them. As for the Salaf, they withhold from
specifying a certain meaning in order to leave the meaning open to other
interpretations.ʺ
This is a clear and plain lie against the Salaf. Not one of them ever negated
that the texts confirm the Attributes of Allaah as they befit Him. Rather, their
statements point out the acceptance of those very Attributes. They even disprove
those who negate them or make Allaah similar to His creation by them. An
example of one such statement is the statement of Naʹeem ibn Hammaad al‐
Khuzaaʹee, 15 the Shaykh of al‐Bukhaaree:
ʺWhoever makes Allaah similar to His creation has disbelieved. Whoever
denies anything of what Allaah describes Himself with has disbelieved.
And there is no Tashbeeh in what Allaah or His Messenger describes
Himself with.ʺ
Their statements regarding this are numerous.
Another point that proves that the Salaf affirmed the Attributes to Allaah
and were not in agreement with those who misinterpret the texts is the fact that
those very ones who misinterpret were in constant opposition and arguments
with the Salaf. They used to accuse them of making Tashbeeh and Tajseem
(affirming a body for Allaah) because they (the Salaf) have always affirmed the
Attributes. If the Salaf were in agreement with them in that the Attributes of
Allaah are not confirmed by the texts, then there would not have occurred
between them such opposition and arguments and accusations as it is clear, and
all praise and thanks are to Allaah.

Reported by adh‐Dhahabee in Siyar ʹAlaam an‐Nubalaa (10/610) and he said in (13/299) that its
chain of report is Saheeh.
15

CHAPTER 7
The Reported Statements of the Salaf Regarding the Attributes
The statements of the Salaf, some general and others more specific have
become widespread regarding the Aayaat and Ahaadeeth of the Attributes. An
example of the more general statements is the saying, ʺAccept them as they have
come without asking ʹHow?ʹʺ 16 This has been reported from Makhool, az‐Zuhree,
Maalik ibn Anas, Sufyaan ath‐Thawree, al‐Layth ibn Saʹd, and al‐Awzaaʹee.
This expression contains a refutation of the Muaʹttilah (those who make
Taʹteel) and the Mushabbihah (those who make Tashbeeh). The statement,
ʺAccept them as they have comeʺ refutes the Muaʹttilah and, ʺwithout asking
ʹHow?ʹʺ refutes the Mushabbihah.
Also, in this statement is the proof that the Salaf have always
acknowledged that the texts of Attributes contained actual correct meanings that
befit Allaah. This proof is from two angles:
1. They said, ʺAccept them as they have come...ʺ Its meaning is to leave the
texts as they have come upon the intended meanings they indicate.
Undoubtedly, they have come confirming actual meanings that befit Allaah.
Otherwise, if they (the Salaf) did not believe the texts confirmed actual meanings,
then they would have said, ʺAccept their wordings and do not acknowledge and
look into their meanings,ʺ or something similar.
2. They said, ʺ...without asking ʹHow?ʹʺ It is obvious that there is an
affirmation of meanings to the texts because if they did not believe in affirming
them, then they would not have needed to forbid asking ʹHow?ʹ they are. In that
case, the forbidding of seeking ʹHow?ʹ would be futile.
It may then be asked: Then what is the response to the statement of
Imaam Ahmad pertaining to the Hadeeth of Allaahʹs descending when he said,
ʺWe believe in it and affirm it without seeking ʹHowʹ it is or its meaning?ʺ
We say: The response to that is that the meaning that Imaam Ahmad was
negating in his statement is the misinterpreted meaning that the Mua’ttilah from

See Iʹtiqaad Ahlus‐Sunnah by al‐Laalakaaee (3/537,930) and Fath al‐Baaree (3/407) and other
references.
16

the Jahmiyyah and others had committed. They distorted the apparent meanings
of the texts of the Qurʹaan and the Sunnah to mean something contradictory.
Our response is indicated by the fact that he negated the (misinterpreted)
meaning and the asking ʹHow?ʹ in order for his statement to actually be a
refutation upon those two groups of innovators: the Muaʹttilah and the
Mushabbihah.
This explanation is also indicated by what he (Imaam Ahmad) said in
regards to the statement of Muhammad ibn al‐Hasanʹs statement, “The scholars
have unanimously agreed ‐ all of them from the east to the west ‐ upon having
Eemaan in the Qurʹaan and the authentic Ahaadeeth that have come from the
) pertaining to the Attributes of the Lord
Messenger of Allaah (
without making an explanation (Tafseer) of them, without describing them, and
without making them similar to anything else (Tashbeeh).”
Imaam Ahmad said regarding this statement that the meaning of making
an explanation of themʺ or Tafseer, is the explanation of the Jahmiyyah who
make Taʹteel. They innovated a distorted explanation of the Attributes in
opposition to what the Companions and their followers held regarding them of
affirming them. 17
This is also an indication that explaining the Aayaat and Ahaadeeth of the
Attributes is of two types:
1. An acceptable explanation: It is what is in accordance with what the
Companions and their followers held of affirming their meanings in a manner
befitting to Allaah and that agree with what is apparent from the Qurʹaan and
Sunnah.
2. A rejected explanations: It is whatever is in opposition to that
mentioned above.
Therefore, there could be an acceptable meaning as well as a rejected one
according to what has preceded.
If it is asked: Is there a sense of ʹHowʹ the Attributes of Allaah are?

17

Al‐Majmooʹ al‐Fataawaa, (5/50) and Fath al‐Baaree (13/407)

The answer is yes, there is a ʹHowʹ to them but it is unknown to us. It is
unknown to us because knowing ʹHowʹ they are could only be known by
actually witnessing how they are, by witnessing something similar to them, or by
way of some trustworthy information that has come about this. All of these
means are non‐existent pertaining to Allahʹs Attributes. With this, it is
understood that the statement of the Salaf, ʺwithout asking ʹHow?ʹʺ means
without making Takyeef (seeking to understand ʹHowʹ). It does not mean the
absolute negation of the ʹHowʹ of them, and Allaah knows best.

CHAPTER 8
The Highness (‘Uluww) of Allaah & its Proofs
The Highness and Exaltedness of Allaah above His creation, or ‘Uluww, is
from His Personal Attributes.
It is of two types:
1. ‘Uluww as‐Sifaat ‐ The Highness of His Attributes.
2. ‘Uluww adh‐Dhaat ‐ The Highness of His Self.
As for the Highness of His Attributes, it means that there is no
characteristic of perfection except that to Allaah belongs what is more perfect
and more complete, whether it is an attribute such as that of honor or
overpowering, or attributes such as beauty or capability.
As for the Highness of His Self, it means that Allaah is personally above
all of His creations. This is proven by the Qurʹaan, the Sunnah, consensus (of the
scholars), the intellect, and the Fitrah, or natural disposition upon which Allaah
creates every human.
As for the proof from the Qurʹaan and Sunnah: They are both filled with
detailed or apparent proofs of the affirmation of the ‘Uluww of Allaahʹs Self
above His creation.
There are many types of proofs of this:
Sometimes, they mention the ‘Uluww explicitly, His Highness, His rising
over the Throne, or being over the heavens, such as His statements:

‫ﻲ ا ْﻟ َﻌﻈِﻴ ُﻢ‬
‫َو ُه َﻮ ا ْﻟ َﻌِﻠ ﱡ‬
ʺAnd He is the Most High, the Greatest.ʺ [Sooratul‐Baqarah, 2:255]

‫ﻋﻠَﻰ‬
ْ ‫ﻚ ا ْﻟَﺄ‬
َ ‫ﺳ َﻢ َرﱢﺑ‬
ْ ‫ﺢا‬
ِ ‫ﺳ ﱢﺒ‬
َ
ʺExalt the name of your Lord, the Most High.ʺ [Sooratul‐Aʹalaa, 87:1]

‫ن َر ﱠﺑﻬُﻢ ﻣﱢﻦ َﻓ ْﻮ ِﻗ ِﻬ ْﻢ‬
َ ‫َﻳﺨَﺎﻓُﻮ‬
ʺThey fear their Lord above them.ʺ [Sooratun‐Nahl, 16:50]

‫ﺳ َﺘﻮَى‬
ْ ‫شا‬
ِ ‫ﻋﻠَﻰ ا ْﻟ َﻌ ْﺮ‬
َ ‫ﻦ‬
ُ ‫ﺣ َﻤ‬
ْ ‫اﻟﺮﱠ‬
ʺThe Most Merciful rose over the Throne.ʺ [Soorah Taa Haa, 20:5]

‫ﻲ َﺗﻤُﻮ ُر‬
َ ‫ض ﻓَﺈِذَا ِه‬
َ ‫ﻷ ْر‬
َ ‫ﻒ ِﺑ ُﻜ ُﻢ ا‬
َ ‫ﺴ‬
ِ‫ﺨ‬
ْ ‫ﺴﻤَﺎء أَن َﻳ‬
‫أَﻣِﻨﺘُﻢ ﻣﱠﻦ ﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱠ‬
“Do you feel secure that He who is above the heaven would not cause
the earth to swallow you?ʺ [Sooratul‐Mulk, 67:16]

And the statements of the Prophet (

):

‫ واﷲ ﻓﻮق اﻟﻌﺮش‬،‫واﻟﻌﺮش ﻓﻮق ذﻟﻚ‬
ʺ...and the Throne is above that, and Allaah is above the Throne.ʺ 18

‫أﻷ ﺗﺄﻣﻨﻮﻧﻲ وأﻧﺎ أﻣﻴﻦ ﻣﻦ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺴﻤﺎء؟‬
ʺDo you not trust me while I am trusted by the One above the
heaven?ʺ 19
Sometimes, the proofs establish the ʹUluww by mentioning that things
ascend or are raised up to Him, such as His statements:

‫ﺐ‬
ُ ‫ﺼ َﻌ ُﺪ ا ْﻟ َﻜِﻠ ُﻢ اﻟﻄﱠﻴﱢ‬
ْ ‫ِإَﻟ ْﻴ ِﻪ َﻳ‬
ʺTo Him ascends good speech.ʺ [Sooratul‐Faatir, 35:10]

‫ﻲ‬
ْ ‫ح ِإَﻟ‬
ُ ‫ج ا ْﻟﻤَﻠَﺎﺋِﻜَ ُﺔ وَاﻟﺮﱡو‬
ُ ‫َﺗ ْﻌ ُﺮ‬

See al‐Laalakaaee (3/395,659) and Mukhtasar alʹUluww (page 48) by al‐Albaanee. Adh‐
Dhahabee and Ibn al‐Qayyim authenticated it, and al‐Albaanee declared it to be acceptable. Its
chain is Mawqoof.
19 Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (4351) and Muslim (1064).
18

ʺThe angels and the Rooh Qibreel) ascend to Him.ʺ [Sooratul‐Maʹaarij,
70:4]

‫ﺑَﻞ ﱠر َﻓ َﻌ ُﻪ اﻟﻠّ ُﻪ ِإَﻟ ْﻴ ِﻪ‬
ʺRather, Allaah raised him (ʹEesaa) to Himself.ʺ [Sooratun‐Nisaa, 4:158]
And the statements of the Prophet (

):

‫وﻷ ﻳﺼﻌﺪ إﻟﻰ ﷲ إﻷ اﻟﻄﻴﺐ‬
ʺAnd nothing but the pure things ascend to Allaah.ʺ

‫ﺛﻢ ﻳﻌﺮ ج اﻟﺬﻳﻦ ﺑﺎﺗﻮا ﻓﻴﻜﻢ إﻟﻰ رﺑﻬﻢ‬
ʺ...then some of those who spent the night among you are raised to your
Lord.ʺ

‫ وﻋﻤﻞ اﻟﻨﻬﺎر ﻗﺒﻞ ﻋﻤﻞ اﻟﻠﻴﻞ‬،‫ﻳﺮﻓﻊ إﻟﻴﻪ ﻋﻤﻞ اﻟﻠﻴﻞ ﻗﺒﻞ ﻋﻤﻞ اﻟﻨﻬﺎر‬
ʺThe deeds of the night are raised to Him before the deeds of the next
day, and the deeds of the day before the deeds of that evening.ʺ
Ahmad recorded it.
Sometimes, the proofs mention the descent of things from Him, such as
His statements:

َ‫ب ا ْﻟﻌَﺎﻟَﻤِﻴﻦ‬
‫ﻞ ﻣﱢﻦ ﱠر ﱢ‬
ٌ ‫ﺗَﻨﺰِﻳ‬
ʺA revelation sent down from the Lord of the worlds.ʺ [Sooratul‐
Waaqiʹah, 56:80]

‫ﻚ‬
َ ‫س ﻣِﻦ ﱠر ﱢﺑ‬
ِ ‫ح ا ْﻟ ُﻘ ُﺪ‬
ُ ‫ﻞ َﻧ ﱠﺰَﻟ ُﻪ رُو‬
ْ ‫ُﻗ‬
ʺSay: The pure Rooh Qibreel) has brought it down from your Lord.ʺ
[Sooratun‐Nahl, 16:102]

And the statement of the Prophet (

)

‫ﻳﻨﺰل رﺑﻨﺎ إﻟﻰ اﻟﺴﻤﺎء اﻟﺪﻧﻴﺎ ﺣﻴﻦ ﻳﺒﻘﻰ ﺛﻠﺚ اﻟﻠﻴﻞ اﻷﺧﺮ‬
ʺOur Lord descends to the heaven of the Dunyaa when the last third of
the night remains.ʺ 20
And there are many other Aayaat and Ahaadeeth that have been reported
with many chains from the Prophet (
) pertaining to the ʹUluww of
Allaah over His creation. The chains of report are so numerous that they
necessitate having certain knowledge that the
) actually said them about His Lord and then the
Prophet (
Ummah learned them from him.
As for the proof from the consensus: The Companions, those who
followed them in righteousness, and the Imaams of Ahulus‐Sunnah were all
unanimously united upon the belief that Allaah is above His heavens on His
Throne. Their statements are filled with this belief either word‐for‐word, or from
the evident meaning. Al‐Awzaaʹee said, ʺWe used to ‐ while the followers of the
Companions were many among us ‐ say that Allaah mentions Himself being
above His Throne. And we believe also whatever has come in the Sunnah of the
Attributes.ʺ Al‐Awzaaʹee said this after the appearance of the methodology of
Jahm (ibn Safwaan) who used to deny the Attributes of Allaah and His ʹUluww.
He (al‐Awzaaʹee) said this so that the people would know that the methodology
of the Salafis in complete opposition to that of Jahm.
Moreover, not one of the Salaf ever said that Allaah is not over the heaven,
or that He is everywhere. Nor did they say, ʺAll places are the same in regards to
Him,ʺ nor that ʺHe is not inside the world, nor outside of it, nor part of it, nor
separate from it...ʺ Moreover, they did not say that it is impermissible to imagine
and indicate where He is. Rather, the most knowledgeable of creation indicated
where He is during his Farewell Hajj on the Day of Aʹrafah among a great
audience. He raised and pointed his finger to the sky and said:

‫اﻟﻠﻬﻢ اﺷﻬﺪ‬
ʺOh Allaah, bear witness.ʺ
20

Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree and Muslim. The details will be given in chapter 13, Page 82.

He was asking Allaah to bear witness to the acknowledgement of his
Ummah that he indeed conveyed the message of his Prophethood.
As for the proof from the intellect: Every sound intellect bears witness to
the fact that Allaah is high above His creation. This is from two perspectives:
Firstly: ʹUluww is a characteristic of perfection and perfection is attributed
to Allaah in all ways. So ʹUluww must be affirmed to Allaah.
Secondly: ʹUluww is the opposite of being low and being low is a
characteristic of deficiency. Allaah is far above being described with any
characteristics of deficiency so He must be free from being low. The opposite is
then affirmed to Him, which is ʹUluww.
As for the proof from the Fitrah: Allaah has made all of the creations, the
Arab and non‐Arab, even the animals, upon the natural disposition of believing
in Him and His ʹUluww. There is no servant that turns toward His Lord with
supplication or worship except that he finds within himself a sense of requesting
from One high above. He turns with his heart towards the sky, not to the right or
left. And no one deviates away from this reality except someone who has been
corrupted by Shayateen and desires.
Aboo al‐Maʹaalee al‐Juwaynee used to say in his gatherings, 21 ʺFirst, there
was Allaah and nothing else. And now He is upon what He is upon.ʺ He
sarcastically means by this the denying of Allaahʹs rising over His Throne. So
Aboo Jaʹfar al‐Hamdaanee said:
ʺSay we leave off mentioning of the Throne ‐ because it is established by
the legislation anyway ‐ and inform us about this sense that we find
within out hearts. No one with knowledge has ever called, saying, ʹOh
Allaah!ʹ except that he finds in his heart a natural sense of seeking from
One high above. He does not turn to the right or left. So how do we repel
this natural sense in our hearts?ʺ
So, Aboo al‐Maʹaalee cried out struck his head and said, ʺAl‐Hamdaanee
has confused me! Al‐Hamdaanee has confused me!ʺ

21

See Siyar ʹAlaam an‐Nubalaa (18/475) by Imaam adh‐Dhahabee.

So these are five proofs (the Qurʹaan, Sunnah, consensus, intellect, and the
Fitrah), each confirming that Allaah, Himself, is indeed above His creation.
As for Allaahʹs statements:

‫ن‬
َ ‫ﺴﺒُﻮ‬
ِ ‫ﺳ ﱠﺮ ُآ ْﻢ َوﺟَﻬ َﺮ ُآ ْﻢ َو َﻳ ْﻌَﻠ ُﻢ ﻣَﺎ َﺗ ْﻜ‬
ِ ‫ض َﻳ ْﻌَﻠ ُﻢ‬
ِ ‫ﻷ ْر‬
َ ‫ت َوﻓِﻲ ا‬
ِ ‫ﺴﻤَﺎوَا‬
‫َو ُه َﻮ اﻟﻠّ ُﻪ ﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱠ‬
ʺAnd He is Allaah in the heavens and in the earth. He knows your
secrets and what you make public.ʺ [Sooratul‐Anʹaam, 6:3]
And His saying,

‫ل‬
َ ‫ض ِإ‬
ِ ‫ﺴﻤَﺎء ِإَﻟ ٌﻪ َوﻓِﻲ ا ْﻟَﺄ ْر‬
‫َو ُه َﻮ اﱠﻟﺬِي ﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱠ‬
ʺIt is He who is (the only) God in the heaven, and on the earth (the only)
God.ʺ [Sooratuz‐Zukhruf, 43:84]
The meaning of both of these Aayaat is not that Allaah is on the earth as
He is above the heavens. And whoever imagines this or reports this from one of
the Salaf, then he is mistaken in what he imagines and lying in what he reports.
The First Aayah affirms Allaahʹs right of being the only god that exists in
the heavens and on earth. Everyone in them ‐ He is their only god and they
worship Him. It is also said that it means that the first part is saying that Allaah
is in (above) the heavens. The second part would then begin with ʺAnd on the
earth, He knows your secrets and what you make public.ʺ Meaning, that His
ʹUluww above the heavens does not prevent Him from still knowing your secrets
and what you make known on the earth.
The Second Aayah means that Allaah is the only god of the heavens and
the only god of the earth. His right of being worshipped is a duty in both, even
while He is above the heavens. Similar to this is the saying, ʺSo and so is the
governor of Makkah as well as Madeenah.ʺ Meaning, that his leadership is in
control over both cities, even if he happens to be in only one of them.
This way of speaking is correct, both linguistically as well as culturally
(Arabic), and Allaah knows best.

CHAPTER 9
The Sense of ʹPositionʹ as it Pertains to Allaah
We would like, with this chapter, to establish whether a sense of position
should be ascribed to Allaah or not.
The correct stance is that it is incorrect to unconditionally ascribe a sense
of position to Allaah, neither negating it nor affirming it. Rather, we must be
specific.
If what is intended is the position of lowliness, then this rejected and
impossible to be associated with Allaah because He has described Himself with
the ‘Uluww of Himself as well as of His Attributes.
If what is intended is the position of being high and exalted while being
encompassed and within (the heavens), then this is also rejected and impossible
to be associated with Allaah. For He is greater and more honorable than to be
encompassed by and within something of His creation. How could this be when
His Kursee alone extends over the whole heavens and earth? 22

‫ﺳ ْﺒﺤَﺎ َﻧ ُﻪ وَﺗَﻌَﺎﻟَﻰ‬
ُ ‫ت ِﺑ َﻴﻤِﻴ ِﻨ ِﻪ‬
ٌ ‫ﻄﻮِﻳﱠﺎ‬
ْ َ‫ت ﻣ‬
ُ ‫ﻀ ُﺘ ُﻪ َﻳ ْﻮ َم ا ْﻟ ِﻘﻴَﺎ َﻣ ِﺔ وَاﻟﺴﱠﻤﺎوَا‬
َ ‫ﺟﻤِﻴﻌًﺎ َﻗ ْﺒ‬
َ ‫ض‬
ُ ‫وَا ْﻟَﺄ ْر‬
‫ن‬
َ ‫ﺸ ِﺮآُﻮ‬
ْ ‫ﻋَﻤﱠﺎ ُﻳ‬
ʺThe earth entirely will be (within) His grip on the Day of Resurrection,
and the heavens will be folded in His right Hand. Exalted is He and
high above what they associate with him.ʺ [Sooratuz‐Zumar, 39:67]
If what is intended is the position of ʹUluww, or Highness, that befits His
greatness and majesty without encompassing Him, then this is the truth and
affirmed to Allaah. The Shaykh Aboo Muhammad ʹAbdul‐Qaadir al‐Jeelaanee
said in his book, al‐Ghaniyyah, 23 ʺAnd he is in the position of ʹUluww, having
risen above the Throne, encompassing complete authority over the kingdom.ʺ
If it is asked: If you deny that something of Allaahʹs creation can
encompass Him, then what is the response to the fact that Allaah is in the heaven

As is proven by the Aayah:
ʺHis Kursee extends over the heavens and earth.ʺ [Sooratul‐Baqarah, 2:2551 (T.N.)
23 See al‐Ghaniyyah li‐Taalibee Tareeq al‐Haqq fee Maʹrifah al‐Aadaab ash‐Shareeʹah, page 94.
22

as He has affirmed for Himself in His Book and upon the tongue of His Prophet
), and as the Muslims have agreed upon?
(
The response is: The fact that Allaah is in the heaven does not necessitate
that the heaven is encompassing and surrounding Him. Whoever says that is
astray if he says that from himself; he is a liar or mistaken if he attributes that
statement to someone else. Anyone who is aware of the greatness of Allaah and
that He encompasses everything, and that the He will grip the whole earth on the
Day of Resurrection, and that He will roll up the heavens like the rolling of a
scroll; whoever knows this, then it would not be imaginable to him that
something of His creation could likewise encompass or surround Him.
This being understood, the fact that He is in the heaven is taken upon two
meanings:
Firstly: That what is meant by the heavens is ʹUluww, meaning in the
position of highness and exaltedness. Moreover, the fact that ʺheavenʺ (as‐
Samaaʹ) could mean ʹUluww is confirmed in the Qurʹaan. Allaah says,

‫ﺴﻤَﺎء ﻣَﺎء‬
‫ل ﻋَﻠَ ْﻴﻜُﻢ ﻣﱢﻦ اﻟ ﱠ‬
ُ ‫َو ُﻳ َﻨﺰﱢ‬
ʺAnd He sent down upon you rain from the heaven (as‐Samaaʹ).ʺ
[Sooratul‐Anfaal, 8:11]
Meaning ‐ from high above, not actually from the heaven itself because
the rain descends from the clouds.
Secondly: That the meaning of ʺinʺ (fee) is taken to mean ʺonʺ or ʺoverʺ
(ʹalaa) thereby making the meaning, ʺAllaah is over the heaven.ʺ And ʺinʺ (fee)
has come upon the meaning of ʺonʺ (ʹalaa) in many places in the Qurʹaan and
other texts. Allaah says,

‫ض‬
ِ ‫ﻷ ْر‬
َ ‫َﻓﺴِﻴﺤُﻮ ْا ﻓِﻲ ا‬
ʺSo travel on (fee) the earth.ʺ [Sooratut‐Tawbah, 9:2]
Meaning ‐ travel ʺonʺ the earth, not ʺinʺ it.

CHAPTER 10
{PART 1}
The Rising of Allaah (Istiwaa) Over His Throne (Arsh)
The word Istiwaa linguistically is used to express different meanings, all
of them having to do with a sense of ʺcompletionʺ or ʺconclusion.ʺ
It is used in the Qurʹaan in three different ways:
1. The word used alone: as in the Aayah,

‫ﺳﺘَﻮَى‬
ْ ‫ﺷﺪﱠ ُﻩ وَا‬
ُ ‫وَﻟَﻤﱠﺎ َﺑَﻠ َﻎ َأ‬
ʺAnd when he attained his full strength and Istawaa...ʺ [Sooratul‐Qasas,
28:14]
Meaning: to become complete, matured.
2. The word used with ʺilaaʺ (to): as in Allaahʹs statement,

‫ﺴﻤَﺎء‬
‫ﺳ َﺘﻮَى ِإﻟَﻰ اﻟ ﱠ‬
ْ ‫ُﺛﻢﱠ ا‬
ʺThen He Istawaa ilaa (to) the heaven.ʺ [Sooratul‐Baqarah, 2:29]
Meaning: to give full attention to.
3. The word used with “’alaa” (upon, over): as in the statement,

‫ﻇﻬُﻮ ِر ِﻩ‬
ُ ‫ﺴ َﺘ ُﻮوا ﻋَﻠَﻰ‬
ْ ‫ِﻟ َﺘ‬
ʺ...that you may Istawaa ‘alaa (upon) their (riding animals) backs.ʺ
[Sooratuz‐Zukhruf, 43:13]
Meaning: then the meaning is to rise upon or over, to settle.
So the meaning of the Istiwaa of Allaah upon His Throne: His rising over
it and settling upon it in a way that befits His Greatness and Majesty. It is one of
His Attributes of action that is proven by the Qurʹaan, the Sunnah, and the
consensus (of the scholars). From the proofs of the Qurʹaan is Allaahʹs statement,

‫ﺳ َﺘﻮَى‬
ْ ‫شا‬
ِ ‫ﻋﻠَﻰ ا ْﻟ َﻌ ْﺮ‬
َ ‫ﻦ‬
ُ ‫ﺣ َﻤ‬
ْ ‫اﻟﺮﱠ‬
ʺThe Most Merciful Istawaa (rose over) the Throne.ʺ [Soorah Taa Haa,
20:5]
From the proofs of the Sunnah is what has been reported by al‐Khalaal in
his book, as‐Sunnah, with an authentic chain of narration according to al‐
Bukhaaree that Qataadah ibn an‐Nuʹmaan said: I heard Allaahʹs Messenger say,

‫ﻟﻤﺎ ﻓﺮغ اﷲ ﻣﻦ ﺧﻠﻘﻪ اﺳﺘﻮى ﻋﻠﻰ ﻋﺮﺷﻪ‬
“When Allaah finished with His creation, He Istawaa (rose over) His
Throne.ʺ 24

Shaykh Abdul‐Qaadir al‐Jeelaanee said, ʺIt is mentioned in every book
that Allaah ever revealed upon a Prophet.ʺ 25
Ahlus‐Sunnah have all unanimously agreed upon the belief that Allaah is
over His Throne, and not one of them ever said otherwise. It is impossible for
anyone to report that from them, neither in wording nor in apparent meaning.
A man once said to Imaam Maalik, ʺOh Aboo Abdullaah,

‫ﺳ َﺘﻮَى‬
ْ ‫شا‬
ِ ‫ﻋﻠَﻰ ا ْﻟ َﻌ ْﺮ‬
َ ‫ﻦ‬
ُ ‫ﺣ َﻤ‬
ْ ‫اﻟﺮﱠ‬
ʺThe Most Merciful Istawaa (rose over) the Throne.ʺ [Soorah Taa Haa,
20:5]
So how did He Istawaa (rise over)?ʺ So, Maalik bowed his head until he
began to sweat, then said,
ʺThe Istiwaa is not unknown, the ʹHowʹ of it is not comprehendible,
believing in it is required, and asking about it is an innovation, and I see
you only as an innovator.ʺ
Ibn al‐Qayyim mentioned it in Ijtimaaʹ al‐Juyoosh al‐lslaamiyyah (page 34). Adh‐Dhahabee
said, ʺIts narrators are trustworthy.ʺ And Shaykh al‐Albaanee relied upon their statements in
Mukhtasar al‐ʹUluww (page 38).
25 See al‐Ghaniyyah (page 96).
24

He then ordered that the questioner be kicked out. 26
Similar to this was reported from Rabeeʹah ibn Abi Abdur‐Rahmaan,
Maalikʹs Shaykh. 27
His statement, ʺThe Istiwaa is not unknownʺ means that the meaning is
not unknown in the language; its meaning is ʺrising over, settling upon.ʺ
His statement, ʺThe ‘How’ of it is not comprehendibleʺ means that we
cannot perceive how Allaahʹs Istiwaa over His Throne is with our intellects. The
only way is by revelation and the revelation has not reported the ʹHowʹ of it. So if
both, the intellect and the revelation do not indicate it, then it is required to
refrain from speaking about it.
His statement, ʺBelieving in it is requiredʺ means that it is obligatory to
have Eemaan that Allaah rose over His Throne in a befitting manner because
Allaah has informed this about Himself, so believing it and having Eemaan in it
is required.
His statement, ʺ...and asking about it is an innovationʺ means that asking
about ʹhowʹ the Istiwaa is an innovation because it was not known even in the
time of the Prophet (
) and the Companions.
This statement that Imaam Maalik mentioned regarding the Istiwaa is a
conclusive measurement of all of the Attributes that Allaah affirms for Himself in
His Book, or upon the tongue of His Messenger. Their meanings are known to
us, although how they are is unknown because Allaah informed us about them,
yet did not inform us about how they are. 28 Additionally, speaking about the
Attributes (of Allaah) is a form of speaking about Allaah Himself. So just as we
affirm that Allaahʹs Self is without Takyeef (seeking ʹHowʹ), we likewise affirm
His Attributes without Takyeef.
Some of the people of knowledge have said that if a Jahmee asks you,
ʺAllaah descends to the heaven of the Dunyaa, so how does He descend?ʺ then

See Siyar ʹAlaam an‐Nubalaa, (8/100‐101), al‐Asmaa was‐Sifaat by al‐Bayhaqee (Page 515) and
al‐Haafidh (Ibn Hajr) declared it to be acceptable in Fath al‐Baaree (13/407).
27 See al‐Asmaa was‐Sifaat (page 516).
28 See for an explanation of the ways that the ʹHowʹ could possibly be known.
26

reply, ʺAllaah informed us that He descends and did not inform us how He
descends!ʺ
Another said that if a Jahmee asks you about anyone of Allaahʹs
Attributes, ʺHow is it?ʺ then reply, ʺHow is Allaah, Himself?ʺ For it is not
possible to seek to understand how Allaah is. So tell him that if Takyeef is not
possible regarding His Self, then likewise it is not possible regarding His
Attributes, because attributes are part of the one described!
If someone says, ʺIf the Istiwaa of Allaah over His Throne means to rise
over it, then that means He is either bigger than the Throne, smaller, or equal in
size. This, therefore, suggests that He must have a body, yet that is impossible!?ʺ
The answer is that, no doubt, Allaah is greater than the Throne and
greater than anything else is. However, this does not imply anything of the false
implications of which Allaah is far above.
As for saying that it is impossible for Allaah to have a body, then it must
be known that speaking about a body and associating it with Allaah, either by
negating it or affirming it, is an innovation that has not been reported in the
Qurʹaan, the Sunnah, or from the statements of the Salaf. It is a broad statement,
which requires more details.
If what is meant by a body is something that is composed, each part
needing and supporting the other, then this is rejected from Allaah, the Ever‐
Living, the Self‐Sustainer and Sustainer of all that exists.
If what is meant by a body is that which He has to be Self‐sufficient and is
described with what befits Him, then this is not denied from Allaah, for Allaah is
Self‐sufficient and is described with attributes of perfection which befit Him.
However, since the word ʺbodyʺ can include a true meaning as well as a false
one as it relates to Allaah, associating it to Allaah, either by absolutely negating it
or affirming it, is not permissible.
`This is one of the statements (ʺIf this is so, then that must mean this!ʺ) that
the people of innovation use to eventually come to the final conclusion of
negating what Allaah has affirmed for Himself of the Attributes of complete
perfection. This type of reasoning is of two types:

1. The correct reasoning is that which does not contradict the perfection,
which is necessarily due to Allaah. This is true and it is a requirement to clarify
this and explain that it (this type of reasoning) is not rejected from Allaah.
2. The corrupted reasoning is that which does contradict the perfection
that is due to Allaah. This is false and it is required to reject it and clarify that it is
not a suitable reasoning of the Qurʹaan and Sunnah, because the Qurʹaan and
Sunnah are true and so are their meanings. And it is never possible for the truth
to be reasoned out to mean something false.
If it is said, ʺIf you explain Allaahʹs Istiwaa over His Throne as rising over
it, then that gives the impression that He needs it to lift Himself or support
Himself!ʺ
The response is that anyone aware of the greatness of Allaah, the
perfection of His Capability, His Strength, and His lack of needing anything,
then it would not occur to him that Allaah needs the Throne to support Himself.
How is this when the Throne itself and every other created thing is in need of His
support and subjected to Him? There is no support or sustenance except by Him.

‫ض ِﺑَﺄ ْﻣ ِﺮ ِﻩ‬
ُ ‫ﺴﻤَﺎء وَا ْﻟَﺄ ْر‬
‫ﻦ ﺁﻳَﺎ ِﺗ ِﻪ أَن َﺗﻘُﻮ َم اﻟ ﱠ‬
ْ ‫َو ِﻣ‬
ʺAnd of His signs is that the heaven and earth only exist by His
command.ʺ [Sooratur‐Room, 30:25]
If it is asked, ʺIs it permissible to explain the Istiwaa of Allaah over His
Throne to mean that He conquered (Isteelaa) it, as the Muaʹttilah explain as a
result of trying to avoid a false type of reasoning?ʺ
The answer is that it is not permissible and that is due to various reasons:
Firstly: If these types of reasoning are true, then they do not prevent
explaining the Istiwaa with its real, actual meaning (which is rising over). If they
are false, then it is not possible that they be suitable types of reasoning derived
from the Qurʹaan and Sunnah. Whoever thinks they are necessary based upon
something else in them (the Qurʹaan or Sunnah) then he is astray.
Secondly: Interpreting it as Isteelaa (conquering) is based upon false
reasoning. It is not possible because it contradicts the consensus of the Salaf and

it would then be permissible to say such things as ʺAllaah Istawaa on the earth
(He conquered it),ʺ and other statements of which Allaah is far above. If He
ʺconqueredʺ the Throne, it would also mean that He was, before that, not in
possession of it when He created the heavens and earth.
Thirdly: The interpretation of Istiwaa (rising over) as Isteelaa
(conquering) is unknown linguistically. It is a lie against it (the Arabic language)
and the Qurʹaan was revealed in the language of the Arabs. Therefore, it is not
possible for us to interpret it with a meaning that the Arabs do not know in their
own language.
Fourthly: Those who interpreted it as Isteelaa (conquering) held the belief
that it was a metaphorical meaning and a metaphorical meaning is not
acceptable unless and until it meets four conditions:
1. An authentic evidence that calls for the statement to be taken
metaphorically, not upon its apparent, actual meaning.
2. The possibility of a metaphorical meaning based upon the language.
3. The possibility of a metaphorical meaning as it may pertain to that
specific context. A possibility of an overall metaphorical meaning does not mean
that it is acceptable in every context. The context of different, specific wordings
and circumstances could prevent some meanings, which the wordings may mean
if taken generally.
4. The proof which indicates a metaphorical meaning must be given and
explained. This is because it may also be that the meaning is actually not
metaphorical, rather to be taken as the apparent, actual meaning. Therefore, it is
incumbent to provide the proof that specifies one or the other, and Allaah knows
best.

CHAPTER 10
{PART Two}
The Throne (Arsh)
The Rising of Allaah (Istiwaa) Over His Throne (ʹArsh)
The word ʹArsh linguistically means ʺthe throne of a king.ʺ Allaah said
about Yoosuf,

‫ش‬
ِ ‫ﻋﻠَﻰ ا ْﻟ َﻌ ْﺮ‬
َ ‫َو َر َﻓ َﻊ َأ َﺑ َﻮ ْﻳ ِﻪ‬
ʺAnd he raised his parents upon the ʹArsh (throne).ʺ [Soorah Yoosuf,
12:100]
And He said about the Queen of Saba,

‫ﻋﻈِﻲ‬
َ ‫ش‬
ٌ ‫َوَﻟﻬَﺎ ﻋَ ْﺮ‬
ʺAnd she has a great ‘Arsh (throne).ʺ [Sooratun‐Naml, 27:23]
As for the ʹArsh of the Most Merciful upon which He Istawaa (rose over),
it is a great Throne which extends over all the creations. He is above it and
greater than it as in the Hadeeth of Aboo Dharr (‫ )رﺿﻰ اﷲ ﻋﻨﻪ‬that the Prophet
(
) said,

‫ واﻷرﺿﻮن اﻟﺴﺒﻊ ﻋﻨﺪ اﻟﻜﺮﺳﻲ إﻷ آﺤﻠﻘﺔ ﻣﻠﻘﺎة ﻓﻲ أرض‬،‫ﻣﺎ اﻟﺴﻤﺎوات اﻟﺴﺒﻊ‬
.‫ وإن ﻓﻀﻞ اﻟﻌﺮش ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻜﺮﺳﻲ آﻔﻀﻞ اﻟﻔﻼةﻋﻠﻰ ﺗﻠﻠﻚ اﻟﺤﻠﻘﺔ‬،‫ﻓﻼة‬
ʺThe seven heavens and seven earths compared to the Kursee are only
like a ring that is thrown in a desert, and indeed the ʹArsh compared to
the Kursee is like the desert compared to that ring.ʺ 29
The author, the Shaykh of Islaam, Ibn Taymiyyah, said in ar‐Risaalah aI‐
ʹArshi;y;yah, ʺAnd the Hadeeth, has different chains of narration. Aboo Haatim
Recorded by Ibn Hibbaan (page 94 in al‐Mawaarid) and by Aboo Naʹeem in al‐Hilyah(1/167)
and in al‐ʹAthmah (2/569, 649). It is also recorded by Ibn Mardawayh as is in Tafseer ibn Katheer
(1/310‐311). Al‐Haafidh (Ibn Hajr) said in Fath al‐Baaree, ʺIbn Hibaan declared it to be Saheeh
and it has a supporting chain from Mujaahid ‐ Saʹeed ibn Mansoor recorded it in at‐Tafseer with a
Saheeh chain from him.ʺ
29

narrated it, as did Ibn Hibaan in his Saheeh collection, Ahmad in al‐Musnad, and
others.ʺ
The word Kursee linguistically means, ʺA chair, whatever is sat upon.ʺ
As for the Kursee that Allaah associates with Himself, it is the place of
Allaahʹs two Feet. Ibn ʹAbbaas (‫ )رﺿﻰ اﷲ ﻋﻨﻪ‬said,
ʺThe Kursee is the place of the Two Feet, and the ʹArsh, ‐ no one can
perceive its proportion except Allaah, the Mighty and Honorable.ʺ
Al‐Haakim recorded it in al‐Mustadrak and said, ʺIt is according to the
conditions of the two Shaykhs (al‐Bukhaaree & Muslim).ʺ It has been recorded as
being Marfoo’ (raised to the Prophet), but it is actually Mawqoof (stopped at the
level of the Companion).
This meaning that Ibn ʹAbbaas mentioned about the Kursee is well‐known
to Ahlus‐Sunnah. It has been preserved from him and memorized. As for what
has been said that it means ʺknowledgeʺ then this has not been preserved, nor
memorized (from anyone of Ahlus‐Sunnah). Likewise, what has been reported
from al‐Hasan that he said it is the ʹArsh, this is weak and inauthentic as Ibn
Katheer mentioned. 30

30

In his at‐Tafseer (1/311). Compare between this and Fath al‐Baaree (8/199).

CHAPTER 11
The Maʹiyyah of Allaah (Being With His Creation)

(

Allaah has affirmed in His Book, and upon the tongue of His Messenger
) that He is maʹ (with) His creation.
From the proofs of the Qurʹaan are the statements of Allaah (

):

‫ﺖ‬
ُ ‫ﻦ ﻣَﺎ آُﻨ‬
َ ‫َو ُه َﻮ َﻣ َﻌ ُﻜ ْﻢ َأ ْﻳ‬
ʺAnd He is maʹ(with) you wherever you are.ʺ [Sooratul‐Hadeed, 57:4]

َ‫ن اﻟﻠّﻪَ َﻣ َﻊ ا ْﻟ ُﻤ ْﺆﻣِﻨِﻴﻦ‬
‫َوَأ ﱠ‬
ʺAnd Allaah is maʹ(with) the believers.ʺ [Sooratul‐Anfaal, 8:19]

‫ﺳ َﻤ ُﻊ َوَأرَى‬
ْ ‫ِإ ﱠﻧﻨِﻲ ﻣَﻌَ ُﻜﻤَﺎ َأ‬
ʺIndeed I am maʹ(with) you both; I hear and see.ʺ [Soorah Taa Haa,
20:46]

(

From the proofs of the Sunnah are the statements of the Prophet
):

.‫أﻓﻀﻞ اﻷﻳﻤﺎن أن ﺗﻌﻠﻢ أن اﷲ ﻣﻌﻚ ﺣﻴﺜﻤﺎ آﻨﺖ‬
ʺThe best of Eemaan is that you know that Allaah is with you wherever
you are.ʺ 31
In addition, he said to his companion, Aboo Bakr, when they were in the
cave,

‫ن اﻟﻠّﻪَ َﻣ َﻌﻨَﺎ‬
‫ن ِإ ﱠ‬
ْ ‫ﺤ َﺰ‬
ْ ‫ﻻ َﺗ‬
َ
ʺDo not grieve; indeed Allaah is maʹ(with) us.ʺ [Sooratut‐Tawbah, 9:40]

Recorded by at‐Tabaraanee in al‐Kabeer and al‐Awsat as is in Mujammaʹ az‐Zawaaid (1/60),
and by al‐Bayhaqee in al‐Asmaa was‐Sifaat (907), and by Aboo Naʹeem in al‐Hilyah (6/124).
31

And the Salaf of the Ummah have unanimously agreed upon that as well
as the Imaams.
Maʹiyyah or ʹWithnessʹ is linguistically used to mean ʺaccompanimentʺ or
ʺcompanionshipʺ. However, what it means and necessitates differs due to the
differences in what it is attributed to, as well as the context and circumstances in
which is it used.
Sometimes it could mean to be ʺmixed withʺ such as the saying, ʺI put the
water maʹ (with) the milk.ʺ
Sometimes it could mean a ʺthreatʺ or ʺwarningʺ as in the saying of a
discipliner to a criminal (as is used in Arabic), ʺGo, but I am maʹ (with) you.ʺ
Sometimes it means ʺvictoryʺ or ʺassistanceʺ like one says when to another
who seeks his help, ʺI am maʹ (with) you.ʺ Similarly, its meanings differ due to
the differences in what it is attributed to as the context in which is it used.
It is not uncommon that a word may be in agreement as to its original
meaning, yet differs in its ruling and what it necessitates based upon the
difference of what it is associated with and its context.
This being clear, it also becomes evident that the Maʹiyyah, when
associated to Allaah, is taken upon the actual meaning, not a metaphorical one.
Still, Allaah being with His creation is in a manner that befits Him. It is in no way
like one of the creation being with another of the creation. Rather, it is higher and
more perfect and is not connected to any specific meanings of what the creation
being with the creation would necessitate.
Some of the Salaf have explained the Maʹiyyah ‐ Allaah being with His
creation ‐ to mean His Knowledge of them. This is only an explanation of what
the Maʹiyyah includes. Their purpose of this explanation was to refute the
Jahmiyyah who said that Allaah is personally everywhere. They (the Jahmiyyah)
then used as proof the texts of the Maʹiyyah (some of which are mentioned
above) to support their misinterpretation. Therefore, those of the Salaf explained
that what is meant by this Maʹiyyah is not that Allaah is personally with the
creation Himself. This is impossible according to the intellect and the legislation
because it contradicts His ʹUluww (being high above the creation) and it would
necessitate that His creation encompasses and surrounds Him which is
impossible.

The Categories of Allaah Being With His Creation:
The Maʹiyyah of Allaah with His creation is of two types, a general type
and a specific.
As for the general Maʹiyyah, it is the encompassment of all the creation,
the believer and disbeliever, the righteous and wicked, with Knowledge, Power,
arranging of affairs, Authority, and other that that from the meanings of
Ruboobiyyah (Allaahʹs Lordship).
This type of Maʹiyyah compels the one who believes in it to be always
concerned and watchful over his relationship with Allaah.
For this, the Prophet (

) said,

.‫أﻓﻀﻞ اﻹﻳﻤﺎن أن ﺗﻌﻠﻢ أن اﷲ ﻣﻌﻚ ﺣﻴﺜﻤﺎ آﻨﺖ‬
ʺThe best of Eemaan is that you know that Allaah is with you wherever
you are.ʺ 32
Some examples of this type of general Ma’iyyah are Allaah’s statements:

‫ﺖ‬
ُ ‫ﻦ ﻣَﺎ آُﻨ‬
َ ‫َو ُه َﻮ َﻣ َﻌ ُﻜ ْﻢ َأ ْﻳ‬
ʺAnd He is with you wherever you are.ʺ [Sooratul‐Hadeed, 57:4]

‫ﺳ ُﻬ ْﻢ وَﻟَﺎ َأ ْدﻧَﻰ ﻣِﻦ‬
ُ ‫ﺴ ٍﺔ إِﻟﱠﺎ ُه َﻮ ﺳَﺎ ِد‬
َ ‫ﺧ ْﻤ‬
َ ‫ﺠﻮَى َﺛﻠَﺎ َﺛ ٍﺔ إِﻟﱠﺎ ُه َﻮ رَا ِﺑ ُﻌ ُﻬ ْﻢ وَﻟَﺎ‬
ْ ‫ن ﻣِﻦ ﱠﻧ‬
ُ ‫ﻣَﺎ َﻳﻜُﻮ‬
‫ﻦ ﻣَﺎ آَﺎﻧُﻮا‬
َ ‫ﻚ وَﻟَﺎ َأ ْآ َﺜ َﺮ إِﻟﱠﺎ ُه َﻮ َﻣ َﻌ ُﻬ ْﻢ َأ ْﻳ‬
َ ‫َذِﻟ‬
ʺThere is no private conversation of three except that He is the fourth of
them, nor are there five but that He is the sixth of them ‐ and no less
than that and no more except that He is with them wherever they are.ʺ
[Sooratul‐Mujaadilah, 58:7]

32

The details of the Hadeeth have proceeded in footnote no. 31

As for the specific Maʹiyyah, it implies Allaah giving victory or assistance
to whomever it is associated with. It is specific to those who deserve it from the
Messengers and their followers.
This type of Maʹiyyah compels the one who believes in it to maintain
constant steadfastness and strength.
Some examples of this type of specific Maʹiyyah are the statements of
Allaah:

َ‫ن اﻟﻠّﻪَ َﻣ َﻊ ا ْﻟ ُﻤ ْﺆﻣِﻨِﻴﻦ‬
‫َوَأ ﱠ‬
ʺAnd Allaah is with the believers.ʺ [Sooratul‐Anfaal, 8:19]

‫ﻦ‬
َ ‫ﻦ ا ﱠﺗﻘَﻮ ْا وﱠاﱠﻟﺬِﻳ‬
َ ‫ن اﻟﻠّﻪَ َﻣ َﻊ اﱠﻟﺬِﻳ‬
‫ِإ ﱠ‬
ʺIndeed Allaah is with those who fear Him (have Taqwaa) and those
who do good.ʺ [Sooratun‐Nahl, 16:128]
And His statement concerning Moosaa and Haaroon,

‫ﺳ َﻤ ُﻊ َوَأرَى‬
ْ ‫ِإ ﱠﻧﻨِﻲ ﻣَﻌَ ُﻜﻤَﺎ َأ‬
ʺIndeed I am with you both; I hear and see.ʺ [Soorah Taa Haa, 20:46]
And His statement concerning His Prophet Muhammad (

),

‫ﻦ‬
َ ‫ن اﻟﻠّﻪَ َﻣ َﻌ‬
‫ن ِإ ﱠ‬
ْ ‫ﺤ َﺰ‬
ْ ‫ﻻ َﺗ‬
َ
ʺDo not grieve; indeed Allaah is with us.ʺ [Sooratut‐Tawbah, 9:40]
If it is asked, ʺIs the Maʹiyyah from the Attributes of Allaahʹs Personal Self
or from the Attributes of (His) actions?ʺ
The answer is that the general type of Maʹiyyah is from the Attributes of
Allaahʹs Personal Self because it is a characteristic that is constantly and forever
affirmed to Him. As for the specific type of Maʹiyyah, it is from the Attributes of
action because it is according to its conditions ‐ if they are fulfilled, it is affirmed,
and otherwise it is not.

CHAPTER 12
Combining Between the Texts of the Highness (ʹUluww) of Allaah Above His
Creation and the Maʹiyyah of Allaah (Being With, His Creation)
Before we discuss how to combine between these two, I would first like to
introduce a very valuable rule that the author, the Shaykh of Islaam, Ibn
Taymiyyah, has pointed to in his book, al‐ʹAql wal‐Naql (1/43‐44). In summary, it
states:
If it is ever said that there is a contradiction between two evidences, then
they are either both certain and convincing or both based upon assumption, or
one is certain, and the other is based upon assumption. So these are the three
categories:
1. Both evidences being certain: They are two evidences that the intellect
can positively affirm what they prove. Any type of contradiction is, therefore,
impossible because to say this would mean that either: one of the proofs must be
cancelled and this is impossible because any certain proof must be affirmed; or it
means that we should affirm both of them while still believing the contradiction
exists, and this is impossible as well because that would be a combination of two
seemingly contrasting things.
So the assumption that they are contradictory either means that they are
not both certain and authentically established proofs, or that there is really no
contradiction at all between them in that one of them is taken upon a certain
perspective and the other upon a different perspective. And of course, if one of
them has been abrogated, then it is not taken because a proof based upon an
abrogated evidence is not upheld, as there is no contradiction between abrogated
evidences.
2. Both evidences are based upon assumptions: Either the evidences are
only assumed based upon the proofs themselves or based upon their
authenticity. In that case, the more correct evidence is sought out and given
precedence.
3. One evidence is certain and the other is only assumed: In this case, the
certain and positively established evidence is given precedence because certainty
is never cancelled out by mere assumption.

If this is clear, then we say that, no doubt, the texts have already
established and affirmed the ʹUluww of Allaah, being personally high above His
creation and the fact that He is also with them. All of these evidences are certain
and positively established in their proofs and authenticity. Allaah even combined
between them in His statement:

‫ﺞ‬
ُ ‫ش َﻳ ْﻌَﻠ ُﻢ ﻣَﺎ َﻳِﻠ‬
ِ ‫ﺳ َﺘﻮَى ﻋَﻠَﻰ ا ْﻟ َﻌ ْﺮ‬
ْ ‫ﺳ ﱠﺘ ِﺔ َأﻳﱠﺎ ٍم ُﺛﻢﱠ ا‬
ِ ‫ض ﻓِﻲ‬
َ ‫ت وَا ْﻟَﺄ ْر‬
ِ ‫ﺴﻤَﺎوَا‬
‫ﻖ اﻟ ﱠ‬
َ ‫ﺧَﻠ‬
َ ‫ُه َﻮ اﱠﻟﺬِي‬
‫ﻦ ﻣَﺎ‬
َ ‫ج ﻓِﻴﻬَﺎ َو ُه َﻮ َﻣ َﻌ ُﻜ ْﻢ َأ ْﻳ‬
ُ ‫ﺴﻤَﺎء وَﻣَﺎ َﻳ ْﻌ ُﺮ‬
‫ﻦ اﻟ ﱠ‬
َ ‫ل ِﻣ‬
ُ ‫ج ﻣِ ْﻨﻬَﺎ وَﻣَﺎ ﻳَﻨ ِﺰ‬
ُ ‫ﺨ ُﺮ‬
ْ ‫ض وَﻣَﺎ َﻳ‬
ِ ‫ﻓِﻲ ا ْﻟَﺄ ْر‬
‫آُﻨ ُﺘ ْﻢ وَاﻟﻠﱠ ُﻪ ﺑِﻤَﺎ ﺗَ ْﻌﻤَﻠُﻮنَ ﺑَﺼِﻴ ٌﺮ‬
ʺIt is He who created the heavens and earth in six days and then rose
over the Throne. He knows what enters the earth and what emerges
from it, and what descends from the heaven and what ascends therein;
and He is with you wherever you are. And Allaah sees what you do.ʺ
[Sooratul‐Hadeed, 57:4]
In this Aayah, Allaah affirms His Istiwaa (rising over) the Throne which is
the highest of all creations. He also affirms that He is with us. There is no
contradiction as it is possible to combine between them.
Reasons for the Possibility of Combining between the Two
Firstly: The texts themselves combine between them so combining
between them is definitely not impossible because the texts would not prove
something that is impossible. Whoever thinks this, then he is mistaken and must
think again, seeking Allaahʹs help and asking Him for guidance and success,
while striving his utmost to know the truth. If the truth then becomes clear to
him, then praise and thanks are due to Allaah for that, otherwise he should
entrust the matter to the One who knows it better and say, ʺWe believe. All of it
is from our Lord. 33 Exalted are You; we have no knowledge except what You
have taught us. Indeed, it is You who is the Knowing, the Wise.ʺ 34

As in the Aayah:
But those firm in knowledge say, We believe. All of it is from our Lord.ʹʺ[Soorah Aali‐Iʹmraan,
3:7]. (T.N.)
34 As in the Aayah:
ʺExalted are You; we have no knowledge except what You have taught us. Indeed, it is You
who is the Knowing, the Wise.ʺ [Sooratul‐Baqarah, 2:32]. (T.N.)
33

Secondly: There is no contradiction between the meaning of the ʹUluww
(Allaah being high above His creation) and the Maʹiyyah (Allaah being with His
creation). For the Maʹiyyah does not mean that He is mixed among them or
within a place, as has previously been explained. It is possible for something to
be itself high above, yet be described as being with something else like in the
saying, ʺWe continued to travel while the moon was with us,ʺ although the moon
is in the sky. This is not considered a contradiction, not in wording nor meaning,
because the one being spoken to understands the meaning of Maʹiyyah in this
sense; he knows it doesnʹt mean that the moon is actually on the earth. So if it is
permissible to combine between ʹUluww and Maʹiyyah as it pertains to the
creation, then it is even more so as it pertains to the Creator (as He is completely
different).
Thirdly: Even if there was a contradiction between ʹUluww and Maʹiyyah
as it pertains to the creation, then that does not necessarily mean that it is the
same regarding the Creator. This is because there is nothing similar to Allaah in
all of His Attributes. Therefore, His Maʹiyayh is not to be judged according to the
Maʹiyyah of the creation. Moreover, His being with them does not give the
impression that He is among them or within their same places because He is
Personally high above. Nothing of His creation will ever encompass or surround
Him while He encompasses everything.
With these points in mind, it is possible to combine even between the
examples that are confirmed of Allaah being high above yet being in front of the
one praying. 35 It is said that combining between them is from various aspects:
Firstly: The texts have combined between them and they would never
include anything that is impossible.
Secondly: There is no contradiction between the meaning of ʹUluww
(being high above) and being in front of or facing. It is possible for something to
be high above another thing while still being in front of it because this does not
necessarily require being physically close or in the same vicinity. Is it not
possible for a man to look at the sun while it is rising and say, ʺItʹs right in front
of my face,ʺ while it is actually in the sky? Again, this is not considered a

As is proven by the Hadeeth recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (401): ʺWhenever any one of you is
praying, he should not spit in front of him because, in the prayer, Allaah is in front of him.ʺ
(T.N.)
35

contradiction, not in wording nor meaning. Therefore, if this is permissible to as
it pertains to the creation, then it is even more so as it pertains to the Creator.
Thirdly: As previously mentioned, even if there was a contradiction
between ʹUluww and something being in front of another with respect to the
creation, then that does not mean that it is the same regarding the Creator
because nothing is similar to Allaah or any of His Attributes. Hence, His being in
front of the one praying does not mean He is physically in the same place or next
to the wall that the person is praying towards. This is not so because of His being
high above and nothing of His creation will ever encompass or surround Him
while He encompasses everything.

CHAPTER 13
{PART ONE}
Allaahʹs Descending to the Heaven of the Dunyaa
It is recorded in the two authentic collections (of al‐Bukhaaree &. Muslim)
that Aboo Hurayrah (‫ )رﺿﻰ اﷲ ﻋﻨﻪ‬narrated that the Prophet (
) said:

‫ ﻣﻦ ﻳﺪﻋﻮﻧﻲ‬:‫ ﻓﻴﻘﻮل‬،‫ﻳﻨﺰل رﺑﻨﺎ إﻟﻰ اﻟﺴﻤﺎء اﻟﺪﻧﻴﺎ ﺣﻴﻦ ﻳﺒﻘﻰ ﺛﻠﺚ اﻟﻠﻴﻞ اﻻﺧﺮ‬
‫ ﻣﻦ ﻳﺴﺘﻐﻔﺮﻧﻲ ﻓﺄﻏﻔﺮ ﻟﻪ؟‬،‫ ﻣﻦ ﻳﺴﺄﻟﻨﻲ ﻓﺄﻋﻄﻴﻪ‬،‫ﻓﺄﺳﺘﺠﻴﺐ ﻟﻪ‬
ʺOur Lord descends to the heaven of the Dunyaa whenever the last third
of the night remains and says, ʹWho is calling upon Me so that I can
answer him? Who is asking something from Me so I can give it to him?
Who is seeking My forgiveness so that I can forgive him?ʹʺ 36
About twenty‐eight different Companions have narrated this
Hadeeth from the Prophet (
) and Ahlus‐Sunnah are united upon
accepting it.
His descending to the heaven of the Dunyaa is one of His Attributes of
action that occur according to His will and wisdom. It is an actual descending
that befits His Majesty and Greatness.
And it is not permissible to make Tahreef (distortion) of it to mean ʺthe
descending of His commandʺ or ʺthe descending of His mercyʺ or ʺthe
descending of one of His angelsʺ or any other misinterpreted meaning. This is
completely false due to the following reasons:
Firstly: It is in opposition and contradicts the apparent meaning of the
) attributed this descending directly to
Hadeeth. The Prophet (
Allaah and the basic principle is that something is only attributed to someone if
he is the one who actually does the action or causes it to happen. Consequently,
to attribute this to someone or something else would be Tahreef (distortion) and
opposing the basic principle.
Secondly: This misinterpreted explanation would indicate that something
is missing from the wording and the basic principle is that one would say what
he means without a hidden, missing meaning.
36

Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (1145) and Muslim (758).

Thirdly: The descending of His command or mercy is not specific only to
this part of the night. Rather, His command and mercy are constantly descending
all the time.
If it is then said that what is meant is a ʺspecial commandʺ or a ʺspecific
mercyʺ and these do not necessarily descend all the time!
The reply to such a statement is that if this presumption and interpretation
were correct, then that would mean that the final destination of these things
descending is the heaven of the Dunyaa ‐ that they stop there! So what benefit
does it do us if the mercy descends only to the sky that the Prophet
) would inform us of!?
(
Fourthly: The Hadeeth shows that whatever descends says, ʺWho is
calling upon me so that I can answer him? Who is asking something from me
so I can give it to him? Who is seeking my forgiveness so that I can forgive
him?ʺ And no one could possibly say that except Allaah.

CHAPTER 13
{Part Two}
Combining Between the Texts of the ʹUluww (Highness) of Allaah & His
Descending
Allaahʹs Descending to the Heaven of the Dunyaa
The ʹUluww of Allaah is one of His Personal Attributes which cannot be
separated from Him. Nevertheless, it does not contradict what the texts have also
come with of His descending to the heaven of the Dunyaa. Combining between
them is from two aspects:
Firstly: The texts have combined between them and they would never
include anything that is impossible, as has proceeded.
Secondly: Nothing is similar to Allaah or any of His Attributes.
Consequently, His descending is nothing like the descending of the creation for it
to be said that it contradicts His being high above His creation, and Allaah
knows best.

CHAPTER 14
Affirming the Attribute of Allaah’s Face
The methodology of Ahlus‐Sunnah wal‐Jamaaʹah is that Allaah has an
actual face that befits Him and it is described with majesty and honor.
Both, the Qurʹaan and the Sunnah have proven this. From the proofs of
the Qurʹaan is the statement of Allaah:

‫ل وَا ْﻟِﺈ ْآﺮَا ِم‬
ِ ‫ﺠﻠَﺎ‬
َ ‫ﻚ ذُو ا ْﻟ‬
َ ‫ﺟ ُﻪ َر ﱢﺑ‬
ْ ‫َو َﻳ ْﺒﻘَﻰ َو‬
ʺAnd there will remain the Face of your Lord, having majesty and
honor.ʺ [Suratur‐Rahmaan, 55:27]
And from the proofs of the Sunnah is the Prophetʹs (
in a supplication that has been reported:

) saying

‫وأﺳﺄﻟﻚ ﻟﺬة اﻟﻨﻈﺮ إﻟﻰ وﺟﻬﻚ واﻟﺸﻮق إﻟﻰ ﻟﻘﺎءك‬
ʺI ask You for the pleasure of looking at Your Face and the desire of
meeting You.ʺ 37
The Face of Allaah is one of His Personal Attributes affirmed to Himself
and actual in meaning in a manner that befits Him.
It’s not correct to distort and misinterpret it to mean ʺ(His) rewardʺ for
many reasons. Some of them are as follows:
Firstly: It is different from the apparent meaning of the text and any
interpreted meaning that is different from the apparent meaning requires a
proof, and there is no proof to indicate this.
Secondly: This Face has been reported in the texts and attributed directly
to Allaah. Anything attributed to Allaah is either something completely separate
in and of itself or not separate. If it is something separate, then it is a created
thing and not one of His Attributes such as saying, ʺthe house of Allaahʺ or ʺthe
camel of Allaahʺ. It is attributed to Him in this way as a form of honoring (the
Recorded by an‐Nisaaʹee in as‐Sughraa (1305), Ibn Hibbaan declared it to be authentic (al‐
Mawaarid ‐ 509), and al‐Albaanee declared it to be Saheeh in his checking of as‐Sunnah (424).
37

created thing) or as a form of associating the property or creation to its Owner or
Creator. However, if it is not something separate, then it is from the Attributes of
Allaah and not created, like the Knowledge of Allaah, His Power, His Honor, His
Speech, His Hand, His Eye, etc. And the Face is definitely of this (second) type.
Therefore, its association with Allaah is one of associating an attribute or
characteristic to the One being described.
Thirdly: The ʺrewardʺ would be something created and separate from
Allaah and the Face is an Attribute of Allaah, neither created nor separate from
Him, so how can it be explained to mean that?
Fourthly: The Face has been described in the texts with majesty and
honor, and that it is light from which refuge is sought, 38 if He were to reveal it,
the splendor of His Face would consume His creation as far as His sight reaches
(everything).
All of these descriptions prevent the meaning from being the ʺrewardʺ,
and Allaah knows best.

This has come in a supplication of the Prophet (
) when he returned from the
city of at‐Taaif after they refused his message. It is recorded by Muslim (179).
38

CHAPTER 15
The Two Hands of Allaah
The methodology of Ahlus‐Sunnah wal‐Jamaaʹah is that Allaah has Two
Hands, both wide‐spreading in giving and blessings. They are from His Personal
Attributes and are to be taken upon their actual, real meaning in a manner that
befits Him.
The Qurʹaan and Sunnah have both proven and affirmed them.
From the proofs of the Qurʹaan is Allaahʹs saying,

‫ي‬
‫ﺖ ِﺑ َﻴ َﺪ ﱠ‬
ُ ‫ﺧَﻠ ْﻘ‬
َ ‫ﺠ َﺪ ﻟِﻤَﺎ‬
ُ‫ﺴ‬
ْ ‫ﻚ أَن َﺗ‬
َ ‫ﺲ ﻣَﺎ َﻣ َﻨ َﻌ‬
ُ ‫ل ﻳَﺎ إِ ْﺑﻠِﻴ‬
َ ‫ﻗَﺎ‬
ʺOh Iblees, what prevented you from prostrating to that which I have
created with My own Two Hands?ʺ [Sooratus‐Saad, 38:75]
And from the Sunnah,

‫ أرأﻳﺘﻢ ﻣﺎ أﻧﻔﻖ ﻣﻨﺬ ﺧﻠﻖ‬،‫ﻳﺪ اﷲ ﻣﻼى ﻻ ﺗﻐﻴﻀﻬﺎ ﻧﻔﻘﺔ ﺳﺤﺎء اﻟﻠﻴﻞ واﻟﻨﻬﺎر‬
‫اﻟﺴﻤﺎوات واﻷرض ﻓﺈﻧﻪ ﻟﻢ ﻳﻐﺾ ﻣﺎ ﻓﻲ ﻳﻤﻴﻨﻪ‬
ʺAllaahʹs Hand is full; spending throughout the day and night does not
decrease it. Do you not see all He has spent since He created the
heavens and earth? It has not even decreased what is in His Right
Hand.ʺ 39
Ahlus‐Sunnah are unanimously agreed upon the belief that they are Two
actual Hands, which in no way, resemble the hands of created beings. It is not
correct to distort and misinterpret them to mean ʺstrengthʺ or ʺblessingsʺ for
many reasons. Some of them are as follows:
Firstly: It would mean that the apparent meaning of the wording is
changed to mean a metaphorical one with no supporting proof.

39

Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (4684) and Muslim (993).

Secondly: It is a meaning that even the (Arabic) language rejects
pertaining to the context in which it has come to associate them directly to
Allaah. For He says:

‫ي‬
‫ﺖ ِﺑ َﻴ َﺪ ﱠ‬
ُ ‫ﺧَﻠ ْﻘ‬
َ ‫ﻟِﻤَﺎ‬
ʺ...to that which I have created with My own Two Hands?ʺ [Sooratus‐
Saad, 38:75]
And it is incorrect to assume the meaning is, ʺ...to that which I have
created with My Blessingsʺ or ʺ...with My Strengthʺ.
Thirdly: They have been attributed directly to Allaah and have been
reported in the dual form (ʺTwoʺ Hands). It has never been reported in a single
place of the Qurʹaan or Sunnah where the blessing or strength has been
associated with Allaah in a dual form, so how could they (the Two Hands of
Allaah) be explained with this meaning?
Fourthly: If the meaning were actually ʺstrengthʺ then it would be correct
to say that Allaah created even Iblees and others with His own Hand. This is
impossible and if it were the case, then Iblees could have used it as an argument
against his Lord when He said,

‫ي‬
‫ﺖ ِﺑ َﻴ َﺪ ﱠ‬
ُ ‫ﺧَﻠ ْﻘ‬
َ ‫ﺠ َﺪ ﻟِﻤَﺎ‬
ُ‫ﺴ‬
ْ ‫ﻚ أَن َﺗ‬
َ ‫ﺲ ﻣَﺎ َﻣ َﻨ َﻌ‬
ُ ‫ل ﻳَﺎ إِ ْﺑﻠِﻴ‬
َ ‫ﻗَﺎ‬
ʺOh Iblees, what prevented you from prostrating to that which I have
created with My own Two Hands?ʺ [Sooratus‐Saad, 38:75]
(Iblees could have said, ʺBut You also created me with Your own Hand
too!ʺ)
Fifthly: The Hand that Allaah has affirmed for Himself has been reported
in ways that prevent its meaning from being ʺfavorʺ or ʺstrengthʺ. It has been
reported with the wording of ʺHandʺ as well as ʺPalmʺ. It has even been reported
by affirming, ʺFingers,ʺ “Gripping,ʺ and ʺShakingʺ to Allaah, such as the
Prophetʹs (
) saying,

‫ أﻧﺎ اﻟﻤﻠﻚ‬:‫ ﺛﻢ ﻳﻬﺰهﻦ وﻳﻘﻮل‬،‫ واﻷرض ﺑﺎﻟﻴﺪ اﻷﺧﺮى‬،‫ﻳﻘﺒﺾ اﷲ ﺳﻤﻮاﺗﻪ ﺑﻴﺪﻩ‬

ʺAllaah will grip His heavens with one Hand, and the earth with the
other and shake them saying, ʹI am the King!ʹʺ 40
Each of these reasons prevents the meaning from being ʺfavorʺ or
ʺstrength.ʺ

40

Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (4812) and Muslim (2787).

CHAPTER 16
The Two Eyes of Allaah
The methodology of Ahlus‐Sunnah wal‐Jamaaʹah is that Allaah has Two
Eyes with which He sees, and they are real and actual in a manner that befits
Him. They are from His Personal Attributes affirmed by the Qurʹaan and
Sunnah.
From the proofs of the Qurʹaan is the statement of Allaah,

‫ﻒ‬
ِ ‫ن ُآ‬
َ ‫ﺟﺰَاء ﱢﻟﻤَﻦ آَﺎ‬
َ ‫ﻋ ُﻴﻨِﻨَﺎ‬
ْ َ‫ﺠﺮِي ﺑِﺄ‬
ْ ‫َﺗ‬
ʺSailing under Our Eyes as a reward for he who had been denied.ʺ
[Sooratul‐Qamar, 54:14]
And from the Sunnah, the Prophet (

) said,

‫إن رﺑﻜﻢ ﻟﻴﺲ ﺑﺄﻋﻮر‬
ʺIndeed your Lord is not blind. 41
And he said,

‫ﻳﻨﻈﺮ إﻟﻴﻜﻢ أزﻟﻴﻦ ﻗﻨﻄﻴﻦ‬
ʺHe is constantly watching you as you are desperately in need.ʺ 42
And his (

) saying:

.‫ﺣﺠﺎﺑﻪ اﻟﻨﻮر ﻟﻮ آﺸﻔﻪ ﻷﺣﺮﻗﺖ ﺳﺒﺤﺎت وﺟﻬﻪ ﻣﺎ اﻧﺘﻬﻰ إﻟﻴﻪ ﺑﺼﺮﻩ ﻣﻦ ﺧﻠﻘﻪ‬
ʺHis covering is light. If He were to remove it, the splendor of His Face
would burn His creation as far as His sight reaches (everything).” 43

Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (3439) and Muslim (169).
Recorded by Ahmad (4/11, 12) Ibn Maajah (181), and Ibn Abee Aaʹsim in as‐Sunnah (554). Al‐
Boosayree said in Misbaah az‐Zujaajah (1/26, 66), ʺThere are some statements (of criticism) about
this chain of narration.ʺ
43 Recorded by Muslim (179).
41
42

Thus, they are Two actual Eyes, which in no way resemble the eyes of
created beings. So, it is incorrect to misinterpret them to mean ʺknowledgeʺ or
ʺsightʺ because:
Firstly: This would be changing the apparent meaning of the wording to a
metaphorical one with no supporting proof.
Secondly: The texts themselves contain wordings and indications that
prevent this, such as his (
) sayings:
ʺHe is constantly watching youʺ
ʺ...the splendor of His Face would burn His creation as far as His sight
reaches (everything).ʺ
ʺIndeed your Lord is not blind.ʺ

CHAPTER 17
The Forms in Which the Attributes of Allaahʹs Two Hands & Two Eyes Have
Been Reported
Both Attributes of Allaahʹs Two Hands and Two Eyes have been reported
in three different forms: a singular form, dual, and a plural form.
Some examples of these Attributes in a singular form are the statements of
Allaah (
):

‫ﻚ‬
ُ ‫ك اﱠﻟﺬِي ِﺑ َﻴ ِﺪ ِﻩ ا ْﻟ ُﻤ ْﻠ‬
َ ‫َﺗﺒَﺎ َر‬
ʺBlessed is He in whose Hand is the dominionʺ [Sooratul‐Mulk, 67:1]
And His saying,

‫ﻋ ْﻴﻨِﻲ‬
َ ‫ﻋﻠَﻰ‬
َ ‫ﺼ َﻨ َﻊ‬
ْ ‫ﺤ ﱠﺒ ًﺔ ﱢﻣﻨﱢﻲ َوِﻟ ُﺘ‬
َ ‫ﻚ َﻣ‬
َ ‫ﻋَﻠ ْﻴ‬
َ ‫ﺖ‬
ُ ‫َوَأ ْﻟ َﻘ ْﻴ‬
ʺAnd I bestowed upon you (Moosaa) love from Me that you would be
brought up under My Eye.ʺ [Soorah Taa Haa, 20:39]
And from the examples of them in the plural form are:

‫ﺖ أَ ْﻳﺪِﻳﻨَﺎ‬
ْ ‫ﻋ ِﻤَﻠ‬
َ ‫َأ َوَﻟ ْﻢ َﻳ َﺮوْا أَﻧﱠﺎ ﺧَﻠَ ْﻘﻨَﺎ َﻟ ُﻬ ْﻢ ﻣِﻤﱠﺎ‬
ʺDo they not see that We have created for them from what Our Hands
have made?ʺ [Soorah YaaSeen, 36:71]
And Allaahʹs statement,

‫ﻋ ُﻴﻨِﻨَﺎ‬
ْ َ‫ﺠﺮِي ﺑِﺄ‬
ْ ‫َﺗ‬
ʺSailing under Our Eyes.ʺ [Sooratul‐Qamar, 54:14]
And from the examples of the dual form is the statement of Allaah,

ِ‫ﻞ َﻳﺪَا ُﻩ ﻣَ ْﺒﺴُﻮﻃَﺘَﺎن‬
ْ ‫َﺑ‬
ʺRather, both His Hands are extended.ʺ [Sooratul‐Maaʹidah, 5:64]

And the statement of the Prophet (

),

‫إذا ﻗﺎم اﻟﻌﺒﺪ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺼﻼة ﻗﺎم ﺑﻴﻦ ﻋﻴﻨﻲ اﻟﺮﺣﻤﻦ‬
ʺWhen a servant stands in prayer, he stands between the Two Eyes of
the Most Merciful.ʺ
This is recorded in Mukhtasar as‐Sawaaʹiq 44 from Aʹtaa narrating from
Aboo Hurayrah, who narrated it from the Prophet (
) yet it is not
strong.
As for the Attribute of Allaahʹs Two Eyes, they have not been explicitly
reported in the dual form in the Qurʹaan.
These are the three forms in which both Attributes, that of Allaahʹs Two
Hands and Two Eyes, have been reported.
Combining between These Three different Forms is as Follows:
First of all, the singular form does not necessarily negate or contradict the
dual form or the plural form because a singular form, if associated with
something is general and could include all of what is affirmed to Allaah whether
it be His Hand or Eye, and whether it be one or more (as is the grammar
principle in the Arabic language).
As for combining between the wordings that have come with the dual
form or plural form, then if we say that the fewest form of a plural could be two,
then there would not be any contradiction between the dual and plural form in
the first place by combining between them.
And if we say that the fewest form of a plural is three, which is more
common, then combining between them would be to say that what is meant by
the plural form is not three or more. What is intended, and Allaah knows best, is
a sense of greatness and appropriateness ‐I mean by this the appropriateness of
attaching something to another as it is used in the language. The attributes are
being attached, in the examples (of the plural form above), to the word ʺOurʺ
which is used to show a sense of greatness. Therefore, it is appropriate to attach
44

See as‐Sawaaʹiq (1/256).

the plural form to it in, because the plural form gives more of an impression of
greatness than the singular or dual forms do. Hence, if the words that are
attached together both indicate this impression of greatness, then the result is a
stronger sense of greatness.

CHAPTER 18
The Speech of Allaah
Ahlus‐Sunnah wal‐Jamaaʹah are united upon the belief that Allaah speaks
and that His speech is a real, actual attribute affirmed to Him in a manner that
befits Him.
He (
) speaks with letters and sound how He wants and when
He wants. So His speech is one of His Personal Attributes in itself, and it is also
one of His Attributes of action.
Both the Qurʹaan and Sunnah have proven this. Some proofs from the
Qurʹaan are Allaahʹs statements:

‫ب‬
‫وَﻟَﻤﱠﺎ ﺟَﺎء ﻣُﻮﺳَﻰ ﻟِﻤِﻴﻘَﺎﺗِﻨَﺎ َو َآﱠﻠ َﻤ ُﻪ َر ﱡ‬
ʺAnd when Moosaa arrived at Our appointed time, His Lord spoke to
him.ʺ [Sooratul‐Aʹaraaf, 7:143]

‫ﻲ‬
‫ﻚ ِإَﻟ ﱠ‬
َ ‫ﻚ َورَا ِﻓ ُﻌ‬
َ ‫ل اﻟﻠّ ُﻪ ﻳَﺎ ﻋِﻴﺴَﻰ ِإﻧﱢﻲ ُﻣ َﺘ َﻮﻓﱢﻴ‬
َ ‫ِإ ْذ ﻗَﺎ‬
ʺWhen Allaah said, ʺOh Eesaa, indeed I will take you and raise you to
Myself.ʺ [Soorah Aali‐ʹImraan, 3:55]
And His (

) saying,

‫ﻲ‬
ّ‫ﺠ‬
ِ ‫ﻦ َو َﻗ ﱠﺮ ْﺑﻨَﺎ ُﻩ َﻧ‬
ِ ‫ﺐ اﻟﻄﱡﻮ ِر ا ْﻟَﺄ ْﻳ َﻤ‬
ِ ‫وَﻧَﺎدَ ْﻳﻨَﺎ ُﻩ ﻣِﻦ ﺟَﺎ ِﻧ‬
ʺAnd We called him (Moosaa) from the right side of the mount, brought
him near, and spoke privately to him.ʺ [Soorah Maryam, 19:52]
In the First Aayah, there is confirmation that the speech is connected to
His will, that it occurs when He wants.
In the Second Aayah, is a proof that it is with letters, because what is
spoken consists of letters.
In the Third Aayah, is a proof that it is with sound, because the calling
and private conversation is only with sound.

(

From the proofs of the Sunnah is the statement of the Prophet
):

‫ إن اﷲ ﻳﺄﻣﺮك أن‬:‫ ﻓﻴﻨﺎدي ﺑﺼﻮت‬.‫ ﻟﺒﻴﻚ وﺳﻌﺪﻳﻚ‬:‫ ﻳﺎ ادم! ﻓﻴﻘﻮل‬:‫ﻳﻘﻮل اﷲ ﺗﻌﺎﻟﻰ‬
.‫ﺗﺨﺮج ﻣﻦ ذرﻳﺘﻚ ﺑﻌﺜﺎ إﻟﻰ اﻟﻨﺎر‬
ʺAllaah will say, ʹOh Aadam!ʹ He will respond, ʹAt your service.ʹ Then
He will call out, ʹIndeed Allaah orders you to take, from your progeny, a
group to the Fire.ʹʺ 45
And His speech (Subhaanahu) consists of both word and meaning; it is
not wording alone or meaning alone. This is the belief of Ahlus‐Sunnah wal‐
Jamaaʹah regarding Allaahʹs speech. As for the beliefs of other than they (the
misguided sects), then what follows is a summary taken from Mukhtasar as‐
Sawaaʹiq al‐Mursalah:
1. The belief of the Karaamiyyah: It is similar to the belief of Ahlus‐
Sunnah except they say, ʺIt happens when before, it was nothing.ʺ They say this
trying to avoid affirming that something could occur from Allaah even if it never
had a beginning (like His speech).
2. The belief of the Kalaablyyah: They say the speech of Allaah is, ʺA
separate meaning in and of itself. It is similar to the Attributes of His Life or His
Knowledge in that they do not occur by His will (when He wants). As for the
letters and sounds, Allaah created them to tell us about that separate meaning
which exists by itself. This meaning consists of four individual meanings:
commanding, prohibiting, informing, and asking.
3. The belief of the Ashaʹriyyah: It is similar to that of the Kalaabiyyah
except that they differ from them in two aspects.
First: Regarding the meanings of speech ‐ the Kataabiyyah say, ʺIt consists
of four meanings...ʺ and the Ashaʹriyyah say that there is only one meaning and
that those four: informing, asking, commanding, and prohibiting are each exactly
the same as the other. Moreover, (as they say) there are not different types of
speech, only different characteristics of it. In fact, the Tawraah, Injeel, and the

45

Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (4741) and Muslim (222).

Qurʹaan are each the same as the other, they do not differ except in the
expressions used.
Second: The Kalaabiyyah also say, ʺThe letters and sounds are only to tell
about the speech of Allaah.ʺ and the Ashaʹriyyah say, ʺThey are mere expressions
(not real) to mean the speech of Allaah.ʺ
4. The belief of the Saalimiyyah: They also describe the speech as, ʺA
separate meaning in and of itself. It is similar to the Attributes of His Life or His
Knowledge in that they do not occur by His will (when He wants). It consists of
letters and sounds all connected; none of them precedes another. So the baa,
seen, and meem in the Basmalah, for example, each one of them is connected to
all the others at the same time, yet they were always and always will be present.ʺ
5. The belief of the Jahmiyyah and the Muʹtazilah: They say of Allaahʹs
speech, ʺIndeed, it is created and not from the Attributes of Allaah.ʺ
And there are some of the Jahmiyyah who blatantly deny Allaahʹs speech
while others from them affirm it, yet claim it is created.
6. The belief of the modern philosophers, the followers of Aristotle:
They say the speech is, ʺThe abundance of intellect and generosity poured forth
upon the honored, pure souls in the degree to which they are utilized and
accepted. So they must imagine and have certainty to the extent of what they
accept from it. These images they imagine and certainties are visualized so much
so until they are so powerful they become something comprehended and
luminous which speaks to them with a speech that is heard by the ears.
7. The belief of the Ittihaadiyyah: They say, as do those who believe in
Wahdatul‐Wujood (pantheism ‐ that God is in everything, and everything is
God) that, ʺEvery speech in essence is the speech of Allaah.ʺ
All of these sayings are in direct opposition to what has been proven by
the Qurʹaan, the Sunnah, and the intellect. And anyone whom Allaah provides
with knowledge and wisdom would understand this.

CHAPTER 18
{PART Two}
The Qurʹaan is the Speech of Allaah
The Speech of Allaah
The methodology of Ahlus‐Sunnah wal‐Jamaaʹah is that the Qurʹaan is the
revealed speech of Allaah, not created. From Him it began, and to Him it will
return. He actually spoke with it, making Jibreel responsible for descending with
it and revealing it upon the heart of Muhammad (
).
Both the Qurʹaan and Sunnah prove this belief.
From the proofs of the Qurʹaan is the statement of Allaah (

),

‫ﻼ َم اﻟّﻠ ِﻪ‬
َ ‫ﺴ َﻤ َﻊ َآ‬
ْ ‫ﺣﺘﱠﻰ َﻳ‬
َ ‫ﺟ ْﺮ ُﻩ‬
ِ ‫ك َﻓَﺄ‬
َ ‫ﺳ َﺘﺠَﺎ َر‬
ْ ‫ﻦا‬
َ ‫ﺸ ِﺮآِﻴ‬
ْ ‫ﻦ ا ْﻟ ُﻤ‬
َ ‫ﺣ ٌﺪ ﱢﻣ‬
َ ‫ن َأ‬
ْ ‫َوِإ‬
“And if anyone of the Mushrikoon seeks your protection, then grant
him protection so that he may hear the speech of Allaah.” [Sooratut‐
Tawbah, 9:6]
The ʺspeech of Allaahʺ here means the Qurʹaan. Another proof is His
statement,

ِ‫ك ﻟﱢﻴَﺪﱠﺑﱠﺮُوا ﺁﻳَﺎ ِﺗ ِﻪ َوِﻟ َﻴ َﺘ َﺬ ﱠآ َﺮ ُأ ْوﻟُﻮا ا ْﻟﺄَ ْﻟﺒَﺎب‬
ٌ َ‫ﻚ ُﻣﺒَﺎر‬
َ ‫ب أَﻧ َﺰ ْﻟﻨَﺎ ُﻩ ِإَﻟ ْﻴ‬
ٌ ‫آِﺘَﺎ‬
ʺA blessed book which We have revealed to you that they might reflect
on its verses and that those of understanding would be reminded.ʺ
[Sooratus‐Saad, 38:29]
And His saying,

‫ﻦ‬
ُ ‫ح ا ْﻟﺄَﻣِﻴ‬
ُ ‫ل ِﺑ ِﻪ اﻟﺮﱡو‬
َ ‫َﻧ َﺰ‬
‫ﻦ ا ْﻟﻤُﻨﺬِرِي‬
َ ‫ن ِﻣ‬
َ ‫ﻚ ِﻟ َﺘﻜُﻮ‬
َ ‫ﻋﻠَﻰ َﻗ ْﻠ ِﺒ‬
َ
‫ﻦ‬
ٍ ‫ﻲ ﱡﻣﺒِﻴ‬
‫ﻋ َﺮ ِﺑ ﱟ‬
َ ‫ن‬
ٍ ‫ِﺑِﻠﺴَﺎ‬
ʺThe trustworthy spirit (Jibreel) has brought it down upon your heart,
that you may be one of the warners ‐ in a clear Arabic language.ʺ

[Sooratush‐Shuʹaraa, 26:193‐195]

(
place:

And from the proofs of the Sunnah, is the Prophetʹs statement
) while he was offering his message to some people in a particular

‫ ﻓﺈن ﻗﺮﻳﺸﺎ ﻗﺪ ﻣﻨﻌﻮﻧﻲ أن أﺑﻠﻎ آﻼم‬،‫أﻻ رﺟﻞ ﻳﺤﻤﻠﻨﻲ إﻟﻲ ﻗﻮﻣﻪ ﻷﺑﻠﻎ آﻼم رﺑﻲ‬
.‫رﺑﻲ ﻋﺰ وﺟﻞ‬
ʺIs there no man who will take me to his people so that I may convey
the speech of my Lord? For Quraysh has prevented me from conveying
the speech of my Lord (
).ʺ 46
Also, his statement (

) to al‐Barraa ibn Aaʹzib:

،‫ ووﺟﻬﺖ و ﺟﻬﻲ إﻟﻴﻚ‬،‫ اﻟﻠﻬﻢ أﺳﻠﻤﺖ ﻧﻔﺴﻲ إﻟﻴﻚ‬:‫إذا أوﻳﺖ إﻟﻲ ﻓﺮاﺷﻚ ﻓﻘﻞ‬
‫ ﻻ ﻣﻠﺠﺄ و ﻻ‬،‫ رﻏﺒﺔ ورهﺒﺔ إﻟﻴﻚ‬،‫ وأﻟﺠﺄت ﻇﻬﺮي إﻟﻴﻚ‬،‫وﻓﻮﺿﺖ أﻣﺮي إﻟﻴﻚ‬
.‫ وﺑﻨﺒﻴﻚ اﻟﺬي أرﺳﻠﺖ‬،‫ اﻣﻨﺖ ﺑﻜﺘﺎﺑﻚ اﻟﺬي أﻧﺰﻟﺖ‬،‫ﻣﻨﺠﻰ ﻣﻨﻚ إﻻ إﻟﻴﻚ‬
ʺWhen you go to bed, say, ʹOh Allaah, I have submitted myself to You, I
have turned my face to You, I have entrusted my affair to You, and I
have entrusted my back to You, out of hope in You and fear of You.
There is no retreat nor refuge from You except with You. I have believed
in Your Book which You have revealed and in Your Prophet which You
have sent.ʹ ʺ 47
Aaʹmir ibn Deenaar said:
ʺI have met the people during seventy years, all of them saying, ʹAllaah is
the Creator and everything other than Him is created, except the Qurʹaan.
For it is certainly the speech of Allaah, not created. From Him it began and
to Him it will return.ʹʺ 48

Recorded by Aboo Daawood (4734), at‐Tirmidhee (2925), an‐Nisaaʹee in al‐Kubraa (7727), Ibn
Maajah (201), Ahmad (3/390), and al‐Haakim (2/669) and he declared it to be Saheeh.
47 Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (247) and Muslim (2710).
48 See as‐Sunan al‐Kubraa by al‐Bayhaqee (10/43, 205) and at‐Tamheed by Ibn Abdul‐Barr
(24/186).
46

The meaning of ʺFrom Him it beganʺ is that Allaah originally spoke with
it (the Qurʹaan). It is also a refutation of the Jahmiyyah who say that He created it
in someone other than Himself.
As for the statement, ʺ...and to Him it will return,ʺ it could have two
meanings:
Firstly: The attribute of speaking with the Qurʹaan returns to Himself,
meaning that no one is described as speaking with it other than Allaah because
He is the original One who spoke with it, and speech is an attribute of the
speaker Himself.
) as it is
Secondly: It (the Qurʹaan) will be raised up to Allaah (
reported in some narrations that He will erase it from the books and hearts in
one night. That will happen ‐ and Allaah knows best ‐when the people totally
and completely abandon acting according to the Qurʹaan. So it will be raised up
from them as a form of honoring it. Allaah is the One we seek help from.

CHAPTER 18
{PART THREE}
Our Recitation of the Qurʹaan
The Speech of Allaah
By ʺrecitingʺ here in Part Three, we are referring to speaking and uttering
the words of the Qurʹaan. It has already been mentioned that the Qurʹaan is the
speech of Allaah, not created. However, as for our uttering the Qurʹaan, is it
correct to say that this is created, not created, or is it required to just remain silent
on this issue?
The answer is that as for making a general, absolute statement either way
is not correct.
As for making a specific, detailed statement, then if what is meant by
ʺspeakingʺ is simply uttering the words, which is the action of the servant, then it
is created because the servant and his actions are both created. 49 However, if
what is meant by ʺspeakingʺ is that which is spoken (the actual words), then it is
none other than the speech of Allaah, and not created. This is because the speech
of Allaah is one of His Attributes and none of His Attributes are created.
There is a statement of Imaam Ahmad that indicates this. He said,
ʺWhoever says, ʹMy speaking with the Qurʹaan is createdʹ and he means
by that the actual Qurʹaan, then he is a Jahmee.ʺ
His statement, ʺand he means by that the actual Qurʹaanʺ indicates that if
what is meant is NOT the actual Qurʹaan, but rather the mere uttering of the
words which is an action of people, then he is not a Jahmee, and Allaah knows
best.

A proof of this is the Aayah,
“And Allaah has created you and whatever you do.ʺ [Sooratus‐Saaffaat, 37:96], (T.N.)

49

CHAPTER 19
The Emergence of Taʹteel and Its Origins
The statements of Taʹteel 50 emerged after the (three) favored generations ‐
the Companions, their followers, and then their followers after them ‐ even
though its origin began to appear during the end of the time of the followers of
the Companions.
The first to speak of Taʹteel was al‐Jaʹd ibn Dirham. He said, ʺIndeed,
Allaah did not take Ibraheem as a Khaleel (close friend) nor did He speak
directly to Moosaa.ʺ 51 So he was killed by Khaalid ibn ʹAbdullaah al‐Qasree, who
was the governor of Iraq during the time of Hishaam ibn ʹAbdul‐Malik. He came
out to the prayer ground on the day of ʹEed with al‐Jaʹd ibn Dirham chained up.
He then gave the sermon and said,
ʺOh people, may Allaah accept your sacrifices. For I will kill (sacrifice) al‐
Jaʹd ibn Dirham. He claims that Allaah did not take Ibraheem as a Khaleel
nor did He speak directly to Moosaa!ʺ
He then descended (from the Imaamʹs stand) and killed him on the Eed of
Sacrifice (ʹEed al‐Adhhaa) in 119 Hijrah.
Ibn al‐Qayyim mentioned this action of Khaalid ibn ʹAbdullaah al‐
Qasreeʹs in some verses of his famous poem, an‐Nooniyyah.
After al‐Jaʹd spoke of Taʹteel, another man known as al‐Jahm ibn Safwaan
began speaking about it. It is to him that the methodology of the Jahmiyyah is
attributed because he is the one who spread it. He was then killed by Salim ibn
Ahwaz, the companion of Nasr ibn Sayyaar. That was in Khuraasaan in the year
128 Hijrah.
During the second century, the books of the Romans and Greeks were
translated into Arabic and the matter of (Taʹteel) increased even more in harm
and severity.

Taʹteel is to denying some or all of the Names and Attributes of Allaah. Shaykh ibn al‐
ʹUthaymeen gives a more detailed explanation of Taʹteel. (T.N.)
51 Both of these statements are in direct denial of the Qurʹaan:
ʺAnd Allaah took Ibraaheem as a Khaleel (close friend).ʺ [Sooratun‐Nisaa
4:125]; and, ʺAnd Allaah spoke directly to Moosaa.ʺ [Sooratun‐Nisaa, 4:164]. (T.N.)
50

Then in the third century, the teachings of the Jahmiyyah were
widespread due to Bishr ibn Ghiyaath al‐Mareesee and his group. The Imaams
(of the Sunnah) have all criticized them, most declaring them to be disbelievers
or misguided. Uʹthmaan ibn Saʹeed ad‐Daarimee authored a book refuting al‐
Mareesee entitled: Naqdh Uʹthmaan ibn Saʹeed aʹlaa al‐Kaafir al‐Aʹneed feemaa Iftaraa
aʹlaa Allaah min at‐Tawheed (The Refutation of Uʹthmaan ibn Saʹeed against the
Arrogant Disbeliever Regarding What He has Fabricated against Allaah from
Tawheed). Whoever reads it with knowledge and fairness; then it will become
clear to him the weakness, rather the falsehood, of the arguments of these
Muaʹttilah (those who make Taʹteel). One will also discover (after reading the
book) that the distorted interpretations which are found in the statements of
many of the modern speakers such as ar‐Raazee, al‐Ghazaalee, Ibn Aʹqeel, and
others are really the same exact distorted interpretations of Bishr ibn Ghiyaath al‐
Mareesee.
As for the origins of Taʹteel, then they are from the Jews, Mushrikoon, and
the misguided ones from the Sabians (those who worshipped the ʺheavenly
bodiesʺ) and philosophers. Al‐Jaʹd ibn Dirham took his teachings, it is said, from
Abaan ibn Samaaʹn who learned from Taaloot who learned from Labeed ibn al‐
Aʹsam ‐ the Jew who performed magic on the Prophet (
).
It is also said that al‐Jaʹd was from a place called Harraan which was a
land full of Mushrikoon, Sabians, and philosophers. And undoubtedly, the
environment has a great affect on the ʹAqeedah and behavior of a person.
There are from them those whose methodology is the belief that Allaah has no
attributes that are affirmed to Him because, according to their claim, affirming
attributes to Allaah means that Allaah is similar to His creation. However, they
do affirm to Allaah Salbiyyah Attributes, or Idhaafiyyah Attributes, or a
combination of the two.
As for Salbiyyah Attributes: They are those that negate anything from
Allaah that does not befit Him (
). And example is their saying, ʺAllaah
is Oneʺ meaning that what is negated from Him is a sense of separation or
parting, yet what it is really negating is any partner with Him.
As for Idhaafiyyah Attributes: They are attributes that Allaah is not
described with as being His confirmed attributes, rather He is described with
them from the point of associating them with something else. An example is their
saying about Allaah, ʺHe is the beginning and the causer.ʺ They mean He is the
beginning and causer from the point that things happen because of Him, not

from the point of being a confirmed Attribute of Allaah, which is Beginning,
Originating things, and Causing things to happen.
As for a combination of the two: They are attributes which are Salbiyyah
from one point and Idhaafiyyah from another. An example is their saying about
Allaah, ʺHe is First.ʺ It is Salbiyyah in that it negates from Him any happenings
or occurrences, and Idhaafiyyah in that it things are after Him.
So if this is what is derived from the way of those who negate Allaahʹs
Attributes, then how would a believer or intelligent person take this path and
abandon the path of those whom Allaah has blessed from the Prophets, the
truthful, the martyrs, and the righteous?

CHAPTER 20
{PART ONE}
The Methodology of Those Who Deny Allaahʹs Attributes
Those who deny (some or all of) the Attributes are in agreement upon
affirming only to Allaah the Attributes which their intellects accept, and denying
those which their intellects feel should be negated whether the Qurʹaan and
Sunnah agrees with this or not. So their way of affirming or negating Attributes
to Allaah is based solely on the intellect.
They then differ regarding the Attributes that the intellect cannot reason
an affirmation or denial for them. So most of them simply negate them and
explain whatever Attributes are reported as being metaphorical in meaning.
Some of them, however, withhold from taking a stance and entrust their
meaning to Allaah while, in fact, negating what the Attributes actually indicate
of characteristics.
They claim that their methodology is the middle path between the proofs
of the intellect and those that are reported (in the texts). However, they lie
because the proofs of the intellect and those that are reported both agree upon
affirming Attributes of perfection to Allaah. None of Allaahʹs Attributes that
have come in the Qurʹaan or Sunnah contradicts the intellect, although the
intellect may not be able to comprehend and perceive the exact details of them.
The way of these people who deny the Attributes is similar to the way of those
whom Allaah spoke of when He (
) said:

‫ن أَن‬
َ ‫ﻚ ُﻳﺮِﻳﺪُو‬
َ ‫ل ﻣِﻦ َﻗ ْﺒِﻠ‬
َ ‫ﻚ وَﻣَﺎ أُﻧ ِﺰ‬
َ ‫ل ِإَﻟ ْﻴ‬
َ ‫ن َأ ﱠﻧ ُﻬ ْﻢ ﺁ َﻣﻨُﻮ ْا ﺑِﻤَﺎ أُﻧ ِﺰ‬
َ ‫ﻋﻤُﻮ‬
ُ ‫ﻦ َﻳ ْﺰ‬
َ ‫َأَﻟ ْﻢ َﺗ َﺮ ِإﻟَﻰ اﱠﻟﺬِﻳ‬
‫ﻻ‬
ً‫ﻼ‬
َ‫ﺿ‬
َ ‫ﻀﻠﱠ ُﻬ ْﻢ‬
ِ ‫ن أَن ُﻳ‬
ُ ‫ﺸ ْﻴﻄَﺎ‬
‫ت َو َﻗ ْﺪ ُأ ِﻣﺮُو ْا أَن َﻳ ْﻜ ُﻔﺮُو ْا ِﺑ ِﻪ وَ ُﻳﺮِﻳ ُﺪ اﻟ ﱠ‬
ِ ‫َﻳ َﺘﺤَﺎ َآﻤُﻮ ْا إِﻟَﻰ اﻟﻄﱠﺎﻏُﻮ‬
‫َﺑﻌِﻴﺪًا‬
‫ﻚ‬
َ ‫ن ﻋَﻨ‬
َ ‫ﺼﺪﱡو‬
ُ ‫ﻦ َﻳ‬
َ ‫ﺖ ا ْﻟ ُﻤﻨَﺎ ِﻓﻘِﻴ‬
َ ‫ل َرَأ ْﻳ‬
ِ ‫ل اﻟﻠّ ُﻪ وَإِﻟَﻰ اﻟ ﱠﺮﺳُﻮ‬
َ ‫ﻞ َﻟ ُﻬ ْﻢ َﺗﻌَﺎَﻟ ْﻮ ْا ِإﻟَﻰ ﻣَﺎ أَﻧ َﺰ‬
َ ‫وَإِذَا ﻗِﻴ‬
‫ﺻﺪُودًا‬
ُ
‫ﻻ‬
‫ن أَرَ ْدﻧَﺎ ِإ ﱠ‬
ْ ‫ن ﺑِﺎﻟﻠّﻪِ ِإ‬
َ ‫ﺤِﻠﻔُﻮ‬
ْ ‫ك َﻳ‬
َ ‫ﺖ َأ ْﻳﺪِﻳ ِﻬ ْﻢ ُﺛﻢﱠ ﺟَﺂؤُو‬
ْ ‫ﻒ ِإذَا َأﺻَﺎ َﺑ ْﺘﻬُﻢ ﱡﻣﺼِﻴ َﺒ ٌﺔ ﺑِﻤَﺎ َﻗ ﱠﺪ َﻣ‬
َ ‫َﻓ َﻜ ْﻴ‬
‫ﺣﺴَﺎﻧًﺎ َو َﺗ ْﻮﻓِﻴﻘًﺎ‬
ْ ‫ِإ‬
ʺHave you not seen those who claim to have believed in what was
revealed to you, and what was revealed before you? They wish to refer
legislation to the Taaghoot (false judges, etc.) while they are
commanded to disbelieve in them. But Shaytaan wishes to lead them far

astray. And when it is said to them, ʺCome to what Allaah has revealed,
and to the Messenger,ʺ you see the hypocrites turning away from you in
aversion. So how (will it be) when disaster strikes them because of what
their hands have put forth and they come to you swearing by Allaah,
ʺWe intended nothing but good and conciliation.ʺ [Sooratun‐Nisaa, 4:60‐
62]
They are similar to those spoken of in this Aayah in many ways. Some of
the similarities are as follows:
Firstly: Each of the two groups claim they are believers in what was
), yet neither accept all of what he came
revealed to the Prophet (
with.
Secondly: These people who deny the Attributes, if they are called to
what the Qurʹaan and Sunnah have come with of affirming Attributes of
perfection to Allaah, they turn away and refuse just like those hypocrites did
when it was said to them, ʺCome to what Allaah has revealed, and to the
Messenger.ʺ They also turned away and refused.
Thirdly: These people who deny the Attributes have Taaghoot (those who
are pleased with the people worshipping them or following them rather than the
legislation of Allaah) that they blindly follow, preferring them to what the
Messengers have come with. They wish to refer judgment of disputes over to
them, not to the Qurʹaan and Sunnah. In the same way, the hypocrites wanted to
refer judgment to the Taaghoot while they were ordered to disbelieve in them.
Fourthly: Those who deny Allaahʹs Attributes claim they only intend
good by their methodology and the conciliation between the intellect and the
legislation just like the hypocrites swear they intended nothing but good and
conciliation.
Any liar and follower of falsehood that disguises himself and his
falsehood while pretending to follow the truth, outwardly showing it; he will
sooner or later come with deceptive calls that spread, yet expose, his falsehood.
Although, whomever Allaah bestows knowledge, understanding, and wisdom
on him while he has good intentions, then he will not be deceived by falsehood
or the spread of these deceptive calls, and Allaah is the One from whom help is
sought.

CHAPTER 20
{PART Two}
Some of the False Allegations of This Methodology
The Methodology of Those Who Deny Allaahʹs Attributes
The methodology of those who deny Allaahʹs Attributes indicate and
necessitate many false allegations against the sources of Islaam and its people.
From these allegations are the following:
Firstly: This methodology alleges that the Qurʹaan and Sunnah both have
explicitly come with Kufr (disbelief) and openly call to it. This is because they are
both full of affirmations and proof of Allaahʹs Attributes ‐ those very Attributes
that these people claim that by affirming them, one is making Tashbeeh
(declaring that Allaah is similar to something else) and Kufr.
Secondly: Their methodology alleges that neither the Qurʹaan nor the
Sunnah clarified the truth because the truth, as they understand it, is the
negation of the Attributes and there is no text or apparent meaning within the
Qurʹaan or Sunnah that negates the Attributes of perfection from Allaah.
Most of those who pretend to have knowledge from these people derive
and reason out their claim 52 based upon proofs such as Allaahʹs Statement,

‫ﺳ ِﻤ ّﻴًﺎ‬
َ ‫ﻞ َﺗ ْﻌَﻠ ُﻢ َﻟ ُﻪ‬
ْ ‫َه‬
ʺDo you know any similarity to Him?ʺ [Soorah Maryam, 19:65]
And His Statement

‫ﺣ ٌﺪ‬
َ ‫َوَﻟ ْﻢ َﻳﻜُﻦ ﻟﱠ ُﻪ ُآﻔُﻮًا َأ‬
ʺAnd there is nothing equal to Him.ʺ [Sooratul‐Ikhlaas, 112:4]
And it is well‐known to anyone with an intellect that what is meant by the
likes of these texts is the affirmation of the perfection of Allaah, and that there is
nothing similar to Him regarding His Attributes. And there is no way they could
indicate a negation of His Attributes. No doubt, that whoever tries to prove to
52

The claim of the negation and denial of Allaahʹs Attributes.

people the negation of Allaahʹs Attributes with the likeness of this speech; then it
is either, vague, deceitful, or incapable of clarifying the true meaning. All of these
are impossible regarding the speech of Allaah (
) or the Messenger
(
). Both of their speech is comprised of the most eloquent of clarity
and intention. There is no agenda within it to misguide the creation and confuse
them with obscurities.
Thirdly: This methodology also alleges that the first and foremost
predecessors from the Muhaajiroon, Ansaar, and those who followed them in
righteousness all used to propagate falsehood while concealing the truth, or they
were all ignorant of the truth. This is because so many chains have reported the
belief of affirming the Attributes of perfection to Allaah from them. It is this very
belief that these deniers claim to be falsehood. None of them (the Salaf) have ever
said a single statement in support of negating the Attributes ‐ the very belief
these deniers claim to be the truth. This allegation is unthinkable regarding the
best generation and the best of this Ummah.
Fourthly: Another false allegation of these deniers is that if Allaah is not
described with attributes of perfection, then He must be described with those of
deficiency, for everything present must have characteristics. Therefore, the
matter is turned against these deniers as they fall into a greater evil than that
which they flee from.

CHAPTER 20
{PART THREE}
The Doubts & Fabrications These Deniers Rely Upon as Proof
The Methodology of Those Who Deny Allaahʹs Attributes
The deniers of Allaahʹs Attributes rely upon doubts and fabrications as
proof. Anyone with whom Allaah has provided correct knowledge and sound
understanding can easily know the falsehood of their so‐called proofs.
53

Most of what they rely upon are issues such as the following:
1. Their lies and false claims such as the scholars are in unanimous
agreement about this point (of denying Allaahʹs Attributes), or that it is the
beliefs of those who authenticate texts, or the statement of their enemies (Ahlus‐
Sunnah) oppose the agreement of the scholars and other similar statements.
2. The assumption of making Tashbeeh based upon their own corrupted
reasoning. An example is their saying that by affirming Allaahʹs Attributes, one
is actually making Tashbeeh because attributes are outward and showing, and
therefore must have a body, and stating this is declaring the bodies to be similar.
3. They constantly use wording and expressions which could have both
correct and incorrect meanings as they pertain to Allaah, such as Allaahʹs body,
or Allaah occupying a certain space, or position. These wordings are vague and
they begin by negating them all together, and ending up absolutely denying all
of His Attributes. 54
They then phrase these doubts using long, strange, yet attractive
expressions, which the ignorant person may believe to be the truth based upon
the beauty of the statements. However, when one fully understands the issue, it
becomes clear to him that they are mere fabrications and doubts.
Such as those Aayaat mentioned:
ʺDo you know any similarity to Him?” [Soorah Maryam, 19:65] and, ʺAnd there is nothing
equal to Him.ʺ [Sooratul‐Ikhlaas, 112:4].
54 See Chapter 9, The Sense of ʹPositionʹ as it pertains to Allaah. Regarding the issue of having a
body, see onwards from Chapter 10. As for occupying a space, then this requires more specifics.
For if, what is meant is that something of the creation surrounds and contains Allaah then this is
impossible. However, if it is meant that He possesses the creation, yet is completely separate from
them, then this is correct.
53

These people are refuted from many aspects.
Firstly: Their claims and their proofs are contradictory in that by claiming
that affirming Allaahʹs Attributes necessitates Tashbeeh; in this they have
already fallen into what they are fleeing from (Tashbeeh) in that they cannot
imagine Allaah being completely different from the creation that He could
possess attributes, yet still be unlike His creation ‐ so they initially make this
Tashbeeh in their minds.
Secondly: The contradiction and confusion of their statements are clear.
You will find a group from them claiming that the intellect proves a certain
matter while another group claims it disproves it. Rather, a single one of them
may claim the intellect proves something and then contradict his own proof in
another circumstance. The contradiction of statements is one of the strongest
proofs indicating their corruption.
Thirdly: They are also refuted by the fact that their denying of the
Attributes results in other corrupted meanings and the corruption of what
something results in proves the corruption of the proof itself.
Fourthly: The texts of the Attributes do not need any interpretation. Even
if some of them did, there is nothing within them that would prevent
understanding them based upon their apparent meanings.
Fifthly: The common people not knowing much about these issues do
)
know for certain from the religion of Islaam that the Prophet (
came with all of it. So misinterpreting them (the texts of the Attributes) is of the
same status as misinterpreting prayer, fasting, Hajj, and other known issues of
Islaam.
Sixthly: The pure, unadulterated intellect, safe and sound from any
doubts or desires; does not actually uphold anything from what the texts have
come with of the Attributes to be impossible. Rather, it suggests the overall
affirmation of perfect Attributes to Allaah, even if there are some detailed
specifics of the Attributes that the intellect may be incapable of perceiving and
fully understanding.
Even the more distinguished of these people (who deny Allaahʹs
Attributes) admit that the intellect is not able to arrive at full certainty regarding

everything of the divinity that is sought. For this, it is incumbent that this be
learned only from Prophethood as it has come with no distortion or
misinterpretations, and Allaah knows best.

CHAPTER 21
Each of the Two Groups of Taʹteel Tamtheel Actually Combine Between Both
Taʹteel & Tamtheel
A Muaʹttil (one who makes Taʹteel) is one who denies anything of Allaahʹs
Names or Attributes such as the Jahmiyyah, the Muʹtazilah, the Ashaʹriyyah, and
others like them. 55
A Mumaththil (one who makes Tamtheel) is one who affirms Attributes to
Allaah that are equal or similar to His creation such as the earlier Raafidhah
(extreme Sheeʹahs) and those like them.
The reality of the issue is that every Muaʹttil is a Mumaththil, and every
Mumaththil is a Muaʹttil.
As for the Muaʹttil, his Taʹteel is obvious. As for his making Tamtheel, it is
because he only makes Taʹteel ‐ the denying Allaahʹs Attributes ‐ in the first place
due to his incorrect belief that affirming the Attributes would require making
Tashbeeh ‐ declaring something to be similar to Allaah. Thus, he denies Allaahʹs
Attributes to avoid declaring anything to be similar to Him. By that, he first
makes Tamtheel (in his mind by believing that Allaah is like His creation so
much so that if He has Attributes, then that must mean He is like His creation)
and then he makes Taʹteel (by absolutely denying Allaahʹs Attributes to avoid
Tamtheel).
As for the Mumaththil, his Tamtheel is obvious. As for his making Taʹteel,
it is from three aspects:
Firstly: He denies the text itself, which affirms the Attribute by changing
what it means and proves. Yet, the text only proves the affirmation of an
attribute that befits Allaah, not that Allaah is similar to His creation.
Secondly: If he declares Allaah to be similar to His creation, then he has
already denied every text that negates any resemblance of Allah to His creation,
such as His (
) statement,

‫ﻲ ٌء‬
ْ َ‫ﺲ َآ ِﻤ ْﺜِﻠ ِﻪ ﺷ‬
َ ‫َﻟ ْﻴ‬
Shaykh Ibn al‐ʹUthaymeen gives detailed definitions of Taʹteel and Tamtheel in Chapter 3.
(T.N.)
55

ʺThere is nothing like Him.ʺ [Sooratush‐Shooraa, 42:11]
And His saying,

‫ﺣ ٌﺪ‬
َ ‫َوَﻟ ْﻢ َﻳﻜُﻦ ﻟﱠ ُﻪ ُآﻔُﻮًا َأ‬
ʺAnd there is nothing equal to Him.ʺ [Sooratul‐Ikhlaas, 112:4]
Thirdly: If he believes Allaah to be similar to His creation, he denies the
perfection that He deserves in that he considers the Lord, perfect in every way, to
be similar to the deficient and flawed creation.

CHAPTER 22
The Salaf’s Warning Against Philosophical Speech (‘Ilm al‐Kalaam)
‘Ilm al‐Kalaam is that which some influential speakers have innovated in
the foundations of the religion of introducing ʹAqeedah beliefs, thereby
abandoning what the Qurʹaan and Sunnah have come with. The statements of
the Salaf are many warning against philosophical speech and its people due to
what it leads to of erroneous beliefs and doubts to such a degree that Imaam
Ahmad said,
ʺThe one who indulges in philosophical speech will never be successful.ʺ
Ash‐Shaafiʹee said,
ʺMy ruling on the people of philosophical speech is that they are to be
beaten with canes and shoes, then paraded in front of the people while it
is said, ʹThis is the reward of those who abandon the Book and Sunnah,
instead accepting philosophical speech.ʹʺ
They indeed deserve what ash‐Shaafiʹee said from the point of
encouraging them to repent to Allaah, and to deter others from following their
methodology. If we look at them from the point that confusion has overwhelmed
them and Shaytaan has overcome them, we feel merciful and sorry for them. We
thank Allaah who has saved us from what He has afflicted them with.
So, we look at them from two points: from the point of the legislation in
that we punish and prevent them from spreading their methodology, and from
the point of what has been decreed for them. We feel sorry for them and ask
Allaah to save them. We thank Allaah for saving us from their ordeal.
The ones we fear misguidance for the most are those who enter into this
philosophical speech and never feel they have reached its depth and limits. This
is because, although he who never enters into it is safe, the one who actually
reaches the limit and final conclusion of this deep thinking; it becomes clear to
him its hopelessness and corruption. He then returns to the Qurʹaan and Sunnah
as some of their scholars have experienced. 56 Thus, the danger remains for the
one who leaves the straight path preferring philosophical speech, while its reality
and depth never become clear to him.
56

See ar‐Raazeeʹs statement on this issue in Chapter 4.

The author, Ibn Taymiyyah, has reported many statements of these
philosophical speakers themselves that are relevant to this issue. He said:
ʺAlthough, we have more than what suffices us from the Qurʹaan and
Sunnah and statements of the Salaf over all other speech, still, many
people have become attached to some influential speakers. They give
them the benefit of the doubt, yet not to others, while being deceived into
imagining that these speakers have reached a depth of certainty in this
matter that others have not. So if they are brought every Aayah and proof,
they will not follow it unless they are given something of this
philosophical speech to validate it.ʺ
He then said:
ʺNot everyone from those whom we may mention something of their
speech we agree with all of what he says. However, the truth is accepted
from anyone who speaks it.ʺ 57
Thus, he explained that his purpose of reporting these statements is to
clarify the truth even when spoken by any person, and to establish the proof
against these speakers with statements from their own scholars, and Allaah
knows best.

See al‐Fatwaa al‐Hamawiyyah al‐Kubraa (The original book that Shaykh Ibn al‐Uthaymeen is
explaining here) included in Majmooʹ al‐Fataawaa (5/99).
57

CHAPTER 23
{PART ONE}
The Categories of Deviant People Concerning the Belief in Allaah & the Last
Day
The way of the Prophet (
), his Companions, and those who
followed them in righteousness is to remain on the straight path in knowledge
and actions. Anyone who truthfully follows them with knowledge knows that
they achieved and actualized the belief in Allaah and the Last Day. They
accepted this (the meeting of Allaah on the Last Day) as certain truth. They were
sincere, doing their actions solely for Allaah and following His legislation, not
committing Shirk, innovations, Tahreef, nor denying anything of the religion.
As for those who deviated from their way, they are three groups: the
people of Takhyeel (those who believe religious concepts are only imaginary,
with no real truth to them.), those of Taʹweel (misinterpretation), and the people
of Tajheel
1. The People of Takhyeel: They are the philosophers and those who hold
there to be hidden, concealed meanings behind everything. Many speakers are
also of this group. The reality of the methodology is that whatever the Prophets
came with regarding the belief in Allaah and the Last Day are merely examples
and imaginary concepts; they are not real at all. These concepts are only meant to
take advantage of the common people, because if it is said to them,
ʺYou have a Great, All‐Capable, Merciful, Powerful Lord, and there is a
severe day before you in which you will be resurrected after your death and you
will be recompensed for the actions you do now.ʺ If they are told this, then they
will straighten themselves up and behave in the manner that is requested from
them, even though there is really no truth to this ‐ according to their claim.
These people are divided further into two categories: the extremists, and
the non‐extremists.
As for the extremists, they claim that the Prophets did not really know
about such issues. Rather, the divine philosophers are the true ones who know
the reality of these issues. So they profess that some of the philosophers are more
knowledgeable about Allaah and the Final Day than the Prophets are. The
Prophets are certainly the most knowledgeable of all people regarding these
matters.

As for the non‐extremists, they admit the Prophets know the realities of
these matters, yet at the same time, they mention things to people that are
imaginary and meant to attract the beliefs of people, not consistent with what is
really true. They (the Prophets) do this for the benefit and well‐being of the
people. So they allege that the well‐being of the servants is only brought about
through such deceptive means which include declaring the Prophets to be liars in
the greatest and most significant of all matters (the belief in Allaah and the Last
Day).
Therefore, the first group (the extremists) ruled that the Prophets are
ignorant while the second group ruled that they are deceptive liars.
This is the belief of the people of Takhyeel concerning the belief in Allaah
and the Last Day.
Pertaining to the concept of doing deeds, some of them claim there is truth
to this concept and that every person is commanded to work good deeds. Others
hold the concept of working deeds to be merely a made‐up, symbolic approach
that only the common people are commanded with, and not the higher, special
class. They misinterpret the meaning of prayer, considering it to really mean the
knowledge of hidden secrets, fasting is the concealing of these secrets, and Hajj
really means traveling to their scholars, and they similarly interpret other
religious tenets. This group consists of such deviants as the Ismaaʹeelees, the
Baatiniyyahs, and others.
The corruption and fraudulent beliefs of this group are known by the
senses, the intellect, and the legislation. We witness uncountable signs that
indicate the existence of Allaah and the perfection of His Characteristics. In
everything there is a sign showing He is indeed One.
Everything that happens and all of the events in perfect harmony and
order are not possibly coming about without a Wise Organizer and Planner that
is Capable of anything.
All of the revelations comprising of the wisdom of Allaah prove the belief
of a Final, Last Day. No one but a truly arrogant or insane person would deny
this.
Not much is needed to refute the people of Takhyeel as the aversion of
most people and their reluctance to accept their beliefs are well known and
obvious.

2. The People of Ta’weel: They are the speakers from the Jahmiyyah, the
Muʹtazilah, and those who follow them.
) came
Their methodology is that whatever the Prophet (
with of texts about Allaahʹs Attributes are metaphorical; the apparent meanings
is not what is intended by them. Rather, other meanings that contradict the
apparent ones are really the intent behind them.
The Prophet (
) knew the hidden meanings yet he left them
for the people to decipher and discover by their intellects. They then try to
interpret and reason out the textsʹ apparent meanings to be consistent with the
) reason behind this was to test the
actual meanings. The Prophetʹs (
peopleʹs minds.
By this, they would gain many benefits by this experience, uncovering the
hidden meanings of the language and strangeness of its speech.
These are the most confused and contradictory of all people because they
have no real, constant foothold or rule by which they can determine which texts
can possibly be interpreted or not, nor any base rules for specifying the intended
meaning behind these texts.
Another point against them is that most of what they claim to be the real,
hidden meanings ‐ it is known by the circumstances and context that they are not
possible according the specific statements.
They openly show that they are in support of the Sunnah, disguising
themselves as those who uphold and honor it. Nevertheless, Allaah exposes their
real identities by the refutation of their dubious beliefs and the falsification of
their proofs. The Shaykh of Islaam (Ibn Taymiyyah) and many others have
confronted them, refuting them more so than other groups because their
deception of the people is more severe as they appear to be in support of the
Sunnah. 58

58

The third category will be discussed in Part Three of this chapter. (T.N.)

CHAPTER 23
{PART Two}
The Methodology of the People of Taʹweel Regarding the Afterlife
The Categories of Deviant People Concerning the Belief in Allaah & the Last
Day
The methodology of the people of Taʹweel (Misinterpretation) regarding
the texts of the afterlife is to believe in them as real and actual without
misinterpreting them. Yet, because their methodology pertaining to the
Attributes is to change them from their apparent meanings to metaphorical ones,
the people of Takhyeel then criticized them, insisting they interpret the texts of
the afterlife in the same way they do those of Allaahʹs Attributes. To this, the
people of Taʹweel defend their position saying, ʺWe know for sure that the
) has come with proofs confirming the next life and we
Messenger (
know the fallacy of the argument against it. Therefore, believing in it is required.ʺ
This is a correct answer and a decisive proof defending their position of
not changing the meanings of the texts dealing with the next life! It also requires
the people of Takhyeel to do likewise ‐ to believe in the hereafter and to accept
the texts upon their real, apparent meanings. If a proof is established and
anything opposing it is shown to be false, then it becomes necessary to affirm
that which is proven.
Ahlus‐Sunnah uses this same argument against the people of Taʹweel for
them to similarly believe in the texts of Allaahʹs Attributes and to accept them
too upon their real, apparent meanings. They say to them, ʺWe also know with
) came with proofs affirming Allaahʹs
certainty that the Messenger (
Attributes and we know the fallacy of the argument against it. Therefore,
believing in it is required.ʺ This is also a correct, decisive, and inescapable proof
against the people of Taʹweel. Accordingly, whoever refuses to change the
meanings of the texts about the hereafter to other, metaphorical meanings, then
they must also refuse to do so regarding the texts of the Attributes of Allaah
which are greater and even more established in the divine books than the texts of
the hereafter. If they choose not to, then their self‐contradictions and corrupted
minds will have become clear.

CHAPTER 23
{PART THREE}
The People of Tajheel
The Categories of Deviant People Concerning the Belief in Allaah & the Last
Day
3. The people of Tajheel (the accusation of others as being Jahl or
ignorant): Many of them try to associate themselves with the Sunnah and the
followers of the Salaf.
The reality of the methodology is that whatever the Prophet
) has come with of the texts about Allaahʹs Attributes ‐ they are
(
mere unknown, incomprehensive words. No one knows their meanings, not
even the Prophet (
) himself. He related many Ahaadeeth of the
Attributes yet he did not know their meanings!
On top of this, they also say that there is no place for the intellect when
dealing with the Attributes of Allaah. This statement of theirs means that the
Prophet (
), nor his Companions, nor the Imaams of the Salaf had
any intellectual knowledge and no revealed knowledge regarding this matter.
This is from the most ridiculous of statements.
Their way in dealing with the Attributes is to accept only their wordings
while believing their meanings are completely unknown. Some of them oppose
one another saying that they are to be accepted upon their apparent meanings,
yet along with a different interpretation that no one knows except Allaah. This is
an obvious contradiction, for if what is really intended is some other
interpretation known only to Allaah, different from the apparent meaning of the
text, then how could one accept them upon their apparent meanings?
Regarding the way of these people, the Shaykh (Ibn Taymiyyah) said in
his book, al‐‘Aql wal‐Naql, vol. 1, page 121:
ʺIt is clear that the statement of those who believe the meanings are
completely unknown ‐ those who claim they follow the Sunnah and the
Salaf ‐ it is one of the most evil statements of all the people of innovation
and deviance.ʺ

The bogus proof these people (who say the meanings of the texts are
unknown) use is the pause that most of the Salaf make after the statement
ʺexcept Allaah,ʺ while reciting the Aayah:

‫ﻦ ﻓﻲ ُﻗﻠُﻮ ِﺑ ِﻬ ْﻢ زَ ْﻳ ٌﻎ ﻓَﻴَ ﱠﺘﺒِﻌُﻮنَ ﻣَﺎ َﺗﺸَﺎ َﺑ َﻪ ِﻣ ْﻨ ُﻪ ا ْﺑ ِﺘﻐَﺎء ا ْﻟ ِﻔ ْﺘ َﻨ ِﺔ وَا ْﺑ ِﺘﻐَﺎء َﺗ ْﺄوِﻳِﻠ ِﻪ وَﻣَﺎ‬
َ ‫ﻓَﺄَﻣﱠﺎ اﱠﻟﺬِﻳ‬
‫ب‬
‫ﻦ ﻋِﻨ ِﺪ َر ﱢ‬
ْ ‫ﻞ ﱢﻣ‬
‫ن ﺁﻣَﻨﱠﺎ ِﺑ ِﻪ ُآ ﱞ‬
َ ‫ﻻ اﻟﻠّ ُﻪ وَاﻟﺮﱠاﺳِﺨُﻮنَ ﻓِﻲ ا ْﻟ ِﻌ ْﻠ ِﻢ َﻳﻘُﻮﻟُﻮ‬
‫َﻳ ْﻌَﻠ ُﻢ َﺗ ْﺄوِﻳَﻠ ُﻪ ِإ ﱠ‬
ʺAs for those in whose hearts is deviation, the follow that which is
unspecific, seeking discord and seeking an interpretation (that suits
them). And no one knows its interpretation except Allaah – and those
firm in knowledge say, ʺWe believe in it. All of it is from our Lord.ʺ 59
[Soorah Aali‐ʹImraan, 3:7]
They make it clear themselves the erroneousness of this proof due to two
reasons:
Firstly: They assert that the Aayaat of the Attributes are from the
unspecific texts.
Secondly: They also assert that the interpretation mentioned in the Aayah
is changing the wordʹs apparent meaning to a different meaning that contradicts
it. The result is that all of the Aayaat dealing with the Attributes have meanings
that contradict their apparent ones and no one knows them except Allaah.

Refuting this group is by the following points:
First, we ask them what they mean by ʺunspecificʺ by which they refer to
all of the Aayaat of the Attributes. Do they mean the meaning is unspecific and
hidden or do they mean that the actuality of how the Attributes are is
unspecified?
If they mean the first meaning ‐ which is in fact what they mean ‐then the
Aayaat of the Attributes are not from this type because their meanings are clear
and apparent. If what they were to mean is the second meaning, then it is true
The point being made here is based on the fact that some of the Salaf explained that the Aayah
could also be read as, ʺAnd no one knows its interpretation except Allaah and those firm in
knowledge. They say...,ʺ indicating that Allaah knows the interpretation as well as those firm in
knowledge.
59

that the Aayaat are of this type. This is because no one knows the actuality of the
). This being said, it is not
Attributes and how they are except Allaah (
correct to refer to the Aayaat of the Attributes as being ʺunspecificʺ as mentioned
in the Aayah above. Rather, the previously mentioned details must be kept in
mind.
Second, by them saying that the interpretation mentioned in the Aayah is
changing the wordʹs apparent meaning to a different meaning that contradicts it;
is not correct. This is a new definition to ʺinterpretationʺ as mentioned in the
Aayah. Neither the Arabs in general, nor the Companions among whom the
Qurʹaan was revealed in their language knew this to be the intended meaning.
On the contrary, what was well known to them is that this interpretation could
have two meanings:
1 ‐ What is meant is the explanation, and the interpretation in this way
was known to those possessing strong knowledge, such as Ibn Abbaas ( ‫رﺿﻰ اﷲ‬
‫ )ﻋﻨﻪ‬who said:
ʺI am one of those firm in knowledge who know its interpretation.ʺ 60
Upon this meaning, many of the Salaf paused reciting after, ʺ...except
Allaah and those firm in knowledgeʺ from the previous Aayah.
2 ‐ What also could be meant is the actuality of something and its end
result or outcome. Upon this meaning, the interpretation of what Allaah has
informed us about regarding Himself, and regarding the Last Day is not actually
known to us. The interpretation in this way is the actuality and how (His
Attributes and the Last Day) really are ‐ this is unknown to us, as Imaam Maalik
and others have said regarding the Istiwaa and other such issues. Upon this
meaning, most of the Salaf hold the pause in the recitation of the aforementioned
Aayah to be, ʺAnd no one knows its interpretation except Allaah.ʺ
The third point in refuting these people is that Allaah revealed the
Qurʹaan for it to be pondered over. He encouraged us to reflect upon it in
entirety, making no exception with the Ayaat of the Attributes. The
encouragement to reflect upon it means that it is possible to arrive at its intended
meanings; otherwise, it would be meaningless to reflect upon it. Pondering upon
something means to gain more than empty speech; the speech of Allaah and His
60

See Tafseer Ibn Katheer (1/348).

Messenger (
) are far above this. The encouragement is to reflect upon
all of it with no exceptions. This shows that the Aayaat of the Attributes have real
meanings and it is possible to reach them by reflecting upon them. The closest of
people in understanding these meanings are the Prophet (
) and his
Companions. The Qurʹaan was revealed in their language and they were the first
people to reflect upon it, especially upon the most important part of the religion
(knowing Allaah and His Attributes).
Aboo ʹAbdur‐Rahmaan as‐Salamee said, ʺThose who used to read the
Qurʹaan upon Uthmaan ibn ʹAffaan, ʹAbdullaah Ibn Masʹood, and others
narrated to us that whenever they used to learn ten Aayaat from the Prophet (ill),
they would not move on past them until they learnt them and what they
contained of knowledge and action. We learned the Qurʹaan, knowledge, and
action at the same time.ʺ So knowing this, how is it practical to assume they were
ignorant of the meanings of the Aayaat regarding Allaahʹs Attributes while this
is the most important part of the religion?
Fourth, the statement of these people suggests that Allaah has revealed in
His Book tests with clear wordings, yet empty in truth.
According to this, they are nothing more than mere alphabetical letters.
This totally contradicts the wisdom of Allaah with which He has revealed the
Book and sent the Messengers.
Note: It is now known from what has preceded that there could be three
meanings of ʺinterpretation:ʺ
1 ‐ It could mean an explanation and clarification of the meaning. This is
the meaning according to most of the Tafseer scholars. From this is the Prophetʹs
) statement to Ibn ʹAbbaas,
(

.‫ وﻋﻠﻤﻪ اﻟﺘﺄوﻳﻞ‬،‫اﻟﻠﻬﻢ ﻓﻘﻬﻪ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺪﻳﻦ‬
ʺOh Allaah, give him understanding in the religion and teach him the
interpretation.” 61
This meaning is well known to the scholars regarding the Aayaat of the
Attributes.
61

Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (143) and Muslim (2477).

2 ‐ It could also mean the actuality of something. This meaning is known
to be from the meanings of ʺinterpretationʺ as used in the Qurʹaan and Sunnah as
in the Aayah,

‫ﻻ َﺗ ْﺄوِﻳَﻠ ُﻪ‬
‫ن ِإ ﱠ‬
َ ‫ﻈﺮُو‬
ُ ‫ﻞ ﻳَﻨ‬
ْ ‫َه‬
ʺDo they await anything but its interpretation (the actuality)?ʺ [Sooratul‐
Aʹaraaf, 7:53]
And His statement,

‫ﻼ‬
ً ‫ﻦ َﺗ ْﺄوِﻳ‬
ُ‫ﺴ‬
َ‫ﺣ‬
ْ ‫ﻚ ﺧَ ْﻴ ٌﺮ َوَأ‬
َ ‫َذِﻟ‬
ʺThat is the best way and best for a final determination.ʺ [Sooratun‐
Nisaa, 4:59]
Therefore, the interpretation of the Aayaat of the Attributes upon this
meaning is the true essence and actuality of them. This is known only to Allaah.
3 ‐ The final meaning of ʺinterpretationʺ is to change the apparent
meaning of a word to another contradictory one. This is the meaning of modern
speakers and others. This meaning is further broken down into two types: a
correct and an incorrect meaning.
As for the correct type, it is to change the meaning of a word based upon a
proof. An example of this is changing Allaahʹs statement

‫ن اﻟ ﱠﺮﺟِﻲ‬
ِ ‫ﺸ ْﻴﻄَﺎ‬
‫ﻦ اﻟ ﱠ‬
َ ‫ﺳ َﺘ ِﻌ ْﺬ ﺑِﺎﻟﻠّﻪِ ِﻣ‬
ْ ‫ن ﻓَﺎ‬
َ ‫ت ا ْﻟ ُﻘﺮْﺁ‬
َ ‫ﻓَﺈِذَا َﻗ َﺮ ْأ‬
ʺSo if you recite the Qurʹaan, then seek refuge with Allaah from
Shaytaan, the rejected.ʺ [Sooratun‐Nahl, 16:98]
to make the meaning, ʺif you want to recite...ʺ
As for the incorrect meaning, it is to change the meaning of a word with
no proof. An example of this type is to change the meaning of the Istiwaa of
Allaah on His Throne to mean ʺconqueringʺ or to change the meaning of His
Hand to ʺstrengthʺ or ʺfavorʺ and other such distortions.

CHAPTER 23
{PART TOUR}
The Tafseer of the Qurʹaan
The Categories of Deviant People Concerning the Belief in Allaah & the Last
Day
It has been narrated that Ibn Abbaas (‫ )رﺿﻰ اﷲ ﻋﻨﻪ‬said:
ʺThe Tafseer (explanation) of the Qurʹaan is by four means: the
explanation known to the Arabs based upon the language, the explanation
which no one is excused for being ignorant of, the explanation known to
the scholars, and the explanation that only Allaah knows; whoever claims
to know this final type is a liar.ʺ
1 ‐ The explanation known to the Arabs based upon the language:
This is explaining the words of the language such as the meaning of Qur
(menstruation), Namaariq (pillows), Kahf (cave), etc.
2 ‐ The explanation which no one is excused for being ignorant of:
This is the explanation of the Aayaat which everyone is responsible to
know ‐ those of ʹAqeedah, or actions. Examples of this are to know Allaah by His
Names and Attributes, knowing about the Last Day, purification, praying,
Zakaah, etc.
3 ‐ The explanation known to the scholars:
This is the explanation, which may not be known to others. Examples are,
knowing the reasons for the revelation of specific Aayaat, the abrogating and
abrogated Aayaat, the general and specific, the precise and the unclear, etc.
4 ‐ The explanation that only Allaah knows:
This is the true essence and actuality of what Allaah has informed about
Himself and about the Last Day. We understand the meanings of such things, yet
we cannot perceive exactly how they are and will happen.
An example of this is that we understand the meaning of Allaah rising
over His Throne, but we cannot perceive and comprehend how this actually
happens. Another example is that we understand the meaning of fruit, honey,
water, milk, and other things that Allaah has informed us they will be in
paradise. However, we cannot perceive actually how they will be. Allaah says,

‫ن‬
َ ‫ﺟﺰَاء ﺑِﻤَﺎ آَﺎﻧُﻮا َﻳ ْﻌ َﻤﻠُﻮ‬
َ ‫ﻦ‬
ٍ ‫ﻋ ُﻴ‬
ْ ‫ﻲ ﻟَﻬُﻢ ﻣﱢﻦ ُﻗ ﱠﺮ ِة َأ‬
َ ‫ﺧ ِﻔ‬
ْ ‫ﺲ ﻣﱠﺎ ُأ‬
ٌ ‫ﻓَﻠَﺎ َﺗ ْﻌَﻠ ُﻢ ﻧَ ْﻔ‬
ʺAnd no soul knows what has been hidden for them of comfort for the
eyes (satisfaction) as a reward for what they used to do.ʺ [Sooratus‐
Sajdah, 32:17]
Ibn ʹAbbaas said, ʺThere is nothing in this life similar to what is in
paradise except by the names.ʺ 62
Knowing this, it is clear that there are some things in the Qurʹaan that are
known only to Allaah, such as the actuality of His Names, His Attributes, and
what Allaah has informed of regarding the Last Day. As for the meanings of
these things, we know them, otherwise there would be no meaning for us to be
informed about them, and Allaah knows best.

62

See az‐Zuhd by Hannaad (1/51/8) and Tafseer Ibn Katheer (1/64).

CHAPTER 24
The Division of the People of the Qiblah Regarding the Aayaat &L Ahaadeeth
of the Attributes
What is meant by ʺthe people of the Qiblahʺ is anyone who prays towards
the Qiblah (the direction of the Kaʹbah in Makkah) which is anyone who
associates themselves with Islaam.
The people of the Qiblah have split up into six groups regarding the
Aayaat and Ahaadeeth dealing with Allaahʹs Attributes:
•
•
•

Two groups who say they are to be taken upon their apparent meanings
Two groups who say they are to be taken upon other than their apparent
meanings
And two groups who withhold from accepting either side

Two groups who say they are to be taken upon their apparent meanings
1 ‐ A group who make Tashbeeh ‐ those who make Allaahʹs Attributes
similar to the attributes of the creation. Their methodology is complete falsehood.
The Salaf have refuted them.
2 ‐ A group, the Salaf, who accept them by their apparent meanings in a
way that befit Allaah (
). Their methodology is correct, based solely
upon the proofs of the Qurʹaan and Sunnah, and the intellect proves it as has
previously been shown in Chapter 3 and 4.
The difference between these two groups is that the first makes Tashbeeh,
and the second deny this.
Thus when someone who makes Tashbeeh says of Allaahʹs Knowledge,
His decent to the lowest heaven, or His Hand, for example, ʺI cannot
comprehend this Knowledge, descent, or a Hand except with what is similar to
those of the creation,ʺ then the reply to this is from various points:
Firstly, The intellect and that which has been revealed both prove the
difference between the Creator and the creation in all of His Attributes. The
Attributes of the Creator befit Him and those of the creation befit them. From the
revealed proofs indicating this difference is the statement of Allaah:

‫ﺴﻤِﻴ ُﻊ اﻟ َﺒﺼِﻴ ُﺮ‬
‫ﻲ ٌء َو ُه َﻮ اﻟ ﱠ‬
ْ َ‫ﺲ َآ ِﻤ ْﺜِﻠ ِﻪ ﺷ‬
َ ‫َﻟ ْﻴ‬
ʺThere is nothing like Him, and He is the Hearing, the Seeing.ʺ
[Sooratush‐Shooraa, 42:11]
And His statement,

‫ن‬
َ ‫ﻖ َأﻓَﻼ َﺗ َﺬ ﱠآﺮُو‬
ُ ‫ﺨُﻠ‬
ْ ‫ﻻ َﻳ‬
‫ﻖ َآﻤَﻦ ﱠ‬
ُ ‫ﺨُﻠ‬
ْ ‫َأ َﻓﻤَﻦ َﻳ‬
ʺIs He who creates similar to he who cannot create? Will you not
remember?ʺ [Sooratun‐Nahl, 16:17]
From the intellectual proofs is that, how could the Creator, perfect in all
aspects, Perfection being part of His Self, be similar to the deficient creation,
deficiency being part of their very selves while they are in need of One who will
complete them?
Secondly, it is replied, ʺDonʹt you comprehend that Allaahʹs very Self is
not similar in any way to those of the creation?ʺ No doubt, there is no similarity;
so likewise, one should understand that Allaah has Characteristics and
Attributes that in no way resemble those of the creation. The belief in Allaahʹs
Self is the same as in His Attributes; whoever makes a distinction between them
is in contradiction.
Thirdly, we witness ourselves that there are some attributes of the
creation which have the same names, yet are different in how they actually are.
The hand of a person is not the same as an animalʹs hand. Hence, if it is possible
for the attributes of the creation to be different amongst themselves while still
having the same names, then the difference between the attributes of the creation
and the Creator is even more so. It is incumbent to accept this difference.

Two groups who say they are to be taken upon other than their apparent
meanings
They deny that Allaah has any Attributes affirmed to him or they deny
some of them or they affirm certain situations, yet not actual Attributes
controlling them.

1 ‐ A group who make Taʹweel (misinterpretation) such as the Jahmiyyah
and others who change interpret the texts of the Attributes to specific meanings
they choose. An example is their changing the meaning of Allaahʹs Hand to
mean His ʺfavorʺ or His Istiwaa to mean ʺconqueringʺ and other
misinterpretations.
2 ‐ A group who make Tajheel (accusing others as being }ahl or ignorant)
and who claim that only Allaah knows what is intended by the texts of His
Attributes, yet they do know, as they claim, that He did not intend by these texts
other, outward Attributes. This statement of theirs is contradictory. Their saying
that they know He did not intend outward Attributes directly contradicts their
belief that only Allaah knows the meanings of the texts. The belief that only
Allaah knows the meanings is one that causes the person to neither confirm nor
deny any Attributes.
The difference between these two groups is that the first affirms meanings
to the texts of Allaahʹs Attributes, yet they oppose their apparent meanings. As
for the second group, they claim only Allaah knows their meanings without
affirming them. They also say that Allaah did not intend by these texts actual
Attributes of Himself.

Two groups who withhold from accepting either side:
1 ‐ A group that alleges the meanings of the texts may or may not affirm
Attributes to Allaah that befit Him. Many Fiqh scholars and others are from this
group.
2 ‐ A group who deny all of this with their hearts and tongues. They do
not even read the Qurʹaan and Ahaadeeth.
The difference between these two is that the first group confirms that the
texts of Allaahʹs Attributes could possibly mean actual attributes that befit Him
or they may not. The second group makes no decision at all, and Allaah knows
best.

CHAPTER 25
The Evil Names with Which the People of Innovation Refer to the People of
the Sunnah
From the wisdom of Allaah is that He made for every Prophet an enemy
from the criminals, preventing the truth as much as they can with words and
actions. They do this by various means of plots and plans, doubts and dubious
beliefs, false calls. Allaah decreed this so for the truth to be made clear despite
this, so that it manifests and rises above all falsehood. The Prophet
(
) and his Companions met much of such opposition as Allaah
(
) said,

‫ﺷ َﺮآُﻮ ْا أَذًى َآﺜِﻴﺮًا‬
ْ ‫ﻦ َأ‬
َ ‫ﻦ اﱠﻟﺬِﻳ‬
َ ‫ب ﻣِﻦ َﻗ ْﺒِﻠ ُﻜ ْﻢ َو ِﻣ‬
َ ‫ﻦ أُوﺗُﻮ ْا ا ْﻟ ِﻜﺘَﺎ‬
َ ‫ﻦ اﱠﻟﺬِﻳ‬
َ ‫ﻦ ِﻣ‬
‫ﺴ َﻤ ُﻌ ﱠ‬
ْ ‫ﺴ ُﻜ ْﻢ َوَﻟ َﺘ‬
ِ ‫َوأَﻧ ُﻔ‬
ʺYou will surely hear from those who were given the scripture before
you and from the Mushrikoon much abuse.ʺ [Soorah Aali‐ʹImraan, 3:186]
Those oppressive Mushrikoon used to refer to the Prophet (
)
and his Companions with defamatory, slanderous, and sarcastic names such as
magician, insane, fortune‐teller, liar, etc.
As the people of knowledge and Eemaan are the inheritors of the
Prophets, they were subjected, by the people of innovation and influential
speech, to the same of which the Prophet (
) and his Companions
were from the Mushrikoon. All of these sects refer to the people of the Sunnah
with names of slander and sarcasm that Allaah has made them free from. They
do this either out of ignorance of the truth, assuming the correctness of what they
themselves are upon and the falsehood the people of the Sunnah are upon; or
they do this from evil intentions trying to alienate them and drive others away
from them. They arrogantly adhere to their opinions knowing their own
corruption.
The Jahmiyyah and their followers who make Taʹteel (denying Allaahʹs
Names and Attributes) call the people of the Sunnah, ʺMushabbihah,ʺ alleging
that by affirming the Attributes, they are making Allaah similar to His creation.
The extreme Sheeʹahs refer to them as ʺNawaasibʺ (enemies) because they ally
themselves with Aboo Bakr and ʹUmar just as they (the Sheeʹahs) claim to ally
themselves with the family of the Prophet (
). They profess that
anyone who allies with Aboo Bakr or ʹUmar then he is an enemy of the Prophetʹs

family. For this, they used to say, ʺThere is no alliance except by remaining free
from.ʺ They mean that there is no allegiance to the family of the Prophet
(
) except by remaining free of Aboo Bakr and ʹUmar!
The people who do not believe in the Qadr (pre‐decree) of Allaah refer to
the people of the Sunnah as ʺMujbarahʺ ‐ those who believe people are forced to
do actions by Allaah with no choice of their own. This is the result of believing in
the QadV, as these people claim.
The Murjiah., those who claim nothing of action diminishes oneʹs Eemaan,
call the people of the Sunnah ʺShakkaakʺ (doubters) because the concept of
Eemaan to them is nothing more than the professing it with the heart. To make
exceptions that Eemaan can be decreased is a doubt to these Murjiah.
The people of influential speech and logic refer to the people of the
Sunnah as ʺHashwiyyahʺ or those who are useless, with no benefit in them. They
also call them ʺNawaabitʺ which are weeds that grow with no benefit in them.
They call them ʺGhuthaaʺ or scum which flood carries of filth. These people of
logic and reasoning use such names because they claim that anyone who does
not encompass the knowledge of logic as they do, then he has no real certainty
about anything ‐ they are useless with there being nothing good about them.
The truth is that this type of knowledge which they boast about actually is
nothing compared to the truth just as the Shaykh (Ibn Taymiyyah)said in his
book, ar‐Radd ʹalaa al‐Mantiqieen, ʺI have always known that no intelligent
person needs Greek logic nor does it benefit a stupid person.” 63

63

See Majmooʹ al‐Fataawaa (3/52).

CHAPTER 26
{PART ONE}
Islaam & Eemaan
Islaam linguistically means ʺobedienceʺ and ʺsubmission.ʺ
In Islaamic terminology, it is when the servant submits and surrenders
entirely to Allaah outwardly and inwardly, obeying His commands, and
avoiding what He has forbidden. It includes all of the religion. Allaah (
) said,

‫ﻼ َم دِﻳﻨًﺎ‬
َ‫ﺳ‬
ْ‫ﻹ‬
ِ ‫ﺖ َﻟ ُﻜ ُﻢ ا‬
ُ ‫َو َرﺿِﻴ‬
ʺAnd I am pleased for you Islaam as a religion.ʺ [Sooratul‐Maaʹidah, 5:3]
And He said,

‫ﻼ ُم‬
َ‫ﺳ‬
ْ‫ﻹ‬
ِ ‫ﻦ ﻋِﻨ َﺪ اﻟﻠّﻪِ ا‬
َ ‫ن اﻟﺪﱢﻳ‬
‫ِإ ﱠ‬
ʺIndeed, the religion in the sight of Allaah is Islaam.ʺ [Soorah Aali‐
ʹImraan, 3:19]
And He (

) said,

‫ﻞ ِﻣ ْﻨ ُﻪ‬
َ ‫ﻼ ِم دِﻳﻨًﺎ َﻓﻠَﻦ ُﻳ ْﻘ َﺒ‬
َ‫ﺳ‬
ْ‫ﻹ‬
ِ ‫ﻏ ْﻴ َﺮ ا‬
َ ‫َوﻣَﻦ َﻳ ْﺒ َﺘ ِﻎ‬
ʺWhoever desires other than Islaam as a religion, never will accepted
from him.ʺ [Soorah Aali‐ʹImraan, 3:85]
As for Eemaan, it linguistically means to ʺbelieve.ʺ
Allaah said,

In this meaning,

‫ﻦ ﱢﻟﻨَﺎ‬
ٍ ‫ﺖ ِﺑ ُﻤ ْﺆ ِﻣ‬
َ ‫وَﻣَﺎ أَﻧ‬
ʺBut you would not believe (have Eemaan in) us.ʺ [Soorah Yoosuf, 12:17]
Islaamically, Eemaan is acceptance of the heart, which necessitates
acceptance in statement and action. It is a belief, a statement, and an action ‐ a
belief of the heart, a statement of the tongue, and action of the heart and limbs.

The proof that all of this enters under the term Eemaan is the statement of
the Prophet (
),

‫ واﻟﻘﺪر ﺧﻴﺮﻩ‬،‫ واﻟﻴﻮﻣﺎﻵﺧﺮ‬،‫ ورﺳﻠﻪ‬،‫وآﺘﺒﻪ‬،‫ وﻣﻼءآﺘﻪ‬،‫اﻹﻳﻤﺎن أن ﺗﻮﻣﻦ ﺑﺎﷲ‬
‫وﺷﺮﻩ‬
ʺEemaan is to believe in Allaah, His Angels, His Books, His
Messengers, the Last Day, and pre‐decree ‐ the good and bad of it.ʹ 64
And his statement:

‫ وأدﻧﺎهﺎ إﻣﺎﻃﺔ اﻷذى‬،‫ ﻻ إﻟﻪ إﻻ اﷲ‬:‫ ﻓﺄﻋﻼهﺎ ﻗﻮل‬،‫اﻹﻳﻤﺎن ﺑﻀﻊ وﺳﺒﻌﻮن ﺷﻌﺒﺔ‬
.‫ واﻟﺤﻴﺎءﺷﻌﺒﺔ ﻣﻦ اﻹﻳﻤﺎن‬،‫ﻋﻦ اﻟﻄﺮﻳﻖ‬
ʺEemaan is made up of seventy‐something parts, the highest of which is
the statement, ʹLaa ilaaha ilia Allaah.ʹ The lowest part is to remove
something harmful from the path, and shyness is a part of Eemaanʺ 65
Eemaan in Allaah, His Angels, etc. is the belief of the heart.
The statement, ʺLaa ilaaha ilia Allaahʺ is a statement of the tongue.
Removing something harmful from the path is an action of the limbs.
Shyness is an action of the heart.
With this, it is known that Eemaan includes the entire religion. So, there is
no difference between it and Islaam. In this way, each one means the same as the
other when used separately. However, when they appear together, Islaam is
explained as an outward submission of the tongue and actions of the limbs. It
occurs from both, a believer with complete Eemaan, and a believer with weak
Eemaan.
Allaah (

64
65

) said:

See al‐Bukhaaree (50) and Muslim (9).
Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (9) and Muslim (35).

‫ن ﻓِﻲ ُﻗﻠُﻮ ِﺑ ُﻜ ْﻢ‬
ُ ‫ﻞ ا ْﻟﺈِﻳﻤَﺎ‬
ِ‫ﺧ‬
ُ ‫ﺳَﻠ ْﻤﻨَﺎ وَﻟَﻤﱠﺎ َﻳ ْﺪ‬
ْ ‫ب ﺁﻣَﻨﱠﺎ ﻗُﻞ ﱠﻟ ْﻢ ُﺗ ْﺆ ِﻣﻨُﻮا وَﻟَﻜِﻦ ﻗُﻮﻟُﻮا َأ‬
ُ ‫ﻋﺮَا‬
ْ َ‫ﺖ ا ْﻟﺄ‬
ِ ‫ﻗَﺎَﻟ‬
ʺThe Bedouins say, ʺWe have believed (Eemaan).ʺ Say, ʺYou have not
yet believed; but say (instead), ʹWe have submitted (Islaam),ʹ for faith
(Eemaan) has not yet entered your hearts.ʺ [Sooratul‐Hujuraat, 49:14]
Based upon this, even a hypocrite would be called a Muslim outwardly,
yet remain a disbeliever inwardly.
Eemaan (when it comes together with Islaam) is explained as inward
submission, which is the belief and acceptance of the heart and its action. This
occurs only with a true believer, as Allaah (Taaʹlaa) said:

‫ﻋَﻠ ْﻴ ِﻬ ْﻢ ﺁﻳَﺎ ُﺗ ُﻪ زَا َد ْﺗ ُﻬ ْﻢ إِﻳﻤَﺎﻧ ًﺎ‬
َ ‫ﺖ‬
ْ ‫ﺖ ُﻗﻠُﻮ ُﺑ ُﻬ ْﻢ وَإِذَا ُﺗِﻠ َﻴ‬
ْ ‫ﺟَﻠ‬
ِ ‫ﻦ ِإذَا ُذ ِآ َﺮ اﻟﻠّ ُﻪ َو‬
َ ‫ن اﱠﻟﺬِﻳ‬
َ ‫إِ ﱠﻧﻤَﺎ ا ْﻟ ُﻤ ْﺆ ِﻣﻨُﻮ‬
‫ن‬
َ ‫وَﻋَﻠَﻰ َر ﱢﺑ ِﻬ ْﻢ َﻳ َﺘ َﻮ ﱠآﻠُﻮ‬
َ‫ﻼ َة وَﻣِﻤﱠﺎ َر َز ْﻗﻨَﺎ ُه ْﻢ ﻳُﻨﻔِﻘُﻮن‬
َ‫ﺼ‬
‫ن اﻟ ﱠ‬
َ ‫ﻦ ُﻳﻘِﻴﻤُﻮ‬
َ ‫اﱠﻟﺬِﻳ‬
‫ق آَﺮِﻳ ٌﻢ‬
ٌ ‫ت ﻋِﻨ َﺪ َر ﱢﺑ ِﻬ ْﻢ َو َﻣ ْﻐ ِﻔ َﺮ ٌة َو ِر ْز‬
ٌ ‫ﺣ ّﻘ ًﺎ ﱠﻟ ُﻬ ْﻢ دَرَﺟَﺎ‬
َ ‫ن‬
َ ‫ﻚ ُه ُﻢ ا ْﻟ ُﻤ ْﺆ ِﻣﻨُﻮ‬
َ ‫ُأ ْوﻟَـ ِﺌ‬
ʺThe believers are only those who, when Allaah is mentioned, their
hearts become fearful, and when His verses are recited to them, it
increases them in faith (Eemaan)ʹ, and upon their Lord they rely ‐ the
ones who establish prayer, and from what We have provided them, they
spend. Those are the true believers.ʺ[Soorah al‐Anfaal, 8:2‐4]
With this meaning, Eemaan is a higher level. So every believer (with
Eemaan) is a Muslim (with Islaam), yet the opposite is not the case.

CHAPTER 26
{PART Two}
The Increasing and Decreasing of Eemaan
Islaam & Eemaan
From the base beliefs of Ahlus‐Sunnah wal‐Jamaaʹah is that Eemaan
increases and decreases. Both, the Qurʹaan and Sunnah prove this.
From the Qurʹaan is Allaahʹs (

) statement,

‫ِﻟ َﻴ ْﺰدَادُوا إِﻳﻤَﺎﻧًﺎ ﱠﻣ َﻊ إِﻳﻤَﺎ ِﻧ ِﻬ ْﻢ‬
ʺ...so they would increase in Eemaan along with their (present) Eemaanʺ
[Sooratul‐Fath, 48:4]
From the proofs of the Sunnah is the saying of the Prophet (
),

.‫ﻣﺎ رأﻳﺖ ﻣﻦ ﻧﺎﻗﺼﺎت ﻋﻘﻞ ودﻳﻦ أذهﺐ ﻟﻠﺐ اﻟﺮﺟﻞ اﻟﺤﺎزم ﻣﻦ إﺣﺪاآﻦ‬
ʺI have not seen anyone more deficient in intelligence and religion ‐
perhaps deterring a determined, wise man ‐ than one of you. 66
Within the Aayah is the proof of the increasing of Eemaan, and in the
Hadeeth is the proof of decreasing in religion.
Every text proving the increase of Eemaan also includes a proof for its
decrease and vice‐versa, because they are both connected. It is not logical that
one could be present without the other.
It has been confirmed that the Companions used to say this; it is not
known that one of them opposed this belief. The Salaf were agreed upon this. Ibn
ʺAbdul‐Barr said, ʺAs for Eemaan increasing and decreasing, the people of the
narrations and the scholars of Fatawaa in all the lands held this belief.ʺ Two
different narrations have been mentioned from Imaam Maalik regarding the
decrease of Eemaan: one that he remained silent, and the second is agreement
with the majority.

66

Recorded by al‐Bukhaaree (304) and Muslim (80).

There are two sects who oppose this fundamental belief:
First: The absolute Murjiah who say that Eemaan is nothing but to profess
it with the heart. They claim this acceptance of the heart never wavers, so
according to them, the wicked and just are both at the same level of Eemaan.
Second: Those who follow only the texts of threats and warnings from the
Muʹtazilah and the Khawaarj. They expel Muslims who commit major sins
entirely from any association with Eemaan. They say that Eemaan is either
completely present or completely nonexistent, and they deny that one person
could be at a higher level than another.
Both of these groups are refuted by legislative proofs and intellectual
ones.
As for the legislative proofs, some texts proving the increasing and
decreasing of Eemaan have already preceded.
As for intellectual proofs, we say to the Murjiah, that their statement of
Eemaan being merely acceptance of the heart, never wavering or changing, then
this is disproved by what has already been mentioned. It is contrary to what the
Qurʹaan and Sunnah establish of statements and actions all entering into
Eemaan.
In addition, their statement that the acceptance of the heart never changes
is contrary to the senses. It is known to everyone that conviction of the heart is
only based upon knowledge, and no doubt, knowledge varies depending on its
sources. The information relayed by one person is not as trustworthy as if it were
relayed by two and likewise. Furthermore, whatever knowledge people gain by
hearing of any matter is in no way comparable to actually witnessing it. So
certainty is of varying levels as is well known, even a single person may find
himself at some times and situations stronger in certainty than at other times.
Thus, we wonder how it is correct to rationally assume two men could be
exactly equal: one remaining constant upon obedience to Allaah, avoiding
disobeying Him; when a notion to sin occurs to him, he immediately gives it up
and repents to Allaah. And the other wasting all chances to carry out what
Allaah has made obligatory on him, committing what Allaah forbids him, yet not
perpetrating deeds which take him into disbelief ‐ how could these two be equal
in Eemaan!

To those who only focus on the texts of threats, warnings, and
punishments, we say their statement that one who commits a major sin leaves
Eemaan totally; this is in contradiction to what the Qurʹaan and Sunnah prove. If
this is clear, how could we conclude that two people are exactly equal when one
fulfills his obligations, seeking Allaahʹs reward and avoids sins, the other
oppresses himself by doing what Allaah forbids him to do, and he leaves his
obligations, although not committing acts that cause him to disbelieve?
Assuming we say that a Muslim who commits major sins does in fact
leave Eemaan, yet how could we say two people are the same in Eemaan, one
seeking the reward of Allaah, and the other from those foremost in doing
righteous deeds by Allaahʹs help?

CHAPTER 26
{PART THREE}
The Ways of Increasing & Decreasing Eemaan
Islam & Eemaan
There are many ways to increase oneʹs Eemaan (faith in Allaah, His Books,
His Messengers, etc.). Some of them are as follows:
1. Knowing Allaahʹs Names and Attributes: Indeed, each time the
servantʹs knowledge of them increase, knowing what they mean and their effects,
then his Eemaan in his Lord likewise increases as well as his love and honor for
Him.
2. Reflecting upon Allaahʹs signs in the universe as well as His Aayaat:
Whenever the servant reflects upon them, thinking deeply over what they
include of Perfect Capability and Supreme Wisdom, then no doubt his Eemaan
and certainty will increase.
3. Performing actions of obedience, seeking nearness to Allaah: Eemaan
increases according to the quality, quantity, and type of deed. Whenever the
deed is performed in the best way, the increase in Eemaan is greater because of
it. And the quality of the action is increased in righteousness by sincerity and
following of the Sunnah.
As for the type of action, those actions Allaah has ordered their
performance are better than the optional ones. Some acts of obedience are better
than others are ‐ the greater the action, the greater the increase in Eemaan. As for
the quantity of actions, Eemaan also increases according to it because action is
itself a part of Eemaan so surely, when the quantity increases, so does Eemaan.
4. Abandoning sins, fearing Allaah: Whenever the urge to commit a sin is
stronger, the increase in Eemaan by abandoning it is even greater. This is because
suppressing a strong desire to sin is an indication of the strength of Eemaan
present within the servant. He gives precedence to what Allaah and His
Messenger like over what his own soul desires.
There are also many ways for oneʹs Eemaan to decrease. Some of them are
as follows:

1. Remaining ignorant of Allaah and His Names and Attributes.
2. Negligence and turning away from reflecting upon the Aayaat of
Allaah, His rules, and His signs throughout the universes: This results in a
sickness of the heart or its death due to being overcome with desires and false
beliefs.
3. Committing acts of disobedience to Allaah: Eemaan decreases
according to the type of action, its degree of sin, considering it to be insignificant,
and the strength or weakness of oneʹs urge to commit it.
As for the type of action and the degree of sin, then surely the decrease in
Eemaan by committing major sins is greater than minor sins. It decreases, for
example, more by the murder of an innocent person than stealing oneʹs wealth.
As well, it decreases more by committing two sins than only one, and so on.
As for considering a sin to be insignificant, this occurs from a heart that
considers the One he is disobeying to be insignificant, having little or no fear of
Him; this causes the decrease in Eemaan to be that much greater. Alternatively,
the decrease in Eemaan is less when the notion to sin occurs to a heart that
honors Allaah, fearing Him yet he just happened to make a mistake and sin.
The strength of the urge to sin also has to do with the decrease in Eemaan.
If a person commits a sin while having only a weak urge or desire to do it, then
his Eemaan decreases significantly more than one whose urge is much stronger.
For this reason, a poor person behaving arrogantly, and an elderly man
committing adultery is a greater sin than the arrogance of a rich and powerful
man or a young man committing fornication, as in the Hadeeth,

.‫ وﻟﻬﻢ ﻋﺬاب أﻟﻴﻢ‬،‫ وﻻ ﻳﺰآﻴﻬﻢ‬،‫ وﻻ ﻳﻨﻈﺮ إﻟﻴﻬﻢ ﻳﻮم اﻟﻘﻴﺎﻣﺔ‬،‫ﺛﻼﺛﺔ ﻻ ﻳﻜﻠﻤﻬﻢ اﷲ‬
ʺThere are three people whom Allaah will not even speak to, He will
not look at them on the Day of Resurrection, He will not purify them,
and they will have a painful punishment...ʺ 67

Recorded by Muslim (107) and at‐Tabaraanee. Al‐Haythamee and al‐Mundhiree said the men
in the chain of narrators are the quality of those in an authentic chain. Al‐Albaanee declared it
Saheeh in Saheeh at‐Targheeb (1788).
67

He then went on to mention the three types of people including a grey‐
haired, elderly fornicator and a poor arrogant person due to the weakness of
their urge to commit the sins.
4. Abandoning acts of obedience to Allaah: The decrease in Eemaan is
according to the degree of the act of obedience. So if the level of obligation is of a
higher degree, then the decrease in Eemaan higher. Perhaps one could lose
Eemaan totally such as is abandoning prayer.
The decrease in Eemaan for abandoning acts of obedience is of two types:
the type that the person could be punished for, such as leaving an obligation
with no excuse; and the type that one will not be punished for, such as leaving an
obligation due to a legislative or legitimate excuse; or leaving an optional act of
obedience. Examples of the second type would be a woman leaving prayer due
to her menses or a person leaving the optional forenoon (Duhaa) prayer, and
Allaah know best.

CHAPTER 26
{PART FOUR}
Istithnaa Regarding Eemaan
Islaam & Eemaan
Istithnaa (making an exception) regarding Eemaan means to say, I am a
believer inshaa Allaah (if Allaah wills).
The people have differed over whether one should add ʺ...if Allaah wills.ʺ
They are of three different beliefs.
1. Saying it is not to be done: This is the belief of the Murjiah and the
Jahmiyyah and those like them. The basis of this statement is the belief that
Eemaan is itself only one thing that a person knows within himself; it is only an
acceptance of the heart. If a person says, ʺ...if Allaah wills,ʺ then this would be a
proof of doubting this acceptance, as they claim. For this reason, they refer to
people who do make this exception as ʺDoubters.ʺ
2. Saying it must be done: This statement is based upon two beliefs.
First: The belief that Eemaan is something that a person dies upon; either
a person is a believer or a disbeliever based upon what he dies upon. This is
something within every personʹs future and unknown to them so no one could
possibly be resolved upon and certain of. Many modern speakers hold this
opinion. However, it is not known that any of the Salaf used to hold this opinion.
They used to be of the second belief:
Second: The belief that complete Eemaan includes performing all
commandments, avoiding all sins. This is something that no person can be
certain about himself. If he claims this, then he is purifying himself and testifying
that he is among the righteous. This would mean that he is testifying that he is
from the people of paradise, which is not permissible.
3. Details must be explained: If adding, ʺ...if Allaah wills,ʺ results from a
doubt that not even the foundation of Eemaan exists within oneʹs heart; then this
is not permissible. Rather, it is disbelief because Eemaan is a conviction and
doubt contradicts this conviction. If saying this results from a fear of purifying
oneself and a fear of testifying that one has fulfilled complete Eemaan in
statement, action, and beliefs; then this is a required fear. If saying ʺ...if Allaah

wills,ʺ is for the purpose of seeking blessings by mentioning Allaahʹs complete
control and will, and that whatever of Eemaan is present in oneʹs heart is only by
the will of Allaah; then this permissible.
Adding the Istithnaa for this reason does not contradict the actualization
of Eemaan. Making such an addition has been made upon such matters that are
certain such as Allaahʹs statement,

‫ن‬
َ ‫ﻦ ﻟَﺎ َﺗﺨَﺎﻓُﻮ‬
َ ‫ﺼﺮِﻳ‬
‫ﺳ ُﻜ ْﻢ َو ُﻣ َﻘ ﱢ‬
َ ‫ﻦ ُرؤُو‬
َ ‫ﺤﱢﻠﻘِﻴ‬
َ ‫ﻦ ُﻣ‬
َ ‫ﺤﺮَا َم إِن ﺷَﺎء اﻟﻠﱠ ُﻪ ﺁ ِﻣﻨِﻴ‬
َ ‫ﺠ َﺪ ا ْﻟ‬
ِ‫ﺴ‬
ْ ‫ﺧُﻠﻦﱠ ا ْﻟ َﻤ‬
ُ ‫َﻟ َﺘ ْﺪ‬
ʺYou will surely enter al‐Masjid al‐Haraam (the Masjid of the Kaʹbah),
if Allaah wills, in safety, with your heads shaved and (hair) shortened,
not fearing (any body).ʺ [Sooratul‐Fath, 48:27]
With this explained it is clear that making an absolute judgment for or
against Istithnaa regarding Eemaan is not correct. Rather, the previous details
must be explained, and Allaah knows best.
May Allaah bestow peace and prayers upon our Prophet Muhammad, his
family, and his Companions.
Written on the seventh of the month Thul‐Qiʹdah in the year 1380 Hijrah.
All praise and thanks to the One by whose favor righteous deeds are
completed.
‐The Author
(Muhammad ibn Saalih al‐‘Uthaymeen)

Appendix for Explanation of a Summary
of ‘Aqeedatul Hamawiyyah:
Ibn Taymiyyah on Trial

Ibn Taymiyyah on Trial:
[A Complete Undoing of Recycled Jahmee Polemic] 68

With the name of Allaah, the Most Merciful, the Bestower of Mercy: A
mentioning of what occurred concerning this blessed ʹAqeedah 69 from studies
which were made evident by its compiler to the opponents.
The Shaykh, ʹAlamud‐Deen mentioned that the Shaykh (i.e. Ibn
Taymiyyah) ‐ may his secret be sanctified ‐ spoke in the gathering of the ruler, al‐
Afram, when he was asked about his creed. So, the Shaykh presented his
ʹAqeedatul‐Waasitiyyah. He said: I wrote this approximately seven years ago,
before the arrival of the Tatars to Shaam. So I read it in the gathering.
Then, ʹAlamud‐Deen mentioned from the Shaykh, that he said: The reason for
writing it was that one of the judges of Waasit, from the people of goodness and
Religion, complained to me about the condition of the people in his land, within
the state of the Tatars. He complained about the overwhelming condition of
ignorance and oppression and the obliteration of the Religion and knowledge. So
he asked me to write for him an ʹAqeedah. So I said to him, ʺIndeed, people from
amongst the Imaams of the Sunnah have already written works of ʹAqeedah.ʺ So
he persisted in the request and said, ʺI would not like, except an ʹAqeedah that
you have written.” So I wrote this ʹAqeedah for him whilst I was sitting after
‘Asr.
Therefore, the leader pointed to the author, so he read it to those who
were present, word for word. So some of them objected to my statement in it,
ʺAnd from Eemaan in Allaah is to have Eemaan in whatever Allaah has
) has
described Himself with and in whatever His Messenger (
described Him with; without Tahreef (distortion), nor Taʹteel (denial), nor
Takyeef (asking how), nor Tamtheel (likening).ʺ So the intended meaning of this
was to negate Taʹweel, which is to direct the word away from its apparent
meaning, either by obligating that, or by merely making it permissible.

Taken from Majmooʹatur‐Rasaaʹilil‐Kubraa (1/413‐421).
Referring to the book, alʹAqeedatul‐Waasitiyyah and the subsequent debate which took place
concerning it, when Ibn Taymiyyahʹs adversaries took him to court for what they perceived as
grave errors in ʹAqeedah.
68
69

So I said: ʺIndeed, I amended the term, ʹTaʹweelʹ to the term, ʹTahreef
because Tahreef is a term that has been rebuked in the Qurʹaan. Hence, I strove
to follow the Book and the Sunnah with this confinement. Thus, I negated what
Allaah rebuked from Tahreef. I did not mention within it the word Taʹweel,
because the term has a number of meanings, as I have explained in its proper
place from al‐Qawaaʹid. So the meaning of the term Taʹweel in the Book of Allaah
is not the same meaning of Taʹweel employed in conventional usage by the
latecomers from amongst the people of Usool (basic principles) and Fiqh.
Moreover, this is not the meaning of the term Taʹweel employed in conventional
usage by many of the people of Tafseer and the Salaf.ʺ
And I said to them: ʺI mentioned the negation of Tamtheel, but I did not
mention Tashbeeh (resemblance), because Tamtheel has been negated by Allaah
in the text of His Book, where He said,

‫ﻲ ٌء‬
ْ َ‫ﺲ َآ ِﻤ ْﺜِﻠ ِﻪ ﺷ‬
َ ‫َﻟ ْﻴ‬
ʺThere is nothing like unto Him.ʺ [Sooratush‐Shooraa, 42:11]

So they took to mentioning the negation of Tashbeeh and Tajseem
(attributing a body to Allaah), and they exaggerated greatly concerning this. So
they raised objections with what some of the people have attributed to us from
that. 70
So I said, ʺMy statement, ʹwithout Takyeef, nor Tamtheel,ʹ negates all
falsehood. I only chose these two terms, because the negation of Takyeef has
been narrated from the Salaf, as was stated by Rabeeʹah (d.136H), Maalik
(d.179H), Ibn ʹUyaynah (d.197H) and other than them. This is the statement that
the scholars have received by acceptance, ʺIstiwaa ʹ(ascension of Allaah above
the Throne) is known, and the Kayf (modality) is unknown. It is obligatory to
have Eemaan in it, and to ask about it is an innovation.ʺ 71 So these Scholars of the
Refer to Ibn Taymiyyah al‐Muftaree ʹalayhi (p. 50‐68).
Rabeeʹah ar‐Raʹee (d.136H) said, ʺAl‐Istiwaaʹ is not unknown, and how it occurs is not
comprehendible, and from Allaah is the Message, upon the Messenger is to convey and upon us
is to affirm.ʺ Related by al‐Bayhaqee in al‐Asmaaʹ was‐Sifaat (no. 516) and al‐Laalikaaʹee in
Sfuzrh Usoolul‐Iʹtiqaad (no. 665), Ibn Taymiyyah said in Majmooʹul‐Fataawaa (5/365), ʺIt is
established from Rabeeʹah.ʺ He also said in al‐Hamawiyyah (p. 80), ʺAl‐Khallaal narrated it with
an Isnaad, all of whom are Thiqaat.ʺ Imaam Maalik (d.179H) said, ʺAl‐Istiwaaʹ is known, and
how is unknown, and to have Eemaan (faith) in it is obligatory, and to question it is an
70
71

Salaf agreed that the Kayf (modality) was not known to us. Therefore, I negated
that in following the Salaf of the Ummah. Additionally, this is negated by the
text. So performing Taʹweel upon the Aayaat pertaining to the Attributes enters
into the reality of the One being described, but the reality of His Attributes are
not known. So this is from the Taʹweel that is not known, except to Allaah, as I
affirmed in the sole principle I mentioned concerning Taʹweel, its meaning and
the difference between our knowledge of the meaning of speech and between
our knowledge of its Taʹweel. 72
Likewise, Tamtheel has been negated in the text and in ancient consensus,
in addition to the sound intellectual proof for its negation and for the negation of
Takyeef. Therefore, Allaah made it unknown to mankind.ʺ
So whilst speaking about that, I mentioned the speech of al‐Khattaabee,
where he mentioned that this was the Madhhab of the Salaf. It is to pass along
the Aayaat pertaining to the Attributes and their Ahaadeeth upon their apparent
meaning, along with negating the Kayfiyyah (modality) and Tashbeeh from
them. 73 So the speech concerning the Attributes is a branch of speech concerning
the Dhaat (Essence). 74 I mentioned this in following his (al‐Khattaabee) example
innovation.ʺ Then he said to the questioner, ʺI do not think, except that you are an evil man.ʺ So
he ordered him to be expelled. Related by al‐Bayhaqee in al Asmaaʹ was‐Sifaat (p. 516) with the
wording, ʺAl‐Istawaaʹ is not unknown and how is unknown, to have Eemaan in it is obligatory
and to question it is an innovation.ʺ Al‐Bayhaqee also relates (p. 516), as does ad‐Daarimee in ar‐
Radd ʹalal‐Jabmiyyah (p. 55) ‐ with a good Isnaad, as Ibn Hajr says in Fathul‐Baaree (13/406) ‐
that Imaam Maalik said, ʺThe Most Merciful ascended as He Himself described, and it is not to be
asked ʹHow?ʹ Since how is unknown.ʺ A complete study of the various statements of the people
of knowledge concerning this is found in Muhadhdhab Ijtimaaʹul‐Juyooshil‐Islaamiyyah (p. 83‐
84).
72 The author discusses this in detail in his book al‐lkkel fil‐Mutashaabih wat‐Taʹweel, and it is
published.
73 Stated al‐Khattaabee (d.388H), ʺThe Madhhab of the Salaf with regards to the Attributes of
Allaah is to affirm them as they are ʹalaa dhaahir (with their apparent meaning), negating any
Tashbeeh (resemblance) to them, nor Takyeef (asking how they are).ʺ Refer to Mukhtasirul‐
ʹUluww (no. 137).
74 Al‐Khateeb al‐Baghdaadee (d.463H) said, ʺSo the basic principle (Asl) is that speech about the
Attributes is speech about the Essence (Dhaat) of Allaah, so it follows it in that and takes it as a
model of example. So when it is known that the affirmation of the Lord of the Worlds, the Mighty
and Majestic, is affirmation of existence, then likewise, affirmation of His Attributes is only an
affirmation of existence, not an affirmation of limitation (Tahdeed) and modality (Takyeef). So
when we say, ʹAllaah has a Hand, Hearing and Seeing,ʹ then these are only Attributes that Allaah
has affirmed for Himself. And we do not say that the meaning of Hand is power, nor do we say
that the meaning of Hearing and Seeing is knowledge. And we do not say that these are bodily
limbs and tools to perform actions. Rather, we say that it is obligatory to affirm them, but to make

and in conforming to his precedence. So since affirmation of the Dhaat (Essence)
is affirmation of Wujood (existence), not affirmation of Takyeef, then likewise,
affirmation of the Attributes is affirmation of existence, not affirmation of
Takyeef.
So one of the elder opponents said, ʺSo at that point it becomes
permissible to say that He is a Jism (body), who is not like the Ajsaam (bodies of
the creation).ʺ
So some of the nobles and I said to him: ʺIt can only be said that Allaah is
to be described with whatever He described Himself with and with whatever His
Messenger (
) has described Him with. And there does not exist in
the Book and the Sunnah anything to indicate that Allaah is a Jism, such that this
could become obligated. And the first one to say that Allaah is a Jism was
Hishaam Ibnul‐Hakam ar‐Raafidee. And as for our statement, then it is the
moderate path amongst the sects of the Ummah, just as the Ummah is the
moderate path amongst the rest of the nations. So they are the moderate path in
the issue of the Attributes of Allaah amongst the people of Taʹteel: the Jahmiyyah
and the people of Tamtheel: the Mushabbihahʺ 75
So it was said to me, ʺYou have written the belief of Imaam Ahmad
(d.241H).ʺ And they wished to end the dispute with the excuse that this was a
Madhhab that was followed.

Tawqeef (stopping at the texts of the Book and the Sunnah) of what is mentioned concerning
them.ʺ Refer to Dhammut‐Taʹweel (no. 15) of Ibn Qudaamah and al‐‘Uluww (p. 185) of adh‐
Dhahabee.
75 BENEFIT ‐ AN ADMISSION OF GUILT: What you have witnessed here, dear reader, is an
indispensable proof that Shaykhul‐Islaam did not enter into Tajseem, Tashbeeh, nor Tamtheel.
And how could this be doubted, since even the principal callers to innovation in our times have
been forced to admit this. Read the statement of Dr. Saʹeed Ramadaan al‐Bootee ‐ an avowed
enemy of the Salafee creed, ʺAnd we are amazed when we see the extremists declaring Ibn
Taymiyyah, may Allaah have mercy upon him, of being a disbeliever. And also at their saying
that he was one who held Allaah to be a body (Jism). I have studied hard and long in order to to
see where I could find a statement or a word from Ibn Taymiyyah that he wrote or said which
would indicate that he held Allaah to be a body, as has been quoted from him by as‐Subkee and
others, and I have not found anything from him like this. All I found was his statements in his
Fataaivaa, ʹIndeed, Allaah has a Hand as He said and has arisen over the Throne as He said, and
He has an Eye as He said.ʹʺ And he (al‐Bootee) said, ʺI referred to the final work written by Abul‐
Hasan al‐Ashʹaree, allbaanah and I found him saying exactly what Ibn Taymiyyah said.ʺ Refer to
Nadwah Ittihaahaatul‐Fikril‐lslaamee (p. 264‐265).

So I said, ʺI have not related anything, except the ʹAqeedah of all the
Salafus‐Saalih, not just Imaam Ahmad specifically.ʺ
And I said: ʺIndeed, I granted respite to those who opposed me in
anything from it for three years. So even if they were to come with a single word
from the three early generations in opposition to what I had mentioned, then I
would repent from that. And it was upon me to bring the statements of all of the
groups from amongst the three early generations in agreement with whatever I
had mentioned, from the Hanafiyyah, the Maalikiyyah, the Shaafiʹiyyah, the
Hanbaliyyah, the Ashʹariyyah, the Ahlul‐Hadeeth and other than them.ʺ
Then, the disputant sought speech concerning al‐Harf (letters in the
Qurʹaan) 76 and as‐Sawt (voice). 77
From Ibn ʹAbbaas who said, ʺWhen Jibreel was sitting with the Prophet (
) he
heard a strange sound from above, so he raised his head and said, ʺThis is a door from the sky
that has been opened today, it has never been opened, except upon this day.ʺ So an angel
descended from it, so he said. ʺThis is an angel that has descended to the earth; it has never
descended except today.ʺ So he greeted them and said, ʹ1 give you glad tidings of two lights that I
have come to give you, they have not been given to anyone before you, al‐Faatihah and the last
Aayah of al‐Baqarah. You will not recite a letter from them, except that it will be given to you.ʺ
Related by Muslim (no. 806), an‐Nisaaʹee (2/138), al‐Haakim (1/558‐559) and Ibn Hibbaan (no.
766).
ʹAbdullaah Ibn Masʹood said, ʺLearn the Qurʹaan. Verily every letter from it that is written, ten
rewards are obtained, and ten sins are expiated. I do not say that ʹAlif Laam Meem,ʹ is ten, rather,
I say that Alif is ten and Laam is ten, and Meem is ten.ʺ Related by Ibn Abee Shaybah (10/461).
Shuʹayb Ibn Habhaab said, ʺWhenever a man used to recite with Abul‐ʹAaliyah (d.90H), and he
did not recite as he recited, rather, he said, ʺAs for me, then I shall recite it as such and such.ʺ He
said, ʺSo I mentioned that to Ibraaheem an‐Nakhaʹee, so he said, ʹI see that your Companion has
heard that whoever disbelieves in a single letter from it, then indeed he disbelieves in all of it.ʺ
Related by Ibn Abee Shaybah (10/513‐514) and by Ibn Jareer in his Tafseer (no. 56).
77 The Imaams of the Salaf used to affirm as‐Sawt (Voice) for Allaah. Stated ʹAbdullaah Ibn
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, ʹI asked my father ‐ rahimahullaah ‐ about a people who say, ʹWhen Allaah
spoke to Moosaa (ʹalayhis‐salaam), He did not speak with a voice.ʹ So my father said, ʹOf course!
Indeed, your Lord the Mighty and Majestic spoke with a voice. We relate these Ahaadeeth as
they have come.ʺ Related by ʹAbdullaah in as‐Sunnah (no. 533). Imaam Aboo Bakr al‐
Marroodhee, the companion of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, said, ʺI heard Abaa ʹAbdullaah ‐ meaning
Ahmad ‐ and it was said to him that ʹAbdul‐Wahhaab was speaking and he had said, ʺWhosoever
claims that Allaah spoke to Moosaa without a voice, then he is a Jahmee, and an enemy of Allaah,
and an enemy of Islaam.ʹ So Aboo ʹAbdullaah said, ʹHow beautiful is what he has said, may
Allaah pardon him.ʺ Related by al‐Khallaal from al‐Marroodhee, refer to Darʹut‐Taʹaamd (2/37‐
39) of Ibn Taymiyyah. ʹAbdullaah Ibn Ahmad said, ʺI said to my father, ʹVerily there are those
who say that Allaah did not speak to Moosaa with a voice.ʹ So he said, ʺThese are the heretical
Jahmiyyah, they only use Taʹteel (denial),ʺ and he mentioned the narrations in opposition to their
statement.ʺ (12/368). Refer to Majmooʹul‐Fataawaa
76

So I said: ʺThat which has mentioned about Ahmad and his companions
that they held the voices of the reciters and the letters inside the written copies to
be ancient and eternal (qadeemun azlee) is a fabricated lie. This was not stated by
Ahmad, or by any of the Muslim Scholars.ʺ So I brought out notebooks, and in
them was what Aboo Bakr al‐Khallaal (d.311H) mentioned in his book, as‐
Sunnah from Imaam Ahmad. And there was included in them what was
collected by his companion, Aboo Bakr al‐Marwazee (d.294H), from the speech
of Ahmad and the speech of the Imaams of his time. It was mentioned that
whosoever stated, ʹMy recitation of the Qurʹaan is created,ʹ then he is a Jahmee.
And whosoever said, ʹMy recitation is not created,ʹ then he is an innovator.
I said: ʺSo what about the one who says, ʹMy recitation is eternal?ʹ And what
about the one who says, ʹMy recitation is ancient?!ʹʺ
So the disputant said, ʺIndeed, he attributes to Ahmad people from the
Hashawiyyah, the Mushabbihah and their like who spoke with such.ʺ
So I said: ʺThe Mushabbihah and the Mujassimah outside the companions
of Imaam Ahmad are greater in number than those amongst his companions. So
all of these Kurdish groups are Shaafiʹiyyah, and they have within them
Tashbeeh and Tajseem the likes of which is not found amongst the other groups.
And the people of Jeelaan are Shaafiʹiyyah and Hanbaliyyah. So as for the pure
Hanbaliyyah, then they do no possess that which other than them possess. And
the Karraamiyyatul‐Mujassimah are all Hanafiyyah.ʺ
And I said to him: ʺWho from amongst my companions is Hashawee with
the meaning that you desire, al‐Athram? Aboo Daawood al‐Marwazee.7 Aboo
Bakr al‐Khallaal (d.311H)? Aboo Bakr Ibn ʹAbdul‐ʹAzeez? Abul‐Hasan at‐
Tameemee? Ibn Haamid (d.403H)? Al‐Qaadee Aboo Yaʹlaa (d.458H)? Abul‐
Khattaab? Ibn ʹAqeel?ʺ And I raised my voice and said: ʺName them! Reply to
me, who are they?!
Is it with that lie and fabrication of Ibnul‐Khateeb 78 upon the people with
regards to their Madhaahib that you nullify the Shareeʹah and obliterate the
signposts of the Religion; just as he and other than him quoted from them that
they would say: ʹThe ancient Qurʹaan is the voices of the reciters and the letters in
the written copies, and that the voice and the letters are ancient and eternal.ʹ

78

Here, the author is referring to al‐Fakhr ar‐Raazee.

Who has said this? And in which books is this found stated by them?
Speak to me! And likewise, from which of them has it been quoted that they said
Allaah will not be seen in the Hereafter, despite conforming to what he claims
and the introduction that has been quoted from them?ʺ
And then the issue of the Qurʹaan came up, and that was the issue that it
is the speech of Allaah, which is not created. It began from Him and to Him it
shall return. Some of them had a contention concerning ʹfrom Him it began and
to Him it shall return.ʹ And they sought an explanation for that.
So I said: ʺAs for this statement, then it has been narrated and confirmed
from the Salaf, such as what has been recorded from ‘Amr Ibn Deenaar (d.126H).
He said, ʹI have met people for seventy years, and they all said, ʹAllaah is the
Creator, and everything else besides Him is created, except for the Qurʹaan.ʹ So it
is the speech of Allaah, it is not created, from Him it began and to Him shall it
return.ʹ 79
So the meaning of, ʹfrom Him it began,ʹ is that He spoke it, and He was the
One who revealed it from Himself. It is not as the Jahmiyyah 80 say, that it was
created in the wind or other than it, and that it began from other than Him.
Saheeh Related by ad‐Daarimee in ar‐Radd ʹalal‐Jahmiyyah (no. 344) and an‐Naqd ʹalal‐
Mareesee (p. 116), al‐Bayhaqee in as‐Sunan (10/205) and al‐Asmaaʹ was‐Sifaat (p. 245) and
Ikhtisaasul‐Qurʹaan (no. 50) of Diyaaʹud‐Deen al‐Maqdisee.
80 Jahmiyyah: They ascribe themselves to Jahm Ibn Safwaan as‐Samarqandee. And he is the one
who manifested negation of the Attributes, Taʹteel (denial) and other than that from the Abaateel
(false understandings). Indeed, he took that from al‐Jaʹd Ibn Dirham, and he was the one who
took that chain of understanding from a filthy Jew.
Indeed, Jaʹd Ibn Dirham was killed by Khaalid al‐Qasree in the year 124H, in Waasit. So Jahm
succeeded him in Khuraasaan. So he manifested his statements there, and the people followed
him upon that. After that, he abandoned the prayer for forty days because he doubted in his
Lord. Indeed, Jahm was killed in Khuraasaan. He was killed by Salm Ibn Ahwaz al‐Maazinee,
during the end of the rule of Banee Umayyah. However, his statements had flourished amongst
the people. So these statements did not cease to remain strong amongst the people and multiply,
not to mention during the time of al‐Maʹmoon. And from the fabrications of Jahm and his
followers are that Paradise and the Fire shall pass away, that Eemaan is Maʹrifah (knowledge)
only, that Kufr is ]ahl (ignorance) only, that no one performs an action in truth besides Allaah
alone, that the actions of the people can only be attributed to them metaphorically, that the
knowledge that Allaah possesses has newly come about and other than that from the Abaateel
(false views) whose misguidance and heresy is not hidden. And along with his misguidance that
we have mentioned, Jahm used to carry a weapon and fight the ruler. Indeed, how beautiful is
the statement of the poet,
ʹI am amazed at a Shaytaan who calls the people openly; to the Fire. And his name as been
derived from ʹJahannam.ʹ
79

And as for, ʹand to Him shall it return,ʹ then it means that the Qurʹaan will
be hidden with Allaah during the end of time, it will be absent from the written
copies and the chests. So there will not remain a single word from it in the chests,
and there will not remain a word from it in the written copies. And the majority
of those present agreed to this.
So I said: ʺLikewise, the Prophet (
) said, ʹThe servants do not
draw closer to Allaah with anything like that which has come from Him,ʹ 81
meaning the Qurʹaan.
And Khabbaab Ibnul‐Aratt said, ʺO Hantaah! Draw close to Allaah with
whatever you are able. So Allaah is not drawn closer to with anything more
beloved to Him than that which came from Him,ʺ 82
And I said: ʺIndeed, Allaah spoke with it in reality (Haqeeqatan). And this
Qurʹaan that Allaah revealed upon Muhammad (
) is the real
(Haqeeqah) speech of Allaah. It is not the speech of anyone other than Him, and
it is not permissible to say unrestrictedly that it is a mentioning from the speech
of Allaah, nor an expression of His speech. Rather, when the people recite the
Qurʹaan, or write it within the books, then that is not excluded from being the
speech of Allaah. So the speech is only connected in reality to the one who stated
it in conveyance and meaning.
So some of them became agitated by the affirmation of it being the speech
of Allaah in reality after he concurred that Allaah spoke it in reality. Then, he
concurred that since it had been clarified to him that it was correct to negate the
metaphorical, then it was not correct to negate this. And he mentioned the
statements of the early Scholars that were narrated from them and the poetry of
the poets, which were all connected to them. These were their statements in
Refer to Sharhul‐ʹAqeedatit‐Tahaawiyyah (p. 522‐524), alMilal wan‐Nihal (1/86‐88) of ash‐
Shahrastaanee and al‐Farq baynal‐Firaq (p. 128) of al‐Baghdaadee.
81 Daʹeef: Related by at‐Tirmidhee (no. 2911), Ahmad (5/268), Ibn Nasr in Qiyaamul‐Layl (p. 41‐
42, 122), al‐Bukhaaree in Khalq Afaalul‐ʹIbaad (no. 509), al‐Bayhaqee in al‐Asmaa.ʹ was‐Sifaat (p.
305) and al‐Khateeb in Taareekh Baghdaad (7/88, 12/220). It was declared Daʹeef by al‐Albaanee
in Silslatud‐Daʹeefah (no. 1958).
82 Saheeh: Related by al‐Aajurree in ash‐Shareeʹah (p. 77) and al‐Bayhaqee in alAsmaaʹ was‐Sifaat
(p. 310‐311), by way of Mansoor Ibnul‐Muʹtamir, from Hilaal Ibn Sayyaaf, from Farwah Ibn
Nawfal. It was authenticated by al‐Bayhaqee.

reality. So when he mentioned therein that the speech is only connected in reality
to the one who originally said it, not to those who said it in conveyance
afterwards, they held this speech as being good and glorified it.
And I mentioned what the Salaf of the Ummah had agreed upon from
Allaah the Glorified being above the Throne, with a true meaning upon its real
sense (ʹAlaa haqeeqatihi). There was no need for Tahreef, except to protect
against false suspicions. And the meaning of,

‫ن ﺑَﺼِﻴ ٌﺮ‬
َ ‫ﻦ ﻣَﺎ آُﻨ ُﺘ ْﻢ وَاﻟﻠﱠ ُﻪ ﺑِﻤَﺎ َﺗ ْﻌ َﻤﻠُﻮ‬
َ ‫َو ُه َﻮ َﻣ َﻌ ُﻜ ْﻢ َأ ْﻳ‬
ʺAnd He is with you wherever you are,ʺ [Sooratul‐Hadeed, 57:4]
is not that He is mixed in with His creation. Since, this is not obligated in the
Arabic language. And it is in opposition to what the Salaf of the Ummah were
agreed upon, and it opposes what Allaah has made the creation naturally
inclined to. Rather, the moon is a sign from the signs of Allaah, it is from the
smallest of His creations. So it is complacent in the sky, yet it is with the traveller
wherever he may be. 83
So when I mentioned that all of the Names of Allaah, which the creation
were named with, such as the term, ʹal‐Wujoodʹ (Existence), which is a statement
of reality upon al‐Waajib 84 and al‐Mumkin, 85 two elders disputed, ʺIs it a
statement of Ishtiraak (sharing similar qualities) or Tawaatuʹ (the very same in all
senses)?ʺ
So one of them said, ʺIt is Mutawaatu’ (the very same in all senses).ʺ And
another said, ʺIt is Mushtarik (sharing similar qualities), in order to avoid
Tarkeeb (composition).ʺ

Shaykhul‐Islaam Ibn Taymiyyah (d.728H) said, ʺThey (Ahlus‐Sunnah) do not make
resemblance between His Attributes and the attributes of the creation, because for Allaah the
Glorified, there is no comparison, nor equal, nor partner, and there is no analogy for Him with
His creation.ʺ Refer to Sharhul‐ʹAqeedatil‐Waasitiyyah (1/127) of Ibnul‐ʹUthaymeen. And Imaam
Muhammad Ibn Saalih al‐ʹUthaymeen (d.H21H) commented, ʺAhlus‐Sunnah are free from
resembling Allaah, the Mighty and Majestic, to His creation, both in respect of His Dhaat and His
Attributes... Ahlus‐Sunnah wal‐Jamaaʹah affirm the Attributes for Allaah, the Mighty and
Majestic, without resemblance.ʺ And he added, ʺOur belief is that there is nothing which
resembles Allaah.ʺ Refer to Sharhul‐ʹAqeedatil‐Waasitiyyah (1/102, 108).
84 Meaning: Allaah, the One whose existence is obligatory.
85 Meaning: the creation, whose existence is merely possible, as they were created by Allaah.
83

And this one said: ʺIndeed, Fakhrud‐Deen mentioned that this dispute is
built upon the question, ʹIs His Existence the source of His Essence (Maahiyah),
or not?ʹ So whoever says, ʹIndeed, the existence of everything is the source of its
essence,ʹ then this is a statement of Ishtiraak (sharing similar qualities). And
whosoever says, ʹHis Existence is an extension of His Essence,ʹ then this is a
statement of Tawaatuʹ(the very same in all senses).ʺ
So he held the first view to be stronger than the second, which was that
the existence is an extension of the essence, in order to aid the position that this is
a statement of Tawaatuʹ. So the second one said, ʺThe Madhhab of al‐Ashʹaree
and Ahlus‐Sunnah is that His Existence is the source of His Essence.ʺ So the first
one objected to that.
So I said: ʺAs for the theologians of Ahlus‐Sunnah, then according to
them, the existence of everything is the source of its essence. As for the other
statement, then it is a statement of the Muʹtazilah: that the existence of
everything is an extension of its essence. So each of these positions is correct from
an angle. So the correct view is that these names are stated with Tawaatuʹ, as I
have already affirmed in other than this place. As for this issue being built upon
the existence of something being the source of its essence, or other than that, then
this is from the errors that have been connected to Ibnul‐Khateeb. So if we were
to say that the existence of something is the source of its essence, then it is not
obligatory for the name to be stated for it and for something else similar to it
with an Ishtiraak in wording only, as occurs in all collective nouns. So the name
of the shape is a statement about this shape and that shape with Tawaatuʹ.
So the source of this shape is not the source of that shape. Therefore, the
name demonstrates the extent of similarity between them, and it is universally
absolute. However, it is not found to be absolute with the condition of non‐
restriction, except in the mind. And it does not become binding from that to
negate the extent of similarity between the existent sources outside, since that
would negate the names that are Mutawaatiʹah (the very same). That is the case
with the majority of existing names in the languages. These are collective nouns
in the language. So it is a name that is connected to something and whatever else
resembles it, whether it be a concrete noun, or a descriptive noun, whether it is
an inanimate object or a derivative, and whether it is a type of logic or
knowledge or none of that. Rather, in the language, the collective noun enters
into categories, groups, types and the like. All of these names are Mutawaatiʹah
and the sources of their appellations are outwardly distinguished.ʺ

This was the last of what was connected to the Shaykh with regards to the
debate, which was conducted in the presence of the ruler, the judges, the jurists
and other than them.
Al‐Haafidh adh‐Dhahabee said, ʺThen there was agreement that this was
a good Salafee creed.ʺ

Glossary

Aʹrafah: The mount Aʹrafah upon which those who make the major pilgrimage
stand and supplicate to Allaah.
Aayaat: Verses of the Qurʹaan.
Ahlus‐Sunnah: The people who follow the Sunnah.
Ahlus‐Sunnah wal‐Jamaaʹah: The people who follow the Sunnah and stick to
the Jamaaʹah or group of Muslims, united upon the Sunnah.
ʹalaa: An Arabic preposition meaning ʺupon,ʺ ʺon,ʺ or ʺover.ʺ
al‐Aʹzeez: One of the names of Allaah meaning: the Mighty.
al‐Ilaah: Meaning: ʺThe God.ʺ
Ansaar: The Companions of the Prophet (
) who lived in Madeenah
and supported him and those who emigrated to Madeenah with him from
Makkah.
ʹAqeedah: The creed and beliefs of a person.
ʹArsh: Throne, usually referring to the Throne of Allaah.
Ashaʹriyyah: A misguided sect that denies the attributes of Allaah. They follow
the teachings of Abul‐Hasan al‐Ashaʹree before he repented and returned to the
Sunnah, eventually dying upon the creed of the Salaf. See the authorʹs
explanation of their beliefs in chapter 18, Part 1.
as‐Samaaʹ: The heavens.
adh‐Dhaat: The ʺSelf,ʺ usually referring to the Allaahʹs Self.
ʹAzza wa Jall: Honorable and glorified.

Baatiniyyah: A misguided sect that claims there are internal, hidden aspects to
things. They claim to, alone, have knowledge beyond the outward
manifestations, perceiving these internal hidden matters.
Daʹwah: A call or propagation to something.
Duhaa: Forenoon, usually referring to the optional prayer specific to this time.
Dunyaa: The current, passing life of this world. ʹBed: One of the two major
celebrations in Islaam.
Eemaan: Faith consisting of beliefs, statements, and actions; specifically to hold
the correct belief in believe in Allaah, His Angels, His Books, His Messengers,
and the Last Day when all people shall be accountable before Allaah, and to
believe in Allaahʹs pre‐decree of everything, the good and bad of it.
Fee: An Arabic preposition meaning ʺin,ʺ or ʺregarding.ʺ It can also mean ʺonʺ or
ʺoverʺ as the author has explained and proven in chapter 9.
Fiqh: The Islaamic science of jurisprudence, or the deduction of rulings and
legislations from the sources of Islaam.
Fitrah: The natural disposition upon which all people are created ‐the ease of
understanding of Tawheed, and the unnaturalness of associating partners with
Allaah.
Ghuthaa: Literally meaning: scum or filth that a flood carries. This is one of the
many derogatory names with which the misguided sects refer to the people of
the Sunnah.
Hadeeth: A statement of the Prophet (
to Makkah.

). Hajj: The major pilgrimage

Hashwiyyah: Literally meaning: useless, possessing no good at all. This is one of
the many derogatory names with which the misguided sects refer to the people
of the Sunnah.
Hijrah: The migration of the Prophet (
) from Madeenah to
Makkah. When associated with a date, it refers to the number of years after this

migration. It could also refer to a migration of any Muslim from one place to
another, seeking the pleasure of Allaah.
‘Ilm al‐Kalaam: The knowledge of philosophical or seemingly intellectual
speech.
Iblees: The proper name of Satan, the one personally and directly outcast by
Allaah from the honorable position which he once had.
Idhaafiyyah Attributes: See the authorʹs explanation in chapter 19: The
Emergence of Taʹteel and Its Origins
Ilaa: An Arabic preposition meaning ʺto.ʺ
Ilhaad: Deviation from the correct beliefs or actions,
deviance regarding Allaahʹs names and attributes.

usually referring to

Imaam: A Leader or scholar.
Injeel: The revealed book given to the Prophet ʹEesaa, the son of Maryam.
Ismaaʹeelee: A misguided sect, stemming from the Raafidees, or extreme
Sheeʹahs. Aga Khan is their supreme leader and, in their view, has characteristics
and attributes similar to those of Allaah.
Istawaa: The Arabic verb meaning to ʺrise over or above.ʺ Isteelaa: The Arabic
noun meaning to ʺconquer.ʺ
Istithnaa: Making an exception. Istithnaa regarding Eemaan means to say, I am a
believer (have Eemaan) while adding the phrase, ʺinshaa Allaahʺ (if Allaah
wills.)
Istiwaa: The Arabic noun meaning to ʺrise over or above.ʺ Ithbaat: Affirmation.
Ittihaadiyyah: A misguided sect. See the authorʹs explanation of their belief in
chapter 18, Part One.
Jahl: Ignorance.
Jahmee: (Sing.) A follower of Safwan ibn Jahm, a major propagator of deviated
and misinterpreted beliefs regarding Allaahʹs Names and Attributes.

Jahmiyyah: A misguided sect following Safwan ibn Jahm, a major propagator of
deviated and misinterpreted beliefs regarding Allaariʹs Names and Attributes.
Jibreel: The angel responsible for bringing the revelation of Allaah down to the
Prophets and Messengers.
Kaʹbah: The sacred, black structure in the middle of the grand mosque in
Makkah.
Kahf: Cave
Kalaabiyyah: A misguided sect. See the authorʹs explanation of their beliefs in
chapter 18, Part One.
Karaamiyyah: A misguided sect. See the authorʹs explanation of their beliefs in
chapter 18, Part One.
Khalaf: The modern people who came after the time of the Salaf, usually
referring to anyone in opposition to the way of the Salaf.
Khaleel: A close friend.
Khawaarj: The very first misguided sect to split away from the main body of the
Muslims. They believe one becomes a disbeliever by committing major sins,
among other false ideologies.
Kufr: Disbelief.
Kursee: Literally: ʺchairʺ or ʺfootstool” usually referring to the footstool of
Allaah, as Ibn ʹAbbaas said, ʺThe Kursee is the place of the Two Feet (of
Allaah)...ʺ See chapterl0, Part 2.
Maʹ: An Arabic preposition meaning ʺwith.ʺ
Maʹiyyah: A concept of ʺwithness,ʺ usually referring to the concept of Allaah
being with His creation.
Majoos: Fire‐worshipper.

Marfooʹ: A status of Hadeeth sometimes referring to a statement of a
Companion, yet being raised up to having the same ruling of a statement from
the Prophet (
)
Masjid: Mosque.
Muʹtazilah: A misguided sect. See the authorʹs explanation of their beliefs in
chapter 18, Part One.
Muaʹttilah: A misguided sect that makes Taʹteel.
Muaʹttil: (Sing.) A person who makes Taʹteel.
Muhaajiroon: Those Companions of the Prophet («H) who migrated from
Makkah to Madeenah.
Mujbarah: A derogatory term used by those who do not believe in the Qadr of
Allaah. They refer to the people of the Sunnah with this name falsely assuming
that the required belief in the Qadr means believing people are forced to do
actions by Allaah with no choice of their own.
Mumaththil: (Sing.) A person who makes Tamtheel.
Murjiah: A misguided sect. They falsely claim that actions are not included in
the definition of Eemaan and that sins do not affect a personʹs faith.
Mushabbihah: A misguided sect that makes Tashbeeh.
Mushrikoon: The people who make Shirk.
Nafee: Negation.
Namaariq: (Pl.) Pillows.
Nawaabit: Literally meaning: weeds that grow with no benefit in them. This is
one of the many derogatory names with which the misguided sects refer to the
people of the Sunnah.
Nawaasib: Literally meaning: enemies. This is one of the many derogatory
names with which the Sheeʹahs refer to the people of the Sunnah, claiming they

are the enemies of the Prophetʹs (
and speaking good of Aboo Bakr and Umar.

) relatives by showing loyalty to,

Qadr: The predestination or pre‐decree of Allaah.
Qiblah: The direction in which every Muslim faces in prayer, towards the Kaʹbah
in Makkah.
Qur: Another word for menstruation.
Qurʹaan: The last, revealed book of Allaah, revealed by Jibreel to His Prophet,
Muhammad (
). It is the actual, uncreated speech of Allaah.
Raafidhee: The extremists of the misguided sect, the Sheeʹahs, who degrade the
), considering them to be traitors to
Companions of the Prophet (
the Prophet and Islaam, among many other false beliefs.
Rabeeʹ al‐Awwal: The third month of the Islaamic calendar.
RadhiAllaahu anhum: ʺMay Allaah be pleased with them.ʺ
RadhiAllaahu anhumaa: ʺMay Allaah be pleased with both of them.ʺ When
mentioned after a Companionʹs name, it refers to him and his father.
Rahimahullaah: ʺMay Allaah have mercy on him.ʺ
Ruboobiyyah: One of the third categories of Tawheed, referring to Allaahʹs
lordship, that He is the sole creator, owner, provider, etc.
Saalimiyyah: A misguided sect.
chapter 18, Part One.

See the authorʹs explanation of their beliefs in

Salaf: The righteous predecessors ‐ those who followed the Prophet, his
Companions in religion.
Salbiyyah Attributes: See the authorʹs explanation in chapter 19: The Emergence
of Taʹteel and Its Origins

SallAllaahu alayhi wa Sallam: ʺMay Allaah send peace and prayers upon him.ʺ
It could also indicate Allaah praising him (the Prophet (
)) among
the angels.
Shakkaak: Literally: ʺDoubters,ʺ a derogatory name by which the Murjiah refer
to the people of the Sunnah.
Shareeʹah: The legislation, or complete system of the religious rulings of Islaam.
Shaykh: A term often used to refer to a scholar of Islaam.
Shaytaan: A devil from men or Jinn, another, unseen, creation of Allaah.
Sheeʹah: A famous misguided sect misguided sect who degrade the
Companions of the Prophet (
), considering them to be traitors to
the Prophet and Islaam, among many other false beliefs.
Shirk: Associating partners with Allaah in anything that is exclusive to only
Him, such as worship.
Sifaat: Attributes or characteristics, usually referring to the Attributes of Allaah.
Subhaanahu wa Taʹaalaa: ʺGlorified and high is He above all imperfections.ʺ
Sunnah: The statements, beliefs, actions, approvals, or descriptions of the
Prophet (
).
Taʹteel: Denying the Names and Attributes of Allaah, or denying some of them.
See the authorʹs explanation in chapter 3.
Taaghoot: False judges, or those who are pleased with the people worshipping
them or following them rather than the legislation of Allaah.
Tafseer: Explanation, usually referring to the explanation of Aayaat of the
Qurʹaan.
Tahreef: Changing a text in wording or meaning. See the authorʹs explanation in
chapter 3.
Tajheel: Declaring or believing that others are ignorant.

Tajseem: The affirmation or notion that Allaah has a body.
Takhyeel: The belief that religious concepts are only imaginary, with no real
truth to them.
Takyeef: The belief of notion of ʺhowʺ Allaahʹs Attributes are.
Tamtheel: The belief or notion that something is equal to something else, usually
referring to the idea that something is equal to Allaah.
Tashbeeh: The belief or notion that something is similar to something else,
usually referring to the idea that something is equal to Allaah.
Tawheed: Pure monotheism, or the belief that Allaah is One and alone in
Worship, Lordship, and completely unique in His Names and Attributes.
Tawraah: The revealed book given to the Prophet Moosaaa.
Thu‐al‐Qiʹdah: The eleventh month of the Islaamic calendar.
ʹUluww: The concept of Allaah being high above his creation.
Ummah: The Islaamic nation.
Wahdatul‐Wujood: Pantheism, the belief that God is in everything and
everything is God.
Zakaah: The obligated charity imposed by Islaam upon the wealth of the rich.

