Ye

FAT-HIL-MAJEED

ae
Ohi 74 1

59 حل[ هه م سي

An interpretation for the book of Unification
Compiled by Sheikh Abdur-Rahman
ben Hasan Al-Ash-Sheikh

Rendered to English
by
Muhammad Itani

Corrected and revised

by
F.Amira Zrein Matraji

DAR EL FIKR
BEIRUT
ALL RIGHTS FOR REPRINTING ARE
RESERVED FOR THE PUBLISHER

1997

BET™TRUT LIBANON

ae
1

HARAT JUVREIK-ABDULNOUR STREET-TELEG:FIXI-P.O.BOX: 11-7061 |

“SY

TEL: §32305 - 838202 - 838136 FAX: 00961 1 837898
WNBTIONSL: TEL AND FAX 001-212-478 2308 OR 090961 1 860962

3 ْ

ا

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH MOST GRACIOUS, MOST
MERCIFUL

On the most difficult tasks is to attempt rendering a religious book into
English. Such a task assumes more difficult dimensions if it were directly
connected to texts which have been either sent down by Allah (the Exalted)
through Revelation or discussed by His Holy Messenger Muhammad (May
Allah’s Blessing sand Peace be upon him). That would be the case for every
translator especially if he/she were to convey the exact meaning intended by the
original text because as is the case with the English language, the Arabic
language terms have a wide range of connotations and denotations relative to
their context. Thus, that was one of the difficulties that I encountered when
trying to render this bok into English. Thus I have decided to include in my
preface explanatory paragraphs that aim at making clear to the reader every
aspect of the translation that makes understanding it difficult or that might lead
him/her to misunderstanding some of the fundamental concepts of Islam.
Therefore this preface has been divided into different sections each of which
aims at clarifying a single aspect of this trfanslation.

SECTION I: NATURE OF THE TRANSLATED BOOK

In fact this book is two books. The first one, Kitab At- Tawheed (The book
of Unification) was written by the religious authority Sheikh Abdur-Rahman
Ben Hasan Ash-Sheikh, (Died in the year 1285 A.H. while the second one, Fat-
h al-Majeed (The Interpretation of The Book of Unification) is its explanation
and was written by Sheikh Abdul-Aziz Ben Baz the president of The Islamic
University of Medina. Thus the reader of the English translation will notice that
the original text occupies parts of some pages while the explanation written by
Sheikh Ben Baz occupies the rest.

The book consists of chapters about which I am going to give the reader a
brief summary. Chapter one discusses the importance of beginning the book or
any significant matter with the Holy Koranic phrase In the name of Allah, Most
Gracious, Most Merciful. Chapter two he starts discussing The Book of Unifica-

3
tion and consequently the concept of Unification in Islam. Chapter three dis-
cusses the benefits of unification and whatever protects Mankind and covers
their sins. Chapter four discusses the case of he who reaches the stage of unify-
ing Allah (the Exalted); he may be admitted into The Garden without being
punished or tortured. Chapter five discusses joining in partners with Allah (the
Exalted) since such an act can never be forgiven by Him (the Exalted) while all
other kinds of sin may be forgiven if He (the Exalted) wishes. Chapter six dis-
cusses calling people to testify that «There is no god but Allah». Chapter eight
explains that the act of wearing a ring, a thread, or similar objects in order to
drive away distress or remove affliction, is considered an act of poilyhtheism.
Chapter nine discusses what has been mentioned about incantations, and amu-
lets. Chapter ten discusses the case of the one who asks for the blessing of a
tree, a stone or something similar. Chapter eleven discusses the case of he who
slays (sacrifices animals for the sake of other than Allah (the Exalted). Chap-
ter twelve discusses the fact that it is proscribed by Islam to sacrifice in a place
where sacrifices are slain for other than Allah (the Exalted). Chapter thirteen
discusses that vowing by other than Allah (the Exalted) is considered in Islam
an act of pollytheism. Chapter fourteen says that Islam considers resorting to
other than Allah (the Exalted) for help is an act of polytheism. Chapter fifteen
elaborates the fact that it is considered an act of polytheism to seek help of
other than Allah (the Exalted). Chapter sixteen interprets the Holy Verse, «Do
the indeed ascribe to Him as partners things that create nothing, but are them-
selyes created? No aid can they give them, nor can they aid themselves!» (7:191-
192). Chapter seventeen interprets the following Holy Verse, «So far (Is this
the case) that, when terror is removed from their hearts (At the Day of Judge-
ment, then) will they say, «What is it that your Lord commanded? «They will
say, «That which is true.and just; and He is the Most High, Most Great».
Chapter eighteen discusses intercession in general and the characteristics of re-
jected intercession. Chapter nineteen discusses the interpretation of the following
Holy Verse, «It is true thou wilt not be able to guide every one whom thou
lovest; but Allah guides those He will» (28:56). Chapter twenty discusses the
‘eason behind Bani Adams; abandoning their religion and states that the reason
is their exaggeration concerning those who are righteous. Chapter twenty-one
discusses the stance of Islam towards the one who worships Allah (the Exalted)
at a righteous man’s grave. Chapter twenty-two discusses that exaggeration at a
righteous man’s grave turns that man into pagan worshipped regardless of Allah

4
(the Exalted). Chapter twenty-three discusses the Holy Prophet's defending
Unification and blocking all the way leading to polytheism. Chapter twenty-four
discusses that some of this nation worship pagans. Chapter twenty-five discusses
what was mentioned about magic. Chapter twenty-six is about showing some
kinds of magic. Chapter twenty-seven discusses what was mentioned concerning
priests and those people similar to them. Chapter twenty-eight discusses incanta-
tions. Chapter twenty-nine discusses pessimism and seeing evil omens by follow-
ing certain procedures adopted from Pre-Islamic times. Chapter thirty discusses
fortune telling such as astrology and augury. Chapter thirty-one discusses resort-
ing to the phases of the moon in order to ask for rain. Chapter thirty-two ex-
plains the Holy verse that says, «Yet there are men who take (for worship)
others beside Allah, as equal (with Allah): They love them as they should love
Allah». (2:165). Chapter thirty-three explains the Holy Verse that says, «It is
only the Evil one that suggests to you fear of this 20147165: be ye not afraid of
them, but fear Me, if ye have Faith». (3:175). Chapter thirty-four explains the
Holy Verse that says, «But on Allah put your trust if ye have faith». (5:26).
Chapter thirty-five interprets the Holy Verse that says, «Did they then feel se-
cure against the plan of Allah? But no one can feel secure from the plan of Al-
lah, except those (Doomed) to ruin!» (7.99). Chapter thirty-six discusses
patience as one the characteristics of a believer in Allah (the Exalted). Chapter
thirty-seven discusses what was said about hypocrisy. Chapter thirty-eight dis-
cusses the case of the man who desires the present life through his deeds; such
acts are considered among polytheistic acts. Chapter thirty-nine discusses the
case of the one who obeys religious authorities and princes in proscribing what
Allah (the Exalted) has allowed or allowing what He ( the Exalted) has pro-
scribed; such a person is considered, to have taken those men as lords besides Al-
lah (the Exalted). Chapter forty interprets the Holy Verse that says, «Hast
thou not turned thy vision to those who declare that they believe in the revela-
tions that have come to thee and to those before thee? Their (real) wish is to re-
sort together for judgement (in their disputes) to the evil one, though they were
ordered to reject him. But Shaitan’s wish is to lead them astray far away (from
the Right). When it is said to them: «Come to what Allah hath revealed, and to
the Apostle. «Thou seest the hypocrites avert their faces from thee in disgust.
How then, when they are seized by misfortune. Because of the deeds which their
hands have sent forth? Then they come to thee, swearing by Allah: «We meant
no more than good-will and conciliation!» (4:60-62). Chapter forty-one dis-

5
cusses the case of the person who rejects any one of the names and attributes of
Allah (the Exalted). Chapter forty-two discusses the Holy Verse that Says,
«They recognise the favours of Allah; then they deny them; and most of them
are (creatures) ungrateful». (16:83). Chapter forty-three interprets the Holy
Verse, «... then set not up rivals unto Allah when ye know the (Truth)» (2:22)
Chapter forty-four discusses the case of the person who cannot be convinced if
sworn to by Allah (the Exalted). Chapter forty-five discusses the case of the
person who curses time; he is considered to have caused harm to Allah (the Ex-
alted). Chapter forty-six discusses using the term» Supreme Judge «and similar
term to name people. Chapter forty-seven discusses revering the names of Allah
(the Exalted) and changing people's names because of that. Chapter forty-eight
discusses the case of the person who mocks at something that includes a mention
of Allah (the Exalted), the Holy Koran or the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
peace and blessings be upon him). Chapter forty-nine explains the Holy Verse
that says, «Then We give him a taste of some mercy from Ouselves, after some
adversity has touched him, he is sure to say», This is due to my (merit): I think
not that the Hour (of judgement) will (ever) be established; but if I am brought
back to my Lord, I have (much) good (stored) in His sight!» But We will show
the unbelievers the truth of all that they did, and We shall give them the taste of
severe penalty». (41:50). Chapter fifty explains the Holy Verse that says, « But
when He giveth them a goodlychild, they ascribe to others a share in the gift
they have received: but Allah is exalted high above the partners they ascribe to
Hime (7:190) Chapter fifty-one explains the Holy Verse that says, «The most
beautiful names belong to Allah: So call on Him (7-180). Chapter fifty-two dis-
cusses that one is not allowed to say three discusses saving, «O Allah! Forgive
me if You wish». Chapter fifty-four says that one should not say, «My slave».
Chapter fifty-five discusses the saying that one must not turn down any one who
asks by using Allah’s (the Exalted) name. Chapter fifty-six discusses the fact
that only admission into the Garden can be asked by using the term «For the
sake of Allah (the Exalted). Chapter fifty-seven discusses what was mentioned
concerning the conditional term «if». Chapter fifty-eight discusses forbidden peo-
ple from cursing the wind. Chapter fifty-nine interprets the following Holy
Verse, «After (the excitement) of the distress, He sent down calm on a band of
you overcome with slumber, while another band was stirred to anxiety by their
own feelings, moved by wrong suspicions of Allah-suspicions due to ignorance.
They said: «What affair is this of our «Say thou»: Indeed, this affair is wholly

6
Allah’s» They hide in their minds what they dare not reveal to thee. They say
(to themselves}: «If we had had anything to do with this affair, we should not
have been in the slaughter here» Say: «Even if you had remaind in your homes,
those for whom death was decreed would certainly have gone forth to the place
of their death»; But (all this was) that Allah might test what is in your breasts
and purge what is in your hearts. For Allah knoweth well the secrets of your
hearts» (3:154). Chapter sixty discusses what was mentioned concerning those
who deny destiny. Chapter sixty-one discusses what was mentioned concerning
those who draw images (which resemble Allah's creation). Chapter sixty-two
discusses what was mentioned about excess swearing. Chapter sixty-ihree dis-
cusses what was mentioned about «Falling within Allah’s (the Exalted} protec-
tion and failing within His Holy Messenger’s (May Alliah’s peace and biessings
be upon him) protection. «ft also includes some explanation of the following
Holy Verse, «Fulfil the Covenant of Allah when ye have entered inic it, and
break not your oaths after ye have confirmed them; indeed ye nave mae Ailah
your security, for Allah knoweth all that ye ‏»مل‎ (16:91). Chapter sixiy-four dis-
cusses what was mentioned about swearing by Allah (the Exaited). Ciarter
sixty-five discusses the fact that it is prohibited to ask Aliah (the Exalted) io in-
tercede among His creatures. Chapter sixty-six discusses what was mentioned
concerning the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah peace and biessing be upon nim)
protection of Unification and blocking the ways leading to polytheism. Chapter
sixty-seven explains the following Holy Verse, «No jusi estimate have they
made of Allah, such as is due to Him: on the Day of Judgement the wicie cf the
earth will be but His handful, and the Heavens will be roiled up in His right
hand: Glory to Him! High is He above the partners they attribute ic Him!»
(39-67).

SECTION 11: TRANSLITERATION

This section aims at explaining the meaning of Arabic proper nouns which
cannot be translated and which were transliterated that is to say represented or
spelled in the characters of the English language. I included this list the most im-
portant transliterated terms:

Aba The father of.

Abbas, ibn Abdullah Ben al-Abbas, a much reserved Muexegete.

Abdulmuittalib The grandfather, on the paternal side, of the Prophet
Muhammad.
The slave of the Most Gracious.

Slave

The grandfather, on the paternal side, of the Prophet
Muhammad > |

The slave of the Most Gracious.

The slave of the Provider.

Father of Hashim and ancestor of the Holy Prophet
Muhammad.

The sons of Abed Manaf.

Slaves

The article «The».

One of the most distinguished mediaval juri theologians
of Islam

One of the nine wives of the Hole Messenger

The article «The»

The Holy Prophet’s cousin and son-in-law He first Shiite
Imam and a

The Moslem term for God.

The prince of all believers; Ali Ben Abi Talib.

He is primarily renowned as the conquror or between 19/
640-21 /642.

The article «The».

Ibn Malik.

The article «The»

The article «The».

The article «The».

The capital of Iraq.

One of the companions of the Holy Prophet.

The sons of.

The sons of.

The son of.

The year in which Mecca was conquered.

The opening chapter of the Holy Koran.

Islamic jurisprudence.

Honorable Hadith.

Abdur-Rahman
Abed
Abdel-Muttalib

Abdel-Rahman
Abdel-Razzaq
Abde Manaf

Abed Manaf, Bani
Abeed

Ad-

Adi Ben Hatem

Ahmad Ben Hanbal

Asia
Al-
Ali Ben Abi Taleb

Allah
Amir al-mu’minin
Amre Ben al-Ass

An-

Anas

As-

At-

Ath-

Baghdad
Bakre, Abu
Bani

Banu

Ben

Fat-h, the year of
Fatiha, al

Figh

Hadith Shareef
Pilgrimage; this is one of the five pillars of Islam

That which is permitted or lawful.

Proscribed.

Son of Ali Ben Abi Talib.

Migration: specifically, the migration of the Prophet from
Mecca to Medina.

The son of.

Abraham, patriarch and ardent proponent of monothe-
ism.

Consensus of opinion.

The exercise of independent judgement unfett
past precedent.

law or

Heresy.

Islamic leader at prayer.
Belief or faith.

Isaac.

Isaac.

The sons of Israel; the Jews.
Jesus Chnist.
Pre-Islamic times.
Gabriel.

Holy stuggle.

Genie.

One of the companions of the Holy Prophet.
Noah.

One of the companions of the Holy Prophet.
The son of Omar Ben al-Khattab.
Demarcation line, limits or border.

Divorce.

Unification.

Intercession.

Distinguished Hanbali jurist and theologian.
The mother of.

Minor Hay.

Hajj
Halal
Haram
Hasan, al-
Hijra

Tbn
Ibrahim

Ijmaa’
Ijtihad

had

Imam

Iman

Is-hak

Is-haq

Israel, Bani
Issa

Jahiliyya

Jibril

Jihad

Jinn(s)

Niwas Ben Semaan
Ben Khalid, an-
Nouh

Omair Ben Habib
as-Safi

Omar, Ibn
Takhm

Talagq, at-
Tawheed
Tawassul
Taymiyya, Ibn
Um

Umra
Wahib The giver or donor.
Wahibah The she giver or donor.

SECTION 111: ESSENTIAL ISLAMIC CONCEPTS

1. THE PILLARS OF ISLAM

The pillars of Islam or «Arkan» (Plural of Rukn which literally means
«supports» or «basic element») This term has been used in Arabic to refer to
the five pillars of Islam. These are in alphabetical order: Hajj, Salat, Sawm,
Shahada, and Zakat. These five pillars of arkan constitute the essence of Isiam,
that is why I would like to say a brief explanatory note about each.

A. Hajj: that is to say pilgrimage to Mecca. This is one of the five arkan or
pillars of Islam. All Muslims, provided a number of conditions including good
health and financial ability are present have a duty to make a pilgrimage to
Mecca at least once in their lifetimes. This major pilgrimage must be made in
the Month of pilgrimage Dhu’l-Hijja, the last month of the Muslim lunar calen-
dar between the eight day of the month and the twelfth or thirteenth. Aiso a min-
or pilgrimage to Mecca, which does not count towards fulfiiment of the religious
duty and is called in Arabic ‘umra, may be made at any time and requires less

ceremonial.

B. Salat: that is to say performing the prayer ritual. Moslems have to pray
five times a day starting with the Morning prayer, the Noon prayer, the After-
noon prayer, the Sunset prayer and finally the Evening prayer.

C. Sawm: that is to say fasting during the holy month of Ramadan. When
they fast they are forbidden to eat or drink or smoke or take any thing that en-
ters the body otherwise they wouldn't be considered as fasting. The duration of
fasting starts from dawn and lasts till sunset is complete.

D. Shahada: that is to say the profession of Faith. The profession of Faith
is saying, «I witness that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His

Holy Messenger».

E. Zakat: that is to say alms giving. Moslems are required to pay a frac-
tion of their money and belongings each year to the poor. This fraction is speci-
fied by the Holy Koran and differs from one type of money and property to
another.

10
2. CALENDAR

The Islamic calendar is lunar rather than solar. If formally began with the
Hijra of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s peace and blessing be upon him) from
Mecca to Medina. This took place in AD622 which became the first year of the
Moslem lunar calendar. Because the Hijri Islamic dates are therefore termed in
Arabic Hijri dates, they are written in English with AH (-Anno Hegirae) as a
prefix or suffix in place of AD.

3. ABLUTION

All Moslems are required to perform the abluton ritual before they start
their prayers, otherwise their prayers would not be accepted by Allah (the Ex-
alted). This ritual consists of washing in sequence parts of the body such as the
face, the head, the hands, part of the arms, the mouth and the feet, always start-
ing with the right part and repeating washing three times.

All help and success are sought from Allah (the Exalted).
December 29, 1996

Muhammad Itani

11
Preface

Praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds, and may Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon the most honorable among the prophets and the messen-
gers, our Prophet, Muhammad, as well as upon his family and Companions,
all together.

To proceed: I have studied the footnotes written by the authority
Sheikh Muhammad Hamed AI-Faki, concerning the book «Understanding
The Exalted- An Interpretation of the Book of Unification» by the research-
er, the authority Sheikh Abdur-Rahman Ben Hasan Ben AlI-Sheikh, the lea-
der (Imam) and the reformer of the features of Islam in the twelfth century
A.H., Al-Sheikh Muhammad Ben Abdel-Wahab Ben Suleiman Ben Ali At-
Tamimi Al-Hanbali, may Allah’s mercy be upon them all. I have found that
those footnotes contain much benefaction and that he had excelled in his
discussions. He had copied most of it, from the above mentioned Sheikh Ab-
dur-Rahman. I ask Allah (the Exalted) may Thou benefit through them
everyone who reads them and to compensate the reward for everybody; He
(the Exalted) the Most Generous, the Most Bountiful. The following is a
manifest of all those remarks. All success is granted by Allah (the Exalted).

Abdulel-Aziz Ben Baz
President of The Islamic University in Medina

13

In the name of Allah the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful Praise be
to Allah the Lord of the worlds, and only those who are pious may succeed
Mankind on earth, and no aggression may take place but against those who
are wrong doers such as those who originate heresies and those who are
polytheists, and I testify that there is no God but Allah (the Exalted) Alone,
He who has no partner with Him, the Lord of those who came before and
those who came after, the Self-subsisting and I testify that Muhammad is
His servant and Holy Messenger as well as the best among all His creatures.
O Allah bless Muhammad, his kinsfolk, his Companions and all who follow
them righteously till the Day of Judgment, and may your peace be upon
them all.

To proceed: Verily the book of Unification which has been written by
the Imam Sheikh of Islam (Muhammad Ben Abdel-Wahab) may Allah (the
Exalted) generously reward him, and forgive him as well as those who re-
sponded to his call till the Day of Judgment - has turned out to be original
in meaning: By using his proofs to show unification and collecting his evi-
dence to clarify it. Thus it has become knowledge for the monotheists and
an evidence against the atheists. Thus many people have benefited from it.
Verily this Imam, may Allah be merciful with him, in his youth Allah (the
Exalted) has expanded his breast for the holy truth which Allah has sent
with His messengers: by sincere worship in all its types only for Allah (the
Exalted) the Lord of the worlds, and by rejecting much of the polytheism of
polytheists. Thereupon Allah (the Exalted) has exalted to his endeavor and
reinforced his determination; thus he embarked to call the people of Najd to
unification, which is the essence of Islam and belief, and he had forbidden
them from worshipping trees, stones, graves, and idols. He also forbade
them from believing in magic, fortune-tellers and soothsayers. Thus Allah
(the Exalted) has abolished every heresy and delusion called for by every Sa-
tan, by his call, also Allah(the Exalted) has erected the banner of holy strug-
gle and refuted the doubts of oppossers among the people of stubborness
and polytheism, and as a consequence most of the people living in that
country adopted the religion of Islam. His call and books spread every
where, till those who are the people of disunion admitted his favor, except
he who was controlled by the Shaitan (Devil) who in turn made him hate
faith, so he kept on being stubborn and oppressive.

The people of the Arab Peninsula became after his mission, as Kutada,
may Allah’s mercy be upon him has said about the case of those who came
first among this nation, «Verily when the Moslims said, «There is no God
but Allah, the polytheists rejected that and considered it as a great sin, also

15

Ibliss and his army of supporters were confined and limited by it; accom-
plishing it, bringing it into existence and supporting it against those who op-
possed and resisted it; it is a word which he who uses in dispute succeeds,

and which he who uses in struggle is granted victory; it is a word known by

the people of the peninsula which is crossed by the riding in few nights; and
there are groups of people living in insignificant eras who neither know
about it nor acknowledge it».

Allah (the Exalted) has already expanded the breasts of many scholars
and authorities and made them acknowledge His call; they in turn had re-
garded that call as auspicious, rejoiced at it and welcomed it by writing
prose and poetry.

As far as his mentioned book is concerned, it is about clarifying what
Allah (the Exalted) has sent through his messengers such as unifying wor-
ship, and supporting it by the Holy Koran and the Sunna (Honourable Ha-
dith), and mentioning great polytheism that contradicts it or polytheism that
is incompatible with its due perfection, or whatever is similar to that or
leads to It.

The writer’s grandson had taken the initiative of explaining it. He is
Sheikh Suleiman Ben Abdullah may Allah’s mercy be upon him. Thus he ex-
plained it extensively and beneficially and exposed whatever eloquence is re-
quired to show and include, and he called it (What The Exalted in Power,
Worthy of all Praise Has Facilitated in Explaining The Book of Unifica-
tion).

When the writer exclaims (Sheikh of Islam) he means Abu Al-Abbas
Ben Abdel-Halim Ben Abdel-Salam Ben Taymiyya, and by (Alhafith) he
means Ahmad Ben Hir Al-Askalani.

When I read his commentaries and explanation, I realized that at cer-
tain places he elaborated it while at others he used repetitions where he
should have elaborated. So I started refining and completing it, and I may
have added some recommendable quotations in order to perfect the benefit.
I called that book (The Glorious’s Blessing For The Explanation of The
Book of Unification).

I ask Allah (the Exalted) to benefit every scholar by this book. I ask
Him (the Exalted) to make it purely for the sake of His Generous Face, and
to lead whomever industriously studies it, to the Gardens in Heaven. There
is no strength or power but with Allah’s (the Exalted) help the Most High,
The Great.

The writer, may Allah be merciful with him, said:

16

¢~

In the name of Allah, Most Gracious Most Merciful.

He began his book by saying, «In the name of Allah, Most Gracious
Most Merciful, following the example of the Holy Koran and in conformity

with an honourable Hadith:

1- «Every significant matter that does not begin with, In the Name of
Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Meciful, is incomplete.» This honour-
able Hadith has been narrated by Ibn Habban in two ways. Ibn Salah said:
This honourable Hadith is fine.

2- Abi Dawud and Ibn Majah said, «Every significant matter that does
not begin with, «Praise be to Allah or with thanking Allah is incomplete.»

3- Ahmad said, «Every significant matter, that does not begin by men-
tioning Allah’s name, is considered incomplete». Also, the Darkutni said
after Abi Huraira, «Every significant matter that is not begun by mentioning
Allah’s name is considered incomplete».

The writer of this book (Sheikh Abdur-Rahman Ben Hasan Al Ash-
Sheik) has limited himself in some of his writings to saying, «In the name of
Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.» because this term is one of
the most eloquent terms of praising and invoking Allah (the Exalted) before
a following speech. The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) used to write it in his correspondence, as in his letter to Heracu-
lus the Chief of the Romans. I have come across a copy written by his (the
writer) own hand, may Allah’s mercy be upon him, in which he started with,
«In the name of Allah, the Most Merciful». Then he continued by saying,
«May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon the Holy Prophet and his kins-
folk. Thus, accordingly, beginning by saying, «In the Name of Allah, the
Most Gracious, Most Merciful» is essential, and saying «May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon the Holy Prophet and his kinsfolk», is relative and
additional, that is relative to what comes after praising Allah (the Exalted).

4- «Verily when the mother of Jesus sent him to a teacher to teach him,
the teacher told him, «write in the name of Allah.» Therupon Jesus said,
«Do you know what Allah is? Allah is the God of Gods.»

The authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said,
«This honourable name has ten verbal properties.» and he listed them, then
he said, «As for its moral properties he said, «The best to know among the
creatures is the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him).

5- «I do not count praise on you as you have praised yourself.» How is

17

زع واو وها واه و معد اعد مد قاقد هد وا قدو و هد .د رده و واف واوا هع .دو فاقاع د واود و .ا هاعد مم ل قفاوا ود .د نودي واو قاع قافا عاه د فد قاع فلواعد فاع نان فا يداع فاده قافا مده عداتد د ند نان ارد مام

it possible to count the properties of a name whose owner absolutely pos-
sesses every perfection, praise, extolment, tribute, glory, majesty, might,
beauty, benefaction, generosity, grace, and reverence? This name has never
been mentioned on a small amount without increasing it; or fear without re-
moving it; upon grief without dispelling it; or distress without relieving it; or
worry without driving it away, or hardship without erasing it. Never has a
weak person clinged to him without giving him power; or a humble person
without granting him might; or a poor person without making him rich; or
a lonely person without putting him at ease; or a defeated without support-
ing him with victory; or a needy person without dispelling harm; or a home-
less wanderer without giving him shelter.

It is really the name by which grief and distress are dispelled; it is the
name by which benefaction is descended and prayers are responded to and ac-
cepted; it is the name by which faults and slips are forgiven, lapses are un-
done, sins are removed and good deeds are brought forward. It is the name
by which the earth and the skies have been erected, Holy books sent down, as
well as messengers, and laws legislated. It is the name by which limitations
and penalties have been set. It is the name by which Holy Struggle has been
legislated, and creatures have been divided into happy and miserable. It is the
name by which the Sure Reality has been proven to be true, and the Event In-
evitable has come to pass. It is the name by which just measures and weights
have been set, the straight path erected and the emporium of Hell and the
Garden has been set out. It is the name by which the Lord of the worlds has
been worshipped and praised; it is the name by which messengers have been
sent; it is the name about which one is asked in the grave and on the Day of
Reserruction. It is the name to which all conflict and litigation belong; it the
name that encompasses all loyaiity and enmity; it is the name which makes
the one who knows it happy; it is the name that causes misery to the one who
does not know about or ignores; it is really the secret of all creation and
states; by this name they have come into existence and have been proved; to
that name they have wound up because He (the Exalted) was the cause and
the reason of all creation. That is what He (the Exalted) has decided and re-
quired, «Our Lerd! Net for naught hast Thou created (all) this! Glory to
Thee! Give us salvation from the Penalty of the Fire». (3 : 191) till the end of
what he (Allah’s Mercy be upon him) had said.

His Saying, «The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful», Ibn Jarir said:
«As-Sari ben Yahya told us that Yahya Othman ben Zafar said that he
heard Al-Azramy saying, «The Most Gracious to all creatures the Most

18

OS SS

Merciful with the believers,» and he supported what he said by what Abi
Sai’d -that is Al-Khidri-said after Allah’s Holy Messenger.

6- «Verily, Jesus, the son of Mary, said: «The Most Gracious: The
Most Gracious in the present life as well as in the Afterlife, while the Most

Merciful: Most Merciful in the Afterlife.»

Ibn Al-Qayyim (Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, «His name, Allah, in-
dicates that He (the Exalted) is worshipped by creatures as a result of their
love to Him, glorifying Him and submitting to him. It also indicates that
creatures resort to him whenever they are in need of something or suffering
from misfortune and calamity. That is necessary for the perfection of his
Lordship and Mercy which include the integrity of the Supreme power and
praise, and His ( the Exalted) Divinity, Lordship, Mercy and authority are
necessarily all the qualities of His (the Exalted) Perfection, since it is impos-
sible to prove that for he who is not alive, can not hear, can not see, can
not move, can not speak, can not perform what he wants, and is not wise in
what he says or does, since the attributes of glory and beauty are exclusive
to the name «Allah», and the attributes of performing, ability and’ exclu-
sively perform the actions of benefitting and harming (Granting, holding
back, executing the will, the perfection of power, and managing the state of
affairs of all creatures: all these are exclusive to the name of the Lord), the
attributes of benefaction, generosity, reverence kindness, grace, compassion,
and favor are exclusive to the name «Merciful».

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s be Mercy be upon him) also said, «The
Most Gracious» denotes the attribute refering to Him (May He be blessed
and praised above) and «The Most Merciful» denotes the attributes of Allah
(the Exalted) refering to the person to whom Allah (the Exalted) has been
merciful upon. If you want to understand what has been mentioned, consid-
er carefully and think deeply about what He (the Exalted) has said, «And
He is full of Mercy to the Believers.» (33 : 43) «Unto them Most kind, Most
Merciful.» (9: 117), and it has never been mentioned as Merciful to them.

He said, «Verily the names of Allah (the Exalted) are names and attri-
butes. They verily are indicative of the attributes of His perfection. Thus
they are not incompatible as far as properties and attributes are concerned.
Thus «The Most Gracious» is His name and His attribute. As far as it is
considered as an attribute it precedes the name «Allah»; and as far it is con-
sidered a proper noun, it has been mentioned in the Holy Koran without
preceding the name «Allah»; rather it has been used as a proper noun. For

19

Praise be to Allah, and may Allah’s blessings and peace be upon Mu-

hammad as well as upon his kinsfolk.

example, Allah (the Exalted) has said, «(Allah) the Most Gracious is firmly
established on the Throne (of authority)» (20: 5).

Praise be to Allah, and may Allah’s blessings and peace be upon Mu-
hammad as well as upon his kinsfolk.

His saying (Praise be to Allah) means using terms to eulogize the freely
chosen in accordance with exaltation. It emanates from the tongue and the
heart. Gratitude can be through the tongue, the soul and the dependence. It
is more general than praise which is more contingent on something, and
more special than praise as a cause; that is because it is in return for bene-
faction and grace; however, praise is more general as a cause, and more spe-
cial as a contingency, because it is in return for benefaction and grace as
well as in return for many other things. Thus on the surface they share the
general and the special; in one aspect they meet and in another aspect they
separate.

His saying (and may Allah’s blessings and peace be upon Muhammad
and his kinsfolk) is the best that has been said to mean Allah on blessing
His servants. Al-Bukhary (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) has mentioned
after Ibn Al-Aliah, «Allah’s blessing of His servant is commending him by
the angles.» This honourable Hadith has been confirmed by Ibn Al-Qayyim
(May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) in his two books, Jala’ Al-Afham» and
«Bada-ih al-Fawaid.

I said: It may be said with the intention to invoke Allah (the Exalted)
as has been mentioned in the Musnad after Ali.

7- «The Angles bless one of you as long as he is in his praying place;
they say, "Oh Allah forgive him, Oh Allah may Thou be merciful with
him.»

His saying (and his kinsfolk) means those who follow his religion; this
has been narrated by Imam Ahmad. Consequently this includes most of the
Companions, including all his Companions and other believers.

20

The Book of Unification

The term book means a set of written, printed, or blank sheets bound
together into a volume.

Unification is two types: Unification concerning knowledge and proof,
and that is unification of Lordship, names and attributes. The second type is
unification in demand and goal, and that is unification of divinity and wor-
ship.

The authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah is Mercy be upon him) has
said. «As far as the unification which messengers have called for, and about
which books have been sent down, is concerned, we say that it is of two
types: Unification concerning knowledge and proof and unification concern-
ing demand and goal. The first is concerned with proving the reality of the
Lord (Be He blessed and raised above), His attributes, His deeds, His names
as well as His expressing Himself in His Holy Books and talking to whom-
ever He wishes from among his servants. It is also concerned with proving
the universality of what He (the Exalted) has predestined and of His (the Ex-
alted) wisdom; the Holy Koran has revealed this type as has been mentioned
at the beginning of the Sura of Hadid , the Sura of Taha, the end of the of
Hashr, the beginning of the Sura of Tanzeel As-Sajda, the beginning of the
Sura of Al-Imran and the whole of the Sura of Iklas and many others.

The second type: What has been included in the Sura «Say: O ye that
reject Faith!» (109: 1) and His saying,«Say, O people of the Book! Come to
common terms as between us and you: That we worship none but Allah; that
we associate no partners with Him; that we erect not from ourselves, Lords
and patrons other than Allah. If then they turn back say ye, Bear witness that
we (at least) are Muslims (bowing to Allah’s Will).» (3 : 64). This has also
been mentioned at the beginning of the Sura of Tanzeel Al-Kitab and its
end, the beginning of the Sura of Mu-’min, its middle and end; the begin-
ning of the Sura of A’raf and its end, the whole of the Sura of An’am and
most of the Suras of the Holy Koran include the theme of both types of uni-
fication, thus testifying by the unification and calling for it.

Verily, the Holy Koran has either informed about Allah (the Exalted),
His names, His attributes, His deeds and sayings; it is the cognitive and in-

21

ولو وى روا عد عد هد واه بحام عد عدم قاقد رد و قاقد رد قا فاو رد عد عاج قفاوا رد و واردا مد قارا ود ‎a‏
‏رام معد عد قاقد هد و قاع هد فاع و ‎٠‏ دواع ماه ود فاو ‎SS DS‏ عدج مد عد :د 5 5 5 5 * *

formative type; however, calling for worshipping Him (the Exalted) Alone,
no partner, with Him, while rejecting all others is willful and is a requested
unification. Thus either commanding and forbidding; requiring us to obey
Allah (the Exalted) or commanding us to obey His (the Exalted) commands
and proscriptions; these are the just claims and integral parts of unification;
the Holy Koran has informed, honoring those people who believed in unifi-
cation and told us what has been done to them in the present life and how
they will be honored in the Afterlife; that is the reward they are given be-
cause they have believed in unification; the Holy Koran has informed about
polytheists and what has been done to them in the present life, that is, how
they have been punished and the torture that they will pass through in the
After-life. That is the punishment for those who reject unification. The
whole Holy Koran is concerned about unification and its just claims and re-
wards. As well it is concerned about polytheism, polytheists and their pun-
ishment.

The Sheikh of Islam has said, «Unification said by the messengers but
includes the proof that Allah (the Exalted) is Alone the only God; that is by
testifying that there is no God but Allah (the Exalted) by worshipping only
Him (the Exalted) by depending on Him (the Exalted) , Alone by remaining
loyal to Him (the Exalted) , by showing enmity towards His enemies, and by
working only for His sake. That includes proving what He (the Exalted) has
proven for Himself through names and attributes. Allah (the Exalted) has
said, «And your God is One God: There is no God but He, Most Gracious,
Most Merciful». (2: 163). He (the Exalted) has also said, «AHah has said,
Take not (for worship) two gods: for He is just One God: Then fear Me (and
Me alone).» (16: 51). He (the Exalted) has also said, «If anyone invokes, be-
sides Allah, any other god, he has no authority therefore; and his reckoning
will be only with his Lord! And verily the unbelievers will fail to win through!»
(2: 117). He (the Exalted) has also said, «And question Thou our apostles
whom we sent before thee; did we appoint any deities other than (Allah) Most
Gracious, to be worshipped?» (43: 45).

Also, He (the Exalted) has told about every prophet among the pro-
phets who have called on people to worship only Allah (the Exalted) with-
out worshipping any partner with Him. He (the Exalted) has said, «There is
for you an excellent example (to follow) in Abraham and those with him, when
they said to their people, We are clear of you and of whatever ye worship ‏سعط‎
‎sides Allah: We have rejected you, and there has arisen, between us and you,

22

ولع زناف ققاع د ود و عا مام قاف فاع وأردفى وا ع ناو فاع د قفا ع تدراو ناو و رار قافا ف عد ردق اودر عدقار و اعد قاعد قد قاد ند قفاوا وأحاع د راع مد وا د.ا ماع مد فعا عد ناقام د عد عداندا نا عدا هم عدناع د تا مم

enmity and hatred for ever, -unless ye believe in Allah and Him alone.» (60:
4). He (the Exalted) has also said about the polytheists, «For they, when they
were told that there is no god except Allah, would puff themselves up with
pride». (37: 36), and «And say, What! Shall we give up our gods for the sake
of a possessed poet?» (37: 36). There are plenty of these examples in the Hely
Koran.

Unification does not mean the unification of Lordship only. That is
thinking that Allah (the Exalted) Alone has created the world as those suff-
ists think. They think that if they had proven this by evidence, they would
have proven unification, and that if they had testified that and they ex-
hausted themselves then they would have perished for the sake of unifica-
tion. Verily if a man acknowledges the names and the attributes that the
Lord (the Exalted) deserves and He exalted Him and acknowledged that He
(the Exalted) is the Creator of everything, that man would not be considered
a unifier [Monctheist] unless he testifies that there is no God but Allah (the
Exalted) Alone; thus he acknowiedges that verily Allah Alone is the Diety
who deserves to be worshipped, and he adheres to worshipping Ailah (he
Exalted) Alone with no partner with Him. And the «Deity» is the god whe
deserves to be worshipped rather than the deity in the sense of he who is
able to invent. Thus if interpreters explain «Deity» to mean who 15 able to
invent, and it has been thought and believed that this meaning is more speci-
fic to describe deity, and proving this has been set as the aim of unification
-as has been done by those suffists, and that is what they say after Abi-’i
Hasan and his followers- they have never realized the reality of unification
with which Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) has been sent. Verily the polythists of the Arabs acknowledged
that Allah (the Exalted) Alone is the sole Creator of every thing; yet, they
were polytheists. Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And most of them believe not
in Allah without associating (others as partners) with Him!» (12: 106). A
group of our forefathers said, «You ask them, who is it that has created the
Heavens and the earth? They say, Allah; however, they worship, another».
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say, To whom belong the earth and all beings
therein? (Say) if ye know!» They will say, «To Allah! say, «Yet will ye not re-
ceive admonition?» say, «Who is the Lord of the seven Heavens, and the Lord
of the Throne, (of Glory) Supreme?» They wili say, (They belong) to Allah?
Say, will yet not then be filied with awe? Say, who is it in whose hands is the
governance of ail things, - who protects (All), but is not protected (of any}?

23

ولام فا قافا م قافاءد هد نافد ما وا فار ف م م ورور و و مارو ما وان نار و واوا قار واوا وا قو وود ماما مد ود رامد هد قاع 1د قد عد هد يد هد 5ه قاع 4د م عد د د 2 6 ‎١ > 5 ١ 2 ٠5‏ 5 5 > > > > > 5 > 55

(Say) if ye know. They will say (it belongs) to Allah. Say, «Then how are ye de-
luded?» (23: 84-89). Thus not every body, who acknowledges that Allah (the
Exalted) is the Lord and Creator of everything, worships Him (the Exalted)
Alone without a partner; invokes Him (the Exalted) , Alone without a part-
ner; asking from Him (the Exalted) Alone; fearing Him (the Exalted) Alone,
remaining loyal to Him (the Exalted) and showing enmity towards His ene-
mies, obeying His Messengers and performing what He (the Exalted) com-
manded him to do, and proscribing what He (the Exalted) has proscribed.
Most polythiests have acknowledged that Allah (the Exalted) is the Creator
of everything while they confirmed those intercessors whom they worship
along with Allah (the Exalted) thus they made equals to Him (the Exalted).
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «What! Do they take for intercessors others be-
sides Allah? Say, «Even if they have no power whatever and no intelligence?»
Say, «To Allah belongs exclusively (the right to grant) intercession, to Him be-
longs the domain of the Heavens and the earth». (39: 43-44) Also Allah (the
Exalted) has said, «They serve, besides Allah, things that hurt them not nor
profit them, and they say, «These are our intercessors with Allah,» Say, «Do
ye indeed inform Allah of something He knows not, in the Heavens or on
earth? -Glory to Him! And far is He above the partners they ascribe (to
Him)!» (10: 18) He (the Exalted) has also said, «And behold! Ye come to us
bare and alone as we created you for the first time; ye have left behind you all
(the favours) which we bestowed on you; we see not with you your intercessors
whom ye thought to be partners in your affairs; so now all relations between
you have been cut off, and your (pet) fancies have left you in the lurch!» (6:
94). He (the Exalted) has said, «Yet there are men who take (for worship)
others beside Allah, as equal (with Allah). They love them as they should love
Allah.» (2: 165).

That is why the followers of those people prostrated themselves for the
sun, the moon and the planets, they also invoked them and fasted and prac-
ticed asceticism for their sake; later to say that this is not polytheism; rather,
polytheism is when I believe that it manages my life, if I made it a cause
and means I would not have committed the act of polytheism while it is ne-
cessarily known in Islam that such behavior is polytheism.

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «I have only created Jinns and men, that
they may serve me.» (51: 56).

The saying of Allah (the Exalted), «I have only created Jinns and men,
24

Allah has said, «I have only created Jinns and men, that they may serve
Me.» (51: 56)

that they may serve Me.» (51: 56).

The Sheikh of Islam has said, «Worship can be by obeying Allah (the
Exalted), that is by performing whatever He (the Exalted) has commanded
us to do through the Messengers.

He (the Exalted) has also said, «Worship is a term that connotes all
that which is said and performed, whether manifest or hidden, and is loved
and accepted by Allah (the Exalted).

Ibn Al-Qayyim had said, «It consists of fifteen rules; he who completes
them has completed all the ranks of serving Allah (the Exalted) and wor-
shipping Him).

That is as follows: Verily worship is divided among the heart, the ton-
gue and the senses; the terms of whorship are five:

1-That which is essential,

2-That which is recommendable,

3-That which is wrongdoing,

4-That which is detestable,

5-That which is permissable (unproscribed). They apply to each of the
heart, the tongue and the senses.

Also, Al-Kurtobi has said, «Worship is firmly rooted in submission and
subservience. The functions of the Islamic law have been called acts of wor-
ship because worshippers abide by them and perform them while in a state
of submission to Allah (the Exalted).

The verse means that Allah (the Exalted) has created the Jinns and men
just to serve Him (the Exalted) and whorship Him (the Exalted). That is the
wisdom behind their creation.

I said, «It is the lawful religious wisdom».

Imam Ibn Kathir had said, «Worshipping Him (the Exalted) is obeying
Him (the Exalted) by performing what He (the Exalted) has commanded us
to perform and by leaving whatever He (the Exalted) has prohibited us from
performing. That is the reality and the truth of the Islamic religion because
in Arabic the term Islam means surrendering to Allah (the Exalted); an ex-
treme state of sumbmission, and subservience.

He had also said explaing this Holy verse, «This Holy verse means that
verily Allah (the Exalted) has created all creatures to serve Him (the Ex-

25

.ا ماقاراه وا مد عاو و ه وقد وام وا ورد و هداوامو د ودود و هاو .ا عدا ود واو و واه ده واأفا كود رد قا قاف م وامد فاع ماعافقافا فاع ودقار د هاد فد ع ردقام فاها ع راو وام و مد راع واو د ,د ورد راو ناج راع راو رامث

alted) and worshipping Him (the Exalted) Alone without joining a partner.
Thus he who obeys Him (the Exalted) , is perfectly rewarded; he who dis-
obeys Him (the Exalted), is severely tortured. He (the Exalted) does not
need them; rather they are poor in ail situations while He (the Exalted) is
their Creator and Benefactor. Also, Ali ben Abi Taleb (May Allah be
pleased with him) said about this Holy verse, «Verily I will command them
te wroship Me and I will call them to serve Me.». Also Mujahid said, «Ve-
rily I will command them and proscribe them from doing what I donot want
them to do.» This has been chosen by the Zajjaj and Sheikh of Islam. He
said: «And the following shows what He (the Exalted) has meant, «Does
Man think that he will be, left uncontrolled, (without purpose)?» (75: 36). Ash-
Shafi’ said, «He (the Exalted) is neither commanded nor proscribed from
dcing whatever He (the Exalted) wants». He (the Exalted) has said in the
Holy Koran and in more than one place, «Adore your Guardian-Lord.» (2:

1) and, «Reverence ye Guardian-Lord.» (4: 1), thus He (the Exalted) has
commanded them to do whatever they have been created for; for that reason
He (the Exalted} has sent messengers and that 15 absolutely what has been
meant by the Holy Verse; that is what the Moslems understand and they use
this Holy verse as an evidence upen it.

He said and this Holy verse resembles what Allah (the Exalted) has
said, «We sent not an Apostle, but to be obeyed, in accordance with the will of
Allah.» (4: 64) then he might be obeyed or disobeyed. Likewise He (the Ex-
alted) has only created them to worship Him, then they might worship Him,
or they might not worship Him (the Exalted) He (Be He blessed and raised
above) has not said that He has done.

The first: He (the Exalted) has created them to be His object.

The second: That is worshipping Him (the Exalted); however, He (the
Exalted) has mentined that He (the Exalted) has done the first so that He
may do the second; thus it turns out that they are the ones who perform or
do things for Him (the Exalted) consequently, they get their happiness
through what He (the Exalted) has done and whatever He (the Exalted)
loves and accepts to emanate from Himseif (the Exalted) directed to them,
takes place.

The best witness to this interpretation or explanation are the traditions,
accounts and talks that have been said at intervals.

For example, what has been narrated by Mosiem in his Saheeh after
Anas ben Malek (May Allah be pleased with him) after the Holy Prophet

26

He (the Exalted) has said, «For we assuredly sent amongst every People

an apostle, (with the command), ‘serve Allah, and eschew Evil’» (16: 36).

(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), who said,

8- «Allah (the Exalted) says to one of the people of Fire who is getting the
easiest kind of torture in Hell: Had you possessed the present life with all that it

included in addition to something equivalent to it, would you have redeemed
yourself by it?» This person would say, . Allah (the Exalted) would say: All I want
from you while you were in the loins of the son of Adam is not to worship a
partner with Me so that I may not admit you into Hell; you refused my offer and
adopted polytheism?» This polytheist has disobeyed Allah’s (the Exalted) will
be worshipping a partner along with Him (the Exalted). That is the

religious, and legitemate will exactly as has been mentioned above.

Thus between the religious and legitemate will on one hand, and univer-
sal deterministic will on the other, there are absolute general aspects and
specific aspects. Both aspects meet in favor of the one who is loyal and obe-
dient, while the universal deterministic will uniquely perform against the dis-
obedient. Thus understand this and you are saved from the ignorance of the
«masters of speech» and their followers.

He (the Exalted) has said, «For we assuredly sent amongst every people
an apostle, (with the command), Serve Allah, and eschew evil.» (16: 36)

He said, «Allah’s (the Exalted) saying, «For we assuredly sent amongst
every people an apostle, (with the command), serve Allah, and eschew Evil.»
(16: 36). Omar ben Al-Khattab (May Allah be pleased with him) said, «Evil is
the Shaitan», and Jaber (May Allah be pleased with him) said, «Evil means
priests upon whom shaitans used to descend.» These two explanations have
been narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem. Malek also said, «Evil is everything that is
worshipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted)».

I said, «And that mentioned above has been comprehensively defined
by the authority Ibn Al-Qayyim; he said, «Evil is everything or every beha-
vior through which a worshipper or servant exceeds the limits or boundaries
set between him and his Lord, follower, or obeyed. Thus every people’s evil
is that to which they resort for justice or rule regardless of Allah (the Ex-
alted) and His Messenger; or they worship regardless of Allah (the Exalted);
or they follow without Allah’s guidance; or obey him in matters that they
do not realize as belonging to Allah’s realm and that they must obey Allah

27

والوا و مد راو قد ها ع ود هد وار وافا واه ماقام قدو قد ود قاع ها قافا عفاود هه درواي فوا فد قدو فوا راو عوراو ما عام ه.ا ها قاف نافد ند ود رد واوا وا مد رام عدما ود عا عد هعد عاد .د مادد مدا رد قدا زداند .د ع.ر

(the Exalted) and only Allah (the Exalted) in such matters. So if you pon-
dered over the evils of the world as well as the states of people in relation to
them, you would realize that most of them have turned away from worship-
ping Allah (the Exalted) to worshipping evil; you would realize that they
have turned away from obeying Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) to obeying evil and following him.

As for the meaning of the Holy verse, Allah (the Exalted) has informed
us that He (the Exalted) has sent to every people messengers with the mes-
sage. «Serve Allah, and eschew Evil». (16: 36). That is worship Allah (the Ex-
alted) Alone and do not worship any other besides Him. In that connection
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Whoever rejects Evil and believes in Allah hath
grasped the most trustworthy hand-hold, that never breaks». (2: 256) and that
is the meaning of «there is no God but Allah», that is trustworthy hand-
hold itself.

Ibn Kathir has said concerning this Holy Verse: All of them-The mes-
sengers call on people to worship Allah (the Exalted), and had forbidden
them from worshipping any body: but Him, thus He (Be the blessed and
raised above) kept on sending messengers to people to teach them that since
the sons of Adam have practised polytheism at the times of the people of
Noah to whom he was sent; he was the first messenger sent by Allah (the
Exalted) to the people of the earth till He (the Exalted) sealed those messen-
gers by Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) whose
call has been applied by Man as well as the Jinns in the east as well as in
the west and all of them as Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Not an apostle did
We send before thee without this inspiration sent by us to him: That there is
no god but I therefore worship and serve Me». (21: 25).

Allah (the Exalted) has said in this Honorable Verse, «For we assu-
redly sent amongst every people an apostle, (with the command), serve Allah
and eschew Evil.» (16: 36) So how can polytheists permit themselves to
say after they heard the above, «Had Allah wished, we would not have
worshipped any other partner besides Him.» Thus His legislative will is not
applicable to them because He (the Exalted) has already forbidden them
from that through His messengers; however, as for His universal] will- that
making them able to do it as part of their destiny- they cannot use it as an
excuse, because He (the Exalted) has created Hell Fire and its people from
Shaitans and unbelievers, while He ( the Exalted) does not consent His ser-
vants to become unbelievers, and He (the Exalted) has a strong evidence and

28

And He (the Exalted) said, «Thy Lord hath decreed that ye worship none
but Him and that ye be kind to parents whether one or both of them attain old
age in thy life, say not to them a word of contempt, nor repel them, but ad-
dress them in terms of honour. And of kindness, lower to them the wing of hu-

mility, and say, ‘My Lord! bestow on them thy Mercy even as they cherished
me in childrhood». (17: 23).

absolute wisdom.

Moreover, He (the Exalted) has told us that He (the Exalted) disap-
proved of what they say inflicting upon them punishment in the present life,
and that is what the messengers have warned them of, thus He (the Exalted)
has said, «Of the people were some whom Allah guided, and some on whom
Error became inevitably (established). (16: 36).

I said, this Holy Verse explains the preceding verse; He (the Exalted)
has said the following, «of the people were some whom Allah guided, and
some on whom Error became enn (established)». (16: 36). So think
about what we have said.

This Holy Verse indicates chat the wisdom behind sending messengers is
to call on their peoples to worship Allah (the Exalted) Alone and to forbid
them from worshipping any other partner along with Him (the Exalted) .
Verily that is the religion of all the prophets and messengers even though
their codes or laws may differ, and that is in conformity with what Allah
(the Exalted) has said, «To each among you have we prescribed a Law and an
Open Way». (5: 51). Also the same Holy Verse indicates that the working of

the heart and the senses are necessary for belief.

He said that Allah’s saying, «Thy Lord hath decreed that ye worship
none but Him and that ye be kind to parents». (17: 23). Mujahid said, «De-
creed» means «willed». Oubay ben Ka‘b and Ibn Masoud and many others
have agreed upon that explanation while Ibn Jarir from Ibn Abbas who said
«Thy Lord hath decreed» means «Thy Lord hath ordered».

His (the Exalted) saying, «That ye worship none but Him» means to
worship Him (the Exalted) Alone without any partner, and that is the mean-
ing of «There is no God but Allah».

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said that absolute ne-
gation is not unification, neither is affirmation without negation; thus unifi-
cation can be only if it includes negation and affirmation. That is the reality
of unification.

29

واللاقا ود 6 لد هد قاو هد هد ارد ه.ا ها ماه وداردو ها راع قا رادها وام عاماعا .د و واوا و واعا ناه هم واوا وا و ماه وار رار قاقا. فاه عا جح ع عاج فاون عداق. وار عاجا مد لدعا رد عد قا ءاعد عدقدا عد .د عد 6د 6 عد 6ه

His (the Exalted) saying, «Ye be kind to parents» that is, He (the Ex-
alted) has commanded you to be kind to parents in the same way He ( the
Exalted) has commanded you to worship Him, Alone with no partner along
with Him as He (the Exalted) has said in the other Holy Verse, «Show grati-
tude to Me and to thy parents: to Me is (thy final) goal.» (31: 14).

And His saying, «Whether one or both of them attain old age in thy life,
Say not to them a word of contempt, nor repel them.» (17: 23) that is He (the
Exalted) commands you not to tell them words that may hurt them, even do
not show contempt which is the least degree of repelling. «nor repel them»
He (the Exalted) commands you not to act in front of them in an offensive
manner; Ata’ ben Abi Rabah said, «Do not shake the dust off your hands
in their presence».

However, after He (the Exalted) prohibited Man from performing in an
offensive manner or from saying something bad. He (the Exalted) com-
manded him to do that which 15 good and acceptable, thus He (the Exalted)
has said, «But address them in terms of honour». (17: 23) that is talk with
them in a polite, good manner; also He (the Exalted) has said, «And, out of
kindness, lower to them the wing of humility.» (17: 23) that is be humble in
front of them «and say, My Lord! Bestow on them thy Mercy.» (17: 23) that
is when they reach old age and die «as they cherished me in childhood.» (17:
23). Also on the subject of being kind to parents there are many honourable
Hadiths some of which are:

9- The honourable Hadith narrated after Anas and others, «Verily
Allah’s Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said Amen,
Amen, Amen, after he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
ascended the pulpit. The Companions and other people asked him, «Oh Allah’s
Holy Messenger why have you said Amem». He answered, «Gibreal came to
me and said, «O Muhammad, you name has been mentioned in front of a man
who did not bless you thereafter he was disgraced and humiliated.» and he
said: Say Amen, and I said Amen. Then he said, «Another man was disgraced
and humilated whea the Holy Month of Ramadan ended and he was not
granted forgiveness, he said: Say Amen, and I said Amen. He said: Inspite one
who perceives his parents or one of them, and they didnot let him enter
Paradise. He said: Say Amen. I said Amen.»

10- Imam Ahmad has narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be
pleased with him) that the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace

30

فلع وى وعد هاو و وقا فد و قافا ,دا ودود ع ما واج فاه هد رامد فاق و اه فد وا مدو فا هاعد مدع اوم ود رمم لد د رام م ماما مدع قلقم قفالا رد تار وماج ود مر واو م فاع ماج عه بم .د بم مده تراع ا مم

be upon him) said, «A man who dies after his parents or one of them and is
denied entrance to the Garden is definitely humiliated and disgraced.» The
authority Ibn Kathir said, «It is true that Abi Bakra (May Allah be pleased
with him) said, Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said,

11- «Shall I tell you about the greatest among the major sins? We said:
Oh Allah’s Holy Messenger: Yes, tell us. He said, worshipping along with Al-
lah (the Exalted) and being ungrateful to parents. Saying this he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) was reclining; he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) straightened up himself and added: Verily false witness,
and verily false witness, and he kept on repeating it till we said, we wish he
had stopped talking.» This was narrated by Al-Bukhary and Muslim. And Ab-
duliah ben Amr (May Allah be pleased with them) said, Allah’s Holy Messen-
ger (May Aliah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

12- «If one’s parents are pleased with him, Allah (the Exalted) will be
pleased with him; if one’s parents are displeased and angry with him, Allah
(the Exalted) will be displeased and angry with him». This was narrated by
At-Tirmithi and approved and corrected by Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim. Ou-
sayd As-Sa’idi (May Allah be pleased with him) said,

13- «While we were sitting at the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) a man from the tribe of Bani Salma came and said,
Oh Allah’s Holy Messenger, «Is there any obedience and filial piety that I
have to perform after my parents die? He said: Yes, you can bless them and
ask Allah (the Exalted) to grant them forgiveness, also you can follow what
they taught you when they were alive, and preserve the ties with blood rela-
tions and honouring their friends.» This was narrated by Abu Dawud and Ibn
Majah. There are many honourable Hadiths related to the same topic.

13- His (the Exalted) saying, «Serve Allah, and join not any partners with
Him.» (4: 36), about this Holy Verse the great authority Ton Kathir ( may
Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, «Allah (the Exalted) commands his ser-
vants to worship Him (the Exalted) Alone without joining any partner since
He (the Exaited) is the Creator and the Provider who confers His (the Ex-
alted} benefit upon His creatures under all circumstances, and He (the Ex-
alted) is the one who deserves to be worshipped Alone regardless of any of
His (the Exalted) creatures (the Exalted).

31

And what He (the Exalted) has said, «Serve Allah, and join not any part-
ners with Hin». (4: 36)...

This Holy Verse which is called the Verse of the ten rights, and in some
adopted editions of this book this Holy Verse has been mentioned before
the Holy Verse of An’am, that is why I have mentioned it earlier because of
the following discussion of the Holy Verse of An’am by Ibn Masoud, so
that mentioning him after, would be more suitable.

Allah’s (the Exalted) saying, «Say, Come, I will rehearse what Allah hath
(really) prohibited you from: join not anything as equal with Him; be good to
your parents...» (6:151-153)

The great authority Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said:
Allah (the Exalted) tells His Holy Prophet and Messenger, Muhammad,
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), «Say» to those polytheists
who have worshipped other than Allah (the Exalted) and prohibited them-
selves from what Allah (the Exalted) has provided them, «Come» that is
come along and rush upon me so that I «rehearse» that is narrate for you
«What Allah (the Exalted) hath (really) prohibited you from» really, neither
by way of fabricating lies, or by way of assumption, imagination or guess,
rather by means of revelation and commands emanating from Him (the Ex-
alted) «join not anything as equal with Him» as if in this Koranic text a de-
leted term that is connoted by the text which implies: Allah (the Exalted)
has commanded you not to worship others along with Him, that is why He
( the Exalted) has said at the end of the verse, «Thus doth He command
(you).» (6: 151).

I said, the meaning is: He (the Exalted) has prohibited you to quit such
as worshipping others along with Him (the Exalted). In that connection Ibn
Hisham mentioned in Al-Mughni about His (the Exalted) saying, «join not
anything as equal with rim». (6: 151) that this has seven interpretations the
best of which is that mentioned by Ibn Kathir and it is as follows: He (the
Exalted) has shown you this and made it clear so that you may not join any-
thing with Him (the Exalted), and the term «commanded» has been deleted
as well as the preposition and what preceded it. That is why, when they
were asked about what Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) was saying, they said,

14- «Serve Allah (the Exalted) and never worship along with Him any-
thing, and stop believing in what your fathers (Pre-Islamic) believed in.» As
what Abu Sufyan said to Hercules, and that is what Abu Sufyan and others

32

and what He has said, «Say: ‘Come, I will rehearse what Allah hath (really)
prohibited you from]. Join not anything as equal with Him; be good to your
parents.’» (6: 151).

«Kill not your children on a plea of want; We provide sustenance for you
and for them; -come not nigh to shameful deeds whether open or secret; take
not life, which Allah hath made sacred, except by way of justice and law: Thus

doth He command you, that ye may learn wisdom.

understood from what Allah's Holy Messenger (May Aliah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) told them! «Say there is no god but Allah so that yo may
prosper and succeed».

He (the Exalted) has also said, «Be good to your parents». (6: 151). Al-
Kurtobi said, «Being good to parents is by being dutiful and obedient to
them as well as by protecting and relieving them from slavery and allowing
them to be in authority.

His saying, «Kill not your children on a plea of want; We provide suste-
nance for you and for then». (6: 151) «want» means poverty; that is to say
do not bury you daughters alive because you are afraid of poverty and need
because I (Allah) provide sustenance for you and for them. Some Pre-Isla-
mic people used to bury their male children alive as well for the same above
mentioned reasons. This was mentioned by the Al-Kurtobi and in the two
Saheehs after Ibn Masoud (May Allah be pleased with him).

15- I said, «Oh, Allah’s Messenger, which sin is considered greatest by
Allah?» He said «To join an equal partner to Allah (the Exalted) while He
(the Exalted) is the one who created you». I said, «Then what» He (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Killing your child out of fear
of eating your food». I said, «Then what» He (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said, «To commit adultery with your neighbour’s wife».
Then Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
rehearsed, «Those who invoke not, with Allah, any other god, nor slay such life
as Allah has made sacred, except for just cause, nor commit fornication; and
any that does this (not only) meets punishment (but) the Penalty on the Day of
Judgement will be doubted to him, and he will dwell therein in ignominy.
Unless he repents, believes and works righteous deeds for Allah will change the
evil of such persons into good, and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
(25: 68-70).

His saying: «Come not nigh to shameful deeds, whether open or secret.»

33

And come not nigh to the orphans property, except to improve it, until
he attains the age of full strength; give measure and weight with full justice;
-no burden do we place on any soul, but that which it can bear; whenever
ye speak, speak justly, even if a near relative is concerned; and fulfil the con-
venant of Allah: Thus doth He command you that ye may remember verily
this is My way leading straight: follow it: follow not (other) paths: They will
scatter you about from His (great) path: thus doth He command you that ye
may be righteous». (6: 152).

(6: 151), concerning this verse Ibn Atiyya said, «This is comprehensive for-
biddance from performing all kinds of fornication and abomination which
constitute sins. «Open» and «Secret» are two states that meet the conditions
for most things.

His (the Exalted) saying: «Take not life, which Allah hath made sacred,
except by way of justice and law.» This was mentioned in the two Saheehs.

16- It was narrated after Ibn Masoud (May Allah be pleased with him),
«No Moslem who witnesses that there is no god but Allah may be lawfully
killed but because of three: The non virgin adulterous woman, the murderer,
and he who left the religion of Islam and the consensus of the Islamic so-
ciety.»

His saying. «Thus doth He command you, that ye may learn wisdom» (6:
151), Ibn Atiyya said, «Thus» refers to all proscribed matters and command
is definite and determined order. His saying, «That ye may learn wisdom» (6:
151); «may» means that Allah (the Exalted) has told us these commands so
that we may act as such and work accordingly.

In the Hanafite Tibri’s interpretation: He mentioned first «Learn wis-
dom» then «remember then «be righteous» because if they become wise,
they will remember; and if they remember, they will become afraid and
pious.

His saying, «And come not nigh to the orphan’s property, except to im-
‏ع قوعم‎ it, until he attains the age of full strength.» Ibn Atiyya said concerning
this Holy Verse: That is comprehensive forbiddance for all kinds of ap-
proach related to dealing with the orphan’s money thus He (the Exalted) has
shut off the way in front all sorts of rationalization; however, He (the Ex-
alted) has excluded all kinds of approach aiming at improving and develop-
ing this money. Mujahid said, «Except to improve it» means using it in
commercial interprise; «Until he attains the age of full strength». Malek and

34

سواه وأعا عد هم قاو د عد قاع ده واعود واع د عاعد قاع فاو 5 م هد 4 ود قا قار عا وام جاجد ما عا ما ماهد عا مامارا م و« هاوعد تر مان م مها فا مدا ماهس .م جم سد ماه هدا فاه هد هد ع١ ‎a‏ م تخ 5 0 ”م

others said, «This means maturity and adulthood and the disappearance of

foolishness and/or stupidity.» Something similar to this was narrated after
Zayd ben Aslam, Ash-Sha’bi, Rabi’a and others.

His saying, «Give measure and weight with (full) justice». [bn Kathir
said, «Allah (the Exalted) commands people to be just in their interaction
among each other. «No burden do we place on any soul, but that which it can
bear» means that Allah (the Exalted) does not ask people to carry the bur-
dens of interpretation or Judgement while giving other people’s dues or
while taking their own dues from other people. Thus if one commits a mis-
take after exerting an effort in trying to give people their rights or dues or
while trying to take his rights or dues then he is not considered sinful or
guilty.

His saying: «Whenever ye speak, speak justly, even if a near relative».
That is a command for people to be just in what they speak as well as in what
they do, whether they were dealing with a close relative or with a stranger.
Al-Hanafi said: Justice in deeds does not vary, whether it was when dealing
with an enemy, an associate; it does not vary whether one is angry or pleased;
rather, one must be just even if it were against a close relative, thus one
Should not tend to be lenient with somebody whom he loves or with a close
reiative. «And let not the hatred of others to you make you swerve to wrong

and depart from justice. Be just: That is next to Piety». (5: 9).

His saying: «And fulfil the covenant of Allah.» Ibn Jarir said, «Fulfil the
commad that Allah (the Exalted) has commanded you». And fufilling this
command takes place by obeying what Allah (the Exalted) has commanded
them to do and by refraining from doing what Allah (the Exalted) has com-
manded them not to do. Also, it is by performing according to the Holy
Koran and the Honorable Sunna of His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him); that is indeed the fulfillment of the Covenant
of Allah (the Exalted). The same interpretation was explained by many
others. His saying, «Thus doth He command you that ye may remember.»
That you may learn a lesson and stop performing your previous acts of Pre-
Islamic times.

His saying, «Verily, this is My Way, leading straight: follow not (other)
paths: They will scatter you about from His (great) Path.» Al-Kurtobi said,
«That is a great Holy Verse related to what has been mentioned before. Ve-

35

والواع وا راع فقاو و .دواع وو فاو ع رار عا عدو ور رد و رد و رد و وه ده عقا قد ف قاف فاع ده فود قد و اعقاو ‎SS‏ ودود فاعد ود قفاو ‎٠.‏ نود تاردق هن

rily, He (the Exalted) forbade, commanded and warned people from follow-
ing other paths than His, and that 15 what the truthful Honourable Hadiths
and narratives of those who came before tell us. «Verily» here means com-
manding the people to rehearse that this is His Path. This interpretation be-
longs to Al-Fira’ and Al-Kisa’i. Also, it may mean that this is what Allah
(the Exalted) has commanded you to believe in and that verily this is My
Path. And the Path itn this context is the religion of Islam. «Straight» means
that Path is correct, sound, virtuous and not twisted or distorted, thus He
(the Exalted) has commanded people to follow His Path that He (the Ex-
alted) has sent through the Holy Prophet, Muhammad (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) and which includes His religion that leads to
the Garden. From this Path there have emerged many paths, those who fol-
low the straight one are saved and those who follow the ramifications are
led to Hell Fire. Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Follow not (other) paths: They
will scatter you about from His (great) Path.» That is scatter means here de-
viate.

The authority, Imam Ahmad, An-Nisai’, Ad-Darimi, Ibn Abi Hatim
and Al-Hakim have narrated after Ibn Masoud (May Allah be pleased with
them) who said,.

17- «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) drew a line by his hand and then said that that was the Straight Path
of Allah, then he drew to its left and to its right many other lines and said
that those were Paths each having Shaitan calling people to it. Then he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) recited, «verily, this is My
way, leading straight: Follow it, follow not (other) paths: ... (till the end of
the Holy Verse). And after Mujahid it was narrated that by «Follow not
(other) paths» Allah (the Exalted) meant do not follow your desires, lusts or
heresy.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, «let us say
something brief about the Straight Path, since people have many terms for
describing it or talking about it as well as about what is related to it; how-
ever, the truth about it is one, it is the path that Allah (the Exalted) has
erected for His servants so that they may be able to reach Him (the Ex-
alted), and there is no other path but it; rather, all other paths are blocked
in front of people but it, that path which He (the Exalted) erected through
His messengers and made it a means for worshipping Allah (the Exalted)
that is worshipping Him (the Exalted) alone and obeying His (the Exalted)

36

Ibn Masoud 5310: «He who wants to read Muhammad’s (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) will that (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) sealed with his own seal, let him read what Allah (the Ex-
alted) has said, «Say, ‘Come, I will rehearse what Allah hath (really) prohib-
ited you from»: Join not anything as equal with Him.» (6: 151) till He (the
Exalted) says: «Verily; this is My way leading straight: Follow it»... till the
end of the Holy Verse». (6: 153).

messengers. Thus people shall not join partners or worship partners along
with Allah (the Exalted) neither shall they obey other than His Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

Thus this means unifying Allah (the Exalted) and following only His
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), all of the
above mentioned is connoted in «There is no god but Allah and that Mu-
hammad is Allah’s Holy Messenger». Therefore, any explanation or interpre-
tation of the straight Path is included in these fundamental two terms. All
this means that you love Allah ( the Exalted) by your heart and please Him
by your performance and deeds, thus you do not leave a place in your heart
that is not full of loving Him (the Exalted), and you will not have a desire
or volition that is not related to pleasing Him (the Exalted). The first event
is accomplished by witnessing that there is no god but Allah (the Exalted)
and the second event is accomplished by witnessing that Muhammad is the
Holy Messenger of Allah (the Exalted). That is true guidance and the reli-
gion of rightness, that is realizing what Allah (the Exalted) has sent through
His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and act-
ing according to it. Now say whatever you want to say as far as the above
mentioned term is the solid and firm bases for it. He said, «And Sahl ben
Abdullah said,

18- You should follow the Honourable Sunna since and fear that a day
will shortly come when a man mentions the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) and follows him in all that he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) does, people curse him, reject him, humili-
ate and scorn him.

His saying, «Ibn Masoud said, He who wants to read Muhammad’s
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) will, that he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) is sealed with his own seal, let him read
what Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say, Come, I will rehearse what Allah,
hath (really) prohibited you from» -till- «verily, this is My way leading

37

لال اس ساس ل لم ل مس اس سوسس سلس ناس عماس ساساس سام م ماس هاعد را عاو ماسام وا وار و واف قاعام رامد عا لاه مارام ماد ودار وا مد 6د لدم م بعد جد دباع فد مد مد فد د كد فد فد ع جد عد 5 ع 0ت هد 0 90 5*5 5 ‎٠0‏

straight: follow it» till the end of the verse».

By Ibn Masoud he means Abdullah ben Masoud ben Ghafil ben Habib
Al-Hathli Abu Abdur-Rahman who is an emanant companion of the first
generation who had the chance to converse with the Holy Prophet (May Al-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and learn from him (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him). Also, he 1s one of the people who fought
with the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) in
the battles of Badr, Uhud, Khandaq and participated in the pledge of alle-
giance of Al-Radwan. He is as well, one of the greatest authorities among
the Companions. He was appointed by Omar as a prince and a ruler of
Kufa. He died in the year thirty-two (32) A.H (May Allah be pleased with
him).

This biography was narrated by At-Tirmithi as well as by Ibn AI-
Munthir, Ibn Abi Hatem and At-Tabarani. Some of those said that these
words mean that he who wants to look at the will as if it had been written
and sealed without undergoing any change, let him read, «Say Come-till the
end of the Holy Verse.». He compared it by the book which was written
then sealed without being added to or decreased from. Verily, the Holy Pro-
phet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ordered his people to
follow only the Holy Koran, Allah’s Holy Book, as was mentioned by Mus-
lim.

19- «Verily, I leave behind me something which if you follow, you will
never ever go astray: Allah’s Holy Book». Also, Oubadah ben As-Samit nar-
rated that the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said,

«Who among you pledge allegiance to me concerning these three Holy
Verses. Then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) rehearsed,
«Say, Come I will rehearse what Allah hath (really) prohibited you fron» till
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) read all the three verses.»
Then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

20- «He who follows them and abides by them honestly, gets his reward
from Allah (the Exalted)’ he who does not follow them exactly, Allah (the Ex-
alted) would punish him in the present life and he whose punishment is delayed
till the After life, then Allah (the Exalted) would either punish him or forgive
him». This was narrated by Ibn Abi Hatim and Al-Hakim and was con-
formed and corrected by him.

38

It was narrated after Mou’ath Ben Jabal that he said, «I was riding be-
hind the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) on a
donkey and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, ‘O
Mou’ath do you know what are the servants’ obligations toward Allah (the
Exalted) and what are Allah’s obligations towards His servants. The ser-
vants’ obligations towards Allah is that they must worship Him without
joining in any partner, and Allah’s obligation toward His servants is not to
torture he who does not join in partners with Him (the Exalted).» T said, «O
Allah’s Messenger, tell the people the glad tidings?» He said, «Donot tell
them they will become dependent.» This Honourable Hadith was mentioned
in the two Saheehs.

I said, «And because the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) did not order his people to do but that what Allah (the
Exalted) commanded them to do through the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) and through His Holy Book which He
(the Exalted) sent down, «Explaining all things, a guide, a Mercy, and Glad
Tidings to Muslims» (16: 89) These Holy Verses are Allah’s commands and
His Holy Messenger’s orders.

His saying : (And after Mou’ath ben Jabal who said, «I was riding be-
hind the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) on a
donkey and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

21- 0 Mou’ath, do you know what are the servants’ obligations toward
Allah (the Exalted) and what are Allah’s obligations toward his servants? I
said «Allah and His Holy Messenger know best. He (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said, «The servants’ obligation toward Allah (the Ex-
alted) is that they must worship Him (the Exalted) Alone without joining in
any partner, and Allah’s obligation toward His servants is not to torture he
who does not join in partners with Allah (the Exalted)». I said, «O Allah’s
Holy Messenger tell those glad tidings to the people.» He said, «Do not tell
them they will become dependent». This Honourable Hadith was mentioned in
the two Saheehs).

This Honarable Hadith tradition is mentioned in the two Saheehs in dif-
ferent versions, one of which is mentioned by the writer.

And (Mou’ath ben Jabal) (May Allah be pleased with him) is the son
of Amr ben Aws Al-Ansari Al-Khazaraji Abu Abdur-Rahman who is a very

39

ل ل لو كد د ره م و راو ب 5ه واو قاع كه مه سه هصس د ماه هوعد و وه هراس ها ما فاه قاع و قاع هد عد عا عد مار رد قاع واو ودرا نه رار هن

famous and eminent Companion of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him). He fought with the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) the battle of Badr and the one after it. He
(May Allah be pleased with him) was an authority concerning the science of
Honourable Hadith, the Holy Koran and religious Jurisdiction. The Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

22- «On the Day of Judgment Mou’ath will be gathered in front of the sa-
vants by one step».

At the end he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «He
precedes the religious authorities by the distance crossed by an arrow thrown
through a bow.» Also it was said, «One mile.» and, «As far as one can see».
These three interpretations fit this Honourable Hadith best. Mou’ath died in
the year eighteen in the land of Ash-sham (Damascus now) of the Plague of
Amwas. The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
assigned him the Caliph of Mecca so that he may teach the people there the
religion, i.e. the religion of Islam.

His saying: (I was riding behind the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) means the riding behind the Holy Prophet on
a donkey is permissible. It also denotes Mou’ath’s (May Allah be pleased
with him) virtue.

His saying: (On a donkey) he means the donkey which was called Ou-
fayre. This was narrated in one of the stories. I said, «The donkey was sent
to the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) as a
gift by the Moukawkas, the ruler of Egypt.

This means: The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) was so humble that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) rode a donkey and accepted that some body else rides behind him
(May Allah’s blessings ana peace be upon him). That is in contradistinction
with what those who are conceited do.

His saying: (Do you know what are the servants’ obligations towards
Allah) is a question in the form of exclamation so that it would be more im-
pressive and more effective in being understood by the learner. And «The
servants’ obligations» is what they have to offer Him (the Exalted) and
«Allah’s obligations towards servants» means that is going to be inevitably
accomplished because He (the Exalted) has promised that to them as a re-
ward for unifying Him (the Exalted) as has been said in the Holy Verse, «(It
is) the promise of Allah. Never does Allah depart from His promise.» (30: 6).

40

تأإقاعا اه قافا عد عد قا شاع عدوا .امام مام راجا عد م عاج عد ما جد مد .ا ما عاق مام عا ماد هد مد ناواو و و عدقاهاه ماع ماوا م .اماد عد ود و قافا فاع ها راو وان فاع م عسد فده فده .دافا عد ثدحا مار زار ار .ا وا رار م

The Sheikh of Islam said, «Deserving the reward, the obedient servant
receives his reward as benefaction and kindness rather than receiving this re-
ward from an equal] creature because of mutual services. Thus some people
say. «Deserving is meaningless». However, He (the Exalted) has told about
this and He (the Exalted) is most truthful and keeps His promises, but most
people confirm the worth and justice of this promise as has been mentioned
in the Holy Koran and the Honourable Tradition (Sunna).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And it was due from us to aid those who
believed». (30: 47) However, the people of the Tradition say, «He (the Ex-
alted) is the One who foreordained upon Himself Mercy, and made incum-
bent on Himself justice; He (the Exalted) has not foreordained mercy upon
His creatures nor has He (the Exalted) made incumbent on them justice. The
Mu’ tazila claim that it is His (the Exalted) duty relative to the creature and
that verily the servants have obeyed Him without making them do that and
that they deserve their reward with Him (the Exalted) being necessarily the
cause. In that conclusion, they made a big mistake. Also, concerning that
the people of Jabr (Determinism) and the people of Qadar (fate) have also
made the same mistake; they are the followers of-Jahm.

His saying: (I said Allah and His Holy Messenger know best) this an-
swer reflects the politeness and civility of the learner; thus he who is asked
about something the answer of which he does not know, should use the
same answer, that is in contradistinction with most mannered people.

His saying: (That they must worship Him without joining in any part-
ner). That is to unify Him (the Exalted) through worship. The religious
authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) did a very good
job when he defined worship comprehensively, so he said,

And worshipping the Merciful,

Two poles when one worships.

One goal, a heart of pure love 15 full.

The second goal a heart of humbleness is full.

You obey the orders.

His commands and His Messenger’s.

Never passion or Shaitan.

His saying: (Without joining in any partner) means to unify Him (the

Fxalted) through worship; it is a must that one frees himself from joining

41

rrr

partners in worshipping Allah (the Exalted) . He who does not free himself
from joining partners along with Allah (the Exalted) during worship does
not in fact worship only Allah (the Exalted); rather he is a polytheist since
he makes equal partners to Allah (the Exalted). And that is the meaning of
what the writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said:

(Worship is unifying Allah (the Exalted), because it leads to contro-
versy. It was mentioned in some Divine quotations, «I (Allah (the Exalted)).
The Jinns and people are in a great conflict, I create and another 1s wor-
shipped, I provide and another is praised. My benefaction 15 sent down to
the servants, and their evil doings is ascending to me; I approach them by
giving them ease and comfort and they make Me abhor them by performing
SIns.>).

His saying: (And Allah’s obligation toward His servants is not to tor-
ture he who does not join in partners with Allah). Al-Hafeth said, «He (the
Exalted) limited Himself (the Exalted) to rejecting polytheism because reli-
gion necessitates unification, and requires proving the Message by necessity,
thus he who gives the lie to Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) has indeed given the le to Allah (the Exalted) , and
he who gives the lie to Allah (the Exalted) is a polytheist as it has been said,
«He who performs the ritual of ablution and prays, his prayer is valid and
accepted, on condition he satisfies all other conditions.

His saying: (tell the people the glad tidings) this terms includes favoring
to tell the Muslim about whatever makes him happy. It also includes what
the companions desired to tell the people. The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be
upon him) said so.

His saying: (Do not tell them the glad tidings so that they will not be-
come dependent on that). That is they will not depend on that and quit
competing in doing good acts. One of the narratives says: «Mou’ath told
this Honourable Hadith just before he died so that not to keep it secret and
do wrong by keeping it secret». Al-Wazeer Abu Al-Muthaffar said, «He
only refrained from telling it to an ignorant person whose ignorance might
lead his to misbehave by disobeying Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him); however, those civil
and courteous people who heard this Honourable Hadith became more obe-
dient and believed that more benefection ease and comfort require more obe-
dience; thus there was no need to refrain from telling them this Honourable
Hadith.

42

‘Chis chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Wisdom behind creating Finns and Mankind.

The second: Verily worship is unification because conflict between the

Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and the
polytheist took place because of it.

The third: The issue that he who does not unify Allah (the Exalted),
does not worship Allah (the Exalted). This denotes what Allah (the
Exalted) has said when He said in His Holy Koran about His Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), «Nor will ye
worship that which I worship.» (109: 3) and His (the Exalted) «Saying,
«Those who believe and confuse not their beliefs with wrong that are
(truly) in security, for they are on the (right) guidance.» (6: 82).

This chapter has many benefits besides what has already been discussed:
urging people to worship Allah (the Exalted) faithfully and that if such wor-
ship 15 accompanied by polytheism, it becomes futile and without any bene-
fit; rather, it is not called worship. Also, the writer drew the attention of
people to the great and significant right of parents and the proscription of
being ungrateful to them. He also drew people’s attention to the greatness of
the perfect and firmly connected Holy Verses of the Holy Sura of An’am as
well as the permissibility of keeping knowledge away from some people of
this works for the benefit of the group.

His saying, «Narrated by» he means Al-Bukhary and Muslim. «AlI-
Bukhary» (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) is the Imam Muhammad
ben Ismail Al-Ja’fi; the great person who knows by heart the Traditions
(Honourable Hadiths) of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him), he is the writer of As-Saheeh, At-Tarrekh and Al-
Adab Al-Mufrad and many other books. The above has been narrated by
Imam Ahmad ben Hanbal, Al-Houmaidy and Ibn Al-Madiny and others
who have the same religious qualifications. It has been narrated about
him by Muslim, An-Nisa’i, At-Tirmithi, and Al-Firbary the narrator of
As-Saheeh. He was born is the year 194 A.H and died in the year
256....A.H

And «Muslim» (May Allah’s be Mercy be upon him) is Ibn Hajjaj ben
Muslim An-Naisabouri, the writer of As-Saheeh, and Al-Wijdan and any
many other books. It has been narrated after Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Ya-
hya Mou’in and Abi Khuthaima and Ibn Abi Shaiba and many others who
are of the same religious qualifications. It has been narrated after Al-Bukh-

43

عقاف تافقارد قا ودود ع قاقفاع وافاو د نات ورد فاع ققد فد فاع عا عادرا وم وقا قا فاه فافاه د قاع وا رادو و وقا رد ف قناع عد ع عد رد ف قاع وعد و وا واه فد ود رد .د راع ردني و قاع قد قاع د قد فد فاح قاع جاع عد رده وام

ary. At-Tirmithi, Ibrahim ben Muhammad ben Sufyan the narrator of As-
Saheeh. He was born in the year 204 A.H and died in the year 261 A.H in
Naisabour (May Allah’s Mercy be upon them).

The fourth: The wisdom out of sending messengers.
The fifth: That the message reached all nations.
The sixth: That verily the religion of prophets is one.

The seventh: The most important and greatest issue 15 that worship-
ping Allah (the Exalted) is achieved only by disbelieving and rejecting
the devil; He (the Exalted) meant this when He said, «Whoever rejects
evil and believes in Allah hath grasped the most trustworthy Hand-Hold,
that never breaks.» (2: 256).

The eighth: Evil is a general term that means all that is worshipped re-
gardless of Allah (the Exalted).

The ninth: The great significance and importance of the three perfect
and firmly connected Holy Verses in the Holy Sura of An’am and this
discusses ten issues the first of which is proscribing polytheism.

The tenth: The perfect and firmly connected Holy Verses in the Holy
Sura of Isra’ which discusses eighteen issues where by Allah (the Ex-
alted) starts by saying, «Take not with Allah another object of worship
or thou (O man!) Will sit in disgrace and distitution.» (17: 22) and He
(the Exalted) ended by saying, «Take not, with Allah, another object of
worship, lest thou shouldst be thrown into Hell, blameworthy and re-
jected» (17: 39) He (Be the blessed and raised above) has drawn our
attention to the significance of these issues by saying,

«These are among the (percepts of) wisdom, which thy Lord has revealed

to thee.» (17: 39).
The eleventh: The Holy Verse in the Holy Sura of Nisa’ (Women)
which is called the verse of the ten rights, which Allah (the Exalted)

has started by saying, «Serve Allah, and join not any partners with
Him.» (4: 36).

The twelfth: Drawing attention to the Holy Messenger’s (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) while on his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) death bed.

44

وام اماه واو هد واو رد قد قاقاع د مد عاعد .د ما قاع ماع.ا عد عد قاد م عد ما .د .د مد و واو قد وام وان .ادعام عد مامد عد مار هاه راف راثا مد رد ود وام فا ماو

The thirteenth: Acknowledging our obligations towards Allah (the Ex-
alted).

The fourteenth: Acknowledging Allah’s obligations towards His ser-
vants if they did what they are supposed to do.

The fifteenth: The issue of Mou’ath is not even known by most of the
Companions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him).

The sixteenth: That it is permissible to keep knowledge as secret if it is
for the welfare of all people.

The seventeenth: Favoring to tell the Moslem glad tidings which make
him happy and pleased.

The eighteenth: Fear of becoming dependant on Allah’s Unlimitea
Mercy.

The nineteenth: A responsible person says, «Allah and His Messenger
know best» when he is asked about an issue the answer of which he
does not know.

The twentieth: It is permissible to allow certain people to learn about
an issue regardless of others.

The twenty-first: The Holy Messenger’s (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) humbleness evident in riding a donkey as well as
accepting to let another person ride behind him.

The twenty-second: It is permissible to ride on a donkey behind some-
body.

The twenty-third: The virtue of Mou’ath ben Jabal.

The twenty-fourth: The great significance of this issue.

45

Chapter

(Benefits of Unification and that which protects Mankind and
covers their sins)

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Those who believe and con-
fuse not their beliefs with wrong- that are (truly) in security, for they are on
(right) guidance.» (6: 82) Ibn Jarir said, «Al-Muzni told me - and he re-
ported his reference - after Al-Rabi’ ben Anas that he said, «Belief is being
faithful to Allah (the Exalted)»).

Ibn Kathir said about the Holy Verse, «Those who faithfully wor-
shipped Allah (the Exalted) Alone without joining partners, those people
will be safe on the Day of Judgment, they are guided to the right path in
the present life as well as in the After life». Also, Zaid ben Aslam said,
«That is from Allah (the Exalted) concerning the judgement between Ibra-
him and his people.

And after [bn Masoud, «When this Holy Verse was sent down they
said, who among us that has not done wrong to himself?».

23- Thereupon Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said, «It’s not your effort, haven’t you heard what Luk-
man has said to his son (Quoted from the Holy Koran), «Join not in worship
(others) with Allah, for false worship is indeed the highest wrong-doing.» (31:
13). Al-Bukhary continued narrating from the reference and said, «Omar
ben Hafs ben Ghayyath told us that Al-Amash said that Ibrahim said after
Alkama after Abdullah (May Allah be pleas:d with them): «When the Holy
Verse was revealed«Those who believe and confuse not their beliefs with
wrong». (6: 82) We said «O Allah’s Holy Messenger, who among us does
not do wrong to himself?» He said, «The truth of the matter is not what
you say; rather, «confuse not their beliefs with wrong» the term «wrong»
here means joining partners with Allah (the Exalted). Have you not heard
what Lukman said to his son. «O Son join not in worship (others) with Allah
for false worship is indeed the highest wrong-doing» (31: 13).

46

مالع مد هد قاع د هد ود و ماع قا فاق يواعد قاع ماقام عد قد مداه قاع د ود عدم فى ».د عدف د فاو وأقاجو ا عد عا هادع عساجد .ام مافادف فد قد عام عد قاع ماعاد م فاع قاع مام قاع عاعا.د م ماس رام ياو واءا اه عاعا. جاء ماحد .ا م

Ahmad said something similar after Abdullah when he said, «When the
Holy Verse was revealed «Those who believe and confuse not their beliefs with
wrong.» (6: 82) The Holy Messenger’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) Companions felt that such a case is hard to bear so they said, «O
Allah’s Holy Messenger, who among us that have not done wrong to him-
self?» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

24- «You have understood that wrongly. Haven’t you heard what the
righteous servant said (O my son! Join not in worship (others) with Allah: for
false worship is indeed the highest wrong-doing (31: 13). Thus doing wrong to
oneself here means joining 12 worship others with Allah.» And after Omar it
has been said that he interpreted doing wrong to oneself as sinning. There-
fore the meaning is the following: Being saved from all sorts of torture. Al-
Hasan and Al-Kalbi said, «Those people are saved from all torture, in the
After-life and they are guided to the right path in the present life».

The Sheikh of Islam said: What people thought is difficult and unbear-
able is that condition was that they should not do wrong to themselves, and
that those who do wrong to themselves can not be saved or guided, so the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) showed them
that doing wrong to themselves in this context means joining in worship
others with Allah (the Exalted) and that was what was meant in Allah’s
Holy Book. Thus peace and guidance to the right path happen only to those
who do not join in worship others with Allah (the Exalted); thus he who
does not perform much wrong, is one of the people who are saved from tor-
ture on the Last Day and those who are guided to the right path in the pre-
sent life; Also he will be from the chosen people as has been said by Allah
(the Exalted) in that connection, «Then we have given the book for inheri-
tance to such of Our servants as we have chosen: But there are among them
some who wrong their own souls’ some who follow a middle course; and some
who are, by Allah’s leave, foremost in good deeds; that is the highest Grace.»
(35: 32) That does not mean that one is not punished if he does wrong to
himself without repenting; in that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said,
«Phen shali anyone who has done an atom’s weight of good, see it! And any
one who has done an atom’s weight of evil, shall see it.» (99: 7-8). and Abu
Bakr As-Siddiq (May Allah be pleased with him) has asked the Holy Pro-
phet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) about this, he said,

47

6اعام د مود ردقه ودقد و ققد واه وا قا راع وادعا. قاود.ع عدواو د ‎SS SS‏ فاو هد و عأعاع قاع فاع قاع قا رده فى اعد .د ماع كد ناح » اوأرو ماران ود ران رام 2م

25- «O Allah’s Holy Messenger, who among us has not done wrong?»
The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) answered,
«QO Abu Bakr, don’t you become ill»? Don’t you become sad? That is your
reward in the present life». So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) showed that verily when the believer dies and is admitted into the Gar-
den he might be punished for his wrong doing in the present lite by calami-
ties and ordeals. Thus he has not performed any of the three types of wrong
doing which are namely, polytheism, oppressing other servants and doing
wrong to himself without joining in worship other partners with Allah (the
Exalted) has in fact been completely saved from punishment and torture and
he is as well guided to the straight path.

On the other hand he who does wrong to himself can enjoy absolute
safety from punishment and guidance into the right path. That is to say he
is going to be admitted to the Garden as he has been promised in the sec-
ond Holy Verse: And verily Allah (the Exalted) has guided him to the
straight path which is rewarded by admission to the Garden, however, some
loss of peace and guidance afflict him in as much as his faith is deficient by
doing wrong to his soul; and the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) by saying «Verily it is polytheism» did not mean that he
who does not commit the greatest of sins enjoys perfect safety and perfect
guidance, rather, verily his Honourable Hadiths, if read in the light of the
Holy Koran show that those who commit great sins are subject to dismay;
they can not enjoy perfect peace and safety, nor perfect guidance which lead
them to the straight path, the path of those whom Allah (the Exalted) has
bestowed upon them; without being afflicted with any kind of torture.
Rather, they possess the base of the guidance to that path.

Grace that He (the Exalted) bestowed upon them; they are definitely ad-
mitted into the Garden. By saying «Rather it is polytheism», he (May ‏لذ‎
‎lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) means the greatest of sins. Thus he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) means he who is not one of
the people who perform great sins, is.saved from torture that Allah (the Ex-
alted) has promised the polytheists; torture in the present life and in the
After-life.

On the other hand if he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
means the type of polytheism. It is said that the servant’s wrong doing to
himself; like his stinginess because he loves money, and not performing some
of his duties is in fact a minor sin. On the other hand loving what Allah
(the Exalted) hates and advancing the satisfaction of his desires to the love

48

It has been narrated after Oubada Ben As-Samit who said that Allah’s
Holy Messenger said, «He who testifies that there is no God but Allah and

that there is no partner with him...

of Allah (the Exalted) is a minor sin. This person loses safety and guidance
in as much as he performs minor sins. That is why those who came first in-

cluded sins in this category or type of polytheism and consider 1] as such.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy upon him) said: When Allah (the
Exalted) said, «Those who believe and confuse not their beliefs with wrong-
that are (Truly) in security, for they are on (right) guidance.» (6: 82) The
Companions said, (O Allah’s Holy Messenger! Who among us has not con-
fused his belief with wrong?» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said, «wrong here means polytheism. Haven’t you heard what the right-
eous servant said (false worship is indeed the highest wrong-doing)» they
would not have been confused about what is meant by wrong-doing, thus
they thought that verily it includes doing wrong to oneself.

Verily he who does wrong to himself, any type of wrong doing, can not
be safed or guided. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) an-
swered them that only polytheism is the wrong-doing which absolutely re-
moves safety, peace and guidance. Moreover, Allah (the Exalted) is the only
satisfying answer. Thus verily absolute and perfect wrong-doing is polythe-
ism that is to say joining in worship (others) with Allah (the Exalted) which
is putting worship in an emplacement to which it does not belong. And ab-
solute safety and guidance are safety in the present life and in the After life
as well a guidance to the straight path. Thus absolute wrong doing removes
perfect and absolute safety as well absolute guidance. It is not impossible for
wrong doing to cause deprivation from absolute safety and absolute gui-
dance. So contemplate; the absolute for the absolute and the partial for the
partial.

His saying: After Oubadah ben As-Samit (May Allah be pleased with
him) who said that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said,

26- «He who testifies that there is no God but Allah and that He (the Ex-
alted) Alone who does not have a partner, and that verily Muhammad is His
servant and Messenger and that verily Jesus (Issa) is Allah’s servant and His
messenger as well as His will that He (the Exalted) sent down to Mary (Mar-
iam) as well as it is His spirit. The Garden is a reality; Hell is a reality, Allah

49

العام سم فاو وا همد عد عد و جاه قاقد هد عد جد هد فاو ود هد ود ود و واو وا رد م جاع هعودعد ود ود ود ماعجاد وار اعد فار يا رام راعا مد قاد .د قاماعد را عرد و داعا مد راد عاع د فقاوقدا فد عدوزد ند قداعد ود ع ندم عد مد رادا مد دن 6 هه

(the Exalted) would admit this person into the Garden for what he had per-
formed.» This was narrated by both.

Oubadah ben As-Samit: One of the researchers on the Holy Prophetic
Traditions; he is a famous man in the battle of Badr; he died in the year 34
A.H at the age of seventy-two years. It was said that he lived till the Cali-
phate of Mou’awyah (May Allah be pleased with him).

His saying. «He who testifies that there is no God but Allah». that is he
who verbalizes this term while fully conscious and aware of its meaning, and
performs according to its meaning; both the hidden and the manifest mean-
ing; 1] 15 imperative that the one who verbalizes the two testimonies be fully
aware of their meanings and perform accordingly; in that connection Allah
(the Exalted) has said, «Know, therefore, that there is no God but Allah» (47:
19) as well as «Only he who bears witness to the Truth, and they know
(him).» (43: 86). As for verbalizing it without realizing its meaning, being
aware of that meaning or performing according to it such as being free from
all polytheism, and being faithful in all what is said or done; whether the
said 1s verbalized or kept secret, or whether what is done is performed and
sensed or just thought of without being executed - that verbalization of the
two testimonies is of no avail; it does not benefit he who verbalizes those
two testimonies.

Al-Kurtobi said in his book «Al-Mufhim» that explaining Muslim’s Sa-
heeh (book), «It 1s not enough to just verbalize the two testimonies; rather,
it is essential to be fully aware of their meaning as well as to be fully con-
scious of what one says-this interpretation is a warning against the corrupt
teachings to the creed of extremist Murji’a who say that just verbalizing the
two testimonies 15 enough for one to be considered a faithful believer. Dis-
cussions in this chapter of his book point at the corruption of this creed;
rather, it is a creed that is notorious for its corruption especially for those
religious authorities, since this creed permits and justifies hypocrisy and the
followers of this creed say that a hypocrite is a good believer while that is
absolutely wrong and untrue.

This discussion includes what we mentioned above and that is his say-
ing, «He who testifies» verily the testimony 15 not valid but if it were fully
aware of knowledge, certitude, lcyaity and truth.

An-Nawawi said, «This is a great discussion that has an Honourable

50

ثم عام م عد قد رد فد ردر د ود و واو ود رد رد قد قاع هد فد و قاف د و ردق يام مدا رادقدا قد قاعد و اعد مد قاف رده وافاه ما وقد رد .ا رد ارام فاقاق ا ما قدارا و قدا مد قاع مد عد رد فدعداع د مار فاع 5 مد كد كد جح ع 5 5 5 ع د 5 ‎١*5‏

status and it is most comprehensive - or one of the most comprehensive-
Honourable Hadiths concerning the dogma. He (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) included in it what leads people out of the various and
differing creeds of disbelief. Thus He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) limited himself to what breaks up with them and contradicts
them all.

The meaning of «There is no God but Allah» is, absolutely there is no
one who deserves to be worshipped but Allah (the Exalted), and this has
been mentioned several times in the Holy Koran. And the Beka’s is clear
and explicit when he said that «alone» is to emphasize and confirm the
testification and that «He has no partner» is to emphasize and confirm the
denial. This was mentioned by Al-Hafeth. Also Allah (the Exalted) has said,
«And your god is One god: There is no god but He.» (2: 163). He (the
Exalted) has also said, «Not an apostle did we send before thee without this
inspiration sent by Us to him: That there is no god but I; therefore, worship
and serve Me.» (21: 25). Also He (the Exalted) has said, «To A’d people, (we
sent) Hud, one of their (own) brethren: He said, «O my people! Worship
Allah! Ye have no other god but Him.» (7: 65) so they answered him by
saying, «They said, Comest thou to us, that we may worship Allah Alone, and
give up the cult of our fathers?» (7: 70) and He (the Exalted) has said, «That
is because Allah- He is the Reality; and those besides Him whom they invoke,
- they are but vain falsehood: verily Allah is He, Most High, Most Great.»
(22: 62).

Thus the above includes disproving divinity of other than Allah (the
Exalted) ; that is in fact worship, and its confirmation that the only god is
Allah (the Exalted); He (the Exalted) has no partners. The Holy Koran from
the very beginning to the very end shows this, decides upon it and guides to
It.

Thus worship in all its kinds emanates from a heart full of love, submis-
sion, and humbleness due to aspiration and want as well as due to fear and
reverence. All that is deserved only by Allah (the Exalted) as was mentioned
in the evidence listed in this chapter. Thus he who performs such acts for
the sake of other than Allah (the Exalted), has in fact made that object a
partner to Allah (the Exalted) in worship and that person cannot benefit
through any deed or any utterance.

51

.ماع واوا و دراه .اه عدزاعد مد قاع ناعاد م عاعاعا .اناعد عا. د قاعا. سام واي راو فد وا ود و واج و وجا » ماأعاعاه قاع د ود دواع ودأقاعد عاد ماعد مد مدعا عد ماع .دما عد و ماد ع عد هس و و عا سداق دقان اعد ند .ا عام

(The discussions of savants concerning the meaning of «There
is no God but Allah»)

The discussion of Ibn Abbas has been mentioned above, also Al-Wazir
Abu Al-Muthaffar said in his book «Al-Ifsah», «His witnessing: There is no
God but Allah» necessitates that the witness is consciously aware that there
is no God but Allah (the Exalted). In that connection Allah (the Exalted)
has said, «Know, therefore, that there is no God but Allah». (47: 19). Abu Al-
Muthaffar also said, and the name (Allah) after (but) denotes that divinity is
necessarily His (the Exalted) and that no body but Him (the Exalted) de-
serves it. He said also that the general or comprehensive theme is to realize
and become aware that this term implies rejecting evil and consequently be-
lieving in Allah (the Exalted); thus when you deny that divinity could be for
someone other than Allah (the Exalted) and confirmed that Allah (the Ex-
alted), Alone must be worshipped then you have in fact rejected evil and be-
lieved in Allah (the Exalted).

Also, Ibn Al-Qayyim said in his book «Al-Badai’» answering that who
said, «Verily the excluded disagees with the excluded from» then if the case
was as mentioned above a man would not embrace Islam just by saying,
«There is no God but Allah» because he did not confirm divinity for Allah
(the Exalted). And that is the greatest term since it included denying divinity
for other than Allah (the Exalted) and confirming it for Him (the Exalted).
Thus its denotation on proving His divinity is greater than saying (Allah is a
God and no body ever suspects that.

Also, Abu Abdullah Al-Kurtobi said when he interpreted (There is no
God but Allah): That no body is worshipped but Him (the Exalted).

Also, Az-Zamakhashari said, The (word) «god is a common noun, like
man and the mare; it is an object of every sort of worship whether this wor-
ship was truthful or false; however, this common noun was predominantly
used for He who is truly worshipped.

Also, Sheikh Al-Islam said, «The God is the one who is worshipped
and obeyed; since verily a God is the one who is worshipped and the one
who is worshipped is the one who deserves to be worshipped. Deserving to
be worshipped takes place because of the qualities that he possesses which in
turn necessitates that he becomes the beloved who receives the highest
degree of love; the one to whom every body submits to the highest degrees
of submission... thus the God is the beloved and the ‏د‎ »rshipped who is

52

ماع قا عام فاو هد هو رد وده فاو قاع فوج قدو د عام يدو شاعام ودج ‎OO‏ تق واردج فاع قاع فاع لاع قاع قل هماه ماع عد معد م تن ف 5 ع فن 6 5ت نان و يورا و قاع قاع فا ناه مع يت نان امام

made divine by the love of the hearts which in turn submits to him and
becomes humble in front of him; he is the one who is feared and begged by
those hearts. They also resort to him in difficult times and invoke him in
times of stress and depend on him concerning their interests and resort to
him and become peaceful when they invoke him and tranquil when loving
him. That is not but Allah (the Exalted) Alone, that is then (There is no
God but Allah) the most truthful among all terms and the people who
verbalize it are the people of Allah (the Exalted) while those who deny it
and reject it are Allah’s enemies and the people who receive His wrath a: 1
revenge. Thus if one verbalizes this term truthfully, every issue and situati 1
and taste will become righteous and if not, corruption and unsoundness wiil
haunt all his knowledge and deeds».

Ibn Al-Qayyim said: (The god) is the one who is worshipped by the
hearts as a result of their love for him, their exalting him, and their turning
to him in repentance. Also this is because they honour him, exalt him, be-
have humbly in front of him, submit to him, fear him and depend on him».

Also, Ibn Rajab said, « (The god) is the one who is obeyed rather than
disobeyed in honor for him, revering and exalting him, as well as a result of
loving him, fearing him, depending on him asking him to satisfy their needs
and desires and invoking him. It is improper to perform all of the above or
to experience those feelings but to Allah (the Exalted), thus he who worships
any one with Allah (the Exalted) is considered an evil doing and disloyality
and deception concerning his saying (There is no God but Allah) thus result-
ing in worshipping other creatures with all the consequences it carries.

Also, Al-Bika’i said, «There is no God but Allah) means that it is abso-
lutely impossible for any body to be truly worshipped but Allah (the Ex-
alted); this knowledge is the greatest one that saves people from the horrors
of the Hour; knowledge is true knowledge when it benefits one, and it bene-
fits people if it is accompanied by obedience, submission and performing ac-
cordingly; otherwise it is pure ignorance.»

Thus (There is no God but Allah) denotes negation of divinity from
everything but Allah (the Exalted) no matter who that thing or being is; also
confirming divinity is for Allah (the Exalted) Alone regardless of any body
else; that is unification which the Holy Messenger called for and which the
Holy Koran pointed at from its very beginning to its very end Concerning
that Allah (the Exalted) has said about the Jinns, «Say, «It has been revealed
to me that a company of Jinns listened (to the Koran). They said, «We have
really heard a wonderful Recital! It gives guidance to the Right, and we have

53

that Muhammad is verily His servant and Messenger...

believed therein; we shall not join (in worship) any (gods) with our Lord.» (72:
1-2) Thus (There is no God but Allah does not benefit except he who rea-
lizes its connotation in its two facts, confirming and negating, besides believ-
ing in that and accepting it and performing according to it. As for him who
says it without realizing its meaning, believing in it or performing according
to it, has in fact been considered by religious authorities as pure ignorance,
this is certainly an evidence against him.

His saying in the Honourable Hadith «.... and that there is not other
partner with him» is a confirmation and account of the connotation of its
meaning. Allah (the Exalted) has verily made that clear in the stories of pro-
phets and messengers in His Holy Book, so how ignorant about their state
are those who worship graves and tombstones! O how great is polytheism
that they have committed, polytheism that contradicts, «There is no God but
Allah», the term of faithfulness! Verily the polytheists among the Arabs and
those who followed their fashion, have denied the term «There is no God but
Allah» both from «Verbal and from a meaningful facts. Those polytheists ac-
knowledged it as a term, yet denied and rejected its meaning, so you may find
one of them say it while worshipping other than Allah (the Exalted) through
performing various sorts of worship like love, exaltation, reverence, hope, de-
pendence and invocatio.: as well as other various sorts of worship.

Rather, their polytheism has exceeded in many degrees the polytheism
of the Arabs, thus if one of them passes through difficulties he will solemnly
invoke other than Allah (the Exalted) and they think that that object of
worship which is other than Allah (the Exalted) is faster in driving away
their worries, that is in contradistinction with the early polytheists who used
to join in partners in worshipping Allah (the Exalted) only during times of
comfort and prosperity while at times of difficulties they only resorted to
Allah (the Exalted) Alone. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said,
«Now, if they embark on a boat, they call on Allah, making their devotion
sincerely (and exclusively) to Him. But when He has delivered them safely to
(dry) land, behold, they give a share (of their worship to others)!» (29: 65).
This shows that the polytheists of these times are more ignorant about Allah
(the Exalted) as well as about unifying Him than the polytheists of the
Arabs and those who came before them.

And his saying, «And that Muhammed is verily His servant and Holy
Messenger» means that one should witness and testify about that. This term
is joined with the term that comes before it (there is no God but Allah); the

54

that verily Issa (Jesus) is the servant of Allah and His Holy Messenger...

term «Servant» means the slave owned who practices worship, that is he be-
longs to Allah (the Exalted), and special and private slavery, as Allah (the
Exalted) has said in that connection, «Is not Allah enough for His servant?»
(39: 36).

Thus the highest degrees of slavery is private slavery and message: since
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) the most
perfect among the creatures possesses these two honorable qualities. As for
Lordship and divinity we say that they are Allah’s rights and no body can
be joined in His (the Exalted) worship, neither a very close king nor a sent
prophet. And His saying «His servant and Messenger». He (the Exalted)
brought these two qualities and combined them in one term in order to
avoid immoderation in interpreting the terms and abusing them, since many
people who claim to belong to the nation of Muhammad(May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) have been immoderate both verbally and
in deed, also he neglected his duties by not following them up and depended
on opinions which are contradicting with what the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) has brought, also he adopted
arbitrariness in interpreting his news and rules and thus by deviating from
its real denotations and connotations as well as by turning away from
following them besides renouncing them, since verily the testimony that
Muhammad is verily the Holy Messenger of Allah necessitates believing in
him as well as believing what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) tells us; it also means that we should obey his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) commands and not performing what he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) proscribed. Also, it means that his
orders and proscriptions should be respected and revered, neither one gives
precedence for the speech of somebody else, no matter who that one was.
However, the status quo these days and before these days. Those who
belong to the realm of religious authority such as Judges and Mufities is the
opposite of that; all help is sought from Allah (the Exalted). Also Al-Darimi
narrated in his Musnad after Abdullah ben Salam that he has said «We
would find the qualities of Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him).

27- Verily we have sent you as a witness, a bearer of glad tidings and a
shield for the illiterate. You are My servant and My Messenger, whom I
called the one having confidence in Me and depending on Me; he is neither
rude nor ungracious; he is neither boistorous while in the markets nor does
he return an evil doing by an evil doing; rather, he forgives and he over-

55

His word that He sent to Mary as well as a spirit from Him.

looks and disregards others’ mistakes. I will never take him into death till he
straightens the deviating people by testifying that verily there is no God but
Allah, by which he makes the blind eyes see, the deaf ears hear and harsh
hearts». Atba’ hen Yasar said, «Abu Wakid Al-Laythi told me that he heard
Ka’b saying the same that Ibn Saiam said.

His saying, «And that verily Issa (Jesus) is the servant of Allah (the
Exalted) and what the Christians believe is that Issa is Allah or the Son of
Allah (the Exalted) or the third among a group of three. May Allah be
exalted and praised. Allah (the Exalted) has said in that connection, «No son
did Allah beget, nor is there any God along with Him» (23:91). Thus it is
imperative that he testifies that Issa is Allah’s servant and messenger and
that definitely he belongs to Him (the Exalted), He has created him from a
female without the need for a male to fertilize her, as Allah (the Exalted)
has said, «The similitude of Issa before Allah is as that of Adam; He created
him from dust, then said to him, «Be», and he was». (3:59) Thus Issa is not a
lord from the things they ascribe to Him. He (the Exalted) has said, «But
she pointed to the babe. They said, «How can we talk to one who is a child in
the cradle?» He said, «I am indeed a servant of Allah; He hath given me
revelation and made me a prophet; and He hath made me blessed wheresoever
I be and hath enjoined on me prayer and charity as long as [ live; He hath
made me kind to my mother, and not overbearing or miserable; so Peace is on
me the day I was born, the day that I die, and the day that I shall be raised
up to life (again)?! Such (was) Issa the Son of Mary; (It is) a statement of
truth, about which they (vainly) dispute. It is not befetting to (the majesty of)
Allah that He should beget a son. Glory be to Him! When He determines a
matter, He only says to it Be», and it is. Verily Allah is my Lord and your
Lord: He therefore serve ye: This is a Way that is straight.» (19:29-36). He
(the Exalted) has also said, «Christ disdaineth not to serve and worship Allah,
nor do the angels, those nearest (To Allah); Those who desdain His worship
and are arrogant, He will gather them all together unto Himself to (answer).»
(4:172) Also the believer testifies what his enemies, the Jews, said is null and
void; they said that he is the son of a harlot but the Holy Koran says that
this is null and void, may Allah (the Exalted) curse them all. Thus no body’s
Islam is truthful unless he denies what the Jews said and only believes in
what Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Verily he is the servant of Allah and His
Messenger.

56

والعا عام قفا ود وى قامعا .د وه قافاه قافاع قافا و هاو واع قفاع قاع و قاف داوعا .د ها قاع قاراد ع قاو ها قد قد هده تعد وام قاع عد هد مداع قاقاع قاقد 4 وده فاه واد باع مام راود عد باع قاع تاعارد قاع اج ماران

His saying: «His word» he means that Issa (May Allah’s peace be upon
him) was called by this term because it exists in what Allah (the Exalted)
has said: (Be, as had been interpreted by those interpreters who came be-
fore. Imam Ahmad said answering the Jouhmi, «The word which He (the
Fealted) sent to Mary when He (the Exalted) said (Be) and so Issa was
through. |

His saying: «Sent it to Mary». Ibn Kathir said, «He (the Exalted) cre-
ated him (May Allah’s peace be upon him) by the word that He (the Ex-
alted) sent with Gibrail to Mary. Gibrail who breathed into Mary from his
spirit in accordance with the commands of Allah (the Exalted): Thus Issa
(May Allah’s peace be upon him) came into existence after the permission of
Allah (the Exalted); therefore, he (may Allah’s peace be upon him) origi-
nated and developed from the word that He (the Exalted) said (Be and he
was) as well as the spirit that was sent with him: he is Gibrail (May Allah’s
peace 56 upon him).

His saying: «And a spirit from Him» Ibn Abi Kaab said concerning it,
«Issa is one of the spirits which Allah (the Exalted) has created and com-
manded to speak by saying, «Am I not your Lord (who cherishes and sustains
you)? They said, «Yea!» (7:172) Allah (the Exalted) has sent Gabrail to
Mary; he breathed a spirit into her». This was narrated by Abd ben Hamid
and Abdullah ben Hamid in the «Zaw’id Al-Musnad» as weli as by Ibn Jar-
ir and Ibn Abi Hatem and many others. Al-Hafeth said, «And He (the Ex-
alted) described him as emanating from Him, but the meaning is that it is
originating from Him. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And
He has subjected to you as from Him, all that is in the Heavens and on earth»
(45:13) It means that he (May Allah’s peace be upon him) came into being
from Him (the Exalted), also the meaning of the second Holy Verse is that
He (the Exalted) subjected all these things that originate from Him (the Ex-
alted), that is He (the Exalted) is the One who formed that and brought it
into being by His (the Exalted) Ability and Wisdom.

Sheikh Al-Islam said: Whatever attribute is given to Allah (the Exalted),
if that attribute has a meaning that cannot stand alone or can stand by
other creatures, then it is a necessity that that attribute is an attribute of
Allah’s (the Exalted) and it cannot be given to a creature who is treated as a
Lord and if the one added is a seperate being like Issa and Gibrail (May
Allah’s peace be upon them) and the spirits of the sons of Adam then it
cannot be an attribute of Allah (the Exalted) because what can stand alone

57

And the Garden is true and the Hell Fire is true, may Allah admit him

to the Garden because of what he used to do».

cannot be an attribute to others.
However, the attributes added to Allah (the Exalted) are of two types:

The first: It is added to Him (the Exalted) because He 15 its Creator
and Originator, and that includes all creatures, like saying the sky of Allah
(the Exalted) and the land of Allah (the Exalted); thus all creatures are the
servants of Allah (the Exalted) and ali belongings belong to Allah (the Ex-
alted).

The second: It is added to Him (the Exalted) because of the special
meaning that He (the Exalted) gave to it; He loves it, and commands people
to perform and accept it; as He (the Exalted) distinguished the Ancient
House by a kind of worship what cannot be practised in another. Also as
has been said concerning the fifth of money and the fay’ which is consi-
dened as the money belonging to Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messen-
ger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). From this we
understand that the servants of Allah (the Exalted) are those who worship
and obey His commands. That is an addition which includes His Divinity,
His legislation and His religion, and that is an addition which encompasses
His Lordship and His creatures.

His saying, «And the Garden is true and the Hell-Fire is true». This
means that he witnesses that the Garden which Allah (the Exalted) has told
us about in His Holy Book, and which He said that He has prepared for
those who rever Him and are pious, is true, that is to say a confirmed un-
equivocal fact; he also witnessed that Hell Fire which He (the Exalted) said
in His Holy Book that He (the Exalted) prepared for those who are unbelie-
vers is as well a confirmed and true fact. In that connection Allah (the Ex-
alted) has said, «Be ye foremost (in seeking) forgiveness from your Lord, and
a Garden (of Bliss), the width whereof is as the width of Heaven and earth,
prepared for those who believe in Allah and His apostles: that is the grace of
Allah, which He bestows on whom be pleases: and Allah is the Lord of Grace
abounding» (57:21)He (the Exalted) also has said, «Then fear the Fire whose
fuel is Men and Stones, which is prepared for those who reject faith» (2:24). In
both Holy Verses as well as in other Holy Verses that are similar to them,
there is evidence that the Garden and Hell-Fire are created now, contrary to
what the heresiarchists say. These two Holy Verses tell us about believing in

the Afterlife.
58

It has been mentioned in the Honorable Hadith of Itban that, «Verily
Allah forbade Hell-Fire from taking any man who says there is no god but

Allah, aiming by that at pleasing Allah (the Exalted).

His saying: «Allah will admit him into the Garden because of what he
used to do». This sentence is the conditional answer. In another narration
«He would admit him from any one of the eight doors of the Garden he
choses.» Al-Hafeth said, «Because of what he used to do» meaning his right-
cous or corrupt behavior because the people of unification are going to be
admitted into the Garden. Also, another interpretation for «Because of what
he used to do» may be that the people of the Garden are admitted into it
according to the degrees of their behavior.

The judge Ayyad said: What was mentioned in Oubad’s Honourable
Hadith is particular to him who said what Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said and at the same time paired
those two testmonies with truthful faith and unification that was mentioned
in the Honourable Hadith. Thereupon such a person is rewarded by what
exceeds his sins and makes him deserve forgiveness and admittance into the
Garden at first sight.

(He said: And they said concerning the Honourable Hadith of Itban.

28- «Verily Allah has forbade Hell-Fire from taking he who says there is
no God but Allah to please Allah only»).

His saying: (And they) he means Al-Bukhary and Muslim and every-
thing they mentioned in their Saheehs. And the above mentioned is part of
long discussion by the two Sheikhs.

And Itban 1s Ibn Malek ben Amr ben Al-Ijlan Al-Ansari; he came from
Bani Salem ben Awf; he was one of the famous Companions of the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and died during the
Cahphate of Moawiya.

Al-Bukhary mentioned in his Saheeh after Qutadah, he said, «Anas ben
Malek told us that the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) and Mouw’ath who was riding behind him (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) on a donkey. He said,

29- «O Mouath, he said, O Allah’s Holy Messenger, here I am at your
service. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, O Mouath.
He said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger! Here I am at your service. He (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: O Mouath! He said: O
Allah’s Holy Messenger! Here I am at your service - Three times - He (May

59

ولع .اع قاو واه عادع د رد و فار وقد عاع د عد راعا .د مد عاه عد عاعا عد عا وا عد عد عد عا.ع د قاقد فاه واف و اه و رهن

Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Every body who testifies that
there is no God but Allah and that verily Muhammad is the Holy
Messenger of Allah, truthfully Allah (the Exalted) will never admit him into
Hell-Fire». He said: «O Allah’s Holy Messenger, shall I tell the Glad
Tidings to the people so that they may become happy? He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said, «They will become dependent».
Mouath told about this before he died, in order to avoid sin. Also it was
mentioned by another reference. Moutamir said that he heard his father
saying that he heard Anas saying, «I was told that verily the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) told Mouath ben Jabal.

30- «He who meets Allah without associating any one with him is ad-
mitted into the Garden. He said, shall I tell the Glad Tidings to the people»
He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «No, verily I fear that
they might become dependent».

I said, «Thus I understood from this context the meaning of the witness
that there is no God but Allah; it denotes quitting polytheism for he who
faithfully and truthfully says it.

The Sheikh of Islam as well as many others said, «Concerning this Hon-
ourable Hadith, he who says the two testimonies and dies believing in them
as has been mentioned «With full awareness and faith without any suspicion
and with truth and certainty». Verily the truth and reality of unification is
the total attraction of the soul to Allah (the Exalted). Thus he who testifies
that there is no God but Allah (the Exalted) truthfully and faithfully, is ad-
mitted into the Garden because faithfulness and sincerity are the attraction
of the heart to Allah (the Exalted) by repenting his sins sincerely. Thus if he
dies while in that condition he obtains that -admission into the Garden -
and verily it was said that «He who says there is no God but Allah is let
out of Hell-Fire and the benefaction in his heart weighs as much as a seed
of hay, or an atom.»

It was frequently said that many of those who say there is 1c God but
Allah are admitted into Hell-Fire then they will be let out of it. Also it was
frequently said that Allah (the Exalted) forbade Hell-Fire from engulfing
areas on the Son of Adam’s body that have resulted from praying, since
those used to pray and prostrate themselves in prayer. Also it was frequently
said that He (the Exalted) forbade Hell-Fire from engulfing he who says
there is no God but Allah. He who testifies that there is no God but Allah
and that verily Muhammad is the Holy Messenger of Allah; however, it is
subject to burdensome conditions, and most of those who rehearse it are not

60

اناعد م ماقام ارد قد قد كد م قاد زد عد .د هاعد ع وا قا عدن قدو .ا قا عاد اه شاوه واوا وام عا راو مام مدعا قا عدو هدو .اما فاه فادها هاعد قا قاءرد .اوقد رده .امد ند هاه قاع جد 6د 6د عد 6د 6د 6 65 95 6 96 550

sincere, most of those who rehearse it say it only imitatingly or as a habit
without having the grace of faith encompassing their hearts. Most of those
people suffer distress at death in the graves as was mentioned in the Hon-
ourable Hadith.

31- «I heard people saying something so I repeated it». Most of the
works of those people are mere imitations and as a result of identification
they are those who most closely fit to what Allah (the Exalted) has said,
«We found our fathers following a certain religion, and we will certainly follow
in their footsteps» (43:23).

Then there is no contradiction among the many Honourable Hadith,
thus if one says it while fully aware of its meaning and fully sincere he
would in this case be insisting on a sin, since verily the perfection of his sin-
cerity and awareness necessitate that Allah (the Exalted) is the One who is
loved Most, and consequently his heart will never include any will for per-
forming what Allah (the Exalted) has proscribed, and whatever Allah (the
Exalted) commands us to do cannot be abhorred. In addition to this person
will be saved forever from Hell-Fire even though before that he might have
had so many sins, since this faith and this sincerity and this repentence and
this love and this certainty do not leave a sin without erasing it in the same
way day light erases the darkness of the night. Thus if one says it in its per-
fect form and satisfying all its conditions, which do not fall within the
realms of great as well as small polytheism, then this person does not intend
to perform a sin; thereupon, Allah (the Exalted) will forgive his sins and
save him from Hell-Fire forever. However, if one says it in such a way that
he falls within the realm of minor polytheism and not major polytheism and
then does not perform what contradicts it, then this good deed cannot be re-
sisted by any of the sins and good deeds will exceed bad deeds. That is in
conformity with the Honourable Hadith.

32- So he will be forbidden from Hell-Fire. However, his rank in the
Garden becomes less in as many sins as he has committed: that is in
contradiction to what happens to him whose wrong-doings exceed his good
deeds and dies insisting and willingly adhering to his stance; this person
definitely deserves to be tortured in Hell-Fire. And if he says there is no
God but Allah and avoids this major sin of polytheism and he doesnot die
while adhering to that stance; rather, he furthur commits wrong-doings
which exceed in degree and frequency the good deed of his saying there is
no God but Allah, he in case he was sincere and faithful when he said it
and performed sins which weakened that term of faith and unification and

61

ساس عه ساس سه هن هي ساس سن ص اس عر ص ست اه اس هاه ست دص هن و هت ص هاه سه هاه سه سه اس هس هاس هاس هاس ساس سي هس ساس ساس سي ماس هاه هاه هاه هادع هاه عه هده اع ساعساس عاج عد ها سد مد ما عا ع هاعد واو .د ثا رالا م را من

strengthened the Fire of sins till it burns that which is good. That ts in
contradistinction to the faithful and fully aware person who says it, this
person possesses good deeds that are definitely exceeding his wrong doings
and sins and this person does not adhere to his stance concerning the wrong
doings, thus if he dies on that situation, then he would definitely be

admitted into the Garden.

Rather it is feared that the faithful person commits one act of wrong
doing that weakens his faith, which leads him to rehearse «There is no God
but Allah» unfaithfully or without certainty which protects him from commit-
ting any sort of sin or wrong-doing, and thus it is feared that he might com-
mit major and minor sins, so if he is saved from the major then the minor sin
would stay with him, this in turn will add to those sins and wrong-doings
which accumuiate to this polytheism which results in the wrong-doings be-
coming in excess and verily wrong-doings weaken certainty and belief. Thus
saying the term «There is no God but Allah» becomes weaker and faith
through the heart stops; consequently the one who verbalizes it becomes, like
somebody who is delirius or talking in his sleep or like somebody who trains
his voice by rehearsing the Holy Koran without having sense, taste or under-
standing. All of those did not say with pure faith and certainty; rather, after
saying it they perform wrong-doings that contradict it; rather, they say with
uncertainty and untruthfully and they live and die on that stance; they per-
form many wrong-doings which deny their entrance into the Garden. So if
sins become plenty, the tongue will find it difficult to verbalize them; the
heart will become too tough to be able to say them, and hate nghteous deeds
and is overburdened by listening to the Holy Koran being rehearsed and he
will become cheerful for other than Allah (the Exalted) and feels peaceful and
reassured when performing or when witnessing the false and the obsolete, and
he would be delighted with sexual intercourse and obscenity, he would be
pleased to socialize and he would hate to socialize with the righteous people,
the people of truth; if such a person says this testimony, he really says it
through his tongue only rather than to express what is in his heart; he verba-
lizes by his mouth what his heart does not believe.

Al-Hasan said, «Faith can not be only by wishing things to happen nor
by outside appearances; rather faith is what the hearts believe in and what
the deeds confirm. Thus he who says something good and does something
good, Allah (the Exalted) would accept that; but he who says something
good and does evil, Allah (the Exalted) would not accept that.».

Bakr ben Abdullah Al-Muzni said, «Abu Bakr did not get ahead of
62

And after Abi Said Al-Khidri who said that Allah’s Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, ‘Moses said: O Lord teach

me something by which I invoke and praise You.

them by much fasting or praying; rather, he got ahead of them all by some
reverence that existed in his heart».

Thus he who said, «There is no God but Allah» and does not work ac-
cording to that term; rather, he works in a way that burdens him with sins
while he is fully believing in it and fully aware of its meanings, but he had
sins that weakened his certainty and truthfulness, and in addition to that
minor polytheism is added and those sins and wrong doings exceed this
good deed and he dies insisting on his sins and wrong-doings; that is in con-
tradistinction with he who says it while fully certain and fully truthful; then
either he is not essentially insisting on a wrong-doing and his unification
which encompasses his certainty and truthfulness will make bad deeds. And
those who say it and are admitted into Hell Fire: either they had not said it
with perfect certainty and truthfulness that are incompatible with sins and
wrong-doings or to their becoming in excess, or they might have said it ex-
ceeded their good deeds and as a consequence their certainty and truthful-
ness become weak, then after that they never said with perfect truthfulness
and full certainty, because sins had weakened that truthfulness and that cer-
tainty existing in their hearts, thus saying it by those people is not strong en-
ough to erase wrong-doing. Therefore, their wrong-doings exceed their good
deeds.

Many religious authorities mentioned that; like Ibn Al-Qayyim, Ibn Ra-
jab and many others.

1 said, «Whatever the Sheikh of Islam decided on, agreed upon by all
Honourable Hadiths.

He said, «The Honourable Hadith includes the evidence that verbalizing
without belief or vice versa is not enough for one to be faithful; the Honour-
able Hadith says that Hell-Fire is forbidden from taking the people of per-
fect unification; it also says that work or actions donot benefit unless they
are purely for the sake of Allah (the Exalted) and according to what He (the
Exalted) has legislated through His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him)».

(A Note) Al-Kurtobi said, «His saying in the Honourable Hadith «to
be faithful» that is to say the products of faith which are in turn the pro-
ducts of the organs. Thus it indicates that good deeds are the products of

63

He (the Exalted) said, O Moses say there is no God but Allah, He said,
O Lord all your servants say this. He (the Exalted) said, O Moses if the se-
ven skies, those inhabiting them and the seven earths were put in one pan of

scales...

faith, and the evidence that he meant by faith what we said, and he did not
mean just the faith which is unification that refutes polytheism or being sin-
cere by saying «There is no God but Allah» The very same Honourable Ha-
dith includes what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,
«Be thrown out-then after that He (Be the blessed and raised above) makes
a group of people die and comes out people who have never done good or
any benefaction.» By this he means unification devoid of all action or per-
formance. This is summarized from the explanation of the Sunan of Ibn Ma-
jah.

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, «(And after Abi
Sa’id Al-Khidri (May Allah be pleased with him) after Allah’s Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) who said,

33 - «Moses(May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) said: O Lord, teach me
something by which I invoke and praise you. He (the Exalted) said: O Moses
say: There is no God but Allah. He said, «All your servants rehearse this.» He
(the Exalted) said: «O Moses, if the seven skies and whoever lives in them and
the seven earths are put in one pan of a balance and on the other hand «There
is no God but Allah» is put in the other, «There is no God but Allah» would
cause the pan to incline. This Honourable Hadith was narrated by Ibn Habban
and Al-Hakem).

Abu Said: His name is Sa’d ben Malek Al-Khazraji; he and his father
were one of the honorable Companions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him). At the battle of Uhud he was not taken
to fight because he was too young; however, he witnessed and participated
in the battles that followed. He died in the Madina in the year 63, 64, or 65
and it was said sixty-four.

His saying: (I praise you) means something that I may use to eulogize
you, (I invoke you) means something that I may use to entreat you with.

His saying: (O Moses say, there is no God but Allah») means that the
one who invokes Allah (the Exalted) says it all and never limits himself to
the exalted name «Allah» nor does he limit himself to the pronoun «He» as
is practised and done by the extremist and ignorant suffists; that is verily a
delusion and an innovation introduced to the religion of Islam.

64

and «there is no God but Allah» in the other pan, would cause the scales to
incline».

His saying: (All your servants say this) was confirmed since it was read
in the original manuscript of the writer and who Originally supports adher-
ing to the term «All» and that is mentioned in the Musnad in part of the
narration of Abdullah ben Amr who says the plural term as was mentioned
by the writer concerning the meaning of «All» and the meaning of «All your
servants say this» means that verily «I want something special for me regard-
less of what you give to your other servants»: in another narration - after he
said,. «All your servants say this-say there is no God but Allah; he said,
«There is no God but You! O Lord! Rather, I want you to give me some-
thing special.»

And since people -rather since all the world- have the need to the term
«There is no God but Allah», it has become the most available term of invo-
cation, the easiest to achieve and the greatest in meaning. Laymen and ig-
norant people turned away from it and resorted to innovative invocations
which were neither mentioned in the Holy Koran nor in the Honourable
Sunna.

His saying: Means, if the seven skies and whatever they included other
than Allah (the Exalted) and the seven earths and whatever lies on them
were put in one pan of scale and «There is no God but Allah» was put on
the other pan, then «There is no God but Allah would cause the scales to in-
cline.

Imam Ahmad narrated after Abdullah ben Amr after the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him),

34 - «Verily Noah (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) said to his son while
he was on the brick of death bed; ’there is no God but Allah, for verily if the
seven Heavens and the seven earths were put in one pan of scales and ’There is
no God but Allah’ was put in the other pan, the pan with "There is no God but
Allah’ would cause the scales to incline; and if the seven Heavens and the se-
ven earths had been a closed ring, «There is no God but Allah» would break
them.

His saying: (In one pan) he means the pan of scales.

His saying: (would cause them to incline) that is to say that pan would
exceed in influence and in power the other pan, and that is because of what
it encompasses such as refuting polytheism, and unifying Allah (the Exalted)
and those are the best and most preferred among deeds, and they form the

65

جأعاع سافاع ساعد فم هس ولعدعاود واو اج و عع واس جاه ساس ع عا واه و فاه ساعد ماود و باع عد اعد راو وشا جاه وأعاع عاو واد يه فقاعد م لاجد عا عاو راو را لا م

basis and essence of religion and faith. Thus he who says it sincerely and
with full awareness of its meaning and works according to it in the strict
sense of the word, and maintains that stance, such benefaction can not be
equalled by any thing. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Ve-
rily those who say, ’our Lord is Allah, and remain firm (on that Path), - on
them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.» (46: 13).

The Honourable Hadith has indicated that «There is no God but AI-
lah» is the best means of invocation, as has been mentioned by the narration
of Abdullah ben Amr that has been mentioned above.

35 - «The best invocation is that said on that Day of Arafa, and the best
that I and the prophets who came before me, There is no God but Allah,
Alone; He has no partner; all belongs to His sovreignty and all praise goes to
Him; He is able to do anything and everything». This was narrated by Ah-
mad and At-Tirmithi.

36 - «On the Day of Judgment a man from my nation who used to be one
of the leaders leading that nation, would be called upon, then ninety-nine re-
cords would be opened for him and each record page is as long as one can see,
then he is asked, «Do you deny anything from this? Did my record keepers op-
press you? He would say, «O Lord No.» Then he would be told, «Do you have
an excuse or have you ever done a good deed? So he would say No. Then he is
told, «Yes, you have done one and you will never be oppressed on this day, so
they would give him a card on which <I testify that there is no God but Allah
and that verily Muhammad is His servant and Holy Messenger» is written. So
he would say, °O Lord what is this card and what are all those records? Then
he is told, you will not be oppressed then the records would be put in one pan
of scales and the card in another, the records would fail and the card would be-
come heavier». This was narrated by At-Tirmithi and Hasan and An-Nisar’
and Ibn Habban and Al-Hakem. This Honourable Hadith is mghteous since
it satisfies the conditions of Muslim and Ath-Thahabi said that it is truthful
when he summarized it.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, «Deeds do not
contend for superiorty by their numbers or their construction; rather, the
contend for superiority by whatever is in the hearts. Thus the image of the
two deeds becomes one; whatever is between them is like that distance be-
tween the earth and the Heaven. He said, «Contemplate over the Honour-
able Hadith concerning the card which is placed in one pan while on the

66

It was narrated by Ibn Hiban and Al-Hakem.

At-Tirmithi - and Hasanh- after Anas said, «I heard Allah’s Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying, Allah (the Exalted)
said addresssing son of Adam: O son of Adam, if you approach me with
sins and wrong-doings that are as much as the size of the earth, then you
approach me without joining partners in worshipping Me, then I would after
your forgiveness.

other pan there are ninety-nine records and each page of that record extends
as far as one can see; the card becomes heavier than the records which in
turn fail to incline the pan, and consequently this person would not be tor-
tured. It is very well known that every person who unifies Allah (the Ex-
alted) has such a card and many of those are admitted into Hell-fire because
of their sins.

His saying: (It was narrated by Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakem). Ibn Hab-
ban’s name is Muhammad ben Habban the son of Ahmad ben Hiban ben
Moua’th, Abu Hatim At-Tamimi Al-Bisty Al-Hafeth the writer of: As-Sa-
heeh, At-Turukh, Ad-Douafa’ Ath-Thukat and many others. Al-Hakem
said, «He was among those most learned people in language of jurispru-
dence, Honourable Hadith and exhortation, in addition he was one of those
most reasonable men. He died in the year 354 A.H in the city of Bost.

As for Al-Hakem, his name is Muhammad ben Abdullah An-Naysa-
bouri Abu Abdullah Al-Hafeth; he was better known by Ibn Al-Biyya’. He
was born in the year 321 A.H. He wrote many books such as Al-Mustadrik,
Turukh Naysabour and many others. He died in the year 405 A.H. The wri-
ter (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said (At-Tirmithi said after Anas:

37 - 1 heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) saying, «Allah (the Exalted) said addressing son of Adam, O
son of Adam if you approach Me with sins and wrong-doings that are as big
as the earth then you approach Me without joining partners in worshipping
Me, I would offer you forgiveness that is as much big»).

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) mentioned the last sen-
tence of the Honourable Hadith and At-Tirmithi narrated it in full, he said,

38 - On the authority of Anas that he had heard Allah’s Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying, «Allah (the Exalted)
said, 70 son of Adam; as long as you invoke Me and ask Me I would forgive
you for whatever you had done and I would not mind about that; O son of

67

This Honourable Hadith conveys to us many issues:

The first one: The extensiveness of Allah’s benefaction.
The Second one: The reward for unification.
The third one: Granting remmission of ones sins.

The fourth one: Interpreting the Holy Verse number 82 of the Holy
Sura of Anam.

The fifth one: Contemplating over the five issues in Oubad’s Honour-
able Hadith.

Adam if your sins and wrong-doings reach the highest skies, then you ask for
my forgiveness, I would forgive you and I would not mind about it; O son of
Adam if you approach Me... till the end of the Honourable Hadith».

At-Tirmithi: His name is Muhammad ben Ad-Dahhak AI-Salmi Abu
Issa the writer of Al-Jami’ and one of those who memorized and rehearsed
the Holy Koran before it was written. He was blind and he narrated after
Kutaiba, Hannad, Al-Bukhary and Khalk. He died in the year 279 A.H.

Anas: He is Ibn Malek Al-Khathraji, Allah’s Holy Messenger’s (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) servant, he served him for ten
years. Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) invoked Allah (the Exalted) for his sake saying, «O Allah! May Thou
augment his money and possessions as well as his children’ O Allah! May
Thou let him admit the Garderi.» He died in the year 93 or 92 A.H. It was
said that he lived for more than hundred years.

The Honourable Hadith was narrated by Imam Ahmad after Abi
Tharr’s he just copied the meaning and put it into his own words and it
reads as follows,

39 - «And he who commits sins and wrong-doing that are as big as the

earth then he approaches Me, not joining partners in worshipping Me, I would
grant him forgiveness that is equivalent to the size of his sins and wrong

doings.».
It was narrated by Muslim and issued by At-Tabarani after Ibn Abbas
after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

His saying: (If you approach Me with sins and wrong-doings that are as
great as the earth), means sins and wrong-doings that fill or almost fill the

earth.

68

The sixth one: If you couple between this Honourable Hadith and It-
ban’s Honourable Hadith and what comes after it, you will realize and
understand the meaning of «there is no God but Allah» and you will

see the mistake of those who are deluded and conceited.

His saying: (Then you approach Me without joining partners with Me.)
This is an important condition for the promise of forgiveness to be fulfilled
and that is being free from polytheism, whether great or minute, minor or
major. No body is saved from this but he who surrenders and accepts Allah
(the Exalted) ; that is the free and pure heart that Allah (the Exalted) tells
us about, «The Day whereon neither wealth nor sons will avail, but only he
(will prosper) that brings to Allah a sound heart.» (26: 88-89).

Ibn Rajab said: «He who believes in unification (Allah (the Exalted) is
One) and commits sins and wrong-doings that are as great as the earth is
met by Allah (the Exalted) with as much of forgiveness - till he (Ibn Rajab)
said - if the servant’s belief in unification and sincerity towards Allah (the
Exalted) are perfect and complete in that servant, and in addition he fulfills
its conditions through his heart (in secret), through his tongue and through
his organs and senses, or through his heart and tongue when on the death
bed; that will result in granting him forgiveness for all his past sins and
wrong-doings and Allah (the Exalted) will save him and definitely prevent
his admission into Hell-Fire. Thus he whose heart has actualized by the term
of unification, this term will drive out of him every thing except Allah (the
Exalted) : For love and exaltation, for reverence, fear and glorification as
well as for dependence. Then all his sins and wrong-doings will be burnt
even it were as the foam of the sea.

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said concerning the meaning of this Honourable Hadith, «The people
who believe that Allah (the Exalted) is one without having any behaviors or
thoughts that are colored by polytheism, will enjoy forgiveness that other
people who are not like them in their faith will not enjoy. Thus if the per-
son, who believes that Allah (the Exalted) is One and never joins partneres
with Him (the Exalted) meets his Lord with sins and wrong-doings that are
as great as the earth, Allah (the Exalted) will grant him forgiveness which is
as big as his sins and wrong-doings. This is not going to happen to him if
he has deficient faith. Thus, verily pure unification which is not spoiled by
polytheism always eradicates and erases all sins and wrong-doings because it
includes such qualities as loving, exalting, eulogizing, revering and pleading
to Allah (the Exalted) Alone, what necessitates washing all sins and wrong-

69

امه واعاعساه عاوقاء د هود واو ها وا عدا عاه عدف فاع قاعد ارد فاو ع قارا. مقا اه وإقاع دواع د و قد رده تراه وأعاد ها قاع رادو فعاو رمد و قاع قاع و قاقد ع هدع فاع قاع اعد مه ودود ود وا فاء د هد ع.ر و ود را عا هن

doings even if they were as great as the earth, thus impurity is incidental
and the motivation for it is strong.

This Honourable Hadith includes: The great number of rewards for uni-
fying Allah (the Exalted) , the extensiveness of Allah’s generosity, benefac-
tion and mercy and responding to those seceders (Khawar1j) who claim that
a Moslim who has sins and commits wrong-doings is a disbeliever, it also in-
cludes the response to the Mu‘tazila, those «Seceders» who believe in a
«Rank between two ranks» which is straying from the right path; they be-
lieve as well that such a sinful person is neither a believer nor a disbeliever;
however, he stays in fire eternally. While the right thing is what the people
of Sunna (Those who follow the Holy Koran and the Honourable Hadith
word for word) that is to say the Sunnites believe that such a person can
not be deprived of the title «Believer» neither it is given to him; rather, it is
said, «He is a disobedient believer.» Or «He is a believer if you take his
faith into consideration and a sinful dissolute if we take his major sins into
consideration.» This is what the Holy Koran and the Honourable Hadith
(Sunna) as well as what those who came before agreed on. And after Abdul-
lah ben Masoud (May Allah be pleased with him) who narrated,

40 - «When it was ascended by the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) he reached the Lote-tree boyond which none
may pass, he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was given
three things, the five prayers, the seals of the Holy Sura of the Cow, and
forgiveness to whomever does not join partners to Allah (the Exalted) dur-
ing worship: This was narrated by Moslim.

Ibn Kathir said in his inerpretation, «Imam Ahmad, At-Tirmithi, Ibn
Majah, An-Nisa’i have said after Anas ben Malek,

4] - «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) read this Holy Verse, ’He is the Lord of Righteousness and the Lord
of Forgiveness.’ then said, "Your Lord said that He deserves to be revered
and feared so people must not join in another partner with Me; thus he who
revers Me and does not join any partner with Me really deserves My for-
giveness.»

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, (Contemplate the
five issues mentioned in the Honourable Hadith narrated by Oubada so that
if you couple between this Honourable Hadith and Itban’s Honourable Ha-
dith and what comes after it, you will realize and understand the meaning of

70

عالقا ها ها ها عد ود هو .واه واو » وعد عاو هاه هد و هم ع عاو واه ماع فاج وافاه واه رهد م .ا را مار هم
وهاه وه فاه م هد و عاواه مو هاه و عفادو ها و واه وهس ها ‎eS‏ عا قاع واه ده تدواع قاع جد وا فاه عا نار را وام

«There is no God but Allah» and you will see the mistake of those who are
deluded and conceited.

This Honourable Hadith means also, that prophets need to have their
attention drawn to the benefits of «There is no God but Allah» as well as
warned that it is predominant with all creatures even though many of these
who rehearse it do not gain much from it. Also this Honourable Hadith in-
cludes confirmation of the qualities in contradistinction to those disrupted
ones. Also it includes that if you learn about Anas’s Honourable Hadith
mentioned in Itban’s Honourable Hadith «That verily Allah (the Exalted)
will save from Hell-Fire he who says There is no God but Allah just for the
sake of Allah (the Exalted).» Thus you realize that quitting polytheism can-
not be accomplished by the tongue only).

The seventh: Warning for the condition in Itban’s Honourable Hadith.

The eighth: The Prophets being in need for having their attention
drawn to the benefits of «There is no God but Allah.»

The ninth: The warning that although all creatures rehearse it, many of
those who rehearse it do not gain much from it.

The tenth: Stating that the earths are like the skies, seven in number.
The eleventh: That they verily have inhabitants.

The twelfth: Confirming qualities contrary to what Al-Ash’ariya believe
in.

The thirteenth: That verily if you learn about Anas’s Honourable Ha-
dith, you will realize that his Honourable Hadith after Itban, «Verily Allah
(the Exalted) will definitely save from Hell-Fire he who says «There is no
God but Allah just for Allah’s sake» It is quitting polytheism rather than
just verbalizing the term.

The fourteenth: Contemplate the fact that Issa (Jesus) and Muhammad
are both Allah’s servants and Messengers.

The fifteenth: Realizing the special quality of Issa as being Allah’s (the
Exalted) will.

The sixteenth: Learning that Issa is a spirit from Allah (the Exalted).

The eighteenth: Understanding his saying «For the deeds he used to
perform.»

The nineteenth: Learning that a balance has two pans.

The twentieth: Learning.
71

Chapter

THAT WHO ATTAINED MONOTHEISM STAGE, ENTERS
PARADISE WITH NO ACCOUNT

(He who reached the stage of unifying Allah (the Exalted) is admitted
into the Garden without being judged).

His saying: (The chapter concerning he who reached the stage of mono-
theism is admitted into the Garden without being judged.) That is to say
without being punished or tortured.

(I said): Meeting the conditions for purifying oneself from the flaws of
polytheism, innovations and wrong-doings.

Allah (the Exalted) said, «Ibrahim was indeed a model, devoutly obedient
to Allah, (and) true in faith, and he joined not gods with Allah.» (16: 120) He
(the Exalted) described Ibrahim (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) with
these attributes which represent the utmost degree of monotheism.

The first one: He was a model; that is to say an example and leader
teaching people to perform that which is good. That is only because he per-
fected the rank of patience and certainty through which leadership in reli-
gion is attained.

The second: His saying, «devoutly» the Sheikh of Islam said, «devo-
tion» is continuous obedience, and if the praying person lengthens his period
of standing, prostration, or bowing down, then he is considered a devoted
and obedient person. Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Is one who worships de-
voutly during the hours of the night prostrating himself or standing (in adora-
tion), who takes heed of the Hereafter, and who places his hope in the Mercy
of his Lord.» (39: 9).

The third: That verily he was true in faith (I said) the religious author-
ity Ibn Al-Qayyim said that he who is truthful in faith is one who ap-
proaches Allah (the Exalted) while avoiding all others.

The fourth: That verily he was never a polythesist; that is because of his

72

And Allah (the Exalted) has said in that connection, «Ibrahim was in-
deed a model, devoutly obedient to Allah, (and true) in faith, and he joined not
gods with Allah.» (16: 120) and He (the Exalted) has also said, «Those who
join not (in worship) partners with their Lord.» (23: 59).

truthfulness and sincerity and their perfection as well as he was very far
from polytheism.

I said, «This is made clear by His saying (the Exalted), «There is for
you an excellent example (to follow) in Ibrahim and those with him». (60: 4)
that is those who followed his religion from among his Moslim brothers;
this was narrated by Ibn Jarir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him), in that
connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «When they said to their people,
«We are clear of you and of whatever ye worship besides Allah’ we have re-
jected you, and there has arisen, between us and you, enmity and hatred for-
ever, - Unless you believe in Allah and Him, Alone.’ But not when Ibrahim
said to his father, ’I will pray for forgiveness for thee, though I have no power
(to get) aught on thy behalf from Allah» (60: 4).

Also He (the Exalted) has mentioned something about His (the Exalted)
befriended (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) that he told his father Azar,
«And I will turn away from you (all) and from those whom ye invoke besides
Allah: I will call on my Lord: Perhaps, by my prayer to my Lord, I shall be
not unblest.’ When he had turned away from them and from those whom they
worshipped besides Allah, we bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob, and each one
of them we made a prophet.» (19: 48-49). That is accomplishing monotheism.
That is being clear and free from polyhtheism and from those who believe in
it; it is rejecting them, hating them and taking them as enemies. May Allah
(the Exalted) give us support and help.

The writer (Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said about this Holy Verse:
«Ibrahim was indeed a model.» So that the one who follows this path would
not feel lonely or estranged due to the small number of those who pass
through it (devoutly obedient to Allah) not to kings or affluent merchants;
(true in faith) means that he does not sway to the left or to the right like the
infatuated religious authorities (and he joined not gods with Allah (the Ex-
alted)) contrary to those who became numerous and claimed that they were
Moslims.

It was narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem after Abi Abbas concerning Allah’s
(the Exalted) saying Ibrahim was indeed a model) an example of a good

73

وم ماع اعد م عد فد ند قارد عد و عد هام .جاع دواع هد هد قد عد قا اجا رد و قا واه عقاق د وار جاع اداه وارد و وارا وا واء. وا راجا عد عارا م جد عد .و قد قاع عد قاع .د وعد عد راد .د راعد عد حافد تع

Moslim. Nobody at his time was a Moslem but him.

I said, «There 15 not contradiction between this and whatever was men-
tioned before concerning his being a leader (Imam) and an example that
people take when they do good deeds.

He said and Allah (the Exalted) has said in that connection, «Verily

those who live in awe out of fear of their Lord those who join not (in worship)
partners with their Lord.» (23:57-59).

In this Holy Verse He (the Exalted) has described the believers who
came before and preceded all people to the Garden, so He (the Exalted)
praised them through the attributes He (the Exalted) gave them the greatest
of which is, «They join not (in worship) partners with their Lord». And
since one may come across what speaks evil of his Islam such as overt or
covert polytheism, Allah (the Exalted) has denied that such is their attribute;
that is actualizing and acquiring monotheism which has made all their deeds
good, perfect and beneficial.

I said: His saying «Their deeds (had been made) good, perfect and bene-
ficial» this means that they have been saved from minor polytheism, as for
major polytheism the above cannot be said about quitting it. So contem-
plate. Even if the commentor said, «It would have become sound, truthful
and correct» that would have been more correct.

Ibn Kathir said: (Those who join not (in worship) partners with their
Lord) that is to say they do not join in worship partners with Allah (the Ex-
alted); rather, they unify Him and are fully aware that «There is no God but
Allah, One and steadfast; He never had a wife or a child and He has no
equal.

The writer said: (After Husein ben Abdur-Rahman: I was at Sa’id ben
Joubeir. He said, «Who among you saw the planet that dove down yester-
day? I said, «I» then I added, «Verily I was not praying; however, I was
stung.» He said, «So what did you do?» I said,. «I wore a charm». He said:
«What made you do that» I said, «Once I heard As-Sha’abi saying after
Bouraida ben Al-Housaib that,

«Charms are worn only against evil eyes or fever». He said he does well
he who understands what he hears, but Ibn Abbas told us after the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him):,

42 - «The nations were exhibited on me, I saw the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) with the people, and he (May Attah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) accompanied by a man or two and I saw him

74

Tt was narrated after Houscin Ben Abdur-Rahman that, «I was at the
house of Sai’d Ben Joubeir and he said, «Who among you saw the planet

that dove down yesterday?» I said, «I» then I added «Verily I was not pray-

ing; however I was stung». He said, «So what did you do?» I said, «I wore a
charm». He said, «What made you do that?».

(May Alluh’s blessings and peace be upon him) not accompanied by anyone.
Then a great multitude of people was presented to me. I thought that they
were my people, but I was told, «This is Moses and his people. So I looked
and saw a great multitude of people and I was told then that those were my
people and among them there are seventy thousand who will be admitted into
the Garden without any judgment or torture. Then he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) rose and entered his house; (the people) listening
Started discussing what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
mentioned and entered his house; the people listening started discussing
what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said. Some of them
said, that those seventy thousands might be the Companions of the Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and some of
them said that they might be those born during the days of Islam and never
joined in worshipping Allah (the Exalted) partners, so the Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) left his house and came to
them, and they told him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
about their discussions. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said that those seventy thousand people are those who do not use charms or
use cauterization or fly birds to help them decide, and they are those who
depend on their Lord. So Oukasha ben Mouhsin stood up and said: O
Allah’s Holy Messenger; may you invoke Allah (the Exalted) to include me
as one of them. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,
that he was one of them. Then another man came and said: Invoke Allah
(the Exalted) to include me among them. He (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said, «Oukasha preceded you.».

This Honourable Hadith was narrated by the writer the way Moslem
narrated it; however, it was also narrated by Al-Bukhary both in summary
and at length. It was also narrated by At-Tirmithi and An-Nisai’.

His saying: (After Husein ben Abdur-Rahman), he is Al-Salami Abu
Al-Huthayl Al-Koufi. He died in the year 136 A.H. and he was 93 years
old.

75

I said: An Honourable Hadith that «Once I heard Ash-Sha’bi saying
after Bouraida Ben Al-Housaib that, «Charms are worn only against evil

eyes or fever». He said he does well he who understands what he hears.

Sai’d ben Joubeir is the religious authority and scholar and one of the
best companions of Ibn Abbas. His narrative about Aisha and Abi Moussa
is an example. He is from Kufa a master among the tribe of Bani Asad. He
was killed by the Hajjaj in the year 95 and he was not 50 years old yet.

It is better here to say that Al-Housein said that he was not praying be-
cause he feared that those present might think what he had seen while pray-
ing and such a condition was not acceptable so he defended himself from
being accused of obscurity of worship, and this indicates and shows the fa-
vor of those who came before and their observance of sincerity and their re-
moteness from hypocrisy and gracing themselves by what does not belong to
them.

His saying: (However, I was stung). The linguists say, he was stung by
a scorpion or any of those poisonous insects or animals, if it poisons him by
pricking him with its sting.

His saying: (I said, «I wore a charm») Moslem narrated it as «I asked
somebody to charm me.»).

His saying: (What made you do that?) That is asking about evidence
concerning the soundness of this behavior.

His saying (an Honourable Hadith that I once heard As-Sha‘bi saying).
His name is Amr ben Shourahil Al-Hindami. He was born during Omar’s
Caliphate and he is one of the most truthworthy and reliable followers and
religious jurists. He died in the year 103 A.H.

His saying (after Bouraida) He means Ibn Al-Housaib Ibn Al-Hareth
Al-Aslamy, a famous companion. He died in the year 63 A.J. This Honour-
able Hadith was narrated by Ibn Saad.

His saying,

43 - (Charms are only worn against an evil eye or fever).It was narrated
by Ahmad, Ibn Majah, Abu Dawud, At-Tirmithi after Omran ben Hussein.
Al-Haithami said that Ahmad’s (references) are reliable.

And the eye is when somebody has evil eye and envies or inflicts others
with diseases, disasters or pain. Fever here means fever resulting from the
poison of a scorpion and the like. Al-Khatabi said that the Honourable Ha-

dith means that there is no charm which is more curing or has priority than
the charm required for evil eye and such fever. Verily the Holy prophet

76

But Ibn Abbas told us after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) that he said, «I was shown the nation so I sawa
prophet accompanied by his people and a prophet accompanied by one or
two men, and a prophet accompanied by no one. Then a great multitude of
people were presented to me. I thought that they were my people, but I was

told that this was Moses and his people...

(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was once charmed and he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) used to charm people.

His saying: (He does well he who understands what he hears) that is he
who understands and applies the knowledge that reaches to him has done
well that is in contradistinction with he who works out of ignorance or does
not work according to what he knows; this person is disadvantageous and
evil. This Honourable Hadith has a benefit which is learning about those
who came before as well as about their good manners.

His saying: (but Ibn Abbas had) narrated, he is Abdullah ben Abbas
ben Abdul-Muttaleb. The Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) cousin. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) in-
voked Allah (the Exalted) for his sake, so he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said,

44 - «O Allah make him become learned in religious jurisprudence and
teach him how to interpret the Holy Koran.» So this invocation was fulfilled
and he became learned in religious jurisprudence. He died in Ta’if in the
year 68 . A.H.

He said: The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) and he has the
depth of the knowledge of those who came before and this is shown when
he said, «He does well, he who understands what he hears and applies the
knowledge that reaches him.» But such and such. Thus it is known that the
first Honourable Hadith does not contradict the second one.

His saying:

45 - (The nations were exhibited on me) At-Tirmithi and An-Nisai’
after Abthar ben Al-Kassem after Husein ben Abdur-Rahman, «Verily that
took place during the Holy Prophet’s the night of ascersion to the seven
Heaven». Al-Hafeth said: «If that was memorized and kept, he who would
gain strength from it, and that it happened in the Medina also (I said) and
that is subject to discussion.

His saying (I saw the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) accompanied by his people). It is mentioned in the Saheeh of

77

so I looked and saw a great multitude of people and I was told then that
those were my people and among them there seventy-thousand who will be
admitted into the Garden without any judgment or torture. Then he rose
and entered his house; the people listening started discussing what he said.
Some of them said that those seventy-thousand might be...

Moslim that this group of people was less than ten in number. It was also
confirmed by An-Nawawi.

His saying (and the Holy prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) accompanied by one or two men, and a prophet accompanied by
no one) is a reply to those who claim that they are greater in number.

His saying: (Then a multitude of people was presented to me) what is
meant here are people or individuals seen from a distance.

His saying (So I thought that they were my people) because people seen
from a far distance cannot be distinguished; rather, one just perceives the
image, and in the Saheeh of Moslem «But look at the horizon» but the wri-
ter did not mention this, it may have been deleted from the original copy of
the Honourable Hadith. Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

His saying: (It was said to him, «This is Moses and his people») that is
to say Moses the son of Imran the one whom Allah (the Exalted) the Most
Merciful talked to. And his people are those who followed his religion from
among Bani Israel.

His saying: (So I looked and saw a great multitude of people and I was
told that those were my people and among them were seventy thousand who
will be admitted into the Garden without any judgement or torture.) That is
because they believed that Allah (the Exalted) is one. And in Ibn Foudail’s
narration «and seventy thousand from the people of your nation would be
admitted into the Garden.» This was mentioned in Abi Huraira’s Honour-
able Hadith as well as in the two Saheehs.

46 - «Verily, their faces would glitter like a full moon» This was nar-
rated by Imam Ahmad and Al-Bayhaqi in Abi Huraira’s Honourable Ha-
dith.

47 - «So I asked my Lord to give me more and He (the Exalted) gave
me an additional seventy thousand with each thousand.» Al-Hafeth said that
this part of the Honourable Hadith is very well supported by evidence.

His saying: The people listening started discussing what he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said, this means that discussions, debates,
disputes and argumentes are religiously allowed.

78

The companions of Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) and some of them said that they might be those born
during the days of Islam and never joined in worshipping Allah partners, so
the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) left his
house and came to them and they told him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) about their discussions. He (May Allah’s blessings and

peace be upon him) said that those seventy thousand people are those who
do not use charms; nor do they use cauterization or fly birds, and they are

So that people may benefit from them and reveal that which is truthful
and certain. It also shows how deeply learned were those who came before
and that they did not reach this degree of knowledge but by hard work. It
also shows how keen were they to do that which is good. This was men-
tioned by the writer.

His saying: (He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said
that those seventy thousand were those who do not use charms). This was
confirmed as such in the two Saheehs, also it was confirmed in the Honour-
able Hadith of Ibn Masoud in Ahmad’s Musnad. Also it was narrated by
Moslem.

48 - «Nor do they write or say charms for others» the Sheikh of Islam
Ibn Taymiyya said, «This addition to the original text is a confabulation
since the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) did
not say nor do they write or say charms for others.» Rather when the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was asked about
using charms, he said,

49 - He who among you has the ability to benefit his brother, let him
do that» and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) also said,

50 - «There is no harm in using charms as far as it does not constitute
an act of polytheism.» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said, «Also, Gibrail didnot use charms on the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) in turn used charms on his Companions.»

He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said that the differ-
ence between the charmed and the charmer is the following, «The one who
asks to be charmed and the charmer is the following, «The one who asks to
be charmed is a beggar and mendicant who turns to other than Allah (the
Exalted) while the charmer is a well-doer.» He said, «What is meant here is

79

those who depend on their Lord.

attributing complete or total dependence on Allah (the Exalted) by those se-
venty-thousand. He said: A consequence of their total dependence on Allah
(the Exalted), do not resort to others to charm them or cauterize them. The
same was narrated by Ibn Al-Qayyim.

His saying: (Nor did they use cauterization that is to say they never ask
others to cauterize them nor did they ask others to charm them as a result
of surrendering to determinism and fate as well as a result to their enjoying
distress and calamity.

I said, «It seems that his saying «Nor do they use cauterization» 15 ta-
ken in a more general sense as for cauterization per se, it is allowable as has
been mentioned in the Saheeh after Jaber ben Abdullah.

51 - «Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) sent to Oubay ben Ka’b a doctor who cut one of his veins then
the latter cauterized it.»

It has been mentioned in Al-Bukhary’s Saheeh after Anas.

52 - «He had been cauterized while the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) was still alive.» and At-Tirmithi and others
narrated that after Anas.

53 - «Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s peace be upon him) cauter-
ized Asa’d ben Zourara from a hurt by a thorn».

Also it was mentioned in Al-Bukhary’s Saheeh after Anas,

54 - «Cure can be achieved in three ways: Drinking honey, cupping
glass, and cauterization; however, I forbid my people from practising cauter-
ization.» And in another reference «I do not like to be cauterized.»

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, «The Honour-
able Hadiths about cauterization fall into four categories;

(The first) is the way performing it.
(The second) is not liking it.
(The third) is concerned about praising he who quits practising it.

(And the fourth) is urging people to practise it. They donot contradict
each other praise be to Allah (the Exalted). Thus performing it means that it
is allowable; not liking it; as for praising he who quits practising it means
that quitting it is better and has priority to practising it; as for urging It,
that is just leaving choice for people to decide while telling them how detest-
ing is that.

80

سا ااا اا م ممما م ما اما مم ا ا ا ال ا ا ا ا الا اا

His saying: (Or they fly birds to help them decide) that is they are never
pessimistic because of birds and other similar objects. This topic if Allah
(the Exalted) wishes, will be discussed extensively in the chapters to follow.

His saying: (And on their Lord they depend) this 15 a mention of the es-
sence from which all these habits and deeds derived and that 1s depending
on Allah (the Exalted) and being sincere when resorting to Him (the Ex-
alted) and depending heartily on Him (the Exalted) and at the end that truly
achieving monotheism which is believing that Allah (the Exalted) is One and
this stance definitively leads to every honorable rank such as loving Allah
(the Exalted) fearing Him (the Exalted) as well resorting to Him to fulfill
your wishes, accepting Him as a God and Lord and accepting His (the Ex-
alted) decree.

Let it be known by you that the Honourable Hadith does not show
that they do not pursue the causes originally; verily pursuing the causes in
general is a necessary and natural matter which no body can do without it;
rather, depending on Allah (the Exalted) must be direct no matter how im-
portant or significant the cause is. In that connection Allah (the Exalted)
has said, «And if any one puts his trust in Allah, sufficient is Allah.» (65: 3)
that is as the Holy Verse says, Allah (the Exalted) is sufficient. What is
meant is that those people quit perfoming abhorred acts although they need
to perform them; they quit that because they totally depend on Allah (the
Exalted); for example, they quit practising cauterization and exorcism be-
cause such things are abhorred especially the ill person who sticks to those
acts because he believes that they constitute a cure for his ailment.

As for practising cauterization and/or exorcism in order to ward off the
causes as well as to get treatment in a way that is not abhorred; that does
not contradict depending on Allah (the Exalted) therefore quitting it would
not be allowable from a religious point of view. This is consistent with what
was said in the two Saheehs after Abi Huraira.

55 - «Allah (the Exalted) has not sent down a disease without sending
its cure or treatment along with it. He who knows it has known it and he
who is ignorant about it is ignorant about it.» And after Ousama ben Sha-
rate,

56 - «I was at the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) house when the Arab tribes came to visit him. They said, «O
Allah’s Holy Messenger, shall we use medication». He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) answered, «Yes. O Allah’s servants use

$1

So Oukasha ben Mouhsin stood up and said, «Ask Allah (the Exalted)
to include me among them». He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said, «You are one of them». Then another man stood up and said,
«Ask Allah (the Exalted) to include me among them». He (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said, «Oukasha preceded you.

medication; verily Allah (the Exalted) has never created a disease without
creating its cure and treatment, with the exception of one.» They asked.
What is it?» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) answered,
«Old age and senility.» This was narrated by Ahmad.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, «These many
Honourable Hadiths have included the evidence on the causes and the
effects as well as the revocation of denying it; rather, they denote that one
may ask for medication and treatment and that this fact does not contradict
depending on Allah (the Exalted) in the same very logic we avoid and fight
the pain of thirst, hunger, heat and cold by resorting to their opposites;
rather, believing in Allah (the Exalted) truthfully can not be accomplished
but by following the causes that Allah (the Exalted) has erected and made
necessary their effects both religiously and deterministically, and that verily
suspending them is speaking evil of depending on Allah (the Exalted), and it
is speaking evil of wisdom. Also one weakens this dependence if the one
who suspends it thinks that leaving it makes dependence on Allah (the
Exalted) stronger, verily leaving it constitutes a failure that contradicts
depending on Allah (the Exalted). The truth of which is the heart’s
dependence on Allah (the Exalted) concerning what benefits the servant in
his present life as well as in the After life; also it protects him from whatever
may harm him in his present life as well as in his after life. And with this
dependence or Allah (the Exalted) there is no alternative to pursuing causes,
otherwise that would constitute suspending work according to religious law
and wisdom, thus the servant would neither make out of his disability total
dependence on Allah (the Exalted) neither would he make of his total
dependence on Allah (the Exalted) total disability.

The savants have disputed in the issue asking for treatment and cure
and whether it is allowable or not, whether quitting it is better than practis-
ing it, or whether it is recommendable, agreeable or necessary and essential.

The famous from Ahmad: The firstly narrated for this Honourable Ha-
dith and interpreted it and the Shafites are well know for the second, even
An-Nawawi mentioned when he interpreted the Honourable Hadiths men-
tioned by Moslim that it is their creed and this creed is the path of those

82

This Honourable Hadith includes many issues:

* The first: Knowing the ranks of people in as far as believing that
Allah (the Exalted) is One (unification).

The second: The meaning of performing it.

The third: His praise to Ibrahim because he was not one of the poly-
theists.

The fourth: His praise to the leaders of holy men because they are
free from polytheism.

The fifth: Quitting exorcism and cauterizing as a factor in achieving
unification.

The sixth: The common factor of those practices is depending on
Allah (the Exalted).

The seventh: The depth of the knowledge of the Holy Prophet’s Com-
panions because they realized that they would not get this but by
working.

The eighth: Their aspiration to do that which is good.
The ninth: The grace of this nation both in quantity and quality.
Then tenth: The grace of the companions of Moses.

The eleventh: Showing him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) all the nations.

who came before and most of those who came after. It was chosen by the
Wazir Abu Al-Muthaffar who said, «And Abi Hanifa’s creed is so surely es-
tablished that it almost approaches the degree of being necessary and essen-
tial. He said, «And it makes no difference if one follows Malek’s creed or
not since Malek said, «There is no harm in asking for treatment and cure as
well as there is no harm in leaving them.»

The Sheikh of Islam said, «Asking for cure and treatment is not said to
be necessary by the Imams; rather; it was made necessary by a small group
of the Shafi’s and Ahmad’s friends.

Thus his saying: (So Oukasha ben Mohsin stood up) he is Ibn Hourth-
ban Al-Asady; he descends from Bani Asad ben Khouzayma. He was
among the first people to embrace Islam and among the most handsome
men. He joined the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) in the Hijra from Mecca to Medina as well he witnessed the battle of
Badr and share in it. He died as a martyr while fighting those who rejected

83

The twelfth: That verily each nation is gathered seperately with its pro-
phet.

The thirteenth: That those who believed and followed the prophets are
few.

The fourteenth: That verily the prophet who was not believed in or
followed, comes on the Day of Judgment Alone.

The fifteenth: The fruit of this knowledge should not be deceived by
large number or renouncing fewness.

The sixteenth: «His saying, ‘You are included among them’» is one of
the banners signs of prophethood.

The seventeenth: Oukasha’s grace.
The eighteenth: using.

The nineteenth: His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
extraordinarily good manners.

The twentieth: Allowing exorcism against evil eye and fever.

The twenty-first: The depth of the knowledge of those who came be-
fore are made evident when he said, «He does well he who under-
stands and performs what he hears but etc.» Thus he knew that the
first Honourable Hadith does not contradict the second one.

The twenty-second: Those who came before are far from praising
somebody for a quality that he does not possess.

Islam after the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) death. He was fighting along with Khaled ben Al-Walid and was killed
by Tulaiha Al-Asadi in the year 12 A.H. After that Tulaiha retuned to Is-
lam and participated in Holy struggle against the Persians in the battle of
Kadisiyya under the leadership of Sa’d ben Abi Wakkas. He died as a Mar-
tyr in the famous battle of Al-Jisre.

His saying: (So he said, «O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) invoke Allah (the Exalted) to include me
among them. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «you
are one of them.) Al-Bukhary narrated it in another way. He said, «He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «O Allah include him
among them.» This Honourable Hadith has the connotation of asking the
honorable person invoke Allah (May Allah be pleased with him) for you.

His saying: (Then another man stood up). This man’s identity is not

84

‎ac see eee.‏ جع ل ‎ree ee reer eter ene ne rete reererererreecezreresreveseeasecre ss seer eee‏ و و و ور

‎very well known and there is no need to discuss his name.

‎His saying: (So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,
«Oukasha preceded you») Al-Kurtobi said, «The second person was not as
qualified as Oukasha, that is why his desire to be included was not fulfilled,
since if he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) had fulfilled the
second man’s desire, every person attending the discussion would have asked
for the fulfillment of the same wish and thus a chain of requests would have
followed, so he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) closed the
door by saying what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said.

‎85

Chapter: The Fear from Polytheism

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Allah forgiveth not that partners should be

set up with Him; but He forgiveth anything else, to whom He pleaseth.» (4: 48
and 116).

The saying of Allah (the Exalted), «Allah forgiveth not that partners
Should be set up with Him; but He forgiveth anything else, to whom He plea-
seth.» (4: 48 and 116).

Ibn Kathir said, «Allah (the Exalted) has informed that verily (He forgi-
veth not that partners should be set up with Him) He (the Exalted) does not
forgive a servant involved in polytheism (but He forgiveth anything else to
whom He pleaseth) that is to say He (the Exalted) forgives any other kind
of guiit or sin that his servants perform if He (the Exalted) pleases.

This Holy verse shows us that polytheism is the greatest among all sins,
because Allah (the Exalted) does not forgive he who does not stop practising
polytheism and repents; Fowever, all other sins or guilts may be forgiven by
Allah (the Exalted) if and only if He (the Exalted) pleases; thus if any one
of His servants commits any kind of sin other than polytheism He (the Ex-
alted) might forgive him or He (the Exalted) might torture him, and that
Stance requires that the servant becomes very much afraid of Allah (the Ex-
alted) and keen to avoid polytheism because polytheism is the ugliest and
the most oppressive and it is dispraising the Lord of the world and the peo-
ple. It purely gives what is to Allah (the Exalted) to other than Allah (the
Exalted) as well as equating Him (the Exalted) with others.

In that conection He (the Exalted) has said, «Yet those who reject Faith
hold (others) as equal with their Guardian-Lord.» (6:1) and because it contra-
dicts that which is meant to be the Creator and Commander as well as in-
consistent with it, and that is the utmost degree of opposing the Lord of the
worlds and regarding as great obeying him and being humble towards him
and submitting to his commands which the world can become righteous only
through obeying them. Thus when the world become devoid of obeying
these commands, it would be destoryed and the Day of Judgment would

86

Al-Khalil (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) said, «And preserve me and
my sons from worshipping idols». (14: 35).

take place, in that connection Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said,

57 - «The Last Hour does not take place til] no body on earth says Allah,
Allah» This was narrated by Moslem. And because polytheism is likening
the creature to the Creator and making him share with the Creator divine
characteristies such as ascribing to him (creature) the ability to cause harm
or benefit, the ability to give or inhibit a characteristic that necessitates
associating invocation, fear, hope, dependence and all sorts of worship with
Allah (the Exalted) Alone. Thus he who associates these characteristics with
another creature, is in fact likening this creature to the Creator, and making
he who does not possess the ability to harm himself, take himself in death,
bring himself back to life again. To whom all praise goes, to whom all
creatures belong, to whom all creation belongs, He (the Exalted) who
possesses every thing and to Him (the Exalted) every command is attributed;
He (the Exalted) possesses all benefaction. Thus all power and authority are
His, whatever He (the Exalted) desires to come into existence, and whatever
He (the Exalted) doesnot desire to come into existence. When He (the
Exalted) gives no body can inhibit what He (the Exalted) gives and when He
(the Exalted) proscribes no body can allow what He (the Exalted)
proscribes; when, he (the Exalted) opens to the people the doors of Mercy
no one can close them or inhibit people from having this Mercy; when He
(the Exalted) withholds something, no one can release it after Him (the
Exalted) and He (the Exalted) is the all-Mighty and all-Wise.

The ugliest type of likening is likening that whose essence is disabled
and poor by someone whose essence is rich and able. Some of the character-
istics of divinity are the following: Absolute perfection from all facets, that
perfection which does not have any defect what so ever. This necessitates
that worship becomes directed for such essence alone, this applies to eulogiz-
ing, exalting, revering, invoking, hoping, turning for repentance, depending,
asking for help, the utmost degree of love and the utmost degree of humble-
ness. All the above mentioned are necessary from religious, mental as well as
from natural points of view; all of that 15 necessary to be directed to Allah
(the Exalted), Alone while at the same time it cannot be applied from reli-
gious, mental, or natural points of view to other than Allah (the Exalted).
And that is the ugliest types of likening and the most untrue as well. Con-

87

اا ا ا ا ا ا اا ااا ا ااا ا ا اا ااا اا ا ل ا ا ا ا ا ا

cerning these matters He (the Exalted) has told us that He (the Exalted) will
never forgive those who commit them even though He (the Exalted) has de-
creed Mercy upon Himself (the Exalted) . This is the meaning of Ibn Al-
Qayyim’s (Allah’s Mercy be upon him) speech.

The Holy Verse includes responding to Khawarij who believe that disbe-

lief is due to sins. It is a response as well to those Mutazila who believe that
those who commit major sins stay in Hell-Fire eternally; and that they are
not considered by them as either believers or disbelievers.
It is not allowable that His Holy Verse, «but He forgiveth anything else» (4:
48) oppresses or discriminates against he who turns to Allah (the Exalted)
for repentance, since verily he who turns to Allah (the Exalted) for repen-
tance because he joins partners with Allah (the Exalted), is going to be for-
given by Allah (the Exalted) who in that connection said, «Say, O my
servants who have transgressed against their souls! Despair not of the Mercy
of Allah, for Allah forgives all sins, for He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.»
(39: 53) In this Holy Verse He (the Exalted) talked about forgiveness while,
generalizing because the person who is meant in this Holy Verse’s context is
the one who has returned to Allah (the Exalted) in repentance.

His saying: (And Al-Khalal (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) said,

«And preserve me and my sons from worshipping idols.» (14: 35). An idol
is that which was sculpted after a certain image while the Pagan is that
which wasn’t made and formed according to a certain image. This was men-
tioned by At-Tabari after Mujahid.

I said: An idol may be termed a pagan, as Al-Khalal (May Allah’s
Peace be upon Him) has said, «For ye do worship idols besides Allah, and ye
invert falshood-till the end of the Holy Verse.» (29: 17), and it is said that a
pagan is a more general and stronger term: verily idols are pagans in the
Same way graves and tombstones are pagans.

His saying: (And preserve me and my sons from worshipping idols) (14:
35) that is put me and my sons away from worshipping idols and separate
us and place us at a distance. Allah (the Exalted) has verily answered his in-.
vocation and made his sons prophets and preserved them from worshipping
idols. He (Al-Khalal) showed or pointed at what necessitates fear of wor-
shipping idols when he said, «O my Lord! They have indeed led astray many
among mankind.» (14: 36) Verily that is what really happens in every era. So
if man learns that many people have committed major polytheism and were

88

11 was mentioned in the Honourable Hadith, «Of the thing I fear most
is that you commit Minor polytheism, so be (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) was asked about it and he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) answered that it is hypocrisy».

deluded by worshipping idols, then that necessitates that man fears to make
the very same mistake made by many people who commit polytheism which
is not forgiven by Allah (the Exalted) .

Ibrahim At-Taymi has said, «Who is safe from evil after Ibrahim?» This
has been narrated by Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatem.

So no body would let himself commit polytheism unless he is ignorant
of it as well as of its consequences, that is he is ignorant of knowledge
about Allah (the Exalted) as well as of what He has sent through His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to believe in Him
(the Exalted) and to say that He (the Exalted) is one as well as to proscribe
joining in partners in His (the Exalted) worship.

The writer said,

58 - «The thing I fear most is that you commit minor polytheism, so he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was asked about it and he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) answered that it is hypoc-
risy.» The writer has mentioned this Honorable Hadith in brief without tra-
cing it back to any of the known references. This Honorable Hadith was
later narrated by Imam Ahmad, At-Tabari and Al-Bayhaqi, and the follow-
ing is how Ahmad has narrated it, he said, «We were told by Younis that
Layth has told them that Yazid -Ibn Al-Had- told them after Amr after
Mahmoud ben Labid that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said, «The thing I fear most is that you commit
minor polytheism. They said: O’ Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) what minor polytheism is? He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said: Allah (the Exalted) on the Day of
Judgment will punish people each according to his deeds, «Go to those
whom you played the hypocrite on in the present life, so reflect, do they of-
fer you any punishment or reward?».

Al-Munthiri said, «Mahmoud ben Labid saw the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him); however he couldn’t have heard
what I saw. Ibn Abi Hatem has also mentioned that Al-Bukhary said, that
Mahmoud was not ever a Companion of the Holy Prophet (May Allah's
blessings and peace be upon him) and this was considered more probable by
Ibn Abdel-Birr and Al-Hafeth. It was also narrated by At-Tabarani men-

89

And after Ibn Masoud (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) it has been
narrated that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) has said, «He who dies invoking an equal to Allah (the
Exalted) regardless of Allah, will definitely be admitted into Hell-Fire.» This
has been narrated by Al-Bukhary.

tioning good supporting references after Mahmoud ben Labid after Rafeh
ben Khadij. Mahmoud died in the year 96 A.H and it has been said in the
year 97. When he died he was 99 years old.

His saying: (Verily of the things I fear most is that you commit minor
polytheism) this was as a result of his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) fear for his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) na-
tion as well as because he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
feels compassion for them, his mercy for them and pity for them, since there
never existed good or benefaction without him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) telling them about it or leading them to it; neither was
there an evil without him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
showing it to them, telling them about it or forbidding them from perform-
ing it; as he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) has truly said,

59 - «Allah (the Exalted) has never sent a prophet to a nation, without
that Prophet showing his nation the best and most benefitting aspects of what
he teaches them-till the end of the Honorable Hadith.» So if the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) fears that his Companions
who are well learned and have strong faith, might fall and make the mistake
of committing minor polytheism so how wouldnot He (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) fear that those who are less learned and
' knowledgeable in religion and monotheism than his Companions wouldn’t
commit minor polytheism? Especially if one realizes that the Savants in var-
ious countries nowadays do not know about monotheism and unification
but that which is recognized by the polytheists; they never know the mean-
ing of divinity which the term faith has denied to attribute to anything but
to Allah (the Exalted).

Abu Y’ala and Ibn Al-Munthir have said after Huthaifa ben Al-Yaman
after Abi Bakr after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him).

60 - «Polytheism is more masked and concealed than the crawling of ants.
Abu Bakr said, «O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace

90

And Moslim has narrated after Jaber (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him)
that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) has said, «He who meets Allah (the Exalted) without having set
up rivals unto Him (the Exalted), will definitely be admitted into the Gar-
den, and he who meets Him (the Exalted) while having set up rivals unto
Him (the Exalted), will definitely be admitted into Hell-Fire».

be upon him) isn’t polytheism nothing more than joining partners in worship-
ping Allah (the Exalted) or invoking others along with Allah (the Exalted) .»
He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «May your mother be
bereaved of you. Polytheism among you is more masked and concealed than
the crawling of ants.» Till the end of the Honorable Hadith which also says,
«Polytheism is saying Allah (the Exalted) and so and so gave me; to invoke he
who is an equal to Allah (the Exalted) is to say, «wouldn’t it have been for so
and so, I would have been killed by that person.

The writer said (And after Ibn Masoud (May Allah’s Peace be upon
Him) that Allah’s Holy Mesenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said,

61 - «He who dies invoking an equal to Allah (the Exalted) regardless of
Allah (the Exalted) , will definitely be admitted into Hell-Fire.» This has been
narrated by Al-Bukhary.)

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) has said, «He who 15
equal is he who is similar or he who resembles, it is said so and so 15 the
equal of so and so and it is said that the equal of his hand to mean that he
is similar to him and like him. Allah (the Exalted) has said in that connec-
tion, «Then set not up rivals unto Allah when ye know (The truth).» (2: 22).

His saying: (He who dies invoking an equal to Allah) that is worship an
equal to Allah (the Exalted) and invokes, begs and asks for his help, such a
person will definitely enter Hell-Fire.

And let it be known that setting up rivals with Allah (the Exalted) 5
two kinds:

The first kind: Is to join in partners with Allah (the Exalted) in all
types of worship or in some of them, as has been mentioned above; that 15
major polytheism.

The second kind: Is any one of the types of minor polytheism, for ex-
ample, when a man says, «What Allah (the Exalted) and you have wished or

wouldn’t have been due to Allah (the Exalted) and you... Minor polytheism
takes place when one easily performs an act of hypocrisy. It has been pro-

91

This Honorable Hadith tackles many issues:
The first: Fear of polytheism.
The second: That hypocrisy is verily one of the kinds of polytheism.
The third: Verily it is minor polytheism.

The fourth: Those most feared of committing minor polytheism are
those who are righteous.

The fifth: The proximity of the Garden and Hell-Fire.
The sixth: Discussing their proximity in one Honorable Hadith.

The seventh: Verily he who meets Him (the Exalted) without joining
partners in His worship will be admitted into the Garden, and he who
meets Him (the Exalted) having joined in partners in worshipping Him
(the Exalted) will be admitted into Hell-Fire even though he was the
best in his worship among those who worship Allah.

The eighth: The great issue of Al-Khalil’s invoking Allah (the Exalted)
to protect him as well as his sons from worshipping idols.

ven that when a man told the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him),

62 - «What Allah (the Exalted) and you wished, the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) asked him, «Have you considered
me Allah’s (the Exalted) rival? Rather, what Allah (the Exalted), Alone has
wished.» This has been narrated by Ahmad, Ibn Abi Shayba, Al-Bukhary in
«Al-Adab Al-Mufrad», An-Nisai and Ibn Majah whose opinion has already
been mentioned in the chapter on the benefits of monotheism.

This Honorable Hadith shows that invoking other than Allah (the Ex-
alted) concerning matters that Allah (the Exalted) Alone is able to accom-
plish, is in fact a manifest of polytheism. It is like asking for intercession
from the dead, since intercession belongs only to Allah (the Exalted) and it
is granted at His will only; it does not belong to any body else; He (the Ex-
alted) is the one who permits the intercessor to mediate for those who com-
mit major sins and meet Allah (the Exalted) with full sincerity and faith that
Allah (the Exalted) is one as will be discussed in the chapter concerning In-
tercession if Allah (the Exalted) pleases.

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) has written: (Moslem has
said after Jaber that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) has said,

92

111 000 5 5 5 5ع ررد تيع تعد ترثعت ءاة و قف ةدر فيه ‎OO‏

63 - «He who meets Allah (the Exalted) without having set up rivals
unto Him (the Exalted) , will definitely be admitted into the Garden, and he
who meets Him (the Exalted) while having set up rivals unto Him (the Ex-
alted) with definitely be admitted into Hell-Fire»).

Jaber is the son of Abdullah ben Amr ben Harama Al-Ansari As-Sala-
mi. He and his father are honorable Companions of the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). His father has famous and virtu-
ous deeds (May Allah be pleased with them). He died in the Medina seventy
of A.H. He become blind when he died at the age of 94.

His saying: (He who meets Allah (the Exalted) without setting up rivals
unto Him (the Exalted). Al Kurtobi has said, «That is, He has not joined
any partners in worshipping Allah (the Exalted) in as far as divinity, or crea-
tion, nor worship. It is very well known from agreed upon legislation of the
Sunnites that verily he who dies satisfying the above mentioned conditions
will definitely be admitted into the Garden, even if before admitting him
into the Garden he passes through various sorts of torture and ordeals. And
if he dies as a polytheist, will never be admitted into the Garden nor will he
receive Allah’s (the Exalted) Mercy; moreover, he will stay eternally in Hell-
Fire, without any interruption of his torture or decreasing durations.

The ninth: Considering worshipping idols as becoming much since he
said (In the Holy Koran), «O My Lord! They have indeed led astray many
among mankind» (14: 36).

The tenth: It includes the interpretaion of «There is no God but Allah»
as has been mentioned by Al-Bukhary.

The eleventh: The virtue of being free from polytheism.

An-Nawawi has said, «As for admitting the polytheist into fire, this is
considered in general, that is to say, the polytheist, will enter Hell-Fire and
stay in it eternally without distinguishing between the Jews or the Christians
and those who worship pagans and the rest of disbelievers; it makes no dif-
ference to the people of faith between the disbeliever as a result of his stub-
borness or other nor between he who disagrees with the creed of Islam and
between he who enters Islam then he ruled according to his disbelief and re-
jection, that is all those are treated equally in Hell-Fire, however, they vary
in their positions in its lowest levels while keeping in mind that your Lord
(the Exalted) does not oppress any body by the weight of an atom. As for
the entrance of he who does not die as a polytheist, the Garden is promised
to him alone. However, if the one who has done a major sin dies uninsisting

93

بي ع ب ع ع ع ع ا ع ا ا م م م ل ا ا ايلا ا يي يي ا اا ا ل ا اي يي ل ال ‎a‏

on it, he will enter the Garden first; if the one who has done a major sin
dies while insisting on it, then he is subject to Allah’s wish. So if Allah (the
Exalted) forgives him, he will enter the Garden first; other-wise he will be
tortured in Hell-Fire then he is discharged from Hell-Fire and admitted to
the Garden.

Others have said, «He limited himself to rejecting polytheism because
this necessitates monotheism and necessitates confirming the Holy Message.
Thus he who lies to Allah’s Messengers has in fact given the lies to Allah
(the Exalted) and he who gives the lies to Allah (the Exalted) is a polytheist.
It is as if you are saying, «He who performs the ablution and prays, his
prayer will be considered valid and hence accepted. That is if all other condi-
tions are valid and accepted prayer are met. Thus what is meant here is the
following:

94

Chapter: Calling people to witness
There Is No God But Allah

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say thou, “This is my way; I do invite
unto Allah, an evidence clear as the seeing with one’s eyes, I and whoever fol-
lows me. Glory to Allah! And never will I join gods with Allah.’» (12: 108).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter: Calling people to testify, there is no God but
Allah).

When the writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him ) mentioned mono-
theism (unification) and the benefits and advantages of monotheism and
what necessitates fear of whatever opposes it, he warned that the one who
knows this fact should not limit this knowledge to himself; rather, he should
call people to believe in Allah (the Exalted) through wise and good advice.
That is the way of messengers and their followers as Al-Hasan Al-Basri has
said when he rehearsed what Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Who is better in
speech than one who calls (men) to Allah, works righteousness, and says, «I
am of those who bow in Islam?» (41: 33). He said, «That is Allah’s beloved,
that is Allah’s creatures, that is the chosen by Allah, that is the most be-
loved among the people of the earth by Allah (the Exalted), he responded to
Allah’s call and in turn called the people to what Allah (the Exalted) has
called him to do, he has done righteous deeds by responding, «I am one of
the Moslims.».

He has said (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him): (And His (the Exalted)
saying «Say thou, «This is my way I do invite unto Allah, an evidence clear as
the seeing with one’s eyes, I and whoever follows me. Glory to Allah! And
never will I join gods with Allah.» (12: 108).

Abu Ja’far ben Jarir said, «Allah (the Exalted) says to His Holy Pro-
phet Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) «Say

95

اا ااا اا ا يي ا ا ااا اا ا ا ا ا ا ل ا ل اي ااا ا ااا

thou» 0 Muhammad «This» is the mission I call for and the way I want
people to follow from invocation to unify Allah (the Exalted) and worship-
ping Him faithfully regardless of pagans and idols or other gods till one ar-
rives at obeying Him and quitting to obey Him (the Exalted) «My way» my
path, my mission «I do invite unto Allah» (the Exalted) Alone who has no
partner «A clear evidence as the seeing with one’s eyes» while I am very
much knowledgeable and certain «I» and he invites all people who believe
me and follow me to believe in Allah (the Exalted) on clear evidence «Glory
to Allah». He commands him saying: «Say Thou» as well as keeping Allah
(the Exalted) away from being likened to others or having a partner joined
in worship along with Him (the Exalted) and exalting Him at the same time.
«And never will I join any God with Allah» He says, «] am not connected
to those who are polytheists; I don’t belong to them nor do they belong to
me».

He said in «Sharh El-Manazil»: «He wants you to use inference in or-
der to reach the highest ranks of knowledge which is the foresight and in-
sight, and that is the distinguishing characteristic with which the
Companions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) were qualified away from other people among the nation of Islam: that
is the highest ranks of religious authorities; He (the Exalted) has said in that
connection, «Say thou, «This is my way: I do invite unto Allah, a clear evi-
dence as the seeing with one’s eyes. (12: 108) That is, I and those who follow
me because of the evidence conclude through their insight and foresight. It
was said that it means I invite unto Allah (the Exalted) while using insight
and foresight to give evidence; he who follows me also invites unto Allah
(the Exalted) using his insight and foresight to give evidence. Whichever ex-
planation we adapt, the Holy verse indicates that his followers are those
people who have insight and foresight who invite unto Allah (the Exalted)
and that he who is not one of them is not considered as one of his followers
who believe in the truth and accept it, even though that person is one of his
followers in as far a call and affiliation.

The writer (Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: (This Holy Verse con-
notes many issues one of which is drawing attention to faith, because one
may call for righteousness, he is in fact doing that is for his own sake. An-
other issue is that insight and foresight are one of the religious obligations.
Another issue is one of the indications of truthfully believing that Allah (the
Exalted) is one, is to keep Him (the Exalted) away from another issue is

96

وعد فا عقاف واو قم قاف و اوقا وداه ولوراف د يو واج واع د وهاو قاع راع اواو هماود و ود ها عاو وام قفاوا وار ورا واه .ا قاعا فاه ع فقواقاع فا فاو و عاقاء وما ود عد مادعا عدوا وا مراع واأ مد عد راواه فار

that one of the reasons why polytheism is ugly is that it is abusing Allah
(the Exalted). Another issue is keeping the Moslem away from the polythe-
ists, he does not become a polytheist ever if he does not join partners in
worshipping Allah (the Exalted).

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Alilah’s Mercy be upon
him) said explaining the Holy Verse, «Invite (all) to the way of thy Lord with
wisdom and beautiful preaching... till the end of the Holy verse.» (16: 125) He
(Be the blessed and raised above) has mentioned all the ranks of inviting
people to Allah (the Exalted) and divided them into three categories relative
to the situation of the invited; so either he is asking for truthfulness and
righteousness and loving for them, prefering them to others if he was con-
fronted with others; this is called wisdom; this person needs neither preach-
ing nor augumentation, or he works and acts against truthfulness and
righteousness, but if he is confronted with righteousness and truthfulness, he
will follow them and adapt them; this person needs preaching built on arou-
sal of preaching and argument, or that person may be obstinately opposing
to truthfulness and righteousness; this person argues by means which are
beautiful. If he refrains from his obstinacy then it is fine; other-wise take
him to the headsman if possible.

He said: (And after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him).

64 - «Verily when Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) sent Moua’th to Yemen he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said, «You are going to meet people who have a Holy
Book. Let the first thing you invoke them to say is to testify that there is no
God but Allah. In another version of the same Honourable Hadith, «Invite
them to believe that Allah (the Exalted) is One». If they obey you, tell them
that Allah (the Exalted) has required them to pray five times every day and
night. If they obey you in that, tell them that Allah (the Exalted) demands
them to pay «Sadaka» Zakat which is a sum of money taken from their rich
and given to their poor. If they obey you, do not ever take that (Zakat) of
the best of their belongings and shield yourself against the oppressed’s invo-
cation of Allah (the Exalted) , since there does not exist a veil between it
and Allah (the Exalted)». This Honourable Hadith was narrated by both
Moslim and Al-Bukhary).

Al-Hafeth said, «In the year 10 A.H Mou’ath was sent to Yemen before
the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) preform-
ing the Hajj as the writer mentioned that. That is to say Al-Bukhary said in

97

And in another version of the Honourable Hadith, ‘Invite them to he-
lieve that Allah (the Exalted) is one’.

the last section of his book «al-Maghazi» (The Themes) and it was said that
that took place at the end of the year 9 A.H when he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) left Tabouk. This was also narrated by Al-Wakidi
after Ka’b ben Malek and it was written by Ibn Sa’d in his book «At-Taba-
kat». All narrators agreed among each other that he stayed in Yemen till the
Caliphate of Abu Bakr (10) then he left for Ash-Sham (Damascus) where he
died.

The Sheikh of Islam said, «One of Mou’ath’s (May Allah’s Peace be
upon Him) virtues is that the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him)sent him to Yemen in order to inform the people about
him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), as a ruler and a teacher
of religious knowledge.

His saying: (You are going to meet people who have a Holy Book) AI-
Kurtobi said that the Jews and the Christians are meant here because in Ye-
men they were more numerous than the Arab polytheists or may be stronger
and rather he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) draws his at-
tention to prepare himself for discussions and debates with them.

Al-Hafeth said, «It is like the introduction of a written will so that he
may gather his strength in that direction.»

His saying :(So let the first thing you invite them to testify that there is
no God but Allah (the Exalted) ).

His saying: (and in another version of the Honorable Hadith, «Invite
them to believe that Allah (the Exalted) is One.») This narrative is con-
firmed in the (Book of Unification) Kitab At-Tawhid of Saheeh AI-Bukh-
ary. The writer by mentioning this narrative indicated the meaning of
«testify that there is no God but Allah» because its meaning is verily unify-
ing Allah (the Exalted) that is not joining partners in worshipping Him (the
Exalted) and rejecting the worship of any other. And in another version of
the same narrative «Let the first thing you invite them to worship is Allah
fthe Exalted)» and that is rejecting evil and believing in Allah (the Exalted).
‏جلا‎ that connection He (the Exalted) has said, «Whoever rejects evil and be-
lieves in Allah hath grasped the most trustworthy hand-hold, that never
breaks.» (2: 256) And the most trustworthy hand-hold is (There is no God
but Allah). And Al-Bukhary said,

65 - «Invite them to testify that there is no God but Allah and that ve-
rily I am Allah’s Holy Messenger.»

98

If they obey you concerning this matter, then tell them that Allah (the
Exalted) has required them to pray five times every day and every night, so
if they obey you concerning that, then tell them that Allah has required that

they pay «Sadaka» which is a sum of money taken from their rich and given

to their poor.

I said: Testifying that verily there is no God but Allah has seven condi-
tions, it does not benefit the one who says it unless these seven conditions
are simultaneously satisfied; the first of these conditions 15, «the knowledge
rejecting ignorance.» The second is, «Certainty rejecting doubt.» The Third
is, «Acceptance rejecting refusal.» The fourth, «Compliance rejecting ne-
glect.» The fifth, «Faith rejecting polytheism.» The sixth, «Truthfulness re-
jecting lying.» The seventh, «Love rejecting its opposite.»

It also connotes that verily unification- which is faithfully worshipping
Allah (the Exalted) Alone without joining partners in worshipping Him (the
Exalted) and quitting the worship of other than Him (the Exalted) is the
first religious obligation. That is why monotheism was the first issue that the
messengers invited people to do (Worship Allah! Ye have no other God but
Him) (23: 32) and Noah said (That ye serve none but Allah) (11: 26) and it
includes the exact meaning of (There is no God but Allah).

Sheikh Al-Islam said, «It was necessarily known through the Holy Mes-
senger’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) religion and all peo-
ple and nations agreed that verily the essence of Islam and the first thing
that creatures are commanded to do is to witness that there is no God but
Allah, and that verily Muhammad is His Holy Messenger. By doing this the
disbeliever becomes a Moslem, the enemy becomes a supporter and protec-
tor and the one whose killing is religiously allowable and whose money may
religiously be taken, becomes now safeguarded in his body and money. Then
if he performs that heartily, then he is a member of belief; if he just re-
hearses it by his tongue and not by his heart, then as far as appearance is
concerned he is a Moslem short of deep faith. He said, «However, if he does
not verbalize it while able to do so, then the Moslems have agreed that such
a person is both secretly and openly a disbeliever; all Moslems including
those who came before as well as their religious authorities.

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: (and it includes that ve-
rily Mankind may be knowledgeable [An ordinary scientist, for example, a zo-
ologist and not a religious authority] but does not know the meaning of «There
is no God but Allah» or even has not heard of it or acted according to it).

99

If they obey you concerning that, then do not ever take from the best
of their belongings and shield yourself against the oppressed’s invocation of
Allah (the Exalted), since verily there is not a veil between it and Allah. This
Honourable Hadith was narrated by both Moslem and Al-Bukhary).

I said: How plenty these people are! May Allah (the Exalted) decrease
their numbers.

His saying: (If they obey you concerning that) ie to testify that there is
no God but Allah and complied with that (then tell them that Allah (the Ex-
alted) has required them to pray five times). This means that prayer is the
greatest and most significant religious duty that comes directly after the two
testifications [There is no God but Allah and that verily Muhammad is ‏على‎
‎lah’s Holy Messenger.] An-Nawawi said indicating that asking people to per-
form their religious duties can not take place but after Islam. However, that
does not mean that they cannot be addressed concerning these matters; that
their torture would be increased in the After life because of them. The truth
is that verily the disbelievers are addressed by all branches of religion that
people are commanded to perform or that people are commanded not to
perform. The above mentioned is agreed on and said by most people.

His saying: (Then tell them that verily Allah (the He be Exalted) has re-
quired that they pay «Sadaka» which is the sum of money taken from their
rich and given to their poor).

This shows that verily the «Zakat» [which is almost the Arabic conter-
part of Sadaka] is the most important pillar after the five prayers, and that
it is verily taken from the rich and given to the poor, and that verily the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) favored the
poor because their right to take «Zakat» is more corroborated and empha-
sized than the right of the remaining eight types.

This Honarable Hadith also includes the following verily the Imam is
the one who is responsible for taking the «Zakat» and spending it on those
who deserve it. Either he spends it by his delegate and it is taken by force
from he who refrains from performing it [paying it].

This Honorable Hadith shows that it is enough to pay «Zakat» from
one sort of goods or money as has been mentioned in the creed of Malek
and Ahmad.

It also shows: That verily it is not allowable to pay the money of «Za-
kat» to either a rich person or a disbeliever who can not be classified as
somebody associating with Islam or liking the company of Moslems. And

100

ولقاعدود قع د و عد ردم لد ف ود مدو د ود تر م در 2 اال ا الا ااال لا ا ااا اا باللا اا الا ا ااا و و و ا ور رول

that verily the «Zakat» is definitely taken from the money of children and
mad persons as the public agree upon because the Honorable Hadith 5
wide, and general.

I said: If the poor were favored by the term it also includes the humble,
and vice versa, that is this applies to all those similar or having the same sta-
tus as the poor. This is in accodance with what the Sheikh of Islam estab-
lished.

His saying: (And do not ever take from the best of their belongings).
The writer of «Malali’>h». The best of their belongings mean, the animal that
gives much milk, that which is most beautiful as well as that which has
much meat and much wool. This was mentioned by An-Nawawi (I said) and
it is also the best and most precious belongings.

It also includes: That it is verily not allowable for the one collecting the
«Zakat» from taking the best of this money and it also means that it is pro-
hibited to give from money which was illegally earned. Rather it is taken
from the middle and if the person agreeably gives the best of his money then
it is allowable to take it.

His saying: (And shield yourself against the oppressed’s invocation of
Allah (the Exalted) that is make between you and this invocation some sort
of prevention by being just and quitting oppression. These two matters pro-
tect who is endowed by them from ‏لاله‎ the evils in the present life and as
well as from many other things.

This Honorable Hadith includes warning against all sorts of oppression.

His saying (verily there) that is the topic being discussed (there is not a
veil existing between it and Allah (the Exalted). This sentence means that
such invocation can not be kept away from Allah (the Exalted) therefore he
directly accepts it.

This Honorable Hadith also means the acceptance of what the One (the
Exalted) and just has informed and the necessity of working in confirmity
with that information. It also includes the information that the Imam [The
religous leader] send people to collect this money of «Zakat» and that he
preaches and advises his delegates and rulers and orders them to rever Allah
(the Exalted) and fear Him. Teach them and forbid them from oppressing
people and informs them about its bad consequences. It also draws attention
to teaching things gradually by teaching first things first. This was said by
the writer.

I said: One should start with teaching the most essential then moves to

101

They also narrated after Sahl ben Sa’ad (May Allah’s Peace be upon
Him) that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said on the day the battle Khaibar, «I would give the banner

teaching that which follows in importance.

Let it be known that the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) did not mention «Fasting» or «Hajj» and this caused
many religious authorities to become confused and uncertain.

Sheikh Al-Islam said: Some people said: Verily some narrators of the
Honorable Hadith had mentioned the Honorable Hadith summarized or in
brief while the Honorable Hadith was not as such. Verily this constitutes
contesting the narrators’ version of the Honorable Hadith.

66 - The Honorable Hadith narrated the delegation of Abdel-Kais,
where some of them [the narrators] mentioned «Fasting» while others did
not mention it. But as for the two separate Honorable Hadiths their case is
not as such; however, there are two answers concerning their issue:

The first one: Verily that happened due to the sequence of sending
down the religious obligations and the first issue that was required of the
Moslems is to testify that there is no God but Allah and that Muhammad is
Allah’s Holy Messenger then the prayer. Verily He (the Exalted) com-
manded people to perform the prayer at the early times of revelation that is
why the Hajj and its necessity were not mentioned; rather, this mention
came in those Honorable Hadiths that came last.

The second answer: Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) used to mention in every occasion whatever suits it. So
once he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) would mention reli-
gious obligations which is usually fought for such as prayer and Zakat and
once he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) would mention
prayer and fasting for he who did not have to pay Zakat, and once he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) would mention Prayer, Fasting
and Zakat, so either they are prior to Hajj or it is that the one who is ad-
dressed does not have to perform the ritual of Hajj [Either because he is not
a Moslem or because he does not have to because of many other reasons].

As for Prayer and Zakat they are more important, that is why Allah
(the Exalted) has said in His Holy Koran that one should fight those who
do not pray or pay Zakat, that is so because they are two visible and obser-
vable types of worship, that is in contradistinction with fasting which is like
performing ablution which is something secretive or private and the servant

102

tomorrow to a man who loves Allah and His Holy Messenger and who ts
loved by Allah and His Holy Messenger. Allah would make him conquer
the enemies. So people spent...

is trusted of performing without being supervised by religious leaders. Thus
a person can not intend to fast and secretly eat. As well he is able to con-
ceal his secrement and ritual impurity, and declaring in the open the deeds
and become Moslims by it. That is why that was associated with prayer and
Zakat regardless of fasting even though it is considered a religious obliga-
tion as has been mentioned in the Holy Verse which was descended after re-
quiring fasting. People agreed on that. When Mou’ath was sent to Yemen
he also did not mention fasting in the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) because fasting was required later and because it is
secret. Moua’th did not mention Hajj as well because not all people are ob-
liged to perform it and because it is recommended for those who are able to
perform it once in a life time. This is the end of interpretation of the mean-
ing.

His saying: (This Honorable Hadith was mentioned by both Al-Bukh-
ary and Moslim). It was narrated by them. It was also narrated by Ahmad,
Abu Dawud, At-Tirmithi, An-Nisai’ and Ibn Mayjah).

He said: (They also narrated after Sahl ben Sa’d (May Allah’s Peace be
upon Him), verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said during the day of the battle of Khaibar:

67 - «Il would give the banner tomorrow to a man who loves Allah and
His Holy Messenger and who is loved by Allah and His Holy Messenger,
Allah (the Exalted) would make him conquer the enemies. So people spent
their night thinking about who was going to be given the banner. Thus when
they woke up in the morning they went early to Allah’s Holy Messengver
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) each hoping to be given the
banner. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Where is Ali
ben Abi Taleb?» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was
answered, «His eyes are hurting him.» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said, «Then send after him.» Thereupon Ali came; the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) spit into his eyes and invoked
Allah (the Exalted) for his sake. Consequently Ali was cured as if his eyes had
never hurt him. So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) gave him
the banner and said, «Go slowly till you reach their field, then invite them to
Islam, and tell them about their duties and obligations towards Allah (the

103

...their night thinking about who was going to be given the banner. Thus
when they woke up in the morning they went early to Allah’s Holy Messen-
ger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) each ...

Exalted), by Allah if through you He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) guides one man to Islam is better for you than the honorables.»).

«Spent their right thinking» that is considering and discussing.

His saying: (After Sa’d ben Sahl) That is to say Ibn Malek ben Khaled
Al-Ansari Al-Khizraji As-Saidi, Abi Al-Abbas who is a famous Companion
of the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). His
father was also a famous Companion. He died in the year 88 A.H and lived
more than one hundred years.

His saying: (He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said
during the day of the battle of Khaibar) the same was mentioned in the two
Saheehs after Salamah ben Al-Akwa’ who said,

68 - «Ali (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) had lagged behind the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) during the day of
the battle of Khaibar because he (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) wa;
suffering from sore eyes. He (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) said, «Is it I
who lags behind the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him)?» Thereupon He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
left home and followed the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him). On the eve of the battle he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said, «I would give the Banner- or he would take the banner-
tomorrow to a man loved by Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger
(May Ailah’s blessings and peace be upon him)» or he said: «Who loves
Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him). Allah (the Exalted) would make him conquer the
enemies.»

His saying: (I would give the banner), concerning this Al-Hafeth from
Bouraida, «Verily I am handing over the flag to a man loved by Allah (the
Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him). Some linguists said that the terms «give» and «hand over» as well as
«flag» and «banner are synonymous, but Ahmad and At-Tirmithi narrated
from Ibn Abbas narration.

69 - «Allah’s Holy Messenger’s banner was black and his (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) flag was white». In that connection At-Ta-
barani said the same after Bouraida. However, Ibn Uday said after Abi Hur-
aira that he added «Also written in it was «There is no God but Allah and

104

- hoping ‏ما‎ be given the bauner. So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said, «Where’s Ali ben Abi Taleb?» He (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) was answered, «His eyes are hurting him» So they

Muhammad is Allah’s Holy Messenger.»

His saying: (A man who loves Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). This shows a great
virtue for Ali (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him).

The Sheikh of Islam said, «This description is not limited to Ali alone
or the Imams alone, verily Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) love every righteous believer
who truly loves Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him), however, this Honorable Hadith is among
the best evidences against hostile people who do not take it upon them-
selves, disbelieve it or claim that it strayed from the right path, as the Khari-
jites [Those who seceded]. However, this evidence can not be completed
according to what the Rafidites [The Rejecters] who believe that texts show-
ing the virtues of the Companions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) were written before they apostated from
Islam; verily the Kharijites say something like this about Ali, but that is
false since verily Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) do not issue such praise on whom Allah
(the Exalted) knows would die as a disbeliever.

This Honorable Hadith also confirms the attribute of love contrary to
what the Juhmites or those who follow them believe.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) would make him conquer the enemies)
this is obviously glad tidings that conquering the enemies was going to take
place; that is one of the signs of prophecy.

His saying: (So people spent their night thinking) the writer said this
means that they spent their night discussing to whom the banner would be
handed over. This means that the Companions of the Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) were keen about that which is
good, interested in that which is advantageous, and that their rank in knowl-
edge and faith was high.

His saying: (Concerning who) was going to be given the banner.

His saying: (Thus when they woke up in the morning they went early to
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
each hoping to be given the banner) and in another narration by Abi Hur-
aira as told by Moslem that verily Omar said:

105

sent after him; he was brought, he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) spit into his eyes and invoked Allah (the Exalted) for his sake.

Consequently he was cured as if his eyes had never hurt him. So he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) gave him the banner and
said, «Go slowly till you reach their field...

70 - «I had never wanted to assume leadership but on that day.»

The Sheikh of Islam said, «That identifies that the Holy Prophet’s (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) testimony to Ali’s private and
manifest faith as well as confirming his loyality to Allah (the Exalted) and
to His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and
the necessity that the believers become loyal to them as well. And. if the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) testifies for
someone concerning any object, or if he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) invokes Allah (the Exalted) for his sake, many people would love
to have such a witness and such an invocation. And verily the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) witnessed for many among
mankind and invoked Allah (the Exalted) for the sake of many among man-
kind; that is similar to witnessing that Thabet ben Kais and Abdullah ben
Salam were going to be admitted into the Garden. Verily he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) had the same witness for many others as
well as the witness to a person who was addicted to alcohol that he loves ‏الث‎
‎lah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him).

His saying: (He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,
«where’s Ali ben Abi Taleb?») This shows that the Imam [Religious leader]
asks and looks after his people.

His saying: (He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was
told, «His eyes are hurting him.») That 15 to say Ali was suffering from sore
eyes as was mentioned by Moslim’s Saheeh after Sa’d ben Abi Waqqas. He
said,

71 ) «Ask Ali to come to me, so he was brought and he was suffering
from sore eyes,» till the end of the Honorable Hadith. And in another ap-
proved version written by the writer «It was said that he was complaining
from his eyes, thereupon he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
sent after him» and Moslem by way Iyas ben Salama ben Al-Akwa’ nar-
rated after his father.

72 - «Thereafter he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) sent
106

. then Invite them to Islam.

me after Ali’. I brought him and guided him because he had sore eyes».

His saying: (and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) in-
voked Allah (the Exalted) for his sake and consequently he was cured that
he was immediately recovered from his disease; his recovery was complete as
if he had never suffered from sore eyes or weakness of eyesight. At-Tabarani
said after Ali (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him),

73 - «Since the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) handed over the flag to me, I never had sore eyes or migraine.» This
includes the evidence on the two testifications.

His saying: (Go slowly) that 1s to say approach them without hurrying
and «their field» is their land and its surroundings.

This includes good manners when fighting and quitting rush, reckless-
ness and unnecessary noises.

It also includes: The Imam’s order to his subordinates to be kind yet
not weak or without determination; this was indicated in his (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) saying: «Then invite them to Islam). What
is meant here is the testification that there is no God but Allah and that ve-
rily Muhammad 15 Allah’s Holy Messenger; 11 you wish you could say that
Islam is: The testification of, there is no God but Allah and that verily Mu-
hammad is His servant and Holy Messenger, and whatever these two wit-
nesses require such as faithfulness to Allah (the Exalted) Alone while
worshipping Him (the Exalted), and being faithful and obedient to His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s peace be upon him). This Honorable Hadith and its
interpretation are in conformity with what Allah (the Exalted) has said to
His Holy Prophet and Messenger, «Say, «O people of the Book! Come to
common terms as between us and you: That we worship none but Allah; That
we associate no partners with Him; that we erect not, from among ourselves,
lords and patrons other than Allah.» If then they turn back, say ye, «Bear wit-
ness that we (at least) are Moslims (bowing to Allah’s will)» (3: 64).

The Sheikh of Islam (May Allah’s be Mercy be upon him) said, «Islam
is surrendering to Allah (the Exalted) , and surrendering is submission and
humbleness Him (the Exalted). This was the linguists’ explanation.

He (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) also said: «The religion of Islam
which Allah (the Exalted) has accepted and sent His messengers to teach
people about it. It has its origin in the heart and submission to Him (the Ex-
alted) Alone by worshipping Him (the Exalted) Alone, with no one with

107

And tell them about their duties and obligations towards Allah(the Ex-
alted) .

By Allah (the Exalted) if through you He (the Exalted) guided one man
to Islam, this would be better for you».

This Honorable Hadith points at many issues:

The first: Verily inviting people to believe in Allah (the Exalted) is the
path of those who follow Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him).

The second: Drawing attention to faithfulness because many of those
who invite people to righteousness are in fact inviting to Him.

The third: Verily insight and foresight are among religious duties and
obligations.

The fourth: An indication of the advantages of unification [Believing
that Allah (the Exalted) is One]: Verily it is exalting Allah (the Ex-
alted) from being abused.

The fifth: Verily polytheism is disgraceful and abominable because it
means abusing Allah (the Exalted).

The sixth: -Which is the most important- keeping the Moslem away
from the polytheists does not become one of them even if he does not
practice polytheism.

The seventh: Unifying Allah (the Exalted) is verily the first religious
duty.

The eighth: Verily to start every thing with it, even the prayer.

Him. Thus he who worships Him (the Exalted) while associating another
God in his worship, is not considered a Moslim. And he who is haughty
about worship is not considered a Moslim; in essence Islam is something
that is performed both by the heart and by the senses and organs. As for
faith; its origin is believing, and confirming.

Thus it has been shown that monotheism and rejecting polytheism in
worship are the essence of Islam; this is what all the messengers invited to
and that is surrendering to Allah (the Exalted) Alone by monotheism as well
as submitting to Him (the Exalted) by obeying His commands sent to them
through His Messengers. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said

108

The ninth: Verily «Yo unify Allah» means to witness there is no God
but Allah (the Exalted).

The tenth: Verily one may be one of the people of the Book [Chris-
tian, Jew]. Yet he does not know it or he knows it but does not work
according to it.

The eleventh: Drawing people’s attention that teaching should be a
gradual process.

The twelfth: One should start by teaching first things first.
The thirteenth: The Bank of Zakat.

The fourteenth: The religious authority explains that which is confus-
ing and ambiguous to the learner.

The fifteenth: Preventing those who collect the Zakat from taking the
best belongings of people.

The sixteenth: Avoiding the oppressed’s invocation of Allah (the Ex-
alted).

The seventeenth: Telling that there is no veil between Allah (the Ex-
alted) and the oppressed’s invocation of Allah.

The eighteenth: Among the evidences of unification is what happened
to the Master of messengers (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) and to the Masters of Allah’s holy men, such as hardships, diffi-

through His Messenger Noah, «That ye should worship Allah, fear and obey
me.» (71: 3).

This Honorable Hadith also includes: That calling people to Islam be-
fore fighting them is religiously allowable, but if embracing Islam were at-
tained, then it is allowable to fight them without inviting them first to Islam
because the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
raided Bani Al-Mostalik while they were inadvertent. However, hadnot the
call to Islam were reached, they should be invited to Islam first.

His saying: «And tell them about their duties and obligations toward
Allah (the Exalted) » that is their duties and obligations toward Allah as set
by Isla. So if they agreed with you then tell them about those duties and
obligations which are essential and necessary to perform; for example,
prayer and Zakat as was mentioned in Abi Huraira’s Honorable Hadith.

109

culties, hunger and disease.

The nineteenth: His saying, «I will give the banner etc...» is of the
signs of prophecy.

The twentieth: Spitting in the eyes of Ali ben Abi Taleb (May Allah’s
Peace be upon Him) is one of the signs of prophecy as well.

The twenty-first: Ali’s (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) virtue.

The twenty-second: The Companions’ virtue in spending that night dis-
cussing what the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) told them and being distracted from the glad tidings of
conquering the enemies.

The twenty-third: Believing in determinism. That is to say believing
that it might happen to the one who does not work for it while it
might happen to the one who does not work for it.

The twenty-fourth: Good manners when saying, «Go slowly».
The twenty-fifth: Inviting people to Islam before fighting them.

Twenty-sixth: Fighting 15 religiously allowable against those who are
invited before.

74 - «If they do that, then they would prevent me from killing them or
taking their belongings unless its their right.» And when Omar told Abi
Bakr concerning fighting those who refused to pay Zakat, «How come do
you fight women when Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said,

75 - «I was ordered to fight people till they say there is no God but
Allah. Thereupon if they said it, then they would prevent me from killing
them or taking their belongings unless with the right.» Abu Bakr said,
«Verily the Zakat is the price of their belongings; by Allah (the Exalted) if
they refuse to give me a young she-goat that they used to pay as Zakat to
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) I
would fight them to prevent that refusal.»

This Honorable Hadith includes: The Imam’s sending men to invite
others to Islam, as used to be done by the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) and his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) Orthodox Caliphs. As was mentioned in the Musnad after Omar

110

Twenty-seventh: Using wisdom while inviting people to Islam. In that
connection he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,
«Tell them about their duties and obligations».

The twenty-eighth: Learning about Allah (the Exalted).

The twenty-ninth: That the one who guides any person to Islam is re-
warded.

ben Al-Khattab (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) that he said in one of his
oration,

76 - «However, I verily by Allah, never send you my rulers to kill your
people or take your belongings; rather, I send them to you to teach you
your religion and line of conduct [The Sunna of the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)].

His saying: «By Allah if through you He (the Exalted) guides one man
to Islam is better for you than the honorable camels.

An-Nawawi said, «Likening the affairs of the After life to the affairs of
the present life is just a matter of approximation in order to make things ea-
sier for people to comprehend; otherwise, one atom from the After life is
better than the whole earth and many other similar earths added to it.

This Honorable Hadith also includes: The virtue of who guides one
man to Islam and that swearing by Allah (the Exalted) concerning what is
told as well as concerning religious advisory opinions is allowable even if
one was not asked or required to swear.

111

Chapter: (Explaining Unification and his testification
That there is no God but Allah)

And Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Those whom they call upon do desire

Chapter

His saying: Chapter Explaining the monotheism and the testification that
there is no God but Allah).

If it was said, «At the beginning of the Book, Holy Verses explaining
the meaning of «There is no God but Allah», and its connotations, were
mentioned, for example, Allah’s (the Exalted) saying: «Thy Lord hath de-
creed that ye worship none but Him» (17: 23) as well as what came before it
and what followed it in addition to what was mentioned in other chapters.
So what is the benefit of this explanation?

It was said: The Holy Verses mentiond in this chapter include
additional clarification concerning the meaning of faithfulness as well as its
denotation such as the monotheism of Allah. It includes the argument
against those attached to prophets and righteous people invoking them and
asking them to fulfil their needs, because that was the reason why some
Holy Verses were descended much as the first Holy verse, «Say ‘call on
those-besides Him- whom ye fancy.» (17: 56). Most interpreters of the Holy
Koran have agreed that it was descended concerning those who worship
Christ and his mother, Ouzair and the angles. Allah (the Exalted) has
strictly forbidden that. This Holy Verse also includes warning and threat
concerning that. This shows that invoking other than Allah (the Exalted) is
considered polytheism which is incompatible with Monotheism and the
testification that verily there is no God but Allah; verily Unification is
accomplished by invoking Allah (the Exalted) Alone. The term of faith
rejected this polytheism because invoking other than Allah (the Exalted) is
treating him as a God and worshipping him.

112

(for themselves) means of access to their Lord even those who are nearest:
They hope for His Mercy and fear His wrath for the wrath of thy Lord is
something to take heed of.» (17: 57)...

77 - «Invoking 15 the core or heart of worship».

This Holy Verse means: Verily the one who is cailed upon does not pos-
sess the ability to dispel harm or divert it from one place to another, or
from one state to another, even if the one who is invoked were a prophet or
a king. This confirms that every invocation directed to other than Allah (the
Exalted) is invalid no matter who that one was, because invoking him fails
the one who invokes him because the one who asks for his invocation has in
fact joined partners with Allah (the Exalted); partners who can neither bene-
fit him nor harm him. This Holy Verse confirms monotheism as ‘vell as the
meaning of the term there is no God but Allah (the Exalted) .

Allah’s (the Exalted) saying, «Those whom they call upon do desire (for
themselves) means of access to their Lord.» (17: 57) shows.

The path of prophets and messengers and those believers who followed
Kutadah said; «Approach Him (the Exalted) by obeying Him (the Exalted)
and by doing what pleases Him (the Exalted).» And Ibn Zaid rehearsed,
«Those whom they call upon do desire (for themselves) means of access to
their Lord, -even those who are nearest.» (17: 57) Ibn Kathir said: «The inter-
preters do not disagree among each other as far as this intepretation is con-
cerned.» And he quoted several interpreters.

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said: «In this Holy Verse the three ranks were mentioned: Love which
desires approaching Him (the Exalted); intercession which is approaching
Him (the Exalted) through performing righteous deeds and finally hope and
reverence. That is the truth concerning monotheism and the reality of the Is-
lamic religion as was mentioned in the Musnad after his grand-father that
he told the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him),

78 - «O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him), by Allah (the Exalted) I did not come to you but after I swore
ten times not to come to you. By the One who sent you to teach righteous-
ness, explain to me that righteousness.» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said: «It is Islam.» He asked, «And what is Islam?» He (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Islam is to surrender your
heart and turn your face to Allah (the Exalted) , pray the preordained
prayers, and pay the required Zakat.» And Muhammad ben Nasr Al-Mar-

113

... and, «They take their priests and their anchorites to be their lords in dero=
gation of Allah.» (9: 31) till the end of the Holy Verse.

ouzi said after Abi Huraira who said that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May ‏على‎
‎lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

79 - «Verily the religion of Islam has a guide post and a beacon similar
to that found on the road to guide people. Some of these guiding principles
are to worship Allah (the Exalted) without joining partners, to pray, to pay
the Zakat, fast the Holy month of Ramadan, and to order people to perfom
that which is good and righteous and forbid them from doing that which is
abominable.» That is the meaning of the following Holy Verse, «Whoever
submits his whole self to Allah, and is a doer of good, has grasped indeed the
most trustworthy hand-hold: And with Allah rests the End and Decision of (all)
affairs.» (31: 22).

And His (the Exalted) saying, «Behold! Ibrahim said to his father and his
people, I do indeed clear myself of what ye worship, (I worship) only Him who
made me, and He will certainly guide me» and he left it as a word to endure
among those who came after him» (43: 26-28) that is to say this Word is,
«There is no God but Allah».

So think about how Ibrahim Al-Khalil (May Allah’s peace be upon
him) expressed this great word to mean what was meant mean of clearing
himself from all that was worshipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted) such
as those things existing in such as planets and the temples and idols that the
people of Noah made according to the images of righteous people, for exam-
ple, Wadd, Souwa’h, Yaqouth and Nasr and many other idols and equals
that used to be worshipped by the polytheists. And he (Ibrahim) did not
choose from all these whorshipped objects but the One who created him,
that One is Allah (the Exalted) Alone who has no partner; this is what the
term faith meant and denoted.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «That is because Allah
He is Reality; and those besides Him whom they; and those besides Him whom
they invoke, they are but vain Falsehood.» (22: 62) Thus every worship
through which other than Allah (the Exalted) is intended, such as invocation
or others is false and invalid; it is unforgiveable polytheism.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Then shall it be said to
them «Where are the (deities) to which ye gave part-worship in derogation of
Allah?» Then will reply: «They have left us in the lurch, nay, we invoked not,
of old, anything (that had real existence)» Thus does Allah leave the unbelie-

114

لم ع مد و لاع عد هد ود رد و شد 41 5 1 لظ قار 5د راق مقا فارع قور ور وت ‎SO‏ تدج ماج ماع م جاع عد عد لدع قد هج عد عاج ماحد عد ع ع عد عد مد م تج م 0 5م

vers to stray.» (40: 73: 74).

Also He (the Exalted) has said, «They take their priests and their anchor-
ites to be their lords in derogation of Allah, and (they take as their lord)
Christ the son of Mariam)» (9: 31).

It was also mentioned in the Saheeh Hadith [Truthful Honorable Ha-
dith].

80 - Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) rehearsed this Holy verse to Uday ben Hatem At-Ta’i. He said, «O AI-
lah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) we do
not worship them.» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,
«Do not they allow what Allah (the Exalted) has proscribed and you per-
form it, and do not they proscribe what Allah (the Exalted) has made allow-
able and you in turn refrain from doing it?» He said: «Yes.» The Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: «Then what
you do 15 worshipping them.»

Thus obeying them to perform that which is prohibited is worshipping
other than Allah (the Exalted) and taking those worshipped as lords, as is
the reality of this; that 15 considered an aspect of major polytheism which re-
jects monotheism that is what the term «There is no God but Allah.» de-
notes.

Thereupon this Holy Verse shows that the word of faithfulness rejects
all this because it contradicts its meaning. So they stuck to whatever poly-
theism rejected and dropped all monotheism it confirms.

Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Yet there are men who take (for worship)
others beside Allah, as equal (with Allah); they love them as they should love
Allah». (2: 165) Thus every one who takes an equal to Allah (the Exalted)
and invokes him regardless of Allah (the Exalted) and asks him to fulfil his
desires and look forward to him to fulfil his wishes and drive away his wor-
ries and grief -that is similar to the case of those who worship graves, tomb-
stones, idols and Pagans.

Thus it is inevitable that they exalt them and love them for this; thus
they verily loved them with Allah (the Exalted) even though they loved
Allah (the Exalted) and say: «There is no God but Allah», pray and fast,
they joined partners with Allah (the Exalted) in love by loving other than
Him (the Exalted) and in worship by worshipping other than Him (the
Exalted). Thus taking equals to Allah (the Exalted) whom they love as they
love Allah (the Exalted) revokes everything that they say and every deed

115

والعا عد قا ءامد وى قاقد ود و قاد قد و فاع هد قدو قاقد هد فود ود ود هد هاعد ها و و وأقاعاعد و عافدقا عدوا م وه واقارا .ا مدو هد وارا م رام فاقاقد عد ود راد مامد .د فده ارد و مام 6د .د عد مدع 5 > تالح 5 ع 6 5 5 05

that they do. That is so because all the deeds of a polytheist are rejected and
considered invalid. If those people say, «There is no God but Allah». They
in reality have dropped all the conditions for saying this great term:
Realizing its denotation. It is so because the polytheist does not know its
meaning and because he is ignorant of its meaning; he joined in partners
with Allah (the Exalted) concerning love as well as many other issues. That
is ignorance that contradicts knowledge of faithfulness that this term
denotes; this person was not truthful in saying it, because he did not reject
polytheism that it rejected, neither did he affirm faithfulness that it
confirmed; he as well dropped certainty, because had he known its meaning
and what it denoted, he would have rejected it, doubted it and denied it
while it 1s the truth and the reality.

Neither did he reject all that is worshipped regardless of Allah (the Ex-
alted) as was mentioned in the Honorable Hadith; rather, he had believed in

what is worshipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted). And worshipping them
regardless of Allah (the Exalted).

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «But those of faith are
overflowing in their love for Allah.» (2: 165) because they were sincere and
truthful in their love thus they never loved but Him (the Exalted) and they
love whoever He (the Exalted) loves and they are sincere and truthful in all
their deeds and they reject whatever is worshipped regardless of Allah (the
Exalted). Through this it 15 shown to the one who is guided by Allah (the
Exalted) to learn that which is truthful and righteous and accept it, how
great those Holy Verses are in showing the meaning of «There is no God
but Allah» as well as the meaning of monotheism to which all the messen-
gers invited people. So think about all this.

He said, and Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Those whom they call upon
do desire (for themselves means of access to their Lord, even those who are
nearest till the end of the Holy verse.» (17: 57). The meaning of this Holy
Verse becomes clear after reading the Holy Verse that came before it and
which says, «Say, «Call on those besides Him whom ye fancy: They have
neither power to remove your troubles from you nor to change them» (17: 56).

Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, «Allah (the Exalted)
says, «Say» 0 Muhammad to those polytheists who have worshipped other
than Allah (the Exalted) «Call on those -besides Him- who ye fancy», such
as idols, pagans and equals and resort to them; they verily do not possess
the ability to dispel what is harming you, that is taken 1 its general mean-

116

Allah also has said, «Behold! Ibrahim said to his father and his people, ‘I
do indeed clear myself of what ye worship, (I worship) only Him who made
me, and He will certainly guid me’. And he left it as a word to endure among
those who came after him, that they may turn back (to Allah).» (43: 26-28)

ing, «nor to change them» that is to say they are unable to deviate harm
from afflicting and direct it to others.

The meaning: Verily he who is able to do all this is Allah (the Exalted)
Alone who has no partner; He (the Exalted) Alone possesses all creation
and He (the Exalted) is the one who is All-commanding. Al-Awfy said after
Ibn Abbas concerning the above mentioned Holy Verse, «Polytheists used ‘o
say, «We worships the angles, Christ and Azir; they used to be invoked, that
is to say the angles, Christ and Azir».

Al-Bukhary narrated after Ibn Masoud (May Allah’s Peace be upon
him) concerning the Holy Verse,

81 - «People worshipped some Jinns; they turned to Islam» And in an-
other version of the same Honorable Hadith, «there was a group of people
who used to worship a group of Jinns; those Jinns turned to Islam and
those people adhered to their religion»

Al-Saddi said after Abi Saleh after Ibn Abbas concerning the Holy
Verse, «Issa [Jesus], his mother and Azir.» Moughira also said in connection
to that, after Ibrahim, «Ibn Abbas used to say about that Holy Verse,
«They are Issa, Azir, the sun and the moon.» And Mujahid said, «Issa, Azir
and the angles».

His saying: (They hope for His Mercy and fear His wrath) worship is
not accomplished but out of fear and hope, thus each invoker who invokes
in worship must satisfy these conditions, either he is afraid or he is hopeful
or both.

The Sheikh of Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said about this
Holy Verse when he discussed what those who explained it said, «All what
they say is true, verily this Holy Verse includes the one whose object of
worship, worships Allah (the Exalted) in turn, whether he was of the Angles,
Jinns or Mankind. Those who came before when they interpreted this Holy
Verse they mentioned that which is commonly or generally meant by the
Holy Verse by way of demonstrating in the same way the translator answers
the following question, «what is the meaning of «bread». He would show
the one who asked the question a loaf of bread and say, «This». Thus he
indicates the kind rather than the essence. By doing this they do not aim at
saying that the Holy Verse is specific; rather, this Holy Verse is directed to

117

وم قفار واف قد رد مد رد قاقد قد قدقاف رار قاراراق ا نا ف ران نار وان لان راو وان وار وما م ود مالا قاع قد وا مده ود قار م مدع هد 6د 6 6د 5 5ج 0 د 6 5 5 5 ع عع د ‎١‏ 5 ع 5 ع ع 5 5 5 5 5 555

whomever invoked other than Allah (the Exalted) who in turn hoped for
Allah’s Mercy and fears His wrath. Thus every one who invokes a dead or
an absent prophet or a righteous man, whether he verbalizes the request for
help or not, is meant by this Holy Verse. It is also directed at those who
invoke Angles and Jinns; Allah (the Exalted) has forbidden us from
invoking them and showed us that they are unable to dispel harm from
those who invoke them, neither can they direct it from one person to
another such as changing its severity or any of its adjectives that is why He
(the Exalted) said (nor can they deviate it}. Thus each one who invokes a
dead or absent prophet or righteous man or invokes the angles has in fact
invoked someone who can not save him; someone who does not possess the
ability to dispel or divert his worries.

This Holy Verse also includes the response to those who invoke right-
eous men and say «f donot join in partners with Allah (the Exalted) , I am
not a polytheist; polytheism is worshipping idols.»

He said, «Allah’s (the Exalted) saying, «Behold! Ibrahim said to his
father and his people «I do indeed clear myself of what ye worship (I worship)
only Him who made me at the end of the Holy verse» (43: 26-28) Ibn Kathir
said, «Allah (the Exalted) says telling us about His (the Exalted) servant,
Messenger, beloved, tue leader of Hanafites, and the father of the prophets
sent after him, to whom Quraish is related in origin and creed, that verily he
cleared himself of his father and people because they worshipped idols, so he
said, «I do indeed clear myself of what ye worship, (I worship) only Him who
made me and He will certainly guide me». And he left it as a word to endure
among those who came after him, that they may turn back (to Allah).» (43:
26-28) That is to say this term which is worshipping Allah (the Exalted).
Alone without joining in partners in His (the Exalted) worship and with dis-
missing all other pagans; this term «There is no God but Allah,» was made
by him an example to be followed by those children of him who were
guided to the right path from among the progeny of Ibrahim (May Allah’s
peace be upon him). (That they may turn back) that is to say to the term
«There is no God but Allah.»

Akrama, Mujahed, Al-Dahhaq, Qatadah, and As-Saddi and many
others said concerning: (And he left it as a word to endure among those
who came after him, that they, may turn back (to Allah) that this ‘word» is
«There is no God but Allah» and that among his progeny there are still peo-
ple who say it and believe in it.

118

ا ا ل ل ل ل م من ا مس اا ل وى سل سل سك ال ا للىى ل ل م ل ا لل ل ل ال الى اام ملك لك ا ا لي ينل لل ل ل جل ل ل م ليلل ل لل من ااا 30000

Ibn Jarir narrated after Qatadah (I indeed clear myself of what ye wor-
ship (I worship) Him who made me- that he said concerning the above men-
tioned Holy Verse that they used to say, «Allah is our Lord»; «If thou ask
them, who created them, the will certainly say, Allah» (43: 87). He did not
clear himself of his Lord. This was narrated by Abed ben Hamid, [bn jarir
and Ibn Al-Munthir also narrated after Qatadah concerning (And he left it
as a word to endure among those who came after him) he said, «faithfulness
and believing that Allah (the Exalted) 15 One; there are still some people
among his progeny who worship Allah (the Exalted) and believe that he is
One.»

I said: Thus it became clear that the meaning of «There is no God but
Allah» is faithful believing that Allah (the Exalted) is One by worshipping
Him (the Exalted) sincerely and clearing oneself of all that is not Him (the
Exalted).

The writer said (He be the blessed and raised above) mentioned that
this clearance and this loyalty is in the testification of «There is no God but
Allah.»).

He said, «Concerning what Allah (the Exalted) has said, «They take
their priests and their anchorites to be their Lords in derogation of Allah» till
the end of the Holy Verse (9: 31) .

Priests are religious authorities and anchorites are human beings this
Holy Verse was explained by Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) to Adi ben Hatem on the following occasion.

82 - «Verily when he embraced Islam and came to the Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) who in turn rehearsed this
Holy Verse. He said, «I said that they did not worship them» He (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Yes, they proscribed for
those people what is allowable and allowed what was proscribed and those
people followed them; that act is worshipping them.» This Honorable
Hadith was narrated by Ahmad, At-Tirmithi, Hasnah, Abed ben Hatem and
Ibn Abi Hatim and At-Tibarani.

As-Saddi said: «They asked for other men’s advice and rejected Allah’s
Holy Book and put it behind their backs. That’s why He (the Exalted) said,
«Yet they were commanded to worship but one god; there is no God but He.
Praise and glory to Him: «Far is He) from having the partners they associate
(with Him).» (9: 31). Thus verily that which is allowable is that which Allah

119

او لل الل لل ل لل و مل ل لان و ول م ل ل نو م و و و وا 6و م ما مام مام ماماو معد ماه 6 م6 6 6د 66د 26 6د معد 6ع 5دعع د تع 5 ‎١9‏ 5 55

(the Exalted) allowed; that which is proscribed [Haram] is that which Allah
(the Exalted) proscribed; religion is what Allah (the Exalted) has legislated.

The above shows that this Holy Verse indicates that he who obeys other
than Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) and turns away from following the Holy Koran and the
Tradition [Honerabie Hadith - Sunna] concerning what Allah (the Exalted)
proscribed or proscribing what Allah (the Exalted) allowed, and obeyed that
person in matters of sinful nature and continued to perform that which Allah
(the Exalted) prohibited, then that person is considered to take a lord and
diety other than Allah (the Exalted) and has associated with Allah (the
Exalted); that contradicts monotheism which is Allah’s religion indicated by
the term of faithfulness (There is no God but Allah). For verily a diety is the
worshipped and Allah (the Exalted) considered obeying them as worship and
He (the Exalted) also called them Lords.

In that connection He (the Exalted) has said, «Nor would he instruct you
to take angels and prophets for Lords and Patrons.» (3: 80); that is to say
partners and associates of Allah (the Exalted) in worship, «What! Would he
bid you to unbelief after ye have bowed your will (To Allah in Islam)?» (3: 80)
That is polytheism, thus every worshipped Lord and every obeyed and fol-
lowed person in matter’s different from what Allah (the Exalted) and His
Holy Messenger have legislated then he, the obedient follower, took him as
a worshipped Lord.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said in the Holy Sura of
An’am, «If ye were to obey them, ye would indeed be Pagans» (6: 14). This
Holy Verse confirms to the interpretation and it resembles in meaning what
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «What! Have they partners (In God head), who
have established for them some religion without the permission of Allah?» (42:
21) and Allah (the Exalted) knows better.

The Sheikh of Islam said concerning the Holy verse, (They take their
priests and their anchorites to be their lords in derogation of Allah), and
those who took their priests and their anchorites to be their lords by obey-
ing them in proscribing what Allah (the Exalted) has allowed and allowing
what Allah (the Exalted) has proscribed are of two categories (the first) they
verily realize that they have altered the religion of Allah (the Exalted) and
they follow this alteration. and consequently believe that what Allah (the Ex-
alted) has proscribed is allowable, or what Allah (the Exalted) has allowed is
proscribed, following their leaders even though they realize that they (the

120

ولقاع ا ماع قاعاع فافع ما ورد » نافد 4 عد قد قافا ع و فوا قاع وا قاع ور اعفاد قفار وفع عا فاو وام قاود و واأواج واقفاع عفادي فاع عا عدار وفع فار عد عد هد م ران م ناما ع جاده ماع تان 4 ما وام

leaders} have contradicted the religion of the messengers. That is disbelief
and Alch (ne Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be or. him) considered that as polytheism, even though those people
did rot pray cr prostrate to those leaders. Thus he who follows others in
matters contradicting with religion while knowing that those matters contra-
dict religion, and he who believes those leaders regardless of what Allah (the
Exalted) ana His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) say, such a person 15 considered a polytheist.

The second: It is the category of people whose faith in proscribing what
Allah (the Exalted) has proscribed and allowing what Allah (the Exalted)
has allowed is fixed, however, they have obeyed their leaders in wrong
doiag; as the Moslem performs wrong doing that he believes are sins; what
applies to those people is that which applies to sinful people. It has been
confirmed that the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said:

83 - «Verily obedience is obedience in performing kindness.»

Then as far the person, who proscribes that which is allowed and allows
what which is proscribed, is concerned, if he were a scholar having his inde-
pedent opinion aiming at following and identifying with the messengers;
however, reality and truth were not clear to him and he revered Allah (the
Exaited) as much as he could; then this person is not blamed or reproached
by Allah (the Exalted); rather He (the Exalted) rewards him for his indepen-
aent opinion or interpretation through which he was most obedient to his
Lord.

However, he who realizes that this person has committed a mistake in
interpreting what the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) brought, then he followed him in his mistakes disregarding what
the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,
such «a person has a share of this polytheism that was cursed by Allah (the
Exalted) especially if he added to this his own desires and supported them
by hand and tongue while knowing that what he is doing contradicts the
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). That is in
fact polytheism and the one who performs it deserves punishment, that is
why the savants have agreed that if one realizes the truth, then it is not al-
lowable for him to follow others in matters that contradict it; rather, they
conflicted over the permissibility of following others while one is capable of
reasoning, even though he 15 unable to reveal the truth which he knows. It is
as if one realizes that the religion of Islam is the truth while he is among

121

and His Holy Verse, «Yet there are men who take (for worship) others beside
Allah, an equal (with Allah): They love them as they should love Allah. But
those of Faith are overflowing in their love for Allah. (2: 165).

Christians, thus if he performs whatever he was able to perform, he would
not be blamed for whatever he was unable to perform. An-Najashi and

others are very good examples.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has sent down Holy Verses,
«And there are, certainly among the people of the Book those who believe in
Allah, in the revelation to you, and in the revelation to them.» (3: 199) and He
(the Exalted) has said, «And when they listen to the revelation received by the
Apostle, thou wilt see their eyes overflowing with tears, for they recognise the
truth ... till the end of the verse.» (5: 86) and He (the Exalted) has said, «Of
the people of Moses there is a section who guide and do justice in the light of
trutht» (7: 159). However, if the follower of the interpreter or the one who
has an independent opinion concerning a religious matter unable to realize
the truth in full detail and he acts according to what others like him to act:
Such as having one’s own opinion concerning classical matters, such a per-
son is not blamed in case he committed a mistake as the case with the Kibla
[Taking the direction of Mecca at praying]. As for the person who copies an-
other person who is less in rank than his counterpart just following his de-
sires and he supports him by his hand and his tongue without realizing that
he is right then that person is like the people of Pre-Islamic times and if the
one followed were right his act is not righteous and even if the followed per-
son was a sinner and a wrongdoer. It is as if one said his own opinion
about the Holy Koran; if he gave the right opinion, then he would make a
mistake [because no body should give such an opinion] and if he made a
mistake, then he would have a place reserved for him in Hell-Fire. Such peo-
ple are of the same category as those who refrain from paying Zakat. Verily
when that person loves money, this love prevents him from loving Allah (the
Exalted) and obeying Him (the Exalted) and he became a servant to that
money; such includes minor polytheism and they are promised to be pun-
ished accordingly. Also the following Honorable Hadith says,

84 - «Verily little hypocrisy is polytheism». That is included in the texts
that classify unbelief and polytheism many sins.

Abu Ja‘far ben Jarir said concerning the meaning of the Holy verse,
«And do ye join equals with Him?» (41: 9) that you join equals with the One

122

وار ,ا ع قاع قاد رد و فد ود و ندع ودود قاع هد رقاو وفقاور د ها عاع د عا مده هد اعد .اماع واو واو و وار ود ماه ماعاعا م م ماود و جد وداوام ووا هد قاو اه فاو وا و وافا. قافا وا دقام عام عماء ماه فاح عد مم

who created that, and they are competent men whom you obey in wrong
doing and disobey Allah (the Exalted)..

I said: This is the truth about many of those who are grave worship-
pers.
He said: And His (the Exalted) saying, «Yet there are men who take (for

worship others besides Allah, as equal (with Allah) they love them as they
should love Allah... till the end of the Holy verse.» (2: 165).

The authority Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)said, «Allah
(the Exalted) mentioned the case of those who join partners with Him (the
Exalted) in the present life and their end in the After life. Since they joined
in partners with Allah (the Exalted) that is to say equals and counterparts
whom they worship and love as they should love Allah (the Exalted) whom
there is no God but Him; He (the Exalted) neither has an equal nor a coun-
terpart nor a partner. In the two Saheehs after Abdullah ben Masoud (May
Allah be pleased with him) who said: I said:

85 - «O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s biessings and peace be
upon him); which is the greatest sin? He (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said, to join in equals with Allah (the Exalted) while He (the
Exalted) is the One who created you.»

Also Allah (the Exalted) has said, «But those of faith are overflowing in
their love for Allah». (2: 165) It is because of their love for Allah (the Ex-
alted) and because of the perfection of their knowledge of Him (the Ex-
alted), their revering to Him (the Exalted), their monotheism to Him (the
Exalted). They do not join in partners with Him (the Exalted); rather they
worship Him, Alone and depend on Him (the Exalted) and resort to Him in
all their matters. Then He (the Exalted) warned the polytheists and those
who did wrong to themselves by joining in partners with Allah (the Ex-
alted). Thereupon Allah (the Exalted) has said in that connection, «lf only
the unrighteous could see, behold, they would see the Penalty: that to Allah be-
longs all power» (2: 165). Some people said that this Holy Verse means: If they
saw or observed the torture, they would realize that Allah (the Exalted) pos-
sesses all power, that is to say all power and authority are His (the Exalted); He
(the Exalted) has no partner; verily all things are under His (the Exalted) power
and authority and that, «Allah will strongly enforce the Penalty.» (2: 165) as
He (the Exalted) has said, «For, that Day, His chastisement will be such as
none (else can inflict, and His bonds will be such as none (other) can bind.»

123

هالو قاء ا قاقد فد و وا قد ها ع ولو و ع وأقا. د فى .د فى قاع ده قاو واف د ود فاود وه وا قازرا م عدوا جا رام م واو قاقد قا فاده قارد و .ا مامد .د قاقد قاع مدقم رو و وايا عا راو عدود عد مد ود مد عافد فد تعد مد مانام

(89: 25-26). He (the Exalted) says: Had they known what they would suffer
and what terrible thing would inflict them because of their polytheism and
disbelief, they would have refrained from straying from the right path.

Then He (the Exalted) informed us about their rejection of their fol-
lowers and clearing themselves. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has
said, «Then would those who are to follow (them).» (2: 166) that is to say, the
angles whom they allegedly worshipped in the present life, cleared them-
selves of them; the angles would say, «We free ourselves (from them) in Thy
presence: We are not whom they worshipped.» (28: 63) and they [The angles]
would also say, «They will say, «Glory to Thee! Our (ties) are with Thee - as
Protector- not with them. Nay, but they worshipped the Jinns: most of them
believed in them.» (34: 41) Also the Jinns clear themselves from them and
disavow worshipping them. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said,
«And who is more astray than one who invokes, besides Allah, such as will not
answer him to the Day of Judgment, and who (in fact) are unconscious of their
call to (them)? And when mankind are gathered together (at the Resurrection),
they will be hostile to them and reject their worship (altogether)!» (46: 5-6).
End of his speech.

Ibn Jarir narrated after Mujahid concerning the Holy Verse «they love
them as they should love Allah». that is considered comparing Allah (the
Exalted) with equals «But those of faith are overflowing in their love for ‏آذ‎
‎lah» from the unbelievers’ love for their idols.

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: (And among those
things that show the meaning of monotheism and the testification that there
is no God but Allah: The Holy Sura of Al-Baqara and what was mentioned
in it concerning the unbelievers; Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Nor will there
be a way for them out of the Fire». (2: 167). He mentioned that they love
those as they should love Allah (the Exalted) , this indicates that they love
Allah (the Exalted) very much. Thus they did not embrace Islam; so what
do you think about the one who loves those whom he considers as equal to
Allah (the Exalted) while disregarding Allah (the Exalted), and that verily is
considered unforgivable polytheism. In that connection Allah (the Exalted)
has said, «Nor will there be a way for them out of Fire.» (2: 167) and, «If
only the unrighteous could see behold, they would see the Penalty». (2: 165).
The term unrighteous means in this context polytheism. He (the Exalted)
also said, «Those who believe and confuse not their beliefs with wrong». (6:

124

‎et en eee ee tenet eee en tence ee,‏ 2227273739 امام م م م م ام اام م ا ا اي ا ل ا اا ل ا

‎82) as has been mentioned above.

‎Thus he who loves Allah (the Exalted) Alone and loved for His sake is
considered sincere, while he who loves Him (the Exalted) and loves others
with Him is considered a polytheist as Allah (the Exalted) has said, «O ye
people! Adore your Guardian-Lord, who created you and those who came be-
fore you, that ye may have the chance to learn righteousness; who has made
the earth your couch, and the Heavens your canopy; and sent down rain from
the Heavens; and bought forth there with fruits for your sustenance; then set
not up rivals unto Allah when ye know (the truth).» (2: 21 - 22) He who re-
sorts to other than Allah (the Exalted) Sheikh Al-Islam, Ibn Taymiyya said
something with the following meaning: thus in order to have his needs fulfilled
or worries dispelled; must be loving to him and his loving is essential.

‎Thus the term of faith, «There is no God but Allah» rejects any type of
polytheism whatsoever and confirms the fact that worship in all its phases
and facets should be dedicated to Allah (the Exalted) Alone. It was men-
tioned before that verily, «A Diety is that which is worshipped and adored
by the hearts through love as well as through other types of worship.» Thus
«There is no God but Allah» rejected all types of worship and love dedi-
cated to other than Allah (the Exalted) and limited them to Allah (the Ex-
alted) Alone. Thus this is what the term of faith means, and there is no
other alternative to learning its full meaning and, accepting it and working
according to it both overtly and secretly and Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

‎The authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said:
Thus unifying the beloved is materialized by not having numerous objects of
that love, that is to say, numerous objects of love along with Allah (the
Exalted) through worshipping him; unifying love is explained as follows:
Verily he should not leave an atom of love in his heart without dedicating it
to Him (the Exalted); such love even may be called passion or adoration -it
aims at the welfare of the servant, his wellbeing, and his comfort; his heart
would not become righteous or feel the ease and comfort unless he loves
Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s peace be upon
him) more than any one and that his love of all other things should follow
his love of Allah (the Exalted), thus he should not love but Allah (the
Exalted) , as was mentioned in the righteous Hadith.

‎86 - «There are three qualities.... till the end of the Hadith.» [An
Honorable Hadith narrated by Al-Bukhary. after Anas] loving Allah’s Holy

‎125

It was mentioned in the Saheeh after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him), «He who said ‘There is no God but AI-
lah’ and rejected all that is worshipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted),
must be protected by Islam; it is forbidden to kill him or take his money
and Allah (the Exalted) would reward him».

Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is a part of
loving Allah (the Exalted); loving other people is for Allah’s sake then it is
like loving Him and if it were for the sake of other than Allah (the Exalted)
, then it would decrease from the love of Allah (the Exalted) and weaken it;
one believes such love if the lover hated the most hateful issues by his
beloved and that is disbelief, like one hates to be thrown into Fire or like
something more severe; this is absolutely the greatest type of love since Man
does not love anything more than he loves himself or his life. Thus if loving
Allah (the Exalted) precedes his love for himself such that if he were given
the choice to choose between disbelief and being thrown into Fire, he would
chose to be thrown into Fire and to reject disbelief. Such love transcends
that love of the passionate lovers; rather, such love is unequalled. Also he
who is loved is not equalled. Also this kind of love necessitates preceding
the beloved to one’s soul, money and child. It also necessitates total
humbleness and submission as well as obedience and eulogizing and
following the beloved both secretly and overtly. Such a love does not have
an equal in the love of a creature no matter who that creature was.

That is why he who joins partners in Allah’s (the Exalted) worship in
this type of special love is committing unforgivable polytheism. In that
connection Allah (May the be Exalted) has said, «Yet there are men who
take (for whorship) others besides Allah, as equal (with Allah): they love them
as they shouid love Allah. But those of faith are overflowing in their love for
Allah.» (2: 165). Verily and truthfully this Holy Verse means: Those who
believe in Allah (the Exalted) love Him (the Exalted) more than those who
love others than Him (the Exalted). As was mentioned before, loving Allah
(the Exalted) by servants can not be matched by the loving of a creature,
also their beloved [(the Exalted)] cannot be equalled. And every harm that
takes place when one loves another is considered comfort and easy in loving
him. Moreover, he who uses as examples of his love those who are used by
the creature who loves his Creator such as maintaining close relationships,
seperation, prejudice without any reason and the like from which Allah ts
Exalted; such a person commits the ugliest mistake and he himself deserves
to be deserted and hated.

126

ولع مام ورد و و ود عد عافدو وقاع ‎٠.‏ ود واه ده واج ع ها وار و فد وار و و عاع ا واو واوا عد قاع عد هار عار ماود واء دواع و قاران مقاع د واج هد رد هده م عار ,د و ما مد مد د.ا واو قاأعد لاع عد عد عد ع هم عد تيه

(It was mentioned in the Saheeh after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him),

87 - «Who said «There is no God but Allah» and rejects every other
thing worshipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted) must be protected by Is-
lam; it is forbidden to kill him or take his money and Allah (the Exalted)
may reward him.» Saying in the Saheeh: That is Moslim’s Saheeh after Abi
Malek Al-Ashja’i after his father from the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him).

Abi Malek’s name is Sa’d ben Tarek; he is from Kufa and is reliable.
He died on the 140 A.H. His father was Tarek ben Ash-yam the son of
Mas‘oud Al-Ashai’. He is one of the Holy Prophet’s Companions and nar-
rated many Honorable Hadiths. Muslim said: It is not known that he had
other sons. Also in Imam Ahmad’s Musnad it was narrated after Abi Malek
that he heard the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) saying to people, «He who believes that Allah (the Exalted) is One and
rejects all that is worshipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted) , is protected
by Islam; it is forbidden to kill him or to take his money and Allah (the Ex-
alted) may reward him.» It was also narrated by Imam Ahmad after Yazid
ben Haroun. He said: We were told by Abi Malek Al-Ashjai’ after his
father. Also Ahmad narrated the same Honorable Hadith after Abdullah
ben Idriss. He said, I heard Abi Malek saying: I told my father.... till the
end of the Honorable Hadith.

His saying: (He who says there is no God but Allah and rejects all that
is worshipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted)) let it be known that the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) connected for-
bidding killing the Muslim and taking his money in this Honorable Hadith
as to two conditions.

The first 15 saying «There is no God but Allah» with full awareness of
its denotations and connotations as he was bound in saying it by things that
were mentioned before.

The second: Rejecting all that is worshipped regardless of Allah (the Ex-
alted) , thus mere verbalizing the term without understanding its meaning
and binding oneself to it is not enough; rather, one has no alternative to it.

I said: This Honorable Hadith also includes the meaning, «Whoever re-
jects Evil and believes in Allah hath grasped the most trustworthy hand-hold,
that never breaks. And Allah hearth and knoweth all things.» (2: 256).

127

والر فاع وا واه وا فاع قاقاع قاع فد واو ده فاه قد ف »ا فقا فاو فاقفاو وفاعم ا قاعدا راو ودياود و فقاع د عا ع مده فقاعد قاع عاعامد و م اماردو قافا مد قاف قفد قاع قفاوا وقد فاو قراح ركان راود و رما هم

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, (That is among the
most significant things that shows the meaning of there is no God but Allah
(the Exalted), he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)did not
consider verbalizing it enough to protect the life and money of a Muslim;
rather, it is not enough even to know its meaning and to verbalize it; nor 5
it enough to aknowledge that; moreover it is not enough to invoke only
Allah (the Exalted) rather, his life and money are not protected by Islam
unless he adds to that rejecting of all that is worshipped regardless of Allah
(the Exalted) ; thus if he hesitates or becomes suspicious, then his like and
money cannot be protected by Islam and thus it would not be prohibited to
kill him or to take his money. O! What an exalted issue this is! O! What
clear rhetoric and convincing evidence for the disputer.)

I said: And that is the condition for saying: «There is no God but
Allah». Thus it is not proper to say it without this mentioned by the writer
for saying: «There is no God but Allah». Thus it is not proper to say it
without this mentioned by the writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) in
the original text. Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And fight them on until there
is not more tumult or oppression and there prevail justice and faith in Allah
altogether and everywhere.» (8: 39) and He (the Exalted) has also said, «Then
fight and slay the Pagans wherever ye find them, and seize them, beleaguer
them and lie in wait for them in every stratagem (of war); but if they repent,
and establish regular prayers and practice regular charity, then open the way
for them». (9: 5) He (the Exalted) commanded us to fight them till they
repent and clear themselves from polytheism and become faithful to Allah
(the Exalted), perform the required prayers, and pay Zakat and in case they
refuse to perform all that or part of it then they are fought.

It was narrated in Muslim’s Saheeh after Abi Huraira,

88 - «I was commanded to fight people till they testify that there is no
God but Allah (the Exalted), and believe in Me and what I have given to
them; if they did that, then I declaze that their lives and their money would
be protected by Islam or be paid for and Allah (the Exalted) would reward
them.» In the two Saheehs it was mentioned after Ibn Omar from Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) who said,.

89 - «Il was commanded to fight people till they testify that there is no
God but Allah (the Exalted) and that verily Muhammad (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) is Allah’s Holy Messenger, perform the five

128

The explanation of this interpretation is found in the chapters to follow.

However it includes the most significant issues which is the interpreta-
tion of the testimony and making it clear.

One of which is the Holy Sura of Isra’ in which He (the Exalted) made
clear the reply to the polytheists who call on the righteous, thus it includes
that this is major polytheism.

Also in the Sura of Bara’ He (the Exalted) showed that the people of
the book took as Lords their monks regardless of Allah; He (the Exalted)
also showed that they were only commanded to worship one God even
though this Holy Sura was unequivocable, includes the meaning that we
should obey the religious authorities in wrong doing but not invoking them.

prayers and pay the Zakat. Thus if they did so, then their lives and money
are protected by Islam otherwise, they should be paid for and Allah (the Ex-
alted) would reward them.» These two Honorable Hadiths explain the two
chapters [Aya] namely the Holy Aya of Anfal and the Holy Aya of Bara’.
Moreover, all religious authorities agree unanimously that any one who says
«There is no God but Allah» without believing its meaning or working ac-
cording to it, should be fought till he works according to what it says.

Abu Suleiman Al-Khatabi (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said con-
cerning the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
saying I was commanded to fight people till they say, «There is no God but
Allah». It is known that people who are meant in this Honorable Hadith are
the Pagans not those who have a Holy Book because these people say,
«There is no God but Allah»; the Pagans are fought till they are killed or
they believe in Allah (the Exalted).

The Judge Ibn Ayyad said: Protecting the life and belongings of the one
who says «There is no God but Allah» is an expression telling us that when
one becomes faithful to Allah (the Exalted) , Allah would respond and pro-
tect him, and that verily those who are meant by this Honorable Hadith are
the Pagans and the polytheist Arabs; however, as far as others who are
monotheists are concerned, it is not enough for him to rehearse «There is no
God but Allah» if his life and money are to be protected by Islam if he were
saying it while he is an unbeliever.

An-Nawawi said: Believing in what the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) came with is inevitable, as was narrated,
«And they believe in me and in what I brought.»

Sheikh Al-Islam said: When he was asked about fighting the Tatars;
129

Some of it: What Al-Khalil (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him)told the
unbelievers (I do indeed clear myself of what ye worship: (I worship) only Him
who made me, and He will certainly guide me). (43: 26). Thus he set aside all
other worshipped objects but his Lord, and He (the Exalted) mentioned that
this clearance and this loyalty constitutes the interpretation of the term
«There is no God but Allah» thus He (the Exalted) continued, (And he left

it as a Word to endure among those who came after him, that they may turn
back (to Allah)) (43: 28).

Also one of them: The Holy Sura of Baqara [The Cow] in which He
(the Exalted) said something concerning the unbelievers, (Nor will there be a
way for them out of the Fire) (2: 167) He (the Exalted) mentioned that they
love their idols as they should love Allah (the Exalted) thus He (the Exalted)
showed that they love Allah (the Exalted) very much, without this love they
will not become Moslims. Thus how about the person who loved his idol
more than he loved Allah (the Exalted)? How about the person who loved
the idol only, regardless of Allah (the "*xalted)?.

each group of people who refuse to confirm with the laws of Islam should be
fought till they confirm with those laws even though they might have verba-
lized the term of the two testifications and confirmed with some rather than
all the laws of Islam. This is similar to what Abu Bakr and the Companions
(May Allah’s Mercy be upon them) did when they fought those who refused
to pay Zakat. All the savants agreed on that. He said: Any group of people
who refuse to perform some required prayers or to fast or to visit the Holy
places the [performing Hajj rituals] or did not observe nor killing other believ-
ers or taking their belongings without paying for them or did not refrain from
drinking alcoholic beverages or gambling, 02 refuse to participate in the Holy
struggle against the unbelievers or reject any other religious duty which abso-
lutely no one is excused to quit or ignore and become an unbeliever. Verily
this rejecting group of people should be fought even though they acknowl-
edge it; as far as I am concerned I haven’t heard as yet that the savants have
conflicted about such a matter. He said that according to religious authorities
those people are not wrong-doers only; rather, they are dissenters [kharijites].

His saying: (Allah may reward him) that is Allah (the Exalted) is the
One who is going to reward the person who verbalizes this term [There is no
God but Allah]; thus if he were truthful, Allah (the Exalted) would reward
him by admitting him into the Garden; if he were a hypocrite, Allah (the
Exalted) would severely torture him. As to the present hfe, one should se-
verely torture him, judge by what can be observed, thus he who believes in

130

One of it also, what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said: «He who says there is no God but Allah» and rejects all that they wor-
ship regardless of Allah, then his life and belongings are protected by Islam
and it is prohibited to kill him or take his money [without paying], and AI-
lah (the Exalted) would reward him». That is among the greatest things that
show the meaning of «There is no God but Allah» He (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) verily did not consider just verbalizing it pro-
tection of his life and belongings; even not knowing its meaning or even
acknowledging it; rather, nor if he invokes only Allah (the Exalted) without
joining in partners in worship; his life and belongings become protected only
if in addition to that he rejects all that is worshipped regardless of Allah
(the Exalted). Thus if he becomes suspicious or if he hesitates, then his life
and belongings cannot be protected by Islam.

O what a great and exalted issue, O what a clear rhetoric and what a
conclusive evidence for the disputer.

monotheism and does not perform what contradicts it while at the same
time he adheres to the laws of religion, should not be persecuted.

I said: This Honorable Hadith also shows that man might say «There is
no God but Allah» and does not reject what they worship regardless of
Allah (the Exalted), and he did not do what protects his life and belongings
as was shown by the Holy Suras and Honorable Hadiths.

His saying: (This interpretation is explained in the coming chapters) [
said: Also the chapters that come after it, explain monotheism and clarify
the meaning of «There is no God but Allah». It also shows many things
that are considered minor and major polytheism the thing that leads to
much exaggeration. Through learning about minor polytheism one learns
about major polytheism that rejects monotheism; as for minor polytheism, it
contradicts the perfection of monotheism, Thus the person who avoids it is
a true monotheist. Also through learning about means of polytheism are
prohibited, become clear, thus avoiding all that requires monotheism and
faithfulness, even it necessitates it and considers it essential. It also includes
evidence on monotheism such as confirming the qualities of Allah (the Ex-
alted) and exalting the Lord from whatever is not appropriate for Him (the
Exalted). All that through which Allah (the Exalted) is known, such as attri-
butes of his perfection, evidence on His Divinity. All this show that He (the
Exalted) is the only object of worship and that verily worship can not be
but for Him (the Exalted); that is monotheism and the meaning of the term
«There is no God but Allah».

131

Chapter

(It is polytheism to wear a ring or a thread or other similar objects in
order to remove affliction or to drive away distress).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say, ‘See ye then? The things that ye in-
voke besides Allah, -can they, if Allah wills some Penalty for me, remove His
penalty? -Or if He wills some Grace for me, can they keep back His Grace?’
Say, ‘Sufficient is Allah for me! In Him trust those who put their trust.» (39:
38).

Chapter

His saying: (It is polytheism to wear a ring or a thread or other similar
objects in order to remove affliction or to drive away distress.) Remove it
means to dispel it after it has happened or occurred and to drive it away
means to prevent it from happening.

He said: Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say, «See ye then? The things
that ye invoke besides Allah, -can they, if Allah wills some Penalty for me, re-
move his penalty? -Or if He wills some Grace for me, can they keep back his
Grace?» Say? Sufficient is Allah for me! In him trust those who put their
trust.» (39: 38).

Ibn Kathir said: That is you can do nothing (say, «sufficient is Allah
for me» that is Allah (the Exalted) responds to those who depend on Him
(the Exalted). (In Him trust those who put their trust) as Hud (May Allah’s
Mercy be upon him) said when his people said, «We say nothing but that

(perhaps) some of our gods may have seized thee with imbecility.» He said, «I
call Allah to witness, and do ye bear witness, that I am free from the sin of as-
cribing, to Him, other gods as partners! So scheme (your worst) against me,
all of you, and give me no respite. I put my trust in Allah my Lord and your
Lord! There is not a moving creature, but He hath grasp of its fore-lock. Ve-
rily, it is my Lord that is on a straight Path.» (11: 54-56). Mukatil said about

132

It was narrated by Imran ben Housein (May Allah be pleased with him)
that, «Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) saw a man in whose hand there was a brassring, so he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) asked, «What for, do you wear this ring?»
The man answered, «I wear it protecting myself against weakness’. He (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, ‘Remove it because it only in-
creases your weakness and if you dy wearing it, you would never succeed
[that is be admitted into the Garden]» This Honorable Hadith was narrated
by Ahmad with satisfactory support.

the meaning of this Holy Verse, «The Holy prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) asked them and they did not respond because they
did not believe in them. [strings and rings].

Rather they used to consider those things as means and intercessors as
to Allah (the Exalted), not as things that remove harm or respond to the
person in distress because they knew that that belonged to Allah (the Ex-
alted) Alone. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And more-
over, when ye are touched by distress, unto Him ye cry with groans; yet when
He removes the distress from you, behold! Some of you turn to other gods to
join with their Lord-» (16: 53).

I said: This Holy Verse as well as similar Holy Verses prevents the
heart from becoming attached to other than Allah (the Exalted) in order to
bring forth benefaction or to dispel distress and joining in partners. More-
over this Holy Verse shows that Allah (the Exalted) has labeled the people
of polytheism by invoking other than Allah (the Exalted) and resorting to
other than Him while monotheism is against that and that is invoking only
Allah (the Exalted), resorting only to Him (the Exalted), depending only on
Him (the Exalted), and this applies to all sorts of worship which are not
right even if a very small part of it was dedicated to other than Allah (the
Exalted). This was shown in the Holy Koran and the Honorable Hadith as
well as consensus of Moslem legal scholars who came before and leaders of
Islam as was mentioned before.

He said: (And it was narrated by Imran ben Housein that verily the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saw a man in
whose hand there was a brass ring. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) asked, «What for do you wear this?» The man answered, «I wear
it against weakness.» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said, «Remove it because it only increases your weakness and if you die

133

خ + + + + - + + + - - - د 7 7 0 0 0 0 د د 0 ل ل ل ف .ل في ف
,امد ةده .ا عافد فد قا هاه ود قاردا ةد فد ود عام عا واف اند .اران واقا راود زا وان مام ودود .ا لام .د مام مد جم ع عد 5ه * 5ت ع * 5 5 *
واللاقا عاو انعا ماع ما ماع 0ه

wearing it, you would never succeed [That is, be admitted into the Garden].»
This Honorable Hadith was narrated by Ahmad with satisfactory support).

Imam Ahmad said: Khalaf ben Al-Waleed told us that Ai-Mubarak
said after Al-Hasan who said that Imran ben Housein told him «Verily the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saw on a
man’s wrist a ring-he said I saw it made from brass- he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said: Woe unto you what’s this? He answered,
«I wear it against weakness». He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) told him. It only increases your weakness. Throw it, because if you die
wearing it, you would never succeed [into entering the Garden}» This Honor-
able Hadith was narrated by Ibn Hibban in his Saheeh, he said,

90- «If you die, then you would be assigned to it.» And he said: 17 hat
Honorable Hadith is truthfully supported. Also it was acknowledged by
Ath-Thahabi. Al-Hakem said, «Our Sheikhs have frequently said that Al-
Hasan heard it from Imran. What he said about support «I was told by Im-
ran» shows this.

His saying: (After Imran ben Housein) that is Ibn Obeid ben Khalaf
Al-Khouzai’; Abu Noujayd Misghar. He was a Companion of the Holy Pro-
phet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and the son of a Com-
panion. He embraced Islam in the year of [the battle] of Khaibar and died
in the year 52 A.H. in the city of Busra.

His saying: (He saw a man) in Al-Hakem’s narration [I entered in the
presence of Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) while I was wearing a brass ring around my wrist. He (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, what is this?.... till the end of
the Honorable Hadith. That which is ambiguous in Ahmad’s narration is
saying that Imran was the one who narrated the Honorable Hadith.

His saying: (I wear it against weakness) Abu As-S’adat said: This is a
weakness caused by a certain vein, artery, or ligament, so people used to
wear a charm against it. It was also said that this weakness is itself a disease
of the upper arm, it afflicted only men. Verily he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) had forbidden him from wearing it because he wore it
thinking that it would stop the pain.

His saying: (Remove it because it only increases your weakness) remov-
ing means pulling by force, and he informed the man that it would not bene-
fit him; rather, it would harm him and increase his weakness. Also this

134

7 7 7 2 - ا ا ا ا ا ا 0 0 0 ل د د ف د د د د ددن د د د دن ف " « « ذا ذا " < " " < « " < : ‎١ : <١‏ 7 1 7 01 ا

applies to every matter that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) prohibited people from performing since they do not benefit and most
often even it had little benefit, its harm would be greater.

His saying: (If you die wearing it, you would never succeed [in entering
the Garden]) because wearing it is in fact polytheism while success is win-

ning and happiness [In the present life as well as in the After life].

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said (This Honorable Ha-
dith supports what the Companions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said: That verily minor polytheism is the most
significant among major sins and it cannot be excused due to ignorance of
the performer. It also shows that disapproval can be by being rough with
the performer).

His saying: (It was narrated by Ahmad with satifactory support). He is
Imam Ahmad ben Muhammad ben Hanbal the righteous and just religious
authority and Imam Abu Abdullah Ath-Thahabi, the Imam of his time and
the most learned among the people of his times in matters of religious legis-
lation and Honorable Hadith and the most pious among them. Some of the
people of Sunna say about him: He was most patient in the present life; and
in the past no one resembled him; the pleasures of life approached him yet
he rejected them. His mother conceived of him in Marou then left for Bagh-
dad where he was born in the year 164 A.H. during Rabi’ the first. He
started his education in the year Malek died, that is to say in the year 79
A.H. He learned after Hasheem and Jarir ben Abdul Hamid and Mu-
hammed ben Idriss Ash-Shafi’ and many others that can not be counted
here.

He got his education in Mecca, Busra, Kufa, Baghdad, Al-Yeman and
other places in various countries. His sons Saleh and Abdullah narrated
after him as well as Al-Bukhary, Muslim, Abu Dawud, Othman ben Sai’d
Al-Dirami and Abu Al-Kassem A]-Baghawi who is the last to say something
about him and among his sheikhs who narrated after him are Abdur-Rah-
man ben Mahdi and Al-Aswad ben Amer; among his companions are Ali
ben Al-Madni and Yahya ben Mou’in Al-Bukhary said: Ahmad got sick for
two nights in Rabi’ the first and died on the twelfth of the same month.
Hanbal said: He died on a Friday in Rabi’ the first in the year 241 A.H. at
the age of 77. His son Abdullah and Al-Fadl ben Ziyad said: He died on the
twelfth of Rabi’ the second, may Allah’s Mercy be upon him.

135

And after Oukba ben Amer it was narrated that the Holy Prophet said,
«He who wore an amulet Allah (the Exalted) would not let him realize his
goal; he who wore a cowry, Allah (the Exaited) would not let him without
penalty». And in another narration «He who wears an amulet commits poly-
theism».

And Ibn Abi Hatem narrated after Houtheifa, «He (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) saw a man around whose hand there was a
thread worn against fever so he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) cut it.

His saying: (And after Oukba ben Amer).

91 - «He who wore an amulet Allah (the Exalted) would not let him
realize his goal; he who wore a cowry, Allah (the Exalted) would not let him
without penalty.» And in another narration,

92 - «He who wears an amulet is a polytheist»). The first Honorable
Hadith was narrated by Imam Ahmad as was mentioned by the writer, also
it was narrated by Abu Ya’la and Al-Hakem. He said, «It is a truthful and
supported by the honorable Hadith» This was confirmed by Ath-Thahabi.

His saying: (And in another narration) that is to say in another
Honorable Hadith narrated by Ahmad, he said, «We were told by Abdul-
Samad ben Abdel Warith that Abdul-Aziz ben Muslim told them that Yazid
ben Abi Mansour narrated after Dojayn Al-Hajari after Oukba ben Amer
Al-Jahni that «Verily a group of people came to the Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) inducted nine of them to Islam and refused one of
them. They said: «O Allah’s Holy Messenger, you admitted nine and
rejected this one?» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:
He is wearing an amulet. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
inserted his hand and snapped it; then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) admitted him into Islam and said: «He who wears an amulet
is a polytheist». This was narrated by Al-Hakem and others who are
trustworthy and reliable narrators.

His saying: (After Oukba ben Amer) who is a famous Companion of
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and a vir-
tuous religious legislator; he was assigned to rule Egypt for three years dur-
ing Mow’awiya’s time. He died when he was about sixty years old.

His saying: (He who wears an amulet) and is heartily attached to it for
anticipating benefaction or dispelling evil. Al-Munthiri said: It used to be a

136

And he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) rehearsed what
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And most of them believe not in Allah without
associating (others as partners) with Him!» (12: 106).

This Honorable Hadith includes many issues:

The first: Being rough with those who wear rings, threads or similar
things worn for the same purposes.

The second: Verily even if no companion of the Holy prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) died while wearing them, he
would not succeed [in entering the Garden]. It includes the Compa-
nions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) that minor polytheism is the most significant among major sins.

The third: This behavior cannot be excused by ignorance.

The fourth: These amulets [Threads, rings and beads] do not benefit in
the present life; rather, they harm. He (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said, «It increases your weakness».

bead which they wore and they thought that it dispelled affliction; that is
mere delusion and mere ignorance since nobody can protect from evil or dis-
pel evil but Allah (the Exalted).

Abu As-Saadat said: Amulets are beads that Arabs used to give their
children to wear to protect them from the evil eye, as they claimed; when Is-
lam came these practices were stopped and prevented.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) would not let him realize his goal) this
is cursing him.
His saying; (Whoever were a cowry,) he said in the Musnad of Fur-

dows: It is something that comes out of the sea, it looks like shells and they
used to wear to protect themselves of the evil eye.

His saying; (Allah (the Exalted) would not let him without punishment).
It is to say Allah (the Exalted) would never let him feel tranquil or relaxed.
Abu As-Saadat said that this is cursing him.

His saying: (And in another narration: He who wore an amulet has in
fact committed polytheism) Abu As-Saadat said: He (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) considered it polytheism because they wanted to
dispel or change predestined fates and they asked to remove harm from
others than Allah (the Exalted) who in the first place had sent it.

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said (And Ibn Abi Hatem
137

The fifth: Rejection [of such practices] by being rough with the one
who performs these practices.

The sixth: Declaring that any one who wears an amulet [or something
similar] would be assigned to him. [To help him on the Day of Judg-
ment].

said after Houthaifa) that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
saw a man around whose hand there was a thread worn against fever, so he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) cut it and rehearsed what
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And most of them believe not in Allah without
associating (others as partners) with Him!» (12: 106).

Ibn Abi Hatem said: Muhammad ben Al-Husein ben Ibrahim ben Ash-
kab told us that Younis ben Muhammad told him that Hammad ben Salma
narrated after Assem Al-Ahwal after Ourwa that, «Houthaifa visited a sick
person and noticed that he was wearing a thread around his arm so he
either snatched it or removed it. Then he said: (And most of them believe not
in Allah without associating (others as partners) with Him!)» (12: 106).

And Ibn Abi Hatem is Imam Muhammad Abdur-Rahman ben Abi Ha-
tem Muhammad ben Idriss Ar-Razi At-Tamimi Al-Hanthali Al-Hafeth, the
writer of «Aj-Jourh», «at-Taadil), «At-Tafsir» and many others. He died in
the year 327 A.H.

Houthaifa is Al-Yaman’s son. His name is: Housseil Al-Absi, the ally of
Al-Ansar. He was an honorable Companion of the Holy Prophet (May AI-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and he was called the keeper of the
secret. His father was a Companion of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) as well. Houthaifa died during the year 36
A.H. of the Caliphates of Ali ben Abi Taleb.

His saying: (He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saw a
man around whose hand there was a thread worn against fever) that is as a
protection from fever. Ignorant people used to wear amulets or threads and
the like in order to dispel fever. And Waki’ narrated after Houthaifa [Verily
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) went to visit a sick man,
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) touched his arm and dis-
covered that there was a thread so he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said, «What is this?» The man said, «Something I was given to
wear as an amulet». He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) cut
it and said, «If you died while wearing it, I would not pray for you.» This
shows that such belief is rejected and denied even though it was a cause, the

138

The seventh: Declaring that any one who wears an amulet in fact is a
polytheist.

The eighth: Verily wearing threads against fever is also polytheism.

The ninth: Houtheifa rehearsing the Holy Verse as an evidence that
the companions take the Holy Verses as evidence about major polythe-
ism as [bn Abbas mentioned about the Holy Sura of Bagara.

The tenth: That verily wearing cowries is also polytheism.

The eleventh: Cursing he who wears an amulet because Allah (the Ex-
alted) would curse him.

only causes allowed are those allowed by Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) while not depend-
ing completely on them. As for amulets, threads, incantations, charms and
the like that ignorant people wear, all those constitute polytheism and
should be rejected and removed both verbally and practically, even though
who is wearing them did not agree.

His saying: And he rehearsed what Allah (the Exalted) has said: (And
most of them believe not in Allah without associating (others as partners) with
Him!» (12: 106) Houthaifa (May Allah be pleased with him) concluded:
That this constitutes polytheism. It shows the correctness of deducing minor
polytheism from what Allah (the Exalted) has sert concerning major polythe-
ism, because the Holy Verse encompasses it and lables it polytheism. The
meaning of this Holy Verse was mentioned earlier after Ibn Abbas and
others by Sheikh Al-Islam and others. And Allah (the Exalted) knows best.
In these written documents about the companions of the Holy Prophet what
reveals the perfection of their knowledge concerning monotheism and al!
that contradicts it or makes it imperfect.

139

Chapter: What was mentioned about

Incantations and Amulets

In the Saheeh after Abi Basheer Al-Ansari (May Allah be pleased with
him), «Verily he accompanied Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) in some of his travels’ he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) sent a messengez telling people to remove
from every riding animal’s neck all amulets or threads».

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter on what was mentioned about incantations and
amulets).

That is to say what was mentioned concerning forbidding them and
what those who came before said about them.

His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh after Abi Basheer Al-Ansari.

93- «Verily he accompanied Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) in some of his travels; he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) sent a messenger telling people to remove
from every riding animal’s neck all amulets or threads.») This Honorable
Hadith was mentioned in the two Saheehs.

His saying: (After Abi Basheer): It was said that his name was Kais ben
Oubeid. Ibn Abdul Barr said: We do not know any name for this man; how-
ever, he is a famous Companion of the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him). He fought with him (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) the battle of Khandag and died after the age of
sixty. It was said by some authorities that he lived over hundered years of
age.

His saying: (In some of his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
140

It was also narrated after Ibn Masoud that he said, «I heard Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying, ‘Ve-
rily incantations, amulets are of polytheism,. This was narrated by Ahmad
and Abu Dawud.

him) travels). Al-Hafeth said:

His saying: (So he sent a messenger) who 1s Zaid ben Haritha. This was
narrated by Al-Hareth ben Abi Ousama in his Musnad. This was told by
Al-Hafeth.

His saying: (To remove all) amulets or threads, since the people of Pre-
[slamic time used to put worn out bow threads around their riding animal’s
neck thinking that this would dispel evil eye.

His saying: (From every riding animal’s neck all amulets or threads)
means: Verily the narrator suspected whether his Sheikh said thread or abso-
lutely any amulet without any specification? Malek’s narration supports the
first; he was asked about amulets and he said, «I never heard that it is hated
but if it were a thread.».

Al-Baghawi said in his «Sharh As-Sunna» [Interpretation of the Honor-
able Hadith], «He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) com-
manded people to cut all amulets worn against evil eye. They used to tie
threads and amulets along with incantations and informed them that they
do not alter or repel what Allah (the Exalted) has predestined.

Abu Obeid said: They used to adorn camels with bow threads against
evil eye. Thus the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) ordered to remove them, telling them that those bow threads do not re-
pel or alter anything. The same thing was narrated by Ibn Al-Jouzi and
others.

Al-Hafeth said, and he was supported by Oukba ben Amer’s who nar-
rated the Honorable Hadith which says:
94 - «He who wears an amulet Allah (the Exalted) will never let his

goal materialize». This was narrated by Abu Dawud. Amulets are worn pen-
dants worn against evil eye and similar things.

The writer said (It was narrated after Ibn Masoud, I heard Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying, «Verily
incantations and amulets are polytheism». This was narrated by Ahmad and
Abu Dawud).

It also includes a story, Abu Dawud said: After Zeinab Abdullah ben
Masoud’s wife: «Verily Abdullah saw a thread around my neck. Thereupon

141

Amulets are things put on children against evil eye, but if that which is

worn 15 from the Holy Koran.

he said: What is this?» I said: «A thread that I wear as an incantation». She
said: He took it, cut it then said: You the clan of Abdullah are not polythe-
ists and you should not become polytheists, I heard the Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying, «Verily incantations
and amulets are polytheism.» I said: «My eye was infected and was dischar-
ging and I used to see a Jewish person for treatment; when he used to
charm it, pain used to recede. Abdullah said: That is the deed of Shaitan, he
used to prick it. It is enough to say as Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) used to say;

95- «Dispel distress, O People’s Lord, cure, you are the Healer there is
no cure but Yours, a cure that does not leave illness.» That was narrated by
Ibn Maja and Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakem and it is said that this Honorable
Hadith 15 truthful and confirmed by Ath-Thahab.

His saying: (Verily incantations) the writer said: (These are the ones
called charms, and that which is free from polytheism is allowable, since
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
allowed it against evil eye and fever. He indicates that charms characterized
as polytheism are those in which they ask the help of other than Allah (the
Exalted); however, if in those charms only the attributes and names of Allah
(the Exalted) were mentioned. Or His Holy Verses or Suras or that which is
copied after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him), then this is allowable and even desirable.

His saying: (Allah’s Holy Messenger allowed it against evil eye and fe-
ver) aS was mentioned in the Chapter or he who accomplishes unification
[Believes that Allah (the Exalted) is One]. In the same way he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) allowed incantations and other means as
was mentioned in Muslim’s Saheeh after Awf ben Malek who said, «In Pre-
Islamic times we used to use charms; we said, O Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) what do you think about

that? He said,

96 - «Let me see your amulets, there is no harm to wear them if they
do not constitute or lead to polytheism.» The chapter includes many other
Honorable Hadiths.

Al-Khatabi said, «He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
used amulets and gave amulets to people and he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) ordered people to practise charm and he (May Allah’s

142

Some of those who came before considered it allowable while others did
not consider it allowable and considered it forbidden, among them is [bn
Masoud (May Allah be pleased with him).

Amulets are those called charms and that which is free from polytheism
is allowable since Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) allowed it against evil eye and fever...

blessings and peace be upon him) allowed it. Thus if they were from the
Holy Koran and from Allah’s (the Exalted) beautiful names and attributes,
then they are allowable or recommended; but preventing and hating them
was because those charms used in languages other than the Arabic language
because they might be disbelief or something which if verbalized would lead
one into polytheism.

I said: Examples about that would be those in Pre-Islamic times who
used to practise it and those who used to. think that it dispelled evil belief
that those evils or diseases were because of the Jinns or their supporters. Al-
Khatabi mentioned something similar.

Sheikh Al-Islam said: You cannot use an unknown name as charm or
incantations besides not being allowed to invoke it, even though one might
know its meaning being hateful in Islam to invoke using languages other
than the Arabic. As for taking non-Arabic terms as slogans, this practice is
not among the practices of Islam.

As-Siyouti said: All savants unanimously agreed that enchanting is al-
lowable only when three conditions are simultaneously satisfied: Verily it
should be written by using Allah’s (the Exalted) terms, names or attributes;
it should be written in comprehensible Arabic terms; it should be believed
that an amulet per se does not have any effect unless Allah (the Exalted)
wills and predestines.

His saying: (Amulets are things put on children against evil eye). Al-
Khilkhali said: Amulets are worn around the necks of boys such as beads
and bones against evil eye, and that is forbidden; it is not allowable because
no one can alter or remove affliction but Allah (the Exalted) and removing
harm cannot be but by Allah’s beautiful names and attributes.

The writer said: (But if that which is worn is from the Holy Koran,
some of those who came before, considered it allowable while others did not
consider it allowable and considered it forbidden, among them is Ibn Ma-
soud.

143

... and is something made by them and they claim that it makes a woman

more lovable to her husband and the husband more lovable to his wife.

Let it be known that verily the savants among the Companions of the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and the fol-
lowers who came after them disputed ever whether wearing amulets written
from the Holy Koran and Allah’s (the Exalted) beautiful names and attri-
butes, were allowable or not. Thereupon one group said and believed that it
is allowable, and this is what Abdullah ben Amr ben AlI-As believed in and
said with and this is what was narrated after Ai’sha. Also this was told and
believed by Abu Jaafar Al-Baker and Ahmad in one of the narrations. They
told the Honorable Hadith about amulets that carry within it polytheism.

Another group of people said that it is not allowable; Ibn Masoud be-
lieved in that and said with it. This is what Houtheifa, Oukba ben Amer
and Ibn Oukeim said as well as a group of followers; among them are Ibn
Masoud and Ahmad in one of the narrations chosen by many of his Compa-
nions and which was authoritatively decided by those who came after and
they used this Honorable Hadith and its interpretation as a proof.

I said: That is which is right due to three facets that appear to the one
who contemplates: The first, forbidden is generalized and there are no speci-
fication for that which is general; the second abstructing rationalizing this
use because it leads to wearing that which is not used for that purpose; the
third is that verily if it was worn then the one wearing it must abuse it by
carrying it when he wants a need fulfilled or when he wants to escape dan-
ger, or something similar.

Now contemplate these Honorable Hadiths and what those who come
before believed in, then we can realize how Islam is alienated and estranged
these days, especially if you know about the serious events that took place
after centuries of exaltedness and greatness. Serious events such as glorifying
tombs and building Mosques on them and approaching them devoutedly
and heartily, and invoking them, fearing and asking them to fulfil needs and
many other aspects of worship that are only Allah’s (the Exalted) right.
They resort to those tombstones regardless of Allah (the Exalted) as Allah
(the Exalted) has said in that connection: «Nor call on any other than Allah;
such will neither profit nor hurt thee: If thou dost, behold! Thou shalt certainly
be of those who do wrong. If Allah do touch thee with hurt». If Allah do
touch: There is no one who can remove it but Him: if He do design some bene-
fit for thee, there is none can keep back His favour: He causeth it to reach
whomsoever of His servants He pleaseth. And He is the Oft-Forgiving, Most

144

And after Abdullah ben Oukaim, «He who wears something [as an
amulet] will be assigned to it [on the Day of Judgment to help him.] This
was narrated by Ahmad and At-Tirmithi.

And Ahmad narrated after Raweifi’ that, «The Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) told me, ‘O Roweifi’ perhaps you
are going to live a long life, then tell people that verily every one who locks
his beard or wears a bow thread or resorts for help through the droppings
of a riding animal or bone, then Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) clears himself from him».

Merciful.» (10: 106-107). There are many other Holy Verses in the Holy
Koran which have similar meanings.

His saying: (At-Tula) the writer said: (It is something made by them
and they claim that it makes a woman more beloved to her husband and a
man more beloved to his wife). Ibn Masoud the narrator of this Honorable
Hadith gave the same interpretation as was mentioned in the Saheeh of Ibn
Hibban and Al-Hakem.

97 - «They said: «O Abu Abdur-Rahman we know about amulets and
charms, now what is At-Tula?» He answered: «Something we make for wo-
men so that their husbands love them?».

Al-Hafeth said, «At-Tula» is something that a woman used to make her
husband love her; it is a sort of magic. Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

It is polytheism to practise something in order to remove affliction or
change it and bring forth benefaction from other than Allah (the Exalted).

The writher said: (After Abdullah ben Oukaim).

98 - «He who wears something [as an amulet] will be assigned to it [on
the Day of Judgment to help him]. This was narrated by Ahmad and At-Tir-
mithi) and it was narrated by Abu Dawud and Al-Hakem as well. And Ab-
dullah ben Oukaim is Mousghar and his nickname was Abu Maabad AI-
Jihni Al-Koufi. Al-Bukhary said: He caught up with the time of the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and it is not known
that he narrated truthful Honorable Hadith. The same opinion is adopted
by Abu Hatem. Al-Khatib said: He lived in Al-Kufa and visited Al-Mada’in
while Houtheifa was still alive. He was trustworthy and it was mentioned by
Ibn Saad after many others that he died while Al-Hajjaj was ruling.

His saying: (He who wears something [as an amulet] will be assigned to
it [on the Day of Judgment to help him]). This could be done by the mind

145

7ع ع ح ‏ ع ع ع حي يي يي اا ل ل الل ل ل ل لي د ين ل يي « « < 7 1
يي يا يي ا ا ا م ع ع ااا ااا ااا ا ا ا ااا ا ا |

as well as by actual deeds or by both. «Assigned to him it [on the Day of
Judgment to help him] that Allah (the Exalted) would assign him to that
object he thought of or wore; thus he who becomes attached to Allah (the
Exalted) and asked Him (the Exalted) to fulfil his needs and resorted to
Him (the Exalted) and depended on Him. Allah (the Exalted) woud suffice
him and bring near him that which is far from him and would facilitate for
him that which is difficult; however, he who becomes attached to other than
Allah (the Exalted) or resorts to his own Opinion, mind, medicine and
amulets or the like, Allah (the Exalted) would assign him to all that and
would turn him down and that is very well known in written texts and
through experience. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) had said, «And if
any one puts his trust in Allah, sufficient is (Allah) for him.» (65: 3).

Imam Ahmad said: We were told by Hisham ben Al-Kassem that Abu
Said heard from Ata’ Al-Khurasani, «I met Wahab ben Manbah while he
was circumambulating around the Old House [Al-Ka’ba]. I said: Tell me a
Holy Hadith that I memorize after you in my present position and tell it in
brief. He said, «Yes, Allah (the Exalted) revealed to Dawud and said, O Da-
wud; behold! By My Glory and Power when one of My servants resorts to
Me regardless of My creatures, I know that from his intentions; if the seven
Heavens and those living in them and the seven earths and those living in
them planned to harm him or decieve him, I would find him a way out. Be-
hold! By My Glory and power when any of My servants clings to a creature
inferior to Me, I know that from his intentions; I would deprive him of My
help and melt the earth under his feet; moreover, I wouldnot care in which
valley he dies».

The writer said: (And Imam Ahmad, narrated after Raweifi’ that.

99 - The Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said, «O Roweifi’, perhaps you are going to live a long life, then tell
people that verily who locks his beard or wears a bowthread or resorts for
help through the droppings of riding animals or bone, then Muhammad
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is exempted from him.»).

This Honorable Hadith was narrated by Imam Ahmad after Yahya ben
Ishaq and Al-Hassan ben Moussa Al-Ashyab and both narrated it after Ibn
Louhaya’. It includes a story told in brief by the writer. The following is
Hassan’s version of the story: ben Thabet said: «During the times of the
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) one of us
used to take his brother’s Camel on condition he gives him half of what he
earned by using this camel and he used to take the other half: even we

146

7اكا رقع ود د وم ود ‎a‏ يمافو فد يع وفا وو تي ععم و قفارت نيفد قة نارافا رار رار وار واو و ور و وه ل و رو و ل نر ل رةه

would go as far as one of us taking the feathers and blades while the other
would take an arrow. Then Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) told me.... till the end of the Honorable Hadith».
Then it was narrated by Ahmad related to Shayban Al-Katabani... till the
end of the Honorable Hadith. Ibn Louhaya’ had an opinion about it.

His saying: (So tell people) this is an evidence that people must be told
and that this was not special for Roweifi’; rather, every one who has knowl-
edge that others do not have and is needed by people, this person has an ob-
ligation to tell them about it. Thus if he and other people share common
knowledge, then informing people [Tabligh] is a collective duty. This was
narrated by Abu Zara’ in Abu Dawud’s «Sharh As-Sunan».

His saying: (Perhaps you are going to live a long life) this includes one
of the signs of prophecy, since Roweifi’ lived in fact a long life till the year
56 A.H when he died in Barga which was a province of Egypt and while he
was still its prince. He was one of the Ansar. Also some authorities say that
he died in the year 53 A.H.

His saying: (He who locks his beard).

Al-Khatabi said: As he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
had forbidden people to lock their beard; this can be explained in two ways.
One of them is what they did at war time, they used to tie their beards, and
that is the way of some non-Arabs who used to interwine and tie it. Abu
As-Saadat said that they used to do so because of their haughtiness and con-
ceit. The second says that it is treating the hair in a certain way till it be-
comes knotted and curly, and this used to be done by those who identified
with females, and Abu Zara’ Ibn Al-Iraqi said: Then he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) attacked those who knotted their beard while
in prayer as was mentioned by the narration of Muhammad ben AlI-Rabt’
who said, «Verily he who knots his beard during the prayer.»

His saying: (Or wore a bow thread) that is put around his neck or his
riding animal’s neck as a pendant. And in Muhammad ben Al-Rabi’s narra-
tion, «or wore a bowthread meaning an amulet.»

If that is the case of the person who wears a bowthread, what about
the person who clings to the dead and asks them to fulfil his needs and dis-
pel his worries, a matter which is forbidden and even strictly prohibited by
the perfect Holy Verses?

His saying: (or resorts for help through the droppings of riding animals
or bones, then Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)

147

Sai’d ben Joubeir said, «He who removes an amulet from the body of a
human being, is like setting a slave free» This was narrated by Waki’.

And he narrated also after Ibrahim, «They used to hate all sorts of
amulets, that which was taken from the Holy Koran and that which was
nob.

Verily verbal incantation by using righteous terms [From the Holy Kor-
an and the Honorable Hadith] is not polytheism.

If the amulet were from the Holy Koran then the religious authorities
conflicted as to whether it is considered polytheism.

Verily if the amulet were from the Holy Koran then the religious autho-
rities conflicted as to whether it is considered polytheism or not.

Putting bow threads on riding animals against evil eye is polytheism.

Seriously warning those who wear a bow thread.

clears himself from him). An-Nawawi said, that is to say he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) is exempted of that deed. This contradicts
that which appears to be the real meaning. And An-Nawawi frequently in-
terprets the Honorable Hadiths by diverting from their appearing meaning.
May Allah (the Exalted) forgive him for that.

In Muslim’s Saheeh it was mentioned after Ibn Masoud (May Allah be
pleased with him),

100 - «Do not ask for help through the droppings of animals nor
through bones because they are the food of your brothers, the Jinns.» Thus
accordingly, resorting to them for help is not penalized as was mentioned in
Ahmad’s creed and because of what was narrated by Ibn Khuzeimah and
Al-Darkutni after Abu Huraira.

101 - «Verily, the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) had forbidden the people from asking help through the drop-
pings or bones of animals and said, «They are never clean.»

His saying: (Sai’d ben Joubeir said, «He who removes an amulet from
the body of a human being, is like setting a slave free.» This was narrated
by Waki’). The savants believed that this [amulet wearing] should be subject
to removing because such thing is not said as a subjective opinion; rather,
through another person because Said was a follower. This Honorable Ha-
dith encompasses the value of removing amulets because they constitute
polytheism.

Waki’ is ben Aj-Jarrah ben Waki’ Al-Koufi. He was a reliable and
148

The value of the reward for who removes an amulet from the body of a hu-
man being.

What Ibrahim said does not contradict what was mentioned before because
he aimed at Abdullah’s companions.

trustworthy Imam. He wrote many books one is Al-Jami’ and others. Imam
Ahmad narrated after him and after others of his rank. He died in the year
197 A.H.

His saying: (And he narrated also after Ibrahim: «They used to hate all
sorts of amulets, those which were taken from the Holy Koran and those
which were not). Ibrahim is Imam Ibrahim ben Yazid Al-Nakhai’ Al-Koufi;
his nickname was Abu Omran and he was a reliable and trustworthy savant.
Al-Muzni said: «He visited Ai’sha and it was never confirmed that he heard
an Honorable Hadith from her [after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him)]. He died in the year 96 A.H. and he was
about fifty years of age when he died.

His saying: (They used to hate amulets) till the end of the Honorable
Hadith. By «they» he means the Companions of Abdullah ben Masoud such
as Ilkkama, Al-Aswad, Wael, Al-Harith ben Suweid, Oubeida As-Salamani,
Masroug and Al-Rabi’ ben Khutheim, Suweid ben Ghiflah and many
others; those are the leaders of the followers and this version is used by
Ibrahim in narrating what they said as was shown by Al-Hafeth Al-Iraqi
and others.

149

Chapter

(He who asks the Blessing of a Tree or a stone or something similar).

Allah (the Exalted) said, «Have ye seen Lat and ‘Uzza, and another, the
third (goddess), Manat?» (53: 19).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter: He who asks the blessing of a tree or a stone or
its like) such as a spot of land or a tomb or something similar, then this per-
son is a polytheist.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Have you seen Lat and
‘Uzza, and another, the third (goddess), Manat?» (53-19)) (The Holy Verses)
Lat was Thugaif’s, ‘Uzza was Quraish’s and Bani Kinana’s and Manat was
Bani Hilal’s. Ibn Hisham said that it was Huthail’s and Khuza’a’s.

As for (Lat), Al-A’mash said: Lat is a name derived from the Arabic
term Hah [God] while the ‘Uzza was derived from the Arabic term Al-Aziz
[The powerful]. Ibn Jarir said that they derived its name from Allah’s name
so they said Lat is the female counterpart of Allah (the Exalted). He said,
that the same logic goes for ‘Uzza and Al-Aziz.

Ibn Kathir said: «Lat was a white rock on which a house in Tai’f that
had curtains and gate keeper’s house and around which there was a sacred
yard to the people of Tai’f was engraved; the people of Tai’f descended from
Thugaif and those who follow this tribe used to be proud of it against those
who showed enmity towards them after Quraish. Ibn Hisham said that then
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) sent
Al-Moughira ben Shou‘bah who destroyed it and then burnt it.

Concerning the second, Ibn Abbas said, «There was a man who made
Suweik [A special kind of food] for the pilgrims; when he died they became
dedicated to his tomb.» This was mentioned by Al-Bukhary. Ibn Abbas
said, «He used to sell Suweik and ghee at a rock where he melted it; when
he died, Thoukaif worshipped that rock in glorification of that person.»
And after Mujahed and others that he said, «When he died, they wor-
shipped him.» This was narrated by Sai’d ben Mansour. The same was re-

150

ا ا اا م ا مم م ل م ل ل ل ا ا ل ا لاا ا اا ا ا ع اا يح ا ا ا اا م

ported by Ibn Abi Hatem after Ibn Abbas that «They worshipped him» and
similarly said a group of savants.

I said: There is no contradiction between the two stories. Verily they
worshipped the rock and the tomb glorifying them and eulogizing them.

For such an aim tombstones and domes were built on graves and tombs
and they were taken as pagans. This shows that the Pre-Islamic people used
to worship righteous people as well as idols.

As for the « Uzza», Ibn Jarir said that it was a tree on which there was
construction and curtains [a palm tree!] between Mecca and At-Taif that
was eulogized and glorified by Quraish. As was said by Abu Sufyan on the
day of the battle of Uhud, «We have the ‘Uzza and you do not have an
‘Uzza.» So Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said,

102 - «Say, «Allah (the Exalted) is our Guardian-Lord and you do not
have a guardian-lord.» Also An-Nisai’ and Ibn Mardaweih narrated after
Abi At-Toufail that.

103 - «When Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) conquered Mecca, he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) sent Khaled ben Al-Walid to Naklah [The palm tree mentioned
above]- where the ‘Uzza was, and it was connected to three trees. Thereupon
he cut them all and destroyed the construction [the house] that was built on
it then he returned to the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) and said: «Go back since you have done nothing.» Thereupon
Khaled returned, when the priests and guardians saw him, they started
climbing the mountain while saying, «O! ‘Uzza, O! ‘Uzza». Thereupon
Khaled approached her to find out that she was naked, with her hair ne-
glected and spread. She was removing dirt from the earth and putting it on
her head, he stabbed her with his sword and killed her. Then he returned to
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and
told him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) what happened, He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: «That was the *Uzza».
I said, «All this and that which is more serious takes place those days at the
graves and tombstones of the dead.

As for «Manat», it was in Mushallal at Kudaid between Mecca and
Medina; it was eulogized and glorified by Khuza’h, Al-Aws and Al-Khazraj
and they used to invoke it at the pilgrimage. Its name was derived from
Allah’s (the Exalted) name Al-Mannan and it was said it was called as such

151

It was narrated after Oubay Waked Al-Laythi who said, «We went out
with Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
to fight the battle of Hounein and we were new to Islam; we were unbelie-
vers a very short time ago. Polytheists used to have a nabk plant to which
they adhered and on which they hanged their weapons; it used to be called
«That Anwat». We passed by a nabk plant so we said, ‘O Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) assign to us «That
Anwat» [a similar tree for a similar function] as they have...

because of the blood that flows when pilgrims immolate with animals, to get
of its blessing.

Al-Bukhary (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said in the Honorable
Hadith from A’isha (May Allah be pleased with her), «It is an idol be-
tween Mecca and Medina». Ibn Hisham said: «Thereupon Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) sent Ali {Ben
Abi Taleb] to destroy it and he did it in the year of Fateh {The year in
which Mecca was conquered]. Thus the Holy Verse means, as was said by
Al-Kurtobi, «It includes deletion believed to be: «Have you seen these
gods; have they caused benefaction or harm so that it may become Allah’s
partners?»

His saying: (What! For you the male sex, and for Him, the female?) (53:
21) Ibn Kathir said: «You assume that He (the Exalted) has a child, and
you assume that this child is a female and you choose for yourselves the
males?» He (the Exalted) said: «Behold! Such would be indeed a division most
unfair!» (53: 22) That is to say this division is mere oppression and is un-
true. So how do you perform this division with your Lord, a division if it
were between two creatures who would be considered mere oppression, then
you desdain from females and devote yourselves to Allah (the Exalted). His
saying, «These are nothing but names which ye have devised, Ye and your
fathers.» (53: 23) That is to say, you spontaneously chose those names, «For
which Allah has sent down no authority (whatever).» (53: 23) that is to Say a
proof, «They follow nothing but conjecture» (53: 23) that is they do not pos-
sess any authority or proof but their own good trust in their forefathers who
followed this untrue and wrong path before them, «And what their own souls
desire!» (53: 23) saying, «Even though there has already come to them Gui-
dance from their Lord!» (53: 23) Ibn Kathir said: Allah (the Exalted) sent
messengers to them and supported them with enlightening truth and conclu-
sive evidence, but on top of that they did not follow what those messengers

152

ل ل ااا امل ل ا ل ل ل ل ل او الل ‎OS‏

brought them nor did they abide by it.

The correspondence of the Holy Verses to the explanation is that verily
the worshippers of those pagans used to think that they could bless them by
exalting and, invoking them, resorting to them for help and depending on
them in order to get what they desire from them or hope from them such as
their blessings and their intercession; thus, going to get the blessings of those
righteous men is going to Lat; going to get the blessing of trees is like going
to ‘Uzza and Manat and this behavior is similar to the behavior of those
polytheists when they worshipped those Pagans; thus he who did something
similar and believed in a tomb, a stone or a tree, then he would be doing
something compatible to what the pagans had done as well as to their poly-
theism; however, what present day polytheists perform is more serious than
that performed by those who came before. May Allah (the Exalted) help us.

His saying: (It was narrated after Oubay Waked Al-Laythi that he said,
«We went out with Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) to fight during the battle of Hounain and we were new
to Islam; we were unbelievers a very short time ago. Polytheists used to have
a noble plant to which they adhered and on which they adhered and on
which they hanged their weapons; it used to be called "That Anwat’. We
passed by a noble plant so we said, ’O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) assign to us «That Anwat» {A similar tree
for a similar function] as they have, so Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said,

104 - For whatever is great, Allah (the Exalted) is Greater, those are
traditions [That you blindly follow] by Allah (the Exalted), the One who
possesses my soul, it is as the sons of Israel said to Moses, «O Moses! Fash-
ion for us a God like unto the gods they have? He said, "Surely ye are a peo-
ple without knowledge!» (7: 138) You would follow the tradition of those who
came before you». This was narrated by At-Tirmithi.

Abu Waked’s name is Al-Hareth ben Awf, and in this chapter it is nar-
rated after him by Abu Sa’d, and Abu Huraira; this was mentioned by At-
Tirmithi and narrated as well by Ahmad Abu U’la, Ibn Abi Shaiba, An-Ni-
sai’? Ibn Jarir, Ibn Al-Munthir, Ibn Abi Hatem and At-Tabarani.

His saying: (After Abi Waked) whose name was discussed above by At-
Tirmithi; he is a reknown Companion of the Holy Messenger(May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him); He died in the year 68 A.H at the age of
85 years.

153

... ‘That Anwat’. So Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said, ‘For whatever is great Allah (the Exalted) is Great-
er, those are traditions [that you blindly follow] by Allah (the Exalted), the
One who possesses my soul, it is as the sons of Israel said to Moses, «O
Moses! Fashion for us a God like unto the gods they have,’ He said, ‘Surely ye
are a people...

His saying: (We went out with Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) to fight the battle of Hounain) it was nar-
rated by Amr ben Awf and mentioned as well] by Ibn Abi Hatem and Ibn
Mardaweih and At-Tabarani that he said, «We and Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) invaded on the day of Fath
and we were more than thousand people till we reached a place between
Hounain and At-Ta’if..» till the end of the Honorable Hadith.

His saying: (We were new to Islam; we were unbelievers a very short
time ago then) not long ago we were unbelievers; this shows that those
among them who embraced Islam before them such as the Companoins, are
not ignorant of that and that verily the one who recently shifted from delu-
sions to which his heart became used to, usually had in his heart traces of
that habit [of polytheism]. This was mentioned by the writer (May Allah’s
Mercy be upon him).

His saying: (The polytheists used to have a nabk plant to which they
used to adhere). Adhering here means Staying at the thing or at the place,
for example, Al-Khalil (May Allah’s peace be upon him) said [As was men-
tioned in the Holy Koran], «What are these images, to which ye are (so assi-
duously) devoted?» (21: 52). The polytheists used to stay at that nabk plant
in order to get its blessing and in order to eulogize it. In Amr’s Honorable
Hadith it was mentioned that, «Weapons used to be hanged on it, that is
why it used to be called "That Anwat’ and it used to be worshipped regard-
less of Allah (the Exalted)».

His saying: (They used to hang their weapons on it) that 1s to say they
hanged their weapons on it, in order to get its blessing.

I said: This shows that worshipping it, used to be by eulogizing it, stay-
ing at it and getting its blessing; through these three ways trees and other
objects used to be worshipped.

His saying: (So we said, ’O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him), assign for us ’That Anwat’) Abu As-Saadat
said: They asked him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to as-

154

ع ارد عد مد مد اعد م عداراع د مد را دود ‎a‏ رده واف وا و قارا ع ناو وار ه قاور وا فا ود فاج اماه تفاع هاج مده قاف فاء فار راو .ا برا رار رو و رار نل لاه

sign for them a similar tree for a similar function so he prohibited them
from that. They thought that Allah (the Exalted) would love and appreciate
such a thing and meant to approach His favour; otherwise, they would
never ever mean to contradict the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him).

His saying: (So Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said, for whatever is great, Allah (the Exalted) is Great-
er) in another version of the Honorable Hadith (Praise Allah and that which
is meant here is eulogizing Allah and exalting Him (the Exalted) from this
polytheism regardless of its type that is exalting Him (the Exalted) by not
asking from other than Him matters that are only asked from Him; the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) used to say
«For whatever is great Allah is Greater» [Allah Akbar] or «Praise Allah»
when he used to show astonishment or surprise that is in order to eulogize
Allan and exalt Him if he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
heard somebody saying something improper and wrong about Allah (the Ex-
alted) and His Lordship or Divinity.

His saying: (Verily these are traditions) that is to say habits and means.

His saying: (By Allah (the Exalted) the One who possesses my soul, it is
as the sons of Israel said to Moses: ’?O Moses! Fashion for us a God like
unto the gods they have.») He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) compared what they said with what Bani Israel said and, that is to say
both had something in common which is to worship regardless of Allah (the
Exalted), eventhough the terms differ, the meaning is the same; changing the
name does not change the truth.

This Honorable Hadith shows fear of polytheism and that verily Man
may like to perform something thinking that it would please Allah (the
Exalted): Yet it turns out to be something that takes him far away from
Allah’s Mercy and brings him nearer to Allah’s Wrath. No body knows this
truth but he who knows what is happening these days and how many
savants and servants are behaving towards the graves and tombs, how they
are exaggerating in their behavior and spending much of their time
worshipping it, thinking that verily they are doing something significant,
while what they are doing is unforgiveable sin.

Al-Hafeth Abu Muhammad Abdur-Rahman ben Ismail Ash-Shafi’
known as Ibn Abi Shama, said in the book of «Al-Bida’ and Al-Hawadeth».
«In this section also we mention the affliction that has prevailed, the afflic-

155

... Without knowledge». (7: 138) you would follow the traditions of those

who came before.» This was narrated by At-Tirmithi.

tion resulting from the Shaitan’s deceiving of common people and making
them personification of walls and pillars and assigning special places in
every country where a teller tells them that he has dreamed about some fa-
mous righteous and virtuous man in them. So they do this and preserve
those places while losing and missing what Allah (the Exalted) required and
what the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
told (Sunna], and they think that by performing such practices they ap-
proach Allah’s favour, then they go beyond that till those places occupy in
their hearts a significant place, and they eulogize them and hope that their
patients become cured and their desires fulfilled by vowing to them, while
they are made of springs of water, trees, walls or stones. In the city of Da-
mascus there are many such places like «Oweint Al-Humma» outside «Bab
Touma», «Al-Amoud Al-Mukhallak» inside «Bab As-Saghir» and «Al-She-
jara Al-Malou’nah» outside «Bab An-Nasr which Allah (the Exalted) facili-
tated its cutting and extraction, O how similar are those to «That Anwat»
that was mentioned in the Honorable Hadith.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) mentioned something
similar to what Abu Shama mentioned. Then he added, «O how quick are
the people of polytheism in worshipping images regardless of Allah (the Ex-
alted) no matter what those images were or what they say; Verily this stone
and that tree and that spring accept vows; that is to say they can be wor-
shipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted) ; verily vowing is a kind of wor-
ship whereby the one who vows approaches the favour the one vowed for.
This matter will be discussed when we mention the Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying, «O Allah do not let my
tomb become a worshipped Pagan.»

This Honorable Hadith includes many benefits: Verily what is done by
those who believe in trees, tombstones as well as in getting their blessing
and staying at them, and sacrificing animals for them is by itself polytheism;
it is joining in partners, worshipping Allah (the Exalted). Don’t be misled by
saying those who perform such practices are commoners, and never think
that polytheism is far from this nation: if some of the Companions thought
that such practices were good and appreciated and asked the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to help them do it till he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) showed them that what they
said was similar to what Bani Israel said, «O Moses! Fashion for us a God
like unto the gods they have». (7: 138) So how it does not appear for those

156

‎ccc ss‏ 5 م ع بل ع مع مم تعد عد ع مدق قواقة ‎een ee eee Eee eee Ere Ere ee EE eae Heer‏ من ءا ا ا ا رو ‎nee een nee‏ ل

‎who are much less virtuous and much less educated than they were in addi-
tion to the predominance of Ignorance and the chronological distance from
the days of the Prophecy [of Muhammad !]. Rather, they could not perceive
the serious consequences of polytheism both in divinity and in Lordship, so
they practised it more frequently and adhered to it more closely.

‎This Honorable Hadith also shows: Verily lessons should be learned
from meanings rather than from names, that is why the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) considered their request similar to
that request of Bani Israel and he did not give importance to the fact that
they called it «Al-Anwat». Thus a polytheist is a polytheist no matter what
he called what he worshipped along with Allah (the Exalted) . This is similar
to that who calls invoking the dead, sacrificing animals for them, and vow-
ing for them eulogizing and loving them; verily that is polytheism no matter
what it is called and there are many examples similar to this.

‎His saying: (You would follow the traditions of those who came before)
that is to say you would follow their habits and their ways and methods. This
is a truthful information and the reality of this nation witnesses upon that.

‎It also includes one of the signs of prophecy since that which was told
by the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) took
place.

‎In the Honorable Hadith: Prohibiting people from identifying with the
Pre-Islamic people and the people of the book [Jews and Christians] in what
they practised but that which was allowed by the religion of Muhammad
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

‎The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: (This Honorable
Hadith also warns about the issues of the grave, verily:.Who is your Lord?
The answer is obvious. Verily; who is your prophet? We conclude through
his telling about that which is unseen. Verily: What is your religion? From
their saying, «Fashion for us a god... etc... Verily it includes that polytheism
is going inevitably to take place in this nation contrary to those who
claimed otherwise; it also includes that anger plays a role in education and
that verily what Allah (the Exalted) used to dispraise the Jews, and the
Christians was told to protect us from them). This was narrated by the wri-
ter (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

‎As for that claimed by some people who came after, that it is allowable
to ask for the blessing of those virtuous and righteous men, it is not allow-
able from different points of view:

‎137

This Honorable Hadith discusses many issues:

The first: Interpreting the Holy Sura of Najm.

The second: Learning about the nature of their request. [They did not
ask him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to assign to
them another God to worship regardless of Allah (the Exalted)].

The third: They did not perform that.

The fourth: They only meant to curry Allah’s favour by doing that,
thinking wrongfuily that Allah (the Exalted) would appreciate it.

The fifth: If they were ignorant about that then others had greater rea-
son to be ignorant about it.

The sixth: Verily they will be granted benefaction and promised mercy
that nobody else enjoyed.

The seventh: Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) did not excuse them; rather, he responded by say-
ing, «For whatever is great Allah is Greater [Allah Akbar]. These are
traditions and you follow the traditions of those who came before.»
So he reprimanded them roughly by these three.

The eighth: The major issue which is aimed at here: That he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) verily told them that their
request is similar to that of Bani Israel when they told Mousa (Fash-
ion for us a god).

The ninth: This was verily denied as being included in the meaning of
«There is no God but Allah»).

The tenth: Verily he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
swore about the formal advisory opinion and he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) never swears unless it were for the best
interest of Islam.

One of these points of view: Verily these who came before such as the
Companions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) neither during his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) life
nor after his death. If such practises were righteous and lead to benefaction
they would have practised them before us, and the best and most preferred
among the Companions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and

158

The eleventh: Verily polytheism is divided into major and minor poly-
theism.

The twelfth: His saying, «And we embraced Islam a very short time
ago; we were unbelievers a very short time ago», means that others are
not unaware of this.

The thirteenth: His saying: «Allah Akbar» when expressing surprise
and astonishment, contrary to those who hate that.

The fourteenth: Rejecting rationalizations and excuses.

The fifteenth: Forbidding people from identifying with Pre-Islamic
people.

The sixteenth: Becoming angry when teaching.

The seventeenth: The general rule for his (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) saying, «These are traditions».

The eighteenth: Verily that is one of the signs of prophecy because all
that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) told and pre-
dicted took place later on.

The nineteenth: Verily what Allah (the Exalted) used to dispraise the
Jews and the Christians in the Holy Koran goes also for us [if we per-
form in a similar manner].

The twentieth: They thought that worshipping is built on commands
thus the issue of the grave was warned against, verily, «Who is your
Lord?» That is obvious. Verily who is your prophet? Through his tell-
ing about that which is unseen. Verily «What is your religion?» This is
deduced from their saying «Fashion for us» the end of the Holy Verse.

The twenty-first: Verily the traditions of the people of the book [The
Jews and the Christians] are as dispraised as the traditions of the poly-
theists.

The twenty-second: Verily, the one who has shifted from delusion that
he got used to, must have in his heart traces of those past habits; they
peace be upon him) are Abu Bakr, Omar, Othman and Ali (May Allah be
pleased with them). Also, Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings

and peace be upon him) witnessed that they as well as others will be ad-

159

said, «We were new to Islam; we were polytheists a very short time
ago».

mitted into the Garden. Such practices were not performed by any of the
Companions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) nor by any one of the followers.

Also another point among these points is: Verily prohibiting this blocks
the way before the various excuses and rationalizations for practicing poly-
stheism. This is obvious.

160

Chapter

He who slays [Sacrifices Animals] for the sake of other than Allah (the
Exalted).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say, ‘Truly, my prayer and my service of
sacrifice, my life and my death, are (all) for Allah, the Cherisher of the
worlds: no partner hath He: this am I commanded, and I am the first of those
who bow to His Will.» (6: 162-163).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter concerning he who slays [Sacrifices animals] for
the sake of other than Allah (the Exalted)) that is considered a warning and
an act of polytheism.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say, Truly, my prayer, and
my service of sacrifice, my life and my death, are (all) for Allah, the Cherisher
of the worlds: no partner hath He.» till the end of the Holy Verse (6-162-163).

Ibn Kathir said: Allah (the Exalted) commands him to tell the polythe-
ists who worship other than Allah (the Exalted) and sacrifice animals for
other than Allah (the Exalted), that he has been sincere to Allah (the Ex-
alted) in as far as his prayer and his sacrifice are concerned, because poly-
theists worship idols or images and slay animals at them as sacrifices. Thus
Allah (the Exalted) commanded that they must be contradicted and opposed
and that people must deviate from those practices and rush upon sincerity
to Allah (the Exalted) through intention and determination. Mujahid said:
Sacrifice is slaying at Hajj and Umra. Ath-Thawri said after As-Sadi after
Sai’d ben Jubair: My sacrifice is what I slay. The same thing was said by
Ad-Dahhak. Others said (My life, and my death) that is to say what I per-
form in my life time and the beliefs and righteous deeds that I accomplished
before I die. (All for Allah, the Cherisher of the worlds) purely for Him (the
Exalted) (no partner hath He) sincerity and faithfulness (this, am I com-

161

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Therefore to thy Lord turn in Prayer and
Sacrifice». (108: 23).

manded, and I am the first of those to bow to His Will.) That 15 to say the
first among this nation because every prophet becomes a Moslem before
other people.

Ibn Kathir said: It is as he said, all the prophets who came before him
called people to become Moslems, that is to say to worship Allah (the Ex-
alted) Alone without joining in a partner. In that connection He (the Ex-
alted) has said, «Not an apostle did we send before thee without this
inspiration sent by us to him: That therefore worship and serve Me.» (21: 25)
and he mentioned other Holy Verses that have the same meaning.

The compatibility of the Holy Verse and its interpretation 1s as follows:
Verily Allah (the Exalted) asked His (the Exalted) servants to worship Him
by sacrifice, as He (the Exalted) commanded them to worship Him through
prayer and other types of worship; verily Allah (the Exalted) commanded
them to be faithful in all types of worship dedicated to Him (the Exalted) re-
gardless of all others. So if they approach other than Allah (the Exalted)
through sacrificing animals or any other type of worship, then they will have
joined in a partner in His worship, that is obvious in what He (the Exalted)
said, (No partner hath He) this is rejecting the idea that Allah (the Exalted)
shares all this worshipping practices with another, and that, praising Allah
(the Exalted) is obvious.

His saying: (Therefore to thy Lord turn in prayer and Sacrifice) (108: 2).
Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Allah (the Exalted)
has commanded him to practise both types of worship namely, prayer and
sacrifice which indicate humbleness, poverty, living up to what Allah (the
Exalted) has commanded, strength of certainty and the tranquillity of the
heart and surrendering to Allah (the Exalted); That is in contradistinction
with the people who are haughty and disinclined, the rich who think that
they do not need Allah (the Exalted) or those who do not need to pray for
thei: Lord and those who do not sacrifice out of fear of poverty, that is why
batit were combined in the Holy Verse, «Say, "Truly my prayers and my ser-
vice of sacrifice... till the end of the Holy verse.» (6: 162). And Sacrifice is
slaying animals for the sake of Allah (the Exalted). They are types of wor-
ship practised to approach Allah (the Exalted) because practising them is
thanking Allah (the Exalted) for giving him Al-Kawthar [A river in the Gar-
den and the most exalted among bodily types of worship is prayer; the most

162

It was narrated after Ali (May Allah be pleased with him) who said,
«Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
told me four terms: Allah (the Exalted) curses the one who sacrifices for

other than Him (the Exalted) Allah curses the one who curses his parents:
Allah (the Exalted) curses the one who...

exalted among the financial types of worship is slaying. What the servant
gains from prayer cannot be gained from other than it, as is known by those
who possess lively hearts; what the servant gains from slaying when accom-
panied by truthfulness and faithfulness, certainty and belief, is very much
wonderful and astonishing and the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) used to pray a lot and to slaughter a lot.

I said: And the prayer includes many types of worship such as invoking
Allah (the Exalted). Saying «Allah Akbar» [Al-Takbir], Praising Allah (the
Exalted), rehearsing the Holy Koran, letting others hear [reciting], standing
and bowing down, prostration and sitting straight, facing Allah (the Ex-
alted) and approaching Him (the Exalted) through the heart and other acts
that are allowable in prayer. All the above mentioned acts are types of wor-
ship that may not be performed to other than Allah (the Exalted) ; the same
thing goes for sacrifice that includes many matters related to worship as was
mentioned above by Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

His saying: (It was narrated by Ali ben Abi Taleb (May Allah be
pleased with him) that he said, «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) told me four terms,

105 - «Allah (the Exalted) curses the one who sacrifices for other than
Allah (the Exalted); Allah (the Exalted) curses the one who curses his par-
ents; Allah (the Exalted) curses the one who shelters the maker of troubles
[or crimes]; Allah (the Exalted) curses he who changes a landmark [that
guides people] on land.» This was narrated by Moslem in many versions.
There is a story about it.

It was also narrated by Imam Ahmad after Abi Toufail, he said, «We
told Ali: Tell us something that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) privately told you. He said: «He never told
me something without telling it to all the people; however, I heard him
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying: Allah (the Exalted)
curses the one who sacrifices for other than Him (the Exalted); Allah (the
Exalted) curses the one who shelters a trouble maker [or a criminal]; Allah
(the Exalted) curses the one who curses his parents; Allah (the Exalted)

163

... Shelters a trouble maker for a criminal]; Allah (the Exalted) curses the one
who changes the landmarks [that guides people] on land.» This was narrated

by Moslem.

curses the one who changes the borders of land, meaning land marks».

Ali ben Abi Taleb is the Imam, the prince of all believers [Amir al-
Mu’minin] Abu Al-Hasan Al-Hashimi, the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) cousin and the husband of his daughter
Fatima; he was among the very first to embrace Islam and among those
who fought the battle of Badr and those who participated in «Al-Radwan»
pledge of allegiance and one of the ten whom the Holy Messenger (May AI-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) witnessed that they will be admitted
into the Garden; he is the fourth of the Orthodox Caliphs; he is very fa-
mous for his (May Allah be pleased with him) virtuous deeds. He was killed
by Abu Muljim Al-Khariji in the Holy month of Ramadan in the year 40
A.H.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) curses). Cursing here means putting
such a person far from or depriving him from Mercy. It was said that a
cursed person is the one who 15 afflicted by a curse or somebody whom
Allah (the Exalted) was invoked against him. Abu As-Sadat said: Cursing
originates from expulsion and removing away far from Allah (the Exalted)
as well as from other people and other creatures.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said what means:
Verily Allah (the Exalted) curses whoever deserves to be cursed by verbaliz-
ing as He (the Exalted) blesses the one who deserves to be blessed from
among His servants.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «He who sends blessings
on you, as do His angels, that He may bring you out from the depths of
Darkness into Light: and He is Full of Mercy to the Believers. Their situation
on the Day they meet Him will be ’Peace!’» (33: 43) and He (the Exalted) has
said: «Verily Allah has cursed the unbelievers and prepared for them a blazing
Fire». (33: 64) and He (the Exalted) has said: «They shall have a curse on
them: Wherever they are found, they shall be seized and slain (without
mercy).» (33: 61). And the Holy Koran 15 His words revealed to Gibrail
(May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) who in turn revealed it to Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and Gibrail (May
Allah’s Peace be upon Him) heard it from Him (the Exalted) as it would be
mentioned in prayer if Allah (the Exalted) wishes so. Thus the prayer is

164

praising Allah (the Exalted) as was mentioned above. Thus Allah (the
Exalted) is the One who praises and the One who rewards as was shown in
the Holy Koran and the Honorable Hadith [As-Sunna]. Imam Ahmad (May
Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, «Allah (the Exalted) is still talking if He
wishes so».

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) curses the one who sacrifices for other
than Him (the Exalted) Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
quoted from the Holy Koran, «And that on which any other name hath been
invoked besides that of Allah.» (2: 173). The apparent meaning: Verily what
was slain for the sake of other than Allah (the Exalted), such as saying: this
sacrifice is for the sake of so and so, and if that was meant then whether the
Slayer verbalizes it or not it is the same. Prohibiting this means other types
are also prohibited; thus if you slay for the purpose of eating and say «In
the name of Christ». Or something similar, then it is forbidden to eat from
that meat. While that which is slain while approaching Allah (the Exalted) is
more pure than that which is slain for meat and said before slaying it: «In
the name of Allah». Thus all that is slain after the name of Christ is prohib-
ited, since worship of other than Allah (the Exalted) by approaching that
other makes that meat prohibited even though the slayer says, «In the name
of Allah», as may be done by the groups of hypocrites of this nation who
approach planets by sacrificing and burning insence and the like and in case
those were receders then the meat of their slain animal can not be eaten any
how. Two conditions are satisfied by such slaying that prohibit people from
eating its meat, the first is that the name of other than Allah (the Exalted)
was mentioned when slaying it; the second is that the one who slayed it is a
receder. Under this category, what is practised by ignorant people in Mecca
who slay for the sake of Jinns, that is why it was narrated after the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) that,

106 - He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) prohibited
people from slaying sacrifices for the sake of Jinns.

Al-Zamakhshari said: When people used to buy a house or build a
house or dig a well, they used to sacrifice out of fear of the Jinns harming
them; thus sacrifices were added for such a reason.

Ibrahim Al-Marouzi mentioned: Verily that which is slain when the Sul-
tan [Ruler] comes in order to approach him, all the people of Bukhara gave
the legal advice of proscribing it because another name is invoked besides

165

واللا م و وا واه وا قاع ما ماح عدوا عد ود ما عا جاه ماد معد راود هو وأماع د هد عاعد ها ماءد عا قفاوا مادعا مد قاع هدوع فافاه رارا عد م راعد ما ماما ماع م ماأماعد قازرا راد قد فد كد ند عد تا 5 ع د 5 6 5
فالعا و قاع عد عد تدع وا وام م عا راواه واأقاع ا م مداع 6ه

that of Allah(the Exalted).

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) curses the one who curses his parents)
that is to say his mother and his father. It was mentioned in the Saheeh that
verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said,

107 - «If a man curses his parents, it is considered a great sin.» They
said: «O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) would a man curse his parents?» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said, «Yes, one curses another man’s father and that man re-
turns back the curse; one curses another man’s mother and that man returns
the curse».

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) curses the one who shelters a trouble
maker [a criminal] that is to say prevented others from taking their due
from him. Not only does he shelter him but he also protects him.

Abu As-Saadat said, as for «trouble maker [or criminal]» this term
means he who supports a criminal and protects him from his opponent and
stands between him and punishment. Thus sheltering here has the meaning
of accepting this person and tolerating him and what he had done; thus if
this person accepts the innovation and acknowledges doing it and does not
reject it, then he has sheltered him.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s be Mercy be upon him) said: This major
sin has various degrees; those degrees vary with the crime; the greater the
crime, the greater the sin.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) curses the one who changes landmarks
of the land). That is to say the signs that mark the borders of lands. Abu
As-Saadat said in the «An-Nihaya»: Cursed is he who changes the demarca-
tion lines of the borders of lands. Borders means demarcation lines. It was
said: He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) meant the borders
of the Holy Mosque; others said he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) meant to generalize thus meaning every piece of land on earth,
still others say he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) meant the
landmarks that guide peopie towards the right direction. It was said: It is
when a man occupies another man’s property and takes it for himself by
force. |

And changing these landmarks: That is to say advancing them or re-
treating them, thus committing wrong-doing by oppressing people. In that
connection the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said,

166

It was narrated after Tarek ben Shehab that verily Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: «A man was ad-
mitted into the Garden because of flies and a man was admitted into the
Fire because of flies.» They said, «O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) how 15 that possible?» He (May Allah’s

blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Two men passed by a people with

108 - «He who oppresses people for a span of land will be surrounded
on the Day of Judgement by seven earths.» Thus this Honozable Hadith car-
ries the meaning that those oppressors are generally cursed without specifica-
tion.

As for cursing the dissolute, there are two opinions: One of them: It is
allowable and this was chosen by Ibn Al-Jouzi and others. The second: It is
not allowable; it was chosen by Abu Bakr AbdulAziz and Sheikh Al-Islam.

His saying: (It was narrated after Tarek ben Shehab that verily Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

109 - «A man was admitted into the Garden because of flies, and an-
other man was admitted into the Hell-Fire because of flies.» They said: «O
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) how
is that possible?» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:
Two men passed by a group of people who have an image beyond which no-
body could go without sacrificing. So those people told one man to sacrifice,
but he said that he had nothing to offer. Thereupon they said: You may of-
fer even flies. So he sacrificed flies. They let him go, and he was [later on
after he died] admitted into Hell-Fire. They told the other one to sacrifice,
he said that he wouldnot sacrifice for other than Allah (the Exalted). There-
upon they cut his head, and he was admitted into the Garden». This was
narrated by Ahmad).

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Imam Ahmad
(May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said that Abu Mouawiya said that Al-
A’mash narrated after Suleiman ben Maysara after Tarek ben Shehab that
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: «A man was ad-
mitted into the Garden because of flies... till the end of the Honorable Ha-
dith.»

Tarek ben Shehab is Al-Bajali Al-Ahmas Abu Abdullah. He met the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) when he was
a fully grown man. Al-Baghawi said that he lived in Kufa. Abu Dawud said
that he saw the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon

167

an image beyond which no body could go without sacrificing. So those peo-
ple told one man to sacrifice, but he said that he had nothing to offer, so
they said you may offer even flies. So he sacrificed flies. They let him go,
and he was admitted into Hell-Fire. They told the other man to sacrifice, he
said that he would not sacrifice for other than Allah (the Exalted). There-
upon they cut his head, and he was admitted into the Garden». This was
narrated by Ahmad.

This Honorable Hadith discusses many issues:

The first: The interpretation of (Truly my prayer and my service).

The second: The interpretation of (Therefore to thy Lord turn in
prayer and sacrifice).

him) yet he did not hear any thing from him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him). Al-Hafeth said: If it is proved that he met the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), then he is a Com-
panion of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him),
if it is proved that he did not hear from him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) any Honorable Hadith. Then his narration is after a
Companion and this is most probably accepted. He died -as Ibn Hibban
confirms- in the year 83. A.H.

His saying: (A man was admitted into the Garden because of flies) that
is to say on account of flies.

His saying: (They said: «O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) how is that possible?»). It is as if they felt
that flies are too small creatures to cause people to be admitted into the
Garden and they were astonished by that. So the Holy Prophet (May Al-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) showed them what made that issue
which they considered as something low, a great deed that made that man
deserve admission into the Garden for it, while the other deserved admission
into Hell-Fire.

His saying: (So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:
«Two men passed by a people who had an image) an image is that which is
sculpted after the image of somebody, and they used to call it pagan.

His saying: (Beyond which no body could go) that is to say no body
could pass by it or beyond it unless he sacrificed an animal even though it
might be minute.

His saying: (They told him you may offer even flies. So he sacrificed
flies. They let him go, and he was admitted into Hell-Fire). This shows the

168

The third: Starting by cursing he who invokes other than Allah’s name

when sacrificing.

The fourth: Cursing he who curses his parents and that cursing ones
parents could happen when you curse another man’s parents who then
curses your parents in retaliation.

The fifth: Cursing he who shelters a trouble maker [or a criminal] that
is to say a man who causes something that deserves punishment ac-
cording to the Islamic laws and he then resorts to somebody who shel-
ters him.

The sixth: Cursing the one who changes the landmarks of land, that is
to say signs drawn in order to distinguish between your land and your
neighbour’s land-by moving that sign forward or backward.

The seventh: The difference between cursing and the sinful wrong-
doers in general.

The eighth: This great story, the story of flies.

The ninth: Being admitted into Hell-Fire because of those flies and his
behavior that was not preplanned; rather, he behaved as such in order
to escape their wickedness.

The tenth: When a believer realizes the seriousness of polytheism he
will tolerate the pain of death and will not agree with them to sacrifice
for the image, even though they only requested observable deeds.

The eleventh: Verily the man who was admitted into Hell-Fire was a
Moslem; had he been an unbeliever; it would have been said, «He was
admitted into Hell-Fire because of flies».

seriousness of polytheism no matter how small it might be; it shows that
even such practice necessitates penalty in Hell-Fire. In that connection Allah
(the Exalted) has said: «Whoever joins other gods with Allah, Allah will forbid
him the Garden, and the Fire will be his abode. There will for the wrong doers
be no one to help.» (5: 75).

This Honorable Hadith includes warning from falling into polytheism,

that verily man might fall into polytheism without realizing it and finally
that this is polytheism that necessitates penalty in Hell-Fire.

It also includes that he was admitted into Hell-Fire for something that

169
The twelfth: A confirmation for the Honorable truthful [Saheeh] Ha-
dith which says, «Verily the Garden is closer to the one among you
than his shoestriag; the same thing goes for Hell-Fire».

The thirteenth: Realizing that verily the deeds of the heart are the great-
est target even to the Pagans.

he did not intend to do; rather, he had done it in order to avoid the wicked-
ness of the people of the image.

This Honorable Hadith also includes the fact that verily the man was a
Moslem before that incident; otherwise, he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) would not have said that he was admitted into Hell-Fire be-
cause of flies.

It also includes that deeds of the heart are the greatest target even to
the Pagans. This was mentioned by the writer.

His saying: «And they told the other to sacrifice. He said that he would
not sacrifice for other than Allah (the Exalted).» This shows the benefaction
and virtue of Faith and monotheism [Unification: Believing that Allah (the
Exalted) is One).

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: (When a believer
realizes the seriousness of polytheism he will tolerate the pain of death and
will not agree with them to sacrifice for the image, even though they only re-
quested observable deeds).

170

Chapter

(It is not allowable to sacrifice in a place where sacrifices are slain for

other than Allah (the Exalted)).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Never stand thou forth therein. There is a
Mosque whose foundation was laid from the first day on piety; it is more
worthy of thy standing forth (for prayer) therein. In it are men who love to be
purified; and Allah loveth those who make themselves pure». (9: 108).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter: It is not allowable to sacrifice in a place where sa-
crifices are slain for other than Allah (the Exalted)).

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Never stand thou forth there-
in...» (9: 108). The interpreters said that verily Allah (the Exalted) has for-
bidden His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
from praying in the Mosque of Ad-Darrar, since all the nation of Islam
would follow him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him); move-
over, He (the Exalted) urged him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) to pray in the Mosque of Quba’ which was originally and from the
very first day, build and based on piety which is obeying Allah (the Exalted)
and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) in
order to bring together the believers and as a stronghold and home for the
Islam and for the Moslims, that is why it was narrated in the following
truthful Honorable Hadith at Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) who said,

110 - «Praying at the Mosque of Quba’ is similar to ‘Umra [visiting
Mecca and performing minor Hajj]». It was mentioned in the Saheeh.

111 - «Verily Allah’s Holy Messenger was visiting Quba’ riding and on
foot.» It was mentioned that the Mosque mentioned in the Holy Verse is the

171

مام عام ماسداعد مد ردق .د هع مده مزاع افاي .د عاو مد عدا عا عد م ارد ود و عاعاعا ما عفدف فاع ماقادق ا فاع فاعا .م واوا. عا قا را عاعاد عد مدعا عد عد هد مد م جاع جد عد 05م

Mosque of Quba’ who are a group of those who came before; Ibn Abbas,
Ourwa, Atiyya, Al-Shou’bi, Al-Hasan and others are among them.

I said: The Holy Verse. «In it are men who love to be purified». (9: 108)
supports this interpretation; it was said that it is Allah’s Holy Messenger’s
Mosque. Abi Said said: «Two men passed by the Mosque that was from the
very first day built and based on piety, so one man said, that is the Mosque
of Quba’, the other said, «It is Allah’s Holy Messenger’s Mosque; Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) heard them
and said,

112 - «This is my Mosque», This Honorable Hadith was narrated by
Moslim and it was also mentioned by Omar and his son, Zaid ben Thabet
and others.

Ibn Kathir said: This is a truthful Honorable Hadith. There is no con-
tradiction between the Honorable Hadith and the Holy Verse because if it
were the Mosque of Quba’ what was from the very first day built and based
on piety, then Allah’s Holy Messenger’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) Mosque is worthier of that. That is contrary to the Mosque of
Ad-Dirar which was built and based on disobeying Allah (the Exalted).

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And there are those
who put the Mosque by way of mischief and infidelity-to disunite the believers-
and in preparation for one who warned against Allah and His Apostle afore
time. They will indeed swear that their intention is nothing but good; but Allah
doth declare that they are certainly liars» (9: 107) About these matters, Allah
(the Exalted) has forbidden His Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) from praying in that Mosque; those who had built it,
came to the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
before he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) left for the battle
of Tabouk. Thereupon they asked him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) to pray in it and said that they had built it for the weak and
chronically ill people so that they may reside in it on rainy nights. There-
upon he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

113 - «Now I am travelling; however, I will pray in it if Allah (the Ex-
alted) wishes so.» So when he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) started his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) return trip
to Medina, and was only seperated from it by a distance of one day or less,

172

It was narrated alter ‏أعطقط!:‎ ben Ad-Dahhak (May Allah be pleased
with him) who said, «A man vowed to slay a camel at Bouwarah. He went
to the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)to ask
for his permission. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,
«Was there an image of the images of Pre-Islam in it that was worshipped?»
They said, «No». Thereupon he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said, «Did they celebrate any of their festivals or feasts there?» They
said, «No». So Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said, «Then carry out your vow, because it is not allowed to car-
ry out a vow if it constitutes...

revelation was sent down concerning that Mosque, he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) sent somebody to destroy it and he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) indeed had it destroyed before he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) got to Medina.

The purpose of choosing this Holy Verse to suit the interpretation: Ve-
rily places prepared for slaying and sacrificing animals for the sake of other
than Allah (the Exalted) must be avoided when one wants to slay or sacri-
fice an animal for the sake of Allah (the Exalted), also verily when this Mos-
que was prepared to disobey Allah (the Exalted). It turned out to be a site
of wrath because of that, that is why it is not allowable to pray to Allah
(the Exalted) in it. That is a truthful logical conclusion supported by the fol-
lowing Honorable Hadith narrated by Thabet ben Ad-Dahhak.

His saying: (In it are men who love to be purified) Imam Ahmad, Ibn
Khouzeimah and others narrated after Oweim ben Said Al-Ansari,

114 - «Verily Allah’s Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) came while they were in the Mosque of Quba’ and said, «Verily Allah
(the Exalted) indeed praised you well concerning you purifying yourselves in the
Mosque, so what is this purification that you practise? They said: By Allah (the
Exalted) O’ Allah’s Holy Messenger(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) we only know that we used to have Jewish neighbours who used to wash
their rear part from feces, so we did as they had done.» And in another version
of this Honorable Hadith after Jaber and Anas, «It is so, perform it» This was
narrated by Ibn Majah, [bn Hatem, Ad-Darkutni and Al-Hakem.

His saying: (And Allah loveth those who make themselves pure) Abu
Al-Aliya said: Verily purifying oneself with water is good but those meant
here are those who purify themselves from sins and guilt. This Honorable
Hadith confirms the attribute of love; contrary to what the Asharites and
their followers believe.

173

... disobedience to Allah (the Exalted) or if it is done by using what the chil-
dren of Adam do not posses». This was narrated by Abu Dawud and sup-

ported by him.

His saying: (It was narrated after Thabet ben Ad-Dahhak (May Allah
be pleased with him) who said, «A man vowed to slay a camel at Bowanah.
Thereupon he went to the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) to ask for his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
permission, he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

115 - «Was there an image of the images of Pre-Islam in it that was
worshipped?» They said: ’No’ so he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said: Did they celebrate any of their festivals or feasts there?
They said: . Thereupon Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said: Then carry out your vow, because it is not allowed
to carry out a vow if it constitutes disobediance to Allah (the Exalted) or if
it is done by what the children Adam do not possess.» This was narrated by
Abu Dawud and supported by him.

His saying: (It was narrated after Thabet ben Ad-Dahhak) that is the
son of Khalifa Al-Ashhali, who is a famous Companion of the Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). Abu Kilaba and
others narrated after him. He died in the year 64. A.H.

His saying: (at Bouwara) Al-Baghawi said that it is a locality below
Mecca and Yalam-lam. Abu As-Saadat said that it is a high land behind
Yanbu‘.

His saying: (Was there an image of the images of Pre-Islam in it that
was worshipped?). This term carries the meaning of prohibiting carrying out
the vow if there was an image in the place, even after it was removed, this
was explained by the writer (May Allah’s peace be upon him).

His saying: (Did they celebrate any of their festivals or feasts in it?)
Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: A feast is a name
called on general assemblies or gatherings that have habitual nature, either
at the beginnning of the year, or the week or the month or the like. What is
meant here is the habitual gathering of the people of Pre-Islamic times. Thus
a feast combines many cases such as a recurrent day such as the day of Fitr
or Friday on which people gather and perform certain practices that are re-
lated to certain habits or practices of worship. The feast may take place at
particular place or it may take place absolutely any where. All such cases
are called «feast». The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be

174

upon him) said about Friday,

116 - «Verily this is a day that Allah (the Exalted) has assigned for the
Moslims as a feast». And gathering and practices as was said by Ibn Abbas,
«I witnessed the feast with Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him).» And as Allah’s Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said,

117 - «Never take my grave as a place for celebrating a feast.» The
term feast may mean both practices and a day and this is more probable as
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

118 - «O Abu Bakr, leave them alone for verily every people have a
feast.»

The writer said: (This has the meaning of asking the advice of those
who can give religious advice and forbidding people from carrying out vow
at a place that was previously a place for celebrating feasts during Pre-Isla-
mic times even though this practice or place has been removed).

I said: It also has the meaning of blocking the way for any excuse or ra-
tionalization for identifying with polytheists; prohibiting people from doing
this, is one of the means.

His saying: (Then carry out your vow) this shows that verily slaying for
the sake of Allah (the Exalted) in the very place where the polytheists used
to slay and sacrifice for other than Allah (the Exalted), that is to say in the
places where they held their feasts, constitute an act of disobedience to Allah
(the Exalted), because he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said: «Then carry out your vow». The above description was followed by
«Then» and that shows that the description led to the judgement of allowing
the man to carry out his vow. Thus the cause for ordering the man to carry
out his vow is that it is clear from the above mentioned two descriptions.
Thus when they said: «No» he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said «Then carry out your vow.» and that means: Had that spot been a
place for their feast or had there been a pagan in it, then slaying or
sacrificing on that land or in that place would have been prohibited even
though the man had already vowed. This was said by Sheikh Al-Islam.

His saying: (It is not allowed to carry out a vow if it constitutes an act
of disobedience to Allah (the Exalted)). This is an evidence that this vow
constitutes an act of disobedience if it was found that in that place there ex-
isted some obstacles [For example a feast of Pre-Islamic people or sacrificing
for other than Allah (the Exalted)] and that it is not permissible to carry out

175

This Honorable Hadith includes many issues:

The first: The interpretation of saying (Never stand thou forth there-
in).

The second: Verily disobeying Allah (the Exalted) may affect the
earth. The same thing goes for obeying Allah (the Exalted).

The third: Returning the problematic issue to that issue which 15 clear,
so that confusion will become clear.

The fourth: Asking for the opinion of those who are religious advisors
if one needs to ask them.

a vow if it constitutes an act of disobedience to Allah (the Exalted). All reli-
gious authorities have unanimously agreed upon that. They varied in their
opinions in as far as whether an atonement for the oath is required in such
cases or not? There are two points of view and both were narrated after Ah-
mad. One of them: Atonement is required, and that is the creed. It was nar-
rated after Ibn Masoud and Ibn Abbas as well as Abu Hanifa and his
companions who narrated the following Honorable Hadith after A’isha
(May Allah be pleased with her) who said,

119 - «It is not allowable to vow concerning matters that constitute an
act of disobedience to Allah (the Exalted) and its atonement is similar to the
atonement of an oath.» This was narrated by Ahmad and those who nar-
rated the Sunna [Honorabe Hadith] and it was used by Ahmad and Ishaq as
an evidence. The second: There is no atonement for it. This was narrated
after Masrouk, Ash-Sha’bi and Ash-Shafi’ after an Honorable Hadith in
which atonement concerning this issue was not mentioned. His answer is:
Verily he mentioned atonement in the above mentioned Honorable Hadith
and the absolute and general is applied to that which is conditioned.

His saying: (Or if it is done by using that which the children Adam do
not possess). He said in «Sharh Al-Masabih». «This means, if he added to
the vow that which he does not possess such as saying, “If Allah (the Ex-
alted) cures my patient, I will set so and so’s slave free, and the like. As if
he committed himself to doing something such as saying: «If Allah (the Ex-
alted) cures my patient, then I will set a slave free, and while in this case he
does not possess one or an equal amount of money, then if his patient is
cured, he will have that promise as an obligation to fulfill.

His saying: (This was narrated by Abu Dawud and supported by their
conditions) that is to say the conditions of Al-Bukhary and Muslim.

176

The fifth: Specifying a certain spot for carrying out a vow is allowable

tf that spot ts free from prohibitions.

The sixth: Prohibiting that an image of the images of Pre-Islamic times
is there, even though it might have been removed.

The seventh: Prohibiting that spot of Pre-Islamic people to celebrate
one of their feasts, even though it is not practised any more.

The eighth: It is not allowable to carry out a vow in that spot because
it is a vow that carries within it disobedience.

The ninth: Warning people from identifying with the polytheists’ pac-
tices at feasts, even though it was not intended.

The tenth: It is not allowable to vow if the vow leads to an act of dis-
obedience to Allah (the Exalted).

The eleventh: Ibn Adam may not vow by promising that which he
does not possess.

Abu Dawud is Suleiman ben Al-Asha’th, a companion of Imam Ahmad
and the author of «As-Sunan», «Al-Marasil» and many other books. He is a
trustworthy and reliable Imam who memorized the Honorable Hadiths from
the greatest savants. He died in the year 275 A.H (May Allah’s Mercy be
upon him).

177

Chapter: (It is polytheism to vow for other than Allah

(the Exalted))

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «They perform (their) vows, and they fear a
Day whose evil flies are far and wide.» (76: 7).

Also He (the Exalted) has said, «And whatever ye spend in charity or de-
votion, be sure Allah knows it alb>. (2: 270).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter: It is polytheism to vow for other than Allah (the
Exalted) .

Thus being a kind of worship one should carry it out if one vows for
the sake of Allah (the Exalted). Thus vowing for other than Allah (the Ex-
alted) is considered as joining in partners with Allah (the Exalted) in wor-
ship.

His saying, «They perform (their) vows and they fear a Day whose evil
flies far and wide.» (76: 7). This Holy Verse has shown that performing vows
is required and if praised the one who carries out his vows as an act of
obeying Allah (the Exalted) and fulfilling his promises that he used in curry-
ing Allah’s (the Exalted) favor.

His saying: «And whatever ye spend in charity or devotion, be sure Allah
knows it allo» (2: 270).

Ibn Kathir said: Allah (the Exalted) informs us that He (the Exalted)
knows every benefaction or charity that charitable people perform such as

money spent or vows that included rewarding those who perform such acts
especially those who do this just for pleasing Him (the Exalted).

If you know this, then these vows performed by grave worshippers in
order to curry their favour so that those dead may fulfil their needs and in-
tercede for them, all that is definitely joining in partners with Allah (the Ex-

178

ا جل لل كل م ال ل من ان تن ل ل لب مل ل ال ‎SS SS‏

alted) in worship. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Out of
what Allah hath produced in abundance in tilth and in cattle, they assigned
Him a share: They say, according to their fancies: «This is for Allah, and this
is» for Our «Partners» reacheth not Allah, whilst the share of Allah reacheth
their partners! Evil (and unjust) is their assingment!» (6: 136).

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s be Mercy be upon him) said: As for that
vowed for the sake of other than Allah (the Exalted) such as vowing for the
sake of images, the sun, the moon, tombs and the like, it is verily like
swearing by the name of other than Allah (the Exalted); he who swears by
other than Allah (the Exalted) does not have to carry out his vow, neither
does he have to pay atonement in case he did not perform the vow; the
same logic goes for the one who vows for creatures. Both cases constitute
polytheism, and polytheism does not have sanctity; rather, such a person
should ask Allah (the Exalted) for forgiveness and say what the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

120 - «He who swears saying, «By Lat and ‘Uzza, then he should say
«There is no God but Allah». He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said concerning the one who vowed a name or something similar as oil
to make it shine and said that verily it accepts the vow as said by some de-
luded persons; such vow is an act of disobedience to Allah (the Exalted) as
is unanimously believed by the Moslims and it must not be curried out, the
same thing goes 11 one vowed for the keepers or those staying at that spot
since they resemble the keepers who stayed at the Lat, Uzza and Manat;
they take the people’s belongings and money unlawfully and prevent people
from following the path of Allah (the Exalted). Those staying there, resem-
ble those about whom Al-Khalil (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) said:
«What are these images, to which ye are (so assiduously) devoted?» (21: 52)
and those passed by Moses (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) and his peo-
ple. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «We took the Children
of Israel (with safety) across the sea. They came upon a people devoted entire-
ly to some idols.» (7: 138). Thus vowing to such people, keepers and those
staying at those spots, constitutes an act of disobedience to Allah (the Ex-
alted). It is similar to the vows of the keepers of crosses and those devoted
to them or similar to the keepers of fetish in India or those who are devoted
to them.

Al-Rafii said in the «Sharh Al-Minhaj»: As for vowing to the tomb-
stones that are placed over the grave of a holy man or a Sheikh or vowing

179

ا ا ا ا يا ا ع ع ا ا ا ا ا يا يا يا ا ا ا ع ااا ا 0 0 0ا0ا0ا0ا0اما06ا0 ا ا ل ا ا
ولمعا ماع وا رامد قداث ‎٠‏ مم

for the names of those buried in those graves, or for the name of someone
who frequented that spot on which lived righteous holy men. Then in case
the vower meant and most probably most people mean it to eulogize that
spot or tombstone or corner or to eulogize to one who was buried in it or
to whom it was related, or it was built after his name, then this vow is void
and not concluded, then verily thinking that those places have special quali-
ties and see that they have the qualities of preventing affliction or bring
prosperity; people seek treatment by vowing for them even, they might go as
vowing to some stones when it was said to them that a virtuous servant of
Allah (the Exalted) has leaned against them; people vow to some graves by
promising to provide oil, candles or lanterns and they say that those graves
accept vows that is to say, needs are fulfilled and hopes for curse will be-
come satisfied or an absent person may return or worries will be dispelled,
and many other types of punished vows becauses such vows are definitely
void and proscribed.

Rather vowing to provide graves with oil, candles or the like is defi-
nitely void and proscribed. A good example about that is vowing many big
and tall candles and other things for the grave of Ibrahim Al-Khalil (May
Allah’s Peace be upon Him) or for the grave of other prophets and holy
men; verily the vower means by this behavior at the grave only to eulogize
the one who is buried and to get his blessing thinking that such behavior
makes him near to Allah (the Exalted); such performance is absolutely void
and prohibited and lighting candles is proscribed whether there was some-
body to benefit from it or not.

Sheikh Kassem Al-Hanafi said in «Sharh Durar Al-Bihar»: a vow
which is vowed by most common people as is observed, such as a person
might have an absent person, an ill patient, or a need so he comes to some
righteous man wearing a cover and say: O my master so and so verily if
Allah (the Exalted) returns my absent relative or cures my ill patient, or
fulfills my aeed then you will get from this gold, this silver, this food, this
water or this oil or these candles such and such an amount. Such vow is
considered unanimously void and obsolete for many reasons some of which
are: It is a vow for the sake of another creature, and vowing for the sake of
another creature is not allowable because it a type of worship, and worship
can not be to a creature; another reason is that the one for whose sake the
vow is practised is a dead person and a dead person can not possess;
another reason is that he thought that a dead person may interfere in the
issues of the present life regardless of Allah (the Exalted) thinking like this

180

Tt was mentioned in the Saheeh after A’isha (May Allah be pleased with
her) that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said, «He. who vows to obey Allah (the Exalted), then let him
obey Him.»...

is disbelief - till he said-: If you realize this, then the money, candles, oil and
other things that are taken and transferred to the tombs of holy men in order
to curry their favour is unanimously considered by Moslims as proscribed.

This was narrated after him Ibn Noujeim in «Al-Bahr Al-Ra’iq» and +
was also narrated by Al-Murshidi who added: Verily people are afflicted by
this [type of polytheism] especially at the celebration of the birthday of ‏حلت‎
‎Badawi {Ahmed A]-Badawi in Egypt].

_Al-Sheikh Sana’ Allah Al-Halabi Al-Hanafi said refuting those who al-
lowed slaying and vowing for the sake of holy men: If such slaying and vow-
ing were for the sake of so and so, then it is for the sake of other than
Allah (the Exalted) and consequently it is void and obsolete. In that connec-
tion Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Eat not of (meats) on which Allah’s name
hath not been pronounced» (6: 121) and, «Say, Truly, my prayer, and my ser-
vice of sacrifice, my life and my death are (all) for Allah, the Cherisher of the
worlds». (6: 162) and vowing for other than Allah (the Exalted) is joining in
partners with Allah (the Exalted) such as slaying or sacrificing for other
than Him (the Exalted).

His saying: (It was mentioned in the Saheeh after A’isha (May Allah be
pleased with her) that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said,

121 - «He who vows to obey Allah (the Exalted) let him obey Allah
(the Exalted) and he who vows to disobey Allah (the Exalted) let him not
disobey Allah (the Exalted).»

His saying: (It was mentioned in the Saheeh) that is to say Al-Bu-
khary’s Saheeh.

His saying: (after A’isha) she is the mother of all believers, the wife of
Allah’s Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and
the daughter of [Abu Bakr] As-Siddiq (May Allah be pleased with them).
Allah’s Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) mar-
ried her when she was seven years old and consummated the marriage with
her when she was nine. She was absolutely the most learned among women
concerning matters of religious legislation and she was the best among the
Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) wives, except

181

... and he who vows to disobey Allah (the Exalted) let him not to do ito».
This Honorable Hadith discusses many issues:

The first: It is necessary to perform a vow.

The second: If it is proved that this vow constitutes one of the types
of worship, then carrying it out for the sake of another is polytheism.

The third: It is not allowable to perform a vow that constitutes an act
of disobedience to Allah (the Exalted).

Khadiya. She died in the year 57 A.H.

His saying: (He who vows to obey Allah (the Exalted) let him obey
Allah (the Exalted) that is to say let him perform his vow that constitutes an
act of obedience to Allah (the Exalted). Savants have unanimously agreed
that he who obediently vows to Allah (the Exalted) in hope that a certain
condition will be fulfilled. If Allah (the Exalted) cures my patient, I will give
such and such as a charity then he should carry out his vow if his
conditions are met or satisfied. It was narrated after Abi Hanifa: That which
constitutes an obligation for performing a vow is only that which is
religiously an obligation such as fasting; however, that which is not as
mentioned above such as staying at a certain place, does not constitute an
obligation for performing the vow.

His saying: (He wo vows to disobey Allah (the Exalted) then do not
let him disobey Him (the Exalted) then do not let him disobey Allah (the
Exalted)). At-Tahawi added: «And let him atone his vow). The savants have
unanimously agreed that it 1s not allowable to perform a vow that constitu-
tes an act of disobedience to Allah (the Exalted).

Al-Hafeth said: They agreed to proscribe a vow that constitutes an act
of disobedience to Allah (the Exalted); yet they disagreed concerning the fol-
lowing matter: Is such a vow concluded and requires atonement or not? It
was mentioned above. It may be inferred from the Honorable Hadith that it
is right to vow in allowable matters, according to Ahmad’s creed as well as
according to others and what was narrated by Abu Dawud after Amr ben
Shouaib after his father from his grandfather, and Ahmad and At-Tirmithi
after Boureida, support this.

122 - «Verily a woman said: «O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) I vowed to tap on your head by the tam-
borine». He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: «Perform
your vow». As for the vow of the obstinate relentless, and angrily impulsive

182

د عد مد عد عد عد عاج تدقع د مد مد مد عد مد مد. د عدوا ورد قداعد. ود رده قدقاع ودقد ف فاع ورد قار هد قاع راف قافا ناي رار رار را ور وار را وان
وأقاع د قاعدا عد قاعاع د ترقا عد » عاعد.د .اناعد نا ل ولو وار ره

oe

that is Considered by Ahmad as an oath; thus one is asked between two al-
ternatives; either to perform it or to atone it like he atones an oath; this was
narrated after Imran ben Housein.

123 - «No vow to who vows as a result of anger; atoning it 15 like aton-
ing an oath». This was narrated by Said ben Mansour, Ahmad and An-Nas-
sai’. Thus if one vows something that is hated such as divorce, then it is
better and it is more desirable to atone and not to perform it.

183

Chapter

(Resorting to other than Allah (the Exalted) is considered an act of
polytheism)

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter: Resorting to other than Allah (the Exalted) for
help is considered an act of polytheism).

«Resorting to other than Allah (the Ealted) for help.» means seeking
refuge and seeking protection, that is why the one to whom people resort
for help is called protector; thus the one who seeks the protection of
Allah (the Exalted) has in fact escaped from what harms him or kills
him; he has escaped and resorted ‘o his Lord (the Exalted) and Owner
(the Exalted) and he seeks His protection and His refuge, and this is just
illustrating; otherwise, that which is performed by the heart such as
resorting to Allah (the Exalted), seeking, His protection and prostrating
between the Hands of the Lord (the Exalted) and needing Him and
subnitting to Him all are matters that cannot be encompassed by terms
alone. This was said by Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him}.

Ibn Kathir said: Asking for Allah’s (the Exalted) help is seeking Allah’s
refuge and adhering to Him from the evil of all those who do evil. It is done
in order to prevent or to remove evil. However, turring to, is used for call-
ing for benefaction.

1 said; it is [Asking for Allah’s help] among the types of worship which
Allah (the Exalted) has commanded his servants to perform; in that connec-
tion He (the Exalted) has said: «And if (at any time) an incitement to discord
is made to thee by the Evil One seeks refuge in Allah. He is the One who
hears and knows all things». (41: 36) and the Holy Koran includes many
much examples, such as: «Say, I seek refuge with the Lord of the Dawn»

184

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «True, there were persons among Mankind

who shelter with persons among the Jinns, but they increased them in folly.»
(72: 6).

(113: 1) and, «Say, «I seek refuge with the Lord and Cherisher of Mankind.»
(114: 1). Thus any thing that is worship for Allah (the Exalted) and is per-
formed for other than Allah (the Exalted) is considered an act of polythe-
ism, that is to say joining partners with Allah (the Exalted) in worship; thus
the one who performs any of these types of worship for other than Allah
(the Exalted) , makes that object a partner of Allah (the Exalted) in worship
and competed with the Lord (the Exalted) in His prayers for other than ‏دلخ‎
‎lah is in fact worshipping other than Allah, and there is no difference as will
be mentioned soon if Allah wishes.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said, «True, there were persons
among Mankind who shelter with persons among the Jinns, but they increased
them in folly» (72: 6).

Ibn Khathir said: This is interpreted to mean that the Jinns used to say
that they were kind to Mankind because Mankind sought refuge with them,
that is to say if Mankind went to a valley or to a deserted place in the wild-
erness, the Arabs of Pre-Islamic times had the habit of seeking refuge with
the greatest among the Jinns living in that place so as to protect them from
evil, also one used to enter his enemies’ country accompanied by a big man
and protected and guarded by him, so when the Jinns realized that Mankind
sought refuge with them because they were afraid of them they [The Jinns]
increased them in folly, that is to say increased their fear, horror and panic
so that they may stay more frightened of them and seek refuge with them
more aften-till he said- Abu Al-Aliya, Al-Rabi’ and Zaid ben Aslam said:
«Folly» means fear. And Al-Awfi said after Ibn Abbas «They increased their
folly» means increased their sin. Kutadah said the same thing.

Verily when an Arab had to spend the night in a deserted valley and he
was afraid that something might happen to him, he would say, I seek refuge
with the master of this valley from its abusive inhabitants; he meant the se-
nior among the Jinns. The savants have unanimously agreed that it is not al-
lowable to seek refuge with other than Allah (the Exalted).

Moula Ali Kari Al-Hanafi said: It is not allowable to seek refuge with
Jinns. Verily Allah (the Exalted) has dispraised unbelievers for such behavior
then he mentioned the following Holy verse; Allah (the Exalted) has said:
«One day will He gather them all together, (and say): O ye assembly of Jinns!

185

It was narrated after Khawla the daughter of Hakam who said. »[ heard
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying,
‘He who stops at a place and says I seek refuge with Allah’s perfect words...

Much (toll) did ye take of men. Their friends amongst men will say: Our Lord!
We made profit from each other: but (alas!) We reached our term-which Thou
didst appoint for us. He will say: The Fire be your dwelling-place: you will
dwell therein for ever, except as Allah willeth. For thy Lord is full of wisdom
and knowledge.» (6: 128) Thus a human enjoying the Jinn in matters of ful-
filling his needs and obeying his orders and telling him about some of that
which is unseen, and the Jinn’s enjoying a human by having him aggrandiz-
ing him, seeking his refuge and submitting to him.

The writer said: (This Honorable Hadith means that a thing being bene-
ficial in the present life does not show that it is not an act of polytheism).

His saying: (It was narrated after Khawla the daughter of Hakem who
said: «I heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) saying,

124 - «He who makes a stop at a certain place and says I seek refuge
with Allah’s perfect words from the mischief of created things, nothing
would harm him till he leaves that place.» It was narrated by Moslim.

She is Khawla the daughter of Hakem ben Oumayya As-Salamiyya. She
is also called Umm Sharik and it was said that she is the Wahiba [The giver
or donator since she gave herself to the Holy Prophet] and before she was
Othman ben Mathoun’s woman.

Ibn Abdul-Barr said: «And she was a righteous and virtuous woman.»

His saying: (I seek refuge with Allah’s perfect words); Allah (the Ex-
alted) has allowed the people of Islam to seek refuge with Him (the Exalted)
instead of seeking refuge with the Jinns as used to be practised by Pre-Isla-
mic people. Thereupon He (the Exalted) has allowed the Moslems to seek re-
fuge with His (the Exalted) names and attributes.

Al-Kurtobi said: It was said: Perfect words means those terms that can
not be rendered deficient or insufficiency as the case with words said by
Mankind. And it was said: It means those curing and sufficient terms. And
it was said: Words here means the Holy Koran, since verily He (the Exalted)
has said about it, «A healing for the (diseases) in your hearts, - and for those
who believe, a Guidance and a Mercy.» (10: 57 and 17: 82 and 41: 44) and
this is guiding people to what removes harm, since that was seeking refuge
with Allah (the Exalted) through His attributes, that was accredited and

186

from the mischief of created things, nothing would harm him till he leaves

that place.» It was narrated by Moslem.

recommended. Accordingly, it is the right of the one who seeks refuge with
Allah (the Exalted) or with His names and attributes, to recieve a truly
positive response from Allah (the Exalted) concerning this request for help
and dependence. Thereupon the person depends on Allah (the Exalted),
thereafter he reaches his goal and his sin is pardoned.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: The Imams
such as Imam Ahmad and others stated that it is not allowable to seek re-
fuge with a creature and this explanation was used to infer or conclude that
Allah’s words were not created. They said: Because it was proved the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) sought refuge with
Allah (the Exalted) words and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) ordered people to do as such, that is why the savants had forbidden
the people from using incantations or amulets, out of fear that they may be
absorbed in polytheism.

Ibn Al-Qayyim said: He who sacrifices for the sake of Shaitan or in-
vokes the Shaitan’s name or seeks refuge with him or curries his favour by
doing what he desires, then he has in fact worshipped him even though he
does not call that an act of worship; rather, he calls it employment, and the
Shaitan in turn responds positively, then it is the Shaitan’s employing him,
so he becomes among the servants and worshippers of the Shaitan; and
through that the Shaitan serves him; however, the Shaitan’s service is not
that of worship, since verily the Shaitan does not submit to him or worship
him as he does to the Shaitan.

His saying: (From the mischie: of created things), Ibn Al-Qayyim (May
Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: From every mischief in any creature that
has evil in him whether he was an animal, a human being or a jinn, a ver-
min or a riding animal, wind or lightning, or any kind of affliction or disas-
ter found in the present life or in the After life.

This means: The mischief of every creature that has evil in him; rather
than of the mischief of all that has been created by Allah (the Exalted) since
Jinns, angels and prophets are not evil; evil may be used to indicate two
things: Pain and whatever it leads to of evil.

His saying: (Nothing would harm him till he leaves that place) Al-Kur-
tobi said: That information is truthful and we have learned that through evi-
dence as well as through experience, for since I have heard it, I worked

187

مقاع مقاعدا مداع مد عد قاع قاع تعادع د قاع قد قاع عد قاع قاع مد و ماه واو وال رو و رن رمام
مالساع د ع مدو هع قاعاه عاعاه و فاع هد عد .ا مام

according to it and I was never hurt till I left those places; I was stung by a
scorpion at Mohdaba at night. So I pondered and realized that I forgot to
use these words to seek refuge with Allah (the Exalted) .

This Honorable Hadith discusses many issues:

(The first): The interpretation of the Holy Sura of Jinns (The second)
that it is polytheism (The third) inferring from that Honorable Hadith; the
savants inferred from it that verily Allah’s words are not created. They said:
Because seeking refuge with a creature 5 polytheism (The fourth) The virtue
of this invocation after being summarized, (The fifth) Verily even though
something brings forth benefit in the present life such as preventing evil or
causing benefit, all this does not show that this act is not considered poly-
theism.

188

Chapter

(It is polytheism to seek the help of other than Allah (the Exalted) or to
invoke other than Allah (the Exalted)).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter: It is polytheism to seek the help of other than
Allah (the Exalted) or to invoke other than Allah (the Exalted) ).

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Seeking help is
asking for aid which is removing stress such as asking for support in order
to win victory, and asking for aid is asking for assistance.

Others said: The difference between seeking help and invoking is that
seeking help takes place just because of anguish or agony while invoking is
more general because it may take place either from distress or because of
other things. Every «seeking help» is invocation while not every invocation
is «seeking help.»

His saying: (Or invokes other than Allah (the Exalted)), I know that the
invocation is of two kinds: Invocation in worship; invocation for request; in
the Holy Koran. Sometimes the first meaning is meant and sometimes the
other while sometimes both meanings are meant. This invocation for request
is asking for whatever benefits the invoker such as removing harm or bring-
ing forth benefit, that is why Allah (the Exalted) rejected that people invoke
other than Him (the Exalted) such as those who do not possess means for
harming or benefitting.

In that connection He (the Exalted) has said: «Say: Will ye worship, be-
sides Allah, something which hath no power either to harm or benefit you? But
Allah, Heareth and Knoweth, all things» (5: 79) and, «Say, «Shall we indeed
call on others besides Allah, things that can do us neither good nor harm, and
turn on our heels after receiving guidance from Allah? - Like one whom the
evil ones have made into a fool, wandering bewildered through the earth, his

189

friends calling, «Come to us», (Vainly) guiding him to the Path. Say: Allah’s
guidance is the (only) guidance, and we have been directed to submit ourselves
to the Lord of the worlds.» (6: 71) and, «Nor call on any, other than Allah;
such will neither profit thee nor hurt thee: If thou dost behold! Thou shalt cer-
tainly be of those who do wrong.» (10: 106).

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Every invoca-
tion is necessarily a request invocation and every request invocation denotes,
worship invocation. Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Call on your Lord with hu-
mility and in private: For Allah loveth not those who trespass beyond bounds».
(7: 55) and He (the Exalted) has said: «Say: Think ye to yourselves if there
comes upon you the wrath of Allah, or the Hour (that ye dread), would ye
then call upon other than Allah? - (Reply) if ye are truthful! Nay; On Him
would ye call, and it is His will, He would remove (the distress) which occa-
sioned your call upon Him, and ye would forget (the false gods) which ye join
with Him!» (6: 40-41) and He (the Exalted) has said: «And the places of wor-
ship are for Allah (alone): so invoke not any one along with Allah» (72: 18)
and He (the Exalted) has said: «For Him (Alone) is prayer in Truth: Any
other that they call upon besides Him bear them no more than if they were to
Stretch forth their hands for water to reach their mouths but it reaches them
not: For the prayer of those without Faith is nothing but (futile) wandering (in
the mind).» (13: 14), and such examples about request invocation as men-
tioned in the Holy Koran are plenty and can not be counted and it connotes
worship invocation because the one who requests is sincere by asking Allah
(the Exalted) and that 15 the best among kinds of worship, the same thing
goes for the one who invokes Allah (the Exalted) and rehearses His Holy
Book [Koran]. Thus such person ts considered a person invoking Allah (the
Exalted) and worshipping Him (the Exalted).

Thus it is made clear through what Sheikh Al-Islam said that verily
worship invocation necessitates the request for invocation; by the same logic
request invocation connotes worship invocation and verily Allah (the Ex-
alted) has said and Al-Khalil, «And I will turn away from you (all) and from
those whom ye invoke besides Allah: I will call on my Lord: Perhaps, by my
prayer to my Lord, I shall be not unblest>. When he had turned away from
them and from those whom they worshipped besides Allah we bestowed on him
Isaac and Jacob, and each one of them we made a Prophet.» (19: 48-49). Thus
invocation became a sort of worship since saying, «I will call on my Lord:

190

ل ااا اوم مسو ومممسى امم ملم ما و لول ل ل مل لمن م ‎mS‏

Perhaps, by my prayer to my Lord, I shall be not Unblest». (19: 48) as when
Zakaria said, «Praying, «O my Lord! Infirm indeed are my bones, and the
hair of my head doth glisten with grey: But never am I unblest O my Lord, in
my prayer to Thee!» (19: 4) and Allah (the Exalted) has commanded people
to invoke Him (the Exalted), that is mentioned in more than one place in

His Holy Koran. For example, He (the Exalted) has said: «Call on your
Lord with humility and in private for Allah loveth not those who trespass be-
yond bounds. Do no mischief on the earth, after it hath been set in order, but
call on Him with fear and longing (in your hearts): for the Mercy of Allah is
(always) near to those who do good.» (7: 55) and verily that is the request in-
vocation or call that connotes worship since the invoker requests the in-
voked to do something for him and he [the invoker] submits humbly to the
invoked.

The rule goes as follows : Verily every issue that was allowed by Aliah
(the Exalted) and every issue that Allah (the Exalted) commands them to
perform is considered when performed as an act of worship, so if one per-
forms any aspect of that worship to other than Allah (the Exalted) then this
performer is a polytheist contradicting that which Allah (the Exalted) sent
through His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him). He (the Exalted) said in that connection, «Say, Allah I serve, with my
sincere (and exclusive) devotion.» (39: 14). This issue will be discussed later
on with more elaboration if Allah (the Exalted) wishes.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said in «Ar-Risalah
As-Sunniya», «Verily if during the Holy Prophet’s times there were among
those who became Moslem, some who recant Islam even though they greatly
practice worship, then let it be known that the one who joins the Islam and
Sunna these days may recant Islam for many reasons some of which are: Im-
moderation concerning eulogizing some sheikhs; immoderation in eulogizing
Ali ben Abi Taleb and immoderation concerning Jesus Christ. Thus any
body who is immoderate concerning a prophet, or a virtuous man and sup-
poses that he possesses a sort of divinity, such as saying, «O My master so
and so, support me or aid me, or provide for me, or you are sufficient for
me and other examples. All that is polytheism and straying from the right
path; he who performs it should be asked to repent, if he repents, then he is
forgiven, otherwise, he should be killed. Since, verily Allah (the Exalted)
sent messengers and sent down [Holy] books to be worshipped without join-
ing in partners with Him (the Exalted) and without invoking another God

19]

لوا ا اا وا ا الا ‎SO‏ وار واو وو تاوعد فاع وراك مده عمام د نا عام راود موقا رد ود وا عد ماوراءو د قا را ورد و هسام قاع عاد.د ع عد قاع قاع سا ع عاأهع هاع عاج ماع جاع مد

besides Him (the Exalted). And those who invoke other gods besides Allah
(the Exalted) such as Christ, angels and images, they never believed that
those created creatures or send down rain or grow plants; rather, they wor-
shipped them or their graves or their images. In that connection Allah (the
Exalted) has said: «We only serve them in order that they may bring us nearer
to Allah» (39: 3) and, «And they say, «These are our intercessors with Allah’»
(10: 18). Thereupon Allah (the Exalted) sent His messengers to prevent peo-
ple from invoking others beside Him whether it were worship or request in-
vocation.

He also said: He who introduces between himself and Allah (the Ex-
alted) intrecessors on whom he depends and whom he invokes and asks for
help, such a person is unanimously considered by the savants a disbeliever.

This was narrated after the writers of «Al-Fourou’» and many others. It
was also mentioned by Sheikh Al-Islam and I narrated it after him to in-
clude it in my reply on Ibn Jirjis concerning the issue of intercessors.

Also, Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Among
its types -types of polytheism- is requesting the fulfillment of needs from
dead people as well as asking for their help and addressing them. That is the
origin of people’s polytheism. Verily the dead man’s function is absent and
he does not possess the ability to profit or to harm himself, besides, he who
asks for his help or asks him to intercede with Allah (the Exalted) for him,
that is so because he is ignorant of the interceded and the intercessored with
and this issue will be elaborated on in the chapter on intercession if Allah
(the Exalted) wishes.

Al-Hafeth ben Muhamamad ben Abdul-Hadi (May Allah’s Mercy be
upon him) said when replying on As-Subki who said: Exaggeration in ag-
grandizing him- Allah’s Holy Messenger- is a necessity.

If what is meant by exaggeration is that which is perceived by every
body as aggrandizement, even visiting his grave, circumambulating around
the Sacred House, believing that he knows that which is unseen, and that he
can give or not and that he can regardless of Allah (the Exalted) harm or
profit the one who seeks his help and that he fulfills the needs of those who
request that of him, and dispels worry and distress of those distressed and
intercedes for whom he wishes to intercede and admits to the Garden whom-
ever he wishes to admit- then such exaggeration in aggrandizing that dead
person is exaggeration in polytheism and breaking away with religion in gen-
eral.

192

And it was mentioned in «Al- Fatawi Al-Bazzaziah» in the books of
Hanafites that our savants said: «He who believes that the souls of the
sheikhs are present and are aware, in fact commits polytheism.»

Al-Sheikh Sana’ Allah Al-Hanafi (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
said in his book relying on those who claimed that holy men possess autho-
rities or powers [to interfere in destiny] during their lives and after their
death as a way of miracles or charismeta: Moreover, and verily there have
appeared among Moslems groups of people who claim that holy men pos-
sess certain powers during their life times or after their death such that peo-
ple seek their help in times of stress and affliction and that by their abilities
worries can be dispelled, no people go to their tombs and call them asking
them to fulfil their needs thinking that they have miracles and they said:
Among them there are chiefs, and superiors, seventy and seven, forty and
four and the leader is the one who constitutes a helper to the people and
everything goes back to him since he is their reference; they allowed peorle
to offer them sacrifices and vows and confirmed that they can reward. He
said: Such talk contains exaggeration and abuse; rather, it contains eternal
destruction and eternal torture because of the certain polytheism and be-
cause of contradiction between the Holy Koran on one way and the beliefs
of Imams and the concensus of the nation [Umma] on the other side.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said in the Holy Koran «If
anyone contends with the Apostle even after guidance has been plainly con-
veyed to him, and follows a path other than that becoming to men of Faith, we
shall leave him in the path he has chosen, and land him in Hell, what an evil
refuge!» (4: 114).

Then he said: As for their saying: Verily holy men have powers in their
liver and after death; Allah (the Exalted) refutes that by saying, «Can there
be another God besides Allah?» (27: 61) and, «Is not He who creates and gov-
erns?» (7: 54) and, «To Allah belongs the dominion of the Heavens and the
earth.» (3: 189, 5: 19, 24: 42, 42: 49, 45: 27 and 48: 14) and similar Holy
Verses that indicate that Allah (the Exalted) Alone is the One who creates,
governs, disposes and predestines; no body else possesses any thing no mat-
ter what. Thus all are under His (the Exalted) Rule and Power. Thus He
(the Exalted) owns, governs, takes in death and creates. Also Allah (the Ex-
alted) mentioned this distinguished characteristic in some of the Holy Verses
in the Holy Koran such as, «Is there a Creator, other than Allah?» (35: 3)
and, «And those whom ye invoke besides Him have not the lest power. If ye in-

193

والري ع هد م قد رد و فراع رفاو فاو قار و فد قار فد وا لاه بورد هع فاع تاماود و راو فود رد ور وا قاو قد قاعد عد ارد مداماع فا قافا عد ماما. بد ناما م ع م قاو و مد ود مامد ماحد عد 6د 609 0ه

voke them, they will not listen to your call, and if they were to listen to your
call, and if they were to listen, they cannot answer your (prayer). On the Day
of Judgement they will reject your Partnership. And none, (O man!) can tell
thee (The Truth) like the One who is acquainted with all things.» (35: 13) and
he mentioned other Holy Verses that have the same meaning.

His saying: The saying in the Holy Verses all «Besides Him» that is to
say from other than Him (the Exalted). It is an important saying that in-
cludes all those who believed in such as holy men and shaitan; verily if
somebody cannot make himself win, then how can he make others win? Till
his saying: Verily that is an evil talk and serious polytheism, till he said: As
for believing that such people have authority and power after death, we say
that it is the ugliest and most serious heresy. It is more serious than saying
they have authority during their lives. Allah (the Exalted) has said in that
connection, «Truly thou wilt die (One day), and truly they (too) will die (one
day).» (39: 30) and, «Allah that takes the souls (of men) at death; and those
that die not (He takes) during their sleep: those on whom He has passed the
decree of death, He keeps back (from returning to life), but the rest He sends
(To their bodies) for an appointed term.» (39: 42) and, «Every soul shall have
a taste of death.» (3: 185, 21: 35, 29: 57) and «Every soul will be (held) in
pledge for its deeds.» (74: 38) and it was narrated in the Honorable Hadith
that:

125 - «If the son of Adam dies, his deeds are suspended but from
three.» Till the end of the Honorable Hadith. Thus all that besides that
which is similar to them show that sensation [perception] and movement of
a dead person cease and that verily their souls are held and that verily their
deeds are suspended, that is to say their deeds are neither increased nor de-
creased. Thus this indicates that verily a dead person is unable or rather
does not have the authority to do anything for himself besides his inability
to do things for others; if he was unable to move himself, how would he
have the power to dispose with others? Verily Allah (the Exalted) informs
that all souls are one with Him (the Exalted) while those unbelievers say:
Verily souls are free and have the powers to do things; in that connection
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say, «Do ye know better than Allah?» (2: 140).

He said: As far as their belief that these powers perform miracles, 5
considered a fallacy because a miracle is something that Allah (the Exalted)
endows the holy men in order to honour them; these holy men do not per-
form these miracles by preplanning them nor as challenge; they do not pos-

194

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «‘Nor call on any other than Allah; -Such
will neither profit nor hurt thee; if thou dost, behold! Thou shalt certainly be of
those who do wrong’» (10: 106).

sess the power or the knowledge to perform these miracles, as was men-
tioned in the story of Mariam the daughter of Imran, Ousaid ben Houdair
and Abi Muslim Al-Khoulani.

He said: As far as their saying that people may seek the help of those
holymen at times of distress. This is uglier than that which was mentioned
above and even more of a heresy because it contradicts what Allah (the Ex-
alted) has said, «Or, who listens to the (soul) distressed when it calls on Him,
and who relieves its suffering, and makes you (Mankind) inheritors of the
earth? (Can there be another) God besides Allah?» (27: 62) and, «Say, «who is
it that delivereth you from the dark recesses of land and sea, when ye call
upon Him in humility and silent terror, «If He only delivers us from these
(dangers) (we vow) we shall truly show our gratitutde? Say, Allah that deliver-
eth you from these and all (other) distresses: and yet ye worship false gods!»
(6: 63-64). Then he mentioned Holy Verses that have similar meaning and
he said: He (the Exalted) determined that He is the One who removes harm
and no body else and that He (the Exalted) exclusively responds to those in
need and He who is sought refuge with, and that He is able to remove harm
and spread good. All the above are exclusively His (the Exalted). Thus if
that is so, then all others such as a king, a prophet or a holyman are ex-
cluded.

He said: And seeking refuge is allowable concerning normal apparent
concrete matters in fighting or chasing an enemy or a lion or the like, like
saying: O Zaid [Help us], O Moslems [Help us] according to observed deeds,
as for seeking refuge with others concerning their powers or influence or
concerning morally distressing matters such as sickness, fear of drawning,
suffering, distress, poverty, requesting providence and the like, such matters
fall only with Allah’s realm and may not be requested from others.

He said: As far as their belief that such people [Holymen] have influ-
ence concerning their needs as used to be thought by Pre-Islamic Arabs, ig-
norant sophists, they called them and sought refuge with them, such acts are
abominable acts. Thus he who believes that other than Allah (the Exalted) ,
a prophet, a holyman, a soul or others, have the ability or power to relieve
his distress or other worries, then that person has joined partners with Allah
(the Exalted) since absolutely no one can remove harm but Him and His

195

«If Allah do touch thee with hurt, there is none can remove it but He: If
He do design some benefit for thee, there is none can keep back His favour:
He causeth it to reach whomsoever of His servants He pleaseth. And He is the
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.» (10: 107).

(the Exalted) benefaction and good are the only benefaction.

He said: As for their saying, verily among those holymen there are
chiefs and superiors, seventy and seven, forty and four and the leader is the
one who constitutes a helper to the people. Such is considered among the to-
pics of their telling lies as was mentioned by the narrator the judge in his
book «Siraj Al-Mourideen» and by Ibn Al-Jouzi and Ibn Taimiyya.

That which is meant here is that verily people who possess religious
knowledge still deny and reject such polytheistic issues which have become
malignantly wide spread and which are believed by those biased. If we fol-
low up what the savants behaved in concerning rejecting and denying such
polytheistic issues. This book would become bigger, and he who is honor-
able and perceptive realizes that which is truthful and righteous from the
very first evidence; he who said something without supporting it by evi-
dence, then what he said is obsolete and in contradiction with what the peo-
ple of Faith and Truth say and believe in, those who adhere to what was
mentioned in the Holy Koran, those who respond to the one who calls for
Faith and Truth. We seek Allah’s (the Exalted) help and we depend only on
Him (the Exalted).

He said: Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Nor call on any other than Allah:
-such will neither profit nor hurt thee: If thou dost, behold! Thou shalt cer-
tainly be those who do wrong.» (10: 106).

Ibn Atiyya said: This means I was told «‘Nor call on». This is adddres-
sing the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and if
the case was as such then others had better beware of that. And this address
is not special to the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him), rather, it is general to all people.

Abu Jaafar ben Jarir said about this Holy Verse, «Allah (the Exalted)
says: ‘O Muhammad do not call on others besides your Creator and your
worship to others that neither profit you in the present life nor in the After-
life, nor harm you concerning your religion or concerning the present life,
He (the Exalted) means other gods and images. He (the Exalted) says do not
worship them expecting their profit or fearing their harm since they verily
can neither benefit nor harm. Thus if you do that, then calling them regard-
less of Allah (the Exalted) (Thou shalt certainly be of those who do wrong)

196

اال م ووه واو عاو ‎٠.‏ واعا .ع قاف و وفاقفاع اواو وعد قاو واف عد كفداواو ماود حا قفد و توا ور واه هاه رو وار قار اعدو رامعا را واد را وار زواع وا فد و اعد و و6اعد ام عد ودا عد ع قدا عد عد م هد 6د 5 ع 0

that is He (the Exalted) says among the polytheists is the one who does
wrong to himself.

I said: This Holy Verse has many similar Holy Verses of equal
meaning, Allah (the Exalted) has said, «So call not on any other god, or thou
wilt be among those under the Penalty.» (26: 213) and, «And call not, besides
Allah, another god. There is no God but He.» (28: 88) These Holy Verses
show that any one who is called on is a God while a diety belongs to Allah
(the Exalted) Alone and none of its aspects is allowed to be performed for
other than Him (the Exalted) that is why He (the Exalted) has said: (There
is no God but He). That is in conformity with what Allah (the Exalted) has
said in the following Holy Verse: «That is because Allah- He is the Reality;
and those besides Him whom they invoke,- They are not but vain faleshood;
verily Allah is He, Most High, Most Great.» (22: 62).

That is monotheism which Allah (the Exalted) sent His (the Exalted)
messengers to teach people and which He (the Exalted) mentioned the Holy
Books that He (the Exalted) sent down. In that connection He has said,
«And they have been commanded no more than this: to worship Allah, offering
Him sincere devotion, being True (in faith).» (98: 5) and Faith [Religion] is all
that is used to approach Allah (the Exalted) or curry His favor such as ob-
servable acts of worship as well as private ones. Ibn Jarir interpreted that by
saying that it is one of the aspects of worship, his interpretation was in con-
formity with that of those who came before; they interpreted the Holy Verse
through some of its meanings. Thus he who performs part of it towards an
image or a tomb or pagan or others, then he has taken that object as an ob-
ject of worship and made it a partner of Allah (the Exalted) in diety which
no one deserves other than Him.

In that connection He (the Exalted) -has said: «If any one invokes, be-
sides Allah, any other god, he has no authority there for; and his reckoning
will be only with his Lord! And verily the unbelievers will fail to win through!»
(23: 117). Thus this Holy Verse as well as other Holy Verses show that ve-
rily invoking other than Allah (the Exalted) is disbelief, polytheism and
straying from the right path.

His saying, «If Allah do touch thee with hurt, there is none can remove it
but He: If He do design some benefit for thee, there is none can keep back His
favour.» (10: 107) Thus verily rule, authority, providing and forbidding, hurt

197

Allah (the Exalted) has also said, «The things that ye worship besides Allah
have no power to give you sustenance: then seek ye sustenance from Allah, serve

Him, and be grateful to Him: to Him will be your return.» (29: 17).

and benefit are exclusively regardless of others. Thus this necessitates that
people invoke Him (the Exalted) Alone, and worship Him (the Exalted)
Alone; verily worship can not be but to the one who possesses the power to
cause harm or to cause benefit and no body possesses such power or even
part of it but Allah (the Exalted). Thus verily He Alone deserves to be wor-
shipped regardless of those who do not possess the power to harm or to
benefit.

And Allah’s saying: «Say, ‘See ye then? The things that ye invoke besides
Allah, - can they, if Allah wills some Penalty for me, remove His penalty?- Or
if He wills some Grace for me, can they keep back His Grace?’ Say, ‘Suffi-
cient is Allah for me! In Him trust those who put their trust.» (39: 38) and He
(the Exalted) has said: «What Allah out of His Mercy doth bestow on man-
kind there is none can withhold: What He doth withhold, there is none who
grants, apart from Him: And He is the Exalted in Power, Full of wisdom.»
(35: 2). That is what Allah (the Exalted) told in His Holy Koran; His exclu-
sively being the God and the Lord and He (the Exalted) gave evidence on
that so the worshippers of graves and tombstones believed in that which
contradicted what Allah (the Exalted) said and they joined in partners
with Allah (the Exalted) to bring forth benefits ard prevent harm, that
was accomplished by asking them and by seeking refuge with them
through requesting things from them, fearing them and supplicating and
praying for them besides many other practices of worship that none de-
serves but Allah (the Exalted). They also made them partners of Allah
(the Exalted) in His Lordship and Diety are concerned and that kind of
polytheism is more than polytheism of the unbelieving Arabs who say (We
only serve them in order that they may bring us nearer to Allah) (39: 33)
(These are our intercessors with Allah) (10: 18). Verily those people invoke
those mentioned above in order that they may intercede with Allah (the Ex-
alted) for them and in order to bring them nearer to Him (the Exalted).
And they used to say in their compliance: Here we are at your service; you
do not have a partner, verily you donot have a partner, you possess him but

he does not possess.

As for these polytheists, they believed in those buried in graves and

198

And Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And who is more astray than one who
invokes, besides Allah, such as will not answer him to the Day of Judgment,
and who (In fact) are unconscious of their call (to them)?» (46: 5). ...

they had faith in tomb-stones, and what is more serious than that is that
they assumed that they enjoyed the ability to manage and act and they
sought refuge with them and resorted to them concerning their desires and
their fears (Allah is far above from what they join in His worship).

His saying: (And He is the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful). that is to say
He (the Exalted) forgives the one who repents.

He said: Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Then seek ye sustenance from
Allah, serve Him, and be grateful to Him: to Him will be your return.» (29:
17). Allah (the Exalted) commands His servants to seek sustenance from
Him Alone regardless of others who do not possess sustenance on earth or
in Heavens. His saying: (Serve Him) since verily seeking sustenance from
Him is a kind of worship [service] which Allah (the Exalted) commanded
people to perform.

Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: (Then seek ye) that
15 to say ask for (sustenance from Allah) that is from Him and not from
somebody else because He possesses that other who does not possess any
thing as such [sustenance] (serve Him) that is to say be faithful while wor-
shipping Him, Alone without joining in partners (and be grateful to Him)
that is to say thank Him (the Exalted) for what He bestowed upon you (to
Him will be your return) that is to say on the Day of Judgement, He will re-
ward every one according to what he had done.

His saying: (And Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And who is more astray
than one who invokes, besides Allah, much as will not answer him to the Day
of Judgment and who (in fact) are unconscious of their call (to them)? And
when mankind are gathered together (at the Resurrection), they will be hostile
to them and reject their worship (altogether)!» (46: 5-6).

Allah (the Exalted) denied and rejected that there is somebody who is
more going astray than the one who invokes other than Him. He (the Ex-
alted) informed that those invoked do not answer the request till the Day of
Judgment. And the Holy Verse generalizes; that is to say:

It includes all those invoked besides Allah (the Exalted). In that connec-
tion Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Say, ‘Call on those-besides Him- whom ye
fancy: They have neither the power to remove your troubles from you nor to

199

... (And when mankind are gathered together (at the Resurrection) they will

be hostile to them and reject their worship altogether» (46: 6).

change them.» (17: 56) Allah (the Exalted) informed in this Holy Verse that
the one invoked besides Him does not answer and that he is unaware of the
one who invokes him (And when mankind are gathered together at the Res-
urrection), they will be hostile to them and reject their worship altogether).
This Holy Verse deals with every invoker and every invoked besides Allah
(the Exalted).

Abu Jaafar ben Jarir said concerning that (and when mankind are gath-
ered together) at the Resurrection), they will be hostile to them). Allah (the
Exalted) says: If people are gathered on the Day of Judgment in order to be
tried, those very gods which they used to invoke in their present life would
become enemies because they [gods] would clear themselves from those peo-
ple (and reject their worship altogether). Thereupon Allah (the Exalted) says:
Their gods which they worshipped and served in their present life would re-
ject their worship because they would say on the Day of Judgment we never
commanded them or felt that they worshipped us, O our Lord we clear our-
selves from them.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «The Day He will gath-
er them together as well as those whom they worship besides Allah, He will
ask, ‘was it ye who led these My servants astray or did they stray from the
Path themselves?’ They will say, ‘Glory to Thee! Not meet was it for us that
we should take for protectors others besides thee: but thou didst bestow on
them and their fathers, good things (in life), until they forgot the Message: for
they were (worthless and) lost people.» (25: 17-18).

Ibn Jarir said: (The Day He will gather them together as well as those
whom they worship besides Allah) such as angels, other men or Jinns and
he [Jarir] continued refering to Mujahid saying: And Issa [Jesus], Azir and
the angels.

Then he said: It is said that Allah (the Exalted) said that the angels
who were worshipped along with Issa by those polytheists besides Allah (the
Exalted): O! Our Lord that is to clear and free you from that which was
added by those polytheists (Nor us that we should take for protectors others
besides Thee) asking for their protection (You are our protector regardless
of them).

I said: The invocation is mostly used in the Holy Koran and Sunna,
language, the Companions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and

200

ح يح يح ا يح حي اي ا ا ا ا ا 0 0 ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ل ل ل ا ا ا ل ل ا ‎a‏

peace be upon him) and the savants who came after them concerning mat-
ters of: Request and demand, that is in conformity with what the linguists
and others say: The prayer is the language of invocation.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And those whom ye in-
voke besides Him have not the least power- ‘ill the end of the two Holy
verses.» (35: 13-14) and He (the Exalted) also said, «Say, ‘who is it that deli-
vereth you from the dark recesses of land sea, when ye call upon Him in humi-
lity and in silent terror.» (6: 63) and He (the Exalted) said: «When trouble
toucheth a man, he crieth unto us (In all postures) lying down, or his side, or
sitting, or standing.» (10: 12) and He (the Exalted) said also: «And when evil
seizes him, (he comes) full of prolonged prayer.» (41: 51) and «Man is not
weary of asking for good (things).» (41: 49) and, «Remember ye implored the
assistance of your Lord, and He answered you: -till the end of the Holy verse.»
(8: 9).

And it was narrated after Anas,

126 - «The invocation is the heart of worship.» It was also narrated in
the Honorable truthful Hadith.

127 - «Invoke Allah (the Exalted) while certain that He (the Exalted)
will answer you.» Also it was narrated in another Honorable Hadith.

128 - «He who does not ask Allah (the Exalted) for something, Allah
(the Exalted) will be wrathful.» And it was narrated in another Honorable
Hadith.

129 - «There is nothing more generous towards Allah (the Exalted) than
invoking Him.» This was narrated by Ahmad, At-Tirmithi, Ibn Majah, Ibn

Hibban and Al-Hakem, who said another version of the same Honorable
Hadith.

130 - «The invocation is the believer’s weapon and the pillar of religion
and the light of Heavens and earth.» This was narrated by Al-Hakem. His
saying. |

131 - «Ask Allah (the Exalted) for every thing, even ask Him (the Ex-
alted) for a sandal throng when it breaks.» Till the end of the Honorable
Hadith. Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) said,

132 - «The best type of worship is invocation.» and he rehearsed, «And
your Lord says, ‘Call on Me; I will answer your (Prayer).» (40: 60) till the
end of the Holy Verse. This was narrated by Ibn Al-Munthir and Al-Ha-
kem. It was also narrated in another Honorable Hadith.

201

قالرار ا م قا رد و مدقارد ود مد ود ناع ا ماعا عد ند و م م أ
وم وى وعد عدا م ها قاواع مد فاة وا راع عا فاق ‎٠‏ قافا وا مد دقام م م قرام قاف مامد ع م .د ماج م م
‎Sd‏

133 - «O Allah I ask You by the fact that to you belongs all grateful-
ness, there is no God but You, You are the Benefactor.» Till the end of the
Honorable Hadith. And in another Honorable Hadith:

134 - «O Allah, I ask You by the fact that You are Allah, there is no
God but You, the One, the Eternal, the Absolute, who begetteth not, nor is
begotten; and there is none like unto Him.» There are many such uncounta-
ble examples in the Holy Koran and in the Sunna concerning invocation
which is requesting and demanding. Thus he who denies that request and de-
mand are kinds of worship, has in fact conflicted with the texts [Koranic
and Honorable Hadith] and contradicted language and the way all the peo-
ple of the nation of Islam used; whether those who came before or those
who followed them.

As for what Sheikh Al-Islam said before and in which he was followed
by Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon them) concerning the fact
that the invocation is of two kinds: An invocation to request [ask something
from Allah (the Exalted) ] and an invocation to worship and the fact that
they are contingent and that the one connotes the other, that is if we consid-
er the invoker, the one who rehearses the Holy Koran, the prayer, the one
who sacrifices and the other if we consider all those as asking for something
and consequently he 15 classified under the term invoker, and Allah (the Ex-
alted) has allowed in required the prayer people to invoke Him (the Exalted)
and request things from Him (the Exalted) such that prayer cannot be prop-
er or correct without such invocation as in the opening chapter [Al-Fatiha]
and between the two prostrations and in the utterance that [There is no God
but Allah (the Exalted) and that Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) is His Holy Messenger]. [This is always rehearsed at the
end of the prayer and followed by an invocation-] and that is considered a
kind of worship like prostration and supplication. So think about this, you
realize the ignorance of those who are ignorant of Monotheism.

What makes this issue more clear is what the savant Ibn Al-Qayyim
(May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said concerning what Allah (the Exalted)
has said in the Holy Verse, «say, ‘Call upon Allah, or call upon Gracious: by
whatever name ye call upon Him (it is well): for to Him belongs the Most
Beautiful Names.» (17: 110). This invocation is well known as the request in-
vocation. They said, the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) used to invoke his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) Lord and one time says «O Allah» and another time «O Most Merci-
ful» so the polytheists thought that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be

202

And Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Or, who listens to the (soul) dis-
tressed when it calls on Him, and who relieves its suffering, and makes you
(mankind) inheritors of the earth? (can there be a God besides Allah» (27: 62)

upon him) had two gods and Allah (the Exalted) sent down this Holy Verse.
This was mentioned by Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them) and it
was said: Verily the invocation here means naming that is to say whichever
name you chose from Allah’s Names, as for «Allah» or «Ar-Rahman» [Most
Merciful]. He (the Exalted) who possesses the Most Beautiful Names. This is
one of the essential meanings of the Holy Verse; however, this is not the
only thing meant; rather, the most imporant thing meant here by the invoca-
tion is the invariably intended meaning in the Holy Koran and that is the re-
quest invocation and the praise invocation.

Then he said, if that is known then His saying: (Call on your Lord with
humility and in private) (5: 55) includes both types of invocation; however,
the only request invocation is outwardly but it connotes worship invocation
that is why He (the Exalted) commanded people to practise it in private. Al-
Hasan said: «There are seventy degrees between private invocation and overt
invocation. Moslims used to persevere an invocation and the only voice that
used to be heard was that whisper between them and their Lord.» Allah (the
Exalted) has said: «When My servants ask thee concerning Me, I am indeed
close (to them). I listen to the prayer of every supplicant when he calleth on
Me». (2: 186) This discusses the two kinds of invocation, and this Holy
Verse was interpreted according to both types of invocation, Allah (the Ex-
alted) said: I give him if he asks Me or it was said I reward him if he wor-
ships Me.

This is not considered as using the term in both its literary meaning and
its metaphorical meaning; rather, it is used to mean its one and only one
truth that includes both meanings. And this is discussed concerning the issue
of prayer and that it was transferred from its linguistic name and then it be-
came a religious truth and it was in this worship metaphorically due to the
relationship existing between it and the linguistic name and it remains in
conformity with the linguistic status. To it were added other pillars and
other conditions. Thus according to what we decided, verily the one who is
praying keeps on invoking from the very beginning of his prayer to the very
end; he is either invoking in worship and praise or he is invoking in order to
demand and request; in both cases he is an invoker.

203

At-Tabarani narrated that, «Verily at the time of the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), there was a hypocrite who
used to harm the believers. Some of them said: Let us go to Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and seek refuge
with him (the Exalted) from this hypocrite; the Holy Prophet said: You can
not seek refuge with me; rather, you can seek refuge with Allah (the Ex-
alted).».

He said: Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Or who listens to the (soul) dis-
tressed when it calls on Him, and who relieves its suffering, and makes you
(mankind) inheritors of the earth? (Can there be any God besides Allah? Little
is that ye heed.») (27: 62). Allah (the Exalted) has shown that verily Arab
polythiests and those who identify with them knew that only Allah (the Ex-
alted) who relieves distress and removes evil. So He (the Exalted) has men-
tioned that giving them evidence that they are resorting to intercessors besides
Him (the Exalted), that is why He (the Exalted) has said: (Can there be any
God besides Allah?). That is to say another God who can do that for them.
Thus if their gods do not respond to them when they are in distress, then it is
improper to take them as partners with Allah (the Exalted) who Alone re-
sponds to those in distress and removes evil. This is the best interpretation of
the Holy Verse as He (the Exalted) has said before in another Holy Verse,
«Or, who has created the Heavens and the earth, and who sends you down rain
from the sky? Yea, with it we cause to grow well-planted orchards full of beau-
ty and delight: It is not in your power to cause the growth of the trees in them.
(Can there be another) God besides Allah? Nay, they are a people who swerve
from justice. Or, who has made the earth firm to live in; made rivers in its
midst; set there on mountains immovable; and made a separating bar between
the two bodies of flowing water? (Can there be another) God besides Allah?
Nay, most of them know not». (27: 60-61) and then in another Holy verse,
«Or, who guides you through the depths of darkness on land and sea, and who
sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings, going before His Mercy? (Can there
be another) God besides Allah? High is Allah above what they associate with
Him! Or, who originates creation, then repeats it, and who gives you suste-
nance from Heaven and earth? (Can there be another) God besides Allah? Say,
‘Bring forth your argument, if ye are telling the trutn!» (27: 64).

Thus, think about those Holy Verses and you will realize that verily
Allah (the Exalted) has used against the polytheists as an evidence what they

204

وم ناماع عا قاع تارود عا وداه عاعدا ع اكد فد 4 قاع فد قهوها .ا فاجاعد ع رد و ماع ورا و راع وقد ف راو ردرا رد را رد م راع را رد راف مد رام
واع ودود ود هد و قدفقاع د قاع ماع داه ده قاع ود وقد ناه معد هد مد هد قاقد قاء ا رار

confessed tha: they rejected, such as limiting worship to Him (the Exalted)
Alone as was mentioned in the opening chapter [Al-Fatiha] of the Holy
Koran, «Thee do we worship, and Thine aid we seek.» (1: 5).

Abu Jaafar ben Jarir said: His saying: (Or who listens to the (soul) dis-
tressed when it calls on Him, and who relieves its suffering- till He (the Ex-
alted) says- little ye heed.» Allah (the Exalted) says: Are those whom you
join in with Allah’s worship, food, or is it who listens to the distressed and
relieves suffering, good? His saying: (And makes your inheritors of the
earth?) He (the Exalted) says: Lets your progeny after you reside on earth.
His saying: (Can there be a God besides Allah?) means can there be another
God who does these things for you and bestows benefaction upon you? His
saying (little is that ye heed).

His saying: (At-Tabarani narrated: «Verily there existed at the time of
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) a hypo-
crite who used to harm the believers. Some of them said: Let us go and seek
refuge with Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) from that hypocrite. Thereupon the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said:

135 - «You can not seek refuge with me; you should seek refuge with
Allah (the Exalted) »).

At-Tabarani: is Imam Al-Hafeth Suleman ben Ahmad ben Ayyoub AI-
Lakhmi At-Tabarani, the writer of the three Mu’jams and many others. He
narrated after An-Nasai’ and after Ishaq ben Ibrahim Ad-Dari and many
others. He died in the year 360 A.H. He narrated this Holy Hadith after Ou-
badah ben As-Samit.

His saying: (Verily at the time of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) there existed a hypocrite who used to harm
the believers). I did not come across the name of this hyporcite.

I said: He is Abdullah ben Oubay as was narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem.

His saying: (Some of them said) that is to say some of the Companions
(May Allah be pleased with them) of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him); he is Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with
him).

His saying: (Let us seek refuge with Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
205

This Honorable Hadith discusses many issues:

The first: Coupling invocation with seeking refuge is considered like
including that which is general in that which is particular and more
specific.

The second: Interpreting Allah’s saying: (Nor call on any other than
Allah; -such will neither profit nor hurt thee).

The third: Verily that is major polytheism.

The fourth: Verily if the most righteous among people performs it in
order to please others, he will become a wrong-doer.

The fifth: The interpretation of the Holy Verse that follows it.

The sixth: In addition to being unbelief, these practices do not bring
forth profit in the present life.

The seventh: The interpretation of the third Holy Verse.

The eighth: Verily asking for benefaction and subsistance should be
only demanded from Allah (the Exalted); in the same sense admittance
into the Garden should not be demanded but from Him (the Exalted).

she ninth: The interpretation of the fourth Holy Verse.

The tenth: No body is considered to have gone astray more than the
one who invokes other than Allah (the Exalted).

The eleventh: The one who is invoked [besides Allah (the Exalted)] is
unaware of the invocation of the invoker.

The twelfth: Verily that invocation is the reason for hating the in-
voked and his enmity.

The thirteenth: Calling that invocation as worship of the invoked [be-
sides Allah (the Exalted)].

The fourteenth: Such invoker is considered an unbeliever.

The fifteenth: This invocation is the reason for considering him the
most deluded [going astray] among peopie.

Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) from this hypocrite) because
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is
able to prevent harm. [This 1s their belief].

206

The sixteenth: The interpretation of the fifth Holy Verse.

The seventeenth: The strong thing which is the Pagans confession that
images do not listen to the distressed [soul] while Allah (the Exalted)
does; that is why they invoke Allah at times of stress faithfully.

The eighteenth: The Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings aud peace
be upon him) protection of unification [Monotheism] and being polite
with Allah (the Exalted).

His saying: (Verily you cannot seek refuge with me; you should seek re-
fuge with Allah (the Exalted) ). This is the text that tells us that one should
not seek refuge with the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) not with any body lower than Him (the Exalted) in rank. He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) hated people to use that
term [seek refuge] addressing him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) even though he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) might
have been able to respond during his life; he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) refused that because he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) wanted to protect the concept of Monotheism and in or-
der to cut the way for rationalizations concerning polytheism; moreover, he
refused it as part of his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
humbleness and politeness with his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) Lord and as a warning for the nation to avoid all the means and
ways that lead them to polytheism whether those means were acts or just
sayings. It were a matter that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) could fulfil during his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
life, how would it be allowable to seek refuge with him (the Exalted) after
his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) death; how would it be
allowable to ask him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to do
matters that only Allah (the Exalted) can perform?.

As was done by many poets such as Al-Bousairi, Al-Burai’ and others
who used to seek refuge with those who do not possess the ability to bring
benefaction or harm for himself; neither when he is alive nor when he is
dead or when he is resurrected, and they used to avoid seeking refuge with
the Glorious Lord who is able to do every thing, the Glorious Lord who
has created all things and to whom belongs all command, and all things,
there is no God but Him (the Exalted).

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) said: «Say, ‘I have no power over
any good or harm to myself except as Allah willeth.» (7: 188) and in other

207

ا ج22 خا ‎eee ee‏

places of the Holy Koran: «Say, ‘It is not in my power to cause you harm, or
to bring you to right conduct.» (72: 21). Thus those turned away from the
Holy Koran and believed in the opposite of what those perfect Holy Verses
indicated, and they were followed in that straying from the right path by
many people who thought that polytheism is a religion. Guidance and right
conduct are straying from the right path. Verily we belong to Allah (the Ex-
alted) and to Him (the Exalted) do we return [after death and before death].
Oh what a great affliction; they stubbornly contradicted the people of unifi-
cation and accused those who free Allah (the Exalted) from all of being in-
novators. We seek refuge with Allah (the Exalted).

208

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) hsa said, «Do they indeed ascribe to Him as partners
things that can create nothing, but are themselves created? No aid can they
give them, nor can they aid themselves!» (7: 191-192).

And Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And those whom ye invoke besides
Him have not the least power.» (35:13)...

Chapter

His saying: Chapter Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Do they indeed as-
cribe to Him as partners things that can create nothing, but are themselves cre-
ated? No aid can they give them, nor can they aid themselves!» (7: 191-192).

His saying: (Do they indeed ascribe to Him as partners) that is to say
in worship. The interpreters said that this Holy Verse severely reprimands
those who join partners with Allah (the Exalted) in worship; partners that
are created and that do not have the ability to create; a creature can not
become a partner for the Creator in worship for which he created them and
showed them that they cannot aid those people, nor can they aid themselves.
Thereafter how could they join partners with Allah (the Exalted) in worship
a thing that do not possess the ability to aid their worshippers or even aid
themselves? That is clear evidence that what they used to worship besides
Allah (the Exalted) or regardless of Him is obsolete, and this applies to all
creatures even angels and righteous and truthful prophets. And the most
honorable among creatures used to ask for his Lord’s aid against the
polytheists and he had said.

136 - «O Allah, You are my support and helper; by You I attack and
fight.» and this is similar to Allah’s (the Exalted) saying: «Yet have taken,
besides Him, gods that can create nothing but are themselves created; and that
have no control of hurt or good to themselves; nor can they control Death nor
Life nor Resurrection.» (25: 3) and, «Say, I have no power over any good or
harm to myself except as Allah Willeth. If I had knowledge of the Unseen, I

209

ال ل و و ع ل م ا ا و ور ف وم ل ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا رار ل را وا راو دقارم انار روا ف مدي فد فج 6 6 م تع 506 د 5 ف 6 0 م ع كك ل تت تت 0

Should have multiplied all good, and no evil should have touched me: I am but
a warner, and a bringer of glad tidings to those who have faith.» (7: 188) and,
«Say, ‘It is not in my power to cause you harm, or to bring you to right
conduct.» Say, ‘No one can deliver me from Allah (If I were to disobey Him),
nor should I find refuge except in Him, unless I proclaim what I receive from
Allah and His Messages.» (72: 21-23).

These Holy Verses constitute a sufficient evidence that invoking other
than Allah (the Exalted) is obsolete, no matter who that other was. So had
it been a prophet or a righteous man, then Allah (the Exalted) would have
honored him by worshipping Him (the Exalted) sincerely and faithfully, and
by making him accept Allah (the Exalted) as a worshipped Lord. Then how
would it be allowable to make the worshipper an object of worship even
though he was addressed and told that he was not allowed to perform such
polytheism.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And call not, besides
Allah, another god. There is no God but He. Everything (that exists) will per-
ish except His own Face. To Him belongs the Command, and to Him will ye
(All) be brought back.» (28: 88) and «The command is for none but Allah: He
hath commanded that ye worship none but Him.» (12: 40). Thus He (the Ex-
alted) commanded among the righteous prophets and others among His ser-
vants to worship Him (the Exalted) faithfully and Alone. As well He
proscribed them to worship others beside Him. That is His religion with
which He (the Exalted) sent His messengers and His Holy Books; He (the
Exalted) accepted this religion, the religion of Islam, for His servants. In
that connection, Al-Bukhary narrated after Abi Huraira concerning Gibrail’s
(May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) question about Him (the Exalted),

137 - « O Allah’s Holy Messenger, ‘What is Islam’? He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said, ‘Islam is to worship Allah (the Ex-
alted) without joining partners with Him (the Exalted) , to pray, to pay the
required Zakat and to fast the Holy Month of Ramadan.» Till the end of
the Honorable Hadith.

Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And those whom ye invoke besides Him
have not the least power. If ye invoke them, they will not listen to your call,
and if they were to listen, they cannot answer your (prayer). On the Day of

Judgment they will reject you «Partnership» . And none, (O man!) can tell
thee (The Truth) like the one who is acquainted with all things.» (35: 13-14).

210

... If ye invoke them, they will not listen to your call, and if they were to lis-
ten, they cannot answer your (Prayer). On the Day of Judgment they will re-
ject your ‘Parntership’. And none, (O man!) can tell thee (The Truth) like
the One acquainted with all things». (35: 13-14).

Allah (the Exalted) informs about the state of those who are invoked beside
Him (the Exalted) such as angels, prophets, images and others and shows
that they are unable and weak and donot possess the qualities of an in-
voked; those qualities are power, the ability to listen to hear the invocation,
and the ability to respond to it; thus when those conditions are not satisfied,
all those invocations become obsolete, so how is it the case if those condi-
tions do not exist at all? He (the Exalted) denied that they have power and
authority by saying, (have not the least power).

Ibn Abbas, Mujahid, Ikrama, Ata’. Al-Hasan and Kutadah said, «Al-
Kitmir [The least power] in the thin cover around the palm seed.» In that
connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And worship cthers than Allah, -
such as have no power of providing them for sustenance, with-anything in Hea-
vens or earth, and cannot possibly have such power?» (16: 73) and, «Say, ‘Call
upon other (gods) whom ye fancy besides Allah: They have no power, not the
weight of an atom, in the Heavens or on earth; no (sort of) share have they
there in, nor is any of them a helper of Allah. No intercession can avail in His
presence, except for those for whom He has granted permission.» (34: 22-23)
He (the Exalted) also said that they can not hear the invocation when He
(the Exalted) said: «If ye invoke them, they will not listen) because they are
either dead or not present busy performing what he was created from and
subjugated according to Allah’s commands, such as the angels, then He (the
Exalted) said: (If they were to listen, they can not answer your (Prayer) be-
cause that does not belong to their realm, since verily Allah (the Exalted)
has not granted any one among His servants the permission to invoke any
one of them, neither as an intercessor nor independently; we mentioned
some evidence on that.

Also His (the Exalted) saying: (On the Day of Judgment they will reject
your (Partnership). This shows that verily invoking other than Allah (the Ex-
alted) is considered polytheism. Also Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And they
have taken (for worship) gods other than Allah, to give them power and glory!
Instead, they shall reject their worship, and become adversaries against them.»
(19: 81) and His (the Exalted) saying: (On the Day of Judgment they will re-

211

It was mentioned in the Saheeh after Anas, «The Ioly Prophet (May

Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was hit...

ject your (partnership). Ibn Kathir said: They will clear themselves of you as
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And who is more astray than one who invokes,
besides Allah, such as will not answer him to the Day of Judgment, and who
(in fact) are unconscious of their call (to them)? And when mankind are gath-
ered together (At the Resurrection), they will be hostile to them and reject
their worship (altogether)!» (46: 5-6).

He (the Exalted) has said: «And none (O man!) Can tell thee (The
Truth) like the One acquainted with all things). That is to say no one can
tell you about the consequences of performances but someone who knows
them very well. Kutadah said, «Allah (the Exalted) means Himself (the Ex-
alted) for He has definitely informed the facts.»

I said: And the polytheists did not surrender to the All knowledgeable
concerning what He (the Exalted) informed them about their objects of wor-
ship so they said that it has power and authority. It can hear responds and
intercedes for the one who invokes it, while they did not attend to His say-
ing that verily every worshipped object becomes hostile to his worshipper on
the Day of Judgment and clears himself of that worshipper.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «One Day shall we
gather them all together. Then shall we say to those who joined gods (with us).
"To your place! Ye and those ye joined as ‘Partners’» we shall separate them,
and their ‘Partners’ shall say, ‘We are not whom ye worshipped! Enough is
Allah for a witness between us and you: We certainly knew nothing of your
worship of us! There will every soul prove (The fruits of) the deeds it sent
before: They wiil be brought back to Allah their rightful Lord, and their
invented falsehoods will leave them in the lurch.» (10: 28-30) Ibn Jarir said
after Ibn Juraij that the later said: Mujahid said, (We certainly knew nothing
of your worship of us!) (10: 29) He said that this will be said by every object
that used to be worshipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted) .

Thus the one who is clever would receive those Holy Verses which con-
stitute evidence, reason and light with faith and acceptance as well as deeds,
and he dedicates all his performances only to Allah (the Exalted) Alone re-
gardless of any body else who does not possess the ability to profit himself
or detain of harm.

His saying: (It was mentioned in the Saheeh after Anas (May Allah be
pleased with him), «The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be

212

... during the battle of Uhud and his quadriceps was broken. Thereupon he
said ‘How would people succeed if their prophet is injured? Thereupon the
Holy Verse was revealed, «Not for thee (but for Allah), is the decision.» (3:
128).

upon him) was fractured during the battle of Uhud and his (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) quadriceps was broken. Thereupon he
said: ‘How would a group of people succeed if they prophet split their?
Thereupon the Holy Verse was sent down: «Not for thee, (but for Allah), is
the decision.» (3: 128).

His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh) (both of them). It was sus-
pended by Al-Bukhary. He said that it was narrated by Hamed and Thabet
after Anas and it was reconnected by Ahmad, At-Tirmithi, and An-Nasav’
after Hamed who in turn narrated after Anas. Also it was reconnected by
Moslim after Thabet after Anas. Ibn Ishaq said in «Al-Maghazi»: Hamed
Al-Tawil told us after Anas,

138 - «The Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) quadriceps was broken and his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) face was injured during the battle of Uhud; the blood oozed on
his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) face, he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) wiped it saying: How would a people suc-
ceed when they let their prophet’s face bleed when he calls them to worship
their Lord? Thereupon Allah (the Exalted) sent down the Holy verse.»

His saying: (The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) was hit). Abu As-Saadat said: Such injury was originally used to
indicate that the head was injured; one hits the head by something and in-
jures it, then this term was used to indicate injuries of other organs. Ibn Hi-
sham mentioned from Abi Said Al-Khidri’s speech that Outba ben Abi
187300245 was the one who broke [Injured] Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) lower quadriceps and injured his (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) upper lip as well and that Abdullah ben
Shehab Az-Zuhri was the one who hit him (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) in the face, and that verily Abdullah ben Kimaa’ injured his
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) face, so two rings of the
rings of Al-Mighfar entered his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) face and that verily Malek ben Sannan sucked the blood from the
Holy Messenger’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) face and
swallowed it. Thereupon he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
told him, «You will not be touched by Fire.»

213

Also in it, was narrated after Omar’s son (May Allah be pleased with
them) that he heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) saying when he raised his (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) head from prostration in the last prostration of the
daybreak prayer, «O Allah curse so and so and so and so», after he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Allah (the Exalted) listens
to the one who is grateful, O our Lord all praise is yours». Thereupon Allah
(the Exalted) sent down the Holy Verse, «Not for thee (but for Allah), is the
decision» (3: 128)-till the end of the Holy Verse...

An-Nawawi (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Man has four
quadriceps.

Al-Hafeth said: What is meant here is that it was broken, thus one lobe
was split; however, it was not severed from its place.

An-Nawawi said: This means that Prophets (May Allah’s peace be
upon them) may suffer from affliction and diseases so that they may get
their ample reward or reinforcement and in order to let the nations know
what happened to them and learn from it.

Al-Kadi said: Let it be known that the [Prophets] are men who may suf-
fer from the afflictions of the present life and that their bodies pass through
all the changes or accidents that the bodies of all men pass through or ex-
perience so that people learn that they are created and have a Lord who
commands them, aids them that they will not be charmed by their miracles
and consequently let the Shaitan control them and clothe them with what
the Christians and others have worn.

I said: This means exaggeration and worship.

His saying: (During the battle of Uhud) that is a mountain to the East
of Medina. Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said,

139 - «Uhud is a mountain that loves us and we love it.» It is a known
mountain where the famous battle [Uhud] took place and was named by its
name.

His saying: (How would a group of people succeed if they fracture their
prophet? Moslim added.

140 - «They broke his quadriceps and made his face bleed.»

His saying: (Thereupon Allah (the Exalted) had revealed, «Not for thee
(but for Allah), is the decision.») Ibn Atiyyah said: It was as if the Holy
Prophet (May Ailah’s blessings and peace be upon him) at that moment be-

214

يي ا ا ا ا ل ا ل ا لال ل لا ل ا ل ل ا ا ا 30

came desperate because of the success of the polytheists of Quraish. There-
upon he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was told, (Not for
thee (but for Allah), is the decision) that is to say consequences all belong to

Allah (the Exalted). Thereupon go on doing what you were told to do and
keep on invoking your Lord.

Ibn Ishaq said: (Not for thee (but for Allah), is the decision) concerning
My servants except that which I (the Exalted) commanded you to do.

His saying: (In it was narrated after Omar’s son (May Allah be pleased
with them) that he heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) saying when he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) raised his head after prostrating the last prostration of the
prayer of day break: «O Allah curse so and so, and so and so after his
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying, Allah (the Exalted)
listens to the one who is grateful, O our Lord all praise belongs to You.
Thereupon Allah (the Exalted) had revealed (Not for thee (but for Allah), is
the decision). And in another narration.

14] - «He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) cursed Saf-
wan ben Umayya, Suhail ben Amr and Al-Hareth ben Hisham.» And the
Holy verse was revealed (Not to thee (but to Allah), the decision).

His saying: (In it) that is to say Al-Bukhary’s Saheeh. It was also nar-
rated by An-Nasa’.

His saying: (after Omar’s son). He is Abdullah ben Omar ben AI-Khat-
tab, an eminent Companion of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him), to whom Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) testified that he is righteous. He died at the
end of the year 73 A.H. or the beginning of the year following it.

His saying: (That verily he heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) saying: Thus humility of those people
after his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) quadriceps was bro-
ken and he was injured during the battle of Uhud.

His saying: (O Allah curse so and so). Abu As-Saadat said: Cursing ori-
ginally means expelling and distancing from Allah (the Exalted). Sheikh Al-
Islam’s (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) opinion concerning this matter
was mentioned above.

His saying: (So and so) means Safwan ben Umayya, Suhail ben Amr
and Al-Hareth ben Hisham as shown in the following story:

It also means: It is allowable to curse polytheists by cursing their lea-

215

... and in another narration, «He was cursing Safwan ben Oumayya, there-
after the Holy Verse «Not to thee (but to Allah), is the decision) was sent
down.

And it was mentioned in it after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased
with him) who said:

ders during the prayer, and that such curse does not negatively affect the
prayer.

His saying: (after: Allah (the Exalted) hears from that who is grateful)
Abu As-Saadat said: That is to say «hears» means here responding to praise
and accepting it. Al-Suheili said: That it is answering those who praise Him
(the Exalted) .

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: «Allah (the Ex-
alted) hears from he who is grateful) means that He (the Exalted) responds
and answers.

Sheikh Al-Islam said: Praise is the contrary of disparagement; praise is
concerned with the good qualities of the praised in addition to loving Him.
On the other hand dispraise or disparagement is concerned with the bad
qualities in addition to hate.

The same thing was told by Ibn Al-Qayyim: And he distinguished be-
tween it and extolement in that telling others about the good qualities of
othes is either devoid of all love and acceptance or is accompanied by love
and acceptance. It were the first case then it is extolement, and if it were the
second, then it is praise. Thus praise is informing about the good qualities
of the one who is praised in addition to loving him, and exalting him. That
is why the one who says, «Praise Allah» or «Our Lord all praise belongs to
You» his speech would include informing others about all that Allah (the
Exalted) is praised for, and that requires proving all perfection that Allah
(the Exalted) is praised for, that is why it is improper to say this term but to
the one who deserves it namely, the Praisworthy the Glorious.

In it we can also find: The statement that verily the Imam combines be-
tween praising and verbalizing and this was said by Ash-Shafi’ and Ahmad:
however, Malek and Abu Hanifa contradicted that and said: This should be
limited to «Allah (the Exalted) hears the one who praises Him.»

His saying: (And in another narration he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) cursed Safwan ben Oumayya, Shouheil ben Amr and
Al-Hareth ben Hisham).

That is so because they were the leaders of the polytheists during the
216

«Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) stood when Allah (the Exalted) sent down unto him (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) «And Admonish thy nearest kinsmem» (26: 214)
and said, ‘O people of...

day of the Battle of Uhud in addition to Abu Sufyan ben Harb; However,
Allah (the Exalted) did not respond to him (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) rather, He (the Exalted) had revealed: «Not to thee (but to
Allah), is the decision; whether He turns in mercy to them, or punish them; for
they are indeed wrongdoers.» (3: 128). Thereupon He (the Exalted) turned in
mercy to them and they embraced Islam to become good Moslems. All this
carries the meaning of «There is no God but Allah». He (the Exalted) to
whom all Command belongs, He (the Exalted) guides whomever wishes by
His Grace and Mercy, and He (the Exalted) guides whomever He (the
Exalted) wishes by His Justice and wisdom.

This includes all evidence and rationalizations that makes that which is
believed by grave worshippers those who worship the graves of the virtuous
and holy men, obsolete. Rather, those who believe in evil and think that
they can benefit by them if they invoke with them, or protect those who
seek refuge with them. Thereafter praise the One who impeded them from
understanding the Holy Book. And that is His Justice; He (the Exalted)
stands between a person and his passions and He (the Exalted) is the One
Most powerful and All-Mighty.

His saying: It quotes Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with him) say-
ing, «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said when Allah (the Exalted) had revealed, «And admonish thy nearest
kinsmen.» (26: 214) he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

142 - «O people of Quraish- or some other term that has the same
meaning- buy yourselves; you can not do without Allah (the Exalted). ©“
Abbas ben Abdul-Muttaleb you can not do without Allah (the Exalted). O
Safiyya the Messenger’s Aunt, you cannot do without Allah (the Exalted). O
Fatima the daughter of Muhammad, ask me to give you any thing from my
money or belongings, I would give you, yet you cannot do without Allah
(the Exalted)».

His saying: ([After] Abi Huraira). The savants disputed in his name.
And An-Nawawi’s Saheeh that his name is Abdur-Rahman ben Sakhr. This
was narrated by Al-Hakem in «Al-Mustadrak» after Abi Huraira; he said:
«My name in Pre-Islamic times was Abdur-Rahman.» Also, Ad-Doulabi

217

... Quraish- or some other term that has the same meaning- buy yourselves;
you cannot do without Allah (the Exalted).

narrated after Abi Huraira, «Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) called him Abdullah.» and he is [related to the tribe
of Dowsi]. A Dowsi and one of the best Companions of the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and among those who mem-
orized after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) more than any other did. He died in the year 59, 58 or 57 A.H. He
was 78 years old then.

His saying: (Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) stood up). This was mentioned in the Saheeh after Ibn Abbas.

143 - «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) ascended up As-Safa.»

His saying: (When [Allah (the Exalted)] sent down unto him (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), «And admonish thy nearest of
kinsmen.» (26: 214) the tribe of a man are the closest sons of his father or
his tribe, because they are most deserving of your benefaction, both that
which is religious and that which is not, [belongs to the deeds of the present
life] as He (the Exalted) has said: «O ye who believe! Save yourselves and
your families from a Fire whose fuel is Men and Stones.» (66: 6). Also Allah
(the Exalted) has verily commanded him (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) to generally admonish people. In that connection He (the
Exalted) has said: «In order that thou mayest admonish a people whose
fathers had received no admonition and who therefore remain heedless (of the
Signs of Allah.)» (36: 6) and, «So warn mankind of the Day when the Wrath
will reach them.» (14: 44).

His saying: (O people of Quraish) [A social unit consisting of a number
of individuals who stand in role and status relationship to one another, sta-
bilizing in some degree at the time and who possesses a set of values or
norms of their own, regulating their behavior, at least in matters of conse-
quence to the group].

His saying: (Buy yourselves) that is save yourselves by Monotheism;
that is to say by believing in one God [Allah (the Exalted)] and through
worshipping Him (the Exalted) faithfully without joining partners with Him
(the Exalted) and through obeying His commands and not performing what
He proscribed. That verily saves one from Allah’s wrath and torture; de-
pending on kinsmen and relations does not save you from Hell-Fire; such

218

O Abbas ben Abdul-Muttaleb, I [My person as a Holy Prophet| can not
save you from Hell-Fire if you resort only to me; you cannot do without
Allah (the Exalted) . O Safiyya the Aunt of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) I cannot save you from Hell-Fire if you
resort only to me you cannot do without Allah (the Exalted). O Fatima
daughter of Muhammad [The Holy prophet’s daughter] ask me to give you
anything from my belongings or my money; I cannot save you from Hell-Fire
if you resort only to me; you cannot do without Allah (the Exalted)».

does not work when it comes to Allah (the Exalted)

His saying: (I can not save you if you resort only to me) this contains
the proof against those who attach to prophets and righteous men and re-
sort to them in order to mediate for him or benefit or protect him; verily
that is polytheism that was proscribed by Allah (the Exalted) and com-
manded His Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
to admonish people against it. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has
said about polytheists in the Holy Koran, «But those who take for protectors
others than Allah (say), ‘We only serve them in order that they may bring us
nearer to Allah» (39: 3) and, «These are our intercessors with Allah.» (10: 18)
Allah (the Exalted) has rejected that and cleared himself from such polythe-
ism. Later on this topic ‏111لا‎ be discussed if Allah (the Exalted) wishes. In
Al-Bukhary’s Saheeh it was quoted, «O Bani Abed Manaf, I cannot save
you if you resort only to me; you cannot be saved without Allah (the Ex-
alted)».

O Abbas ben Abdul-Muttaleb, I can not save you from Hell-Fire if you
resort only to Allah (the Exalted). O Safiyya the Aunt of the Holy Prophet

(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) I cannot save you from
Hell-Fire.

His saying: (Ask me to give you anything from my belongings or my
money) Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) showed that nothing saves from Allah’s wrath and torture but believ-
ing in Allah righteous and virtuous deeds.

It also includes: Verily it is not allowable to ask from another slave but
that which he is able to perform in the present life. However, as for asking
for forgiveness, the Garden, or being saved from Fire or similar matters;
those matters which can be performed and accomplished only by Allah (the
Exalted), then it is not allowable to request such matters but from Him (the
Exalted); that which Allah (the Exalted) can not be attained or gained but

219

This Honorable Hadith discusses many issues:
The first: The interpretation of the two Holy Verses.
The second: The story of the Battle of Uhud.

The third: Submissiveness of the Master of all Messengers (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and the Masters of all holy

men in prayer.
The fourth: Those who are cursed are verily unbelievers.

The fifth: They [Those unbelievers] did matters that were not pre-
viously done by other unbelievers such as hitting their prophet on the
head and injuring him and insistence and persevering trying to kill
him. Also they did things like mutilating the dead even though those
dead were their cousins.

The sixth: Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) sent down to the Holy
Prophet (Not for thee, (but for Allah); is the decision) (3: 128).

The seventh: His saying: (Whether He turns in mercy to them, or punish
them; for they are indeed wrong-doers) (3: 128) and He (the Exalted)
forgave them and they believed in Him.

The eighth: Submitting to Allah (the Exalted) at times of disaster.

The ninth: Naming those who are cursed during prayer by mentioning
their names and their fathers names.

The tenth: Cursing he who is named.

through Monotheism; that is by believing that Allah (the Exalted) is One
and by being faithful to all what He (the Exalted) has legislated and ac-
cepted for His servants to use as means of approaching Him. If the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) cannot benefit his
daughter, uncle, aunt or relatives or others who are related, then others are
more deserving and more appropriate.

Thereupon now look at the reality of many people who resort to the
dead by asking them to fulfill their desires. The dead people who are impo-
tent and do not possess even for themselves the power to either benefit or
harm themsleves. That is in addition to others- then you realize that they
know nothing and are unguided.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «In that they took the
220

The eleventh: His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
story when the Holy verse (And admonish thy nearest kinsmen) (26:
214).

The twelfth: His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
grandfather who did what made people think that it is madness,

The thirteenth: Telling the closest relatives as well the farthest stran-
ger, «I [My person as a Holy Prophet] cannot save you from Hell-Fire
if you resort only to me; you cannot do without Allah (the Exalted).»
Till he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «O Fati-
ma daughter of Muhammad I cannot save you from Hell-Fire; you
cannot do without Allah (the Exalted).» So if he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) who is the Master and Leader of all Al-
lah’s Messengers that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) cannot save the Leader of all women from Hell-Fire’ only Allah
(the Exalted) can do that; and Man believes that he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) says only the truth. |

evil ones, in preference to Allah, for their friends and protectors, and think
that they receive guidance» (7: 30). The Shaitan showed them polytheism in
the form of loving righteous and virtuous people, and every righteous clears
himself from this polytheism in the present life and on the Day of Judgment
that doubtlessly love of righteous and virtuous people takes place by identi-
fying with them religious matters and through following their deeds obeying
the Lord of the people; this cannot be accomplished by joining them as part-
ners with Allah (the Exalted) whom they love as an act of polytheism and as
an act of worshipping other than Allah (the Exalted) and becoming the en-
emy of Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) and those who are righteous among Allah’s servants.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And behold! Allah will
say, ‘O Jesus the son of Mary! Didst thou say unto men, ‘worship me and my
mother as gods in derogation of Allah?’ He will say, ‘Glory to Thee‘ Never
could I say what I had no right (to say). Had I said such a thing, thou wouldst
indeed have known it. Thou knowest what is in my heart, though I know not
what is in Thine. For Thou knowest in full all that is hidden. Never said I to
them aught except what Thou didst command me to say, to wit, ‘Worship
Allah, my Lord and your Lord; and I was a witness over them whilest I dwelt

221

ملام لأسا عا م عام سد مد و ها ها عدر عا م شاه م سا ساه عد وام هدو هد هما عد ناوا عافا دافاو راود ران واف راع وه فاماع اما وا هاه واوا . قاع واعد ماع فا هد هد دح ‎٠‏ هع د د دأع د أ ‎١‏ 5*6

amongst them; when thou 0105) take me up Thou wast the Watcher over them,
and Thou art witness to all things.» (5: 119: 120).

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said concerning this Holy Verse after he made an introduction for that
purpose. «Then he [Jesus] denied that which he was not commanded to say
{by Allah (the Exalted) ] and that thing was pure Monotheism, so he (Jesus)
said [as mentioned by Allah (the Exalted) in the Holy Koran], «Never said I
to them aught except what Thou didst command me to say, to wit, ‘Worship
Allah, my Lord and Your Lord.» (5: 120). Then he said concerning the peri-
od during which he lived among them; verily after that period he knows
nothing about them; verily Allah (the Exalted) is the one and only One who
watches them after his [Jesus] death, so he said [as mentioned by Allah (the
Exalted) in the Holy Koran], «And I was a witness over them whilest I dwelt
amongst them, when thou didst take me up thou wast the watcher over them,
and thou art a witness to all things.» (5: 120) Allah (the Exalted) has de-
scribed His witness as above, all others’ witnesses and as more comprehen-
sive.

I said: This shows that verily the polytheists contradicted and dis-
obeyed, what Allah commanded His messengers tc teach; that is they did
not believe in One god; they didn’t unify Him (the Exalted) . This religion
which is their religion, on which they agreed and called on the people to be-
lieve in, and for which they departed from all people but those who be-
lieved, so how could it be said to those who believed in their religion and
obeyed them concerning what Allah (the Exalted) commanded them to
teach; being faithful in worship to Allah (the Exalted) Alone: Verily he did
wrong to them by this Monotheism through which he obeyed his Lord, and
followed His messengers (May Allah’s peace be upon them) and raised his
Lord above polytheism which is doing wrong to Lordship and Diety and
distrusting the Lord of the worlds?

Polytheists are the enemies and adversaries of messengers in the present
life as well as in the Afterlife. The messengers legislated for their followers
and allowed them to clear themselves from every polytheist and to reject
and hate him, to take him as an enemy of Allah (the Exalted), their only ob-
ject of worship. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say, ‘With
Allah is the argument that reaches home: If it had been His will, He could in-

deed have guided you all.» (6: 149).

222

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «So far (is this the case) that, when terror
is removed from their hearts (At the Day of Judgment, then) will they say,

‘What is it that your Lord commanded?’ They will say, “That which is true and
just; and He is The Most High, Most Great’» (34: 23).

Chapter

His saying: Chapter (Allah (the Exalted) has said: «So far (is this case)
that, when terror is removed from their hearts (At the Day of Judgment, then)
will they say, what is it that your Lord commanded?» They will say: ‘That
which is true and just; and He is the Most High, Most Great.» (34: 23).

His saying: (So far (is the case) that, when terror is removed from their
hearts (At the Day of Judgment, then) that is to say fear is gone and they
are no more afraid. This was mentioned by Ibn Abbas, Ibn Omar, Abu Ab-
dur-Rahman As-Salami, Ash-Sha‘bi, Al-Hasan and others.

And Ibn Jarir said: Those from whose hearts terror is removed are an-
gels. They said: Rather, fear or terror removed from their hearts means that
they are brought back to consciousness after being unconscious and after lis-
tening to Allah’s words as said in the revelation.

Ibn Atiyya said: It is as if He (the Exalted) said: Nor are they interces-
sors as you claim. Moslem worshippers who will worship Allah (the Exalted)
till eternity; means they are led even when terror is removed from their
hearts. Those creatures meant here are the angles as was decided by Ibn Jar-
ir and others.

Ibn Kathir said: That is the truth which cannot be doubted because
many Honorable truthful Hadiths were mentioned concerning it.

Abu Hayyan said: There are many Honorable Hadiths narrated after
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) con-
cerning Allah’s saying (so far (is the case). When terror is removed from

223

it was mentioned in the Saheeh after Abi Huraira (May Allah be
pleased with him) that the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said, «If Allah...

their hearts (On the Day of Judgment) verily they are the angels who heard
revelation sent to Gibrail and the later got Allah’s command. They heard it
like dragging iron chairs on As-Safwan. They become terrorised in reverence
and in order to aggrandize Allah (the Exalted). He said: This meaning men-
tioning angles at the beginning of the Holy Verse- of this Holy Verse is con-
sistent with the meaning of the first one, and he who didnot feel that those
who were meant here are the angels, starting by what He (the Exalted) said:
«Others whom ye fancy» which is part of the Holy Verse preceding it; this
person had not realized that this Holy Verse is connected to the one preced-
ing It.

His saying: (Will they say, «What is it that your Lord commanded?»)
And they didnot say what is it that our Lord created? If Allah’s terms had
been created, they would have said: What did he create?.

And in a similar Honorable Hadith, «O Gibrail! What did our Lord
say?» There are many such examples in the Holy Koran and the Sunna.

His saying: (They will say: That which is true and just) that is to say
Allah (the Exalted) has said, that which is truthful and just, and that is so
because when they heard Allah’s terms, they would be shocked and faint,
and after they returned to their consciousness they would start asking: What
did your Lord say? They will say: He (the Exalted) said that which is truth-
ful and just.

His saying: (and He is the Most High, Most Great) that is to say Most
High in Worth, High in subdual, and High in Essence; He (the Exalted) pos-
sesses the perfect Greatness and in all its aspects as was said by Abdullah
ben Al-Mubarak when he, inturn was told: With what shall we learn, about
our Lord? He said: «You can learn about your Lord, «by the fact that He
(the Exalted) occupies His Throne and He (the Exalted) is intelligible by His
creatures; that interpretation is consistent with what Allah (the Exalted) has
said in the Holy Koran, «(Allah) Most Gracious is firmly established on the
Throne (of authority).» (20: 5) and, «And is firmly established on the Throne
(of authority).» (25: 59) and in seven other places in the Holy Koran, (7: 53,
14: 2, 32: 4 and 57: 4).

His saying: (The Most Great) that is to say the One who has no one
bigger or greater than Him.

224

vee in Heavens commands, the angels would flap their‘ wings in submission to
what He (the Exalted) said as if it were an iron chain on ‘Safwan’ that
reaches them...

His saying: (It was mentioned in the Saheeh after Abi Huraira (May
Allah be pleased with him) that the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said,

144 - «if Allah (the Exalted) in Heavens commands [The Revelation
through Gibrail] the angels would flap their wings in submission to what He
(the Exalted) said, as if it were an iron chain on ‘Safwan’ that would reach
them and when terror is removed from their hearts they would say: What
did your Lord say?» They would answer, «He (the Exalted) said that which
is just and truthful and He is Most High, Most Great. Then the one over
hearing would hear it and like a chain one overhears from the other- Sufyan
described this by his hand, so he swerved it and separated his fingers- There-
upon one hears the word and would send it to the one lower than him, then
this would send it in turn to the one under him till he would send it through
a magician or priest, or he might be hit by a shooting star before he sent it
or he might send it before he is hit. Thus he would lie a hundred lies with it
So it would say: Weren’t we told on such and such a day, such and such a
piece of information. Then he is believed by this term that was heard from
Heavens.»

His saying: (If Allah (the Exalted) in Heavens commands) Gibrail to
carry the Revelation, as was mentioned in the following Honorable Hadith.

145 - «If Allah (the Exalted) verbalized the Revelation, the people of
Heavens would hear it like the clinging or dragging an iron chain on the
Safwan.»

146 - Ibn Abbas narrated, «What the All-Mighty sent down of Revela-
tion to Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), He (the
Exalted) called on a messenger from among the angels to carry the Revela-
tion, and the angels heard the voice of the All Mighty saying the Revelation.
When He (the Exalted) relieved their hearts they asked about what was said.
They said: All that which is truthful. And they learned that Allah (the Ex-
alted) says only that which is truthful.»

His saying: (The angels flapped their wings in submission to what He
(the Exalted) said, that is to say in submission to His commands.

His saying: (As if it were an iron chain on Safwan). That is to say as if
the heard voice was a chain dragged on Safwan which is the smooth rock.

His saying: That is to say, it would reach and be understood by them

225

... till terror is removed from their hearts then they would say: What did
your Lord (the Exalted) say. They would answer: He (the Exalted) said that
which ts truthful; He (the Exalted) is Most High, Most Great; these words
would be heard by an overhearer among [The angels] -and one after the
other they are overhearers- Sufyan described it by using his hand; he
swerved it and separated his fingers- one would hear the term [command]

and tell it to the one under him.

[the angels] till they become terrorized by it. Ibn Murdawaih said after Ibn
Abbes: «It [Allah’s Command] is never sent to people of Heavens without
shocking them». And Abu Dawud and others said, «If Allah (the Exalted)
cominands or teaches Gibrail the Revelation, those inhabiting the lower
Heavens would hear it like the dragging of an iron chain on As-Safa. There-
upor they would become shocked and stay as such till Gibrail comes to
them]. Till the end of the Honorable Hadith.

His saying: (Till terror is removed from their hearts) this was explained
above.

His saying: (Will they say, ‘What is it that your Lord commanded?»
They will say: That which is true and just»). They said: Allah (the Exalted)
said all that which is true and just, and they realized that Allah (the Ex-
altec:) only says that which 15 true and just.

His saying: (An overhearer would hear) that is to say he would hear the
command that Allah (the Exalted) decreed and they are the Shaitans one
riding over the other. This was mentioned in Al-Bukhary’s Saheeh after

A’isha who said,

147 - «Verily the angels descend to the clouds and mention that the
command was said in Heavens, so the Shaitans would overhear that and re-
veal it in turn to priests.».

His saying: (and this overhearer was described by Sufyan by his hand)
that is to say he described how they ride over each other.

Sufyan; Ibn Ayyinah Abu Muhammad AlI-Hilali Al-Koufi then Al-Mac-
ci, vwho was a reliable person and one of those who memorized the Holy
Koran; he was as well a legislator; he died in the year 198 A.H and he was
91 years old.

His saying: (So he swerved it). His saying (and separated) that is to say
separated his fingers.

His saying: (So he would hear the word and tell it to the one under

226

Then he [the Shaitan] would tell it to the one under him, till he [the last
one] tells it through a magician or a priest, or he might be hit by a shooting
star before he tells it, or he might not be hit before he tells, then he lies
along with it a hundred lies. Thereupon he said,

him). That is to say the one above would hear the term and then send it to
another under him then he would send it to those under him till it reaches a
magician or a priest.

His saying: (Or he might be hit by a shooting star before he told it) a
shooting star is a heavenly body that is thrown, that is to say this heavenly
body might reach the ovehearer. This indicates that throwing with shooting
star existed before the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) was sent. That is according to what was narrated after Ahmad
and others- the text is his in the «Musnad» after Mouammar-: Az-Zahri told
us after Ali ben Al-Hussein that Ibn Abbas said,

148 - «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) was sitting with a group of his (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) Companions - Abdur-Razzak said that they were a group of
Ansar- he said that a great star was thrown; he got light from it; he said:
«You wouldn’t have said something similar in Pre-Islamic times? They said,
«We used to say, Perhaps a great person has been born or has died.» I told
Az-Zuhri, «Were shooting stars thrown [at Shaitan] in Pre-Islamic times?»
They said: «Yes, but it became more frequent after the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was sent.» He said: «They are
never thrown for the birth of somebody or for his death; but, our Lord (the
Exalted), when He (the Exalted) decrees a command, those carrying His
Throne start praising Him (the Exalted) then those inhabiting Heavens
Praise Him (the Exalted) then those after them and those after them, till
praising Him (the Exalted) reaches the lowest sky. Then the people of Hea-
vens ask those that come next to-those carrying the Throne, then those in
turn ask the carriers of the Throne: «What did your Lord say?» So they
would inform them, and thus all the people of Heavens are told till this in-
formation reaches our sky [this sky] and the Jinns overhear so they are
thrown with shooting stars; so whatever they mentioned as it was heard by
them, is considered true; however, they change it and add to it.» Abdullah
said: «My father said, ‘Abdur-Razzak said,

«The Jinns are kidnapped and thrown at [with shooting stars].» And in
another narration he said, «Yet they add to it, change it and delete from it.»

227

Did not He (the Exalted) tell us on such and such a day, such and
such? So he is believed through this term that was heard from the Heavem».

And it was narrated after Al-Nawwas ben Semaan (May Allah be
pleased with him) who said, the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said, «If Allah (the Exalted) wanted to send the Revela-
tion He (the Exalted) would command through Revelation.

His saying: (So he lies with it a hundred lies) that is to say the priest or
the magician.

His saying: (Then it said weren’t we told on such and such a day such
and such a thing?) This was mentioned as such in a copy by the writers
handwriting and it matches that found in Al-Bukhary’s Saheeh.

The writer said (this includes that souls readily accept that which is ob-
solete; so how do they cling to one while not learning from one hundred
lies?).

This Honorable Hadith also shows that verily if a certain matter con-
tains one truthful aspect, this does not mean that all of it is truthful; many a
time the people who are untruthful confound truth with delusion so that it
might be accepted. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And
cover not Truth with falsehood, nor conceal the Truth when ye know (what it
is).» (2: 42).

These Honorable Hadiths and those that follow it have meanings:
Confirming that Allah (the Exalted) is Most High above His creatures,
Highness that is proper to His Exaltedness and Greatness, and that verily
He (the Exalted) still may say words if He (the Exalted) wishes to, that can
be heard by the angels, and this is unanimously what the Sunnites believe in,
those Sunnites that came before and those that will follow that is contrary
to the Juhmites and Asharites and the Mutazila believe in. So beware
looking or reading what the people of Suspension [suspending the real
meanings of the Holy Koran and the Honorable Hadith] decorate for us; we
turn only to Allah (the Exalted) for aid, support and dependance.

His saying: (And it was narrated after An-Nawwas ben Semman who
narrated from the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him),

149 - «If Allah (the Exalted) wants to send Revelation, He (the Exalted)
would command through Revelation, then the Heavens start to tremble- or
he said to shake- severely out of fear of Allah (Be the blessed and raised
above). So if the people of Heavens heard that, they would be shocked and

228

To start to tremble -or he said to shake- severely out of fear of Allah
(Be the blessed and raised above). Thereupon if the people of Heavens heard
that they would be shocked and would fall in prostration.,...

they would fall down prostrating; the first one to raise his head at that inci-
dent would be Gibrail, and Allah (the Exalted) would talk to him through
revelation and He (the Exalted) reveals His will, then Gibrail passes by the
angels; each time he passes by a sky, its angels would ask him: «O Gibrail!
What did our Lord (the Exalted) say?» Gibrail would say, «He (the Exalted)
said that which is true and just; He is Most High, Most Great.» So they all
would say as he said and Gibrail ends up with the Revelation where Allah
(the Exalted) has commanded him»).

This Honorable Hadith was narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem and supported
by him. It was also mentioned by Al-Imad Ibn Kathir in his interpretation.

An-Niwas ben Semaan ben Khaled Al-Kilabi, and it was said Al-An-
sari. He was a Companion of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) and it was said that his father was a Companion of the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) as well.

His saying: (If Allah (the Exalted) would reveal, He would command)
till the end. This includes the statement that Allah (the Exalted) send the Re-
velation, and that is the proof of the Sunnites against those who deny such
thing: Allah (the Exalted) still talks as long as He (the Exalted) wishes.

His saying: (The skies start trembling) that is to say Heavens start trem-
bling because of what Allah (the Exalted) said. Heavens shake. It is clear
that Heavens can hear His words, as was narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem after
Ikrama. He said, «If Allah (the Exalted) verbalizes a command, Heavens,
the earth and the montains would tremble and the angels would fall down is
prostration.» |

His saying: (Or he said would shake- severely) this is doubted and as-
sumed by the narrators.

His saying: (Out of fear of Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) and
that is apparent, that verily Heavens fear Allah (the Exalted) due to the feel-
ings and knowledge that Allah (the Exalted) creates in it. And Allah (the Ex-
alted) has informed that those great creatures praise Him (the Exalted).

Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said: «The seven Heavens and the
earth, and all beings therein, declare His glory: There is not a thing but cele-
brates His praise; and yet ye understand not how they declare His glory! Ve-
rily He is Oft-Forebearing, Most Forgiving!» (17; 44), and He (the Exalted)
has said: «At it the skies are ready to burst, the earth to split asunder, and the

229

... Gibrail would be the first one to raise his head, and Allah (the Exalted)
would talk to him through revelation about what He wishes then Gibrail
would pass by the angels, every time he passes by a Heaven the angels inha-
biting it would ask him, «O Gibrail! What did ‘our Lord say?» So he would
say, «He (the Exalted) said that which 15 true and just; He (the Exalted) is
Most High, Most Great. So all of them would repeat what Gibrail said, and

mountains to fall down in after ruin.» (19: 90) and He (the Exalted) has said,
«And others which sink out of fear of Allah.» (2: 74). The authority Ibn Al-
Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) decided that these creatures
really fear Allah (the Exalted) and praise Him and he used those Holy
Verses as evidence.

150 - Ibn Masoud narrated «We used to hear the food praising Allah
(the Exalted) while 1t was being eaten and in it another Honorable Hadith
narrated by Abi Tharr,

151 - «Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) held pebbles in his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) hands. People heard them praising Allah (the Exalted) till the end of
the Honorable Hadith.» It was also narrated in the Saheeh.

152 - The story of the yearning branch at which the Holy Prophet used
to deliver his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) speeches be-
fore he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) started using the pul-
pit. Such examples are plenty.

His saying: (They were shocked and fell prostrating) being shocked is
fainting accompanied by prostration.

His saying: (Gibrail wuld be the first one to raise his head) the mean-
ing of the name «Gibrail» is Abdullah [Allah’s servant] as was narrated by
Ibn Joubeir and others after Ali ben Al-Hussein who said, «Gibrail’s name
was Abdullah, and Michael’s name was Oubeid Allah and Israfil’s name Ab-
dur-Rahman. This Honorable Hadith shows Gibrail’s (May Allah’s peace be
upon him) virtue. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Verily
this is the word of a most honourable Messenger, endued with Power, with
rank before the Lord of the Throne, with authority their (and) faithful to his
trust.» (81: 19-21).

Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Verily this Holy
Koran is sent and reported by an Honorable Messenger «Gibrail]. Abu
Saleh said about the Holy Verse, «Gibrail would enter through seventy veils

230

Gibrail would carry the Revelation to where Allah (Be the blessed and
raised above) has commanded him».

This Honorable Hadith discusses many issues:
The first: The interpretation of the Holy Verse.

The second: The evidence and proof against polytheism, especially that
concerning the righteous, and it is the Holy verse that cuts the veins of
polytheism in the heart.

The third: Interpreting (They will say, ‘That which is true and just. He
is Most High, Most Great).

The fourth: The reason for their asking such a question.

The fifth: Verily Gibrail answers them by saying, «He (the Exalted)
said so and so».

The sixth: Mentioning that the first one to raise his head was Gibrail.

The seventh: Verily he talks to all the inhabitants of Heavens because
they ask him.

of light without permission.»

And Ahmad narrated and was supported by the Saheeh after Ibn Ma-
soud,

153 - «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) saw Gibrail in his real image and he has six hundred wings; every
wing has blocked the horizon. When he flaps his wing pearls, rubies and
whatever Allah (the Exalted) knows falls down.» If this represents the great-
ness of such creatures, then its Creator is Greater and More Exalted. So
how is it possible to worship other than Allah (the Exalted): Invoking them,
fearing them, revering them and depending on them besides other kinds of
worship which others do not deserve? Thus look at the state of the angels
and their fear of Allah (the Exalted); Allah (the Exalted) has said, «They are
(but) servants raised to honour. They speak not before He speaks, and they act
(In all things) by His command. He knows what is before them, and what is
behind them, and they after no intrecession except for those who are accepta-
ble, and they stand in awe and reverence of His (glory). If any of them should
say, ‘I am a God besides Him’ Such a one we should reward with Hell: Thus
do we reward those who do wrong.» (22: 26-29).

His saying: (Then Gibrail carries Revelation to where Allah (Be He
231

The eighth: That all the inhabitants of Heavens faint.
The ninth: All Heavens tremble because of Allah’s words.

The tenth: Verily Gibrail is the one who carries the Revelation to
where Allah (the Exalted) commanded him.

The eleventh: Mentioning that the Shaitans overhear.

The twelfth: The quality of the Shaitans that they ride above each
other.

The thirteenth: Sending shooting stars.

The fourteenth: That sometimes a shooting star hits a shaitan and
sometimes it does not, while at other times the Shaitan tells these
words to human being who is loyal to him before he is hit by a shoot-
ing star.

The fifteenth: A priest might sometimes tell the truth.
The sixteenth: A priest lies while telling the truth a hundred lies.

The seventeenth: His lies are not believed but because that word which
was heard coming from Heavens.

The eighteenth: Souls may accept that which is untruthful; how do
they stick to one and do not consider a hundred?

blessed and raised above) commanded him, in Heaven or on earth). And
that is the end of the Honourable Hadith.

The mentioned Holy Verses in this chapter as well as the Honourable
Hadiths confirm Unification which is denoted by the testification: «There is
no God but Allah» Thus verily the Great king by whose speech the angels
become shocked in fear and reverence, and which makes all creatures trem-
ble, the One whose essence is perfect, and whose qualities are perfect, the
One whose knowledge, ability, dominion, glory and power are perfect, the
one who can do without all creatures and the one who is needed by all crea-
tures, the one who is most influential; it is not allowable neither from a men-
tal point of view nor from a religious point of view to join in parnters with
Him (the Exalted) how then is it possible to treat the servant as a wor-
shipped Lord? Where did the minds of polythiests go? Praise Allah (the Ex-
alted) and raise Him (the Exalted) above joining partners with Him (the
Exalted).

232

The nineteenth: They learn these words from each other, memorize
them and are guided by them.

The twentieth: Proving Allah’s attributes in contradistinction to Ashar-
ites who refuse to say that Allah (the Exalted) has qualities [like speak-
ing].

The twenty-first: Verily that trembling and fainting is out of fear of
Allah (Be the blessed and raised above).

The twenty-second: All of them fell prostrating to Allah (the Exalted).

Allah (the Exalted) has also said: «Not one of the beings in the Heavens
and the earth but must come to (Allah) Most Gracious as a servant.» (19: 93)
From the first one to the last among mankind preventing them from com-
mitting that kind of polytheism and preventing them as well from worship-
ping other than Allah (the Exalted). End of explanation of Ibn Maja’s
Sunnan.

233

Chapter on Intercession

And Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) has said, «Give this warn-
ing to those in whose (hearts) is the fear that they will be brought (To Judg-
ment) before their Lord: Except for Him they will have no protector nor
intercessor. That they may guard (Against evil).» (6: 51) and He (the Exalted)
has said, «Say, ‘To Allah belongs exclusively (the right to grant) Intercessiom.
(39: 44).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter concerning the Intercession) that is to say show-
ing what the Holy Koran has proved and confirmed and what it denied and
rejected. It also shows the truth of what the Holy Koran confirmed and
proved.

His saying: (And Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) has said,
«Give this warning to those in whose (hearts) is the fear that they will be
brought (to judgment)) that is to say, fear and warning from it.

His saying: (This) Ibn Abbas said what is meant here is the Holy Kor-
an, (those in whose (hearts) is the fear that they will be brought (to judg-
ment) before their Lord). and «They are believers». His (the Exalted)
creatures; rather, He (the Exalted) admonishes those who have minds, thus
He (the Exalted) has said: (Give this warning to those in whose (hearts) is
the fear that they will be brought (to judgment) before their Lord.) While
they are the believers who have rational minds.»-

His saying: (Except for Him they will have no protector nor intercessor)
Az-Zajjaj said that this means they abandon any supporter or intercessor.

His saying: (That they may guard (against evil) that is to say perform
deeds in the present life that make Allah (the Exalted) save them from tor-
ture on the Day of Judgment.

His saying: (Say, “To Allah belongs exclusively (the right to grant) inter-
234

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Who is there can intercede in His presence
except as He permitteth?» (2: 255).

cession- (39: 44) and before it, (What! Do they take for intercessors others be-
sides Allah? Say, ‘Even if they have no power whatever and no intelligence?’)
(39: 43) And this is similar to His (the Exalted) saying: «They serve, besides
Allah, things that hurt them not nor profit them, and they say: These are our
intercessors with Allah]. Say: ‘Do ye indeed to inform Allah of something He
knows not, in the Heavens or on earth? -Glory to Him! And is He above the
partners they ascribe to Him!» (10: 18). Thereupon Allah (the Exalted) has
shown in these Holy Verses and other similar Holy verses that verily such in-
tercessions is rejected, unacceptable and unallowable, and that verily taking
others as intercessors is considered as an act of polytheism; may Allah (the
Exalted) be praised and raised above such polytheism verily Allah (the Ex-
alted) has said: «Why then was no help forth coming to them from those
whom they worshipped as gods, besides Allah, as a means of access (to Allah)?
Nay, they left them in the lurch but that was their falsehood and their inven-
tion.» (46: 28). So Allah (the Exalted) has shown that worshipping them be-
cause they intercede for their sake; this claim is all false and invented by
them.

Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Say, ‘To Allah belongs exclusively (the
right to grant) intercession». That is to say He (the Exalted) owns it all, and
those from whom it is asked do not have anything of it; rather, it should be
requested from the one who owns it regardless of any other; that request

would be considered an act of worship that 15 improper but to Allah (the
Exalted) .

Al-Badawi said: «Perhaps it is a response to what might be their answer
that intercessors are persons who are close to Allah (the Exalted) .

Allah (the Exalted) has said: «To Allah belongeth the domain of the hea-
vens and the earth.» (2: 107) This Holy Verse decides that taking intercessors
besides Allah (the Exalted) is void and invalid, because all dominion belongs
to Him and possessing intercession belongs to all dominion. Thus if He (the
Exalted) is the owner, then it is invalid to ask someone who does not own it
to intercede. He (the Exalted) has said: «Who is there can intercede in His
presence except as He permitteth?» (2: 255) and, «And they offer no interces-
sion except for those who are acceptable.» (21: 28).

Ibn Jarir said: «This Holy Verse was sent down when the unbelievers

235

And He (the Exalted) has said, «How many-so-ever be the angels in the
Heavens, their intercession will avail nothing except after Allah has given leave
for whom He pleases and that he is acceptable to Him» (53: 26).

And He (the Exalted) has also said, «Say, ‘Call upon other (gods) whom
ye fancy, besides Allah: They have no power, -not the weight of an atom, in
the Heavens or on earth: no (sort of) share have they therein, nor is any of
them a helper to Allah. No intercession can avail in His presence, except for
those for whom He has granted permission» (34: 22).

said: ‘We do not worship our images but to approach us to Allah (the Ex-
alted). Allah (the Exalted) has said: «To Him belongs the dominion of the
Heavens and the earth: At the End, it is to Him that ye shall be bought back.»
(39: 44).

He said: (Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Who is there can intercede in
His presence if He permitteth?» (2: 255). It is clear from the Holy Verses
mentioned before that verily intercession rejected by the Holy Koran is
that intercession requested from others beside Allah (the Exalted) . In the
following Holy Verse it is made clear that intercession takes place in the
Afterlife by His permission. Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said:
«On that Day shall no intercession avail except for those whom permission has
been granted by (Allah) Most Gracious and whose word is acceptable to Him.»
(20: 109). Thereupon He (the Exalted) showed that it [Intercession] cannot
happen to any one but after two conditions are satisfied: the Lord (the
Exalted) has permitted the intercessor to intercede, and His acceptance to
the person interceded for. He (the Exalted) does not accept from all
deeds, private of manifest but that which is for His sake, and that by
which the servant meets his Lord faithfully and free from all doubt wha-
tesoever, aS was shown by the Honorable and Saheeh Hadith and that
will be mentioned later confirmed by sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy
be upon him).

His saying: («How many-so-ever be the angels in the Heavens their inter-
cession will avail nothing except after Allah has given leave for whom ise
pleases and that he is acceptable to Him» (53: 26)) Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s
Mercy be upon him) said (How many-so-ever be the angels in the Heavens,
their intercession will avail nothing except what He pleases and what is ac-
ceptable to Him) 15 like His (the Exalted) saying: «Who is there can intercede
in His presence except as He permitteth?» (2: 255) and, «No intercession can

236

ل م م مم م مد ع وده ءا شاع عد ع شاع شاه سدع سدع جد جد جاه عد هد .اعد عد هد و فراع عدم قافداو مداعدأعماقا. د راجا ورد عماماعجا امد نامار ا مد مد م وو مامد قار م نام مامح جد جد مد ع 6د د م كد عد 5 ‎١ 1١ ٠‏ 5 > > 5 5

avail in His presence, except for those for whom He has granted permission»
(34: 23). So if that was the case concerning the closest creatures, namely the

angels, so how do you, ignorant people, request the intercession of these
people with Allah (the Exalted) and He (the Exalted) neither allowed people
to worship them nor did He (the Exalted) permit them to intercede; rather,
He had proscribed and forbidden it through all His messengers and sent this
proscription down in all His Holy Books?

He said: (Allah (the Exalted) has said) «Say, ‘Call upon other (gods)
whom ye fancy, besides Allah; they have no power, not the weight of an atom,-
in the Heavens or on earth: no (sort of) share have they therein, nor is any of
them a helper to Allah. No intercession can avail in His Presence, except for
those for whom He has granted permission.» (34: 22-23).

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said concerning these
Holy Verses: «Verily Allah (the Exalted) has put an end to the reasons to
which polytheists cling. For the polytheist verily takes an idol in anticipation
of profit, and profit can not be attained but from who possesses one quality
from the following four; either he possesses what his worshipper requests
from him, so if he were not a partner, then he would be a helper and sup-
porter; if he were not a helper, then he would be an intercessor. Thereupon
Allah (the Exalted) has made these four ranks absolutely invalid, moving
from the highest to the lowest; so He (the Exalted) rejected others possessing
dominion, partnership, help and intercession demanded by a polythiest, and
He (the Exalted) confirmed that type of intercession which maynot happen
to a polytheist; that 15 intercession after His permission.

This Holy Verse suffices as light and proves Monotheism and for cut-
ting the roots and materials for polytheism for those who adopt them. And
the Holy Koran is full of such Holy Verses and such examples; however,
most people do not feel that reality is included in the Holy Koran; they
think that 1t is a characteristic of a certain kind of people who existed before
them never leaving a heritage behind. Such is what interferers between the
heart and between understanding the Holy Koran. By Allah, had these peo-
ple lived before, then they would have been inherited by those similar to
them or even more evil than them or lower than them, and they would have
dealt with the Holy Koran as those would have dealt with.

Then he said: Among its -types polytheism- asking for needs from dead
people and asking for their aid, and that is the origin of polytheism among
people. Verily the dead person has his deeds suspended and he does not pos-

237

> + > > - + > > > ع ع خ ح > ع ح ع ح ح 2 ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ل 1 1 0 01 0101 10 010 0 0 ب نل د د 2 ل د ل د د د د هس دس دس 5ه د '* : . -. : « ‎١‏

sess the power to profit or to hurt himself besides the one who invokes him
and asks him to intercede for him with Allah (the Exalted). And this is ig-
norance of the intercessor and the interceded as verily he is unable to inter-
cede for him with Allah (the Exalted) unless Allah (the Exalted) permits,
and Allah (the Exalted) did not make out of asking for help and the request
a reason for His permission; rather, the reason is to perfect unification, so
this polytheist came with a reason that prevents permission and he is like
asking to accomplish or to fulfil his need by doing what prevents it from
being fulfilled.

This is the case of every polytheist; they paired joining in partners with
that who is worshipped and changing his religion on one hand and being
hostile to monotheists on the other hand. They [polytheists] believe that the
monotheists dispraise the dead while they dispraise the Creator [Allah (the
Exalted) ] through polytheism; they dispraise the monotheist holymen by
defaming them, criticizing them, and treating them as enemies, and they
dispraised the one whom they joined partners within worship since they
thought that they are satisfised with them by this, and that verily they
ordered them to perform it and that they support them concerning it, these
are the enemies of the messengers in every time and place. Oh how plenty
are those who respond to them; no one is saved from this major polytheism
but those who freed his belief that Allah (the Exalted) is one from all types
of polytheism and treated polytheists with enmity for the sake of Allah (the
Exalted) and curried Allah’s favour by dispising them and took as supporter
God and diety only Allah (the Exalted), so he cleared his love for Allah (the
Exalted), his fear to Him (the Exalted), his hope from Allah (Glory be to
Him), his humility towards Allah (the Exalted), his dependance on Allah
(the Exalted), his asking for Allah’s aid, his resorting to Allah (the Exalted),
his seeking refuge with Him (the Exalted) and his seeking Allah (the
Exalted), following His commands demanding His acceptance; if he asks he
would ask Allah (the Exalted), if he seeks help, he would seek help from
Allah (the Exalted), if he did something he would do it for Allah’s sake. He
is for Allah (the Exalted), with Allah (the Exalted) and to Allah (the
Exalted).

This was mentioned by this Imam concerning the interpretation of the
Holy Verse as the reality and essence of the religion of Islam as He (the Ex-
alted) has said: «Who can be better in religion than one who submits his whole

self to Allah, does good, and follows the way of Abraham the true in faith?
For Allah did take Ibrahim as a comrade.» (4: 125).

238

Abu AI-Abbas said, «Allah (the Exalted) denied from all others that
which polytheists cling to; He (the Exalted) denied that others possess do-
minion or part of it, He (the Exalted) denied that others might aid Him and
He only left intercession. He showed that it does not profit except those per-
mitted by Him as He said, «And they offer no intercession except for those
who are acceptable» (21: 28). Thus such intercession which is assumed by
polytheists is invalid. On the Day of Judgment as it was rejected by the
Holy Koran, and He has told the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him), «verily, he comes and prostrates to his Lord and
Praises Him» that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) does
not start by intercession first. Then it is said to him (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him), «Raise your head and speak you will be heard, ask
and you will be given, and intercede you will be granted intercession».

His saying: (Abu Al-Abbas said) that is the surname of Sheikh Al-Islam
Ahmad ben Taymiyya Al-Hirani, the Leader of Moslems (May Allah’s
Mercy be upon him).

(Allah (the Exalted) denied from all others that which polytheists cling
to; He (the Exalted) denied that others possess dominion or part of it, He
(the Exalted) denied that others might be aids of His intercession. He (the
Exalted) showed that it does not profit except those permitted by Him (the
Exalted) as He (the Exalted) said: «And they offer no intercession except for
those who are acceptable.» (21: 28). Such intercession which is assumed by
polytheists is invalid on the Day of Judgment as it was rejected by the Holy
Koran, and the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said,

155 - «Verily he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) comes
and prostrates to his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) Lord
(the Exalted) and praises Him (the Exalted);he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) does not start with intercession first. Then it is said to
him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) raise your head and
speak, you will be heard, ask and you will be given; intercede and you will
be granted intercession.» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
was asked by Abu Huraira: «Who is the luckiest to get your intercession.»
He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) answered, «He who
faithfully and truthfully said: ‘There is no God but Allah’, since that consti-
tutes intercession for the people of faith if Allah (the Exalted) permits; it can
not be granted to those who join in partners with Allah (the Exalted). Its

239

Abu Huraira said, «Who is the luckiest to get your intercession’» He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «He who faithfully
said, “There is no God but Allah» such intercession is granted the people of
Faith if Allah (the Exalted) permits and it cannot be granted to those who
join in partners with Aliah (the Exalted).

Its reality is: Verily Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) is the One
who sends His benefaction to the people of faith, so He (the Exalted) for-
gives them through the invocation of the one who is granted permission to
intercede so as to honour him and to grant him the praised rank.

Thus intercession that was rejected by the Holy Koran included poly-
theism, that is why He (the Exalted) confirmed intercession in some
places [of the Holy Koran], intercession that He (the Exalted) permits.
And the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
showed that verily it can be granted only to the people of Faith and
Unification».

reality is: Verily Allah (Be He blessed and raised above) is the One who
sends His benefaction to the people of Faith, so He (the Exalted) forgives
them through the invocation of the one who is granted permission to inter-
cede so as to honor him and to grant him the praised rank. Thus interces-
sion, rejected by the Holy Koran included polytheism, that is why He (the
Exalted) confirmed intercession in some places of the Holy Koran, interces-
sion that He (the Exalted) permits. And the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) showed that verily it can be granted only to
the people of Faith and unification.» |

His saying: (Abu Huraira said) till the end of the Honorable Hadith.
This Honorable Hadith-was narrated by Al-Bukhary, and An-Nasai’ after
Abi Huraira; it was also narrated by Ahmad and corrected by Ibn Hibban.
It says,

156 - «f grant my intercession to whomever says, ‘There is no God but
Allah’ faithfully and truthfully believing in it; his heart confirms what his
tongue said and his tongue confirms what his hearts said.» It is confirmed in
Muslim’s Saheeh who narrated after Abi Huraira: «Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

157 - «Each prophet is granted an answered invocation; however, every
one of them rushed and asked for his. I kept my intercession till the Day of
Judgment. It will take place and will be responded to, if Allah (the Exalted)

240

قراو و قدافاع وقاع قد ع قاهده فاع وه قاقد و ‎OS‏ فعا ع وود ود نافد ود و را قاع تناح يد كد رار ند مد نام

wishes and it will be granted to who died while not joining partners with
Allah (the Exalted).»

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) mentioned what Sheikh
Al-Islam said: It stood in place of the explanation and interpretation be-

cause of the Holy Verses included in this chapter, and it is enough even in
brief form. And Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

And he denied faithfulness by giving a very good definition. Thereupon
he said: «Faithfulness is loving only Allah (the Exalted) and working for His
sake.»

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said concerning the
meaning of Abi Huraira’s discussion: Think about how this discussion made
out of all the causes that lead to His intercession, clearing Unification from
all polytheism. That is contrary to what the polytheists believe in, that verily
intercession may be granted by worshipping them and being loyal to them.
The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) overthrew
their false belief and informed that the cause of intercession is freeing unifi-
cation from all polytheism, then and only then Allah (the Exalted) permits
the intercessor to intercede. It is part of the polytheists ignorance to think
that the one whom he took as intercessor or supporter can benefit him or
support him, as the case with rulers and kings who benefit and support
those who are loyal to them. They did not know that no one can intercede
unless He (the Exalted) grants him permission to intercede. Moreover, He
(the Exalted) doesnot permit any body to intercede unless He (the Exalted)
accepts his deeds and sayings, as He (the Exalted) has said in the Holy
Verse, «Who is there can intercede in His presence except as He permitteth?»
(2: 255) and, «And they offer no intercessions except for those who are accep-
table.» (21: 28) and there still remains a third one which says that He (the
Exalted) doesnot accept among sayings and deeds but unifying Him (the Ex-
alted) and following His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him). These three aspects severe the tree of polytheism from the
heart of the one who perceives it and is conscious of it.

He (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) also mentioned that there are six
types of intercessions:

(The first) Grand intercession for which is not granted to those who
possess the firm will till it reaches the Holy prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) who in turn says,

158 - «It is for me» and that is when all creatures resort to the prophets

241

This chapter discusses many issues:
The first: The interpretation of the Holy verse.
The second: Characteristics of rejected intercession.
The thrid: Characteristics of accepted intercession.

The fourth: Mentioning the Grand intercession and it is the praised
Rank.

The fifth: That the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) does not start by interceding; he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) starts by prostrating, if he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) is granted permission, he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) will intercede.

for intercession so that their Lord (the Exalted) relives them from the hard-
ship of the Day of Judgment. This intercession is his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) only and no one shares it with him (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him).

(The second) His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) inter-
cession for the people of the Garden concerning their entrance into it. It was
mentioned by Abu Huraira in his agreed on lengthy discussion.

(The third) His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) interces-
sion for a group of disobedient people from his (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) nation; those people committed sins that required their
admission into Hell-Fire; he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
intercedes for them so that they will not be admitted into Fire.

(The Fourth) His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) inter-
cession for the disobedients among the people of monotheism who are ad-
mitted into Hell-fire because of their-sins as in the Honorable Hadiths after
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). Concern-
ing this type of intercession and all the Companions of the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and the people of Sunna
have unanimously agreed on it and called those who rejected it as innova-
tors, and they reprimaded him [who rejected it] and called him untruthful
and deluded.

[The fifth] His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) interces-
sion for a group of the people of the Garden concerning increasing their re-
ward and raising their rank; and that is never disputed by anybody. All of it

242

The sixth: Who is the luckiest to get this intercession.

The seventh: It cannot be granted to those who join in partners with
Allah (the Exalted).

The eight: Showing its truth.

concern the people of Faith who never took besides Allah (the Exalted)
either an intercessor or a supporter. Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has
said: «Give this warning to those in whose (hearts) is the fear that they will be
brought (To Judgment- before their Lord: except for Him they will have no
protector nor intercessor: that they may guard (Against evil).» (6: 51).

(The sixth) His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) interces-
sion for some of his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) unbe-
lieving kinsmen who are to be admitted into Hell-Fire, so that Allah (the
Exalted) would lighten their torture. This intercession is exclusively for Abi
Taleb.

243

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «It is true thou will not be able to guide
every one whom thou lovest; but Allah guides those whom He wills» (28: 56).

And it was narrated in the Saheeh after Ibn Al-Musseib who narrated
after his father that, «When my father Abu Taleb was on his death bed

Chapter

His saying: Chapter (Allah (the Exalted) has said, «It is true thou wilt
not be able to guide every one whom thou lovest; but Allah guides those He
will.» (28: 56)).

The reason for sending down this Holy Verse was Abu Taleb’s death
while he was still following the creed of Abdul-Muttaleb, as will be dis-
cussed later in this chapter.

Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Allah (the Exalted)
tells His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him):
Verily 0 Muhammad you are unable to guide whomever you love, that is to
say that is not your job; rather, your job is Just to tell the people and Allah
(the Exalted) guides whomever He wills. And He possesses that great wis-
dom and conclusive evidence. Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said:
«It is not required of thee (O Apostle, to set them on the right path, but Allah
sets on the right path whom He pleaseth.»(2: 272) and He (the Exalted) said:
«Yet no faith will the greater part of mankind have, however ardently thou do-
est desire it.» (12: 103).

I said: That which is denied here is guidance to acceptance and success;
verily that isssued completely belongs to Allah’s (the Exalted) domain and
He Alone is able to accomplish it. As for guidance mentioned in the Holy
verse, «Thou dost guide (men) to the straight way.» (42: 52) Verily such gui-
dance is directing and showing; he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be

244

Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
came to him where he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) found
Abdullah ben Abi Umayya and Abu Jahl visiting him. Thereupon he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, ‘O Uncle say there is no God
but Allah (the Exalted) a term that helps me intercede for you [with Allah
on the Day of Judgment}.

Thereupon they [the two men] told him, «Do you leave the creed of Ab-
dul-Mattaleb?».

upon him) is, according to Allah (the Exalted) shows His religion and ..1-
rects people to it.

His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh after Ibn Al-Museib who
narrated after his father that, «When Abu Taleb was on his death bed, then
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
came to him where he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) found
Abdullah ben Abi Umayya and Abu Jahl visiting him, so he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said: ‘O Uncle say there is no God but
Allah (the Exalted) a term that helps me intercede for you [with Allah (the
Exalted) on the Day of Judgment the two men] told him: «Do you leave the
creed of Abdul-Muttaleb?». Thereupon the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) repeated what he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said and then they repeated what they said. The
last thing the dying man said: 1:11 keep on Abdul-Muttaleb’s creed and he
refused to say there is no God but Allah (the Exalted). The Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: «I will ask Allah (the
Exalted) to forgive you, unless I was not allowed to do so.» Allah (Be the
blessed and raised above) sent down the Holy Verse, «It is not fitting, for the
Prophet and those who believe, that they should pray for forgiveness for
pagans, even though they be of kin, after it is clear to them that they are
companions of the Fire.» (9: 113) and He (the Exalted) sent down concerning
Abi Taleb, «It is true thou wilt not be able to guide every one whom thou
lovest; but Allah guides those whom He will.» (28: 56).

159 - His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh) that is to say in the
two Saheehs. Ibn Al-Mousayyed, is one of the seven great savants and juris-
prudents and one of the followers. Experts with the Honorable Hadith
agreed that his reports are among those that are most truthful and most reit-
able. And Ibn Al-Madini said: «I donot know among the followers any one
who is more knowledgeable than him. He died after the year 90 A.H and he
was about eighty years old.

245

Thereupon the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) repeated what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said
and then they repeated what they said. The last thing the dying man said
was, «I will keep on Abdul-Muttaleb’s creed».

And his father Al-Mousayyeb is a Companion of the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and stayed alive till the Cali-
phate of Othman (May Allah be pleased with him). The same applies for his
grandfather Hazm who is a Companion who was martyred in Al-Yamama.

His saying: (When Abu Taleb was on his death bed) that is to say when
the signs of approaching death appeared on him.

His saying: (Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) came to him, it is possible that Al-Mousayyeb came with the
other two since they are from the children of Makhzoum and he is one of
them as well, and at that time the three men were unbelievers. Abu Jah] was
killed while he was still an unbeliever while the other two embraced Islam.

His saying: (O uncle).

His saying: (Say there is no God but Allah) he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) ordered him to say it because Abu Taleb knows
that it is rejecting both polytheism and being faithful in worship to others
besides Allah (the Exalted). Verily he who says it while realizing its denota-
tions and while fully aware, becomes clear from polytheism and polytheists
and embraces Islam. Because they realized its meaning those times, there
was not in Mecca but either a Moslim or an unbeliver. It is said only by
those who leave polytheism and clear themselves from it. And when the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) immigrated
along with his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) Companions
to Medina, there were Moslems who were unifiers and those who were hypo-
crites who used to say it realizing its meaning but not believing in it because
of enmity, suspicion and doubt that filled their hearts. So apparently they
were supporting the Moslems, while secretly they were not. In Medina there
were also Jews; and Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) acknowledged them when he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) immigrated and made peace with them as long as they
did not betray him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) or sup-
port an enemy against him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon hirn)
as mentioned in books concerning Honourable Hadith and the way of life of
the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

246

واواه .د واهىد .د زد .و ودفاع د ود فاه وه شدقفا. فقاود .دو وا واه و اواماع د مهاعم وارام فا مداع رمام فاو عد واعد ورد و رد فراع وقانام عدامد م عد قرع مامد وام ماود را مدو اماع عاد عد فا قار معد عد مد نا ما عدا مد مم

His saying: (A term) Al-Kurtobi said: It is the appositive of «There is
no God but Allah.»

His saying: (That helps me intercede for you with Allah (the Exalted)
on the Day of Judgment) what is intended here is using it as a support for
interceding for him, had he [Abu Taleb] said it when he was in that condi-
tion. It also includes the evidence that deeds are judged by their results, be-
cause has he said it when he was on that condition, believing in what it
denotes conforming with rejecting [polytheism] and corroborating [unifica-
tion], it would have benefited him.

His saying: (So they told him, ‘Do you leave the greed of Abdul-Mutta-
leb). They mentioned the damned argument which polytheists use against
the messengers; it is similar to what the Pharaoh told Moussa, «(Pharaoh)
said ‘What then is the condition of previous generations?’» (20: 51) and His
(the Exalted) saying, «Just in the same way, whenever we sent a Warner be-
fore thee to any people, the wealthy ones among them said, ‘We found our
fathers following a certain religion, and we will certainly follow in their
footstps.» (43: 23).

His saying: (The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) repeated what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
had said, and they repeated what they had said). This means that they un-
derstood the meaning of «There is no God but Allah» because they knew
that which Abu Taleb had said about, he would have been cleared from Ab-
dul-Muttaleb’s creed.

Since verily Abdul-Muttaleb’s creed is by itself joining in partners with
the Diety of Allah (the Exalted). As for the Lordship; they did acknowledge
it as was mentioned before. And verily Abdul-Muttaleb told Abraham, «I
am the Lord of camels; the house [Kaaba] has its lord who prevents you
from entering it.» Their saying after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) had told his((May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) uncle: «Say there is no God but Allah» is considered as an act
of pride and arrogance.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said about them and about
those polytheists who are similar to them, «For they, when they were told
that there is no God except Allah, would puff themselves up with Pride and
say: ‘What! Shall we give up our gods for the sake of a possessed poet?» (37:
35-36) He (the Exalted) answered them saying: «Nay! He has come with the
(very- Truth, and he confirms (the Message of- the apostles (before him).» (37:

247

And he refused to say that there is no God but Allah. So the Holy Pro-
phet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «On the Day of
Judgment] I will ask Allah (the Exalted) to forgive you unless I am not al-
lowed [by Allah] to do so.» Thereupon Allah (Be the blessed and raised
above) revealed the Holy Verse, «It is not fitting, for the prophet and those
who believe, that they should pray for forgiveness for Pagans». (9: 113) and
Allah (the Exaited) sent...

37). Allah (the Exalted) showed that their pride had prevented them from
saying: «There is no God but Aliah» was due to the fact that it denotes
rejecting the worship of their gods that they used to worship regardless of
Allah (the Exalted). Verily the denotation of that term on rejecting the
worship of their gods is a sure denotation.

And it 15 of the Lord’s (the Exalted) wisdom not to guide Abi Taleb to
Islam, that He (the Exalted) may show His servants that verily it is up to
Him and that He Alone is the One who is able to do it and nobody else. If
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)- who is
the best among Allah’s creatures- the ability to guide the souls and dispel
distress, forgive sins, saluate from torture, and the like, then the one who de-
serves such forgiveness best would have been his uncle who cared for him
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) supported him (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him), protected him and sheltered him, so
praise the One whose wisdom astonished the minds and guided the servants
to what leads them to knowing and unifying Him (the Exalted) working
faithfully, only for Him.

His saying: (So the last thing he said was).

His saying: (I will stay on Abdul-Muttaleb’s creed) what appears here is
that Abi Taleb said «I» but the narrator changed the term because he fan-
cied that this term is ugly; he did well. This was said by Al-Hafeth.

His saying: (And he refused to say there is no God but Allah). Al-Ha-
feth said: This is a confirmation by the narrator that Abu Taleb refused to
say it.

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said (This Honorable Ha-
dith includes responding to those who claimed that Abu Taleb and those

who came before him embraced Islam, and it shows the harm done by evil
people to mankind, and the harm attained by aggrandizing those who came

before).
That is to say: If [This aggrandizement] exceeded that which is reli-

248

... down about Abi Taleb, «It is true thou wilt not be able to guide every one
whom thou lovest; but Allah guides those whom He will».

This Honorable Hadith encompasses many issues:

The first: The interpretation of, «It is true thou wilt not be able to
guide every one who thou lovest; but Allah guides those whom He wiil».

The second: interpreting His saying (the Exalted). «It is not fitting, for
the Prophet and those who believe, that they should pray for forgiveness,
for Pagans, even though they be of kin, after it is clear to them that
they are companions of the Fire.» (9: 113).

giously allowable; so that their sayings become arguments that 15 referred to
during disputes.

His saying: (The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said, «I will ask Allah (the Exalted) to forgive you, unless I was
not allowed to do so». An-Nawawi said, «This Honorable Hadith shows
that it is allowable to swear without being asked to do so. Swearing was
here to confirm the intention to ask for forgiveness in order to please Abu
Taleb’s soul.

Abu Taleb’s died in Mecca before immigration [to Medina] by a very
short time.

Ibn Faris said: «Abu Taleb died when Allah’s Holy Messenger was 49
year eight months and eleven days.

Khadija, the mother of all believers, (May Allah be pleased with her)
died after Abi Taleb’s death by eight days.

His saying: (It is not fitting, for the Prophet and those who believe, that
they should pray for forgiveness for Pagans, even though they be of kin... till
the end of the verse» (9:113) That is to say they ought not do that, and this
informing that means forbidding. It appears that this Holy Verse was sent
down concerning Abi Taleb.

Verily the savants mentioned other reasons for sending down this Holy
Verse. However, they do not contradict each other since the causes for send-
ing down one Holy Verse may be various.

Al-Hafeth said: «As for sending down the second Holy Verse; it is clear
that it concerned Abu Taleb’s story. As for sending down the Holy Verse
coming after it, this can be discussed. It appears that verily that which is in-
tended is that the Holy Verse connected with asking for forgiveness was sent
down some time after Abi Taleb and it discusses the issue from a general

249

The third: It is the great issue; interpreting his saying «There is no Gad
but Allah» contrary to that believed by those who claim to know.

The fourth: Verily Abu Jahl and those accompanying him know the
Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) inten-
tion when he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) told him
to say «Say there is no God but Allah». Thereupon May Allah con-
demn whosoever Abu Jahl is more learned than him concerning the
origins of Islam.

The fifth: His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) exces-
sive request of his uncle’s embracing Islam.

The sixth: Responding to those who claimed that Abdul-Muttaleb and
those who came before him embraced Islam.

The seventh: His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
prayer for forgiveness and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) was not permitted; rather, he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) was prevented from doing that.

The eighth: Harm of evil people to mankind.

The ninth: Harm of aggrandizing those who came before and those
who are old.

The tenth: Pre-Islamic people used that.
The eleventh: Witnessing that deeds are judged by their end results.

The twelfth: Thinking about how great this doubt is in the hearts of
those going astray, because the story does not mention that they ar-
gued with him, even though he insisted and repeated. So because of its
clarity and greatness which they fancy, they did not discuss it with
him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

point of view; concerning him and concerning others. This is made clear by
what was mentioned in the interpretation, then Allah (the Exalted) sent
down: «It is not fitting, for the prophet and those who believe, that they
should pray for forgiveness, for pagans... till the end of the Holy verse» (9:
113) and concerning Abi Taleb the following Holy Verse was sent down, «lt
is true thou wilt not be able to guide every one whom thou lovest...» all of that

shows that he died as a non-Moslem and at the same time weakens what

250

,مارو ها واه وارا م ماع عد قار و راردا راو ما فاق ود وا م قاع و4 .د و وا وام قاع فافقار دو ها هده فاو يدفاء د .د هاو هد .د فد و وارام ود قاقارد و عاعد .د عدو فداه عد وا قامعا هد وار و وا وفايا عد تناع م 60 0560 0560م

was mentioned by As-Souheily who said it was narrated in some of Al-Mas-
soudi’s books that he embraced Islam, because such does not contradict that
which is mentioned in the Saheeh.

This chapter includes proscribing the asking for forgiveness of pagans
of loving them or supporting them, because if it is forbidden to ask Allah
(the Exalted) to forgive them, then the same logic goes for supporting them.

251

Chapter

(The reason behind the children of Adam’s abandoning their religion is
their exaggeration concerning those who are righteous).

And Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) has said, «O people of the
Book! Commit no excesses in your religion: Nor say of Allah aught but the
truth.» (4: 171).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter concerning the reason behind the children of
Adam’s abandoning their religion is their exaggeration concerning those who
are righteous).

His saying: (Abandoning) the writer (May Allah’s be Mercy be upon
him) wanted to show the consequence of exaggeration concerning those who
are righteous, such as polytheism or joining partners with Allah (the Ex-
alted) which is the greatest among sins disobeying Allah (the Exalted) ; it re-
jects Monotheism that the term of faithfulness indicated; the testification
that there is no God but Allah.

His saying: (and Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) has said): («O
People of the Book! Commit no excesses in your religion nor say of Allah but
the truth. Christ Jesus the son of Mary was (no more than) an apostle of
Allah, and His word, which He bestowed on Mary, and a spirit proceeding
from Him.» (4: 171). Excess is exaggeration in aggrandizement, both saying
and believing, that is to say [Allah (the Exalted) says] do not raise the
creature above the rank which Allah (the Exalted) sent down with, no you
give him a rank that should be given only to Allah (the Exalted); the
address -even though the people of the Book were addressed- it is general
and all the nation is meant and addressed by it; they all were warned not to
do with their Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
what the Christians did to theirs- Jesus- and the Jews to theirs- Al-Azir-.

252

It was narrated in the Saheeh after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased
with them) concerning the Holy Verse, «And they have said (To each other),
‘Abandon not your gods, abandon neither Wadd nor Suwa, neither Yaguth nor
Ya‘uq, nor Nasr’ (971: 23) He said that these were righteous men among the

people of Noah.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) said: «Has not the time arrived
for the Believers that their hearts in all humility should engage in the remem-
brance of Allah and of the Truth which has been revealed (to them), and that
they should not become like those to whom was given Revelation aforetime,
but long ages passed over them and their hearts grew hard? For many among
them are rebellious transgressors».» (57: 16) That is why the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) had said:

160 - «Do not extol me as the Christians extoled the son of Mariam.»

Every body who invoked a prophet or a holy man besides Allah (the
Exalted) had in fact taken him as a god, and identified with the polytheism
of the Christians and with the abuse of Jews. Verily the Christians exagger-
ated concerning Issa (May Allah’s peace be upon him) while the Jews were
hostile towards him, they cursed and dispraised him. Thereupon the Chris-
tians exaggerated and the Jews abused, Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Christ
the son of Mariam was no more than an apostle; many were the apostles that
passed away before him. His mother was a woman of truth. They had both to
eat their (daily) food.» (5: 78) In this Holy verse and in similar ones one can
find the response to the Jews and the Christians.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: He who identi-
fies in such matters with the Jews and the Christians and exaggerates the be-
lief of religion by exceeding or abusing, then he has been like them. He said:
and Ali (May Allah be pleased with him) burned those who exaggerated
among Ar-Rafida so he ordered his people to dig holes for them at the gate
of Kinda and he threw them into these holes. Also all companions agreed
on killing them but Ibn Abbas said that they should be killed by sword
rather than burnt. This is what most of the savants had believed in.

His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh after Ibn Abbas (May Allah
be pleased with them) concerning Allah’s (the Exalted) saying,

161 - «And they have said (To each other), ‘Abandon not your gods:
Abandon neither wadd nor Suwa‘, neither Yaguth nor Ya‘uq, nor Nasr’.» (71:
23). He said: And those are names of righteous people among the people of
Noah, when they died, the Shaitan revealed to their people: You should

253

So when they died, the Shaitan revealed to their people: You should
erect at their confering places images and call them by their names. So they
did, yet they were not worshipped till those people died and people forgot
that knowledge, then they were worshipped.».

erect at their confering places images and called those images by their
names. So they did, yet they were not worshipped till they died and knowl-
edge was forgotten; then they [The images] were worshipped.

This literature was summarized by the writer. Al-Bukhary wrote it as
follows: After Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them) who said:

«Idols which were erected at the time of Noah’s people reached the
Arabs. As for «Wudd» it belonged to Kalb at Dawmat Al-Jandal. As for
«Suwa’» it belonged to Hutail. As for «Yuguth» it belonged to Murad to
Bani Ghutaif in Al-Jurf at Saba. As for «Yaouk» it belonged to Hamadan.
As for «Nasr» it belonged to Himyar and specifically to the people of this
Al-Kila‘: names of righteous men among the people of Noah- till the end of
the discussion».

Ibn Jarir said: We were told by Ibn Hamed: Mihran told us after Suf-
yan after Moussa, after Muhammad ben Kais, «Verily Yaguth, Yaouk, and
Nasr were righteous people among the sons of Adam, and they had fol-
lowers what they identified with. So when they died their companions said:
If we build idols that resemble them, worship would be more desirous, so
they built those images when they died and others came, Iblis came to them
and said: Verily they used to worship them and through them they prayed
for the rain to fall so that they could water their plants. Thereupon they
worshipped them.»

His saying: (you should erect).

His saying: What is meant here are idols that were built after the right-
eous men those which they erected in their confering places and called them
by their names. And in Ibn Abbas’ literature there is what shows us that
those are called pagans. So a pagan’s name encompasses every object of
worship regardles of Allah (the Exalted) whether that worshipped object was
a grave, a tombstone, an idol or any otherthing.

His saying: (till those people died) that is to say those after whose idols
were built.

His saying: (and people forgot that knowledge). Al-Bukhary said «re-
voked» [instead of forgot] and Al-Kashmayhini «and that knowledge was re-
voked» that is to say this knowledge was obliterated after those authroities

254

lon Al-Qayyim said, that one of those who came before had said,

«When they died people clinged to their graves, then made images after their
forms, then after a long while they worshipped them»».

passed away and ignorance was all over till they became unable to differenti-
ate between monotheism and polytheism, so the indulged in polytheism
thinking that it my lead them to Allah (the Exalted) and benefit them.

His saying: (They were worshipped) when Iblis said: Verily those who
were before you used to worship them and through them they prayed for
rain in order to water their plants. He was the one who made them worship
idols and he ordered them to perform it. Thereupon in reality he became
their god. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Did I not enjoin
on you, O ye children of Adam, that ye should not worship the Shaitan; for
that he was to you an avowed enemy? And that ye should worship Me (for
that) this was the straight way? But he did lead astray a great multitude of
you. Did ye not, then, understand?» (36: 60-62). This should help people be
aware of [falling into polytheism] exaggeration and means of polytheism,
even though intentions might be good. Since verily the Shaitan admitted
those people into polytheism through the door of exaggeration concerning
the righteous and through the door of loving them excessively as has hap-
pened to this nation: He showed them exaggeration and innovation in ag-
grandizing and loving the righteous so that he make them commit that
which is more serious than that; worshipping them besides Allah (the Ex-
alted). And in another version: «Verily they said: ‘O how great are those
who came before us; they seek their intercession with Allah (the Exalted)»
that is to say they hope for the intercession of those righteous people who
constructed the idols after theirs and cailed them names there after. From
this it is known that verily asking of their intercession and requesting from
them is definitely joining in partners with Allah (the Exalted) as was men-
tioned above in the perfect Holy Verses.

His saying: (Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said:
More than one of those who came before said: When they died they clinged
to their graves, then they built their idols, then after some long time they
worshipped them).

His saying: (And Ibn Al-Qavyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
said). He is the Imam and savant Muhammad ben Abi Bakr ben Aiyub ‏الث‎
‎Zari’ Ad-Dimashki known as Qayyim Al-Jouzieh. Al-Hafeth As-Sakhawi
said: The savants who is highly knowledgeable and who agree and those

255

ولام قرا ود م ود قار ماقام قد قد هد عا ند وا فاه ود قد هد عاعا م واقاعا هد ارا وا ما م واقا راود ارا ما رام واقاف عار تار اماه ودوداق اكد ناد م قاف ع تنح تامام دقام قادح د 5 4 5 "د 5ت ع 5 5 ع 5ت 5ت 5 055

who do not, the writer of «Al-Tasanif Al-Sairah» and «Al-Mahasen Al-Jam-
ma» died in the year 751 A.H.

His saying: (and more than one of those who came before said) this
means that which was mentioned by Al-Bukhary and Ibn Jarir; however, he
mentioned their staying at their graves before they constructed their idols.
That is considered among the means of polytheism; rather, it is by itself
polytheism, because staying is done for Allah’s (the Exalted) sake at Mos-
ques an act of worship. So if they stayed at graves, their staying is consid-
ered as aggrandizing and as loving which is considered in turn an act of
worship.

His saying: (Then, after a long time passed they worshipped them). The
reason for that worship and the thing that led to it was those who came be-
fore had done such as aggrandizing them by staying at their graves and by
erecting their idols at their confering places. Thus through those images, pa-
gans were worshipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted), as was mentioned
by the writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him). Verily by doing this they
abandoned the religion of Islam on which those people had been before in-
troducing these means of such polytheism; they became disbelievers though
worshipping these images and taking them as intercessors. That was the first
act of polytheism that took place on earth. ‏ش‎

Al-Kurtobi said: Verily those who came before these people built idols,
that they might follow them in their deeds. They might have their opinions
as those did and worship Allah (the Exalted) at their graves. Then they were
followed by a people who ignored their real intentions. The Shaitan whis-
pered to them that verily their forefathers used to worship and aggrandize
those idols.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: The Shaitan
still whispers the grave worshipper and teaches them constructions at graves.
Staying at them is considered an act of showing their love of those righteous
men and prophets, and that verily invoking at them is answered. Then the
Shaitan transfers them from this stage to the stage of invoking the images
and swearing by them; verily Allah (the Exalted) is Greater than swearing
by Him (the Exalted) or asking from Him through any of His creatures.

When that 1s accomplished [by the Shaitan] he orders them to invoke
him as weli to worship him, and asking for his intercession besides Allah
(the Exalted). He also decides that his grave as a pagan on which lanterns
and curtains are hanged and around which people circumambulate around

256

والقام زدوراه وام عدا ماه مهارد و وداواو وه يافام .ا ساي ما هاه ه قاف هاه ها فا واوا ع د واه واوا وي قافا واج سا .ا هم عا هاس ها ما هافاي .دج عاى 4ه ها ماه مامد هده هدعا > جاع حدما. ا .د ناعم د نامدا ما لاا مده

and which they kiss, pilgrimed and stayed at. So when that is accomplished
he orders those people to ask all other people to worship it and take it as a
monastory and feast, and believed that that was more useful for them in
both their lives; their present life and their Afterlife. All that which is neces-
sarily known through the religion of Islam that it is contrary and against
what Allah (the Exalted) sent with His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him); renewing Monotheism and that no one is to
be worshipped but Allah (the Exalted) .

When that is accomplished he decides to make them believe that he
who forbids these performances has dispraised the people of such high ranks
and degraded them and claimed that they do not have respect or worth, and
the polytheists become angry and disgusted. In that connection Allah (the
Exalted) has said, «When Allah, the One and Only, is mentioned, the hearts
of those who believe not in the Hereafter are filled with disgust and horror; but
when (gods) other than He are mentioned, behold, they are filled with joy!»
(39: 45) and that 1s spread in the souls of many of the ignorant and com-
mon people as well as among those who attach themselves to knowledge
and to religion, till they treat the people of Monotheism with enmity and ac-
cused them of committing great sins and they made people repel them while
they support the people of polytheism and aggrandize them and claim that
they were Allah’s holy men and the supporters of His religion and His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him;’ however, Allah
(the Exalted) refuses that, «And they are not its guardians? No men can be its
guardians except the righteous but most of them do not understand.» (8: 34)
End of the discussion of Ibn Al-Qayyim May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

This story encompasses many themes that were mentioned by the writer
(May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

One of which: Refuting uncertainty called by some scholastic theologists
rationality and in turn they refute by it the qualities of Monotheism brought
forward by the Holy Koran and the Sunna; they reject it instead of proving
them or confirming them in a manner that fits Allah’s Glory, Greatness and

pride.
Some of which: Disadvantage of imitation.

Some of which: The nation’s need for what Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) brought; both knowledge

257

And it was narrated after Omar that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Do not extol me as
the Christians extoled the son of Mariam» Verily I am a servant; so say
Allah’s servant (Abdullah) and His Holy Messenger». It was narrated by

and deeds according to the Holy Koran and the Sunna. So verily the ser-
vant’s need for that is above all needs.

His saying: (And it was narrated after Omar that verily Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

162 - «Donot extol me as the Christians extoled the son of Mariam. Ve-
rily I am a servant; so say Allah’s servant (Abdullah) and His Holy Messen-
ger.» It was narrated by both.

His saying: (after Omar) He is Ibn Al-Khattab ben Noufail Al-Adawi
the prince of believers and the best among the Companions, next to Abu
Bakr As-Siddiq (May Allah be pleased with them). He stayed a Caliph for
ten and a half years. Justice was every where. During his days the kingdoms
of Kisra and Caesar were conquered. He (May Allah be pleased with him)
was martyred in Thil-Hijja in the year 23. A.H.

His saying: (Do not extol me as the Christians extoled the son of Mar-
iam). Extolment is exceeding the limits of ordinary praise till it reaches the
degree of lying at him. It was said by Abu As-Saadat. Others said: That is
to say do not praise me by saying that which is not true and never exceed

limits when praising me.

His saying: (Verily I am a servant so say Allah’s servant [Abdullah] and
His Holy Messenger) that is to say do not exaggerate in praising me as the
Christians had done in praising Issa [Jesus] (May Allah’s Peace be upon
Him) so they claimed that he is a diety. Rather, I am Allah’s servant and
His Holy Messenger, do describe me by this as my Lord described me, and
say Allah’s servant and His Holy Messenger. Thereupon the polytheists re-
fused but to disobey his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) or-
ders and commit that which he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) forbade and as a result they aggrandized him (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) by using that which he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) warned them from, and prohibited them from him. As
well they contradicted him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
seriously and competed with the Christians concerning their exaggeration
and polytheism. Thus they fell into that which is not permissable; exaggera-

258

both, Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said: «Do not ever exaggerate; verily exaggeration killed those who

came before you.» And Moslim narrated...

tion and polytheism appearing in the form of verse and prose and which if
counted would take long time and they made their classifications.and ranks.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) mentioned after
some of the people of his time that it is allowable to seek refuge with the
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) concerning
all matters which normally one seeks refuge with Allah (the Exalted); how-
ever, that was classified and refuted by Sheikh Al-Islam. The response is
found. Thanks to Allah (the Exalted). And he says: Verily he knows the
keys to the unseen which is only known by Allah (the Exalted). And he
mentioned to them similar things. We seek refuge with Allah (the Exalted)
against blindness of soul.

Al-Bousairi’s peom is so famous concerning that issue:
O most generous among mankind

Whom shall I seek refuge with.

But you? When sad events are around?

The verses to follow which have the meaning of invoking faithfully,
seeking refuge with hope, dependence in most difficult situations, and during
the greatest need for other than Allah (the Exalted). Thus they contradicted
Allah’s Holy Messenger by committing what he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) proscribed and they made it extremely difficult for
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) that
is so because the Shaitan showed them such evil kind of polytheism in the
form of loving the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) and aggrandizing him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).
He |the Shaitan] showed them faith and unification that Allah (the Exalted)
sent in the form of dispraising him. Those polytheists are the ones who
should be dispraised. They lack every thing, so they did not care about his
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) sayings or his (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) deeds, neither did they accept his (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) deeds, neither did they accept his
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) wisdom or submitted to him
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). Rather, aggrandizing the

259

اع راق وقد و لاد و( ودج قاقد ع تقد رد زر قد رد ف را راع فراع فار ور رار ور و را مذ راقع تر ورد و ماروا و قفاوا مدع رامد و دقار م ما را عد وقد عاو عا رد و واأحا ود مد عام قاقد قاعا رده جتاعا ع 6ه

Holy Messenger takes place by what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said or what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
prohibited and by being guided by his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) guidance and by following his (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) tradition [Sunna], by calling on people to adopt his religion
and by supporting him and those who support him and by treating with
enmity those who are his enemies and those who disobeyed him. Yet, those
polytheists reversed what Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) intended; both concernng
knowledge and concerning deeds, and they committed what Allah (the
Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) had proscribed. If only Allah’s help we seek.

His saying: (And Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said,

«Donot ever exaggerate. Verily those who exaggerated before you were
killed.»

This Honorable Hadith was mentioned by the writer without mention-
ing who narrated it. However, it was narrated by Imam Ahmad, At-Tirmithi
and Ibn Majah after Ibn Abbas.

The following is Ahmad’s version: It was narrated after Ibn Abbas
(May Allah be pleased with them) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May AI-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said in an early morning in front of
a crowd,

163 - «Bring me stones they were picked up and brought to him (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). They were stones for hurling. So
when he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) put them in his
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) hand, he said: Use such
things to throw and do not ever exaggerate as far as religion is concerned,
verily those who came before you and exaggerated concerning religion were
perished.»

Sheikh Al-Islam said: This is general and touches all sorts of exaggera-
tion in beliefs and in deeds, and the reason for saying this was hurling
stones [During pligrimage at Iblis]; while he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) was going to throw stones. Thereupon the exaggeration
in that context was using large stones to throw thinking wrongly that they

260

.. after Ibn Masoud that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said, «The extravagant are to be destroyed».
He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) repeated it thrice.

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Verily he who understands this chapter and two chapters
after it perceives Allah’s ability and Allah’s (the Exalted) manipulation
of hearts.

The second: Knowing about the first act of polytheism that took place
on earth; it took place through uncertainy of the righteous.

The third: The first thing that was used to alter the religion of pro-
phets, and its cause even though people knew that verily Allah (the
Exalted) sent them. ‏ش‎

The fourth: Accepting the innovations although religion and innate fa-
culties refute them.

The fifth: Verily the reason for all that is mixing truth with that which
is untrue. For ihe first is loving those who are righteous and the sec-
ond is done by knowledgeable people with the intention of doing
something good. So they who came after them thought that they
meant something else.

The sixth: The interpretation of the Holy Verse from the Holy Sura of
Noah.

reach with more certainty than smaller ones; so verily the one joining them
in some of their guidance fear that they may perish.

164 - His saying: (And Moslim narrated after Ibn Masoud that verily
Allah’s Holy Messenger said: «The extravagant are to be destroyed». He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) repeated it thrice).

Al-Khatabi said: The extravagant is the one who overacts in searching
for it in what scholastic theologians [Ah] Al-Kalam] have discussed and in-
terfered with that which does not belong to their realm, those who discuss
that which can not be comprehended by their minds.

Another example of extravagance: absolutely refraining from that which
is allowed, for example, he who refrains from eating meat and bread and do
not wear cotton; he wore only wool; he refrained from marrying woman

261

The seventh: The nature of mankind; in his heart that which is truth-
ful becomes decreased:and that which is untruthful becomes increased.

The eighth: It includes proof for what was narrated after those who
came before; they said that the cause of unbelief is innovation.

The ninth: Knowing the Shaitan by learning the consequence of inno-
vation, even though the doer has good intentions.

The tenth: Knowing the general rule; it is forbidden exaggeration
knowing what it leads to.

The eleventh: Disadvantages of staying at a grave for the sake of a
good deed.

The twelfth: Knowing forbidding images and the wisdom behind re-
moving them.

The thirteenth: Knowing the importance of this story and the severe
need for it.

The fourteenth: This is the most astonishing, and that which is even
more astonishing is that they read it in the books of interpretation and
Honorable Hadith while they know what those terms mean, and the
fact that Allah (the Exalted) blocked between them and their souls tll
they believed that what the people of Noah had done was the best
ways of worship so they believed that verily what Allah (the Exalted)
and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) proscribed is unbelieved which permits taking the unbeliever’s be-
longings and life.

The fifteenth: Declaring that they never wanted that by intercession.

thinking that this is desired asceticism. The Sheikh Takieddine said: Such a
person is ignorant and deluded.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Al-Ghazali

said: The extravagant in research and investigation.

Abu As-Saadat said: They are those who exaggerate in logic and ana-

lyze the speech deeply; those who talk at length.

An-Nawawi said: This term connotes hating those who speak gutturally

by mouthing and simulating eloquence and using that language which is not

262
The sixteenth: Their thinking that verily those authorities whom they
constructed, wanted them to do so.

The seventeeth: The great statement in his (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) saying: «Do not exto] me as the Christians ex-
tolled the son of Mariam.» So may Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon the one who informs people about the clear and evident religion.

The eighteenth: His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
warning that those extravagant would perish.

The nineteenth: Declaring that they were not worshipped until knowl-
edge concerning them was forgotten. This encompasses the knowledge
about the importance or adavantages of knowledge and the disadvan-
tages of its absence.

The twentieth: Verily the reason for losing knowledge is the death of
the authorities.

beautiful, as well as the specificities of language in addressing common peo-
ple and other laymen.

His saying: (He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) re-
peated it thrice) that is to say he said those words three times for emphasis
as a means of teaching them and informing them so he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) has informed the clear ordinance.

263

Chapter

(What was mentioned concerning someone who worshipped Allah (the
Exalted) at a righteous man’s grave, so how would it be if he worships that
man’).

Jt was mentioned in the Saheeh after A’isha that verily Umm Salma
mentioned to Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) something about a church she saw in the land of...

Chapter

His saying: Chapter (What was mentioned concerning being rough with
someone who worshipped Allah (the Exalted) at a righteous man’s grave, so
how would it be if he worshipped that man?).

That is to say the righteous man; verily worshipping him is considered
an act of major polytheism, while worshipping Allah (the Exalted) at his
grave is a means for worshipping him, and means of polytheism are pro-
scribed because it leads to major polytheism which is the greatest of sins.

His saying: (It was mentioned in the Saheeh after Aisha (May Allah be
pleased with her) that verily Umm Salama had mentioned to Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) a church she saw
in the land of Ethiopia and told him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) about the pictures and idols that were in it. So he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said,

165 - If a righteous man or righteous servant dies among those people;
they would build a Mosque on his grave and would draw pictures after him.
Allah (the Exalted) considers those people to be the most evil among His
creatures». Verily they paired between the two ordeals; that of graves and
that of images).

-His saying: (It was mentioned in the Saheeh) that is to say in the two
Saheehs.

264

... Habasha. She told him (the Exalted) about the pictures and images that
were in it, so he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: If a
righteous man or a righteous servant died among those people, they would
build a Mosque on his grave and draw pictures after his image. Allah (the
Exalted) considers those people to be the most evil among His (the Exalted)
Creatures)».

So those painted between two ordeals that of the graves, and that of
images.

His saying: (Verily Umm Salama) is Hind daughter of Abi Umayya ben
Al-Mughira. Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) married her after Abi Salama’s death in the year 4 A.H. and it
was said in the year 4 A.H. She had immigrated with Abi Salama to Haba-
sha. She died in the year 62 A.H.

His saying: (She mentioned to Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him)) and in the two Saheehs «Verily Umm Ha-
biba and Umm Salama mentioned that to Allah’s Holy Messenger (May AI-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him).» and.

His saying: (and would draw pictures after his image) this is an indica-
tion to what Umm Salama and Umm Habiba had mentioned concerning
pictures which were in the church.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) considers those people to be the most
evil among His (the Exalted) creautres). This necessitates proscribing build-
ing Mosques on graves and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) cursed those.

Al-Badawi said: When the Jews and Christians used to prostrate them-
selves at the graves of prophets in order to aggrandize them and in order to
make them an object to turn in prayer and they took it as pagans, then the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) cursed them.

Al-Kurtobi said: Verily their forefathers drew pictures so that they may
console themselves by those pictures and in order to remember their right-
eous deeds. So they might do as those did, and worship Allah (the Exalted)
at their graves; then they were followed by a group of people who were ig-
norant of the real intentions, then the Shaitan whispered to them that those
who came before them used to worship and aggrandize those pictures.
Thereupon the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
warned people against such things shading the way in front any rationaliza-

tion that may lead to this.

265

والقا م عا قاع م دواع و »د .د قاقد و وه فادرا ود و وار عام همدو ودود ود و فا وا و هد .ا ه» مراع هاعد قد و وديا عدو واواع هد وادفد ود را رار »ا و وا واه قفاوا» قاع عاد قار و٠‏ رادو واوا راع قاف رد عرد .د ند فد ند 6د

His saying: (So those paired between two ordeals; that of graves and
that of idols.) This is quoted from Sheikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya (May
Allah’s Mercy be upon him) the writer mentioned it as warning against
attachment and clinging to graves and idols. Verily clinging to graves is an
affliction similar to clinging to idols or may be it 1s more serious.

Sheikh Al-Islam said: And this affliction because of which the Holy
Legislator forbade people from building Mosques on graves because such
acts led many nations to fall either in major polytheism or in polytheism
that is less than that, since verily souls commit polytheism when they erect
idols of righteous men, and talismas that they claim to be signs of planets
and the like. Thus verily committing polytheism by clining to a man’s grave
whom the people think is righteous, such polytheism is closer to the souls
than polytheism by clinging to a piece of wood or stone. That is why you
find polytheists pleed at those places and fear and submit and worship
through their hearts a kind of worship that they do not do in the houses of
Allah [Mosques] nor at time of practising magic, and there are those among
them who prostrate in front of those images and most of them hope for the
blessing of a prayer at those places and invoke what they do not say at
Mosques. Because of this evil the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) resolved this issues, till he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) forbade people from praying in a grave-yard all
together, even he did not intend to get the blessing by his prayer as he
intends to get the blessing of Mosques. Also he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) forbade people from praying when the sun rises or sets
because these were times during which polytheists intend to pray for the
sun. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) forbade his (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) nation from praying at those times
even though one does not have the intention of polytheists; he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) did that in order to block the road infront
of rationalizations. But if a man intends to pray at graves asking for the
blessing of that spot, this is challenging Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and acting in
contrardiction to his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) religion
and inventing an religion that is not allowed by Allah (the Exalted), verily
the Moslims have unanimously agreed on what they had known by necessity
from the Holy Messenger’s religion. Verily praying at graves is absolutely
forbidden and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) cursed
those who take those spots as Mosques, so among the most serious events

266

And they narrated after her that she said, «When Allah’s Holy Messen-
ger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was revealed on him, he |
started by throwing a garment of his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) face, so when he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
became upset he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) removed it
and said- and it is as such- May Allah (the Exalted) curse the Jews and the
Christians because they.took their prophet’s...

and causes of polytheism praying at them [graves] and taking them as
Mosques or building Mosques on them. And there are varied stories after
the Holy prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) forbidding
that and being rough with those who practise it. And all sects declared
forbidding people from building Mosques on them following in that the
right and clear Sunna. Ahmad’s companions and others among the
companions of Malek and Ash-Shafi’ declared that such practices are
proscribed. One sect said that it is hateful and it ought to make people hate
proscription thinking well of those savants and that verily they should not
be thought of as allowing what was frequently said after Aliah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) that he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) had cursed its doer or forbade
people from doing it.

His saying: (and they narrated after A’isha (May Allah be pleased with
her) who said: «When the angels descended on Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) he started putting a garment
on his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) face, when he became
sad he removed it and said- and it is as such- May Allah (the Exalted) curse
the Jews and the Christians. They made out of their prophet’s graves
Mosques, beware of what they did. Had it not been because of this, his
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be-upon him) grave would have been risen
up, but people were afraid that it might be taken as a Mosque.» This was
narrated by both.

166 - His saying: (and they narrated- that is to say Al-Bukhary and
Moslim.

His saying: (When the angels descended) that is to say the angel of
death and other honorable angels (May Allah’s peace be upon them).

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) curses the Jews and the Christians they
took their prophet’s grave as Mosques [places of worship].) It shows that he
who does that would be afflicted by a curse similar to that which afflicted
the Jews and the Christians.

267

... 5 Mosques |Places of worship} -He (May Allah's blessings and peace be
upon him) warned from what they did in case, his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) grave would have been risen; however, he (May ‏لك‎
‎lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) feared that it might be used as a

Mosque». It was narrated by both.

His saying: (He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) warns
from what they did) what appears here is that is what A’isha (May Allah be
pleased with her) said because she understood from the Holy Prophet’s
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) speech that he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) was warning his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) nation from such performances that used to be
practised by the Jews and the Christians at their prophet’s graves; it is very
exaggerating in aggrandizing the prophets. As well it is one of the greatest
means of reaching polytheism. What is strange concerning the Moslims is
that this performance, the doers of which were cursed by Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger - as a warning to his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
nation; is verily practised by his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) nation towards him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
and towards the righteous among his nation- this has been practised by
many people among the retarded of this nation, and they thought that
through it they would approach Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) which is in fact one of the
most evil wrong doings and rejected deeds; they never felt that such perfor-
mances constitute a challenge to Aliah (the Exalted) and to His Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

Al-Kurtobi said concerning the meaning of this Honorable Hadith: and
all of that was to block the road infront of any rationalization leading to
worshipping those in the graves as was the cause leading to worshipping
idols.

Thus there is no difference between worshipping a grave whomever is in
it, and worshipping an idol. Contemplate what Allah (the Exalted) has said
about His prophet Yusuf ben Yacoub, «And I follow the way of my fathers,-
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and never could we attributed any partners what-
ever to Allah.] (12: 38) This negation includes all sorts of polytheism.

His saying: (Had it not been because of that) that is to say he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) wouldnot have warned from
taking the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)

268

And Muslim narrated after Jundub ben Abdullah that, «I heard the

Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying before
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) died by five, «Verily I am

grave as a Mosque and his grave would have been raised and put among the
graves of the Companions whose graves were in an ordinary spot.

His saying: (But he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
feared that it might be taken as a Mosque) and. he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) ordered them to bury him where he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) died, that it is possible that the Compa-
nions were the ones who feared that such an act may be performed by some
of the people of this nation. Thereupon they did not raise his (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) grave, out of fear that such may be per-
formed by some of the people of this nation as aggrandizing and raising due
to what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) forbade people
from performing and due to what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) warned them of and cursed its performer.

Al-Kurtobi said: That is why the Moslems exceeded in blocking the ra-
tionalization and excuses concerning the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) grave. Thereupon they raised the walls and
blocked the entrances then they made it surround his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) grave. They feared that the spot on which the grave
was, might be turned to be a praying place if it happened to be facing the
praying, then praying in its direction will be interpreted as some sort of wor-
ship. They built two walls from the northern two corners of the grave and
they swerved them till they met at a triangular corner at the northern side
so that no one would be able to turn to his (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) grave in prayer [whether intentionally or accidentally].

His saying: (And Moslem narrated after Jundub ben Abdullah who
said: I heard the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) saying before he died by five (days),

167 - «Verily I infront of Allah {the Exalted) is free from having a com-
rade among you. Verily Allah (the Exalted) has taken me as a comrade as
He has taken Ibrahim; if I were to take from among my nation a comrade,
I would have chosen Abu Bakr. However, verily those who came before you
used to take their prophet’s graves as Mosques [places of worship]; I verily
forbid you from that»).

His saying: (It was narrated after Judub ben Abdullah) that is to say
Ibn Sufyan Al-Bajali, and he is related to his grandfather who is a famous

269

in front of Allah (the Exalted), free from having a lover among you. Verily,
Allah (the Exalted) has taken me as a comrade as He (the Exalted) had ta-
ken Ibrahim as a comrade; if I were to take from my nation a comrade, I

would choose Abu Bakr,...

Companion. He died at the age of sixty.

His saying: (Verily, I, in front of Allah (the Exalted) free myself from
having a comrade from among you) that I refrain from that which I am not
allowed to do. It is higher in rank than liking.

That is true concerning its meaning as was mentioned by Sheikh AI-Is-
lam and [bn Al-Qayyim and Ibn Kathir and many others.

Al-Kurtobi said: Verily that was so because his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) heart was full of gratitute to Allah (the Exalted),
aggrandizing and knowing Him.

His saying: (Verily Allah (the Exalted) has taken me as a comrade.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: As for that
which is thought by some of the mistaken that verily liking is more perfect
than loving, and that verily Ibrahim is Allah’s comrade, and that
Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is loved by
Allah - that is because of their ignorance. Verily liking is more general while
loving is specific and it starts with liking to end up in loving. And the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) informed that Allah
(the Exalted) took him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) as a
comrade and rejected the idea that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) might have a lover other than his (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) Lord (the Exalted). In addition to that, his (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) love for Aisha, her father, Omar
ben Al-Khattab, Muath ben Jabal and many others (May Allah be pleased
with them). Also, verily Allah (the Exalted) loves those who repent, clean
themselves and are patient and His love is specific to the two [Ibrahim and
Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon them)].

His saying: (If I were to take a comrade, I would take Abu Bakr). This
shows that verily Abu Bakr was the best among his Companions. And it in-
cludes the response to those Rafida and Jahmiyya which are the most evil
among innovators. Some of those who came before dropped them from the
seventy-two [Islamic] groups. Because of Al-Rafida polytheism and worship-
ping graves took place, and they were the first people to build Mosques on
them. This was said by the writer and what he said is doubtlessly true.

270

.. and verily those who came before you took their prophet’s graves as Mos-
ques; it 1s forbidden to take graves as Mosques; I forbid you from that.

Thereupon he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) forbade
that at the end of his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) life.

Then while he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was talk-

ing, he cursed those who practised it. As well the prayer at it, is considered
as such even though a Mosque was not built...

This includes pointing to Abu Bakr’s Caliphate, because he who loves a
person best, that person deserves it more than any body else. And he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) asked him to lead the prayer and
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) became angry when he
was told: Let Omar pray, while the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) was sick with that sickness in which he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) died.

Abu Bakr’s name was: Abdullah ben Othman As-Siddiq; he is the one
to follow Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) and the best among the Companions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) as is unanimously believed by reliable reli-
gious authorities. He died in Jamad the first in the year 13 A.H. He (May
Allah be pleased with him) was sixty-three years old.

His saying: (Verily those who came before you, used to take their pro-
phets’ graves as Mosques- till the end of the Honorable Hadith). Al-Khal-
khali said: The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) rejection of what they did have two meanings the first is that verily
they used to prostrate in front of the prophet’s graves in order to aggrandize
them.

The second: Verily they allowed the prayer in the prophets’ graveyards,
and they allowed turning to those graves in prayer thinking that they wor-
ship Allah (the Exalted) through exaggeration in aggrandizing prophets. The
first is clear polytheism, and the second is secondary polytheism, that is why
they deserved cursing.

His saying: (He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) for-
bade, at the end of his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) life
aS was mentioned in Jundub’s Hadith. This is what Sheikh Al-Islam said.

His saying: (Then while he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) was talking, he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) cursed

271

... This is the meaning of her saying, «He (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) feared that they might take it as a Mosque». So verily the
Companions wouldnot have built a Mosque around his grave. And every
spot he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) prayed at was a
Mosque; rather, every spot in which people pray is called a Mosque, as he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «The earth was made a

clean place for me to pray om».

those who practised it), as was mentioned in Aisha’s Honorable Hadith.

I said: How is it possible after such rough reproach coming from the
Master of all Messengers (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
built on them and prayed at them and for them? That is the most serious
challenge for Allah (the Exalted) and for His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him), if those people only thought.

His saying: (And praying at them is considered as such, even though a
Mosque was not built) that is to say he who takes them as Mosques is
cursed.

This necessitates proscribing prayer at graves as well as for them.

And it was narrated after Abi Sai‘d Al-Khidri (May Allah be pleased
with him),
168 - «All earth can be taken as places of prayer except graveyards and

bathrooms.» This was narrated by Ahmad as well as the people of Sunan. It
was reviewed and corrected by Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakem.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: In general he
who knows about polytheism, its causes and its rationalizations, and under-
stands the intentions of Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him), then he will definitely decide that such exaggeration,
cursing and forbiddance as they were mentioned- «Do not» and «I forbid
you from doing that».- was not because of impurity; rather it resulted from
polytheism and following the one who disobeyed him (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) and committed what he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) forbade them from doing, and followed his desires and
never feared his Lord (the Exalted), and whose share from «There is no
God but Allah» became scare or did not exist at all. So verily this and the
like that were said by the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) in order to maintain Monotheism and protect it from polytheism.

So the polytheists refused but to disobey his order and to contradict his
forbiddance; the Shaitan tempted them that this verily is aggrandizing the

272

See ee ‏ع ع‎ ee ee ee ‏ممالل‎ EERE EHH EHH GEE ‏ا ا اا ا ا ام ل ل ا م م‎ TELS ‏ا اا ا‎ ee ew ee ee ee

graves of the Sheikhs and the righteous and the more you aggrandize them
and the more you exaggerate, you would become happier when near them,
and farther from their enemies; by Allah (the Exalted) from this door the
Shaitan entered on those who worshipped Yaouk, Yaguth and Nasr, and he
[Shaitan] entered on the idols worshippers since the day they existed till the
Day of Judgment. Thereupon the polytheists paired between exaggeration
and defaming their way; and Allah (the Exalted) guided the people of
Monotheism for following their way yet he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) degraded those others to the ranks of slave.

The interpreter (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Among those
who explain fearing ordeals [That take place] because of polytheism: Imam
Ash-Shafi, Abu Bakr Al-Athram, Abu Muhammad Al]-Makdisi, Sheikh Al-
Islam and many others (May Allah’s Mercy be upon them). And undoubt-
edly that is the truth.

His saying: (Verily the Companions would not have built around his
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave a Mosque). That is to
say, when they learned that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) was serious concerning forbidding such behavior and that he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) cursed the one who practised it.

His saying: (And every spot where people prayed was made a Mosque)
that is to say, even though a Mosque was not built; rather, every spot where
people pray is called a Mosque.

169 - His saying: (As Allah’s Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said: «The earth was made for me a Mosque and a
means of purifying myself.») That is to say he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) called the earth a Mosque where the prayer is allowable
on any spot but those excluded such as the grave-yard and similar places.

Al-Baghawi said in «Sharh As-Suna»: What is meant here that the peo-
ple of the book [Jews and Christians] are only allowed to pray in their
Churches and Synagogues; Allah (the Exalted) permitted this nation to pray
wherever they were, so that praying would become easy and uncomplicated.
Then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) excluded from all
those spots, the bathroom, the graveyard and dirty places.

His saying: (And Ahmad narrated after Ibn Massoud,

170 - «Verily among evil people, those who perceive the Hour and those
who take graves as Mosques.» This was narrated by Abu Hatem Ibn Hib-
ban in his Saheeh).

273

This chapter encompasses many issues:

The first: That which was mentioned by Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) concerning those who build
a Mosque in which Allah (the Exalted) is worshipped at a righteous
man’s grave, even though the intentions of the doer were good.

The second: Forbidding people from erecting images and he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was very much serious
concerning that.

His saying: (Those who perceive the Hour) that‘is to say the early signs
of the Hour such as the appearance of the beast and the sun rising from the
west. After the appearance of those signs the bugle is blown the blow of ter-
ror and horror.

His saying: (And those who take graves as Mosques) that is to say
among the most evil of the people are those who take graves as Mosques by
praying at them and for them, and by building Mosques on them. It was
mentioned earlier in the Honorable Hadiths that this is verily practised by
the Jews and by the Christians and that verily the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) cursed them, as a warning to a
nation which is against their Holy prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) and their righteous men as the Jews and the Christians did.
Such practices did not raise the heads of most of them; rather, they thought
that verily such a practice will make them curry Allah’s (the Exalted) favor;
while it is what separates them from His (the Exalted) Mercy and
Forgiveness. What is strange here is that verily most of those who claim to
know among this nation do not deny that; rather, they see it as something
good and encourage others to do it. Verily strange practices in Islam have
become plenty and intense, and that which is good has become rejected and
that which is rejected has become good; the Sunna had become an
innovation and the innovation has become Sunna. All people, young and
old have grown up old according to it.

Sheikh Al-Islam said: As for building Mosques on graves, verily most
sects have declared that it is forbidden, that is in accordance with Honor-
able Hadiths. Our friends and others among the Companions of Malek and
Ash-Shafi declared that it is proscribed. He said: There is no doubt that it is
absolutely forbidden, then he mentioned the Honorable Hadiths concerning
that (till he said) and these Mosques built on the prophet’s and righteous
men’s graves or on those of kings or others must be removed by destroying
them or by any other means. Concerning this I donot know that savants dis-

274

The third: The theme concerning his (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) exaggeration about that. How he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) showed them and before he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) died by five, he said what he said,
then when he was talking about it he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) was not satisfied with what came before.

The fourth: Forbidding people from doing such things at his (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave before that grave existed.

The fifth: It is among the traditions of the Jews and the Christians to
do such practices at the graves of their prophets.

The sixth: Cursing them for that doing.

The seventh: Verily he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
intended to warn us concerning his (May Aliah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) grave.

The eighth: The reason for not building his (May Ailah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) grave.

puted or argued or conflicted about that.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: These domes
which were built on graves must be destroyed because they were built on
disobeying Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) and the Shafities have decided that every erected building in the
graveyard must be destroyed. Among them are Ibn Ath-Jumaizy, Ai-Thahr
At-Tirmithi and others.

The Judge Ibn Kaj said: It is not allowable to put cement around
graves, nor is it allowable to build domes over them, or other than domes;
wills concerning that are invalid.

Al-Athrai’ said: As for the invalidity of the will concerning building do-
mes and similar buildings and spending much money; such practices are
doubtlessly proscribed.

Al-Kurtobi said concerning Ibn Jaber’s (May Allah be pleased with
him) Honorable Hadith.

171 - «It was forbidden to put cement on a grave or to build on it [any
kind of construction]». Apparently about this Honourable Hadith Malek
said, putting cement on graves building constructions on them is hated; how-
ever, others allowed it and this Honourable Hadith is taken against him.

275

The ninth: The meaning of taking them as Mosques.

The tenth: He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) verily
paired between who takes those graves as Mosques and those who wit-
ness the signs of the Hour, so he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) mentioned the rationalization for polytheism before it hap-
pened along with its consequences.

The eleventh: His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
manifestation that in his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) speech before he died by five: Responding to the two religious
groups whose followers practise the most evil innovations; rather,
some authorities dropped them from the seventy-two religious groups.
These two groups were Al-Rafida and Al-Jahmiyya. And because of
Al-Rafida polytheism and worshipping graves took place, and they
were the first to build Mosques on them.

Ibn Rushd said: Malek hated building on the grave as well as writing
on the tombstone and considered this among the innovations of the people
of Might; they innovated this to feel proud, to boast and to become reputa-
ble. This matter is not disputed.

Al-Zailai’ said in «Sharh Al-Kanz»: It is hated to build on a grave.
Kadi Khan mentioned: Verily cement should not be put on graves nor
should constructions be made for it, as it was narrated after the Holy Pro-
phet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) that he forbade putting
cement or building on the grave- what is meant by hated- as to the Hana-
fites is making it as hateful as proscription. That was mentioned by Ibn
Noujaim in Sharh Al-Kanz.

Ash-Shafi (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: I hate to see a crea-
ture aggrandized to the degree of making his grave a Mosque out of fear of
tempting people to do some thing later on. Ash-Shafi‘s discussion shows
that what is meant by hateful here, is considered as proscription.

The interpreter said: An-Nawawi determined in «Sharh Al-Muhathab»
that building on graves is absolutely proscribed. It was also mentioned in
Moslim’s interpretation as well as in that of others.

Abu Muhammad Abdullah ben Ahmad ben Kudam, the Imam of the
creed of Hanbals and the writer of many book such as «al-Mughni» and
«al-Kafi» and others (May Allah be Merciful with them) said: It is not al-
lowable to build Mosques on graves because the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s

276

The twelfth: What afflicted him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) because of intense fear.

The thirteenth: Allah’s (the Exalted) honoring him (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) by giving him the title of comrade.

The fourteenth: Declaring that loving is higher in rank than liking.

The fifteenth: Declaring that As-Siddiq was the best among the Com-
panions.

The sixteenth: Hinting that he [As-Siddiq] was going to become the
first Orthodox Caliph.

blessings and peace be upon him) said:

172 - «Allah (the Exalted) cursed the Jews and the Christians- till the
end of the Honourable Hadith» and we narrated that verily the beginning of
the worship of idols: Aggrandizing the dead and hanging their pictures, and
wiping oneself with them and praying at them.

Sheikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyia (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said:
As for the grave-yard there is no difference between that which is new and
that which is old whether its dirt was turned or not. There is no difference
whether there exists an obstacle between him and the earth; that is so be-
cause the naming is not specific. It is rather general and the cause is general
as well the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
cursed those who took their prophet’s graves as Mosques and it is known
that verily the prophets’ graves are never impure.

In general, he who specifically said that the cause for proscribing prayer
in grave yards, is the impurity of the dirt, this person is too far from the
Holy prophet’s intention: Then it is not impossible that a Mosque was built
on a grave, then it is not allowable to pray in that Mosque whether one
prays behind the grave, or infront of it; all creeds agreed upon that because
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:

173 - «Verily those who came before you used to take their prophets’
and righteous men’s graves as Mosques; make every effort not to take
graves as Mosques; I verily forbid you from doing that.» He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) mentioned in particular the Prophet’s
graves because the people’s stay at their graves is more serious; and taking
them as Mosques is more severe, by the same token if there was not a Mos-
que on it, then one would be build, such a person would be considered as
committing the real act of corruption because the prayer at graves was pro-

277

ااا 260690600 ااا ‎TENET ETN‏
7 7 5 5 0 0 5 0 0 نكن

scribed, since verily every spot where the, prayer is performed is called a
Mosque as he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

174 - «The earth was made for me a place of prayer [a Mosque] and a
means for purifying myself» even though it might be a spot of one or two
graves.

Some of our Companions said: The prayer is not forbidden in it be-
cause it is not called a graveyard, and this difference does not exist in Ah-
mad’s discussions nor does it exist in his companions discussions; rather,
their talking in general necessitates forbidding the prayer at each and every
grave.

Also, it was mentioned before, after Ali (May Allah be pleased with
him) that he said, «I donot pray in a bathroom nor at a grave.»

Thus according to this proscription one should include the area around
it as well as its yard; prayer is not permitted in a Mosque that is built in a
graveyard; whether this grave has walls that separate it from other graves or
whether it was not.

He said about Al-Athram’s narration: If the Mosque was among graves
one should not pray the required prayer in it, and if there were between it
and the Mosque a wall then it was permitted to pray the special prayer be-
fore burying the dead; other required prayers should not be prayed in it.
Then he mentioned Abi Marthad’s Honorable Hadith after the Holy Pro-
phet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him),

175 - «Do not pray towards the graves)» and he said. This Honorable
Hadith is well supported.

If we follow up the discussions of the savants concerning that, it would
take more space. It is clear through this that verily the religious authorities
showed the cause for proscribing and what this cause might lead to:
Exaggeration concerning [Prophets, righteous men, the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)} and worshipping them regardless
of Allah (the Exalted) which is the case of present time Moslims. We seek
Allah’s aid.

Some Imams whose teachings’ people fancy as important have discussed
aspects of knowing Allah (the Exalted) and led to causing these people trou-
ble, and their veil that prevents them from knowing what Allah (the Ex-
alted) has sent. Such as guidance and knowledge has become thick, so they
limited the texts of the Holy Koran and the Sunna by ties that made follow-
ing them [The Holy Koran and the Sunna] tiring. Moreover they altered

278

عام ف .اعد مد عدج ارد و فدو فم ها فاع ده مد قاقد هد اعدو قاقد و ‎Oh‏ قاع اما عد عد مف فم فقا ‎ee‏ فد يم فراع ود قاع رف راف زاف عد عد تا مد ناه تدرا ناث عد راع ‎Se‏

that which was intended by Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him). When he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) forbade people from performing such practices some of them
said: Forbidding people from building on graves and forbidding the prayer
in it because the decaying dead make them impure. All that is invalid from
different aspects some of which are; it is a sort of discussing Allah (the Ex-
alted) without having enough knowledge that is proscribed in the Holy Kor-
an.

And some of which: Verily that which they said does not necessitate
cursing or being rough with the one who does such practices; what pre-
vented him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) from saying: He
who prayed in an impure spot then Allah (the Exalted) curses him. What
those people said necessitates that the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) did not show the cause and referred the nation to
those who came after him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
and after centuries and many Imams; this is definitely invalid from mental
and religious aspects because of it, verily the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) was unable to tell or was short of telling
and this is that, which is most invalid and obsolete. Since verily the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) completed perfectly
what Allah (the Exalted) wanted him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) to do and his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
ability transcends that of all others, so if that which is necessary was invalid,
all those consequent are invalid as well.

It is also said: This cursing and this rough treatment and reproaching;
is concerning only those who took prophets’ graves as Mosques and it was
mentioned in some texts that which encompasses all prophets as well as
others. If that cause had not been applied to the graves of prophets because
their bodies do not decay and do not have bad smells which prevent the
prayer at them; if forbidding from taking Mosques at graves includes a pro-
phet then it will be known that the cause mentioned by those savants whose
discussions were told. Thank Allah (the Exalted) because the proof and the
evidence supporting that became manifest. Thank Allah (the Exalted) who
guided us to this and we would not have been guided if He doesnot wish
that.

279

Chapter

(What was mentioned concerning exaggeration about the righteous
men’s graves, turns them into pagans worshipped regardless of Allah (the
Exalted).

Malek narrated in «Al-Muwatta’» that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «O Allah do not let my
grave become a worshipped pagan, Allah’s wrath was so even with a people
who took their prophet’s graves as Mosques».

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter on what was mentioned concerning that verily ex-
aggeration about the righteous men’s graves, turns them into pagans wor-
shipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted).

(Malek narrated in «Al-Muwatta’» that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «O Allah do not let my
grave become a worshipped pagan, Allah’s wrath was so severe with a peo-
ple who took their prophets’ graves as Mosques»).

This Honorable Hadith was narrated by Malek after Zeid ben Aslam
after Ata’ ben Yasar: Verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said- till the end of Honorable Hadith». It was also
narrated by Ibn Abi Shaiba in his book after Ibn Ijlan after Zeid ben Aslam
and he never mentioned Ata’.

This Honorable Hadith is supported by Imam Ahmad after Suhail ben
Abi Saleh who narrated after his father who in turn narrated after Abi Hur-
aira.

176 - «O Allah do not let my grave become a Pagan, Allah (the Ex-
alted) curses the people who take their prophet’s graves as Mosques».

His saying: (Malek narrated in Al-Muwatta’). He is the Imam Malek
ben Anas. He is the Imam of Dar Al-Hijra and one of the four Imams and

280

لاع م ع ع م ع و م كد عد ذم مد ف م ‎ee HEH aH‏ م م در مد و مم مد هد مد واو دو ودعو فد ووم فاو قاور يتم اوور م عبارو رمو و راو واو وار و هافو ‎we he ee‏ ره

one of those who mastered the science of Honorable Hadith, till Al-Bukh-
ary: The most perfect among references is Malek after Nafi’ after Ibn Omar.
He died in the year 179 A.H. He was born in the year 93 A.H. and it was
said in the year 94 A.H. Al-Wakidi said: He lived till the age of ninety.

His saying: (O Allah! Do not let my grave become a worshipped pagan)
verily Allah (the Exalted) answered his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) invocation as was said by Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be
upon him).

The Honourable Hadith showed that verily had the Holy Prophet’s
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave been worshipped, it
would have become a pagan, however, Allah (the Exalted) protected it by
blocking between. Also, the Honourable Hadith showed that verily pagans
are graves and coffins attended to by a worshipper. This temptation and
staying at graves in order to aggrandize them and worship them has become
more and more serious as was said by Abdullah ben Masoud (May Allah be
pleased with him).

177 - «It is as if an affliction or a temptation hits you; the adult grows
old with it and the young grows and develops with it. It hits them and the
people take it as tradition. If it was changed it is said: The Sunna is chan-
ged.»

And out of fear of such temptation, Omar forbade people from tracing
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

Ibn Waddah said: I heard Issa ben Younes saying:

178 - «Omar ben Al-Khattab (May Allah be pleased with him)ordered
[the Moslems] to cut the tree under which the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) was pledged allegiance. Thereupon cut it
because the people used to go to it and pray under it; he (May Allah be
pleased with him) feared that they might be tempted.

Al-Marour ben Soweid said: «I prayed with Omar ben Al-Khattab on
the way to Mecca the Dawn prayer. Then he saw the people taking different
ways. So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) asked: Where
are those going? It was said: O prince of believers, they are going to a Mos-
que in which the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) had prayed; they want to pray in it. So he (May Allah be pleased with
him) said: Verily those who came before you and did such practices per-
ished; they used to trace their prophets and take such places as churches and
synagogues. So whomever reaches the time of prayer and was by chance

281

مواقا م عاق ود كد ررد فده راع ها واوا ةا معان واوا وق يه و اواو ها م وام وان ما ماران و ارام و راواه فاجا رام واقازا مه م قا نيه والا م مده 6د دمو ود تعد تدع م ع دع 5 5 5 كدت 0 تع 5 555

near those places, may pray in them; otherwise let him pass without inten-
tionally praying there».

In Abi Isaac’s «Maghazi» from Younes ben Bukeir’s «Ziyadat» who
said: We were told by Abu Al-Aliya: When we conquered Tustar we found
in treasury of Al-Harmezan Abed on which there was a dead man at whose
head there was a Holy Koran. Thereupon we took the Holy Koran to
Omar; he called on Kaab who translated it into Arabic; verily I am the first
man to read it among the Arabs. I read it as I would read the Holy Koran.
I told Abi Al-Aliya: What was in it? He said: Your way of life, your matters
and concerns, and what will exist later on? I said: What did you do with the
man? He said: We dug during day time thirteen different and spread graves.
When the night come we buried him and levelled all the other graves in or-
der to blind people from recognizing his grave and exhuming him. I said:
Why should they do so? He said: If the sky stopped raining those people
would bring his bed to the outside and the sky would rain. I said: Who do
you think he is? He said: A man called Daniel. I said: When did you find
him? He said: Three hundred years ago. I said: Did any part of his body
change? He said: No, but little hairs on his back; verily the meat [body] of
prophets are not decayed by the earth.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: This story tells
us what the «Muhajiroun» and «Al-Ansar» (May Allah be pleased with
them) had done; they obscured his grave so that people would not be
tempted by it; they never raised it in order to get blessing at it or to invoke
at it; had those who came after go to it, they would have combated for it by
the sword and they would have worshipped it regardless of Allah (the Ex-
alted).

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: And rejected
such practices; thus he who intentionally went to a spot hoping for benefac-
tion- and the legislator did not fancy going to it- then this is classified
among those rejected actions, and it is classified in degrees some of which
are more serious than others; whether one went there to pray or to invoke
at it, or to read [The Holy Koran], or to invoke Allah (the Exalted), or to
sacrifice or to practise ascetiscism at it such that he specializes that spot by
some sort of worship which is not religiously permitted neither in kin nor in
principle; however, verily that may be allowable if it happens by chance
rather than by intention and pre-planning to do such performances there,
for example, like someone who visiting it go to it, and to ask Allah (the Ex-
alted) to protect him and to protect the dead as has been mentioned in the

282

And Ibn Jarir narrated after Sufyan ben Mansour.

After Mujahid (Have ye seen Lat, and ‘Uzza (53: 19) He said: Fine flour
used to be pulverized for them. So when he [pulverizer] died they stayed at
his grave». The same thing was said by Abu Al-Jawza‘ after Ibn Abbas «He
used to pulverize fine flour for the pilgrims».

Sunna. As for preferring invocation at it thinking that verily invocation is
more answerable at it than at other spots; this is forbidden.

His saying: (Allah’s wrath would be more intense against a people who
took their prophet’s graves as Mosques). This includes proscribing building
on graves as well as praying at them, and that is verily considered among
the major sins. It was mentioned in «al-Qira» by At-Tabari, who is one of
Malek’s Companions, after Malek that he hated to say: I visited the Holy
prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave and he gave
a reason for that by quoting him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him).

179 - «O Allah (the Exalted) do not let my grace become a worshipped
pagan». till the end of the Honorable Hadith to the grave so that people
would not identify with those [who worshipped graves] in order to block the
way of rationalization and excuses.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Malek lived at
the days of the followers who are the best acknowledged people concerning
this matter; so that showed that they did not have terms to use when visit-
ing the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
grave-till he said- and they mention from the causes of his hating this peo-
ple’s saying, «I visited the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) grave» because such term is said by many people to mean an
innovative visit; it is visiting the dead to ask him for something or to invoke
him and to resort to him in order to fulfil the needs. That which is similar is
practised by many people since by the term «Visit» they mean something of
the sort. And that is religiously allowable as unanimously agreed on by the
Imams. Malek hated to verbalize a term with general meaning that indicates
an invalid meaning, just in contradiction to him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him). Since verily that was which Allah (the Exalted) has
commanded. As for using the term «visit» in its general sense concerning all
graves, such meaning is not understood here; let what he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) had said be known.

180 - «Visit graves; it verily reminds you of the Afterlife». When he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) used to visit his (May

283

ولث رد ف ف ودع ف فى وا ع قدو رد ف رو و راع قاو واو راواه وارا هف ع قار قاد ورا فم فوا وو قو م وزافاءا .د عاقد رد و عاواماود فد قا قدو رده ارده مد ود ءاهد نه 6د ع عد م 6 66 2م 90 5 50 5 5 5558

Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) mother’s prave. Verily this
concerns the unbelievers’ graves. It is not understood from visiting the dead
in order to invoke him, ask him for something, and seeking his aid and that
which is similar to that practised by the people of polytheism and
innovation; that is in contradiction to the visited if religiously aggrandized,
like the prophets and the righteous. Verily that which is meant by visiting
their graves, that innovative and polytheistic visit. That is why Malek
detested that.

This Honorable Hadith also includes: Verily the Holy Propeht (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) did not seek refuge with Allah (the
Exalted) but from that which he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) feared to happen. This was mentioned by the writer (May Allah’s
Mercy be upon him).

(And Ibn Jarir narrated after Sufyan after Mansour after Mujahid
«Have ye seen Lat and ‘Uzza» (53: 19). So when he [that man] died they
stayed at his grave». The same thing was said by Abu Al-Jawza’ after Ibn
Abbas.

His saying: (And Ibn Jarir narrated).

He is Imam Al-Hafeth Muhammad ben Jarir ben Yazid Al-Tibari, the
writer of «At-Tafsir», «At-Tarkh», «al-Atikam» and many others. Ibn Khu-
zeima said: I do not know on earth anyone who is more knowledgeable than
Muhammad ben Jarir and he was among those who had their opinions and
he did not immitate others. He had companions learning about the doctrine
after him and following his sayings. He was born in the year 224 A.H and
died two days before the end of Shawwal in the year 310 A.H.

His saying: (After Sufyan) He appears to be Sufyan ben Sai’d ben Mas-
rouq Ath-Thawri Abu Abdullah Al-Koufi. He was a reliable man, who
memorized the Holy Koran, and he was a great savant. As well he was, an
Imam, a worshipper and had his own opinions. He had followers learning
from his creed. He died in the year 161 A.H, sixty-four years old.

His saying: (After Mansour) He is the son of Mu’tamir ben Abdullah
As-Salami. He was reliable and a religious scholar. He died in the year 132
A.H.

His saying: (After Mujahid). He is Ibn Jabr Abu Al-Hajjaj Al-Makh-
zoumi a reliable Imam concerning the interpretation of the Holy Koran. He

learned after Ibn Abbas and others (May Allah be pleased with them). He
died in the year 104 A.H. This was said by Yahya Al-Kattan. Ibn Hibban

284

And it was narrated after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them)
that, «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon

him) cursed the women who visited graves...

said that he died in the year 102 or 103 A.H while he was prostrating. He
was born in the year twenty-one during the Caliphate of Omar (May Allah
be pleased with him).

The occasion for mentioning this: Verily they exaggerated in aggrandiz-
ing him-till they worshipped him and his grave became a pagan among the
pagans of the polytheists.

His saying: (The same thing was narrated by Abu Al-Jawza’) He is Aws
ben Abdullah Al-Rabi. He died in the year 83.

Al-Bukhary said we were told by Muslim that he is Ibn Ibrahim. We
were told by Abu Al-Ashhab that Abu Al-Jawza narrated after Ibn Abbas,

181 - «Lat was a man who used to pulverize pilgrims’ fine flour».

Ibn Khuzeima said: The same thing goes for the ‘Uzza which was a tree
on which there was a construction and curtains. It was between Mecca and
At-Taif and Quraish used to aggrandize it. Abu Sufyan said on the day of
the battle of Uhud, «We have the ‘Uzza and you donot have ‘Uzza.»

His saying: (And it was narrated after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with them).

182 - «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) cursed the women who visited graves and took them as Mosques
and.» This was narrated by the people of Sunan).

I said: This chapter discusses the Honorable Hadiths of Abi Huraira
and Hassan ben Thabet. Concerning that of Abi Huraira; it was narrated by
Ahmad and At-Tirmithi while Hassan’s Hadith after Abdur-Rahman ben
Hassan ben Thabet after his father who said,

183 - «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) cursed the women who visisted graves».

And Ibn Abbass’s Honourable Hadith referred to Abu Saleh the master
of Umm Hani’. This Hadith was weakened by some and confirmed by
others. Ali ben Al-Madani said after Yahya Al-Kattan: I never saw any one
of our companions leaving Abu Saleh the master of Umm Hani’, and I
never heard any one of the people say something about them. Neither, Shu-
ba nor Zai’da nor Abdullah ben Othman left him. Ibn Mw in said: There is
no objection to him that is why Ibn As-Sakan reported it in his Saheeh.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: It reached us
285

يي يا يا ع يا يا ا ع ا ا ا ع ا ا يي ا ا ا ا ا ا لل 1 ا ام ا الي ا ا ل يا الاي ل ل ا ا ا ا يي ا ا ا ا ةا

after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
through two main ways: After Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with
him) who said, «Verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) cursed the women who frequently visited graves». And
he mentioned Ibn Abbass’s Honourable Hadith then said: The men of this
are not the men of that. So neither one took after the other, however, in the
two references there is one who is accused of lying. Such is definitely an evi-
dence. This is among the best which was conditioned by At-Tirmithi; verily
he considered good that which reached through varied ways and its narrator
was never accused of lying, that is to say it did not contradict that which
was confirmed and proved by reliable references. This Honorable Hadith
reached us through various ways and none of its narrators was accused of
lying nor was it contradicted by any of the reliable references. That’ would
be the case if it was narrated after one reference: how would it be if it was
narrated by one after the other? All this show that verily this Honourable
Hadith is originally well known.

Those who permitted such visits depended on what was narrated after
Aisha (May Allah be pleased with her) that she visited the grave of her
brother Abdur-Rahman and she said, «Had I seen you, I wouldn’t have vis-
ited yows, and this shows that verily women’s visiting the graves is not as re-
commanded as that of men. Since if that had been as such she would have
liked his visit whether she had seen him or not.

I said: Thus according to this, those who say that it is allowable cannot
take this as an evidence.

This text of Aisha’s Honourable Hadith was narrated by At-Tirmithi
after Abdullah ben Abi Mulaika after her [Mulaika] and it contradicts Al-
Athram’s text after Abdullah ben Abi Mulaika who as well said: «Verily
Aisha (May Allah be pleased with her) went one day to the grave-yard. I
told her: «O mother of believers,

184 - Had not Ailah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) forbidden us from visiting the graves? She said: Yes, he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) forbade visiting graves, then
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ordered visiting them.»

So Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) answered con-
cerning this and said: Aisha’s Honorable Hadith does not constitute an evi-
dence verily the one who objected against what she said, objected concerning
total forbidding, so she defended that by saying that such forbiddance was

2836

جاع ماهد ود ود قد وافا عه واو وا ماع عد ث وام عد .عدا ما مام عد 6ع م فاواا م ماوا هش قد هد اعدو رعاو ماو وار و فوفاف قاف » عدماع د و راود فا قاف .> هاراو واوا .ا رو وري و راو رو م راو ران رار وا نا ران

later cancelled, and the one objecting did not mention to her forbidding par-
ticular to women who were cursed for such visits. That shows her saying,
«Verily he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ordered visiting
them.» That shows that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
ordered her and order requiring saying that it is desirable, and desirability is
particularly confirmed just for men. Had women been ordered to visit
graves, they would have done so as men did and she would have not told
her brother «I would have never visited you» and cursing is clear concerning
proscription and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ad-
dressed the people saying: «Then visit them» [ordering men. The pronoun
used in the Arabic text is that for men] and he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) did not address women so they could not be meant by
the cancellation and that which is general when it is known as coming after
that which is particular, would not cancel it; this is what the savants say;
this is in confirmity with the creeds of Ahmad and Ash-Shafi’ in the most
famous of the two narratives after him [Ahmad] and he is very well known
by his companions so how would it be if it was not known that this general
rule came after that which is specific?.

Thus his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying might
have been, «Allah (the Exalted) curses women who frequently visit graves.»
After he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) allowed me to visit
them. This shows that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
paired it with those who build on them Mosques and...... It is known that
building Mosques and [on graves] is strictly forbidden as was shown by the
Honourable righteous Hadiths.

That which is true: Verily women were not included in this permission
to visit graves for many reasons:

First: Verily his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying,
«Then visit them» those who were addressed [in the Arabic terms] were men.
However, there are two opinions concerning this Honourable Hadith; it was
said: Verily a separate evidence is needed to confirm that women were al-
lowed as well. Accordingly allowing women to visit graveyards is a weak evi-
dence and that which is general does not contradict that which is particular,
nor does it delete it. This is what the savants believe in. If women were in-
cluded in this address, he would recommend their visiting graveyards. We
have not known that any of the Imams recommended that for them, nor did
women during the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon

287

والما وا رار راع راود ود قاع يا وده واو واوا ع هد هد راودو وا واو را ماو ووا راعا. ماراراو قاواء د ماما عار ما ود وام واه عد .ا مد ماما نع ودود مدو ود تعد تعد عد ماحد مده عد ماج عد عع م عد تخ 9 6 2 2 5*9

him) time or during the times of his successors the Orthodox Caliphs visit
graves.

Secondly: Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) rationalized permitting men to visit graves by,

185 - «It reminds of death, makes the heart more sympthetic and makes
the eyes tear». This was mentioned in Ahmad’s «Musnad». It is known that
verily if a woman visits the graves, she would become afraid, she will wail
and mourn, because she is weak and impatient in her structure. If women’s
visit to the graves lead to suspicions and to proscribe matters then it is not
possible to limit the consequences or to differentiate between one kind and
another. It is at the roots of religion: Verily if wisdom was unseen or spread
the judgment concerning it will be suspended because it is just a possibility.
Thus this would be proscribed in order to black the way before rationaliza-
tions and excuses as it was proscribed to look at covered primping, and as it
was proscribed to stay alone with a foreign woman and other like matters.
There is none among that which contradicts this evil matter; the aim of visit-
ing the grave is to invoke Allah (the Exalted) for the sake of the dead; she
can do that while at her home.

There are some savants who say: This includes escorting the deceased to
his final resting place, his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
Honourable Hadith is used as an evidence,

186 - «Return veiled not since verily you tempt he who is alive and of-
fend the dead». The following was narrated after Fatima,

187 - «Truly, if you reach the graveyard with them, you would not en-
ter the Garden with them». This is supported by what was mentioned in the
two Saheehs,

188 - «Verily he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) forbade
women from following the funerals», and it is known that he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said,

189 - «He who prays at a funeral is rewarded by a carat, he who fol-
lows it is rewarded by two carats». It was learned through the righteous
Honourable Hadiths that this generality did not include women as far as the
Holy Propeht’s forbidding them from walking after funerals is concerned;
they were not included in this general meaning that is similar to what was
discussed before.

I said: Thus allowing the visit to graves is specific to men. He (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) particularly addressed men when

2388

.. and built at them Mosques and lanterns» It was narrated by the people
of Sunnan [Tradition].

This chapter discusses many issues:.

The first: Interpreting pagans.

he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Allah curses
women who frequently visit graves- till the end of the Honourable Hadith».
So it is that which is general.

And there are answers concerning that which those who believe so used
as reference.

One of which: Verily what was mentioned about Aisha, and Fatima
(May Allah be pleased with them) contradicts that which was narrated after
them in this chapter so it is not confirmed without revocation.

And one of which: Verily what the companion said and can not be ta-
ken as evidence to exclusively support the Honourable Hadith. As for his
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) teaching Aisha what to say
when visiting graves and the like, this does not show that what those Hon-
ourable Hadiths told concerning cursing women who frequently visit graves,
was revoked, because it is possible that it happened before certain and strict
forbidding and serious warning, and Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

Muhammad ben Ismail As-Sanni (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
said in his book «Tat-hir al-I’tiqad»: Verily such domes and tombstones
which became the greatest reason for polytheism unbelief as well as the
greatest means for destroying the religion of Islam and its structure. Most of
those-rather all- who build them [Domes over graves] are kings, sultans
presidents and rulers, either on a relatives grave or on the grave of some one
whom they fancy is righteous, savants sufist, fakir, or a great sheikh then
people who know him would visit him as they should visit the dead without
calling his name; rather, they invoke Allah (the Exalted) for him and ask
Allah (the Exalted) to grant him forgiveness. They keep on performing this
till all those who know him die and perish, then those who come after them
and find a grave on which a construction is erected and candles are lit, and
fine rugs are spread at it, curtains are hanged, and flowers and roses are
put, so it would be thought that such performances are done either to get
benefit or to remove harm, and those guarding and serving it start telling
lies about the dead persons deeds; they would say that he did so and so, and
harm so and so and benefit so and so. They keep on doing this till they
implant in his character all that which is invalid and untrue while the real
state of affairs is that the Holy Prophetic Hadiths mentioned cursing the one

289

The second: Explaining worship.

The third: He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) never
sought refuge with Allah (the Exalted) but from that which he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) feared to happen.

The fourth: Paring this with taking prophets’ graves as Mosques.
The fifth: Mentioning the severity of Allah’s wrath.

The sixth: This is the most important, The characteristic of knowing
about worshipping Lat which is the greatest among pagans.

The seventh: Knowing that it is the grave of a righteous man.

The eighth: It is the name of the buried person and explaining the
meaning of Lat.

The ninth: Cursing women who frequently visit graves.

The tenth: Cursing he who lights candles or lanters at graves.

who lit candles, wrote or built on graves. The Honourable Hadiths
concerning this matter are very well known and widespread; verily that in
particular is forbidden. Then it is the cause of a most serious evil.

From this Honourable Hadith you learn the compatibility of this Hon-
ourable Hadith to the interpretation. And Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

His saying: (And those who built on it Mosques) this was explained ear-
lier in the previous chapter.

His saying: (lanterns) Abu Muhammad AlI-Makdissi said: If lighting
candles and lanterns had been allowed on graves, he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) would not have cursed he who did it, because it is
a futile loss of money and exaggeration in aggrandizing graves that is similar
to aggrandizing idols.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Taking them
[graves] as Mosques and lighting candles and lanterns on them are among
2133/25 sins.

190 - His saying: (It was narrated by the people of Sunan) means Abu
Dawud, At-Tirmithi, and Ibn Majah only; it was not narrated by An-Nasav’.

290

Chapter

What was mentioned concerning the Holy Prophet’s {Al-Mustapha
means «The chosen»] (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) de-
fending aspects Unification and blocking all the ways leading to polytheism.

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Now hath come unto you an Apostle from
amongst yourselves: it grieves him that ye should perish...

Chapter

His saying: Chapter (what was mentioned concerning the Holy Pro-
phet’s [al-Mustapha aspects means «The chosen»](May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) defending Monotheism and his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) blocking all the ways leading to polytheism).

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Now has come unto you an
Apostle from amongst yourselves: It grieves him that ye should perish: Ar-
dently anxious is he over you: to the Believers is he most kind and Merciful.
But if they turn away, say, ‘Allah sufficeth me: There is no God but He: on
Him is my trust, -He the Lord of the Throne (of Glory) Supreme!» (9: 128-
129).

fbn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Allah (the Exalted)
has said sending His Grace to the believers through the Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) that He (the Exalted) sent; a
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) from
among themselves and who speaks their language as Ibrahim (May Allah’s
Peace be upon Him) said: «Our Lord! Send amongst them an Apostle of their
own» (2: 129) and He (the Exalted) has said: «Allah did concern a great fa-
vour on the Believers when He sent among them an Apostle from among them-
selves». (3: 164) and He (the Exalted) has said: «Now hath come unto you an
Apostle from amongst yourselves» (9: 128) that is to say from you, as Jaafar

291

... Ardently anxious is he over you: To the Believers is he most kind and
merciful. But if they turn away, ay, ‘Allah sufficeth me: There is no God but
Him: On him is my trust, -He is the Lord of the Throne (of Glory) su-
preme!» (9: 128-129).

ben Abi Taleb told An-Najashi and Al-Mughira ben Shouba told Kisra’s
Messenger: «Verily, Allah (the Exalted) sent us a Holy Messenger from
among us; we know his-(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) des-
cent, and characteristics, history, truth, and honesty». Then he continued the
discussion. Sufyan ben Ayyina said after Jaafar ben Muhammad after the la-
ter’s father about Allah’s (the Exalted) saying, «Now hath come unto you an
Apostle from among yourselves.» (9: 128) He said: «He was not born as a
consequence of [illegal] Pre-Islamic [relatins] marriage».

His saying: (It grieves him that ye should perish) that is to say he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) becomes stricken with grief be-
cause of the hardships and distress from which his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) nation is suffering. That is why it was mentioned in
the Honourable Hadith narrated after him (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) that he said,

191 - «I was sent with generous and tolerant Truth.» And it was nar-
rated in the Saheeh,

192 - «Verily this religion is simple and accessible» All his (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) religion is tolerant, simple and perfect; it
is easy for the one whom Allah (the Exalted) has made easy.

His saying: (Ardently anxious is he over you) that is to say he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is anxious to guide you and make
benefation in the present life as well as in the Afterlife reach you. It was
narrated after Abi Tharr (May Allah be pleased with him) who said,

193 - «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) left us and not a single bird in the sky existed without telling us
something about it». This was narrated by At-Tabarani who said: and
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said,

194 - «There is nothing that leads towards the Garden or leads away
from the Garden but was made clear and evident by me.»

His saying: (To the believers he is most kind and merciful- as Allah (the
Exalted) has said: «And lower thy wing to the believers who follow thee. Then
if they disobey thee, say, ‘I am free (of responsibility) for what ye do!’ And put
thy trust on the Exalted in Might, the Merciful.» (26: 215-217). Thus He (the :

292

It was narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with him) that
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said, «Do not bury your dead in your houses, nor make a feast around my
grave; however, pray for me because verily your prayer reaches me wherever
you are». This was also narrated by Abu Dawud and was supported by

good references. Those who narrated it are reliable...

Exalted) commanded him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) in
the Holy Verse (If they disobey thee) that is to say concerning the great, per-
fect and pure religion that you brougth (Say, «Allah sufficeth me: There is no
God but He. On Him is my trust, -He the Lord of the Throne (of Glory) su-
preme!» (9: 129)).

I said: So such attributes which the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) was described by warning and admonishing
them from committing polytheism which is the greatest sin among sins, and
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) showed them its causes
leading to it and achieved forbidding them from performing it. For example,
aggrandizing graves exaggertion in visiting them, praying at them and for
them, and similar performances bading to worshipping them as was men-
tioned above and as will be mentioned in the discussions of this chapter.

His saying: (It was narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased
with him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said.

195 - «Do not bury your dead in your houses, nor make a feast around

His saying: (Do not bury your dead in your houses) Sheikh Al-Islam
said: That is to say do not do something that prevents you from praying, re-
hearsing the Holy Koran or invoking Allah (the Exalted) in them: because
when you bury the dead inside them they would become similar to grave-
yards’ so he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ordered to free
praying at homes and preventing it at graves is contrary to what is practised
by the polytheists of the Christians and those from this nation who identify
with them.

It was mentioned in th two Saheehs after Ibn Omar.

196 - «Pray at your homes and never make them [Your homes] grave-
yards. And it was narrated in the Saheeh of Muslim after Ibn Omar,

197 - «Do not make your houses graves since verily the Shaitan escapes
from the house in which he hears the Holy Sura (Al-Bakara) rehearsed in it.»

293

... and it was narrated after Ali ben Al-Hussein that, ...

His saying: (And do not make a feast around my grave) Sheikh AI-Is-
lam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: A feast is the general meeting
which is habitually repeated or made. It is repeated either every year, or
every week or every month and the like.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: A feast is what
people habitually or traditionally do or perform at a certain time and place.
So if it were a name of the place then it 1s the place where people confer for
worship and do other practices, as is the «Masjid Al-Haram.», «Mona»,
«Muzdalifa», «Arafa» and «Al-Masha’ir» were made by Allah (the Exalted)
a feast for Hanafites and a reward, and as He (the Exalted) made those days
of the feast a holiday. The polytheists had temporal and local feasts. When
Allah (the Exalted) sent Islam He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) invalidated them and compensated for the Hanafites by assigning them
«Al-Fitr», «Al-Adha» and «Days at Mona», as He (the Exalted) compen-
sated for localities by assigning them «Al-Kaaba», «Mona», «Muzdalifa»,
«Arafa» and «Al-Mashaim.

His saying: (And pray for me since verily your prayer reaches me wher-
ever you are).

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: He(May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) shows that verily what reaches
him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) from blessings and
peace, reaches him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) whether
they were near his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave or
far from it, so there is no need to hold a feast around it.

His saying: (Do not make your houses graves) Sheikh Al-Islam’s discus-
sion was mentioned earlier concerning the meaning of the previous Honour-
able Hadith.

His saying: (It was narrated after Ali ben Al-Hussein (May Allah be
pleased with him): «He saw a man approaching a gap that was at the Holy
Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave; he used to
enter it and invoke; he [Ali] forbade him and said, “Truly I tell you some-
thing that I heard from my father after my grandfather Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)?» He said: «Donot
make a feast around my grave, nor make your houses graves; pray for me
since verily your blessings and greeting reach me wherever you are.» It was
narrated in Al-Mukhtar).

This Honourable Hadith and the one before it are good and have good
references.

294

ا ا اي ا ا ا ااا ا ا ا ا

As for the first, it was narrated by Abu Dawud and others after Abdul-
lah ben Nafi’ Al-Saigh who said: Ibn Abi Thi’b told me after Sai’d Al-Mik-
bari after Abi Huraira - and he narrated the Honourable Hadith, those who
narrated it are famous and reliable, but Abu Hatem said about Abdullah
ben Nafi’: He did not memorize very well, he recognized yet then denied re-
cognition. Ibn Mouin said: He is reliable. Abu Zaraa said: There is no objec-
tion about him. Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said:
And such a person; if there are witnesses for his Honourable Hadith then it
is known that this Honourable Hadith is memorized, and the Honourable
Hadith at hand has many references to support. Al-Hafeth Muhammad ben
Abdul Hadi said: His is a well supported Honourable Hadith and it has re-
ferences that raise it to the degree of being righteous. As for the second
Honourable Hadith; it was narrated by Abu U’ala, Al-Kadi Ismail, Al-Ha-
feth Ad-Diya’ Muhammad ben Abdul-Wahid Al-Makdissi in his book «al-
Mukhtar».

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: So at this tra-
dition [Sunna] how the people of Medina and the kinsfolks of the Holy pro-
phet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Those people who
were relatives, close relatives and neighbours of Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) because they more than
others needed that, so they controlled it and abided by it more.

Said ben Mansour said in his «Sunan»: We were told by Abdul-Aziz
ben Muhammad that Suhail ben Abi Sahl said: «Al-Hasan ben Abi Taleb
(May Allah be pleased with them) saw me at the grave, so he called me
while he was at Fatima’s house having dinner, he said: Come and join me
for dinner. I said I donot want. He said: What is the matter with you; I saw
you at the grave? I said: I greeted the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him). He said: Then greet him (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) when you enter the Mosque. Thereupon he said:
Verily Allah’s Holy Messenger said: Do not make a feast around my grave,
nor make your houses graves, and pray for me since verily your prayer
reaches me wherever you are; may Allah (the Exalted) curse the Jews and
the Christians because they took their prophet’s graves as Mosques; you and
those at Andalus are equal [concerning that matter].»

Said also said: Hibban ben Ali told us that Muhammad Ijlan narrated
after Abi Said, the master of Al-Mahri; he said: Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Do not make a feast

295

_. eerily he saw a man approaching a gap that was at the Holy Prophet’s
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave, he would enter it and
invoke, so he forbade him and said, «Truly I tell you an Honourable Hadith
which I heard from my father, from my grandfather, after Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) who said, ‘Do

arour.d my grave, nor make your houses graves, and pray for me, since ve-
rily your prayer reaches me wherever your are.»

Sheikh Al-Islam said: Thus these two Honourable Hadiths from two
different aspects show that the Honourable Hadith is confirmed especially
the one who told it give evidence for it. That necessitates that it was proved
and confirmed by him, had it not been narrated from different and sup-
ported aspects other than this; so how would it be the case and it was nar-
rated with its proof?

His saying: (Ali ben Al-Hussein) that is to say Ali ben Abi Taleb
known as Zein Al-Abedin (May Allah be pleased with him) and the best fol-
lower and most known among his kinsfolk. Az-Zuhri said: I never saw a
man from Quraish who is better than him. He died in the year 93 A.H. He
is Al Hussein’s father; Al-Hussein is Allah’s Holy Messenger’s (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) grand-son and sweet basil. He memorized
after the Holy prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and
was martyred on the Day of Ashura in the year 61 A.H. He (May Allah be
pleased with him) for fifty-six years old.

His saying: (Verily he saw a man approaching a gap at the Holy Pro-
phet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave). It is a small
window in a wall and a skylight or anything similiar.

His saying: (He would enter it and invoke so he forbade him). This in-
dicates that intentionally visiting graves and tombstones for invocation and
prayer in forbidden.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: I never knew
that someone who permitted it, because it is like taking it as a feast, and it
also shows that verily intentionally visiting a grave to greet if one enters a
Mosque to pray, is also forbidden because it was not allowed by religion.
Malek hated the people of Medina visiting the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) grave each time they entered the Mosque
because those who came before never did such practice. He said: «Nothing
will reform those who came last among this nation but that which reformec
those who came first.» And the Companions and the followers used to come

296

not make a feast around my grave, nor make your houses graves; pray for

me since verily your greeting reaches me wherever you are». It was narrated

in Al-Mukhtar.

to the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) Mos-
que and pray, and when they finish praying they would either sit or leave;
they never approached the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) grave to greet him (May Allah’s peace be upon him) for they
know that verily blessing him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) and greeting him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) at
prayer is more perfect and much better.

As for their entering his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
grave to bless and greet him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
there; or in order to pray and invoke, this was not allowed by him (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him); rather, he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) forbade them from practising it when he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) told them: «Do not make a feast
around my grave, and pray for me since verily your prayer reaches me».
Thereupon he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) showed that
verily the prayer reaches him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
even from very far places; the same logic applies to greeting him (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). He (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) cursed those who take the prophet’s graves as Mosques.
And the room, at those times used to be entered through the door, for
Aisha (May Allah be pleased with her) was in it; after that they kept on
doing that till the second wall was built. They, even though could reach his
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave, did not enter, neither
to bless nor to pray; neither to invoke for themselves nor for others; nor for
asking about an Honourable Hadith or’a certain knowledge; neither was the
Shaitan tempted to seduce them till he makes them hear words of greetings
so they thought that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
talked to them and gave his opinion and interpreted the Honourable
Hadiths for them, or he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
returned the greeting by a loud voice, as the Shaitan tempted others and
misguided them at his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave
or at others grave, till they came to believe that the buried person is
ordering them, forbidding them, giving them his opinion or may be
apparently talking to them, and that verily he leaves his grave and can be
seen leaving the grave. They used to think that the souls of the dead bodies

297

فراع ووو ققاع د هاو قادياء د ‎SO‏ وقارد ماماو هد مار م قاواو فدهو جاع ود .5 فاقاع قاف قافا »د عاد و عادفاى عدي عاد .د رار عارد ند رده ندر

came out and talked to them, and that verily the dead person’s spirit
materialized in front of them and saw it as the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) saw them during the night of his (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ascersion to the seventh Heaven
[al-Miraj].

What is meant here is the following: Verily the Companions (May Allah
be pleased with them) were not in the habit of blessing him (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) at his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) grave as those who came after them did; rather, some of them
used to come from the outside and greet him (May Allah’s peace be upon
him) at his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave as those
who came after them did; rather some of them used to come from the out-
side and greet him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) when he
arrived from his travel. Such was what Ibn Omar did. Obeidallah ben Omar
narrated after Nafi’,

198 - «When Ibn Omar used to arrive from travel, he used to go to the
Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave and
used to say, ‘Peace be upon you, O Allah’s Holy Messenger. Peace be upon
you, O Abu Bakr. Peace be upon you, O father. Then he used to go]. Obei-
dallah said, ‘We do not know any of the Holy Prophet’s Companions who
had done that but Ibn Omar’. And this indicates that he did not stand at
the grave in order to invoke after he greeted, as done by many people.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Because that
was not traced after any one of the Companions. Thus it was pure innova-
tion. Malek said in «al-Mabsout»: I do not view any right to stand at the
Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave but
one may greet him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and
leave. Ahmad stated that he should turn to the Qibla and let the room be
on his left so that he wouldnot turn back to the grave.

In general all the savants have agreed that if one invokes, he should not
turn to the grave; however, they have not agreed concerning the following:
Shall he turn to the grave when he greets him or not? The Honourable
Hadith also includes the proof of prohibiting planning to visit his (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) grave or the graves and
tombstones of others, because that is considered feasting around them.
Rather, it is considered among the most serious causes of polytheism since
one joins those buried, as partners with Allah (the Exalted). This is the issue
about which Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) gave his

298

DEN TC ‏وم نم مره وو يل مم مل مار ووم ل ره مو ةم مايق يه مد جم م مد م دم مم‎ ete ese e nse eetaerareceves

own opinion, I mean he who travelled just in order to visit the graves of
prophets and the righteous- and it was said that the savants did not agree
concerning that issue; such as Al-Ghazali and Abi Muhammed AI-Makdissi
considered it permissible while some such as Ibn Batta, Ibn Akl, Abi
Muhammad Al-Jouweiny and the judge Ayyad considered it not permissible.
This last opinion is considered by most people. Malek stated it and was not
contradicted by any of the Imams; that is right, just and proper, especially
when it is mentioned in the two Saheehs after Abi Said after the Haly
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

199 - «Setting off can not be but to three Mosques: [Al-Masjed Al-Har-
am», this Mosque of mine, and «Al-Masjed Al-Aqsa». So setting off for vis-
iting graves and tombstones is included among the forbidden; so either it is
forbidden or rejecting. It was mentioned in one narration as fobidden; thus
It is necessarily forbidden. That is why the Companions (May Allah be
pleased with them) understood from him (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) as mentioned in «Al-Muwatta’», «Al-Musnad» and «As-Su-
nam»-.

It was narrated after Basra ben Abi Basra Al-Ghifari that he said to
Abi Huraira- when he approached the boundaries-:

«Had I seen you before you left, I would not have left». I heard Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying,

200 - «Riding animals are not prepared but to travel to three Mosques:
«Al-Masjed Al-Haram, this Masjed (Mosque), and «Al-Masjed Al-Aqsa».
Imam Ahmad and Omar ben Shabba narrated in «Akhbar Al-Medina» men-
tioning good reference after Qaza‘ who said,

201 - «I came to Omar’s son and said: I am intending towards the
boundaries. So he said: Verily setting off is only to three Mosques: ‘A]-
Masjed Al-Haram’, ‘Masjed Al-Medina’, and, ‘Al-Masjed Al-Aqsa’. So let
the boundaries and never approach it.» Ibn Omar and Basra ‏قعط‎ Abi Basra
considered or claimed the boundaries among those places that people are
forbidden to set off for, because the terms used by them includes forbidding
people from setting off to other than the three places mentioned above that
are visited in order to curry Allah’s favour. That is why they forbade from
setting off to the boundaries using this Honourable Hadith as a reference.
The boundaries are travelled because of the virtue of that spot since verily
Allah (the Exalted) called it (The Holy valley and the Blessed spot) and He

299

This chapter discusses many issue:

The first: Interpreting the Holy Verse of Bara.

The second: Driving his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) nation away from this position.

The third: Being anxious about us, his (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) kindness and mercy.

The fourth: Forbidding people from visiting his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) grave in particular even though visiting it 1s
among the best deeds.

The fifth: His Forbiddance from such visits.

The sixth: Urging people to perform supererogatory prayers at home.

(the Exalted) talked to Moussa (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) there.
This is what is believed by the four Imams and most of the people. He who
wanted to spread that belief and trespond to whomever opposed it, has to
adopt what Sheikh Al-Islam wrote in answer to Ibn Al-Akhnai‘ concerning
his objections to what the Honourable truthful Hadiths show and what the
savants adopted because evil consequences are evident and clear.

As for forbiddance from visiting other than the three mentioned Mos-
ques is because: Verily there is no benefit requiring setting off, nor there is a
quality requiring it. Al-Hafeth Muhammad ben Abdul-Hadi spread that say-
ing in his book «As-Sarim al-Manki» in responding to As-Subki; he men-
tioned in it the causes or reasons for the Honourable Hadiths concerning
visiting the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
grave and along with Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon them)
they mentioned none of them.

Even though it does not indicate the point of conflict since it only dis-
cusses the visit in the absolute and that is not denied by any one without set-
ting off; so he criticizes the proper visit which does not include polytheism
or innovation.

His saying: (It was narrated in «Al-Mukhtar)» Al-Mukhtara is a book
in which its writer collected good Honourable Hadiths in addition to that
mentioned in the two Saheehs.

Its writer: Is Abu Abdullah Muhammad Al-Hanbali. One of the emi-
nent authorities. Ath-Thahabi said: He spent his life searching about this is-

300

The seventh: Verily it already decided by them that praying in a grave-
yard is furbidden.

The eighth: Giving reason for that; verily a man’s prayer and greeting
him (May Allah’s peace be upon him) can reach him even if he was
far; there is no need to imagine that proximity is necessary.

The ninth: When he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is
at the «Barzakh» he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
will be shown his nation’s deeds concerning prayer and greetings dedi-
cated to him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

sue; he was a man of religious integrity, reverence, perfect virtue and perfec-
tion. May Allah be merciful and pleased with him.

Sheikh Al-Islam said: His corrections in his «al-Mukhtara» are defi-
nitely better than Al-Hakem’s corrections. He died in the year 643 A.H.

301

Chapter

(What was mentioned concerning: Verily some of this nation worship
pagans).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Hast thou not turned thy vision to those
who were given a portion of the Book? They believe (May Allah’s Mercy be
upon them)’in sorcery and evil, and say to the unbelievers that they are better
guided in the (right) way than the believers!» (4: 51).

Chapter

His saying: Chapter (what was mentioned: Verily some of this nation
worship Pagans).

(Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Hast thou not turned thy vision to those
who were given a portion of the Book? They believe in sorcery and evil.» (4:
51).

«A pagan» is a noun used io mean a sort of worship regardless of
Allah (the Exalted) such as graves, tombstones and others in accordance
with what Al-Khalil (May Allah’s Peace be upon Him) said: «For ye do
worship idols besides Allah, and ye invent falsehood» (29: 17) and, «They said,
‘We worship idols, and we remain constantly in attendance on them» (26: 72)
and, «He said, ‘worship ye that which ye have (yourselves) carved?’» (37: 95)
By this one realizes that verily "pagan" is 2 word given to idols and others
that used to be worshipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted); as was
mentioned above.

His saying: (They believe in sorcery and evil) Ibn Abi Hatem narrated
after Ikrama, «Huyay Ibn Akhtab and Kaab ben Al-Ashraf came to the
people of Mecca and told them: You are the people of the Holy Book and
the people of knowledge so tell us about ourselves and about Muhammad.
Thereupon they said: What are you and what is Muhammad? So they an-
swered: We visit our relatives, and slay,

302

Also He (the Exalted) has said, «Say, ‘Shall I point out to you something
worse than this, (as judged) by the treatment it received from Allah? Those
who incurred the curse of Allah and His wrath, those of whom some He trans-

formed into apes and swine, those who worshipped evil». (5: 63).

And Muhammad separated us from our relatives and followed that the
thieves of pilgrims from Ghifar. Is he better or are we? Thereupon they said:
You are better and more guided.» Allah (the Exalted) sent down the follow-
ing Holy Verse, «Hast thou not turned thy vision to those who were given a
portion of the Book? They believed in sorcery and evil, and say to the unbelie-
vers that they are better guided in the (right) way thou the believers!.» (4: 51).

Something similar was mentioned in Ahmad’s «Musnad» after Ibn Ab-
bas and others.

Omar ben Al-Khattab (May Allah be pleased with him) said, «Sorcery
is magic and evil is the Shaitan». The same was said by Ibn Abbas, Abu AI-
Aliah, Mujahid, Al-Hasan and others. And after Ibn Abbas, Ikrama and
Abi Malek, «Sorcery is Ash-Shaitan- Ibn Abbas added: As to the Ethio-
pian» And after Ibn Abbas also, «Sorcery is polytheism» and «Sorcery
means idols» And after him as well «Sorcery is Hayy ben Akhtab» And
after Al-Shoubi «Sorcery means the priest» and after Mujahid «Sorcery is
Kaab ben Al-Ashraf» Al-Jawhari said: «Sorcery is a word applied to an
idol, priest or magician». And many such examples can be found.

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: (This encompasses
learning about believing in sorcery and evil; is it [believing] essential or is it
that those people believe in them while they hate them and know about
their invalidity?).

His saying: (Also He (the Exalted) has said: «Say, ‘Shall I point out to
you something much worse than this, (as judged) by the treatment received
from Allah? Those who incurred the curse of Allah and His wrath, those of

whom He transformed into apes and swine, those who worshipped evil.» (5:
63).

Allah (the Exalted) tells His Holy Prophet Muhammad (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him): O Muhammad say shall I tell you about
the punishment you will receive on the Day of Judgment as a result of what
you thought about us? And you have these qualities which are made clear:
(Who incurred the curse of Allah (the Exalted)) that is to say drove him
away from Allah’s Mercy and wrath- to say such wrath after which Allah
(the Exalted) would never become pleased (He transformed them into apes

303

nee ‏لا ا ل لل‎ SSS TSS ST

and swine). Verily Ath-Thawri said about Alkama ben Marthad after Al-
Mughira ben Abdullah Al-Yashkari after Al-Maarour ben Suweid that ve-
rily Ibn Masoud (May Allah be pleased with him) said,

207 - «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) was asked about apes and swine, are they what Allah (the Ex-
alted) transformed? He said, that verily Allah (the Exalted) never anhilated a
people- or he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said Allah (the
Exalted) never transformed a people- and then allowed them to have pro-
geny or descendants. Verily apes and swine existed before that.» This was
narrated by Moslem.

Al-Baghawi said in his interpretation (say) O Muhammad (shall I point
out to you) tell you (something worser than this), he means their saying: We
never witnessed a people of religion who were less fortunate in the present
life and in the Afterlife than you, nor did we witness a religion which is
more evil than yours. So he said the answer by introductory terms even
those such introduction is not evil; He (the Exalted) has said, «Say, ‘Shall I
tell you of something (far) worse than these signs? It is the Fire (of Hell)!»
(22: 72).

His saying: (By the treatment received) as a reward or punishment from
Allah? Those who incurred the curse of Allah) that is to say: He was cursed
by Allah (the Exalted) (and His wrath) he means here the Jews (those of
whom some He transformed into apes and swine). The apes are the people
of Sabbath [Saturday] and swine are the unbelievers on the last dinner table
of Jesus. And after Ali ben Abi Talha who narrated after Ibn Abbas: «Ve-
rily both transformed are the people of Sabbath; there you were transformed
into apes and their oldmen were transformed into swine.»

(Those who worshipped evil) that is to say and made among them who
worshipped evil; that is to say obeyed the Shaitan in that which he tempted
him. Ibn Masoud rehearsed (those who worshipped evil-) while Hamza said
«Oubada» [Evil was worshipped] and Al-Hasan rehearsed, «And he wor-
shipped evil». That is say he talked about one person.

He said: Hamza’s argument concerning his way of reading (Those who
worshipped evil) that he made him do what he did as if: He (the Exalted)
made among them the one who worshipped evil. The meaning of trans-
formed here is created, like in His (the Exalted) saying: (And made the
Darkness and the Light- and not (worshipped) as Allah (the Exalted) has
said, «But if ye count the favours of Allah, never will ye be able to number

304

And Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Those who prevailed over their affair
said, ‘Let us surely build a place of worship over them». (18: 21).

It was narrated after Said (May Allah be pleased with him) that verily
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said, «Verily you would follow the way of those who came before you it is

them». (14: 34). As if he were saying: Verily he worshipped evil in all possi-
ble ways.

As far he who said (And he worshipped evil) that is He (the Exalted)
coupled him with (Those who incurred the curse of Allah).

Sheikh Al-Islam said concerning that: (Those who worshipped evil) the
right meaning is coupled with the berbs that came before it. That is to say
he who is cursed [By Allah (the Exalted)] and he who received Allah’s
wrath, and those whom Allah transformed into apes and swine and those
who worshipped evil. He said: The verbs that came before the subject carries
Allah’s name [as subject] whether frankly mentioned or connoted in the con-
text. Here the subject is the name of he who worshipped evil. It is the pro-
noun in (worshipped) and He (the Exalted) did not name (who) because He
(the Exalted) made these actions a quality of one group of people, namely
the Jews.

His saying: (These are (many times) worse in rank- than you think
about us (and far more astray from the even path). In that connection Allah
(the Exalted) has said: «The companions of the Garden will be well, that Day,
in their abode, and have the fairest of places for repose.» (25: 24). This inter-
pretation was said by the savant, Ibn Kathir in his interpretation.

His saying: (And Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Those who prevailed
over their affair said, ‘Let us surely build a place of worship over them» (18:
21)) What is meant here is that they did for the young after their death that
the doer is dispraised, because the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said,

203 - «Allah (the Exalted) curses the Jews and the Christians; they took
their prophet’s and righteous men’s graves Mosques.» He (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) wanted to warn his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) nation against doing what those people had done.

His saying: (It was narrated after Abi Said (May Allah be pleased with
him) that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger said,

204 - «You would follow the way of life of those who came before you;
it is like an arrow tracing another arrow; even if they entered the hole of the

305

like an arrow tracing another arrow; even if they enter the hole of the dabb,
you would enter it. They said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger, do you means the
Jews and the Christians? He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said: Then who?» It was narrated by Moslem and Al-Bukhary.

And Moslem narrated after Thawban (May Allah be pleased with him)
that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said: «Verily Allah (the Exalted) showed me the whole earth so I
could see its eastern and western sides. Verily the property of my nation will
reach those parts I saw. I was given...

dabb, you would enter it; they said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him, do you mean the Jews and the Christians?
He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Then who?» It was
narrated by Moslim and Al-Bukhary) This is Moslem’s text.

His saying: (Ways of life) means the traditions of those who came be-
fore you. Al-Malheb said:

His saying: (It is like an arrow tracing another arrow). That is to Say
you would follow their example in every thing they did and in that you are
similar to them in as such an arrow’s head looks like another arrow’s head.
This shows the fitting of the interpretatoin to the Holy Verses. And what he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) told has already happened
and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is a Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) among the eminent pro-
phets.

His saying: (Even if they entered the hole of a dabb, you would enter
it). And in another Honourable Hadith.

205 - «Even if there had been among them he who overtly approaches
his mother [sexually], some one among my nation would have done so.» He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) meant that his (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) nation does not leave any performance
done by Jews and Christians without performing it completely, that is why
Sufyan ben Aiynah said: He who is corrupt and evil among our savants has
infact identified with the Jews: he who corrupts an evil among our people
has in fact identified with the Chrisitans.

I said: How plenty are those two! But because of Allah’s Mercy and
His (the Exalted) benefaction that He (the Exalted) made this nation never
agree to that which is obsolete and invalid as will be mentioned in the Hon-
ourable Hadith of Thawban which will soon be mentioned.

306

ااا م ا ل ل ا ل ااا ع ل اا اا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا

His saying: (They said: 0 Allah’s Holy Mesenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him), do you mean the Jews and the Christians? He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Then who? That is to
say, are they the Jews and the Christians whose ways of life we follow?

His saying: (He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:
Then who?) This is an interrogation that connotes denial and rejection. That
is to say, then who do I mean but those?

His saying: (It was narrated by Moslem after Thawban (May Allah be
pleased with him) that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said,

206 - «Verily Allah (the Exalted) showed me the earth, so I could see its
eastern sides and its western sides. And verily the property of my nation will
reach those parts of the earth I was shown. I was given the two treasures:
The red and the white. Verily I asked my Lord (the Exalted) not to annihi-
late my nation because of others general ways of life, and not to set up an
absolute master on them an enemy but from among themselves; and that ve-
rily my Lord (the Exalted) said: O Muhammad if I decreed something then
it cannot be changed, rejected or warded off, and I promised your nation
not to annihilate it because of a general way of life. Also I promised not to
set up an absolute ruler, an enemy but from among themselves who would
violate theirs, even if all the people of the earth unite till they kill and cap-
ture each other».

The same Honorable Hadith was narrated by Al-Bukhary in his Saheeh
and he added: «Verily I fear that there comes in my nation untruthful Im-
ams. And if the sword befallen them, it will not be raised till the Day of
Judgment. The Hour will not take place till a person from my nation identi-
fies with the polytheists and till groups from my nation worship pagans.
And that verily there will exist in my nation thirty lars, all of whom claims
that he is a prophet; I am the seal of all prophets; no prophet will come
after me. And a group of my nation keeps on sticking to that which is truth-
ful and right, victorious and not harmed by those who let them down or by
those who contradict them till Allah’s (Be the blessed and raised above)
command comes»).

This Honourable Hadith was narrated by Abu Dawud in his «Sunan»
and it was narrated by Ibn Majjah who included the addition mentioned by
the writer.

307

... treasures; the red and the white. And I verily asked my Lord (the Ex-
alted) not to anhilate my nation because of others’ general ways of living

and not to...

His saying: (After Thawban). He was a servant of the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him. He accompanied him and
stayed with him and after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) died he went to Ash-Sham and died in Homs in the
year 54 A.H.

His saying: (He (the Exalted) showed me the earth) At-Turbashti said:
«Showed» here means concentrated and focused and made clearer to see;
that is to say observe it closely. This means that Allah (the Exalted) folded
the earth and made it look like the palm of a hand in his (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) field of vision so that he may look at it. At-
Taibi said: That is to say He (the Exalted) concentrated, till he (may Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) could see the property of his nation from
the far east till the far west.

His saying: (And verily the property of my nation will reach the parts
that were concentrated for me to observe). Al-Kurtobi said: This informa-
tion and the seriousness of the one who told it, as he said, and this was
among the signs of his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) pro-
phecy; because the property of his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) nations spread till it reached the most distant point At-Tanjah- which
constitutes the boundaries of the western civilization; and it spread as well
till the most distant point in the east which is a spot beyond Khurasan and
the river and many of the countries of As-Sind, India and As-Su’d. How-
ever, that spreading did not continue in the direction of the south or the
north and that was not mentioned by kim (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) that it was shown to him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) nor that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was
told that these places would be among the properties of his (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) nation.

His saying: (I was shown) probably it may be as well, He (the Exalted)
showed me.

His saying: (I was given the two treasures: The red and the white) AJ-
Kurtobi said: He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) means the
treasure of Kisra; the king of the Furs [Persians] and the treasure of Ceasar
who is the king of the Romans and their palaces and land. And verily he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

207 - «By the One who possesses my soul, you are « ing to spend both

308

... and not to set up an absolute master on them an enemy but from among
themselves in order not to let such enemy violate their sacredness and that
verily my Lord (the Exalted) said, O Muhammad if I decree something, then
it can not be changed, rejected or warded off, and I promise your nation
not to annihilate it because of a general way of life. Also I promise not to
set up as absolute ruler an enemy but from themselves in order not to let

such enemy violate their sacredness even if all the people of the earth unite
till they kill and capture each other». The same Honourable Hadith was nar-
rated by Al-Burkary in his Saheeh...

treasures for the sake of Allah (the Exalted)» And he (May Allah’s blessi: ‏د‎
‎and peace be upon him) used the term red to mean Caesar’s treasure be-
cause most of what they had was gold; he used the term white to mean Kis-
ra’s treasure because what they had most were jewels and silver. That
materialized during the Caliphate of Omar. Since verily Kisra’s crown and
jewelry and all that was found in his treasury was driven to Omar, in addi-
tion to all what his vast and great kindgom possessed. Allah (the Exalted)
did the same thing to Ceasar.

His saying: (Verily I asked my Lord (the Exalted) not to annihilate my
nation because of a general way of life) that was proved in the reference of
the writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

His saying: Al-Jawhari said: Verily Allah (the Exalted) does not set up
enemies on all of the Moslems so that this enemy might violate all their
lands and properties even if all of those enemies came from all the parts of
the earth and united their forces.

His saying: (Till they annihilate each other and capture each other)
what is apparent here is that (till-) means that this issue will come to an end
when they kill each other. Verily the reality is that some of them are set as
absolute master on others and that is due to their variance and separation.

His saying: (Verily my Lord (the Exalted) said: O Muhammad, if I de-
creed something then it is never changed, rejected or warded off). Some said:
That is to say if I judged a final and valid rule, then nothing can after,
change or repel it; no body can do that as the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said,

208 - «None can alter, reject or ward off what You decree».

His saying: (It was narrated by Al-Barkary in his Saheeh). He is the
great memorizer Abu Bakr Ahmad Ash-Shafi’. He was born in the year 336
A.H and died in the year 425 A.G. Al-Khatib said: He was trustworthy and

309

... and he added, «Rather I fear that there comes in my nation untruthful

Imams...

feared Allah (the Exalted); we never saw among our sheikhs any one who is
more trustworthy than him; he was learned and knowledgeable concerning
legislation and religious books. He wrote a reference in which he included
what the two Saheehs included and he as well collected the Honourable Ha-
dith of Ath-Thawri, Shuba and Taifa.

This Honourable Hadith was narrated completely by Abu Dawud and
referred it to Abi Kulaba after Abi Asna’ after Thawban (May Allah be
pleased with him) who said: Allah’s Holy Messenger said, «Verily Allah (the
Exalted) or he said verily my Lord showed me the earth so I was shown the
east and the west sides of the earth, and verily the property of my nation
will reach all that was known to me. Also I was given the two treasures:
The red and the white. And verily I asked [Allah (the Exalted)] not to anni-
hilate my nation because of the general way of life, nor to set up as an en-
emy but those from among themselves, in order not to let such enemy
violate their lands. And verily my Lord told me: O Muhammad verily if I
decreed something, it cannot be altered, rejected or warded off; I will not an-
nihilate them because of a general way of life, nor will I set up unto an en-
emy but from among themselves in order not to let such enemy violate their
land even though all people from all parts of the world unite- or He (the Ex-
alted) said- all countries of the world unite- against them till some of them
kill the other and till some of them capture the other.

Rather I fear that there comes in my nation untruthful Imams. And if
the sword befalls on them, it will not be raised till the Day of Judgment.
The Hour will not take place till some tribes of my nation identify with
polytheists, and till some tribes of my nation worship pagans, and verily
there will exist in my nation thirty liars all of whom claim that he is a pro-
phet. And I am the seal of prophets; there is no prophet after me; and a
group of my nation keeps on sticking to that which is truthful and right, vic-
torious and not harmed by those who let them down or by those who con-
tradict them till Allah’s command comes.»

Abu Dawud also narrated after Abdullah ben Masoud (May Allah be
pleased with him) who in turn narrated after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him),

209 - «Islam will erupt for thirty- five, or thirty-six or thirty-seven; if
they were perished, then they followed the path of those who perished; and
if their religion is established, it would take seventy years; I said, seventy re-

310

شاع ه.ا عد جا ‎cr‏ مد ع.د م .ا ماءد .دا مد و واع ‎A A‏ هد هد وه مواق فافاه وما» وردود ردو د قاقد .د فاع مد ماع »د قاعد ع قاع مه وق وام ماع عد عد عدا عد وا عماس مامد و ود ود و ود ودح ود و ل وال عا ل لاع و لو 6 م

maining years or seventy passing years? He said: Those that passed.»

He narrated in his Sunan also after Abu Huraira (May Allah’s Mercy
be upon him) from Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) who said,

210 - «Time approaches and knowledge decreases, ordeals appear, scar-
city is cast, commotion and hubbub increase. It was said: O Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) what are they
[commotion and hubbub]? He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said: Killing, killing».

His saying: (Rather I fear that there comes in my nation untruthful Im-
ams) that is to say princes and savants who judge and rule the servants
while they are deviod of right and correct knowledge, and they misguide
them. Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And they would say,
‘Our Lord! We obeyed our chiefs and our great ones, and they misled us from
the (right) path» (33: 67) And some of those used to tell his companions: he
who has a need, let him come to my grave, I would fulfil it for him; there 5
no benefaction in a man who hides this benefaction under a cubit of dirt;
they would say many like things. That is verily far misguidance; he calls his
friends to worship him regardless of Allah (the Exalted) and he tells them to
ask those needs and to dispel their worries which in reality he is not able to
fulfil or dispel. Verily Allah (May He be Exalted said: «They call on such de-
ities, besides Allah, as can neither hurt nor profit them. That is straying indeed
(from the way)! (Perhaps) they call on one whose hurt is nearer than his profit:
Evil, indeed, is the patron, and evil is the companion (for help)!» (22: 12-13)
and He (the Exalted) has also said: «Yet have they taken, besides Him, gods
that can create nothing but are themselves created; that have no control of
hurt of good to themselves; nor can they control Death nor life nor Resurrec-
tion.» (25: 3) and He (the Exalted) has said: «Then seek ye sustenance from
Allah, serve Him, and be grateful to Him: To Him will be your return.» (29:
17) And many such examples are found in the Holy Koran in which Allah
(the Exalted) shows the difference between guidance and going astray.

A similar example would be: He who claims that he reaches with Allah
(the Exalted) to a state during which ‘formalities’ are dropped, and he
claims that verily holymen can be invoked and sought refuge with during
their lives and after their death and that verily they possess the abilities to
harm, benefit, manage things because of their honour or charisma, and that
he can see the «Lawh Al-Mahfouth» [A protected and kept tablet on which

311

وى ماو فال قا م م زاود هد هد هده ها ما وافد .د هقا. شا راع ما فاو و فاه .اودارا و ماراه ما واو و وار را قار ورا م زا مانا فا را فاناه لام قاما مد دان قاهد .د مل. د عددد مد ود عد ي. مدو زد 5 5 م ع ع ‎١ ١‏ 5 5 535

Allah (the Exalted) has decreed everything] and knows the secrets of people
and their private thought, he permits building Mosques on graves of pro-
phets and the righteous as weli as lighting them with lanterns and candles
ana the like such as exaggeration and immoderation and worshipping other
than Allah (the Exalted). O how pienty is such delirium and disbelief and
challenge of Allah’s Holy Book and Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him).

His saying: (Rather I fear that there comes in my nation untruthful mis-
leading Imams). He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) used
«Rather» which is usually used to specify something; he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) used it because he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) was so anxious that his (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) nation might go astray; what the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) thought of was nothing but that
which Allah (the Exalted) informed him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) about the unseen, that verily something similar to that mentioned
in the Honourable Hadith will take place before him (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him). We understand this from his (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) saying «You would follow the ways of life of
those who came before you-till the end of the Honourable Hadith».

It was also narrated after Abi Ad-Dardara’ that Allah’s Holy Messen-
ger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

211 - «That which I fear most for my nation are the deluded Imams».
This was narrated by Abu Dawud At-Tayalisi. And it was narrated after
Thawban (May Allah be pleased with him) that verily Allah’s Holy Messen-
ger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

212 -«Rather I fear for my nation of deluded Imams». This was nar-
rated by Ad-Darimi.

Verily Allah (the Exalted) has shown in His Holy Book His straight
path which is the path of the believers. So every one who performs some-
thing not found in Allah’s Holy Book nor in the Tradition of His Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is cursed and his
performance is rejected and turned down, as the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said,

214 - «He who causes disorder or turmoil or shelters someone who
caused them, then may the curse of Allah (the Exalted), angels and people
altogether be upon him. On the Day of Judgment Allah (the Exalted) would

312

if the sword is befallen it will not be raised till the Day of Judgment. The
Hour will not take place till a living person from among my nation identi-
fies with the polytheists and till groups of my nation worship pagans...

never accept irom him spending money (or poor people- cr straightness»
And he (Mav Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

214 - «He who causes among us that which contradicts or conflicts
{with our religion» then he is considered a rejector». And he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said,

215 - «Every disorder or trouble is an innovation and every innovation
is a delusion that misleads people». These are truthful Honourable Hadiths.
Verily Allah (the Exalted) has shown these roots in many places of His Holy
Book; in that connection He (the Exalted) has said, «Follow (O men!) The
revelation given unto you from your Lord, and follow not, as friends or protec-
tors, other than Him. Little ye remember of admonition.» (7: 3) and He (the
Exalted) has said, «Then we put thee on the (right) Way of Religion: so follow
thou that (way), and follow not the desires of those who know not.» (45: 18)
Similar Holy verses in the Holy Koran are plenty.

It was narrated after Ziad ben Houdair: Omar (May Allah be pleased
with him) who told me,

216 - «Do you know what destroys Islam? I said, ‘No’. He said, ‘It is
destroyed by an error by religious authorities, a hypocrites argument con-
cerning the Holy Koran, and the rule of deluded and misguiding Imams».
This was narrated by Ad-Darimi.

Yazid ben Omeir said,

217 - Muath ben Jabal (May Allah be pleased with him) used not set or
confer with others invoking Allah (the Exalted) but to say: Allah (the Exalted)
is a Just Ruler: May those who doubt this perish- This means: Beware when
the wise man goes astray, verily the Shaitan used to say that delusion and
untruthfulness comes through a wise man’s tongue, and a hypocrite might say
that which is truthful. I told Muath: How would I know, may Allah (the
Exalted) be merciful with you, that verily a wiseman might say that which ts
deluding and untruthful and that a hypocrite may say that which is truthful?
He said: You should avoid from a wise man’s speech that which is doubtful
and questionable about which people say: What is this? And say what is that,
and never give up asking him, since verily he might rethink that which is
truthful, and take that which is truthful when you hear, verily truth is lighted».
This was narrated by Abu Dawud and others.

313

... and verily there will exist in my nation thirty liars all of which claim that

he is a prophet...

His saying: (And if the sword is befallen, it will not be raised till the
Day of Judgment). And that was what really happened. Verily the sword fell
on the day Othman (May Allah be pleased with him) was killed and it is
not raised yet; it will stay as such till the Day of Judgment; however, it
might once be frequent and once infrequent at a certain area it would esca-
late while at others would recede.

His saying: (The hour will not take place till someone who is living
from among my nation identifies and follows the polythiests). «Some one
who is living» means one of the tribes and in Abu Dawud’s narration «till
tribes from among my nation identify with and follow the polytheists». This
means: Verily they would be with them and become willingly rejectors of the
Muslims and identify and follow the polytheists.

His saying: (Till groups from among my nation worship pagans).

218 - In Abu Dawud’s narration, «till tribes from among my nation
worship Pagans».

That is the proof of the interpretation; it includes responding to those
who said that which contradicts it, those ungrateful grave worshippers who
join in partners with Allah (the Exalted) by worshipping pagans. That is so
because of their ignorance of the reality of monotheism and of the polythe-
ism and joining in partners that contradicts it. Thus Monotheism is the ut-
most required thing and polytheism is the most seroius among sins.

And concerning the meaning of this Honourable Hadith: What was
mentioned in the two Saheehs after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with
him),

219 - «The Hour will not take place till the buttocks of the women of
Dows become restless around Thi Al-Khisla. He said and this Al-Khisla is
the tyrant of Dows whom they worshipped in Pre-Islamic times». Ibn Hib-
ban narrated after Muamar and said that now there is a closed house built
on it.

The savant Ibn Al-Qayyima (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said
concerning the story of destroying the Lat; when Thoukaif embraced Islam:
It is not allowable to keep the spots of polytheism and evil after attaining
the ability to destroy them and ruling them one day the same rule goes for
tombstones which were built on graves and which were taken as pagans wor-
shipped besides Allah (the Exalted) and those stones which people plan to

314

... and I am the seal of prophets; no prophet would come after me. and a

go to or to visit in order to get their blessings or in order to vow, it is not
allowable to keep any thing of them on the surface of the earth if one is
able to destroy and remove them. Many of those had the ranks of Lat
‘Uzza and Manat, of what serious polytheism was practised at them and
through them. Those followed the ways of life of those who came before
them, and followed their path like an arrow head resembles another’s arrow
head, and polytheism prevailed among most people because of ignorance
and obscurity of knowledge; then that which was considered known became
rejected and that which was rejected became known; the Sunna became an
innovation and an innovation became a Sunna, and knowledge was wiped
out, and estrangement of Islam became more severe, savants became less,
foolish and abusive persons become more abundant, suffering became more,
corruption appears at land and at sea because of people’s performances, yet
a going of the Muhammadan group still adhere to Truth, and still fight the
people of polytheism, and innovations till Allah (the Exalted) inherits the
earth and those who are on it; He (the Exalted) 1s the best among inheritors.

I said: If that existed in the seventh century and before, then that which
came after it, is considered as more serious in corruption as is the case.

I said: (There will exist in my nation thirty liars ail claim that he is a
prophet). Al-Kurtobi said: A number of them were mentioned in the Hon-
ourable Hadith of Huthaifa who said: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said,

250 - «There will appear in my nation twenty-seven liars and impos-
tures; among them there are four women». This was narrated by Abu Naim,
who also said, that was a strange Honourable Hadith.

Thawban’s Honourable Hadith is more correct than this.

Al-Kadi Iyyad said: He counted those who claimed prophecy since the
time of Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) till now; those known and deludedly and deviantly followed by a group
of people. And he found this number fitting their number. He who read the
books of history and dates learns about the truthfulness of this Honourable
Hadith.

Al-Hafeth said: What confirms that started appearing on the days of
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him);
Museilama the liar appeared in Al-Yamama, and Al-Aswad Al-Unsi ap-
peared in Al-Yemen. During the Caliphate of Abu Bakr: Touleiha ben Kho-
weilid appeared in Bani Asad ben Khuzeima, Sajaj in Bani Tamim, Al-

315

faction from among my nation still.adheres to truthfulness and right; victor-
ious and cannot be harmed by those who let them down till Allah (Be the
blessed and raised above) commands.».

Aswad was killed before the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) death, and Museilima was killed during the Caliphate of
Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with him); he was killed by Wahshi the
one who killed Hamza at the battle of Uhud; a man from the Ansar helped
him kill Museilima on the day of Yamama. However, Touleiha repented and
died as a Moslem at the time of Omar (May Allah be pleased with him).

It was said that verily Sajaj also repented. Then appeared Al-Mukhtar
ben Abi Oubeid Ath-Thaqafi and he overcome Al-Kufa at the beginning of
Ibn Al-Zubeir’s Caliphate. He showed gratitude for the people of the house
[Relatives of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him)] and called people looking for the killers of Al-Hussein. He followed
their traces and killed many of them who started that killing or aided the
killers. Thereupon the people loved him, then he claimed prophecy and that
verity Gibrail (May Allah’s peace be upon him) came to him. Al-Harith-
The liar is among this group of liars; he appeared during the Caliphate of
AbdulMalek ben Marwan and he was killed. Also during the Caliphate of
Bani Al-Abbas a group of those liars appeared.

It is not meant by claiming prophecy at those who claim prophecy be-
cause they can not be counted because most of them do that either because
of madness or because of depression. Rather, those who are meant here are
those who became strong and powerful and doubt which we described ap-
peared to them. Verily Allah (the Exalted) has annihilated those who be-
haved as such and there remained from them those to follow their friends’
the last one was the Anti-Christ [Dajjal].

His saying: (I am the seal of prophets- Al-Hassan said: The seal is that
with which things are sealed; he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) means that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is the
last among a series of prophets. Concerning that, Allah (the ~xalted) has
said: «Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but (he is) the Apostle
of Allah, and the seal of the prophets» (33: 40)(Rather, Issa the son of Mar-
iam would be descended soon before the Hour ruling according to the reli-
gion of Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) turning
to his Qibla when praying; he is like someone of his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) nation; rather, he is the best among this nation.
The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

316

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Interpreting the Holy Verse of An-Nisa’
The second: Interpreting the Holy Verse of Al-Maida.
The third: Interpreting the Holy Verse of Kahf.

The fourth: -This is the most important- what is the meaning of believ-
ing in sorcery and evil? Is it a belief of the heart or is it just people’s
consenting while hating it and knowing that it is invalid?

The fifth: Their saying: Verily unbelievers who are aware of their dis-
belief are more guided than the believers.

The sixth: -This is what is meant by the interpretation- verily this must
exist in this nation as was desided in the Honourable Hadith narrated
by Abi Saad.

The seventh: Declaring its happening, I mean worshipping pagans in
this nation as practised by many groups.

221 - «By the One who possesses my soul, the son of Mariam will des-
cend among you as a just ruler; he will break the cross, kill the swine and
impose tribute.»

His saying: (And a faction from among my nation still adhere to truth-
fulness and right; they are victorious and cannot be harmed by those who
let them down). Yazid ben Haroun and Ahmad ben Hanbal said, «If they
were not [The faction] the people of Honourable Hadith, then I donot know
who they are?».

Ibn Al-Mubarak, Al-Bukhary and others said, «they are the people of
Honourable Hadith». It was narrated after Ibn Al-Madani, «They are the
Arabs» and he referred to various narratives they say that are the people of
the west and he explained the west to be the Great Aquarius because the
Arabs are the ones who resorted to it for rain.

An-Nawawi said: This faction could be a group of many kinds of be-
lievers the brave, the religious legislator, the conversationalist, the inter-
preter, the one who bids people to do that which is good and forbids them
from doing that which is forbidden and abominable, the worshipper and as-
cetic; it is not necessary to find them in one country; rather, they may be
found in one region or they may spread in many regions of the earth. They
may be evacuated one after the other leaving one group of them in one
country; when they perish, Allah’s (the Exalted) command will happen. This
was narrated by Al-Hafeth.

317

The cighth: The most strange event: The appearance of those who
claim prophecy, like Al-Mukhtar even though he verbalized the two
testifications [There is no God but Allah, and Muhammad is His Holy
Messenger] and declaring that he belongs to this nation and that verily
the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
and the Holy Koran are true. All this means that he accepts at the
same time that Muhammad is the seal of al] prophets; he is believed
with all this clear contradiction. Al-Mukhtar appeared at the end of
the time of the companions and he was followed by many tribes.

The ninth: The glad tidings that Truth cannot be completely elimi-
nated as it was previously done; rather, a group of people still adheres
to it.

The tenth: The great sign that even though they are few in number
cannot be harmed by those who conflicted or contradicted with them.
The eleventh: Verily that condition stays till the Hour takes place.

Al-Kurtobi said: It includes the evidence that consensus constitutes and
evidence and proof, because if the nation unanimously agreed then that vic-
torious faction is among them.

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: (It includes the Holy
Verse: Verily even though they are not many; those who let them down or
conflict with them can not hurt them. It also includes the glad tidings that
verily truth does not completely cease to exist).

I said; Imam Ahmad used it as reference that verily giving ones opinion
concerning religous matters does not become suspended as long as this na-
tion exists.

His saying: (Till Allah (the Exalted) commands) what appears here is
that which was narrated about taking into death by sweet smelling and
agreeable wind, happening of great signs; then He (the Exalted) does not
leave but those who are evil people as was narrated by Al-Hakem that verily
Abdullah ben Omar said,

222 - «The Hour does not take place but on those evil people; they are
the most evil among Pre-Islamic times». So Oukba ben Amr told Abdullah:
«I know what you say; as for me, I heard the Holy Prophet saying, ‘A
group of my nation still fight as Allah (the Exalted) commanded: non
among those who contradicted them can harm them till the Hour takes
place and they are on that». Abdullah said: «Allah (the Exalted) would send
a wind that smells like musk and its touch is like silk; it will never leave a

318

The twelfth: The great signs they included.

One of which: Informing that verily Allah (the Exalted) showed him
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) the eastern and the western
sides of the earth and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) in-
formed about its meaning and whatever he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said in fact took place with the exclusion of the south and the
north.

Informing that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was
given the two treasures.

His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) informing that his
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) invocation for the sak, of
his nation was answered concerning the two issues.

Informing that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was
not granted the second.

Informing that the sword will be befallen and if it were befallen it will
never be raised.

Informing of the appearance of those who claim prophecy in this na-
tion.

Informing that the victorious group will stay.

person with an atom’s weight of faith in his heart without taking him into
death; then those evil people stay; the Hour then takes place on them». And
it was narrated in Moslem’s Saheeh,

223 - «The Hour wiil not take place till it is said on earth Allah, Allah
(the Exalted)».

Accordingly, that which is intended in Oukba’s Honourable Hadith and
that similar to it is the following: «Till the Hour comes and annihilates
them». Their Hour is the time of their death by the blowing of the wind
(That was mentioned above]. This was mentioned by Al-Hafeth.

Verily the savants did not agree concerning the place of the group of
people; so Ibn Battal said: Verly it is at Beit Al-Makdiss [Jerusalem] as was
narrated by At-Tabarani after Abi Umama’s Honourable Hadith,

224 - «It was said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger, where are they? He (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said at Beit Al-Madkiss». Also
Muath ben Jabal (May Allah be pleased with him) said,

225 - «They are in Ash-Sham [Damascus].» And in what At-Tabari said, is
that which shows that it should not always be either in Ash-Sham or in Beit Al-
Makdiss; rather, it might be in another place in some of the times.

319

خ > > 7 ا 1 ا 0 1 0 00 0 0 0 0 1 ل. ل 0 ل ل نل كن د في في "
واوا ة راود و و وا وار وامد د واوا هد هد هاته 455345 1 ‎١15‏ ل ل اا اا ا ااا الل ا تت ا تت 5ت ‎oe one eer ae ١55‏

I said: The reality as well as the state of the people of Ash-Sham and
the people of Beit Al-Makdiss witness for what he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said. Verily they since a very long time it is not
known that someone did this after Sheikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya (May
Allah be pleased with him) and his Companions in the seventeenth century
and the beginning of the eighth. Verily they at their times were sticking to
that which is true and just, calling people to follow it, debating about it and
going for Holy struggle because of it. There might come people similar to
them in Ash-Sham who do what they did concerning calling people to that
which is true and just, and adhering to the Sunna. Allah (the Exalted) is
Most Able to do whatever He (the Exalted) pleases.

That which supports this is that verily the people of Truth and Sunna at
the time of the four Imams and the abundance of savants that time and be-
fore it; all those were found in one place; rather, they were round in most re-
gions; in Ash-Sham there were Imams, as well as in Al-Hijaz, Egypt, Iraq and
Yemen. All of them adhered to the Truth and fought for it, joined Holy strug-
gle against the innovators, they have their own books which turned out to be
guideposts for the poeple of Sunna, and an argument against every innovator.

Thus, this group of people might be found in one place or they might
be spread; it might be in Ash-Sham or in other than Ash-Sham; verily Abi
Umama’s Honourable Hadith as well as that of Muath, do not denote limit-
ing it to Ash-Sham; rather, it denotes that it might be in Ash-Sham at some
times not at all times.

Every sentence of this Honourable Hadith is a sin among the signs of
prophecy, verily all that which the Holy Prophet informed in that Honour-
able Hadith took place as he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said,

As for the attribute «Be blessed» it is His (the Exalted) exclusively, as
He (the Exalted) has said about Himself, «Blessed be Allah, the Cherisher
and Sustainer of the worlds!» (7: 54) and, «Blessed be He in whose hands is
Dominion; and He over all things hath Power» (67: 1) Don’t you see that it
was regularly mentioned in the Holy Koran as exclusively His (the Exalted);
it cannot be used to describe any body else? It was mentioned as a linguistic
construction meaning extensiveness and exaggeration; such as «Raised
above»; so the construction of «Blessed» added to «Raised above» is that
which indicates the perfection of highness; there is nothing as high. By the
same logic «Blessed» denotes the perfection of His (the Exalted) Blessing
and greatness and their extensiveness.

320

Chapter: (What was mentioned about magic).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And they knew that the buyers of (magic)
would have no share in the happiness of the Hereafter. (2: 102).

Allah (the Exalted) has also said, «They believe in sorcery and evib». (4:

51).
Omar said, «Sorcery is magic, and evil is the Shaitan».
Chapter
His saying: (Chapter on what was mentioned about magic) and fortune-
telling.

Magic in language; It is that the cause of which is concealed and deli-
cate, that is why the Honourable Hadith said,

226 - «Verily some of the eloquence is magic».

Abu Muhammad Aj-Makdissi said in his book «Al-Kafi»: Magic is in-
cantations, spells, and charms and knots, it affects the [psyche] heart as well
as the bodies; it causes illness, kills, separates between the husband and wife.
Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said, «They learned from them the
means to sow discord between man and wife». (2: 102) And He (Be the
blessed and raised above) has said: «From the mischief of those who practice
secret arts» (113: 4) He (Be the blessed and raised above) means the witches
who in their magic use knots and exhale into those knots. Had magic not
been real, Allah (the Exalted) would not have commanded people to seek re-
fuge with Him (the Exalted) against it.

It was narrated after A’isha (May Allah be pleased with her).

227 - «Verily, the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) was magic spelled such that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) used to think that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) had done something while in fact he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) had not, and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be

321

And Jaber said, «Evils are priests upon whom the Shaitan descended in

every quarter one.

upon him) one day told her: Two angels came to me; one of them sat at my
head and the other at my feet, and he said, «What hurts this man». He said:
«He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is charmed». He said,
«And who charmed him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)?»
He said: «Loubeid ben Al-Asam by using his (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) comb and combing and this was narrated by Al-Bukh-
ary.

His saying: (And Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And they knew that the
buyers of (magic) would have ne share in the happiness of the Hereafter» (2:
102)). Ibn Abbas said (no share in) Kutada said: This is the promise to the
people of the Holy Book that verily a magician has no share in the happi-
ness of the After-life. Al-Hassan said: He does not have a religion.

This Holy verse showed that magic is proscribed; it is proscribed in all
messengers religions. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And
the magician thrives not. (No matter) where he goes.» (20: 69) And verily Ah-
mad’s companions stated that if he learns it and teaches it, then he is consid-
ered a disbeliever. It was narrated by Abdul-Razzaq after Safwan ben Salam
who said that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said:

228 - «He who learns some magic, whether little or much; Allah (the
Exalted) would terminate His promise for him» And that is already told.

They conflicted as to the following: Shall a magician be said as an un-
believer first? Some of those who came before that magician becomes an un-
believer. Concerning this person Malek, Abu Hanifa and Ahmad (May
Allah’s Mercy be upon them) said: He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) told his Companions: Unless his magic 15 by harmful medication,
inhaling smoke, or giving something to drink, this magician is not an un-
believer.

Ash-Shafi said: If someone learns magic, we would say to him: Describe
your magic for us; if he describes that which requires unbelief such as the
people of Babel believed in like currying favour with the seven planets and
believing that they can do what people ask them to do then he is an unbelie-
ver, even though it doesnot by necessity require unbelief, thus if he believed
that it 15 allowable, then he would become an unbeliever.

Venly Allah (the Exalted) has called it disbelief when He (the Exalted)
322

His saying: (Jaber said) He is Ibn Abdullah ben Haram Al]-Ansari.

said: «We are only for trial; so do not blaspheme». (2: 102) and, «The blasphe-
mers were, not Solomon, but the evil ones». (2: 102) Ibn Abbas said concern-
ing that: (We are only for trial, so do not blaspheme) that is verily learned
the difference between good and evil, belief and disbelief; so they knew that
verily magic is considered disbelief.

His saying: (And Allah (the Exalted) has said: «They believe in sorcery
and evil» (4: 51). Discussing this was mentioned in the Chapter that came be-
fore. It says that magic is one aspect of sorcery. This was said by the writer
(May Allah’s Mercy be upon him). :

His saying: (Omar (May Allah be pleased with him) said; sorcery is ma-
gic and evil is the Shaitan). This was narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem and
others.

His saying: (Jaber said: Evils are priests upon whom the Shaitan ‘used
to descend on in every quarter). This was narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem after
Wahab ben Manbah who said, «I asked Jaber ben Abdullah about evils to
which they resorted to judge among them; he said: Verily, there is one
among Juhaina, one among Aslam, one among Hilal and among every tribe
there is one; they are priests upon whom the Shaitans used to descend».

His saying: (Evils are priests- He meant that priests are from among
evils.

His saying: (The Shaitan used to descend upon them). He meant the
common noun Shaitan rather than the particular Shaitan who is Iblis;
rather, the Shaitans descended upon them addressed them and told them
what they overheard; they used to tell the truth once and tell along with it a
hundred lies.

His saying: (One in every quarter) Quarters here mean tribes; that is to
say in every tribe there was a priest to whom they resorted to judge among
them and they sued to ask him about the unseen. That was the case before
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was sent,
so Allah (the Exalted) abolished that by the Islam and the sky was guarded
by many shooting stars.

His saying: (It was narrted after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased
with him) who said that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said,

229 - «Avoid the seven great sins. They said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), what are they? He (May

323

They said, 0 Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) what are they? He (May Allah’s blessings, and peace be upon
him) said, ‘Polyetheism, magic, killing those whom Allah (the Exalted) pro-
scribed to kill...

Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Polytheism, magic, killing the
soul that Allah (the Exalted) forbade to kill but by right, usury, taking the
money of an orphan, escaping from the Holy struggle, and defaming
immaculate, inattentive believing women.»

The same thing was narrated by the writer but without mentioning any
reference. Verily it was narrated by Al-Bukhary and Moslim.

His saying: (Avoid) that is to say do not approach, that is more elo-
quent than saying leave or drop because forbidding offering was already in-
formed, that is similar to His saying: «Come not night to shameful deeds,
whether open or secret]. (6: 151).

His saying: (Geat sins) that is to say dangers leading to death. They
were called great sins because it would wipe out those who practise them in
the present life because of the consequence punishment and the torture in
the After-life.

And in Tbn Omar’s Honourble Hadith as was discussed by Al-Bukhary
in his «Al-Adab Al-Mufrad» and by At-Tabari in his «At-Tafsir» and by
Abdu-Razzak who said:

230 - «Great sins are nine- he mentioned the seven mentioned above-
and added: Atheism concerning that which is inviolable and being ungrateful
to ones parents.» Ibn Hatem narrated after Ali, he said, «Great sins- He
mentioned the seven- but the property of an orphan and he added being un-
grateful to ones parents, assimilating oneself to the Arabs after immigration,
parting with the majority of Moslems, and breaking deals».

Al-Hafeth said: I need an answer to explain the wisdom behind limiting
great sins to seven.

It 15 answered: Verily the concept of number can not be taken as an evi-
dence and it is weak, or it is verily more informing of that which in cited.
Then it is more informing concerning that which is added, thus one ought
accept that which is added, or verily limiting is relative to the rank or posi-
tion with respect to the one asking.

At-Tabarani and Ismail Al-Kadi narrated after Ibn Abbas that it was
said to him, «The seven great sins». He said, «They are more than seven
and seven». And in another narration, «They are closer to seventy». And in

324

١ but by right, usury, taking the money of an orphan, escaping from the

Holy struggle, and defaming immaculate, inattentive believing women».

another narration «to seven hundred».

His saying: (He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said
polytheism) that is to join in a partner with Allah (the Exalted) invoking
him, pleeding him and fearing him as he should fear Allah (the Exalted). He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) started by this because it is
the greatest sin by which Allah (the Exalted) was disobeyed, as was men-
tioned in the two Saheehs after Ibn Masoud.

231 - «I asked the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) which is according to Allah the greatest sin? He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said: To join in a partner with Allah (the
Exalted) while He is the One who created you... till the end of the
Honourable Hadith». Also, At-Tirmithi narrated referring to Safwan ben
Assal who said: «A Jew told his friend: Take us to this prophet, so he told
his friend, do not say prophet, verily if he had heard you, he would have
had four eyes. So they went to Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) and asked him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) about nine Holy Verses. Thereupon the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:

232 - Do not join anything with Allah (the Exalted) in worship, do not
steal, do not commit adultery, do not kill the soul that Allah (the Exalted)
proscribed but by right, do not take an innocent person to a ruler who
would kill him, do not use magic, do not take usury, do not defame an
immaculate women, do not escape at the Holy struggle, and especially you
the Jews do not attack on the Sabbeth [Saturday]. So they kissed his (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) hands and face and said, we testify
that verily you are a Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him)... till the end of the Honourable Hadith» Hasan said that it is
righteous. |

His saying: (Magic) Its meaning has already been discussed. This is how
the Honourable Hadith fits the interpretation.

His saying: (Killing the soul that Allah (the Exalted) proscribed to kill)
that is to say forbidden to kill. It is the soul of infallible Moslem.

His saying: (But by right- that is to say you cannot kill that soul unless
it does what requires killing it, such as committing polytheism, [killing an-
other] a soul for the soul, the one who commits adultery after marriage, also
killing the ally, as was mentioned in the Honourable Hadith.

325

اا ا ا ا ااا ا ا يي ا ا ااا ا اا اا ااا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا |

233 - «He who killed an ally will riever smell the scent of the Garden».

The savants conflicted concerning the one who intentionally killed a be-
liever; is his repentence accepted or not? Ibn Abbas, Abu Huraira, and
others said that his repentance is not acceptable, taking Allah’s (the Exalted)
Holy Verse as reference, «If a man kills a believer intentionally, his recom-
pense is Hell, te abide there in (For ever)». (4: 93) And Ibn Abbas said,

234 - «This Holy Verse descended and it was the last to descend,
therefore no other Holy Verse invalidated it». And in another narration, «It
descended among those Holy Verses that descended last; none invalidated it
till Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
died and no revelation descended after that». And citations by Imam
Ahmad, An-Nasai’ and Ibn Al-Munthir after Mouawiya who said that he
heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) saying:

235 - «Allah (the Exalted) may forgive every sin but that of the man dy-
ing as a polytheist or intentionally killing a believer.»

Many among the people of this nation, those who came before and
those who came after said that verily the killer can repent between him and
Allah (the Exalted). If he repents and turns to Allah (the Exalted) and did
that which is good and righteous Allah would reward him. Concerning that
connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Those who invoke not, with Allah,
any other god, nor slay such life as Allah has made sacred, except for just
cause, nor commit fornication; - and any that does this (not only) meets
punishment (But the penalty on the Day of Judgment will be doubled to him,
and he will dwell therein in ignominy, -Unless he repents, believe, and works
righteous deeds.... till the end of the Holy verse». (25: 68-71).

His saying: (He who intentionally kills a believer) Abu Huraira and
others said: «That is his penalty if He (the Exalted) punishes him».

And it was narrated after Ibn Abbas that which agrees with what most
authorities say, thus Abed ben Houmeid and An-Nahhas narrated after Said
ben Oubadah that verily Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) used
to say: (He who kills a believer will be given the chance to turn to Allah
(the Exalted) for repentance). The same was said by Omar’s son (May Allah
be pleased with them). It was narrated «Verily he will be punished in Hell
Fire if He (the Exalted) punisheas him».

His saying: (Taking usury) that is to say taking 1t by whatsoever means,
as Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Those who devour usury will not stand ex-

326

It was narrated after Jundub, «The punishment of a magician is killing
by sword». This was narrated by At-Tirmithi and he said: The truth is sus-
pended.

cept as one stands whom the evil one by his touch hath driven to madness.
That is because they say: ‘Trade is like usury], But Allah hath permitted
trade... till the end of the Holy verse» (2: 275-280). Ibn Dakeek Al-Eid said:
It is subject to evil. We see refuge with Allah (the Exalted) from that.

His saying: (Eating the property of the orphan) He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) means intruding upon his money, he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) used eating because it is the most
general aspects of benefit, as Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Those who
unjustly eat up the property of orphans, eat up a Fire into their own bodies:
they will soon be enduring a blazing fire.» (4: 10).

His saying: (Escaping on the day of Holy struggle) that is to say turn-
ing away from unbelievers during battles; rather, this behavior is considered
a great sin if he escaped to another group of people or if he were not in-
clined to fight, as what was said in the Holy Verse.

His saying: (Defaming inattentive immaculate believing women) those
protected from adultery or those who guard their pudendums; that which is
meant by free women 15 chastice, that which is meant by accusing; this is ac-
cusing them of committing adultery or sodomy. Inattentive he means not
aware or not knowing obscenity or what was said about them. Thus they
are innocent because he who is unaware is innocent from what he has been
accused of. By believers he means believers in Allah (the Exalted) guarding
against defaming unbelieving women.

His saying: (It was narrated after Jundub,

236 - «The punishment of the magician is killing him by the sword.»
This was narrated by At-Tirmithi and he said, the truth is suspended).

His saying: (It was narrated after Jundub) He is Thaher Sani’ At-Tabar-
ani, it was mentioned in Kabir that he is Jundob ben Abdullah AlI-Bijali,
not Jundub Al-Kheir Al-Azdi the killer of the magician; it was narrated in
the interpretation of Jundub AI-Bijli after Khaled Al-Abed after Al-Hasan
after Jundub after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) Khaled Al-Abed is weak. Al-Hafeth said and the truth is that it
is someone else. It was also narrated by Ibn Kani and Al-Hasan ben Sufyan
in two different versions after Al-Hasan after Jundub Al-Kheir, «Verily he
went to a magician and hit him by the sword till he died. Then he said, ‘I

327

It was narrated in Al-Bukhary’s Saheeh after Bajahah ben Abdah that,

Omar ben Al-Khattab wrote: Verily one should kill every magician and
every witch. He said so we killed three witches.

It was also true that Hafsa (May Allah be pleased with her) ordered
killing a servant who bewitched her. And she was killed. The same was nar-
rated truly after Jundob.

heard Allah’s Holy Messenger saying... and he mentioned the Honourable
Hadith». Jundub Al-Kheir is Jundub ben Kaab, and it was said: Jundub ben
Zuhair, and it was said; they are one person as was said by Ibn Hibban:
Abu Abdullah Al-Azdi Al-Ghamidi who is one of the Companions of the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) who narrated
after Ibn Al-Sakan from Buraida’s Honourable Hadith that verily the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: «He should be
hit once, so as if the whole nation hit him.»

His saying: (Punishment of the magician is killing him by the sword)
and it was narrated in two ways the first was already mentioned, the second
is (One blow by the sword and both are Saheeh).

Malek, Ahmad, and Abu Hanifa adopted this Honourable Hadith and
said: «The magician should be killed». This was also narrated after Omar,
Othman, Ibn Omar, Hafsa, Jundob ben Abdullah, Jundob ben Kaab, Kais
ben Saad and Omar ben Abdul-Aziz; however, Ash-Shafi did not fancy kill-
ing just because of magic. Yet verily if he performs in his magic that which
requires disbelief, the same was said and believed by Ibn Al-Munthir who
narrated after Ahmad. The first has priority over the second concerning nar-
rating after Omar, and the people performed according to it during the Cali-
phate of Omar without any rejector.

He said (It was mentioned in Al-Bukhary’s Saheeh after Bijalah ben
Abdah who said:

237 - Omar ben Al-Khattab wrote verily you should kill every magician
and every witch. He said so we killed three witches).

This was narrated by Al-Bukhary as was said by the writer (May
Allah’s Mercy be upon him); however, he did not mention killing the
witches.

His saying: (After Bijahah) He is Ibn Abadah AI-Anbari; he is a trust-
worthy man from Basra.

His saying: (Omar ben Al-Khattab wrote to us: Verily you should kill
every magician and every witch). It appears that they are killed without re-
pentance. The same thing was known to be narrated after Ahmad and Mal-

328

Ahmad said: After three of the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) companions.

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: The interpretation of the Holy Verse of Al-Baqara.
The second: The interpretation of the Holy Verse of An-Nisa’.

The third: Interpreting sorcery and evil and explaining the difference
between them.

The fourth: Verily evil may be among the Jinns or may be among
mankind.

The fifth: Knowing the seven great sins that are especially forbidden.
The sixth: Verily a magician becomes a disbeliever.
The seventh: Verily he is killed without being asked for repentance.

The eighth: The existence of this at the time of Omar; so how is it
after him?

ek because knowing magic cannot be removed by repentance. And after Ah-
mad it is mentioned he is asked to repent; if he repents, his repentance
would be accepted. This was said by Ash-Shafi because his sin does not go
beyond polytheism, and even a polytheist is asked to repent and his repen-
tance is accepted that is why the Pharaoh’s magicians and their repentance
and belief were accepted.

His saying (It was truly narrated after Hafsa that she ordered the kill-
ing of a servant of hers that bewitched her).

This was narrated by Malek in «Al-Muwatta’».

Hafsa is the mother of all believers, the daughter of Omar ben Al-Khat-
tab. The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) mar-
ried her after Khuneis ben Huthafa and she died in the year 45 A.H.

His saying: (The same thing was narrated after Jundob). The writer in-
dicated by this to his killing the magician as was narrated by Al-Bukhary in
the history of Abi Othman An-Nahdi that he wrote: «There was at Al-Wa-
lid’s a man who plays; he slayed a man and showed us his head and we
were astonished, then he returned his head and Jundob Al-Azdi came and
killed him». This was narrated by Al-Baihaky in the «Dalail» at length. It
was also narrated as, «So al-Walid ordered punishing him and he was impri-
soned. And he mentioned the whole story; it has many versions.

329

ا يي ا ا ا ل ا ا ا ا ا ا ل ا ل ا ااال ا ‎a‏

His saying: (Ahmad said after three of the Holy Prophet’s Compa-
nions). Ahmad is Imam Ibn Muhammad ben Hanbal.

His saying: (After three) that is to say it is proper to kill a magician as
was confirmed by three; or killing a magician was said by three of the Holy
Prophet’s Companions, that is to say Omar, Hafsa, and Jundob. And Allah
(the Exalted) knows best.

330

Chapter: (Showing some kind of magic)

Ahmad said: We were told by Muhammad ben Jaafar that Awf told
them after Hayyan ben Al-Ala’ that Katan ben Kubaisa told them after his
father that he heard the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) saying, «Verily all types of sorcery».

Awf said: Is driving away birds, and is drawing lines on earth.

And sorcery: Al-Hasan said «The tinkling of the Shaitan». Its references
are good.

Chapter

His saying: Chapter (showing some kind of magic).

I said: The interpreter (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) mentioned
here some aspect of usual supernatural acts and charismas of Holymen and
he mentioned what many people were deceived by those Shaitanic states that
deceived many commoners and ignorant people. They thought that it is a
sign that the one whom it appeared through his hands is among those sup-
ported by the Shaitan rather than those supported by the Most Merciful.
Then he said: And Sheikh Al-Islam has a book (Differentiating between the
supporters of the Shaitan and the supporters of the Most Merciful).

He said (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him): (Ahmad said: We were told
by Muhammad ben Jaafar, that Awf told them after Hayyan ben Al-Ala’
that Katan ben Kubaisa told them after his father that he verily heard the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying,

238 - «Abhorrence, getting the wind of, and foreboding are considered
types of sorcery».

Muhammad ben Jaafar is the one known as Ghandar al-Hathli Al-Bas-
ri, a famous and a trustworthy man. He died in the year 206 A.H.

Awf is son of Abi Jamila Al-Abadi Al-Basri who is better known as
Awf Al-Arabi. He 15 trustworthy; he died in the year 47 or 46 A.H. He was
86 years old then.

331

It was narrated after Dawud, An-Nisai’ and Ibn Hibban who said in his
Saheeh referred by him.

It was narrated from Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) that
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said, «He who acquired knowledge from the stars then had learned a branch
of magic, the more he learns the greater is his» the reference 1s righteous.

And Katan is Abu Sahl Al-Basri’ he is a trustworthy.

His saying: (After his father) who is Kubaisa Ibn Mukhariq Abu
Abdullah Al-Hilali. He is a famous Companion of the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him. He resided at Al-Basra.

His saying: (A type of sorcery) that is to say magic. Al-Kadi said: Ori-
ginally sorcery is failure that carries no good or benefit, then this term was
applied to whatever 15 worshipped besides Allah (the Exalted) and to call of
magician or magic.

His saying: (Al-Hasan said: Tinkling of the Shaitan) I said: Ibrahim ben
Muhammad ben Mufleh mentioned in the interpretation of Baqyy ben
Makhlad that verily [blis tinkled four times: Once when he was cursed; once
when he was descended, once when Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) was born and once when the opening
chapter of the Holy Koran was descended. Said ben Jubeir said: When
Allah (the Exalted) cursed Iblis his image changed and he wouldnot
resemble angels any more, and he tinkled once; thus each tinkling among
these in the present life stays till the Day of Judgment. This was narrated by
Ibn Abi Hatem. And it was narrated after Said ben Jubeir after Ibn Abbas.
He said, When Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) conquered Mecca Iblis tinkled once that made his soldiers gather
around him. This was narrated by Al-Hafeth Ad-Diya in «Al-Mukhtara»
: tinkling is a sound and thus Al-Hasan’s (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
saying is made clear,

His saying: (It was narrated after Dawud and Abi Hibban in his Sa-
heeh: It is his reference) yet he did not mention the interpretation that was
said by Awf. It was narrated by Abu Dawud in the above mentioned inter-
pretation without mentioning that which was said by Al-Hasan.

His saying: (It was narrated after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased
with them). He said that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said:

332

And An-Nasai’ narrated after Abi Huraira, «He who ties a knot and
blows in it, has practised magic; he who practised magic has committed
polytheism; he who hangs something [like an amulet] he would be assigned
to him on the Day of Judgment».

239 - «He who acquired knowledge from the branch stars, then he had
learned a branch of magic, the more he learns the greater is his sin». This
was narrated by Abu Dawud and his reference is Saheeh). Also it was con-
sidered as Saheeh by An-Nawawi and Ath-Thahabi. It was narrated by Ah-
mad and Ibn Mayah.

His saying: (He who acquired) Abu As-Saadat said: You acquire knowl-
edge when you learn it.

His saying: (A branch) that is to say learn certain knowledge from a
group of stars. A branch means a group. The Honourable Hadith makes the
meaning of the term «Branch» clearer.

240 - «Shyness is a branch of faith) that is to say it is a part of it.

His saying: (He had learned a branch of magic) that is magic the learn-
ing of which is proscribed.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) declared that the
science of stars is considered an aspect of magic, and Allah (the Exalted) has
said, «And the magician thrives not, (No matter) where we goes.» (20: 69).

His saying: (The more he learns the greater is his sin) that is to say the
more he acquires from the science of the stars the greater is his sin through
his acquisition; verily that which he believes about stars concerning their ef-
fect is void and invalid, as well the effect of magic is void and invalid.

His saying: (It was narrated by An-Nasai’ after Abi Huraira (May
Allah be pleased with him).

241 - «He who ties a knot and blows in it has practised magic; he who
practised magic has committed polytheism; he who hangs [around his neck
or arm] anything, it will be assigned to him on the Day of Judgment»). This
is an Honourable Hadith that was mentioned by the writer after Abi Hur-
aira’s Honourable Hadith that was referred to An-Nasai’. Verily it was nar-
rated by An-Nasai’ and it was improved by Ibn Muflih.

His saying: (It was narrated by An-Nasai’). He was an Imam the mem-
orizer [of the Holy Koran and Honourable Hadith] Ahmad ben Shouaib,
the writer’of «As-Sunan» and other books. He narrated after Muhammad
ben Al-Muthainna, Ibn Bashar, Kuteiba and Khalk. And to him all people

333

And it was narrated after Ibn Masoud that verily Allah’s Holy Messen-
ger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Truly, shall I in-

form you about the backbiting?.

referred concerning the causes of Honourable Hadith. He died in the year
303 A.H. He was 88 year when he (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) died.

His saying: (He who ties a knot and blows in it has practised magic).
Let it be known that if magicians want to practise magic, they would tie
threads and blow at every knot till the magic they are aiming at takes place.
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «From the mischief of those who practice secret
arts». (113: 4). He (the Exalted) means witches who practise that, and blow-
ing in fact is blowing accompanied by saliva not carrying along with it any
spittle. Such act is practised by the magician. Thereupon if his soul adapted
to that which is mischievous and evil directed at that witched or conjured
and he asks to accomiplish that magic for the help of evil spirits, he would
blow in that knot blowing accompanied by saliva. So from an evil spirit
there comes a breath mixed with evil and harm comparable with evil and
harm comparable with saliva mixed with that, and he and the evil spirit
might help each other to harm the conjured person so he would harm him
by Allah’s determinstic permission; rather than by His religious permission.
This was said by Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

His saying: (He who practised magic has committed polytheism). This is
declaring that a magician is a polytheist, since magic can not take place
without joining in partners with Allah (the Exalted) as was told by Al-Ha-
feth after some people.

His saying: (And he who hangs a thing [Hangs a charm or an amulet
around his neck, arm or body], it will be assigned to him on the Day of
Judgment). That is to say he whose heart gets attached to something, such
that he depends on it and pleeds it, Allah (the Exalted) will assign him to
that thing [on the Day of Judgment]. Thus he who clings to his God, Lord,
Master and Supporter, the Lord and Possessor of every thing Allah (the Ex-
alted) would suffice, protect and support him. So how good is the Lord;
How good is the supporter. Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Is not Allah en-
ough for His servant?» (39: 36). And he who clings to the magician and Shai-
tans and others who are created, Allah (the Exalted) will assign him to all
that to which he clinged and attached to, so he perishes. He who contem-
plates about that as far as the case of creatures is, and looked thouroughly,
he saw that with his eyes, and this is among that which is agreed upon by

334

ع ح ع ع ع ل ا اح م اال ا ا ا الا لي لا ا ا ا ا ا ا اا ا ا ا ا يي ا ا ا ا ا ا اا ا اي ا ا اي ل لي 3

all. And Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

He said: (It was narrated after Ibn Masoud (May Allah be pleased with
him): That verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be wpyn dim) said,

242 - «Shall I inform you what the back- biting is? It is tattling; that is
gossip among people». It was narrated by Moslim.

His saying: (Truly shall I inform you) tell you (back-biting) Abu As-
Saadat said: That is how it is narrated in the books of Honourable Hadith.

Ibn Abdel-Barr narrated after Yahya ben Abi Kathir who said, «He
who is a liar and tattler ruins in one hour what the magician can not ruin in
one year». Abu Al-Khattab said in «Ouyoun Al-Masa-il», fabricating lies
and causing trouble among people are aspects of magic. He said in «Al-
Fourou’» he means that by fabricating and performing such man means to
harm others through tricks and craftiness and that is more similar to magic.
However, it is said: Verily a magician commits disbelief because of the char-
acteristics of magic per se; that is a special issue that has a special evidence;
such [person is not a magician; Further, his act does its effects so he gives
his judgment but concerning that which is particular for disbelief and reject-
ing repentance.

Through ‘this it is shown that the Honourable Hadith fits the interpreta-
tion. It indicates that tattling is proscribed. It is unanimously agreed on. Ibn
Hazm (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: They agreed on proscribing
slander and tattling in other required and necessary advice. It also includes
that it is among major sins.

His saying: (That is gossip among people). Abu As-Saadat said: That is
to say talking much and causing conflict and quarrel among people, and be-
cause of it the following Honourable Hadith was said.

He said: (And they narrated after Omar’s son that verily Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

243 - «Verily some of the eloquence is magic») Eloquence, good style,
and fluencey. Sa’sa ben Sowhan said, «Allah’s Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said the truth, verily a man might be mis-
taken yet he is more fluent at mentioning evidence that the other person
who has right. Thereupon he who charms the people has right, he charms
them by his eloquence and good style which results in eliminating the truth».
Ibn Abdel-Barr said that it was explained by a group of people and dis-
praised because magic is dispraised, and most people of knowledge and peo-

335

It is tattling: That is gossip among people.» It was narrated by Moslem.

They narrated after Omar’s son (May Allah be pleased with them) that
verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said, «Verily some eloquence is magic».

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Verily as aspects of sorcery.
The second: Interpretation
The third: Verily the science of stars is an aspect of magic.

The fourth: Knotting with blowing [accompanied by saliva only] is
considered an aspect of magic.

The fifth: Verily tattling is considered an aspect of magic.

The sixth: Some of the magic has to do with eloquence.

ple of literature held the view that it is to be praised because Allah (the Ex-
alted) praised good style. He said, and Omar ben Abdul-Aziz told a man
who asked him about a need; he had a good style in asking, so he liked
what the man said. He said: «This by Allah (the Exalted) is allowable ma-
gic». The first is more correct and proper and that which is intended by
good style is that good style, concealing the truth hiding the reality from the
listener.

His saying: (Verily some aspects of eloquence is magic) that is considered
a metaphor, because good style has the function of magic. Thus it renders
that which is right and truthful in the form of that which is void and invalid,
and that which is void and invalid in the form of that which is right and
truthful, so it wins over the hearts of the ignorant till they accept that which
is invalid and not right and reject that which is righteous and truthful. We
ask Allah (the Exalted) to keep us consistent and straight following guidance.

As for good style which makes truth clear and proves it; good style
which rejects that which is void and invalid and makes it obvious and clear.
Such good style is praised. Such is the case of the messengers and their fol-
lowers that is why their ranks have been raised concerning virtues and their
benefactions have become greater:

In general, good style is not praised unless it does not go beyond over
elaboration, exaggeration and concealing that which is right and truthful
while ameliorating that which is void and invalid. So if it goes beyond that,
it would be dispraised. All Hounorable Hadiths point at that, such as the

336

ماه م هج *

ا ا ا ا ا

337

Chapter: (What was mentioned concerning priests and those

similar to them)

Moslem narrated in his Saheeh of some wives of the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) that he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said, «He who...

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter on what was mentioned concerning priest and
those similar to them).

«The priest» is the one who takes after the over hearer: before Allah (the
Exalted) sent the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) they were plenty. That is so because Allah (the Exalted) guarded the sky
by shooting stars. Most of that which happens to this nation is what the Jinns
tell to their supporters among mankind about things unseen concerning that
which happens on earth, so the ignorant thinks that it is a charisma or revela-
tion. Many people have been deluded by that thinking, the one informing
them such news after the Jinns a holy man supported by Allah (the Exalted)
while he is loyal and is supported by the Shaitan. Concerning that Allah (the
Exalted) has said: «One day will He gather them all together, (and say): ‘O ye
assembly of Jinns! Much (told) did ye take of men]. Their friends amongst
men will say: ‘Our Lord! We made profit from each other: But (alas!) We
reached our term-which thou hast appoint for us». He will say, ‘The fire be
your dwelling place: You will dwell there in forever, except as Allah willeth’.
For thy Lord is full of wisdom and knowledge». (6: 128).

His saying: (It was narrated by Moslim in his Saheeh after some of the
wives of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
that he said: «He who went to a fortune-teller and asked him about a cer-
tain matter then he believes in him. No prayer will be accepted from him for

forty days»).
338

... goes to a fortune-teller and asks him about a certain matter then he be-
lieved in him, no prayer will be accepted from him for forty days».

It was narrated after Abi Huraira who narrated after the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) that he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said, «He who came to a priest and believed
in what he said has disbelieved in what was sent down on Muhammad (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)» This was narrated by Abu Da-
wud .

The four and Al-Hakem and it was said who narrated after the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), «He who goes to a
priest or a fortune-teller and believes in what he said, then he verily disbe-
lieved in what was sent down on Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him)».

His saying: (It was narrated after some of the wives of the Holy Pro-
phyet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)). She was Hafsa. This
was mentioned by Abu Masoud Ath-Thagafi because he mentioned this
Honourable Hadith in «al-Atraf» in the references.

His saying: (He who came to a fortune-teller). Defining a fortune-teller
will be discussed later if Allah (the Exalted) wishes. What is apparent from
that Honourable Hadith is that verily warning is a result of asking him,
whether he believed in him or doubted his knowledge. Since verily in some
of the narrations in the Saheeh it was said: «He who went to a fortune-teller
and asks him about something, no prayer will be accepted from him for for-
ty nights».

His saying: (No prayer will be accepted from him) 11 that was the case
of the one asking, so how is the case of the one asked? An-Nawawi and
others said: It means that his prayer will not have recompensed, even
though it was subdivided because this duty has become invalid. This inter-
pretation concerning this Honourable Hadith is inevitable, verily the savants
agreed that he who comes to a fortune-teller does not have to repeat the
prayers of forty nights.

The Honourable Hadith also had forbidden the priest or any one simi-
lar to him to do that. Al-Kurtobi said: He who is able to do that such as a
treasurer or a teller or others, must supervise those merchants or dealers
who practise that and deny it seriously; deny going to them; he should not
be deluded by their truthfulness in some matters, nor by the muititude of
people that go to them especially those who are well knowlegeable, since ve-

339

Abi Ya’la narrated with a good reference after Ibn Masoud a similar
Honourable Hadith.

It was narrated after Imran ben Houssein, [He who foresees an evil
omen] or foretold or...

tily they are not deep rooted in knowledge; rather, they are considered to be
ignorant because they commit that against which they were warned.

He said: (It was narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with
him) who narrated after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

246 - «He who went to a priest and believed in what he said, then he
disbelieved in what was sent down on Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him).» This was narrated by Abu Dawud).

247 - And in Abu Dawud’s narration, «or went to a woman- Musaddad
said: His woman during her menses or went to a woman. Musaddad said:
Sodomized his woman- then this man is free from what was sent down on
Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). The one who
told this Honourable Hadith from the Sunnan deleted this sentence and lim-
ited himself to that which suited the interpretation.

He said: The four and Al-Hakem- (and it was righteous narrated after
the Holy prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him): He who
goes to a priest or a fortune-teller and believes in what he says, then he dis-
believed in what was sent down on Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him).

That is how the writer copied the name of the narrator. This was narra-
tedd by Ahmad, Al-Bayhaki and Al-Hakem after Abi Huraira.

His saying: (He who goes to a priest). Some said: There is no contradic-
tion between this and the Honourable Hadith saying, «He who goes toa
fortune-teller and asks him about a certain matter, no prayer is acceptable
by him for forty nights». This is according to those who say that such an
act 1s considered a sort of disbelief. Accordingly he who adheres to the exact
apparent terms of the Honourable Hadith, asks about the point behind pair-
ing between those two Honourable Hadiths. That which appears from the
Honourable Hadith is that this man is considered a disbeliever when he be-
lieved him in whatsoever. Most priests used to take after the Shaitans before
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

His saying: (Then he disbelieved in what was sent down on Muhammad
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)). Al-Kurtobi said: What is

340

... had somebody fortelling for him, or used magic or had someone use ma-
vic for him, and he who goes to a priest and believes in what he said then

he disbelieved in what: was sent down on Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him).» It was narrated by Al-Bazzaz with good reference.

It was also narrated by At-Tabarani in «Al-Awsat» with good reference
after Ibn Abbas.

Al-Baghawi said: A fortune-teller is the one who claims knowing things
through signs or introductions which help know that which was stolen or
the place of that which was lost and the like.

meant by sent down are the Holy Koran and the Sunna. These are the most
two famous narratives after Ahmad (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

He said: (It was narrated after Abi Ya‘la with good reference after Ibn
Masoud a similar Honourable Hadith).

Abu Ya’la is Ahmad ben Ali ben Al-Muthama Al-Mousah, the Imam
and writer of many books such as «Al-Musnad» and others. He narrated
after Yahya ben Mouin, Abi Khaithama, Abi Bakr ben Abi Shaiba and
Khalaq. He was are of the memorizer Imams. He died in the year 307 A.H.
This Honourable Hadith was also narrated by Al-Bazzar who said,

248 - «He who goes to a priest or a magician and believes in what he
said: Then he disbelieved in what was sent down on Muhammad (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him.» It also shows that the priest and
the magician are disbelievers because they claim to know the unseen and
that is disbelief, and he who believes in them believes in what they said and,
accepts that and that is also disbelief.

He said: (It was narrated after Imran ben Hussein (May Allah be
pleased with him) that,

249 - «He who sees an evil omen [in order to forsee an evil omen] or
foretells, or uses magic or has someone using magic for him. He who goes
to a priest and believes in what he says, he disbelieved in what was sent
down on Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). It
was narrated by Al-Bazzar with good reference. It was also narrated by At-
Tabarani with good reference after Ibn Abbas; however, he did not say, «He
who came». Till the end).

His saying: (Is not from us- This includes strict warning that shows that
such matters are considered among major sins and it was mentioned before
that priesthood, and magic are considered disbelief.

His saying: (He who sees an evil omen). The same logic goes for «or

341

And it was said: He is a priest and the priest is the one who tells about
that which is unseen in the future. And it was said: He is the one who tells
what is in one’s mind.

Abu Al-Abbas, Ibn Taymiyya said: A fortune-teller is one of the names
of a priest, soothsayer, and the like who talk about knowing matters using
these ways.

foretells or has somebody foretelling for him». He is like the one who goes
to the priest, believes and follows him, the same logic also goes to the one
for whom magic was performed.

Thus every one who learns these matters from those who practise them
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
would clear himself (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) from
him because they constitute polytheism [in order to see an evil omen] or dis-
believe such as priesthood and magic; thus he who accepts that and sticks to
it, is considered as a doer because he accepts that which is void and invalid
and follows.

His saying: (It was narrated by Al-Bazzar). He is Ahmad ben Amr ben
Abed el-Khaliq; Abu Bakr Al-Bazzar Al-Basri the writer of «al-Musnad AI-
Kabir». He narrated after Ibn Bashir, Ibn Al-Muthri and Khaliq. He died in
the year 292 A.H.

His saying: (Al-Baghawi said... till the end) Al-Baghawi is Al-Hussein
ben Masoud AI-Farra’ Ash-Shafi the writer of «At-Tasanif» and the author-

ity of the people of Khurasan. He was trustworthy, a religious legislator and
an ascetic. He died in the month of Shawwal in the year 516 A.H.

His saying: (The fortune-teller is that who claims knowing matters) lit-
erally: A fortune-teller is the one who tells about events such as the theft,
the theif, the lost object and its place.

Sheikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said:
Verily a fortune-teller is a name of the priest or the soothsayer and the like
such as the guesser who claims knowing that which is unseen or claims the
ability to reveal things.

He also said: And the soothsayer is also a term used to describe a for-
tune-teller; some even consider that it is the meaning of fortune-teller.

He also said: The term soothsayer is one of the names of the priest as
considered by Al-Khatabi and other savants. This was narrated also after
the Arabs while others consider it a sort of priest and even much worse than
him.

342

- خ + خ خ + خ > خخ ح خخ خ حي ا ا ا 0 1 0 0 00 0 0 0 0 ل ل ل ل د دس دن د دس د د نه د سس « هن د : ف د « : « « < « : « « « « « « < | « « « « « « " : <« : : < 7 ><

Imam Ahmad said: Fortune telling is a sort of magic; however, magic is
more evil.

Abu As-Saadat said: A fortune-teller is a soothsayer and a guesser who
claims knowing the unseen; such knowledge is exclusively Allah’s (the Ex-
alted).

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: He who was fa-
mous of being good at predicting was called a «A-if» that 1s to say a person
who sees an evil omen in flying birds or a fortune-teller.

What is intended here is the following: Knowing that he who claims
knowing something of the unseen can be classified as a priest, or he shares
with him the name morally; thus he follows him morally. That is saying cor-
rectly something about unseen matters sometimes takes places through reve-
lation and some of it is through Shaitans or through good omen, flying
birds, throwing stones, drawing lines on earth, augury, priesthood, magic or
the like from the arts of Pre-Islamic times.

By Pre-Islamic times we mean all those who are not followers of mes-
sengers (May Allah’s peace be upon them) such as philosphers, priests, and
astrologists. Pre-Islamic times of the Arabs existed before the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was sent, and the one who
called for practises all such matters is called a priest, a fortune-teller or
something that carries the name meaning; thus he who goes to them and be-
lieves in what they say, is meant by this warning. Many people inherited and
learned such knowledge from them and thus they claimed to know that
which is unseen exclusively belongs to Allah (the Exalted) . They claimed
that they are holymen and that was their charisma.

There is no doubt that he who claims being a holyman, and used his in-
formation by some of that which is unseen, then he is among those loyal to
the Shaitan not among those loyal to the Merciful verily charisma is some-
thing that Allah (the Exalted) makes happen through His (the Exalted) be-
lieving and pious servant, either through invocation or through good deeds
not created by the holy man nor is he able to perform them, that is in con-
tradistinction with the person who claims that he is a holyman and tells peo-
ple: Verily I know that which is unseen; since verily all such matters may
take place due to the causes mentioned before, even though these causes
might be mostly proscribed and untruthful, that is why the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said describing priests,

250 - «They would lie a hundred lies with it». Thus he showed that they
343

Ibn Abbas said -About a people who wrote and observe the stars- «I do
not think that he who did so will have a recompense from Allah (the Ex-
alted)».

tell the truth once and lie a hundred times, and that is the case of the one
who follows the path of priests who claim to be holymen and knowing what
people think even though their claim by itself is a lie, because claiming to be
a holyman he justifies himself and that is proscribed by Allah (the Exalted)
who said, «Therefore justify not yoursevles»i. (53: 32) and that is not the
business of holymen; so how is it that they come to people and say: Know
that we are holymen; we verily know that which is unseen? This denotes ask-
ing for a special rank in the hearts of the creatures and catching the present
life by such matters. You need only think of the case of the Companions
and the followers of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) and they are the masters of holymen; did they have any of such
claims.....? No. By Allah (the Exalted); rather, the one of them could not
even prevent himself from crying when he rehearsed the Holy Koran; like
[Abu Bakr] As-Siddiq (May Allah be pleased with him); and Omar (May Al-
lah be pleased with him) used to be heard sobbing when he cried during his
prayer. He (May Allah be pleased with him) used to be heard at the back
lines of prayers; also while reading a section of the Holy Koran recited
every night he used to become sick for nights and people sued to visit him
after he had read a Holy Verse.

And Tamim Ad-Dari used to turn on his bed and sleep just for a little
time out of fear of Hell-Fire then he used to pray. Suffice are the attributes
of holymen that are mentioned by Allah (the Exalted) in the Holy Sura of
Al-Raad, Al-Mu’minun, Al-Furkan, Ath-Thariyat and At-Tur. Thus verily
these characterized with these qualities are the pure holymen, not those qua-
lities are the pure holymen, nor those claiming to be as such, those lying
and contradicting the Lord of the worlds, concerning attributes which are
exclusively His such as pride, glory, and knowledge of the unseen; rather,
just claiming to know that which is unseen makes such people liars.

How is it possible that such a person who claims to possess such attri-
butes be a holyman supported by Allah (the Exalted)? Verily harm has be-
come more serious and misfortune has become more severe because of those
fabricators of liars who inherited such knowledge from the polytheists and
made things obscure for those whose hearts were predisposed he asks Allah
(the Exalted) peace of heart, and good health in the present life and in the
Afterlife.

344

This chapter discusses many 1: ‘ues:

The first: One can not pair between believing a priest fa fortune-teller]
and believing in the Holy Koran.

The second: Stating that it is disbelief.

The third: Discussing the one to whom the fortune-teller predicted
events.

The fourth: Discussing the evil omens.
The fifth: Discussing the one for whom magic was used.
The sixth: Discussing the one who learned Abi Jad.

The seventh: Discussing the difference between a priest and a fortune-
teller.

His saying: (Ibn’Abbas said about a people who wrote the language of
Abu Jad, till the end). This was narrated by At-Tabarani after Ibn Abbas.
His reference is weak and it goes as follows,

251 - «Many skilled teachers, one is Abi Jad who observed the stars
and studied astrology will not be recompensed by Allah (the Exalted) on the
Day of Judgment». This was narrated by Ahmad ben Zanjawaih also saying,
«Many star observers and learners of the crafts as Abi Jad, will not be re-
compensed on the Day of Judgment».

His saying: (He did not see) a meaning he does not know of such a per-
son. It also might mean. I do not think so.

The writing of «Abi Jad» and teachings to those who claim to know the
unseen the knowledge of which is known as the science of the letter’ is what
the warning was about; as for learning it in order to know how to spell and
to construct sentences, then there is no objection to that.

His saying: (And they observe the stars) that is to say observe the stars
and believe that they have effects [on people in the present life] as will be
discussed in the chapter on astrology. Among the benefit of this Honourable
Hadith is not to be deceived by what untruthful people show of their knowl-
edge and sciences as Allah (the Exalted) has said, «For when their apostles
came to them with clear signs, they exulted in such knowledge (and skill) as
they had; but that very (Wrath) at which they were want to scoff hemmed
them im. (40: 83).

345

Chapter: (What was mentioned about incantations)

It was narrated after Jaber that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) was asked about incantation? He (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «It is considered an act of
the Shaitan.» This was also narrated by Ahmad with good references. It was
also narrated by Abu Dawud who said: Ahmad was asked about it and he
said: Ibn Masoud hates all that.

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter concerning what was mentioned about incanta-
tions).

Abu As-Saadat said: The incantation is a kind of therapy and charms,
which was used to treat he who was thought to be mad.

Al-Hasan said: The incantation is a kind of magic. Thus the Honour-
able Hadith narrated, «May be he was afflicted by magic; then incanted, to
Say: I seek refuge with the Lord and Cherisher of mankind.» That is to say
he enchanted him.

Ibn Al-Jouzi said: The incantation is undoing magic from the one who
is afflicted by. Almost no one can practice it but those who know magic.

He said: (It was narrated after Jaber (May Allah be pleased with him)
that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said,

252 - «I was asked about incantation, thereupon he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said: It is considered an act of the Shaitan».
This was also narrated by Ahmad with good reference. It was also narrated
by Abu Dawud who said: Ahmad was asked about it and he said: Ibn Ma-
soud hates all that).

This Honourable Hadith was narrated by Ahmad and Abu Dawud nar-
rated it in his Sunan after him. It was also narrated by Al-Fadl ben Ziad in

346

It was mentioned by Al-Bukhary after Kutadah: I told Ibn Al-Mus-
sayeb a man afflicted by magic or separated from his woman, is it removed
from him or shall he be incanted? He said: There is no objection about it,
rather, they mean to do that which is good; that beneficial aspect was not
forbidden.

And it was narrated after Al-Hasan who said: Magic can not be re-
moved but by a magician.

«Kitab Al-Masail» after-Abdur-Razzag after Oukail ben Maakal ben Man-
bah after Jaber who mentioned it. Ibn Mufleh said: It has good references.
Also Al-Hafeth supported it.

His saying: (He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was
asked about incantation) that is to say the usual incantation that Pre-Islamic
people made and it is considered among the deeds of the Shaitan.

His saying: (He said: Ahmad was asked about it and said. Ibn Masoud
hates all that). Ahmad (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) wanted to say
that Ibn Masoud hates incantation which is considered among the deeds of
the Shaitan, as he hates absolutely wearing amulets.

His saying: It was narrated by Al-Bukhary after Kutadah: I told Ibn
Al-Mousayyeb: «A man was afflicted by magic, shall he be separated from
his woman, shall it be removed, or shall he be incanted? He said: There 15
no objection about it; rather, the beneficial aspect was not forbidden».

His saying: (It was narrated after Kutadah). He as the son of De-amah
Ad-Dawsi. He is a reliable religous legislator and among those followers
who memorized most [of the Holy Koran and Honourable Hadith]. It was
said that he is Akrama’s son. He died about the year 112. A.H.

His saying: (A man was afflicted with magic) that is to say he was be-
witched.

Ibn Al-Anbari said: Using magic to cure illness is called treatment.

His saying: (Shall he be separated) that is to say separated from his
wife and prevented from intercourse with her.

His saying (There is no objection about that). He means that there is
objection about incantation because they mean to do good, that is to say to
remove magic; it was not forbidden to practise it if that which is meant is re-
conciling [between a man and his wife]. This is said by Ibn Al-Moussayib. It
sustains a kind of incantation not known to be magic.

His saying: (And it was narrated after Al-Hassan that he said, «Magic
can not be removed but by a magician»). This was narrated by Ibn Al-Jouzi
in «Jami‘ Al-Masanid».

347

[bn Al-Qayyim said: Incantation is removing magic from the one af-
flicted by it; it is of two kinds (one) is removing magic by another magic;
that is considered among the deeds of the Shaitan. Accordingly what AI-
Hassan said is supported. The incanted and the incantor curry favor with
the Shaitan by doing what he likes he removes magic from the one afflicted
(and the second) incantation by enchanting, seeking refuge with Allah, medi-

cines, and allowed invocations; this is allowable.
This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Forbidding incantation.

The second: The difference between that which is forbidden and that
which is allowable in a way that removes obscurity.

Al-Hassan in Ibn Abi Al-Hassan. His:name is Yasar Al-Basri Al-An-
sari: he is their master; a reliable religious legislator and an Imam among
the best followers. He (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) died in the year
110 A.H. and he was almost ninety years old.

His saying: (Ibn Al-Qayyim said: The incantation is removing magic
from the one afflicted and it is of two kinds, removing magic by a similar
magic, which is considered among the deeds of the Shaitan -till the end of
the Honourable Hadith). And among that which was mentioned about the
characteristics of allowed incantation are the following: What was men-
tioned by Ibn Abi Hatem and Abu AlI-Sheikh after Laith ben Abi Salem
who said: «I heard that those Holy Verses constitute a cure from magic by
Allah’s permission. They are read over a pot of water then poured on the
head of the man afflicted by magic. The Holy Verse in the Holy Sura of
Younis, «When they had had their throw, Moses said, ‘What ye have brought
is sorcery: Allah will surely make it of no effect: for Allah prospereth not the
work of those who make mischief. And Allah by His Words doth prove and es-
tablish his Truth, however much the Sinners may hate it!» (10: 81-82) and,
«Thus truth was confirmed, and all that they did was made of no effect». (7:
118) till the end of the four Holy verses [118-120], and «What they have
faked is but a magician’s trick: And the magician thrives not, (no matter)

where he goes». (20: 69).
Ibn Battal said in Wahab ben Mubbah’s book: Verily he takes seven
leaves from a green nabk tree, then he pounds them between two stones,

then he beats them with water and read the Holy Verse of [Kursy] Throne
and the Holy Verses Of [Kwakil] Al-Iklas, Al-Falag, and An-Nas and he

348

ع ,د د عدم معد عد عد جاده .د عدم د ‎ee eh‏ ود و و فاه عاء د وا عد ود و وا فاو ودف فاود فاه عاد فاع عد ع ماع ‎ee ee‏ ند ود مدع ود ع راع نيا هد رد رد ىد قاع عد دان عد عد عد قاع دراه رن نان ار ار ير

sips from this mixture thrice. Then he washes himself with it; all his ailments
will go away; that is good for the man if he were impotent.

I said: What the savant Ibn Al-Qayyim said (the second is incantation
by enchanting, seeking refuge with Allah (the Exalted), invocation, and al-
lowable medicines; that is allowable) He (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
points at something similar, and thus he supports those who allowed incan-
tation.

Conclusion: Verily that [incantation] that is related to magic is pro-
scribed, and that which is performed by the Holy Koran, invocations and al-
lowable medicines then that is allowable: Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

349

Chapter

(What was mentioned about flying birds in order to see an evil omen).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Behold! In truth the omens of evil are
theirs in Allah’s sight, but most of them do not understand!» (7: 131).

And He (the Exalted) has said, «They said, ‘Your evil omens are with
yourselves: (Deem ye this an evil omen). If ye are admonished? Nay, but ye
are a people transgressing all bonds!» (36: 19).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter concerning what was mentioned about that who
sees an evil omen).

That is to say concerning was forbidding and warning against practising
it. It originated from those «Favourable and advantageous» and those «un-
favourable and disadvantageous» by using birds, deer or the like. That prac-
tice used to keep them off their goals, thus it was rejected by the Legislator
and considered it invalid and informed that such practice does not have any
effect in bringing benefit or driving harm away.

Al-Madaini said: «I asked Rou‘ba ben Al-Ajjaj. I said: What is that
which is «Favourable and advantageous»? He said that which went or flew
to your right. I said what is that which is «unfavourable and disadvanta-
geous». « He said that which went or flew to the left. And that which went
straight in front of you is the butter while that which came from behind you
is the sitting and the disabled.»

Since seeing evil omen through such methods is considered polvtheism
that denies the necessary perfection of unification because they are thrown
into the soul by the Shaitan, his horror and his obsession. This was men-
tioned by the writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) in the Book of
Monotheism as a warning against that which contradicts the necessary per-
fection.

350

و وود هدو اود قاع قاه» وقدود ود قداعراه ود قاقاءر ا واعد ها وام هد عا هد .را »ا .امدق ود واه و واو واو واد مد هاج هوا واه »د 8ع قافاع د قد فاو وها ود هدو وقد فادها ع قافا عد واعادو ثد فاه ود و ودا فاع عام تمانو

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Behold! In truth the omens of
evil are theirs in Allah’s sight» till the end of the Holy Verse. (87: 131) Allah
(the Exalted) has mentioned this Holy verse in His context, «But when good
(times) came, they said, ‘This is due to us’; when gripped by calamity, they as-
cribed it to evil omens connected with Moses and those with him!» till the end
of the Holy Verse. (7: 131) The meaning verily the people of the Pharaoh, at
good times; fertility, prosperity and good health, as was interpreted by Mu-
jahid and others- used to say we really deserve it however, when they were
afflicted by calamities, that is to say drought, they saw bad omen in Moses
and those with him. They used to say: That is because of Mosa and his com-
panions; we were afflicted by their bad omen, thus Allah (the Exalted) said,
«Behold! In truth the omens of evil are theirs in Allah’s sight» (7: 131). Ibn
Abbas said «Omens: What was predestined and predetermined for them».
And in another narration «Their omens of evil are their’s in Allah’s (the Ex-
alted) sight and by Him (the Exalted)» that is to say; rather, evil afflicted
them by Allah (the Exalted) becausé of their disbelief and their giving the lie
to His Holy Verses and messengers.

His saying: (But most of them do not understand) that is to say most
of them are ignorant and do not know. If they had uderstood, they would
have known that what Mousa brought encompasses nothings but benefac-
tion, blessing, happiness and success for he who believed and followed him.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said, «They said, your evil omens
are with yourselves...» Till the end of the Holy Verse (36: 19). The meaning
of this Holy Verse is- and Allah (the Exalted) knows best- your lot and
whatever evil afflicting you takes place because of your [evil] deeds and dis-
belief and your contradicton to those advising you; it is neither for our sake
nor because of us; rather, it is because of your wrong-doing, oppression and
agression., Since the evil omen of the oppressor is with him; any evil that af-
flicts him is really caused by him he is the one who brings it to himself.
That is due to Allah’s Ability, Wisdom and Justice.

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Shall we then treat the
people of Faith like the people of Sin?: What is the matter with you? How
judge ye?» (68: 35-36). And the meaning might be: Your evil omen is with
you, that is to say it returns to you; the evil omen that took place will re-
turn to you; this is a sort of punishment and he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said something similar.

351

It was narrated after Abi Huraira (May Aliah be pleased with him) that
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said, «No contagion, no evil omen...

253 - «If the people of the Book greeted you then say, ‘And upon you’»
This was mentioned by Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

Allah’s (the Exalted) saying: (If ye are admonished): That is to say be-
cause we admonished you, reminded you, and ordered you to unify Allah
(the Exalted) you responded by saying this, (Nay, but ye are a people trans-
gressing all bounds). Kutadah said: If we remind you of Allah, you believe.
that we are evil omen.

The fitting of the two Holy Verses to the interpretation: Verily seeing
evil omen was among the performances of Pre-Islamic times and polytheists.
Allah (the Exalted) has dispraised them and detested them for that; Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) forbade see-
ing evil omen and informed that polytheism will be mentioned in the Hon-
ourable Hadiths in this chapter.

He said: (It was narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with
him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said,

254 - «No contagion, no seeing evil omen, no vermin and no hunger».
It was narrated by both. Moslem added, «And no tempest and no ghoul).

255 - It was narrated by Moslem that Abi Huraira used to say «No
contagion» and said after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him), «A sick person who has a contagious disease should
not be admitted to a healthy person.» Then verily Abu Huraira limited him-
self to the Honourable Hadith, «A person who has a contagious disease
should not be admitted to a healty person». And he abstained from saying
the Honourable Hadith: «No contagious». They told him: We heard you say
it; he refused to admit that. Abu Maslama- the one narrating after Abi Hur-
aira -said: I do not know whether he forgot or one of the Honourable Ha-
diths cancelled the other.

A group of the Companions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) narrated the Honourable Hadith, «No conta-
gion». They are Anas ben Malek, Jaber ben Abdullah, Al-Sa’ib ben Yazid,
Ibn Omar and others. It was mentioned in one of the narratives of this Hon-
ourable Hadith.

256 - «You should escape from the leper as you should escape from a
liom».

352

7خ > خ ع ع ع خ > خخ خخ يح ح ع حي يي يي ا اي ا ا ا ا 1 1 0 1 0 0001 0 1 10 10 0 0 0 2 2 2 . 2 1د 3 ف 4 3د :د 3د 4 3 . د :. -* : 5 : 5 : 5 5: : :« : :د هس : - : - : : : : : : : د : د« 0"

The savants conflicted over that. The best said about it was what Al-
Baihaqi said and was followed by Ibn As-Saleh, Ibn Al-Qayyim, Ibn Rajab.
In Mufleh and others: Verily saying, «No Contagion» according to the way
thought of by Pre-Islamic people; they thought that this action is done by
other than Allah (the Exalted) that verily such matters are naturaily
contagious; otherwise Allah (the Exalted) would render by His over will the
mixing of healthy person with a sick person a reason for that to happen,
that is when he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: «You
should escape from a leper as you should escape from a lion». And He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

257 - « A person who has a contagious disease should not mix with a
healthy person». And He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said about the plague.

258 - «He who heard that it spread in a certain region, then let him not
approach that region». And all of that takes place by the determination of
Allah (the Exalted) . It was narrated by Ahmad and At-Tirmithi after Ibn
Masoud, «Nothing is contagious» he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said it thrice, so an Arab asked him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him): O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) verily a puncture which is one of the early signs of sca-
bies appears at the camel’s lip or the tail of very big camels then it spreads
all over its body? Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said: «Then who became seabied first? No contagion, no evil
omen, no vermin, and no hunger; Allah (the Exalted) created every soul and
wrote its life, affliction and subsistence». He (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) informed that all of that is predetermined by Allah’s de-
terminism and fatalism, and that the servant is commanded to avoid the
causes of evil if he is healthy.

Thus as one is commanded not to throw himself in water or in fire such
that one might get killed or get hurt. In the same way one should avoid mix-
ing with the sick such as the leper or going to a region where there is pla-
gue. Verily all these are the causes of decay and illness, since verily Allah
(Be the blessed and raised above) is the Creator of all causes and effects.
There is no other creator but Him (the Exalted) and no pre-determiner but
Him. However, if dependence on Allah (the Exalted), and faith in His (the
Exalted) determinism and fatalism became so great thus strengthening the
soul to pursue these causes depending on Allah (the Exalted) and hoping
that He (the Exalted) would never let one be hurt; in such cases it is allowed

353

واأعا م ماود وا عد .دقام قا رد قاع ماح 4 زد فد ف ود وده ودح قاف ما و راو رفاو ‎SS‏ 6 مد :د د56 5ع مدع «* ‎٠١ 9١ +89١ ١+ ١‏ *

to pursue that, especially if there is general interest or private interest; thus
accordingly the Honourable Hadith narrated by Abu Dawud and At-Tir-
mithi is supported.

259 - «Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) held the hand of a leper and put it in a pot and said «Eat in the
name of Allah (the Exalted), trusting Allah (the Exalted) and depending on
Him». This was accepted by Imam Ahmad. This was also narrated after
Omar, his son and Salman (May Allah be pleased with them). And some-
thing; similar was narrated after Khalid ben Al-Walid (May Allah be pleased
with him) that he ate poison from it and walked away. Also Saad ben Abi
Waqgqas and Abi Moslem Al-Khoulani walked on the sea; this was said by
Ibn Rajab (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

His saying: (No evil omen). Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be
upon him) said: It might be a rejection or forbidding, that is to say do not
see evil omen, but his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying
in the Honourable Hadith, «No contagion, no hunger and no vermin» indi-
cates that which is intended here is rejection and considering these matters
that Pre-Islamic times people suffered from, are invalid. Such rejection is
more significant than forbidding because rejection indicates that it is invalid
and ineffective, but forbidding means that it is prevented.

It was narrated in the Saheeh of Moslem after Mouawiah ben Al-Ha-
kem: that he told Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be tipon him),

260 - «Among us there are people who see evil omen. He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said: That is something that one of you
finds in himself so let it not shun you». He (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) was told that his being hurt and his pessimism by evil omen;
rather comes from himself and from what he believes in, not in the object
used for seeing evil omen. Thus his delusion, fear and polytheism is the
thing that makes him see evil omen and give it precedence for what he sees
or hears. Thereupon he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ex-
plained the issue for his nation and made clear the invalidity of seeing evil
omen so that they may realize that Allah (Be the blessed and raised above)
did not make it a sign for them nor did He (Be the blessed and raised
above) make it an indicator, nor erected it as a cause for their fear and cau-
tion, and in order to calm their hearts and let their souls become tranquil in
the Monotheism of Allah (the Exalted) with which He (the Exalted) sent His
messengers, and sent down His Books, and for which He (the Exalted) cre-

354

... NO vermin and no hunger» It was narrated by both.

Moslem added, no tempest and no ghoul».

ated the Heavens and the earth and filled the Heaven and Hell-Fire. He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be. upon him) suspended polytheism from
their hearts so that none of polytheism stays in them, that they will not com-
mit any of the acts of the people of Hell-Fire.

Thus he who adheres to the steadfast tie of unification, and adhered to
its tight rope and depended on Allah (the Exalted), would have severed the
obsession of seeing evil omen before it established itself. Ikrama said: We
were sitting at Ibn Abbas when a bird passed by singing, so one of the peo-
ple said: Good, good. Ibn Abbas told him: That is neither good, nor evil.
Thus he took the initiative of rejecting that will not think that he believed in
good or evil. Tawus accompanied by his friend set off for travel, then a
crow cried and the man said: Good. Then Tawus said: What good does that
have? Do not accompany me.

Also some Honourable Hadiths were mentioned which made some peo-
ple think that it shows that seeing evil omen is permissible, such as his (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying,

261 - «Evil omen is in three: A woman, a riding animal, and a house».
And the hike.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: his (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) telling about evil omen in those
three does not confirm seeing evil omen which Allah (Be the blessed and
raised above) rejected; rather, he means that verily Allah (Be He blessed and
raised above) may create from them those who are evil to the one who
approaches or inhabits them or those who are blessed that does not harm
the one who approaches it. That is like His (Be the blessed and raised
above) giving the parents a blessed child that brings forth benefaction, by
the same logic He (the Exalted) may give other parents an evil child who
brings forth evil with him. Also what He (the Exalted) gives the servant such
as support or the like; the same thing goes for the house, the woman, or a
horse. Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) is the Creator of that which
is good and that which 15 bad, that which is fortunate and that which is
unfortunate. Thus He (the Exalted) would create some of those blessed and
fortunate and determines that he who approaches them becomes happy and
fortunate prosperous and blessed and He (the Exalted) creates some of them
as unfortunate that cause the misfortune for those who approach them. All
that 1s because of His predetermination and fatalism as He (Be the blessed

355

and raised above) created all other causes and connected them to their
varied and opposing effects as He (the Exalted) created the musk and other
good scents and made those people who approached them enjoy them. He
(the Exalted) also created their opposite and made it the cause of pain for
those who approach them, and the difference between these two types is
perceived by the senses, the same thing goes for houses, women and horses.
That is something and seeing evil omen is something else.

His saying: (no vermin). Al-Farra’ said it is one of the birds of the
night. As if he meant the owl. Ibn Al-Arabi said: They used to see evil omen
with it if it falls on the house of one of them. They used to say: It an-
nounced to him his own death or the death of one of the household, so the
Honourable Hadith was said rejecting this and invalidating it.

His saying: (no hunger). Abu Oubaida said in a strange Honourable
Hadith after Row’ba: It is a sort of snake found in the belly [Stomach and
intestines] of cattle and people, it is more contagious than scabies that af-
flicted the Arabs. Thus accordingly what is intended by rejecting it is what
they believed in concerning contagion. ‘Among those who believed so, is Suf-
yan ben Ayyina and Imam Ahmad, Al-Bukhary and Ibn Jarir.

Others said what is intended is the month of «Safar», and rejecting
what Pre-Islamic people did by postponing; they exchanged the month of
Safar for the month of Muharram. This was said by Malek.

Abu Dawud narrated after Muhammad ben Rashed that: Verily the
people of Pre-Islamic times used to see evil omen in the month of Safar and
said: It is an evil month; so the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) invalidated that. Ibn Rajab said: Perhpas this saying is
the most obscured among the sayings; seeing evil omen in the month of Sa-
far is a sort of seeing evil omen which is forbidden. The same thing goes for
evil omen in one of the days such as Wednesday and the Pre-Islamic times
people’s seeing evil in marriage especially in the month of Shawwal.

His saying: (no tempest) The tempest will be discussed in a special chap-
ter if Allah wishes.

Abu As-Saadat said: The ghoul is a kind of Jinns and Shaitans which
the Arabs claimed they existed in empty places and were seen by people.
They could assume several forms and delude them and misguide from their
correct way and kill them. Thereupon the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) rejected this and invalidated it.

Thereupon it was said: What does rejection mean while the Holy Pro-

356

Also they narrated after Anas who said: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s peace be upon him) said, «No contagion, no evil omen and I like
good omen. They asked; and what is good omen. He (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said: It is the nice word».

phet (May Allah’s peace be upon him) said,
262 - «If the gouls attack them start calling on for prayer.

It was answered: Verily that was at the béginning, then Allah (the Ex-
alted) repelled them from His servants. Or it is said: That which is rejected
is not the existence of the ghoul; rather, what the Arabs claimed of its acting
freely and independently, or the meaning of, «No ghoul» is that it cannot
delude or misguide anybody along with invoking Allah (the Exalted) and de-
pending on Him (the Exalted). The second Honourable Hadith supports this
interpretation, «No ghoul but aggressors are witches of the Jinns». That is
to say, but there are magicians and witches among the Jinns who can con-
fuse people and make them imagine things. Thus the following Honourable
Hadith.

263 - «If the ghouls were attacked, then start calling for prayer». That
is to say ward off its evil by invoking Allah (the Exalted). This indicates
that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) did not intend to
deny them or to deny their existence. Thus the Honourable Hadith of Abi
Aiyoub, «I used to have dates; while I was inattentive, the ghoul used to
come and take from them».

His saying: (Also they narrated after Anas who said: Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «No contagion,
no evil omen and I like good omen. They asked, ‘What is good omen’? He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, it is the good word»).

His saying: (and I like the good omen) Abu As-Saadat said: Good
omen is that which might please or displease, while evil omen 5 only that
which displeases. It might be used only: for that which pleases. It is said: I
had good omen by so and so; rather, he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) liked good omen because if people looked forward on Allah’s
benefaction and hoped for benefit from Him (the Exalted) for every cause
whether weak or strong then they are doing good, but if they loss hope that
Allah (the Exalted) would benefit then, that would be evil. As for seeing evil
omen, then verily it constitutes mistrusting Allah (the Exalted) and expecting
affliction, seeing good omen: Verily when a man, for example, is sick and he
hears another saying: O Salem; or when one is seeking something is lost and
hears another saying: O the One; he believes that he will be cured from his

357

It was narrated by Abi Dawud with a righteous reference after Oukba
ben Amer who said, «Seeing evil omen was mentioned in front of Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him); he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: ‘The best is good omen; it
does not discourage a Moslem. If any of you sees what he hates, he should
say: O Allah (the Exalted) none can bring forth benefaction but you; none
can remove evil but you; there is no power or might but through Yow».

illness or find what he has lost. Thus the Honourable Hadith was said, «It
was said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) what is good omen? He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said, ‘It is the good word».

His saying: (They said: What is good omen? He (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said: It is the good word.) He (May AIL
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) showed that he liked good omen
thus he indicated that it is not considered among the forbidden seeing of
evil omen.

Ibn Al Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: There is not
any sort of polytheism in liking good omen; rather, that shows the natural
needs and the essential innate human nature to tend to that which suits it as
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) told them.

264 - He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) verily liked
from the present life, woinen and scents, and he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) liked sweets and honey, the Holy Koran and the ‏للك‎ for
the prayer rehearsed. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
liked refined morals and virtuous practices. In general, he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) liked all that which is good, and perfect and
all that leads to them. And Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) has ve-
rily furnished the people’s instincts with the admiration of hearing and liking
the nice name as well as tending to it. He (the Exalted) also furnished it
with satisfaction, rejoicing at success, peace, congratulation, glad tidings,
winning achievement and the like; thus if those words were said, people
would rejoice at them, chests would expain and hearts would become stron-
ger while if their opposites were heard, just the opposite would be felt and
experienced; the soul would become sad, afraid, pessemistic, with drawn, de-
pressed about what it aimed at and determined to do; this would result in
harm in the present life and a deficiency in faith and commiting polytheism.

Al-Houleimy said: Verily he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon .
him) used to like good omen because pessimism is mistrusting Allah (the Ex-

358

والواء واو و وا و و و واد قا واج > قارواو و واوا وا وه مقاواو وارارا ع ‎Deere‏ ها مار و .ا مده واقار .ام م امام مام مد معد مدمع مد مام ع مد م عد د مع م م وم ددر ‎eer‏ د ع تت دتعت ‎see‏

alted) without any certain cause. Seeing good omen is trusting Him (the Ex-
alted); the believer is commanded to trust Allah (the Exalted) whatsoever.

His saying: (It was narrated after Abi Dawud with good reference after
Oukba ben Amer who said,

265 - «Seeing evil omen was mentioned to Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) who said: The best is seeing
good omen; it does not discourage a Moslem, if one sees what he hates, he
should say: O Allah (the Exalted) none can bring forth benefaction but you;
none can remove evil but You; there is no power and might but through
you.»»).

His saying: (after Oukba ben Amer) That is how it was mentioned in
«Naskh At-Tawhid). The correct thing is: It was narrated after Ourwa ben
Amer. That is how it was mentioned by Ahmad, Abu Dawud and others.
He is from Mecca and the authorities conflicted as to his lineage; Ahmad
said: It was narrated after Ourwa ben Amer Al-Kurashi; others said: Al-Ju-
hanni. Also they conflicted concerning his companions; Al-Mawardi said:
He had companions and Ibn Hibban mentioned him among the reliable fol-
lowers, and Al-Muzni said, he did not have real companionship.

His saying: (So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,
the best is good omen). It was mentioned before, that the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) liked good omen. At-Tir-
mithi narrated and corrected after Anas (May Allah be pleased with him),

266 - «Verily the Holy prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) used to like to hear O Najih! O Najih! When he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) left his (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) house for doing something». And Abu Dawud narrated after
Bouraida,

267 - «Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) never saw evil omen in anything; when he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) wanted to send a ruler, he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) used to ask him about his name. If he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) liked it, he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him)would be happy, and if he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) hated it, it would be shown on his (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) face.» Its reference is good. This Honourable
Hadith includes his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) using of
good omen.

359

It was narrated after Ibn Masoud, «Seeing evil omen is polytheism; see-

ing evil omen is polytheism. None of us but [Had some doubt in his heart],

out Allah (the Exalted)...

Ibn Al-Qayyim said: He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
informed that seeing good omen is a sort of seeing evil omen yet it is better.
Thus ne (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) invalidated seeing
evil over and told that good omen is part of it yet it is better; so by this he
May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) separated between seeing
good and evil omen, because of the difference and contradiction and because
one of them is beneficial while the other is harmful. That which is similar to
this is his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) forbiddance of in-
cantation through joining in partners with Allah (the Exalted), and allowing
it if it does not denote polytheism because the former includes benefit de-
void of evil.

His saying: (It does not discourage a Moslem) At-Tiabi said: This
shows that the opposite happens to the disbeliever.

His saying: (O Allah (the Exalted), none can bring forth benefactica
but You; none can remove evil but You) that is to say, seeing evil omen
does not bring forth benefaction, nor can it dispel that which is hated;
rather, You (the Exalted) Alone, having no partner, can bring fo:th benefac-
tion, and dispel evil. «Benefaction» here means blessings and comfort while
«Evib> means disaster and affliction.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «If some good befalls
them, they would say, ‘This is from Allah’; but if evii, they say: ‘This is from
thee’ (O Prophet). Say, ‘All things are from Allah’. But what hath come to
these people, that they fail to understand a single fact? Whatever good, (O
man!) Happens to thee, is from Allah; but whatever evil happens to thee, is
from thy (own) soul». (4: 78-79). This Holy Verse shows that it is rejected to
let the heart cling to other than Allah (the Exalted) concerning benefaction
or dispelling harm; that is Monotheism. Also this Holy Verse includes the
right call for the one in whose heart there is some evil omens well as declar-
ing that it neither brings forth profit nor does it dispel harm and the one
who believes in it is considered a stupid polytheist.

His saying: (There is no strength nor might but through Allah (the Ex-
alted)). This is asking for Allah’s aid to help one depend on Him (the Ex-
alted) and trust Him (the Exalted) and not to turn to seeing evil omen
which might be the cause of that which is hateful as a punishment to the

360

.. removes it by trust {in Him (the Exalted)] and dependence. It was nar-
rated by Abu Dawud and At-Tirmithi. The last one to say it was Ibn Ma-

soud.

Also, it was narrated by Ahmad after Amr’s son, «He who is turned
away from his need by seeing evil omen, has in fact committed polytheism».
They said, «How can that be atoned?.

doer. This invocation rather, eminates from the truth of dependence and
trust which are the strongest causes of bringing forth benefaction and dispel-
ling that which ts hated.

And «Ability» here means the ability to change and move from one si-
tuation to another; «Strength» here means that Allah (the Exalted), Alone
who does not have a partner possesses this ability [To change things]. This
includes freeing oneself from ability, strength or will regardless of the ability,
strength or will of Allah (the Exalted). That is Monotheism of Lorship; it is
the evidence on the Monotheism of Diety which is alloting all kinds of wor-
ship to Allah (the Exalted); That is unification of volition and intention;
that was, praise Allah (the Exalted), discussed before.

His saying: (It was narrated after Ibn Masoud (May Allah be pleased
with him).

268 - «Seeing evil omen is polytheism, seeing evil omen is polytheism;
none of us but [Had some doubt in his heart], but Allah (the Exalted) re-
moves that by trust and dependence on Him (the Exalted) .» This was nar-
rated by Abu Dawud and At-Tirmithi the last to narrate it was Ibn
Masoud.

It was also narrated by Ibn Majah and Ibn Hibban. Abi Dawud pro-
nounced «seeing evil omen is polytheism, seeing evil omen is polytheism, see-
ing evil omen is polytheism». That 15 clear concerning proscribing seeing evil
omen and that it is a considered sort of polytheism because it requires that
the heart clings to other than Allah (the Exalted).

Ibn Hamdan said: Seeing evil omen should be hated. The same thing
was said by Ahmad’s companions.

Ibn Mufleh said: And the first says that it is absolutely proscribed be-
cause it is polytheism; so how can polytheism be hated?

He said in «Sharh As-Sunan»: Rather he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) considered seeing evil omen as a kind of polytheism be-
cause they used to believe that seeing evil omen would bring them benefit or

361

He said: You should say: 0 Allah (the Exalted) there is no benefaction
but yours; there is no omen but yours’ there is no God but You».

And he narrated after Al-Fad] Ben-Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
him), «Verily evil omen is what makes you go or turn away».

dispel harm if they performed according to it. Thus it is as if they joined
partners with Allah (the Exalted).

His saying: (None of us but [had some doubt in his heart]). Abu Al-
Kassem Al-Asbahani and Al-Munthuri said: This Honourable Hadith con-
ceals a meaning which is: None among us but has experienced some doubt
in his heart concerning that matter.

Al-Khilkhali said: Deleting that which is excepted because of the hateful
state that it connotes. That is good style in literature.

His saying: (But Allah (the Exalted) removes it by trust and dependence
[on Him (the Exalted)]). That is to say when we trusted Allah (the Exalted)
and depended on Him (the Exalted) in bringing forth benefit and removing
harm, Allah (the Exalted) would remove it because of that trust and depen-
dence.

His saying: (And the last one to say it was Ibn Masoud). Ibn AI-
Qayyim said: And that is right; verily seeing evil omen is a sort of polythe-
sim.

He said: (And Ahmad narrated after Amr’s son: He who is turned away
from his need by seeing evil omen, has in fact committed polytheism. They
said: How can that be atoned? He said: You should say,

269 - O Allah (the Exalted) there is no benefaction or grace but Yours;
there is no omen but yours; there is no God but You).

This Honourable Hadith was narrated by Ahmad and At-Tabarani
after Abdullah ben Amr ben Al-Ass and its reference is by Abi Louhai and
the rest of the men who narrated it are reliable.

His saying: (after Amr’s son) He is Abdullah ben Amr ben Al-Ass. It
was said Abu Abdur-Rahman; one of the wealthy and first Companions [of
the Holy Propeht (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)] and one
of the religous and worshipping jurists. He died in Thi’l Hijja most probably
in At-Taif.

His saying: (He who is turned away by evil omen has in fact committed
polytheism). That is so because seeing evil omen is becoming pessimistic
through that which is seen or heard thus if he is turned away from a need
by something of the sort, such as he suspended his travel or the lie, and

362

> + + 2 < : : - - 5 5 أ د د د د د د د د د د د 00
ع ا يي ا 0 0ل 0 0 ل ين يس م

then in turn prevents him from getting what he wants or seeks because of
what he sees or hears, then such a person has committed polytheism, as was
mentioned before; he has not absolutely trusted Allah (the Exalted) and de-
pended on Him (the Exalted) by turning to others. Thus the Shaitan has his
share of him.

His saying: (How can that be atoned?) Till the end of the Honourable
Hadith. Thus if he says that and turns away from what enters his heart and
does not turn to it, Allah (the Exalted) would forgive him and remove that
which enters his heart through this invocation that connotes and denotes de-
pending on Allah (the Exalted), Alone and turning away from all others.

The Honourable Hadith also denotes that seeing evil omen does not
harm the one who hates it and continues his way; as for the one who does
not faithfully depend on Allah (the Exalted) and let oneself go with the Shai-
tan concerning that matter. Thus he might be punished by getting caught in
what he hates. because he turned away from the duty of believing in Allah
(the Exalted) and (the Exalted), Alone possesses all benefaction; He by His
volition and will brings it to His servant and He (the Exalted) by His ability,
kindness, Grace and Benefaction can dispel harm; no benefaction can take
place but through Him (the Exalted), and He is the One who dispels harm
away from His servant. Thus what afflicts him is due to his sin as Allah (the
Exalted) has said: «Whatever is good, (O man!) Happens to thee, is from Al-
lah; but whatever evil happens to thee, is from thy (own) soul». (4: 79).

His saying: (And he narrated after Al-Fadl ben Abbas,
270 - «Verily evil omen is what made you go or made you turn away.»).

This Honourable Hadith mentioned by Imam Ahmad after Al-Fadl ben
Abbas, «I went out with Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him)one day; he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) harassed a deer; it swayed so I embraced it and said: O Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) have you seen
evil omen; he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) answered:
Rather, evil omen is that which wakes you up or makes you turn away.»
And both references are separated, that is to say between Maslamah the
narrator of the Honourable Hadith and Al-Fadl who is Al-Fad] ben ‏لذ‎
‎Abbas ben Abdul-Muttaleb the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) cousin. Ibn Mou’in said: He was killed during the battle
of Yarmouk. Others said: He was killed on the battle of «Marj As-Soufar»

363

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Warning concerning (In truth the omens of evil are theirs)

and (they said, ‘Your evil omens are with yoursleves).
The second: Rejecting contagion.

The third: Rejecting seeing evil omen.

The fourth: Rejecting the vermin.
The fifth: Rejecting Jafar.

The sixth: Verily good omen is not considered among the above men-
tioned; rather, it is desired.

The seventh: Explaining good omen.

The eighth: Verily that taking place in the hearts from that, even
though it is hated; it does not harm; rather, Allah (the Exalted) re-
moves it by dependence on Him (the Exalted) and by trusting in Him.

The ninth: Mentioning all that.
The tenth: Declaring that verily seeing evil omen is polytheism.

The eleventh: Explaining dispraised omen.

in the year thirteen A.H. He was twenty-two years then. Abu Dawud said:
He died in Damascus and on him he had Allah’s Holy Messenger’s (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) shield.

His saying: (rather, evil omen is what makes you so or makes you turn
away) that is the limit beyond which one is punished; the limits are forbid-
den to go beyond. It is that which makes man continue doing what he
wants or prevents him from doing what he wants. As for good omen which
was preferred by the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him); this includes a kind of glad tidings. Thus a servant becomes hap-
py with it and does not depend on it, that is in contradistinction with what
makes him continue or turn away, since such makes the heart a sort of de-
pendence. So understand and conceive of the difference and Allah (the Ex-
alted) knows best.

364

Chapter

(What was mentioned about Fortune-telling [Astrology or augury)).

Al-Bukhary said in his Saheeh: Kutadah said, «Allah (the Exalted) cre-
ated those three stars as a decoration for the Heaven and as objects to stone
the Shaitans, ...

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter concerning what was mentioned about fortune-tell-
ing [Astrology or augury]).

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Astrology is
inferring through astronomical states events that happen on earth.

Al-Khatabi said: The forbidden astrology is that claimed by astrologers
such as knowing those beings, entities and events that will take place in the
future, such as when the wind will blow, when it will rain, when the prices
will change, and what it denotes or connotes of the matters claiming that
they can be predicted by studying the paths and orbits of planets, as well as
by studying when they pair or separate; they claim that they influence things
below and such behavior over that which is unseen and dealing with knowl-
edge which is exclusively for Allah (the Exalted); no body knows the unseen
but Him.

His saying: (Al-Bukhary said in his Saheeh: Katada said: Allah (the Ex-
alted) created those three stars a decoration for the sky and as objects for
stoning the Shaitans as well as marks that guide [people in their travel].
Thus he who used them for other than the above purpose has made a mis-
take and lost his lot and burdened oneself to discuss that which he does not
know).

This Honourable Hadith was interpreted by Al-Bukhary in his Saheeh.
It was also narrated by Abdur-Razzak, Abed ben Houmaid, Ibn Jarir, Ibn
Al-Mounthir and others. It was narrated by Al-Khatib in his book «Kitab

365

.. and signs for guiding [people travelling]. Thus he who inferred through
them other than this, has made a mistake, lost his chance and burdened

himself with discussing that which he doés not know».

An-Noujoum» after Kutada who said: «Verily Allah (the Exalted) created
those three stars for three functions: He (the Exalted) made them decoration
for the sky, He made them signs of guiding [Travellers] and objects for ston-
ing the Shaitans. Thus he who dealt with them in a way other than that,
would have said his own opinion and missed his fortune and lost his chance
and burdened himself by discussion that which does not know and that ve-
rily some people ignorant of Aliah’s command have given rise to priesthood
out of those stars: He who is wedded by such and such a star, such and
such would happen to him; he who travelled by such and such a star such
and such would happen to him. By my life there is not a star but when it
shines the red, the black, the toll, the short, the handsome and the ugly. are
born. And these stars, this riding animal, and this bird do not know of any
thing of the unseen and if one wishes to know that which is unseen, it
would be Adam who was created by Allah (the Exalted) and to whom He
(the Exalted) commanded His angels to prostrate, and He (the Exalted)
taught him the nature of all things».

Then think about what this Imam has rejected from those abominable
happenings at the times of those to follow. Still evil increases with every dec-
ade [after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)]
till it reached the maximum in our times, and affliction with it has become
general in all regions, the poor, the rich and fewer people reject and deny it.
Thus the affliction has become more serious as far as religion is concerned.
To Allah (the Exalted) we belong, and to Him (the Exaited) is our return.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) created those three stars) Allah has
said: «And we have (from of old), adorned the lowest heaven with lamps, and
we have made such (lamps) (as) missiles to drive away the evil ones.» (67: 5)
and He , has also said, «And marks and sign-posts; and by the stars (men)
guide themselves.» (16: 16). There is an indication that verily the stars of the
lowest sky, as was narrated by Ibn Mardawaih after Ibn Masoud (May
Allah be pleased with him) who said: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said, «As for the lowest sky, verily Allah
(the Exalted) has created it from smoke and He (the Exalted) created in it a
lamp and a shining moon, and He (the Exalted) decorated it by lamps which
He (the Exalted) made as missiles for driving the Shaitans aways, as well as
protection from every stoned Shaitan.

366

> > 7 6 1 0 7 1 1 0 7 0 0 23 2
لواو و و دواع تقار مام عاوالد عد قار ها نم
وال اا و لا ا وااو وم و لع او د 6 ام 5 5 ‎1٠‏
‏وما ع وا و 4 6د ع و نا قو
وما قال ده نع م

His saying: (And marks) That is to say indicators of the directions (to
be guided by) that is to say people use it to know directions.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «He who maketh the
stars (as beacons) for you, that ye may guide yourselves, with their help,
through the dark spaces of land and sea». (6: 97) That is to say to use it in
order to know where the direction you want. It is not meant that they [The
stars] guide people to know that which is unseen, as astrologists think. Its
untruthfulness and its being invalidated have been mentioned above in Kuta-
da’s discussion: «He who inferred from them other than this.» That is to say
claimed other than that which was mentioned by Allah (the Exalted) in His
Holy Koran, then he has committed a mistake, because he claimed some-
thing that Allah (the Exalted) has not authorized any body with, and he lost
his chance of getting all benefaction because he occupied himself with what
harms and does not benefit him.

If it were said: A fortune-teller might tell the truth? It is said: His tell-
ing the truth is similar to that of the priest; he tells the truth once and lies a
hundred times. Moreover, his telling the truth is not built on knowledge;
rather it is built on chance. Thus what he says may become evil to the one
who believes him.

It was narrated after Ibn Abbas concerning Allah’s (the Exalted) saying:
«And He has set up on the earth mountains standing firm, lest it should shake
with you; and rivers and roads; that ye may guide yourselves; and marks and
sign-posts.» (16: 15) His saying «marks and sign-posts» is coupled with what
was mentioned before about the earth, then He continued and said (And by
the stars (Men) guide themselves). This was mentioned by Ibn Jarir after Ibn
Abbas and both gave the same meaning.

The Honourable Hadiths were mentioned after the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s peace be upon him) invalidating astroiogy [Augury or Fortune-tell-
ing], such as,

271 - «He who learned something from a group of stars, then he had
acquired something of magic. The more they acquire the greater is his sin.

It was narrated after Raja’ ben Hayat that verily the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Verily I fear about
my nation most: Believing in stars, denying determinism and the Imams’
wrong doing.» This was narrated by Abed ben Hamid. It was also narrated
after Abi Mihjan,

367

And Kutada hated:

Learning the phases of the moon, and Ibn Ouyayna did not allow it.
This was mentioned by Ibn Harb concerning them. However, Ahmad and
Is-haq allowed learning about those phases.

And it was narrated after Abi Mousa that Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Three will not be ad-
mitted into the Garden: An addict [Alcoholic], ...

272 - «I fear of three things for my nation: The Imams’ wrong-doing,
believing in stars and denying fate» This was narrated by Ibn Asaker, and
was corrected by As-Seyouti.

It was narrated after Anas (May Allah be pleased with him).

273 - «I fear that after me my nation would adhere to two habits: De-
nying fate and believing in stars.» This was narrated by Abu Yala, Ibn Ou-
day and Al-Khattab in «Kitab An-Noujoum». It was also corrected by As-
Seyouti. Honourable Hadiths concerning dispraising astrology and warning
against it are plenty.

His saying: (And Katada hated learning about the phases of the moon.
Ibn Ouyayna did not allow it. This was mentioned by Ibn Harb about them.
However, Ahmad and Ishaq allowed learning about those phases.

Al-Khatabi said: As for astronomy which is the science of studying
stars by observing them and of telling when mid-day take place and which is
the direction of the Qibla is, such science is not included by that which is
forbidden. That is knowing that observing the shade is nothing more than
the shade when it diminishes. This means that the sun is rising to the middle
of the sky in the east, and if it starts to increase then one knows that the
sun is setting from the middle of the sky in the west. Such is a science that
may be learned by observation; however, the people of this science have
managed with the machines they invented which helps the observer to do
without caring for the duration and observation. As for those stars which
are used to find the direction of the Qibla; these are planets observed by
those experienced among the Imams in whose care for the matters of reli-
gion, knowing them, and their telling the truth, we do not doubt; such as
observing them while at the Qaaba and while not there. Thus their concep-
tion was through observation, and our conception is through their experiene.

It was narrated by Ibn Al-Munthir after Mujahid that verily he did not
object if a man learned about the phases of the moon. It was narrated after
Ibrahim that he did not object if a man learned about the stars that which

368

0 ‏ن « < د«‎ cr

helped him know his direction. Ibn Rajab said: That which is permitted to
be learned is that connected with knowing direction not that knowledge of
the effects [of stars on earth]; this is verily invalid and proscribed, whether it
was practised or not. As for that science of knowing directions, one should
learn only what he needs in order to find his way and know the direction of
the Qibla; that is allowable by all the savants.

His saying: (This was mentioned by Harb about them). He is the Imam,
the memorizer Harb ben Ismail, Abu Muhammad Al]-Karamani a religious
jurist and one of the best companions of Imam Ahmad. He narrated after
Ahmad, Ishaq, Ibn Al-Madini, Ibn Mouin and others. He corapiled «Kitab
Al-Massail» [Matters] about which Imam Ahmad and others were asked.
He died in the year 280 A.H. As for Ishaq, he is Ibn Ibrahim An-Naisa-
bouri, the Imam known as Ibn Rahawaih. He narrated after Ibn Ai-~-Mubar-
ak, Abi Ousama, Ibn Ouyiyna and those similar to them. Ahmad said: We
consider Ishaq as one of the Imams of the Moslims. Ahmad AI-Bukhary,
Moslim, Abu Dawud and others narrated after Him. He also narrated after
Ahmad. He died in the year 230 A.H.

He said: (It was narrated after Abi Mousa (May Allah be pleased with
him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said,

274 - «Three will not be admitted into the Garden: An addict [Alco-
holic], the one who severes relations with relatives, and a believer in magic».
It was narrated by Ahmad and Ibn Hibban in his Saheeh.

This Honourable Hadith was also narrated by At-Tabarani and AI-
Hakem who said: It is righteous. It was confirmed also by Ath-Thahabi.
The complete Honourable Hadith is, «He who dies as an addict to alcohol,
Allah (the Exalted) would make him drink from the river of Al-Ghouta; a
river flowing from the vulvas of harlots; the people of Hell-Fire are harmed
by the wind of their vulvas.

His saying: (It was narrated after Abi Mousa). He is Abdullah ben
Ghaddar, Abi Moussa A]-Ashari. He is an honourable Companion. He died
in the year fifty A.H.

His saying: (Three will not be admitted into the Garden). This is among
the texts of warning which those who came before hated to interpret. They
said: Take it as it is, as for interpreting them it is considered a dangerous
sort of saying about Allah (the Exalted) that you do not know. It is best to
say: Verily every deed that is below polytheism and disbelief which casts one

369

... the believer in magic, and the severer of relations with relatives». This
was narrated by Ahmad and Ibn Hibban in his Saheeh,

This chapter discusses many issues:
The first: The wisdom behind creating the stars.

The second: Replying to who claimed otherwise.

The third: Mentioning disagreement concerning learning about the
phases [of the moon].

The fourth: Warning those who believe in any sort of magic even
though he knew that it was invalid.

out of the religion of Islam. It verily is up to Allah’s (the Exalted) volition:
if He (the Exalted) tortures him, then he deserves torture; if He (the Ex-
alted) forgives him, then it is because of His benefaction and mercy.

His saying: (An addict [Alcoholic]) that is to say who constantly drinks
win.

His saying: (The severer of relationships with relatives) He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) means relativs as Allah (the Exalted) has
said: «Then, is it to be expected of you, if ye were put in authority, that ye
will do mischief in the land, and break your ties of kith and kin?» (47: 22) Till
the end of the Holy Verse.

His saying: (The believer of magic) that is to say absolutely including
astrology, because of what was mentioned above. That is how the Honour-
able Hadith fits the interpretation.

Ath-Thahabi said concerning major sins: Magic includes learning tricks
and performing them, seperating a man from his wife, making a man love
his wife by using unknown terms. He said: Many major sins- rather almost
211 of them- people donot know that it is proscribed, it is warned against
and performers are reproached.

370

Chapter

(Concerning what was mentioned about asking for rain from the
moon).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And have ye made it your livelihood that
ye should declare it false?» (56: 82).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter concerning what was mentioned about asking for
rain from the moon.

That is to say warning that was said about that matter. That which is
meant: Attributing the coming of water and rain to the phases of the moon.
Abu As-Saadat said: They are twenty-eight phases. Every night the moon
passes through one of those phases. In that connection Allah (the Exalted)
has said, «And the Moon, we have measured for her mansions (to traverse).»
(36: 39) It sets in the west every thirteen nights one phase with dawn, and
another phase starts from the east. Thus all of them pass by the end of the
year. The Arabs used to claim that with the setting of a phase and the rising
of another, rain comes, and they used to attribute rain to them [The phases]
and say, «Our rain takes place during such and such a phase.»

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And have ye made your liveli-
hood that ye should declare it false?» (56: 82) It was narrated by Ahmad, At-
Tirmithi- he improved it-Ibn Jarir, Ibn Abi Hatem, Ad-Dia‘ in his book
«Al-Mukhatara» after Ali (May Ailah be pleased with him) that Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

275 - «And have Ye made your livelihood’, He says: Your being grate-
ful, ‘that ye should declare it fasle?? You say: Our rain comes during such
and such a phase [of the moon]: by such and such a star». This is the first
interpretation of the Holy Verse. That was narrated after Ali, Ibn Abbas,
Kutada, Ad Dahhak, Attar Al-Khurasani and others. That is what the ma-

371

It was narrated after Abi Malek Al-Ashari (May Allah be pleased with
him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said, «Four [habits] in my nation that are [inherited] from Pre-Islamic
times and they will not be dropped...

jority of interpreters say and through it, is shown the aspect of the writer’s
(May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) inferring from the Holy Verse.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: You determine
your lot from this benefactton which 15 the cause of your life: You deny it,
that is to say the Holy Koran. Al-Hasan said: You determine your lot and
fortune from the Holy Koran and it is a lose.

His saying: (It was narrated after Abi Malek Al-Ashari (May Allah be
pleased with him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said: «My nation will not leave four [habits] from Pre-
Islamic times: Pride in descent, defaming ancestry, asking for rain through
the stars, and wailing.» And he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said:

276 - «If a wailing woman does not turn to Allah (the Exalted) in re-
pentance, she will be ressurrected on the Day of Judgment with a garment
of tar and a shield of scabies on her» This Honourable Hadith was narrated
by Moslem) Abu Malek’s name 15 Al-Hareth ben Al-Hareth Ash-Shami. He
is a companion after whom Abu Salam exclusively narrated. And among the
companions there are two others Abu Malek Al-Ashaari.

His saying: (My nation will not leave four [habits] from Pre-Islamic
times). This nation will perform them either knowing that it is proscribed or
without knowing that, even though it is among the dispraised, hated and
proscribed practices of Pre-Islamic times. What is meant by Pre-Islamic
times here is: All that took place before the dispatching of the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). They said that because of
their excessive ignorance. All that contradicts what the Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) came with. Verily Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) contra-
dicted them concerning many or most of their affairs, and that can be seen
by contemplating about the Holy Koran and by learning the Sunna. Our
Sheikh (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) has a book in which he men-
tioned that which Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) contradicted Pre-Islamic people; they are about one hundred
and twenty topics.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon } ‏(د‎ said: He (May
372

... pride, defaming ancestry, asking for rain through the stars and the wail-

ing womam).

Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) informed that some of the habits
and practices of Pre-Islamic times will not be dropped by people as a way of
dispraising those who do not drop it. This requires that all the habits and
practices of Pre-Islamic times are dispraised by the religion of Islam,
otherwise there was no necessity to add all those to deny Pre-Islamic
practices and dispraise them, and it is known that adding those to Pre-
Islamic times meant to dispraise them.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And make not a da7-
zling display, like that of the former times of Ignorance». (33: 33) Verily that
includes dispraising wearing make up as well as the early Pre-Islamic times;
that necessitates forbidding identification with them all together.

His saying: (Pride in descent) that is to say treating people haughtily be-
cause of ones fathers’ acheivements; that is great ignorance since there is no
honour but through piety as Allah (the Exalted) has said: «The sight of Al-
lah is the most righteous of you». (49: 13) and, «It is not your wealth nor your
sons, that will bring you nearer to Us in degree: but only those who believe
and work righteousness these are the ones for whom there is a multiple Reward
for their deeds, while secure they (reside) in the dwellings on high!» (34: 37).

It was narrated by Abi Dawud after Abi Huraira,

277 - «Verily Allah has eliminated of Pre-Islamic times in its pride in
fathers; rather, he is a pious believer, or a dissolute wrong-doer; people are
the sons of Adam and Adam was created from clay; let men put their pride
away rather, they are wood coal from that of Hell-Fire, or they would be ea-
sier for Allah (the Exalted) than scarabs».

His saying: (defaming ancestry) that is to say shaming and disparaging
them. When Abi Tharr (May Allah be pleased with him) dispraised a man
by his mother, the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) held him,

278 - «Did you shame him by his mother? You are a man who still car-
ries Pre-Islamic habits». This Honourable Hadith is agreed upon. This indi-
cates that defaming ancestry is among the practices of Pre-Islamic times and
that verily a Moslem may still have some of these habits named as ignor-
ance, Judaism and Christianity, and that does not demand that he his disbe-
lieves or is straying from the right path. This was said by Sheikh of Islam
(May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

373

اي ع يح ع يح ع ع يع يع يي ع ع ع يع يي ‎eee tte ttt tte‏ اا ا ا يي ا ا ا ل ‎ee‏

His saying: (And asking for rain through the stars) that is attributing
rain to the Naw’ which is the falling of a star. Also Imam Ahmad, Ibn Jarir
narrated after Jaber As-Siwai who said: I heard Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying,

279 - «I fear that my nation would suffer from three: Asking for rain
through stars, the Sultan’s injustice, and denying destiny».

Thus if someone said: Our rain is attributed to such a star or such a
Naw, then he must believe that such things play a role in bringing rain.
That is polytheism and disbelief. And that is what is believed by Pre-Islamic
people; it is similar to their belief that invoking the dead and the absent can
bring them benefit or dispel harm, or that dead or absent persons can be-
cause of their invocation intercede for them; that is polytheism against
which Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) was sent and aganist which he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) fought. |

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And fight them or until
there is no more tumult or oppression, and there prevail justice and faith in
Allah.» (8: 39). Tumult is polytheism. But if he says: Our rain takes place
during such and such a Naw, for example, but with believing that the only
cause for rain is Allah (the Exalted) also. Yet it is something usual that rain
falls when such a star falls; that which is right is the following: It is
proscribed to attribute that to the star even by way of metaphor, since Ibn
Mufleh declared in «Al-Fourou», that it is proscribed to say, Our rain is
attributed to such and such a Naw’». And he stated positively that
proscribing it even if it were used metaphorically, is proscribed and he did
not mention anybody who contradicted him. That is so because the one who
Says so kas attributed that which no one can perform but Allah (the
Exalted) to another creature who is subjugated, and who can neither harm
nor benefit nor possess the ability to do anything. Thus this is considered
minor polytheism. Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

His saying: (And the wailing woman) that is to say raising the voice in
crying and lamenting the dead, because she shows dissatisfaction with
Allah’s determinism, and that contradicts the required patience. That is
considered among major sins because of the intense warning and
punishment promised.

His saying: (The wailing woman, if she did not repent before her dead):
This includes remarking that repentance leads to granting remission of sin

374

And he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «The wail-
ing woman if she does not repent before her death, she will be resurrected

on the Day of Judgment wearing a garment of tar and a shield of scabies».
It was narrated by Moslem.

They also narrated after Zaid ben Khaled (May Allah be pleased with
him) who said, «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) led us in the Dawn prayer at the Houdaybiyya Day; when he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) finished he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) approached the people and asked them;
do you know what your Lord said? They said: Allah (the Exalted) and His
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) know best.
He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: There emerged
among My servant a believer in Me and a disbeliever.

even though it might be serious; that is generally agreed upon. Also good
deeds, the Moslems’ invocation for each others’ sake, intercession if Allah
(the Exalted) permits, and Allah’s forgiveness for whomever He (the Ex-
alted) wishes among those who do not join in partners in worshipping Him
(the Exalted). All these may be used to be granted remission of sins. It was
narrated after Ibn Omar.

280 - «Verily Allah (the Exalted) accepts the servant’s repentance unless
he bubbles.» This was narrated by Ahmad, At-Tirmithi, Ibn Majah and Ibn
Hibban.

His saying: (On the Day of Judgmet she will wear a garment of tar and
a shield of scabies). Al-Kurtobi said: A garment is a sort of clothes and
shirts, that 15-10 say they will be stained with tar which will be like shirts so
that lighting their bodies with fire wil be more seroius and their smell will be
worse and their pain because of scabies will be more severe. It was narrated
after Ibn Abbas: Verily what is meant by tar here is melted brass.

He said: (They narrated after Zaid ben Khaled who said:

281 - «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) led the Dawn prayer at the Houdaybiyya directly after a night
sky; when he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) accomplished
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) approached the people
and asked them: Do you know what your Lord said? They said: Allah (the
Exalted) and His Holy Messenger know best. He (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said: He (the Exalted) said: There emerged among My
servants a believer in Me and a disbeliever. As for the one who said: Our

375

As for the one who said: Our rain takes place because of Allah’s Bene-
faction and Mercy; such a person. believes in Me and disbelieves in planets.

As for the one...

rain takes place because of Allah (the Exaited) and His Mercy, such a per-
son 15 a believer in Me; a disbeliever in planets. As for the one who said:
Our rain takes place during such and such a phase; such a person disbelieves
in Me and believes in planets).

Zaid ben Knaied Al-Jouhni is a famous companion. He died in the year
68 A.H and it was said in other years. He was 85 years old when he died.

His saying: (When he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
finished praying and turned to those people praying behind him, he said,

282 - «Haven’t you heard what your Lord has said to night?». This is
among the Honourable Hadiths. It shows that a savant put a question be-
fore his companions testing them.

His saying: (They said: Allah and His Holy Messenger know best). This
shows good manners of the one asked about that which he does not know;
he just says that this knowledge belongs to the one who knows it. That is a
must.

His saying: (There emerged among My servants). That is to say show-
ing that people are divided into a believer and a disbeliever. In that connec-
tion Allah (the Exalted) has said: «He who has created you; and of you are
some that are unbelievers, and some that are believers.» (64: 2).

His saying: (A believer in Me and a disbeliever). If one believes that the
phases of the moon do affect rain fall, then such a person has committed
polytheism in Lordship. A polytheist is a disbeliever even if he didnot think
so. It is considered a minor polytheism because he attributed benefaction of
Allah (the Exalted) to other than Him (the Exalted) and because Allah (the
Exalted) did not make the phase a reason for rain; rather, it is the result of
Ailah’s (the Exalted) Benefaction and Mercy; He withholds it if He (the Ex-
alted) wishes.

This Honourable Hadith also shows that it is not allowable for any one
to add to Allah’s deeds to other than Allah (the Exalted) even metaphori-
cally.

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: (This Honourable
Hadith includes realizing belief in this topic). It shows that it is verily faith.

His saying: (As for the one who says: Our rain takes place because of

376

.. who says our rain takes place during such and such a phase, such person

is a disbeliever in Me and a believer is planets...

Allah’s Benefaction and Mercy). Verily benefaction and mercy are two of
Allah’s (the Exalted) attributes. And the peopie of the Sunna: Veriiy that
which Ailah (the Exalted) used to describe Himself and that which His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)used to describe
such as: Life, Knowledge, Mercy with which He has compassion for His ser-
vanis. All these attributes are praticular to Allah (the Exalted) and do not
belong to any body else.

This Honourable Hadith also means: Verily it is not allowable to add
or attribute to Allah’s benefaction but to Him; He (the Exalted) Alone is
praised for it; that is the case of the people of Monotheism.

His saying: (As for the one who says: Our rain takes place during such
and such a phase). Till the end of the Honourable Hadith; this was dis-
cussed above.

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: (This Honourable
Hadith includes realizing disbelief in this topic).

He indicates that attributing benefaction to other than Allah (the Ex-
alted) is disbelief, that is why some savants have asserted that it is pro-
scribed even though it is not believed that the phases can effect rainfall.
Thus it is considered as disbelieving in Allah’s benefaction because it is not
attributed to the one who grants it and because it is attributed to someone
zlse; in that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «They recognize the fa-
vours of Allah’ then they deny them». (16: 83).

Al-Kurtobi said while interpreting Zaid ben Khaled’s Honourable Ha-
dith: The Arabs used to do the following; if a star rose in the East and an-
other fell in the West and this was followed by rain or win; some of them
used to attribute that to the rising star while others to the falling using
terms such as create or make, and they used to say that term mentioned in
the Honourable Hadith. Thus the religious legislator forbade that so that no
one believes in what they believed, or identify with what they said.

His saying: Some of them used to attribute that... using terms such as
create or make -this shows that some of them did not believe in that, as
Allah (the Exalted) said, «And if indeed thou ask them who it is that sends
down rain from the sky, and gives life there with to the earth after its death,
they will certainly reply, «Allah says, ‘Praise be to Allah!’ But most of them
do not understand.» (29: 63).

377

... aS creating the rain. Yet those may think that phases have something to
do with it. Al-Kurtobi in his interpretation did not staie that all Arabs be-
lieved as such. Thus it is not objected in the Holy Verse because of the
above mentioned probability that, «this is indeed an honourable Koran, in a
well-guarded book...

Also they narrated after Ibn Abbas: «Some said: Such a phase and such
a phase predicted rain truthfully. So Allah (the Exalted) sent down the fol-
lowing Holy Verses, «Furthermore I call to witness the setting of the stars, -
and that is indeed a mighty adjuration if ye but know, that this is indeed an
honourable Koran, in a well-guarded Book, which none shall touch but those
who are clean: A Revelatoin from the Lord of the Worlds. It is such a Mes-
sage that ye would hold iin light esteem? And have ye made it your livelihood
that ye should declare it false?» (56: 75-82).And it was narrated after Ibn Ab-
bad who said: «It raised during the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) time, so he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said: Some of the people are unbelievers. They said: That is Al-
lah’s Mercy while some said: Such and such a phase of the moon predicted
rain truthfully». He said: Thus the Holy verse was sent down, «furthermore
I call to witness the setting of the stars).

That is an oath by Allah (Be the blessed and raised above). He (the Ex-
alted) swears by any of His creatures on whom He desires. The answer to
the other (it is the Holy Quran). This means: It is not as you claimed that
the Holy Koran is magic or fortune- telling; rather, it is a Holy Koran. Ibn
Jarir said: Some Arabs said: The meaning of His saying: (Furthermore I call
to witness). It is not as you say; then the oath was continued: The setting of
the stars. Ibn Abbas said: He (the Exalted) means the stars of the Holy Kor-
an since it was descended in the night of «Kadrm. From the upper sky to the
lower sky, then it was descended [to earth] part by part the years to follow.
Then Ibn Abbas read this Holy Verse. Their settings: Their descending one
after the other. Mujahid said: The setting of the stars are the places where
they rise and set. Ibn Jarir chose that interpretation. Accordingly the congru-
ence between that sworn by and that sworn on-which is the Holy Koran has

many aspects:

The first is that Allah (the Exalted) has created them in order to guide
people in the darkness of land and sea, while the Holy Verses of the Holy
Koran are used to guide people in the darkness of ignorance and sin. The
former constitutes guidance in physical darkness, while the Holy Koran con-
١ stitutes guidance in moral darkness. So He (the Exalted) paired between

378

والعا و قاع و ع قافقده فاع عفدفاجو واو مد فاو و هداع قا وداه مااع ده دقان وار واد ودود وام هاه ده .اماه و .افاي واو وا وان و وام هد ود فاو .م وامام د و هس موا وهام .ا اوها .ها عد قا مداه 2ه م .ا م .اماه

these two types of darkness in addition to apparent decoration of the stars.
In the Holy Koran there is hidden decoration, and in addition to the ston-
ing of the Shaitans characteristic of the stars, while in the Holy Koran there
are connoted stoning of the Shaitans of mankind and the Shaitans of Jinns.
The stars are observable by eyes while the Holy Verses of the Holy Koran
are recited and heard; in addition to what morals and denotation their set-
ting in the west have, as well indicating the Holy Verses and their places of
descending. This was mentioned by Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be
upon him).

His saying: (And that is indeed a mighty adjuration). Ibn Kathir said:
That is to say verily that is the oath which I used; it is verily a great one; if
you had known its greatness, you would have aggrandized the one using it.

His saying: (That this is indeed an Honourable Koran). That is: The
sworn on, the Holy Koran, that is to say it is Revelation from Allah (the
Exalted) and His words sent down, not as the unbelievers say: It is magic
and fortune-telling or poetry; rather, it is a Holy Koran, that is to say great
and has much benefaction because it is what Allah (the Exalted) said.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Describing Him
(the Exalted) by using the terms necessitated by His Goodness, Benefaction,
and Exaltedness. Verily the generous is the glorious who has much benefac-
tion; it is the best and most virtuous of everything. Allah (Be the blessed
and raised above) described Himself (the Exalted) by generosity, He also
used the same term to describe His words, His Throne and whatever of the
plants that has much benefaction and good appearance that is why the term
«generous» was explained as good. Al-Azhari said: Generous is a name that
includes all that is praised, and Allah (the Exalted) is generous and has
beautiful deeds, and it is a Generous Koran that is praised because of the
guidance, eloquence, knowledge and wisdom which it contains.

His saying: (In a well-guarded book) that is to say in an exalted and
revered book. This was said by [bn Kathir.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: The interpreters
conflicted about this; thus it was said: This well guarded tabled; the truth is
that the book which 15 in the angels hands and that is which is mentioned in
the Holy Verse, «(It is) in Books held (greatly) in honour, exalted (in dignity),
kept pure and holy (written) by hands of scribes-honourable, pious and Just»
(80: 13-16). His (the Exalted) saying (which none shall touch but those who
are clean) indicates that it 15 the book that angels carry, and that they touch

379

.. which none shall touch but those who are clean: A Revelation from the

Lord of the worlds. It is such a Message that ye would hold in light es-
teem?» (56: 75-82).

it with their hands.

His saying: (Which none shall touch but those who are clean). Ibn Ab-
bas (May Allah be pleased with them) said: «None shall touch but those
who are clean. He said: The book that is in the sky.» And in another Ver-
sion, «None shall touch but those who are clean: This means the angels».
Kutada said: «None at Allah’s (the Exalted) shall touch but those who are
clean.» As for the present life it is touched by the Magus, unclean, hypo-
crite, and filthy». This explanation was chosen and adopted by many among
them are Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him). Ibn Zaid said:
Quraish claimed that this Holy Koran was brought down by the Shaitans,
thus Allah (the Exalted) informed that none shall touch it but those who are
clean. Concerning Allah (the Exalted) said: «No evil ones have brought down
this (Revelation). It would neither suit them nor would they be able (to produce
it). Indeed they have been removed far from even (a chance of) heariny it.»
(26: 210-212) Ibn Kathir said: This is a good discussion and it does not con-
tradict that which came before it. Al-Bukhary (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him)said in the Saheeh about this Holy Verse, «None can taste it but those
who believe in it.»

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: This is what the
Holy Verse points at and draws attention to, understands it and thinks
about it but he who witnesses that it is really Allah’s words that have been
really spoken and sent down as Revelation on His Holy Messenger (May AI-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him). None shall understand its meanings
but he whose heart does not have any wrong-doing whatsoever.

Others said: (None shall touch it but those who are clean) that is to
say clean from sexual impurity and excrement. They said: The terms of
the Holy Verse is information that carries the meaning of request. They
said: What is meant by the Koran here is the Holy Koran and as evi-
dence they gave what Malek narrated in «Al-Mouwatta‘’» after Abdullah
ben Hazm.

248 - «Verily it is mentioned in the letter written by Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger to Amr ben Hazm: Verily none shall touch the Holy Koran but a
clean person».

380

This Honourable Hadith 0156115565 many issues:

The first: Intepreting the Holy Verse of Al-Wagia.

The second: Mentioning the four [Characteristic habits] of Pre-Islamic
people.

The third: Mentioning that some of them is disbelief.

His saying: (A Revelation from the Lord of the worlds). Ibn Kathir
said: This Holy Koran is sent down by the Lord of the worlds and not as
you say that it is magic, fortune-telling or poetry; rather, it is the undoubtful
truth and this Holy Verse says that they are Allah’s spoken words.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said; that which is si-
milar to it, «But the word from Me». (32: 13) And, «Say the Holy Spirit has
brought the revelation from thy Lord in Truth.» (16: 102). That is a proof that
Allah (the Exalted) is above His creatures. Since verily bringing [down (as the
Arabic term means)} is that action perceived by minds and realized by inborn
nature, that is the arrival of something from an upper place to a lower one, He
(the Exalted) said: «And he sent down for you eight heads of cattle in pairs».
(39: 6) because we say: Verily the one who sent them above His (the Ex-
alted) case with the creatures; how is it proper with His perfect Lordship
over them, to leave them in vain, ignore them, and create them to no avail.
That is to say, does not command them, prohibit them, reward them, or
punish them? Thus he who acknowledges that He (the Exalted) is the Lord
of the worlds, acknowledges that He (the Exalted) is the Lord of the worlds,
acknowledges that the Holy Koran is sent down by Him (the Exalted) or
His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), and
concluded through His being the Lord of the worlds that His Holy Messen-
ger’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) Message is Truthful;
this conclusion is stronger and more virtuous than concluding through mira-
cles and supernatural acts, even though they constitute a closer evidence as
far as the minds of common people are concerned. Such proof is particular
to those intellectuals.

His saying: (It is such a Message that ye would hold in light esteem?)
Mujahid said: Do you want to support and trust them?.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Then He (the
Exalted) reprimanded them because they hold light esteem where it should
not be held and that they flatter where they should let it be known,

381

The fourth: Verily some of unbelief is that which does .
from the sect.

The fifth: His saying, «There is among My servants a believer in Me
and a disbeliever» Because of the [falling rain] benefaction.

The sixth: Realizing faith in this part.
The seventh: Realizing disbelief in this part.

The eighth: Realizing his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) saying: (Such and such a phase [of the moon] predicted the
truth). |

The ninth: Teaching something by asking about it when he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Do you know what
your Lord said?».

The tenth: Warning the wailing woman.

And have ye made it your livelihood that ye should declare it false?) (56:
75-82).

adopted, fought for and made peace for, nor should one turn from it to the
right or left, nor should the heart turn to someone else for justice, nor
should one claim enmity but for His sake. There is guidance for reaching es-
teemed goals but through His light, no cure but through Him (the Exalted);
He (the Exalted) is the essence of existence, the life of the world, the source
of happiness, leader to success and happiness, leader to success and to the
road of deliverance, the path to right guidance and the light of insight. So
how is flattery requested in His (the Exalted) case while He (the Exalted)
sent down every thing for the sake of Truth. Flatter is practiced concerning
that which is invalid and strong and cannot be eliminated, or concerning a
weak subject that cannot be supported. Thus the flatterer needs to let some
truth and adopt some falsehood; but that Truth upon which is erected every
other Truth, how can such a thing be flattered?

His saying: (And ye have made it your livelihood that ye should declare
it false?) This was discussed earlier. Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

382

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Yet there are men who take (for worship)
others besides Allah, as equal (with Allah): They love them as they should love
Allal» (2: 165).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter: Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Yet there are men
who take (for worship) others besides Allah, as equal (with Allah): They icve
them as they should love Allah» (2: 165)).

When loving Him (Be the blessed and raised above) has been the es-
sence of the religion of Islam around which it rotates, thus when this love is
perfect then this faith becomes perfect, and when it is defective, then man’s
unification becomes defective. The writer has drawn the attention to that in
this interpretation.

His saying: (Yet there are men who take (for worship) others besides
Allah, as equal (with Allah)) till the end of the Holy Verse. He said in his
«Sharh Al-Manazei» Allah (the Exalted) informed that any one who loves
besides Allah (the Exalted) something, then he has taken besides Him (the
Exalted) others as equal to Him (the Exalted), such is an equal in loving not
in Lordship and creation. Since verily none of the people of the earth do not
confirm such an equal, that is contrary to the equal in loving. Verily most of
the people of the earth have taken as equals to Allah (the Exalted) in love
and aggrandizing. Then He (the Exalted) said: «But those of faith are over-
flowing in their love for Allah». (2: 165) This Holy verse has two connota-
tions: One of them says: And those who believe in Allah (the Exalted) are
more loving to Allah (the Exalted) than those other gods and aggrandize
them regardless of Allah (the Exalted).

It was narrated by Ibn Jarir after Mujahid concerning His (the Exalted)
saying: «They love them as they should love Allah (the Exalted)». Then he
narrated after Ibn Zaid, he said: Those polytheists have their gods which are

383

اي ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ااا ا ا ا ا ا اا الا ‎a‏

their equals whom they loved and worshipped with Allah (the Exalted); they
love them as those believers love yet those who believe love Allah (the Ex-
alted) more than those who love their gods.

The second: Those who believe love of Allah (the Exalted) more than
those who join partners [as equals] with Allah (the Exalted). Thus verily the
believers’ loving is pure and the polytheists’ loving of their equals [with
Allah (the Exalted) ] is impure; pure loving is more powerful than that
which has partners. These two explanations are built on what Allah (the
Exalted) said: «They love them as they should love Allah». Also about this
there are two interpretations; the first; they love them [The partners] as they
love Allah (the Exalted); thus He (the Exalted) would have confirmed that
they love Allah (the Exalted). Then Allah (the Exalted) showed that the
believers’ love of Allah (the Exalted) is greater and more powerful than the
polytheists love of those partners [equals] .

Sheikh Al-Islam, Ibn Taymiyya (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) pre-
ferred the first explanation and said: Rather, they were dispraised because
they joined between Allah (the Exalted) and their equals [of Allah] in loving
and they were not purely and only loving of Allah (the Exalted) as the be-
lievers loved Allah. This equivalence is mentioned in His saying: A story
about them while in Hell-Fire. Telling their gods and equals present with
them during their torture, «By Allah, we were truly in a manifest error when
we held you as equals with the Lord of the Worlds». (26: 97) And it is known
that they did not hold them as equals [of Allah (the Exalted)] in creation or
lordship; rather, they held them as equal in love and aggrandizement and
that is repeated by him (Be the blessed and raised above) in the following
Holy Verse, «Praise be to Allah, who created the Heavens and the earth, and
made the Darkness and the Light. Yet those who reject faith hold (others) as
equal with their Gaurdian-Lord». (6: 1) That is to say they held others as
partners in worship which is loving and aggrandizing.

He (the Exalted) said: «Say, ‘If ye do love Allah, follow me, Allah will
love you». (3: 31) This is called the Holy Verse of trial. Some of those who
came before said: A group of people claimed to love Allah (the Exalted) so
He (Be the blessed and raised above) sent down this Holy Verse: «Say, ‘If ye
do love Allah, fellow me, Allah will love you.» (3: 31). This was sent down as
an indication of the consequence and benefit of loving Allah (the Exalted);
thus the sign and indicator of this loving is: Following Allah’s Holy Messen-
ger; its consequence and benefit is the loving of the sender. Thus if you do

384

2 2 > - + خ 7 + ح + ع ا ا ا ا ا ا ا الح ‎SS‏

not consistantly foliow, then your love is not taking place and His (the Ex-
alied) love 15 denied.

Allah (the Exalted) has said: «O ye who believe! If any from among you
turn back from his Faith, soon will Allah produce people whom He will love as
they will love Him, -lowly with the believers, mighty against the rejectors,
fighting in the way of Allah, and never afraid of the reproaches». (5: 57) He
(the Exalted) mentioned ‘our signs:

‘ihe first is that they are lowly with the believers. It was said: It means that

y are tencer, merciful pitiful and kind with the believers: when He (the Ex-

a een connoted the term «Lowly » with those meanings He (the Exalted) then

said «with» Ata* Cviay Aliah’s Mercy be upon him) said: 7} ney are to the believ-

i child to his father, and asa servant to his master: while with ti rejecters

e like th elion with his prey, (And these whe are with hin: are ‏ع‎ strong
ine unbelievers, (but) compassionate amongst each other) » (48: 25

at

ot
Led
bet
2622
et
el = 2

The third sign: Holy struggle for Allah’s (the Exalted) sake can be by
the soul, hand, money and tongue. That is accomplishing or realizing the
claimed love.

The fourth sign: Verily they are not affected, concerning this love. by
reproacnhes.

This is an indication that this love is truthful. Thus every loving person
who reproaches or blames his beloved is not really loving. Allah (the Ex-
alted) has said: «These whom they call upon do desire (for themselves} means
of access to their Lord,)- even those who are nearest: They hope for His
Mercy and fear His Wrath». (17: 57). Thus He (Be the blessed and raised
above) mentioned the three ranks in love. It is desiring approaching Him
(the Exalted) and pleading to Him (the Exalted} by doing righteous deeds.
Hope and fear show that desiring the means is an additional issue hoping
for mercy and fear of torture. It is absolutely known that the competition
can not but for approaching he whose proximity is loved, and loving his
proximity is a cosequence for loving his essence or self; rather, loving his self
necessitated loving his proximity.

The Juhmites believed: All that is not true; they believe that His (the
Exalted) essence does not approach anything; nothing can approach His (Be
the blessed and raised above) self; He (the Exalted) does not love either, so
they denied the life of hearts [Affection], the happiness of spirits, the joy of
souls, and delight of the eye and the highest delight of the present and the

385

ام ةم مم رم مم ةيم ءامو م ةق ةمهم ممه م ممم مم رهن ةن ة ةم مل ةن ةن ة ةم مم ثم ثم قم ع مع عم عد مج خدج 26 06ج 2 0 511

Afterlife. That is what their hearts were stricken by rqughness and toughness
and between them and Allah (the Exalted) there existed a screen that
prevented them from knowing Him (Be the blessed and raised above) and
loving Him (Be the blessed and raised above); thus they do not know Him
(the Exalted), love or invoke Him (the Exalted) but when His names and
attributes are suspended, thus mentioning those attributes or names is
among the greatest and most serious sins; rather, they punish the one who
invokes Him (the Exalted) by saying His names and attributes and call them
as an attribute they are more deserving. It is sufficient for he who has
insight and a living heart to see and how is their rough and tough folk they
may love Allah (the Exalted) unifying and knowing Him (the Exalted) as
something repelled and disgusting. We seek the aid of Allah (the Exalted) .

He (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) also said: Loving can not be
bound by bounds which are more obvious than it. Verily those boundaries
only increase its privacy. Thus limiting it denotes its existence, and loving
can not be described by that which is more obvious than loving itself;
rather, people discuss its causes, consequences, signs, evidence, results and
rules. And the most agreed upon discussion concerning that is what was
mentioned by Abu Bakr Al-Kitani who narrated after Al-Junaid.

Abu Bakr said: «A discussion concerning love took place at Mecca -
May Allah (the Exalted). Cherish this city at the season of Hajj- Thus the
sheikhs discussed and Al-Junaid was the youngest among them. Thereupon
they said: Tell us what you want to say, O Iraqi [Maz who comes from
Iraq], and he bowed his head and his eyes were filled with tears. Then he
said: A servant who forgets about himself, continuously invokes his Lord,
rising to give Him (the Exalted) that which is due to Him (the Exalted),
looking at Him (the Exalted) through his heart; he burnt his heart by the
lights of His (the Exalted) Reverence; his drink from the cup of His love
which is pure, modesty is uncovered by the screens of His unseen; thus if he
talks, he talks by Allah (the Exalted); if he speaks, he speaks about Allah
(the Exalted); if he moves, he moves by Allah’s command; if he dwells, he
dwells with Allah; he is for Allah. So the sheikhs wept and said: Nothing
can be added to this; may Allah (the Exalted) support you, O the crown of
those who know».

He (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) mentioned also: Verily the causes
that bring love are ten:

The first: Rehearsing the Holy Koran by thinking about and under-
standing its meanings and its aims.

386

And His (the Exalted) saying: «Say, ‘If it be that your fathers, your
sons, your brothers, your mates, or your kindered; the wealth that ye have
gained; the commerce in which ye fear a decline; or the dwellings in which ye
delight- are dearer to you than Allah, or His Apostle, or the Striving in His
cause; - then wait until Allah brings about His Decision». (9: 24).

The second: Currying favor with Allah (the Exalted) by performing that
which is supererogatory after performing that which is required.

The third: Invoking Him (the Exalted) continuously and under all cir-
cumstances, through the tongue, the heart, and deeds. His share from love is
equal to these performances.

The fourth: Prefering loving Him (the Exalted) to your other loved ob-
jects when desire predominates.

The fifth: The heart’s rehearsing of His (the Exalted) names and attri-
butes, and observing them and researching restlessly within the gardens and
realms of knowledge.

The sixth: Observing His kindness, benefaction, and favors; both in the
hidden and in the open.

The seventh: -This is the most astounding- when between His hands,
the heart breaks. |

The eighth: Seclusion during divine descension. [That is two thirds of
the night pass] and rehearsing His Holy Koran, then ending that by repen-
tence and asking for forgiveness.

The ninth: Sitting with the truthful and loving, and catching from what
they say, the best; and not talking unless you realize that talking is benefi-
cial and is profitable for you and for others.

The tenth: Putting away every cause that parts between the heart and
Allah (Be the blessed and raised above).

Thus through these ten causes, the lovers have reached the ranks of
love and joined the beloved.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Say, ‘If it be that your
fathers, your sons, your brothers, your mates, or you kindred; the wealth that
ye have gained; the commerce in which ye fear a decline: Or the dwellings in
which ye delight- are dearer to you than Allah, or His Apostle, or the striving
in His cause; -then wait until Allah brings about His Decision: and Allah
guides not the rebillions». (9: 24).

Allah (the Exalted) commanded His Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) to warn the one who loves his relatives, prop-
erty, kindred, trade and habitat; all or some, more than Allah (the Exalted)

387

It was narrated after Anas that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
)lessings and peace be upon him) said, «None of you becomes a believer un-

ess he loves me more than he loves his child, father and people altogether.»
This was narrated by both.

required him to perform, those performances loved and accepted by Allah
(the Exalted) such as immigration, Holy struggle and the like.

The authority Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: That
is to say if those things were (loved by you more than you loved Allah (the
Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) and the Holy struggle for the sake of Allah (the Exalted) that is to say
wait for the punishment that will befall you. Imam Ahmad and Abu Da-
wud- the text is his- narrated after Abi Abdur-Rahman As-Salami after Ata’
Al-Khurasani after Nafi’ Ibn Omar (May Allah be pleased with them) that
the later said: I heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) saying,

285 - «If you buy and sell oxen, take the tail of cows, accept planting and
dropped Holy struggle, Allah (the Exalted) would set upon you lowliness which
He (the Exalted) would never remove unless you go back to your religion».

Thus it is necessary for Allah’s servant to prefer that which is loved and
wanted by Allah (the Exalted) to that which is loved and wanted by the ser-
vant, so he loves what Allah (the Exalted) loves and hates what Allah (the
Exalted) hates; he supports those supported by Him (the Exalted) and de-
clares enmity against those declared enemies by Him (the Exalted), and fol-
lows His Holy Messenger as was mentioned in the Holy Verse of Trial as
well as in those similar to it.

His saying: (It was narrated after Anas (May Allah be pleased with
him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said,

286 - «None of you becomes a believer unless he loves me more than he
loves his child, his father and people altogether». It was narrated by both).
That 15 to say Moslem and Al-Bukhary.

His saying: (None of you becomes a believer) That is to say the required be-
lief, and that which is meant here is its perfection, so that the Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is more beloved by the servant
than the servant’s child, father and people altogether; rather, this perfection is
not accomplished unless the Holy Messenger is loved by the servant more than
the servant loves himself, as narrated by the Honourable Hadith,

287 - «Verily Omar ben Al-Khattab (May Allah be pleased with him)
said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon

388

They narrated after him: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said, «There are three (characteristics] leading one
to the delightfulness of Faith...

him) I love you more than anything but not more than myself. He (May Al-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: By the One who possesses my
soul, I will be beloved by you more than you love yourself. Thereupon
Omar told him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him): Now you
are loved by me more than I love myself, so He (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said: O, Omar, now». This was narrated by Al-Bukhary.

He who said: That denied is perfection, if he wanted the required per-
fection which the one who drops is dispraised and is made liable to punish-
ment, then he said the truth; and if he meant that that which is denied is
desired perfection, such was never mentioned by Allah (the Exalted) or by
His Holy Messeger, (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). This
was said by Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

Thus he who claims loving the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) without following his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) path and preceding what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said to what others said, is considered a liar as Allah (the Exalted) has
said, «They say, ‘We believe in Allah and in the Apostle, and we obey.’ But
even after that, some of them turn away; they are not (Really) believers.» (24:
47). Thus He (the Exalted) rejected to call believers those who turned away
from obeying the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him). However, every Moslem is a loving Moslem in as much as he has of
Islam and each Moslem has to be a believer even though his belief is not an
absolute one, because that happens only to those distinguished believers.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: As for the
commoners who became Moslems after they were disbelievers, or if they
were born Moslems and adhered to the rules of Islam and they obeyed
Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger. They are Moslems and their
Faith is a general one. However, embracing the true faith to their hearts
takes place gradually if Allah (the Exalted) grants them that, otherwise,
many people do not reach certainty nor to Holy struggle, if they were
subjected to doubt, they would doubt; if they were ordered to go to the
Holy struggle, they would not go because they do not possess of the certain
knowledge what dispels doubt, nor do they possess of the strength of love
for Allah (the Exalted) and His Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) what they precede to relatives and property, for if those were

389

... to verily love Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) more than anything else...

guarded from trial, they died and entered the Garden; and if they were
afflicted by someone who brought them that which is suspicious, they would
become full of doubt and move to a type of hypocrisy.

This Honourable Hadith says: Verily eminent deeds are from faith, be-
cause love is a deed of the heart.

It also says: Verily loving Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) is an obligation and is necessitated by loving
Allah (the Exalted) , it is love for Allah’s sake and for Him (the Exalted) at
the same time, it increases by augmenting the love of Allah (the Exalted) in
the heart of the believer and decreases when that decreases. Such love does-
not include any of the impurities of polytheism such as depending on Him
(the Exalted) and pleading Him to fulfill a need or to dispel something
feared. And that loving which has impurities of polytheism such as clinging
to others and currying their favor besides Allah (the Exalted), by this one
can distinguish between loving by Allah (the Exalted) and for Allah which is
the perfection of unification and between loving [Someone] with Allah which
is loving equals [to Allah (the Exalted)] besides Him (the Exalted) due to
what adheres to the hearts of polytheists of that divinity which is not allow-
able but for Allah (the Exalted).

His saying: (And they-that is to say Al-Bukhary and Moslem- narrated
after Anas (May Allah be pleased with him)- who said: Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,

288 - «There are three [characteristics] in whomever they are, they lead
him to the delightfulness of Faith: To verify the love to Allah (the Exalted)
and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
more than anything else; to love only for Allah (the Exalted); to hate to re-
turn to disbelieve after being salvaged by Allah (the Exalted) from it as he
hates to be thrown into Fire.» And in another version, «No one discovers
the delight of Faith till he loves only for the sake of Allah (the Exalted) ....
till the end of the Honourable Hadith.»).

His saying: (They lead him to delightfulness of faith). Delightfulness
here is expressed through sense because of that enjoyment, happiness, de-
light and nourishment of the heart, and that is something left and found by
the people of faith in their hearts.

Al-Seyouti (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said in «At-Tawshih».
«He found the delight of Faith» This includes an imaginable metaphor. He
compared the believer’s desire in Faith as something sweet and proved that

390

... to love only for Allah (the Exalted); to hate to return to disbelief after being
salvaged by Allah (the Exalted) from it as he hates to be thrown into Fire».

it is contingent.

An-Nawawi said: Delight of Faith means enjoying obedience, tolerating
hardships and prefering them to the matters of the present life; and the ser-
vant’s love to Allah (the Exalted) by obeying Him (the Exalted) and leaving
what contradicts Him (the Exalted). The same thing goes for the Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

Yahya ben Mouath said: The truth about loving Allah (the Exalted): It
does not increase by piety nor is it decreased by roughness.

His saying: (Verily the love to Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) are more than any-
thing else). By «else» he means all that is naturally loved by man, such as
loving one’s children, property and the like.

Al-Khatabi said: What is meant here by loving is that love which is
chosen not that which is natural. That is what he said.

As for polytheistic love which was discussed above, whether much or lit-
tle all of it contradicts loving Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger.
And in some Honourable Hadiths it was said,

289 - «Love Allah (the Exalted) with all of your hearts». Thus among
the signs of loving Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger is: Loving
what Allah (the Exalted) loves and hating what Allah (the Exalted) hates
and the prayers to please Him (the Exalted) rather than others, and striving
to please Him (the Exalted) as such as he can, and to avoid what Allah (the
Exalted) proscribed and to hate it most, and to follow His Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and obey him (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) and leave what he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) ordered him to leave.

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «He who obeys the
Apostle, obeys Allah.» (4: 80) Thus he who prefers others to him (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and contradicts what he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) prohibited, that constitutes a sign
not loving Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him). Verily loving the Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is necessitated by loving Allah (the
Exalted). Thus he who loves Allah (the Exalted) and obeys Him (the
Exalted), loves the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be

391

ملام عاقدءد عه مار م فا ودح فده واوا واه عام م واأفادود هار و وا واقا را فاه ماو وا و وا ناماو م و وأا قا عه رواوا جم فع ءاره مار قد وا قء د ند قارد نا ته ل ع هم دج ع ع 5 ع د ع * تع * 5 5 55

upon him) and obeys him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).
And he who does not [love him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) and obey him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)] then he
doesnot [love and obey Him (the Exalted)] as was mentioned in the Holy
Verse of Trial and those similar to it. May Allah (the Exalted) aid us.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: The Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) informed that in
whomever there existed three.characteristics, finds the delight of Faith,
because finding delight of something follows loving it. Thus whoever loves
something and desires it; if he gets what he wants and desires, then he will
find delight, pleasure and happiness in that and pleasure is something that
follows that which is suitable which is the beloved or the desired. He said:
Thus the delight of faith that includes pleasure and happiness follows the
perfection of the servants love of Allah (the Exalted) and that is through
three things: Perfecting loving, performing it and repelling that which
contradicts it. Thus perfection is when Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) become loved by
the servant more than any body else, since loving Allah (the Exalted) and
His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is not
enough; rather, it is necessary that Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) become more
beloved by the servant rather than any one else.

I said: Loving Allah (the Exalted) requires loving to obey Him (the Ex-
alted) since He (the Exalted) verily loves to be obeyed by the one who wor-
ships Him (the Exalted), and a lover loves that which is loved by his lover.

And among the requirements of loving Allah (the Exalted) also: Loving
the people who obey Him (the Exalted) such as loving His prophets, messen-
gers, and righteous men among His servants. Thus loving what Allah (the
Exalted) loves and whom Allah (the Exalted) loves is among the things that
perfect Faith, as was narrated by Ibn Abbas.

He said: Performing it; this means that one should not love but for
Allah’s sake. He said: Repelling that which contradicts it means to hate that
which is against faith as he hates to be thrown into Hell-Fire.

His saying: (To verily love Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) more than anything else.
This was explained in two ways:

392

And tn another narration, «None can reach the delight of Faith» Till
the end of the Honourable Hadith.

It was also narrated after Ibn Abbas, «He who loves for Allah (the Ex-
alted), hates for Him, supports [others], antagonizing for Him. Verily Allah’s
support is gained through these...

The first: That one should love them both and that loving one of them
only is invalid.

290 - He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ordered a
speaker [At the Friday prayers] to talk about Allah (the Exalted) and His
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) indepen-
dently without joining them.

The second: The speaker’s speech would be more polite and the more
deserving, and that is the allowable.

A third answer: This was originally mentioned and the speaker’s speech
is a tradition thus it is more acceptable.

His saying: (As he hates to be thrown into Hell-Fire) that is to say both
cases are considered by him as equivalent. This includes a response to those
who suppose that when a servant commits a sin, this will absolutely decrease
his right even though he repents while that which is correct is the following.
Verily if he did not repent, decrement would take place and if he repents,
then [decrement] would not take place. That is why the Immigrants and An-
sar (May Allah be pleased with them) are considered among the best of this
nation even though originally they were unbelievers, whom Allah (the Ex-
alted) guided to Islam and Islam effaces that which took place before it; the
same thing goes for immigration. There is a righteous Honourable Hadith
about that.

His saying: (And in another narration: none can reach). This narration
was told by Al-Bukhary in his Saheeh and it goes as follows, «None can
reach the delight of faith till the one who loves only for Allah (the Exalted)
and till throwing him into fire becomes more desired by him than returning
to disbelief after being saved from it by Allah (the Exalted) and till he loves
Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) more than anything else».

It was mentioned before, that loving here is considered as a kind of
worship concerning that delight, pleasure, happiness, reverence, veneration
and all that which follows these are reached or achieved by the believer.

His saying: (It was narrated after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased
393

.. and no servant would discover the taste of faith, no matter how fre-
quently he prays or fasts till he becomes as such. It has become a genera]
practice that people follow each other concerning matters of the present life;

that does not ever benefit those who practise it.» It was narrated by Ibn Jar-

Ir.

with them) who said: [He who loves for Allah’s sake hates for Allah’s sake,
supports for Allah and antagorizes for Allah (the Exalted). Verily Allah’s
support is gained through these, and no servant would discover the test of
faith, no matter how frequently he prayed or fasted, till he becomes as such.
It has become a general practice that people follow each other concerning
matters of the present life; that does not ever benefit those who practise it.»
It was narrated by Ibn Jarir).

His saying: (He who loves for Allah’s sake. That is to say he loves the
people of beliefs in Allah (the Exalted) and those who obey Him (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) because of that.

His saying: (Hates for Allah (the Exalted) ) that is to say hates those
who disbelieve in Allah (the Exalted) and join in partners with Him and dis-
obey Him, he hates them because what they did makes Allah (the Exalted)
wrathful even though they may be among those very close to Him (the Ex-
alted). Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said: «Thou wilt not find any
people who believe in Allah and the Last Day loving those who resist Allah
and His Apostle... till the end of the Holy Verse». (58: 22).

His saying: (Supported for Allah (the Exalted)). This condition and the
one before it are requirements of the servants love of Allah (the Exalted) be-
comes strong in his heart, the more such actions resulting from them be-
come strong; when they become perfect the process of unification performed
by the servant becomes perfect and its weakness takes place relative to the
weakness of the servant’s love of his Lord (the Exalted), thus there is the
poor, the rich and the deprived [concerning such loving].

His saying: (Verily Allah’s (the Exalted) support is gained through
these). That is to say His support from His servant; that is to say brother-
hood, loving and support. Ahmad and At-Tabarani narrated after the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) who said,

291 - «A servant cannot reach frank faith till he loves and hates for
Allah (the Exalted). If he loves and hates for Allah (the Exalted), then he
deserves Allah’s (the Exalted) aid and support.» And it is narrated in
another Honourable Hadith,

394

Ibn Abbas said concerning Allah’s saying, «And all relations between
them would be cut off». (2: 166) He said that it is «Friendliness and inti-
macy».

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Interpreting the Holy Verse of Baqara.

The second: Interpreting the Holy Verse of Baraat [Immunity] or
{[Tauba (Repentance)].

The third: It is necessary to love him (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) more than one loves himself, wife and children and
property.

The fourth: Denying faith does not indicate leaving Islam.
The fifh: That faith has delight that man may or may not reach.

The sixth: The four deeds of the heart that Allah’s support is not
achieved without reaching the taste of Faith.

The seventh: How the companion understand reality.

292 - «The strongest bond of Faith is his love for Allah (the Exalted).
It was narrated by At-Tabarani.

His saying: (And no servant would discover the taste of Faith) till the
end of the Honourable Hadith. That is to say he would not acquire the
taste, pleasure, and delight of Faith even though he frequently prays or fasts
unless he becomes as such; that is to say until he loves, hates and antagi-
nizes for Allah (the Exalted) and supports for Him.

11 was narrated in Abi Umama’s Honourable Hadith,

293 - «He who loves, hates, gives and forbids for Allah (the Exalted),
then he has perfected his Faith». This was narrated by Abu Dawud.

His saying: (It has become a general practice that people follow each
other concerning matters of present life; that does not ever benefit those
who practise it). That is to say it does not profit them; rather, as Allah (the
Exalted) has said, it harms them, «Friends on that Day will be foes, one to
another, -except the righteous» (43: 67). Thus if affliction prevailed at the
time of Ibn Abbas which is considered the best among the centuries, then
after that time, the situation augmented till people supported each other con-
cerning polytheism, innovation, sin and disobedience. In fact what he (May

395

قوع قم »قاع و ىد هام واو واو هد ولو ود فاو ,داعا قاع عد قاد قا مده ده مق قاع مااع فاه ‎SO‏ فوا ود و وار ده قافقاع و فراع وعد قدو عدجا عد راود و نان نا مار

Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) told had happened,

294 - «Islam started as strange and it will return strange as it started.»
The Companions (May Allah be pleased with them) among Muhajirin and
Ansar at the time of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) as well during the time of Abi Bakr, and Omar (May Allah be
pleased with them). Concerning this He (the Exalted) has said, «But give to
them preference over themselves, even though poverty was their (own lot),» (59:
9) And it was narrated after Omar’s son (May Allah be pleased with them)
that he said, «You could see us during the time of Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) none of us thinking that he
is more deserving of his Dinar more than his Moslem brother». This was
narrated by Ibn Mayjah.

His saying: (Ibn Abbas said concerning Allah’s (the Exalted) saying:
«And all relations between them would be cut off». (2: 166). He said that it is
friendliness and intimacy). This was narrated by Abed ben Hamid Ibn Jarir,
Ibn Al-Munthir, [bn Abi Hatem and Al-Hakem.

His saying: (He said that it is friendliness and intimacy). That is to say
friendliness and intimacy that existed among them in the present life be-
trayed them when they needed it most, and they cleared themselves from
one another as Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And he said, ‘For you, ye have
taken (for worship) idols besides Allah, out of mutual love and regard between
yourselves in this life; but on the Day of Judgment ye shall disown each other
and curse each other: And your abode will be the Fire, and ye shall have none
to help». (29: 25).

The savant Ibn Al-Kayyim said concerning His (the Exalted) saying:
«Then would those who are followed clear themselves of those who follow
(them): They would see the penalty... till the end of the Holy Verses» (2: 166-
167). Those followed were on the right path and their followers claimed
following their path and ways while they contradicted them and followed
other than their path and claimed that loving them would benefit them even
though they contradicted them. Thus on the Day of Judgment they would
clear themselves from them since they took them as supporters regardless of
Allah (the Exalted) and that 15 the case of any one who 12165 5
regardless or besides Allah (the Exalted), and that is the case of any one
who takes supporters regardless or besides Allah (the Exalted), supporting
others for them, antagonizing for them, becomes pleased for them, angry for

396

رك “تن

The eighth: Interpreting (And all relations between them would be cut
off).

The ninth: Verily among the polytheists those who love Allah (the Ex-
alted) very much.

The tenth: Warning those who loved the eight [Fathers, sons, brothers,
husbands and wives, tribe, property, business and houses] more than
they love their religion.

The eleventh: Verily he who takes and equals to Allah (the Exalted) in
love has committed major polytheism.

them, verily all his deeds are invalid and he sees his deeds on the Day of
Judgment as regrets for him due to their being intense, plenty, and tiring,
since he did not dedicate his support, hostility, love, hate preference and aid
only for Allah (the Exalted).

Thus Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) invalidated all those deeds
and cut all those relations thus on the Day of Judgment all relations, cause
and intercession and friendship that was directed for other than Allah (the
Exalted) will be cut and there only remains that relation connecting, the
servant and his Lord (the Exalted). That is his lot from migrating to him
and to His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
and dedicating his worship to Allah (the Exalted) along; such as love, hate,
giving, forbidding, support, antagonizing approaching and keeping away, as
well as following Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) purely and without contaminating this by turning away from
him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to others in addition to
joining between him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and
others and prefering what others say to him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him). That is the relation that is not cut and that is the
relation between a servant and his Lord (the Exalted); it is pure slavery [To
Allah (the Exalted)]; it is his intimacy which cannot be achieved but through
purely following Messengers. Since this such worship was mentioned by
them and it was not known but through them, and it cannot be achieved
but by following them. He (the Exalted) has said, «And we shall turn to
whatever deeds they did (in this life), and we shall make such deeds as floating
dust scattered about». (25: 23) Thus those deeds that were performed in the
present life in a way different from the way of His messengers and their
tradition and for other than Him (Be the blessed and raised above), He (the

397

اعدو عاقا قا واد مد وه قداقا. قافاج ود ود هد و قا لدو فا قاع قافا فاه ده وأقا فار سعا. .د همد .د .دهاع دودو » .مااع قفار قد فاع مهاه ارا م راو ودر راودا وام عاه د عاو عد ود و هد ودود رد لد م لالد جاه

Exalted) would make those deeds as floating dust scattered about which will
not benefit their performer by anything. That is considered among the most
serious of laments on the servant on the Day of Judgment: That he observes
that all what he had done is lost. Verily the people who strive to perform
that which is beneficial would be happy by their deeds.

398

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «lt is only the evil one that suggests to you
fear of his votaries: Be ye not afraid of them, but fear Me, if ye have Faith»
(3: 175).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter [concerning what] Allah (the Exalted) has said, «It
is only the evil one that suggests to you fear of his votaries: be ye not afraid of
them, but fear Me, if ye have Faith» (3: 175)).

Fear is one of the best and most high ranks of religion, and the most
common among the kinds of worship which must be performed sincerely for
Allah (the Exalted). Verily Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And they stand in
awe and reverence of His (glory)». (21: 28) He (the Exalted) has also said,
«They all revere their Lord, high above them» (16: 50) And, «But for such as
fear the time when they will stand before (the Judgment seat of ) their Lord,
there will be two Gardens». (55: 46) And, «Then fear Me (and Me alone).»
(16: 51) And He (the Exalted) has said, «Therefore fear not men, but fear
Me». (5: 47) There are many similar Holy Verses in the Holy Koran.

Reverence is divided into three parts:

The first: The secret reverence, that is to fear other than Allah (the Ex-
alted) such as an image, or evil or to fear that he might afflict him by that
which he hates. That is as Allah (the Exalted) has said about the people of
Hud( (May Allah’s peace be upon him) that they said, [We say nothing but
that (perhaps) some of our gods may have seized thee with imbecility’. He
said, ‘I call Allah to witness, and do ye bear witness that I am free from the
sin of ascribing, to Him, other gods as partners! So scheme (your worst)
against me, all of you, and give me no respite». (11: 54) And He (the Exalted)
has said: «They try to frighten thee with other (gods) besides Him!» (39: 36)
That is the case of the grave worshippers and those who worship similar pa-

399

والعا عد م راف 6د ) واجد. قاقد و ود قدو ما عا ماه ناهد هد .د رادقا ‎SS‏ و راعاما. واوا واه ما فاه افا قد وا ما زعا ع. عاج واه ع واه و واودا. د عد ود عد عد رد عد زد ماما مد مد مد رداق .د حدر عه

gans and fear them and use it to frighten the people of unification if they re-
jected worshipping them and ordered to worship Allah (the Exalted) sin-
cerely. This contradicts Monotheism.

The second: That man drops that which he is required to perform. out

of fear of some people. That is proscribed and is considered as a sort of
polytheism that 22101111 the ‏ل م‎ of Moncthe
own this Holy Verse, as Allah (the

caid to them, “A a army is ¢ 41 against 83

لمكم

eason for 11

0
&=

>
‏احلا‎
‎tle
‎soy
‎1
‎tet
‎eae ‏ا‎
‎rh
‎ep
‎a]
‎ar
‎oe
‎Al
‎La)
‎ve

their Faith: * ihey said, ‘For us Alieh sulficeth, and He
afiairs}, And they returned with Grace and Rounty ‘rom
“OG Harm ever touched them: For they fc
Allan: Ang Aflah is the Lord of bounties unbounded. it is only the evil one thet
suggesis fo vou the fear of his votaries> Till the end of the Holy Verse (3:
173-175) And it was narrated in the Honourable Hadith,

295 - «Verily Allah (the Exaited) will say to the servant on the Day of
Judgment: What prevented you to change that which is Anais nable when

you saw it? He wil say: C Lora I feared people. He (the Exalted) will say
You had better feared ves

The third: The natural fear, thai is fear of an enemy, a lion or other.
Than that such fear is not dispraised as Allah (the Exalted) said in the stery
oi Mousa (May Allah’s peace be upon him), «He therefore got away there
from, looking about, in a state cf fear». Till the end of the Holy Verse

The meaning of the Holy Verse (It is only the evil one that suggests to
you fear of his votaries) that is to say his supporters make you afraid {be ve
not afraid of them, but fear Me. That is Allah’s (the Exalted) forbidding the
believers to fear other than Him and He commanded them to exclusively
fear Him; they should not fear other than Him (the Exalted). That is faith
and sincerity which Allah commanded His servants to perform and which
He accepted from them. Thus if they feared Him only faithfully as well as
worship, He would give them all they hoped for and He would be secured
then and reassured them concerning the fears of the present and Afterlife. In
that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «is not Allah enough for His
servant? But they try to frighten thee with other (gods) besides Him!» Till the
end of the Holy Verse. (39: 36).

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said: An example of the deception of Allah’s enemy: He verily frightens
the believers by his troops and supporters so that [The believers] will not

400

And He (the Exalted) has said: «The Masques of Allah shall be visited
and maintained by such who believed in Allah and the Last Day, establish the
regular prayers, and practise reguler charity, and fear none (at all) except
Allah. They who are expected to be o% true guidance» (9: 18).

enter into Holy struggle against them, order them ‏ما‎ do that which is kind anc
orohibit the from performing that which is spontnae He also informec
that such is from the deception and frightening cf the Shaitan and He (the
Exalted) commanded us not to fear them. ric (the ene alted} said: This 8
is agreed upon by all interpreters: He frightens inemi by nis suppor rters. Kutada
hanes 136 nakes 3 10 andized in ‏كنتت‎ heats. Thus whenever the servant's

ifs allan & SUTPCPETS Will OO Pile , iron

ae

stronger. Thus this is Holy Verse indicates thut feering [ANah, Alone? Faithfully
among the conditions that perfect Faith.

His saying: (And Allah (the Exalted) has said: «The Mosques of Allah
shah be visited and maintained by slat a helever in Allah and the Last Day.
establish regular prayer, and practise charity, and fear nene (2) ail) except
Aliah... (9: 18).

the Exalted) has informed that verily Allah’s Mosqu
Bera and visited by the people of Fait th who believe in Allan Che Ex-
alted) and the Last Day, those who believed through their hearts and per-
formed by their senses, and sincerely iearea Him (the Exalted; Aione, thus
He ithe Exalted) established for them bui'ding Mosques after He (the Ex-
alted) denied it for the polytheists, because estab! ishing Mosques is through
obedience and righteous work yet when the poiytheist performs something
his performance would be [As Allah (the Exalted) has said, «.. like a mirage
in sandy deserts, which the man parched with thirst raistakes for water; until
when he comes up te it, he finds it to be nothing». (24: 39) or »... aS ashes, on
which the wind blows furiously on a tempestuous day». (14: 18) And void is
considered to be better than that which is as such. Thus Mosques cannot be
established but by faith which is mostly unification paired with righteous
deeds that are pure from impurities of innovations and polytheism. All of
that is classified under absolute faith by the people of Sunna and consensus.

‘>
per)
fete
eo
oq
—
4 8
he
bog
‏م2‎
‏سر‎
‎wet
‎pascal
‎at

His saying: (And fear none (at all- except Allah). Ibn Atiyya said: He
(the Exalted) means fearing through agerandizing, worshipping and obeying.
It is definite that man fears the dangers of the present life and he should
fear in all of that Allah’s (the Exalted) pre-determinism, fatalism and full
authority.

401

Allah (the Exalted) has also said «Then there are among men such as
say, “We believed in Allah’; but when they suffer affliction in (the cause of)
Allah they treat men’s oppression as if it were the Wrath of Allah!...» (29: 10).

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Fear is slavery
of the heart. It should not be performed but for Allah (the Exalted), it is
like humbleness, turning for repentance, love, dependence, hope and other
matters concerned with the subservience of the heart.

His saying: (They who are expected to be or true guidance) Ibn Talha
said after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them): He (the Exalted)
says: Verily those are the guided; every time the terms «Should» or «ex-
pected» are used in thee Holy Koran. As to the Honourable Hadith:

296 - «If you see a man habitually visiting Mosques, then witness that
he is a Faithful believer. Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «The
Mosques of Allah shall be visited and maintained by such a belief in Allah and
the Last Day». (9: 18). It was narrated by Ahmad, At-Tirmithi and Al-Ha-
kem after Abi Said Al-Khidri.

His saying: («Then there are among men such as say, ‘We believe in
Allah.’. But when they suffer affliction in (the cause of) Allah, they treat men’s
oppression as if it were the Wrath of Allah!...» (29: 10).

Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: He (the Exalted)
says informing about the qualities of a people of liars who claim to believe
through their tongues, while faith is not really established in their hearts: Ve-
rily if they were afflicted in the present life they will think that Allah’s wrath
is directed at them. Thus they turned away from Islam. Ibn Abbas (May AI-
lah be pleased with them) said, «To treat people» means to turn away from
his religion if he suffers of affliction in (the cause of) Allah (the Exalted)».

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: If messengers
were sent to people, those people would oscilate between two eases; either
one of them says: We believed or he would not say so; rather, he would
keep on doing wrong and disbelief. Thus he who said: We believed, his Lord
would test [his faith] and make him suffer of affliction [in His cause]. Affic-
tion and suffering is testing so that the liar and the truthful would be distin-
guished. He who did not say: We believed, let him not make it impossible
for Allah (the Exalted), escape or overcome Him (the Exalted). Thus he who
believes in messengers and obeys them is treated with hostility, harm and
suffer affliction by their enemies; he who did not believe and obey them is
punished in the present and After life. Such pain would be greater and more

402

1 9 ع ع 9 ‎ee eee Ae‏ ع داتع ‎ee‏ عد عدي ‎Ee‏ تاعارد كا تقار رمد ره وفع .د تو فود ةاور تم ماف ف وود قف تيفو ييدث ‎LE EE‏

casting than the pain caused to the believers by the enemies of the messen-
ger. Thus every soul would suffer pain whether it believed or whether it
turned away from belief; yet the believer gets pain in the present life as a
start then his successors would follow both in the present life and in the
After life; he who turns away from faith will at the beginning get pleasure
then he suffers constant pain and suffering.

A man should definitely live with other people and other people have
wilis and imaginations and they ask him to agree with them concerning
these wills and imaginations and if he donot they would harm and torture
him and if he agrees with them he would suffer torture, once from them and
once from others, it is like someone who has a religion and reverence and
lives among people or as oppressors and dissolute who can not practice their
dissolution or oppression unless he agrees or keeps silent; thus if he agrees
with them or keeps silent concerning their performances he is saved from
their evil in the beginning; then they will overpower him by insulting him,
and harming him many times more than what he feared in the beginning in
case he rejected their oppression and contradicted them. Even if he is saved
from them he will definitely be insulted and punished by others.

Thus strictness and firm concerning adhering to what the mother of all
believers, Aisha (May Allah be pleased with her), told Mouawiya (May
Allah be pleased with him), «He who pleases Allah (the Exalted) through
the people’s wrath, Allah (the Exalted) would suffice him the need of people.
And he who pleases people through Allah’s wrath, those people would not
ever suffice regardless of Allah (the Exalted)».

Thus he who is guided, inspired and protected from the evils of his spir-
it by Allah (the Exalted), he will not agree to perform that which is pro-
scribed and he will be patient concerning their enmity; then he will be
succeeded and rewarded in the present life as well as in the Afterlife, as is
the case of the messengers and their followers.

Then He (the Exalted) informed about the case of the one who joins
the Faith without insight and that when he suffers for Allah (the Exalted),
he oppresses people and makes them objects of displacement which is harm-
ing them and doing evil to them and that is the suffering and pain that defi-
nitely afflicts messengers and their followers who contradicted those; he
makes that by escaping from it and leaving its cause: Such as Allah’s tor-
ture from which the believers escaped through belief.

Thus the believers who due to their perfect insight escaped from the
pain of torutre of Allah (the Exalted) to belief and tolerated temporary and

403

It was narrated after Abi Said (May Allah be pleased with him),

«Verily pleasing people by Allah’s wrath, and praising them for Allah’s
(Be the blessed and raised above) benefaction is considered weakness of cer-
tainty», ...

transient pain. But this person due to his weak insight has escaped from the
pain caused the the enemies of the messengers by agreeing with them and by
following them. Thus he escaped from the pain of their torture to the pain
of Allah’s torture. Thus he made the pain of people’s suffering but escaping
from him as equivalent to Allah’s torture and he was treated unjustly since
he sought refuge from shelter with fire. He escaped from the pain of one
hour to eternal pain; and if-Allah (the Exalted) rendered His soldiers and
Supporters victorious He (the Exalted) said: It was with you. And Allah (the
Exalted) knows best what hypocrisy his chest contains.

In the Holy Verse also there is a response to the Murjia and Al-Karra-
miyya. It says: They were not profited by saying: We believed in Allah (the
Exalted), in addition to their impatience to the harm of those who were hos-
tile against them for Allah (the Exalted). Thus saying and confirming with-
out performing are not profitable. Thus religious belief is not confirmed for
a man unless three conditions are met: Believing through the heart and its
deeds; saying through the tongue; and acting according to the pillars [of Is-
lam]. That is what the people of Sunna and consensus, say and believe,
whether those who came before or those who came after, and Allah (Be the
blessed and raised above) knows best.

It also includes fear of currying favour with people concerning that
which is truthful. He who is guarded is the one guarded by Allah (the Ex-
alted) .

His saying: It was narrated after Abi Said,

297 - «Verily pleasing people by Allah’s wrath and praising them for Al-
lah’s (Be the blessed and raised above) benefaction and verily dispraising
them for what Allah (the Exalted) has not given you, is considered as weak-
ness of certainty. Verily Allah’s benefaction is not brought forth by desire of
the one who desires, nor is it turned away but the hatred of one who
hates.»).

This Honourable Hadith was narrated by Abu Naim in «Al-Houlya» as
well as by Al-Bathaqi; Muhammad ben Marwan As-Siddi said: It is weak.
Also Atiyya Al-Awfi said: It was mentioned by Ath-Thahabi among the
weak and abandond Honourable Hadiths; the meaning of the Honourable
Hadith is righteous.

404

. .د ‎١‏ تدع د ف دع م م ع عدم ود ود .د عد عد مد مدو د فيد مدر م م مده 6 رام مارم د وام وا فا وه مدع مدرد رم رد و واوا فقا و وو ود فا واود هد فو واورد هد ودار تامار ترا وار راو و رار رو رو و راو ارال(

298 - «Verily Allah (the Exalted) through His wisdom made relief and
joy found in acceptance and certainty and He (the Exalted) made distress
and grief found in doubt and wrath.».

His saying: (Is considered as weakness of certainty.) Weakness is the op-
posite of strength and «Certainty» is the perfection of Faith. Ibn Masoud
said, «Certainty is all Faith; patience is half of the Faith». This was narrated
by Abu Naim in «Al-Houlya» and by Al-Bayhaqi in «Al-Zuhd». He said:

299 - «If you could perform while accepting certainty, then do; if you
could not, then being patient concerning that which you hate leads to much
benefaction.» And in another version, «It is said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), what shall I do with cer-
tainty? He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: You should
verily realize that which happened to you, would not have mistaken you and
that which mistook you, would not have happened to you».

His saying: (Verily pleasing people by Allah’s wrath) that is to say to
prefer pleasing them to pleasing Allah (the Exalted) aggrandizing Allah and
raising Him above and fearing Him, the things that prevent him from asking
for the acceptance of other creatures which in turn brings forth unto him his
Lord’s, Creator’s and Master’s wrath, the One who disposes of the hearts
and dispels worries and forgives sins. According to this he commits some
kind of polytheism because he preferred pleasing other creatures to pleasing
Allah (the Exalted) and he curried his [The creature] favour by performing
that which makes Allah (the Exalted) wrathful. None can be saved from
that but those who are saved by Allah and guided by Him to know Him (Be
He blessed and raised above) and to learn what is allowable concerning
Allah (the Exalted) such as confirming His qualities and whatever suits His
Glory and raising Him above all that which deserves His perfection; and
knowing how to unify Him (the Exalted) as Lord and as Diety. All success
is granted by Allah (the Exalted).

His saying: (And praising them for Allah’s benefaction). That is to say
praising them for whatever reaches you through them by attributing it to
them and thanking them for it. Verily in reality the Benefactor is Allah (the
Exalted) Alone, He is the One who determines it and made it reach you; if
he (the Exalted) wanted something to happen, he would lead to it its causes.
This does not contradict any Honourable Hadith.

300 - «He who does not thank people does not thank Allah (the Ex-
alted).» Because thanking then is by invoking Allah for them because Allah

405

... and verily dispraising them for what Allah (the Exalted) has not given
you, is considered as weakness of certainty. Verily Allah’s benefaction is 61
brought forth by desire of the one who desires, nor is it turned away by the
hatred of the one who hates».

(the Exalted) led that thing or benefaction through their hands; thus you in-
voke Allah (the Exalted) for their sake or you reward them. That is in accor-
dance with the following Honourable Hadith,

301 - «You should reward the one who does you a favour; if you do
not find what to reward him with, then keep on invoking Allah (the Ex-
alted) for him till you see that you reward him.» Thus attributing perfor-
mance to them because they became a cause through which benefaction
reached you, while the one who predestined it and led it to you is Allah (the
Exalted) Alone.

His saying: (And verily dispraising them for what Allah (the Exalted)
has not given you) because He did not predestine what you asked for to
take place through them; thus if He (the Exalted) had predestined it, des-
tines would have led it to you. Thus he who knows that the one who exclu-
sively gives and prevents is Allah (the Exalted) Alone and that he is the One
who endows the servant with or without reason and from where he does not
expect; this person will never praise another creature for certain benefaction
nor will he dispraise someone for preventing benefaction and he entrusts his
state and depends on Him concerning all the affairs of his present and After-
life. Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
established this meaning in the Honourable Hadith, «Verily Allah’s benefac-
tion is not brought forth by the desire of the one who desires, nor is it
turned away by the hatred of the one who hates». Concerning that, Allah
(the Exalted) has said: «What Allah out of His Mercy doth bestow on man-
kind there is none can with hold: What He doth with hold, there is none can

grant, a part from Him: and He is the Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom».
(35: 2).

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Certainty con-
notes being certain concerning performing Allah’s command, it connotes
being certain of what Allah (the Exalted) promised those who obey Him
(the Exalted). It also connotes being certain of Allah’s predestination, crea-
tion and managing. Thus if you please them by Allah’s wrath, you would
not be certain neither about His promise, nor about His benefaction; verily
that which drives man to that is either a tendency to get what they possess
so he by Allah’s command stops Supporting them because he has a need

406

It was narrated after Aisha (May Allah be pleased with her) that
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said, «He who entreats Allah’s pleasure and acceptance through people’s
wrath, Allah (the Exalted) will be pleased with him and will make people
pleased with him; he who entreats people’s pleausre and acceptance through
Allah’s warth, Allah (the Exalted) will be wrathful with him and will make
people wrathful with him.» It was narrated by Ibn Hibban in his Saheeh.

that they have, or because his belief in what Allah (the Exalted) promised
those who obeyed Him (the Exalted) such as victory, support, reward in the
present and in the Afterlife is weak.

Thus if you please Allah (the Exalted), He would support, benefact you
and suffice you from needing them. And pleasing them by performing that
which makes Him angry, which is rather due to fearing and pleading them,
all of that is due to weak certainty. And if it was not destined for you that
which they did to you then it is Allah’s command not theirs. Verily what-
ever He wishes, takes place and whatever He does not wish will not take
place. Thus if you dispraise that who did not predestine, due to the weak-
ness of your certainty, do not fear or, plead or dispraise them with respect
to yourself and your desire, but he who is praised by Allah (the Exalted)
and by His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
is the praised and he who is dispraised by Allah (the Exalted) and by His
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is the
cursed. When some of the delegation of Bani Tamim said, «O Muhammad
give me. Verily my praising is good and my dispraising is shame.

302 - The Holy Prophet(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said «That is to Allah (the Exalted).» The Honourable Hadith showed that
Faith increases and decreases and that verily deeds are determined by Faith.

His saying: (It was narrated after Aisha (May Allah be pleased with
her) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said,

303 - «He who entreats Allah’s pleasure and acceptance through peo-
ple’s wrath, Allah (the Exalted) will be pleased with him and will make peo-
ple pleased with him; he who entreats people’s pleasure and acceptance
through Allah’s Wrath, Allah (the Exalted) will be wrathful with him and
will make people wrathful with him.» It was narrated by Ibn Hibban in his
Saheeh).

This Honourable Hadith was narrated as such by Ibn Hibban. It was
407

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: The interpretation of the Holy Sura of Al-Imran.

The second: The interpretation of the Holy Sura of Barat.

The third: The interpretation of the Holy Sura of Ankabout [Spider].
The fourth: That certainty may become weak or strong.

The fifth: The sign of its weakness. And among that are those three.

The sixth: Verily fearing Allah (the Exalted) sincerely is among the re-
ligious obligations.

seventh: Mentioning the reward of the one who performs it.

The eighth: Mentioning the punishment of the one who drops it.

also narrated by At-Tirmithi after a man from the Medina who said,
«Mouawiya (May Allah be pleased with him) wrote to Aisha (May Allah
be pleased with her): Write me a letter in which you advise me, but do
not write a lengthy one. Aisha (May Allah be pleased with her) wrote:
To Mouawiya, May peace be upon you verily I heard Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying, «He
who entreats Allah’s pleasure and acceptance through people’s wrath,
Allah (the Exalted) will suffice him needing people; he who entreats
people’s pleasure through Allah’s wrath, Allah (the Exalted) will entrust
him to people». May peace be upon you. It was narrated after Abu Naim
in his book «Al-Houlya».

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Aisha wrote to
Mouawiya; it was narrated that she presented it, «He who pleases Allah (the
Exalted) through people’s wrath, Allah would suffice him the need of peo-
ple. Those people did not suffice him [instead of Allah (the Exalted)].» That
is the presented version. And the undecided version is, «He who pleases Al-
lah (the Exalted) through people’s wrath; Allah (the Exalted) would be
pleased with him and will make people pleased with him; he who pleases
people through Allah’s wrath his praises would dispraise him and that is
considered as the greatest and deepest knowledge of religion. Thus he who
pleases Allah through their wrath, has in fact revered Him and became His
righteous servant, and Allah supports and helps those who are righteous,
and Allah suffices His servant.

Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said, «And for those who fear
408

عو م وا عمد قاعا م . تشاع و قاع .د فقا ع ا هم .د عد وداه عهاعقد قار وا واراج وعد ف والعا فود ود و عع لس قدو ه قافدف عفد قا معد .د ناهد تيا ماقام واوا و رو ماوا ع٠‏ معد .د عفد .د مد مد .ا .د م عد م م عد م ‎٠.‏ م0 6م

Allah, He (ever) prepares a way out, and He provides for him from (sources)
he never could imagine». (65: 2-3) And Allah (the Exalted) would doubtlessiy
suffice him needing people. As for ali people becoming pleased with him,
such thing would not happen, but they become pleased with him if they are
saved from the intentions and if they realize the consequences. «And he who
pleases people through Allah’s wrath, those people will not suffice him».
Like the oppressor who bites his hands. As for his praiser turning into
dispraising him, that thing frequently happens and it takes place in the
generations to follow. Verily offspring that follow reverence does not take
place due to their desires.

Ibn Rajab (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: He who realizes that
every creature existing above dirt is dirt, so how would he prefer to obey
who is dirt to obedience of the Lord of lords? Or how does he please dirt by
the wrath of the most benefacting Lord? That is most astounding.

It was mentioned in the Honourable Hadith: The punishment of he
who fears people and prefers pleasing them to pleasing Allah (the Exalted)
and that such punishment can be about religion. We seek refuge with Allah
(the Exalted) against that. Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said, «So
He hath put as a consequence hypocrisy into their hearts, (to last) till the Day
where they shall meet Him: Because they broke their covenant with Allah, and
because they lied (again and again)». (9: 77).

409

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «But on Allah put your trust if ye have
faith.» (5: 26).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter: Allah (the Exalted) has said, «But on Allah put
your trust if ye have faith.» (5: 26)).

Abu As-Saadat said: It is said: Trust [in Allah (the Exalted) ] concern-
ing an issue. [It is said so] if he ensures performing it; and I entrust so and
so if I depend upon him; so and so entrusted so and so if he thinks that
such is reliable or if he himself was unable to perform it by himself.

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) aimed through this inter-
pretaion of the Holy Verse to show that trust is a religious obligation that
must be sincerely performed for Allah (the Exalted). Verily making the ob-
ject come first means exclusivity. That is to say on Allah (the Exalted) put
your trust not on anybody else, such is among the most comprehenisve and
significant forms of worship because of the righteous deeds that result as a
consequence. Thus if one depends on Allah (the Exalted) in all the matters
of his present life and religous life, regardless of all else, his sincerity and
dealing with Allah (Glory be to Him) become right since such is among the
highest ranks, «Thee do we worship, and thine aid we seek» (1: 5 ). Thus the
three types of perfection of unification do not take place unless with the per-
fection of trust in Allah (the Exalted) as mentioned in the Holy Verse and
as Allah (the Exalted) has said: «If ye do (really) believe in Allah, then in
Him put your trust if ye submit (your will to His)». (10: 84) and, «He is the
Lord of the east and the west: There is no God but He: Take Him therefore
for (thy) Disposer of Affairs» (73: 9). And the Holy Verses commanding peo-
ple to trust in Allah (the Exalted) are many. Imam Ahmad (May Allah’s
Mercy be upon him) said: «Trust is an act of the heart».

410

His saying: «For believers are those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel
a tremor in their hearts, and when they hear His signs rehearsed, find their

faith strengthened, and put (all) their trust in their Lord.» (8: 2).

Ibn Al-Qayyim said about the meaning of the interpreted Holy verse:
Thus trust in Allah (the Exalted) was made a condition to Faith so it
showed that faith does not exist when it does not exist, and in the other
Holy Verse, «Moses said: ‘O my people! If ye do (really) believe in Allah, then
in Him put your trust if ye submit (your will to His).» (10: 84). Thus He (the
Exalted) made trust [in Allah] as an indication to the real submission to
Allah’s will. The stronger the servant’s Faith is the stronger his trust and if
Faith becomes weak, trust would become weak; and if trust is weak, it
indicates that faith is weak and that is definite; Allah (the Exalted) pairs
between trust and worship and between trust and faith and between trust
and reverence and between trust and Islam and between trust and guidance.

Thus it is shown that trust is the basis of all the ranks of Faith and
Benefaction and of all the deeds related to Islam and that its rank is similar
to that existing between the head and the rest of the body. Thus as the head
cannot be erected by one the body, Faith and its ranks and deeds can not
be erected or based but on trust [in Allah (the Exalted)].

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: No creature
has pleaded another or trusted in him but later was disappointed and he is a
polytheist, «If anyone assigns partners to Allah, he is as if he had fallen from
heaven and been snatched up by birds, or the wind had swooped (like a bird on
its prey) and thrown him into a far distant place». (22: 31).

The interpreter (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: I said: But trust
in Allah is of two types: The first is trusting the affairs that Allah (the Ex-
alted) does not like those who trust in the dead and evils hoping that their
requests such as victory, protection, benefaction or intercessoin are an-
swered. That is major polytheism.

The second: Trust in apparent causes, such as he who trusts in a prince
or a sultan concerning the benefaction that Allah (the Exalted) predestined
for him, or concerning dispelling harm or the like, such is a kind of minor
polytheism. The only allowable trust is that of a man trusting in another
man concerning what that new can do for him in his absence, but not to de-
pend upon him in making that happen; rather, he should trust in Allah (the
Exalted) in facilitating his affairs which he or the one who takes his place re-
quests; that is among the things that are allowable; they can not depend on

411

And His (the Exalted) saying, «O Apostle! Sufficient unto thee is Allah

-(unto thee) and unto those who follow thee among the believers.» (8: 64).

it, rather, the one who is dependent on or trusted in, is the One who created
the cause and the effect.

He said: (Allah (the Exalted) has said: «For believers are those who,
when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their hearts... till the end of the
Holy Verse» (8: 2).

Ibn Abbas said about the Holy Verse, «As for the hypocrites, nothing
enters their hearts of invoking Allah (the Exalted) when they perform them
and they do not believe in any of the Holy Verses of Allah (the Exalted) nor
do they believe in Allah or pray if they were absent or pay regular charity.
Then Allah (the Exalted) informed that they are not believers, then he de-
scribed the believers when He (the Exalted) said: «For believers are those
who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their hearts.» (8: 2). They per-
formed the duties He (the Exalted) set». It was narrated by Ibn Jarir and
Ibn Abi Hatem. The tremor of the heart when Allah (the Exalted) is men-
tioned requires performing that which He commanded and dropping that
which He proscribed. As-Siddi said: Those, when Allah is mentioned, feel a
tremor in their hearts. It is about a man who wants to do wrong or it is
said started to commit a sin, so it is said to him: Fear Allah (the Exalted),
thus he feels a tremor in his heart. It was narrated by Ibn Abi Shaiba and
Ibn Jarir.

His saying: (And when they hear His signs rehearsed, their faith
strengthened). The Companions (May Allah be pleased with them) of the
Holy prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and the fol-
lowers and those who followed them from the people of Sunna inferred
from this Holy Verse and from similar Holy Verses that faith may increase
or decrease.

Omair ben Habib As-Safi, a Companion [of the Holy prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)] said, «Verily faith can increase
and decrease, so he was told: And how can it increase or decrease? He said:
If we invoke Allah (the Exalted) and fear Him then that would be an
increase, while if we miss and forget and lose, then that would be its
decrease.» It was narrated by Ibn Saad.

Mujahid said: «Faith may increase or decrease and it is verbal». It was
narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem.

Ash-Shafi’ said that it is unanimously agreed upon. Then something

412

He (the Exalted) has said, «And if any one puts his trust in Allah suffi-
cient is (Allah) for him.» (65: 3).

was said by Ahmad, Abu Oubeid and others (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
them).

His saying: (And put (all) their trust in their Lord) that is to say they
depend on Him (the Exalted) is to say they depend on Him through their
hearts, entrusting to Him (the Exalted) all their affairs. Thus they do not
ask from anybody else or resort to anybody but Him (the Exalted); they
know that whatever He (the Exalted) wishes will come into existence and
whatever He (the Exalted) does not wish will not, materialize, and that He
(the Exalted) Alone is the disposer of all dominion and He (the Exalted) is
the only worshipped one, He (the Exalted) has no partner.

In the Holy Verse He (the Exalted) described the believers in three
ranks of the ranks of benefaction, they are: Fear, increasing faith and trust-
ing in Allah (the Exalted) Alone. Those ranks require perfection of its deeds,
both secret and overt. An example about that is the prayer, thus he who
prays and perservers in prayer and gives regular charity as Allah (the Ex-
alted) commanded him then such act requires performing the duties he is
able to perform and leaving all those proscribed as Allah (the Exalted) has
said, «For prayer restrains from shameful and unjust deeds; and remembrance

of Allah is the greatest (thing in life) without doubt.» (29: 45).

He (the Exalted) has said: «O Apostle! Sufficient unto thee is Allah, -
(unto thee) and unto those who follow thee among believers» (8: 64). Ibn Al-
Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: That is to say Allah (the Ex-
alted) Alone will suffice you and your followers. Thus you will not need besides
Him (the Exalted) anyone. That is the opinion of Sheikh Al-Islam Ibn Tay-
miyya (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

It was said: This means Allah (the Exalted) is sufficient for you and the
believers are sufficient for you.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: That is a clear
mistake and it is not allowable to attribute such meaning to the Holy Verse,
since sufficiency such as trust, fear, and worship belong to Allah (the
Exalted) Alone. Allah has said: «Should they intend to deceive thee, - verily
Allah sufficeth thee: He is that who hath strengthened thee with his aid and
with (the company of) the believers.» (8: 62). Thus He has differentiated
between sufficiency and support [strenghtened]. Thus He (the Exalted) made
sufficiency His own and made support through Him (the Exalted) and

413

ااا ااا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا اااي ا ا ااا ااا ا ا ا ا ا ا يي اي رام

through His servants. And He praised the people of unification among His
servants who distinguished Him by sufficiency. Thus He (the Exalted) has
said: «Men said to them, ‘A great army is gathering against you’: And
frightened them: But it (only) increased their Faith: They said: ‘For us Allah
sufficeth, and He is the best Disposer of affairs.’» (3: 173); they did not say:
For us Allah and His Holy Messenger sufficeth.

A similar Holy Verse is His (Be the blessed and raised above) saying:
«And had said, ‘Sufficient unto us is Allah! Allah and His Apostle will soon
give us of His bounty: To Allah do we turn our hopes!’ (That would have been
the right course)». (9: 59). He (the Exalted) did not say; for us sufficeth
Allah and His Holy Messenger ; rather, He made it exclusively His (the
Exalted), as He said: (To Allah do we turn our hopes). Thus He (the
Exalted) made turning hopes to Him, Alone as He (the Exalted) said, «And
to thy Lord turn (all- thy attention.» (94: 8). Thus turning to, trusting in, and
sufficiency are Allah’s alone, in the same way that worship, fear,
prostration, vowing swearing are directed to Him (Be the blessed and raised
above) Alone.

Through this it is shown how the Holy Verse fits the interpretation.
Thus if He (the Exalted) suffices His servants, he must not trust but in Him
and any time he turns his heart to some one else, Allah (the Exalted) will as-
sign him to the one whom he turned to as is mentioned in the Honourable
Hadith,

304 - «He who hangs [on his body] something, will be assigned to it [on
the Day of Judgment].».

He said: (Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And if any one puts his trust in
Allah, sufficient is (Allah) for him.» (3: 65).

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) and others said: That
is to say He (the Exalted) suffices him. And he whom Allah (the Exalted)
provides and suffices and protects him, then no enemy will be tempted to at-
tack him but by inevitable harm, such as heat, cold, hunger and thirst. As
for being hurt by this enemy so that this enemy gets his desires, such thing
will never happen, and he distinguished between harm which appears to be
hurting while in fact it is benefaction and harming himself and between
harm through which he takes revenge. Some of those who came before said
Allah (the Exalted) has made a reward for every deed from Himself (the Ex-
alted), and He rewarded trust in Him (the Exalted) by sufficing the person

414

It was narrated after [bn Abbas who said, «For us Allah sufficeth, and
tic is the best disposer of affairs; it was said by Ibrahim (May Allah’s bles-
gings and peace be upon him) when he was thrown into fire and by Muham-
mad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) when they told him
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). A great army is gathering
against you’, and fightened them: But it (only) increased their Faith: They

said, ‘For us Allah sufficeth, and He is the best Disposer of affairs’ (3: 173)»
It was narrated by Al-Bukhary and An-Nasai.

who trust in Him (the Exalted); Therefore, He (the Exalted) did not say: He
will be rewarded with such and such a reward as He said concerning deeds
rather He (Be the blessed and raised above) made Himself as sufficient for
His trusting servant as well as his supporter and protector. Thus if the ser-
vant depends on Allah (the Exalted) truthfully and faithfully, and the skies,
the earth and those living in them plan to harm him, Allah (the Exalted)
would create a way out, provided for him, supported him as well sufficient
for him.

And in another Honourable Hadith narrated by Ahmad about ascitism
after Wahab ben Manbah. He said, the Holy Books: I swear by My Glory
and power that he who takes refuge with Me then the skies and those living
in them and the earths and those living in them plan to harm him, I will cre-
ate a way out for him; and he who does not seek refuge with Me, I will de-
prive him of all the means of Heaven and I will cause the earth to sink
under his feet. Thus I will make him stand in the air and assign him to him-
self. I am a sufficient resort for my servant. If My servant obeys Me, I will
give him before he asks and I will respond to him before he invokes Me. I
verily know his need which,

The Holy Verse contains an indication on the virtue of trust [in Allah
(the Exalted)] and that it is among the greatest causes that bring forth profit
and dispel harm, because Allah (the Exalted) conditioned the last clause by
the first clause. Thus it is not possible to equate the presence of a condition
with its absence because Allah (the Exalted) disposed judgement according
to its suitable description. Thus it is known that his trust [in Allah (the Ex-
alted) [ is the cause of Allah being sufficient for him,

It also includes: Warning [people] to trust in Allah (the Exalted) with
performing the causes, because He (the Exalted) mentioned piety then He
mentioned trust, as He has said, «So fear Allah, and on Allah let believers

put (All) their trusb». (5: 12).
Thus He (the Exalted) made trust in Him and fearing Him or the estab-

415

ا ا ااا ا ا ا ا ل ال الل ل ا ل ا ا ا ا ا يي ا ل ا ا ا يي اا

lishment of the commanded causes. Thus trust without establishing the com-
manded causes is mere disability even though <١ nught be accompanied bv a

sort 01 trust. [sus it is not proper for the servant to make his trust, disabil-
ity, nor his diseoility trust; rather, he should mike his trust among the other

4

Z 3 ti “RT 37 ; 4 n?} * 15 1 ‏جم اب«‎ ia = = 3
causes without which all the goal can not be secomplished

with them} who said: «For us Allah sufficeth, and He is the best Disposer of
ifairs». It was said by [brahim (May Allah’s blessings and peace ‏وى عط‎
him; when he was thrown into fire and it was saic by Muhammad (May
Auah’s blessings and peace be upon tum) when they tcld him (iMiav Aiai’s
blessings and peace be upon him). A great army is gathering against vou.
and frightened them: but it (only increased their Faith: iney said. for us

Anah sufficeth, and He is the best isposer of affairs). This was narrated by

1

g. (for us Allah sufficeth) that is to say He (the Exalted>
provides for us and He (the Exalted) gives us enough [Food and suprort,.
Thus we do not trust but in Him (the Exalted). He (the Exalted) said: «Is

mis sayin

net Allah enough for His servant?» (39: 36).

His saying: (and He is the best Disposer cf affairs- that is to say the
best entrusted as Ailah (the Exalted) has said, «And hold fast to Allah! He is
your Protector- the best to protect and the best te help!» (22: 78). The subject
of the «the best» is He (the Exalted).

Ton Ai-Qayvvim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: He (the Ex-
aited) suffices those who trust in Him (the Exalted) and provides he who
seeks refuge with Him (the Exalted): He is the One who pacities the fear of
he who is afraid, saves the one who seeks refuge. Thus he who resorts to
Him (the Exalted). asks for His help and trusts in Him and is devoted com-
pletely to Him, He will protect him, guard him, and support him. He who
fears and revers Him, He will ressure him against what he fears of and will
bring to him all the benefits that he needs.

His saving: Allah (the Exalted) has said: «They said: «Burn him and pro-
fect your gods, if ye do (anything at all)!’ We said, ‘O fire be thou cool, and
(a means of) safety for Ibrahim’. then they sought a stratagem against him:
But we made them the ones that lest most!» (21: 68-70).

His saying: (It was said by Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) when they told him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be

416

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Verily trusting {in Allah (the Exalted) [ is among religous ob-
ligations.

The second: It is among the conditions for Faith.

The third: The interpretation of the Holy verse of Anfal.
The fourth: Interpreting the Holy verse.

The fifth: Interpreting the Holy verse of At-Talaq [Divorce].

The sixth: The great significance of this term; it was said by Ibrahim
and Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) at
hard times.

upon him): «A great army is gathering against you and frightened them but
it (only) increased their faith. They said: ‘For us Allah is sufficient, and He
is the best disposer of affairs».) That was after Quraish and the Ahzab [the
parties] left Uhud, «It reached him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) that Abu Sufyan and those with him decided to raise against
them again.

The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) set
out with twenty horsemen and rode till he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) reached a place called Hamra As-Assad, where Allah (the Ex-
alted) threw horror in the heart of Abu Sufyan. Thereupon he returned and
those with him to Mecca. Then a group from Abed Al-Qais passed by him.
He said: Where are you going? They told him we are going to Medina. He
said: You tell Muhammad this message? They said: Yes. He said: If you
meet him tell him that we gathered a great army and we will return to ex-
tract those remaining. Then those people passed by Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) while he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) was still at Hamra As-Assad. He told him
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon. him) what Abu Sufyan had said.
So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: For us Allah
(the Exalted) sufficeth and He (the Exalted) is the best Disposer of affairs».
In those two stories lies the virtue of this great term; it was said by the two
lovers [of Allah (the Exalted) ] May Allah’s peace and blessing be upon
them at times of hardship. It was mentioned in the Honourable Hadith,

306 - «If you were afflicted by serious trouble, then say: For us Allah
(the Exalted) sufficeth and He (the Exalted) is the best Disposer of affairs».

417

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Did they then feel secure against the Plan

of Allah? -But no one can feel secure from the Plan of Allah, except those
(Doomed) to ruin!» (7: 99)).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter: Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Did they then feel
secure against the plan of Allah. -But no one can feel secure from the plan of
Allah except those (Doomed) to ruin!» (7: 99).

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) meant to say by mention-
ing this Holy Verse that safety against the plan of Allah (the Exalted) is of
the greatest sins and that it contradicts the perfection of unification, as does
dispairing from Allah’s Mercy, that shows that the believer walks forth to-
wards Allah (the Exalted) between fear and hope as was shown by the Holy
Koran and the Sunna and as was told by those of this nation who came be-
fore as well as by the Imams.

The meaning of the Holy Verse 15: Verily when Allah (Be He blessed
and raised above) mentioned the case of the villagers who give the lie to
messengers, He (the Exalted) showed that the thing that motivated them to
do that was securing themselves against the plan of Allah (the Exalted) and
not fearing Him, as He has said, «Did the people of the towns feel secure
against the coming of Our Wrath by night while they were asleep? Or else did
they feel secure against its coming in broad daylight while they played about
{carz-free)? Did they then feel secure against the plan of Allah? But no one
can feel secure from the plan of Allah except those (Doomed) to ruin!» (7: 97-
99) ‘That is to say those who will perish, that is so because they secured
themselves from the plan of Allah (the Exalted) when He seduced them by
prosperity and benefaction. Thus they ruled out that might be a plan.

Al-Hasan (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: «He who is bene-
418

And His (the Exalted) saying, «And who despairs of the mercy of his

Lord, but such as go astray?» (15: 56).

facted by Allah (the Exalted) and he did not think that he is secure against
the plan of Allah, then he is not obeyed.

Also, Qutadah said, «Allah’s command came unexpectedly upon people,
and Allah never punished a people but during their fun, prosperity and
heedlessness. Thus never become enticed by Allah (the Exalted)’.

307 - It was mentioned in the Honourable Hadith, «If you see Allah
(the Exalted) give the servant from the [Joys] of the present life even though
that servant was disobeying Him (the Exalted) than that is enticement.» It
was narrated by Ahmad, Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatem.

Ismail ben Rafi said, «An example of securing oneself against the plan
of Allah (the Exalted) is to perform the sin while hoping for forgiveness
from Allah (the Exalted)». This was narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem.

And that is the interpretation of the plan of Allah (the Exalted) as said
by some of those who came before, «Allah (the Exalted) intices them by
١ prosperity if they disobey Him, and He prolongs their lives then He (the Ex-
alted) takes them unexpectly as most powerful, Most Able.» That is the
meaning of Plan, trick and the like. This was mentioned by Ibn Jarir.

He said: (And Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And who despairs of the
Mercy of his Lord, but such as go astray?» (15: 56) Dispair: Thinking that re-
lief and dispelling away worries is far away and losing hope. It corresponds
to securing oneself against the Plan of Allah (the Exalted). Both are great
sins. What was mentioned above about it was mentioned because it contra-
dicts the perfection of Monotheism.

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) mentioned this Holy
Verse along with one that precedes it in order to attract attention that it is
not permissible to the one who fears Allah (the Exalted) to despair of His
Mercy; rather, he should fear Him and hope from Him; he should fear his
sins, obey Him and hope for His Mercy, as He has said: «Is one who
worships devoutedly during the hours of the night prostrating himself or
standing (in adoration), who takes heed of the Hereafter, and who places his
hope in the Mercy of His Lord- (like one who does not)?» (39: 9) and He (the
Exalted) has said, «Those who believed and those who suffered exile and
fought (and strove and struggled) in the path of Allah, -they have the hope of
Mercy of Allah; and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful». (2: 218).

419

It was narrated after Ibn Abbas that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May

Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was asked about major sins and
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) answered, «Joining in
partners with Allah, losing hope in Allah’s support and security».

Thus hoping for Mercy along with sinning and disobeying Allah (the
Exalted) is a temptation of the Shaitan, not that he may entrap the servant
in fears in addition to dropping all the causes of salvation from pitfalls, that
is in contradistinction to the people of Faith who adopted the causes of salu-
tation while fearing Allah (the Exalted) and escaping His punishment and
desiring His forgiveness and reward.

The meaning: Verily Allah (the Exalted) narrated the speech of His
lover Ibrahim (May Allah’s peace be upon him) when the angels gave him
the glad tidings concerning his son Ishaq, «He said, Do you give me glad tid-
ings that old age has seized me? Of what then is your good news?» (15: 54) be-
cause it is the usual course of things when a man and his wife become old.
They are less likely to have a child. Allah (the Exalted) is able to do every-
thing, thus the angels said (we give thee glad tidings in truth) which can not
be doubted. Verily if Allah (the Exalted) wants something to happen, he
would say «Be» and it would come into existence (Be not then in despair)
that is to say among those who have lost hope. Thereupon he (May Allah’s
peace be upon him) said, «And who despairs of the Mercy of his Lord, but
such go astray?) Thus it is known that Allah (the Exalted) has the ability
and Mercy to do that which is greater; and Allah (the Exalted) knows best-
he said that in exclamation.

His saying (But such go astray). Some said: But those who mistake the
right path, like His saying, «Truly no one despairs of Allah’s soothing Mercy,
except those who have no Faith.» (12: 87).

308 - His saying: (It was narrated after Ibn Abbas that Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s peace be upon him) was asked about major sins and
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) answered, «Joining in part-
ners with Allah, losing hope in Allah’s support and security against the Plan
of Allah (the Exalted).» This Honourable Hadith was narrated by Al-Bazzar,
Ibn Abi Hatem after Shabib ben Bishr after Ikrama after Ibn Abbas and all
of them but Shabib ben Bishr was the most trustworthy. So Ibn Mouin said:
{He is] reliable. Abu Hatem metigated it. Ibn Kathir said: There is some
doubt concerning its references, and most probably it is suspended.

His saying: (Joining in partners with Allah (the Exalted)). This is the
420

0 0 ‏ل د 1 د د س د د 3 د د د هس هد د د نس دن د ن دن دن ل ين ل د ند ل ل ع‎ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Src

greatest among major sins. Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said: Joining in partners with Allah (the Exalted) is doing wrong to
Lordship dispraising Diety and mistrusting the Lord of the worlds.

Verily he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: «Yet
those who reject faith hold (others) as equal with their Guardian-Lord.» (1: 6)
Also He (the Exalted) has said, «False worship is indeed the highest wrong-
doing» (31: 13) that is why Allah (the Exalted) does not forgive anyone but
after repenting.

His saying: (Losing hope in Allah’s support). That is to say despairing
from all hope in Allah (the Exalted) concerning that which he fears and
hopes for, and that is mistrusting Allah (the Exalted) and being ignorant of
Him, the vastness of His Mercy, His generosity and forgiveness .

His saying: (And security against the Plan of Allah (the Exalted)). That
is to say against His tempting the servant and depriving him of the faith He
gave. We seek refuge with Allah (the Exalted) against that. That is verily ig-
norance of Allah (the Exalted) and His ability and self confidence and con-
ceit.

Let it be known that it was not intended through this Honourable
Hadith to limit major sins in three; rather, major sins are many yet those
three are among the greatest major sins mentioned in the Holy Koran and
the Sunna; it is checked by what the savants said: Every sin was sealed by
Allah by Fire, curse, wrath or torture. Sheikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya (May
Allah’s Mercy be upon him) added: Or denying Faith.

I said: Also the one from whom Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) cleared himself from: Did not he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) say: «He who does so and so does
not belong to us».

It was narrated after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them):
«They are nearer to seven hundered than to seven; yet there is no major sin
along with asking for Allah’s forgiveness, nor there is a minor sin along
with intentiom».

309 - His saying: (It was narrated after Ibn Masoud (May Allah be
pleased with him), «The greatest among major sins is joining in partners
with Allah (the Exalted), securing oneself against Allah’s (the Exalted) plan,
losing hope in Allah’s Mercy, and dispairing from Allah’s support». It was
narrated by Abdur-Razzak).

It was also narrated by Ibn Jarir and supported by truthful references

421

It was narrated after Ibn Masoud, «The greatest among major sins:
Joining in partners with Allah (the Exalted), securing oneself against the
Plan of Allah (the Exalted), losing hope in Allah’s Mercy, and despairing
from Allah’s support. It was narrated by Abdur-Razzak.

This chapter discusses many issues:
The first: Interpreting the Holy verse of Aaraf.

The second: Interpreting the Holy verse of Houjor.

The third: Serious warning of he who secured himself against Allah’s
plan.

The fourth: Serious warning against losing hope.

after Ibn Masoud (May Allah be pleased with him).

His saying: (The greatest among major sins are joining in partners with
Allah (the Exalted). That is to say in His Lorship or worship. That is unani-
mously agreed upon. |

His saying: (Losing hope in Allah’s Mercy) Abu As-Saadat said: It is
the most difficult dispair.

This [Honourable Hadith] includes pointing out for hope and fear; thus
if he fears, then he should not lose hope or become desperate; rather, he
should hope for Allah’s Mercy. Those who came before us to desire fear
concerning health, and hope concerning illness. That is the way of Abi Sulei-
man Ad-Darimi and many others. He said: The heart should mostly fear,
thus if hope was more than fear then the heart would grow corrupt. Allah
(the Exalted) said: «As for those who fear their Lord unseen, for them is For-
giveness and a great Reward,» (67: 13) And He (the Exalted) also said,
«Their (only) fear is for the Day when hearts) and eyes will be transformed (in
a world wholly new)» (24: 37). And He (the Exalted) said, «And those who
dispense their charity with their hearts full of fear, because they will return to
their Lord; Those who hasten in every good work, and these who are foremost
in them.» (23: 60-61). And He (the Exalted) said: «Is one who worships de-
voutly during the hours of the night prostrating himself or standing (in adora-
tion), who takes heed of the Hereafter, and who places his hope in the Mercy
of his Lord- (like one who does not)?» (39: 9). He (the Exalted) gave priority
to caution and not to hope in this Holy Verse.

422

Chapter

(Among the Characteristics of Faith in Allah (the Exalted): Being pa-
tient with what Allah (the Exalted) predestined).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter: Among the characteristics of Faith in Allah (the
Exalted): Being patient with what Allah predestined).

Imam Ahmad said: Allah mentioned patience in ninety places in His
Holy Koran.

310 - It was mentioned in the righteous hadith, «Patience is light.» It
was narrated by Ahmad, Moslim as well as by Al-Bukhary and Moslem.

311 - «None has been given a gift wider than patience».

312 - Omar (May Allah be pleased with him) said: «We found the best
of our living through patience.» It was narrated by Al-Bukhary.

Ali (May Allah be pleased with him) said, «Verily patience is to Faith
as is the head to the body- then he raised his voice- he said truly he who is
not patient does not believe.» It was presented by Al-Bukhary and Moslem.

Its derivation the one who is patient is a person who suppressed and de-
prived. Patience is suppressing the soul from impatience or worry, it is sup-
pressing the tongue from complaining and becoming wrathful; it is
restrainging the senses from slapping the cheeks and tearing pockets and the
like. It was mentioned by Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

Let it be known as well, that patience is three kinds: Patience for what
Allah (the Exalted) has commanded, patience for what Allah (the Exalted)
has proscribed, and patience for the ordeals that He (the Exalted) predes-
tined.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And if any one believes in
Allah, (Allah) guides his heart (aright)» (64: 1).

423

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And if any one believes in Allah, (Allah)
guides his heart (a right): for Allah knows all things». (64: 11).

Alkama said, «He is the man who is afflicted by disaster and he knows
that it is from Allah (the Exalted); he accepts and surrenders.».

The beginning of the Holy Verse is (No kind of calamity can occur, ex-
cept by the leave of Allah) (64: 11). That is to say by His (the Exalted) voli-
tion, will and wisdom, as He said in the following Holy Verse, «No
misfortune can happen on earth or in your souls but is recorded in a decree be-
fore we bring it into existence: That is truly easy for Allah». (57: 22) And He
(the Exalted) also said, «But give glad tidings to those who patiently perse-
vere, - who say, when afflicted with calamity, ‘To Allah we belong and to Him |
is our return.’: -They are those on whom (Descend) blessings from Allah, and
Mercy, and they are the ones that receive guidance.» (2: 155-157).

His saying: (And if any one believes in Allah, (Allah) guides his heart
(aright). Ibn Abbas said concerning His saying (except by leave of Allah)
that is to say «except by Allah’s command» means His predestination and
volition (And if any one believes in Allah, He guides his heart (aright). That
is to say he who is afflicted by a disaster and knows that it has been predes-
tined by Allah (the Exalted) and he stays patient, becomes contended and
surrenders to Allah’s predestiny. Allah (the Exalted) would guide his heart
and compensate for him what he missed from the present life as guidance in
his heart and truthful certainty. And He (the Exalted) may return to him
what was taken from him.

His saying: (For Allah knows all things). This is pointing out that this
emits from His knowledge which includes His wisdom. And that necessitates
patience and acceptance.

His saying: (Alkama said: He is the man who is afflicted by disaster
and he knows) that it is from Allah (the Exalted); he accepts and surren-
ders).

This Honourable Hadith was narrated by Ibn Jarir and Ibn Abi Hatem.

Alkama is Ibn Qais Al-Koufi. He was born while the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was still alive, and heard
from Abi Bakr, Omar, Othman, Ali, Saad, Ibn Masoud, Aisha and many
others (May Allah be pleased with them). He is among the great followers
and most knowledgeable and reliable among them. He died after sixty years
old.

His saying: (He is the man who is afflicted by disaster ...). This Honour-
424

It was narrated in Moslem’s Saheeh after Abi Huraira that verily
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said, «Two qualities of people include disbelief: Defaming, ancestry and
wailing over the dead person».

And they narrated after Ibn Masoud, «he does not belong to us, he
who beats his cheeks, tears his clothes, and calls for the practices of Pre-Isla-
mic times».

able Hadith was narrated by Al-Amash after Abi Thibyan. He said: We
were at Alkama’s and this Holy Verse was recited (And if any one believes
in Allah, (Allah) guides his heart (aright). He said: It is the man afflicted by
disaster and he knows that it is from Allah (the Exalted) so he accepts and
surrenders. That is the text of Ibn Jarir. This includes an evidence that verily
deeds are from Faith. Said ben Joubeir said (He who believes in Allah (the
Exalted), Allah would guide his heart). That is to say: He says: We belong
to Allah (the Exalted) and to Him we return. Also it is shown in this Holy
verse that patience is the cause of the guidance of the heart and that is
«Guidance of the Heart» the reward of those who are patient.

313 - His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh by Moslim after Abi
Huraira (May Allah be pleased with him) that: Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Two qualities of peo-
ple include disbelief: Defaming ancestry, and wailing over a dead person.»).

That is to say when they exist in people they constitute disbelief since
they were among the practices of Pre-Islamic times; they exist in people and
none is saved from them but he who is salvaged by Allah (the Exalted) and
endowed knowledge and faith to light his way. But it is not who performed
it a branch of the branches of disbelief becomes a disbeliever such as abso-
lute disbelief. Also, it is not who performed it a branch of the branches of
Faith becomes a believer, an absolute believer.

314 - «Between a servant and the disbelief or polytheism there exists
nothing but dropping the prayer».

His saying: (Defaming ancestry) that is to say shaming which includes
his saying: That 15 not so and so’s son even though his fatherhood is known.

His saying: (And wailing over the dead person) that is to say raising the
voice while crying and mentioning the virtues of the dead person, because
that includes objecting against patience, for example, the wailing woman
who says: O my supporter, O My defender and the like. It also includes the
patience as an obligation and that all which is not copied after the creed is
considered disbelief.

425

It was narrated after Anas that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s

blessings and peace be upon him) said, «lf Allah (the Exalted) desires that
which is good for His servant, He (the Exalted) would hasten the punish-
ment in...

315 - His saying: (And they narrated after Ibn Masoud, «He does not
belong to us, he who heats his cheeks, tears his clothes and calls for the
practices of Pre-Islamic times»).

That is among the texts of threatening; and it was narrated after Sufyan
Ath-Thawri and Ahmad that it is hated to interprete so that its impact on
the soul is greater and its deterrent effect is more eloquent, and it indicates
that such practices contradict the required perfection of Faith.

His saying: (He who beats his cheeks) Al-Hafeth said: The cheek was
mentioned in particular because beating it was more pervasive, otherwise
beating the whole face is similar.

His saying: (Tearing clothes-) It is the part of the clothes where the
head enters, and that was the tradition of the Pre-Islamic people when they
wanted to express their sorrow for a dead person.

His saying: (Calls for Pre-Islamic practices). Sheikh Al-Islam said: It is
wailing over the dead person. Others said: It is calling with woe and grief.
Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Calling with Pre-Is-
lamic calls such as calling for tribes and tribalism, and being fanatic for
sects, creeds and sheikhs and prefering one for the other, invoking that and
supporting others against him or becoming hostile, all such practices are
among the practices of Pre-Islamic times.

It was also mentioned by Ibn Hajjah and considered as righteous by
Ibn Hibban who narrated after Ibn Umama.

316 - «Verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) cursed the woman who scores her face, the woman who tears
her clothers, and the woman who calls woe and grief».

This indicates that such matters are considered among major sins, and a
small part of that might be forgiven if it was truthful and not for wailing
and objecting against destiny. This was narrated by Ahmad (May Allah’s
Mercy be upon him) for what happened to Abi Bakr and Fatima (May
Allah be pleased with them) when Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) died.

These Honourable Hadiths do not include that which says that crying is
forbidden.

426

... the present life, and if He (the Exalted) desires that which is evil, He (the
Exalted) suspended his punishment till He (the Exalted) meets him on the
Day of Judgment»...

317 - Verily when Ibrahim, Allah’s Holy Messenger’s (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) son died, he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said: «The eye tears, the heart grieves, yet we do not say but
that which pleases the Lord, and we are sorry for you O Ibrahim.» It was
mentioned in the two Saheehs.

318 - It was narrated after Ousama ben Zaid (May Allah be pleased
with him), «Verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) set off to one of his daughters who had a dying son. He was
raised to him (may Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and his breath
was clattering. Thereupon his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) eyes became full of tears. Saad said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) what is this? He (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said: That is mercy that Allah (the Exalted)
put in the hearts of His servants, and verily Allah is Merciful with His ser-
vants.».

319 - His saying: (It was narrated after Anas (May Allah be pleased
with him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said: «If Allah (the Exalted) desires that which is good for His
servant He would hasten his punishment in the present life, and if He de-
sires that which is evil, He would suspend his punishment till He meets him
on the Day of Judgment.»).

This Honourable Hadith was narrated by At-Tirmithi and Al-Hakem
and was improved by At-Tirmithi. It was presented by At-Tabarani and AI-
Hakem after Abdullah ben Maghfal. It was also presented by Ibn Al-Magh-
fal. It was also presented by Ibn Adi after Abi Huraira while At-Tabarani
narrated it after Ammar ben Yaser.

His saying: (If Allah desires that which is good for His servant, He has-
tens his punishment in the present life. That is to say He would cast on him
affliction and disasters because of his excessive sins, so he would drop those
sins and become sinless and meets his Lord as such on the Day of Judg-
ment.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Disasters are
benefaction because they grant remission of sins and call for patience. Thus
the servant is rewarded for them. They required turning to Allah (the Ex-
alted) in repentance and becoming humble in front of Him. They require
shunning from creatures as well as other great benefits. Thus the very same

427

.. and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said «verily the

greater the affliction the greater the reward).

affliction is used by Allah (the Exalted) to remit people’s sins and yuilts, and
that 15 among the best kinds of benefacton. Thus disasters are mercy and
benefaction to all creatures, but if he who is afflicted commits because of
them more serious sins than those before affliction then that would be evil
for him as far as his religion is concerned, since verily there are some people
who when afflicted by poverty, sickness, or pain, they would suffer from hy-
pocrisy; fear, sickness of heart and overt disbelief and dropping some duties
and performing some proscribed actions the thing that causes him harm as
far as his religion is concerned, for such a person health is better for him as
far as what the disaster concerned has given him not as far as the disaster
per se is. Also they become patient and obedient because of a disaster, such
disaster is a religious benefaction for him, it is itself caused by the Lord (Be
He blessed and raised above) and it is Mercy for the creatures and Allah
(the Exalted) is praised for it. Thus he who is afflicted and then endowed
with patience, patience was a benefaction in as far as his religion is con-
cerned, and he got what remitted his sins; that is Mercy he got through
praising his Lord (the Exalted) his Lord’s . Allah (the Exalted) has said,
«They are those on whom (Descend) blessings from Allah and Mercy.» (2:
157) He would get forgiveness of sins and raising of his ranks. Thus he who
performs the required patience, would get that.

His saying: (And if He (the Exalted) desires that which is evil; He sus-
pended His punishment. That is to say He delays punishing him for his sins
till He meets him on the Day of Judgment».

Al- Azizi said: That is to say He (the Exalted) does not punish him for
his guilts in the present life till he reaches in the Afterlife having committed
all his sins, so he gets all the punishment that he deserves. This sentence is
the last sentence of the Honourable Hadith. The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said: «The greater the affliction, the
greater is the reward,» till the end of the Honourable Hadith, that is the
beginning of another Honourable Hadith, yet when At-Tirmithi narrated
them refering to one reference and one companion of the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

It also demonstrates at the hope in Allah (the Exalted), and thinking
about Allah (the Exalted) all that is good concerning what He predestines
for you. In that connection He (the Exalted) has said, «But it is possible that
ye dislike a thing which is good for you, and that ye love a thing which is bad

428

And verily if Allah (the Exalted) loves people, He (the Exalted) would
send them ordeal. Thus he who accepts gets acceptance [Allah (the Exalted)
will be pleased with him] and he who becomes angry gets [Allah’s (the Ex-
alted) wrath] It was improved by At-Tirmithi.

for you. But Allah knoweth, and ye know not» (2: 216).

His saying: (The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said, «Verily the greater the affliction the greater the reward. Ve-
rily if Allah (the Exalted) loves a group of people He (the Exalted) would
send them ordeal. Thus he who accepts gets acceptance [Allah (the Exalted)
will be pleased with him] and he who becomes angry he gets [Allah’s (the
Exalted) ] wrath.» It was improved by At-Tirmithi).

320 - At-Tirmithi said: Kuteiba told us that Al-Laith narrated after
Anas, and he mentioned the preceding Honourable Hadith. Then he said:
And with such reference after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) verily he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said, «Verily the greater the affliction.... till the end of the Honourable
Hadith.» Then he said: That is good Honourable Hadith yet strange from
this aspect. It was also narrated by Ibn Maja.

321 - Imam Ahmad narrated after Mahmoud ben Labib that: «If Allah
(the Exalted) loves a group of people, He (the Exalted) would send them or-
deal. Thus he who 15 patient would get [Allah’s] patience; he who becomes
grieved would get grief.» Al-Munthiri said: Those who narrated this Hadith
are reliable.

His saying: (The greater the reward) that is to say he whose affliction is
greater in quantity and quality.

This Honourable Hadith may be used as an evidence by the one who
says: Verily disasters are rewarded in addition to remission of sins, and Ibn
Al-Qayyim considered it better, that its reward is only the remission of sins
unless they were the reason for a good deed such as patience, acceptance, re-
pentance and asking for forgiveness, since then he would be rewarded for
what results from them. It is said about the meaning of the Honourable Ha-
dith: Verily the greater the affliction, the greater the reward if he is patient.

322 - His saying: (Verily if Allah (the Exalted) loves a group of people,
He (the Exalted) would send them ordeal). That is why it was mentioned in
Saad’s Hadith, «He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was
asked, which of the people suffers from affliction? He (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said: The prophets, then the best then the best. The

429

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Interpreting the Holy verse of At-Taghabon.
The second: Verily that is considered faith in Allah (the Exalted) .
The third: Defaming ancestry.

The fourth: Serious warning against hitting cheeks and tearing clothes
and calling for the practices of Pre-Islmic times.

The fifth: The sign that Allah (the Exalted) wants to do to His ser-
vant.

The sixth: Allah (the Exalted) wishes to do him harm.
The seventh: The sign that Allah (the Exalted) loves the servant.
The eighth: Proscribing discontent and wrath.

The ninth: Rewarding acceptance by affliction.

a man is afflicted according to his religion; if he were firm concerning his re-
ligion, then his affliction would be more severe; if he were lenient concerning
his religious duties, he would be afflicted according to his religion. Affliction
sticks to the servant till he walks on earth carrying no sin.» This Honour-
able Hadith was narrated by Ad-Darimi; Ibn Majah and At-Tirmithi.

This Honourable Hadith as well as those similar to it of the evidences
of unification. Thus if the servant knows that prophets and the holymen are
afflicted with their souls, that is in reality mercy and it cannot be dispelled
away from them but by Allah (the Exalted). He [The servant] would realize
that they do not possess the ability te protect or to benefit themselves. Thus
it is proscribed to go to them or to resort to them in order to ask them to
fulfil a need or dispel worry. In the affliction that befalls the prophets and
the righteous, there are countless secrets, wisdom, interests and good conse-
quences.

His saying: (Thus he who accepts get the acceptance). That is to say
from Allah (the Exalted), acceptance and being pleased are two adjectives
which Allah (the Exalted) used to describe Himself (the Exalted) in many
places of His Holy Book, such as, «Their reward is with Allah Gardens of
Eternity, beneath which rivers flow; they will dwell therein for ever; Allah well
pleased with them, and they with Him». (98: 8). And the way of those who
came before as well as those who followed them among the people of the
Sunna: Confirming the attributes which Allah (the Exalted) used to describe

430

> خ - > + :> + > ع خ خ خ خ خخ ح ح جح حي ا ا ا ا ا 1 1 0 0 1 0 01 1 0 0 0 0 02 لي ل ل 2 ل 0 د د ل ل د دن د د دن د د ف دن د د دس د د ل دن د ل د هس د م دن د د ل ع هس دن ا سد د ع ا 0

Himself and with which Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) described Him, in a way that fits His Glory and Great-
ness. That does not include likening [Allah (the Exalted) to others] and in-
fallibility that does not include any suspension; thus if Allah (the Exalted)
becomes pleased with him, every sort of good and benefaction will happen
to him, and he will be saved from every evil. Acceptance is when the servant
serrenders himself totally to Allah (the Exalted) and does not doubt or sus-
pect Allah (the Exalted), and desires His reward; he may find in that com-
fort and relaxation because of his love for Allah and trust. As Ibn Masoud
(May Allah be pleased with him) said: Verily Allah (the Exalted) by His Jus-
tice. He (the Exalted) created happiness and joy in certainty and acceptance,
and He (the Exalted) created sadness in anger and doubt.

His saying: (And he who becomes angry) Abu As-Saadat said: Anger is
hating the thing and not accepting it. That is to say he who becomes angry
with Allah (the Exalted) concerning that which He predestined. This person
will receive anger from Allah (the Exalted); such punishment is sufficient. It
might be used to indicate the necessity of acceptance, and that is Ibn Akil’s
choice. However, Al-Kadi decided that it is not necessary yet it was pre-
ferred by Sheikh Al-Islam and Ibn Al-Qayyim.

Sheikh Al-Islam said: [Allah (the Exalted) ] did not command people to
be accepting as He (the Exalted) commanded them to be patient. Rather,
those who accept [their destiny] were praised. He said,

323 - As for the following, «He who is not patient with My affliction
and does not accept My predestiny let him take another god.» That is Israeli
and it is not a righteous Hadith told after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him).

Sheikh Al-Islam said: That which 15 higher in rank than that -that is to
say acceptance- is to verily thank Allah (the Exalted) for the affliction and
disaster because of the benefaction of Allah (the Exalted) that he sees in it.
And Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

431

Chapter

(Concerning what was said about hypocrisy).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say, ‘I am but a man like yourselves,
(but) the inspiration has come to me, that your Allah is one God: Whoever
expects to meet his Lord, let him work righteous, and in the worship of his
Lord, admit no one as partners» 918: 110).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter concerning what was said about hypocrisy).

That is to say [Chapter concerning] forbidding hypocrisy and warning
against it.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Say, ‘I am but a man like
yourselves, (but) the inspiration has come to me, that your Allah is one God».
(18: 110) That is to say I have nothing to do with Lordship or diety; rather,
all that belongs to Allah (the Exalted) Alone, He (the Exalted) has no part-
ner and He (the Exalted) revealed that to me, «Whoever expects to meet his
Lord» (18: 110) That is to say whoever fears Him (the Exalted), «let him
work righteous, and in the worship of his Lord admit no one as partner.» (18:
110) His saying: (No one) is generalizing proscription and this generalization
includes prophets, angels, the righteous, the Holy men and others.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: As for «meet-
ing» it was interpreted by some of those who came before and those who
came after as to mean observing the Lord with the eye. They said: Meeting
Allah (the Exalted) includes seeing Him (the Exalted) on the Day of Judg-
ment and they gave an evidence.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said about the Holy
Verse: Since Allah (the Exalted) is one and since there is no God but Him

(the Exalted) then worship should be for Him (the Exalted) Alone without
joining in partners, thus as He is exclusively a diety, He (the Exalted) should

432

It was narrated after Abi Huraira with references, «Allah (the Exalted)
said, «I satisfy the partners from joining in partners, he who does something
and joins in partners with Me, I let him in his polytheism.» It was narrated

by Moslem.

be exclusively worshipped. Thus a righteous deed is free from hypocrisy and
bound by the Sunna.

The Holy Verse also includes the evidence that the root of the religion
with which Allah (the Exalted) sent His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) as well as other messengers before him (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and that is performing all sorts of
worship exclusively for Allah (the Exalted). In that connection he (the Ex-
alted) has said, «Not an apostle did we send before thee without this inspira-
tion sent by us to him: That there is no God but I; therefore worship and serve
Me». (21: 25).

And those among this nation who contradict this fundamental principle
are divisions: An evil person who contends with Allah (the Exalted)
concerning His Lordship and Diety, and calls people to worship Him, or an
evil who calls people to worship idols, or a polytheist who invokes other than
Allah (the Exalted) and curries his favour through all or some sorts of
worship, or someone doubting unification [The Oneness of Allah (the
Exalted)]: is it true or is it allowable to join in partners with Allah (the
Exalted) in worship? Or an ignorant person who thinks that polytheism is a
religion that leads to Allah (the Exalted) and that is the most prevalent state
of most commoners because they are ignorant and because they just immitate
those who came before them, otherwise people wouldnot have been alienated
from religion and knowledge of the religion of messengers were forgotton.

324 -His saying: (It was narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be
pleased with him), «Allah (the Exalted) has said, «It satisfies partners from
joining in partners, he who does something to join in partners with Me, will
be let by Me in his polytheism». It was narrated by Moslem).

His saying: (He who does something to join in partners with Me). That
is to say intended through his deed [to worship] other than Me from among
other creatures, I let him and his polytheism alone. And Ibn Maja said: «I
am free and he is the one who committed polytheism». __

Ibn Rajab (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Let it be known that
dedicating deeds to other than Allah (the Exalted) is divided into divisions:
Thus once it were hypocrisy as is the case of hypocrites. In that connection

433

ل رار فالالا وا نار فده تف مد 5 6 5 م © ب ع5 تت 55
ا ا اا ا ‎DO‏

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «When they stand up to prayer, they stand with-
out earnestness, to be seen of men, but little do they hold Allah in remem-
brance». (4: 142) Such pure hypocrisy hardly ever be done from a believer
during the prayer or fasting. It might be done while giving alms or during
required Hajj or others of the seen deeds or it does not exceed the benefits
of those deeds, since Faith while performing such deeds is rare. No Moslem
doubts that such deed is wrong and that the doer deserves Allah’s wrath
and punishment.

At other times the deeds are dedicated to Allah (the Exalted) yet it is
combined with hypocrisy, so if it originally was combined with hypocrisy
then we say that the truthful texts show that it is invalid. He mentioned
Honourable Hadiths that show that, for example, this Honourable Hadith
and Shaddad ben Aws’s Honourable Hadith.

325 - «He who dissimulates in prayer has in fact committed polytheism;
he who dissimulates in fasting has in fact committed polytheism; he who
dissimulates when alms giving has in fact committed polytheism, and verily
Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) says: I am the best oath for he who
joins in partners with Me. Thus he who joins in a partner with Me, then the
truthfulness of his deed whether little or much, is dedicated to the partner
he joined with Me. I am satisfied without him.» It was narrated by Ahmad.

And he mentioned the Honourable Hadiths that have the same mean-
ing. Then he said: Thus, for example, if the intention were to go for the
Holy struggle and it was combined with something other than hypocrisy,
such as taking a salary for the service, taking something from the loot or
goods then the reward for his Holy struggle would decrease yet it would not
be totally eliminated.

[bn Rajab said: Imam Ahmad (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said:
The merchant, the hired, the mercenary, they get their reward for their Holy
struggle according to the purity of their intentions and they are not equal to
the one who goes to Holy struggle sacrificing himself and giving his money
with pure intentions.

He also said about the one who takes fees for the Holy struggle: If he
did not set for the Holy struggle but for money, then there is no objection,
it is as if he sets off for the sake of his religion, if he were given something,
he would take it. It was narrated after Abdullah ben Amr (May Allah be
pleased with them) that, «If the one of you decides to go for the Holy strug-
gle and Allah (the Exalted) provides for him as some sort of recompense

434

It was narrated after Abi Said, «Shall I inform you of that which fright-
ens me a more than the Anti-Christ? They said, O Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) yes. He (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said: Secret polytheism: The man stands and
prays so he prays well when some other man looks at him.» It was narrated
by Ahmad.

then there is no harms in that. Yet if the one of you goes for the Holy stug-
gle only when he is given money and if he were not given money he would
not go then there is no good in him.,»

It was narrated after Mujahid (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) that
he said about the Hajj of the camel driver and the Hajj of the merchant, «It
is perfect and complete; it does not decrease anything from their reward».
That is to say because their original intention is to perform the rituals of
Hajj ragardless of gain. He said: But if the origin of the deed as for Allah’s
(the Exalted) sake then hypocrisy is incidental, then if it were just a passing
through and he dispels it then this would not cause him harm, that is not
disputed. Yet if he indulges in it, would his deed be considered wrong or
would he not be rewarded for the original intention? The savants among
those who came before conflicted over that issues. This was told by Imam
Ahmad and Ibn Jarir and overweighed that his deed would not be consid-
ered invalid and that he would be rewarded for his first and original inten-
tion. This is narrated after Al-Hassan and others. The Honourable Hadith
of Abi Tharr after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon‘him) carries the same meaning.

326 - «He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was asked
about the case of a man who does that which is good and for which people
praise him. He (May Allah’s. blessings and peace be upon him) said: That is
the immediate glad tidings of the believer». It was narrated by Moslem.

I said: And the completeness of this rank is made clear in the interpre-
tation of the Honourable Hadith of Abi Said if Allah (the Exalted) wishes.

327 - His saying: (It was narrated after Said (May Allah be pleased
with him), «Shall I inform you about what I fear most for you than the
Anti-christ? They said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him), yes. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said: Secret polytheism: The man stands and prays, and he pretends to
pray well when some other man looks at him». It was narrated by Ahmad.

328 - It was narrated by Ibn Khouzeimah in his Saheeh after Mahmoud

435

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: The interpretation of the Holy Sura of Kahf.

The second: The serious issue of rejecting a good deed if it includes
something for other than Allah (the Exalted) .

The third: Mentioning the cause requiring that; it is perfect sufficiency.

The fourth: Verily among the causes: He (the Exalted) is the best
among partners.

The fifth: The Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) fear for his companions against hypocrisy.

The sixth: He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ex-
plained that as the man praying for Allah (the Exalted) yet praying
properly when he sees another man looking at him.

ben Labeed, «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) came and said: O people! Beware of secret polyetheism! They
said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him), what is secret polytheism? He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said the man stands and prays and when he sees another man
looking at him he prays properly. That is secret polytheism».

His saying: (It was narrated after Abi Said Al-Khidri) This was men-
tioned before.

His saying: (Secret polytheism) He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) called it secret because the person who practises it shows that his
deeds are for the sake of Allah (the Exalted) while he means others, or he
joins in partners by praying properly for this partners.

329 - It was narrated after Shaddad ben Aws, «During the Holy Pro-
phet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) days we considered
hypocrisy as minor polytheism». It was narrated by Ibn Abi Ad-Dunia in
the «Book of Ikhlas» and by Ibn Jarir in «At-Tahthib» and by Al-Hakem.

Ibn Al-Qayyim said: As for :ninor polytheism, it is like little hypocrisy,
dissembling in front of people and swearing by other than Allah (the Ex-
alted) and the man telling another man! What Allah (the Exalted) wishes
and what you wish, and that is from Allah (the Exalted) and that is from
you, and I swear by Allah (the Exalted) and by you, and I have no one but
Allah (the Exalted) and you, and I depend on Allah (the Exalted) wishes
and what you wish, and that is from Allah (the Exalte2 >nd that is from

436

فاقا عم ف قاعاعه قفعقاعم واواو وار و ود قاعم ماماو فاقاهد .د مدمداها. هافدو واوا فد فاه اوداع واو قار و فاج ه» وا رادو قدي وأوافا ع عا فاع عار د و ودود و ود و راو ودار مد ردق .6د عمد عد عاع د عد زاعد لا لا را م

you, and I swear by Allah (the Exalted) and by you, and I have no one but
Allah (the Exalted) and you, and I depend on Allah (the Exalted) and you,
and had it not been because of Allah (the Exalted) and you, such and such
a thing would not have happened. Yet this might be according to the one
saying it and according to his intentions major polytheism.

There is no dispute over the matter that faith is a necessary condition
for the validity of the deed as well as for accepting it. Also carrying on per-
forming the deed as was said by Al-Fadl ben Ayyad (May Allah is Mercy
upon him) concerning Allah’s saying, «That He may try which of you isk t
in deed» (67: 2) He said, «The most sincere and most correct. He was tc‘d:
O Aba Ali, what is that which 1s most sincere and most correct? He said:
Verily if the deed was sincere yet not correct it would not be accepted; if it
were correct yet not sincere, it would not be accepted until it is both sincere
and correct. Verily that which is sincere is that which is dedicated to Allah
(Glory be to Him) and that which 15 correct is that which is in conformity
with the Sunna».

Discussing the benefits: The Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) pity on his nation and his (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) advice for them and that hypocrisy is more horrible for
the righteous than trouble made by men. Thus if the Holy Prophet (May ‏لذ‎
‎lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) fears hypocrisy for the masters of the
Holymen with all that great faith and wide knowledge then others who are
lower than them by so many times deserve fear for them of polytheism both
minor and major.

437

Chapter

(A man desiring the present life through his deeds is among polytheistic
acts).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Those who desire the life of the present
and its glitter,- to them we shall pay (the price of) their deeds therein, with-
out diminution. They are those for whom there is nothing in the Hereafter
but the Fire: Vain are the designs they frame therein, and of no effect are
the deeds that they do!» (11: 15-16).

CHAPTAR

His saying: (Chapter concerning a man desiring the present life through
his deeds is considered among polytheistic acts).

Thus if it is said: What is the difference between this interpretation and
the interpretation mentioned in the previous chapter?

I say: There is between them absolute common and particular aspects
that are combined in subject matter, that is if what man intends to dissem-
ble in front of people and believing properly in order to be praised by them,
then that is hypocrisy as was mentioned before. That is the case of the hypo-
crites: Also, it is desiring the present life by dissimulating in front of people
and asking for their praise and honour. It is differentiated from hypocrisy
by being a righteous deed through which one desires an aspect of the pre-
sent life, like going for Holy struggle in order to take money, as will be men-
tioned in the following Honourable Hadith.

330 - «Miserable is he who worships the dinar». Or goes for Holy
Struggle in order to gain or other than that of the matter, mentioned by our
Sheikh after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) as well as after
other interpreters of Allah’s Holy Verse, «Those who desire the life of the
present and its glitter» (11: 15).

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) meant by this interpreta-
438

وه قاواه وا ققاء وار عام رباع فاه واو و قار وه فاعد قاع مار ود و جو ماع ماو م فاه قاقد وا فاو قافا قاع عاد فود فد ماع ران م عدف و »ا .اعد هد و ماقام .د وام هد اندها فادأقاف د و عداعا لا عام را م واه

tion and by what followed, that verily working for the present life is consid-
ered an act of polytheism that contradicts the required perfection of unifica-
tion and deems all actions wrong. It is more serious than hypocrisy because
the one desiring the present life might have a will that overpowers or con-
trols most of his deeds, as for the hypocrites, hypocrisy might ensue in one
deed but not another and he might not indulge in it, and the believer is cau-
tious against this and that.

His saying: Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Those who desire the life of
the Present and its glitter, -to them we shall pay (the price of) their deeds
therein, without diminution, they are those for whom there is nothing in the
Hereafter but the Fire; vain are the designs they frame therein, and of no ef-
fect are the deeds that they do» (11: 15-16)).

Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) said, «Those who desire
the life of the present life» that is to say its reward and «Its glitter» 1s its
money. «We shall pay» that is to say we provide them with the reward for
their deed through health and happiness with money, wives; and children.
Later on, it was revoked by the following Holy Verse, «If any do wish for
the transitory thing (of this life). We readily grant them - much thing as we
will...» Till the end of the two Holy Veres. (17: 18-19) It was narrated by
An-Nahhas in his «Nasikh».

His saying: «Later on it was revoked» that is to say conditioned. Thus
the Holy Verse did not say absolute.

Kutadah said, «He for whom the present life was his want, desire and
intention will be rewarded by Allah (the Exalted) for his good deeds in the
present life and he will reach the After life without a good deed to be re-
warded for. As for the believer, he will be rewarded for his good deeds in
the present life and recompensed for them in the Afterlife». It was men-
tioned by Ibn Jarir and supported it by his reference. Then he continued.

331 - Abi Huraira’s Honourable Hadith after Ibn Al-Moubarak after
Haywat Ibn Shouraih: He said: I was told by Al-Waled ben Moslem who
told him that Shoufayy ben Mati‘ Al-Asbahi told him (Verily he entered
Medina to reach a man around whom people gathered. Thereupon he said:
Who is this? They said: Abu Huraira. He said so I approached him till I
could sit between his hands [Very close to him] while he was talking to peo-
ple. When he stopped talking and became alone I said: I beseech you to tell
me an Honourable Hadith that you heard from Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and that you learned and

439

لارام ماود قا هد .د راءد ما ود .د قاع ود .اع قا راود و رد فد قد كدو وافا. واراعار د را وا راو وا ارد و را وا راع مدو م زراند هراعد قاع وقا عد فد قدعدار تقار قلاع 5 كد ع در عع 5 5 ع > ع 5 + 5 5 5 5 5 55

understood. He said: Thereafter Abi Huraira said: I will do, 1'11 teil you an
Honourable Hadith that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) hold me in this house while we were alone then Abu
Huraira sobbed and took a deep breath; then he came back to consciousness
and said: I will tell you an Honourable Hadith that Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)told me in this house while
we were alone. Then he sobbed another time and fell on his face, and he
stayed like that for a long time. Then he came back to consciousness and
said: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) told me, «Verily when Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) descends
on the Day of Judgment to judge among the people while every nation is
kneeling, the first one to be called is the reciter of the Holy Koran, a man
who died for Allah’s sake, and a man who has a lot of money.

Then Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) would say to the rehear-
ser of the Holy Koran: Havenot I told you what I sent down on My Holy
Messenger? He said: Yes. He (the Exalted) said: What did you benefit from
what you learned? He said: I prayed all through the night and all through
the day. Then Allah (the Exalted) would tell him: You lied, and the angels
would tell him: You lied, and Allah (the Exalted) would tell him; rather,
you wanted the people to say that so and so rehearsed the Holy Koran,
then that is said. The one who has money is brought, and Allah (the Ex-
alted) would tell him: Havenot I given you money so that you would not
need any body? He said: O Lord, yes. He (the Exalted) said: What did you
do with what I gave you? He said I used to pay alms and visit my relatives
consistently, so Allah (the Exalted) would tell him; You lied and the angels
would tell him: You lied. And Allah (the Exalted) would say; rather, you
war.ted people to say that so and so is generous, then it was said. Then the
one who died for the sake of Allah (the Exalted) is brought and asked: Why
were you killed? He would say: I was commanded to go for the Holy strug-
gle and I fought till I was killed. Allah (the Exalted) would tell him: You
lied; and the angels would tell him: You lied and Allah (the Exalted) would
say; rather, you wanted people to say So and So is brave and it was said:
Then Allah’s Holy Messenger hit my knees and said: O Abu Huraira these
three people are going to be the first three of Allah’s (the Exalted) creatures
with whom Fire is lit on the Day of Judgment».

Verily our Sheikh asked the writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
about this Holy Verse and he answered the summary of which is: He men-
tioned after those who came before types of what people practise today

440

.م لاع هد عدر مه هد قاع ودود ددا و وأواع د واف فاع قاف فاق را هار ده دود واه قا عد عد هده قافا فادها قد قا فاع قاقد ود وا رادا قار ردقار د ود عد ندرا عد عد مامز قاورد و قاع واعد عد عار عا عد عد داعا قناع وه ند ناماه

without realizing its meaning.

Such as: A good deed done by many people for Allah’s sake, such as
alms giving and prayer, visiting relatives, being good to people, leaving
wrong doing and the like of what the man does or drops purely for Allah’s
sake, yet he does not desire its reward in the Afterlife; rather, he wants AI-
lah’s sake. Yet he does not desire its reward by preserving and developing
his money, or by guarding his family and children, or maintaing benefac-
tion, while he does not worry about desiring the Garden or escaping from
Hell-Fire, that person is rewarded for his deeds in the present life and not in
the Afterlife. This type was mentioned by Ibn Abbas.

The second type: And this is greater than the first and more feared; it is
the type that was mentioned by Mujahid about the Holy Verse: It was sent
down concerning him: That verily he does righteous deeds while his inten-
tion is to dissimulate people not to ask for the reward of the Afterlife.

The third type: To verily perform righteous deeds aiming to earn
money, such as performing the Hajj rituals to take some money, or imi-
grates for a present life matter, or to marry a woman or he sets off for Holy
Struggle because of gains; this type was also mentioned in interpreting this
Holy Verse; it is similar to the case of the man who learns for the school of
his family or for their gain or for becoming their leader, or he learns the
83019 Koran and perseveres on praying because he wants to get a job ina
Mosque.

The fourth type: Is to verily perform deeds obeying Allah (the Exalted)
faithful in that to only Allah (the Exalted) without introducing a partner,
yet he is performing something that brings him out of Islam, such as the
Jews and the Christian when they worship Allah (the Exalted) or when they
give alms or fast for Allah’s sake and for the sake of the Afterlife and like
many of the people of this nation who perform in a way of disbelief or ma-
jor polytheism that brings them totally out of Islam; if they obey Allah (the
Exalted) they would obey Him (the Exalted) purely desiring His reward in
the Afterlife? But they perform deeds that take them out of Islam and make
their deeds rejected; this kind was also mentioned in the Holy Verse as was
narrated after Anas and others; those who came before used to fear them;
thus some of them said: Had I known that Allah (the Exalted) accepts one’s
prostration from me, I would have desired death because Allah (the Exalted)
says, «Allah doth accept of the sacrifice of those who are righteous». (5: 30).

Then he said: Finally it should be said: If a man performs the fire
prayers, gives alms, fasts and performs the rituals of Hajj for the sake of

441

It was mentioned in the Saheeh after Abi Huraira: Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Miserable
is the one who worships the dinar; Miserable is the one who worships the
dirham; miserable is the one who worships the black garment; miserable is
the one who worships the thicket; if he was given, he became pleased and if

not he becomes angry, miserable and set back is he and if he..:

Allah (the Exalted) asking for the reward of the Afterlife, then after that he
performs deeds through which he shows desire for the present life such as
going to the Hajj for the sake of Allah (the Exalted) then he goes another
time to Hajj for the sake of present life, as the case of our reality, then he is
classified with that which is preferred by him. Some said: The Holy Koran
often mentions the pure among the people of the Garden and those who
purely belong to Hell-Fire.

332 - His saying: (It was mentioned in the Saheeh after Abi Huraira
(May Allah be pleased with him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Miserable is the one who worships
the dinar; Miserable is the one who worships the dirham; miserable is the
one who worships the black garment, miserable is the one who worships the
thicket; if he was given he is pleased, and if not he becomes angry, miserable
and set back is he; if he is stunned by a thorn he cannot remove it. Blessed
is a servant who rides his horse for Allah’s sake, his hair is unkempt, his
feet are dusty if he is guarding then he is in the rear lines, then he is in the
rear lines; if he asks for permission, he is not allowed, and if he interceded
he.».

His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh) That is to say Al-Bukhary’s
Saheeh.

His saying: (Miserable) that is to say fell, what is intended here is per-
ished. This was said by Al-Hafeth who said in another place: It is the Oppo-
site of fortunate and happy wretched. Abu As-Saadat said: Miserable is said
if one tumbles and falls on his face. That is invoking Allah (the Exalted) to
make him perish.

His saying: (worshipped the dinar) it is that known amount of gold
such a weight.

His saying: (Miserable is the worshipper of dirham) and that is made of
silver, it was estimated by philologist to be equal to a grain of barely in
weight, and we have a dirham that was coined by Bani Umayya and it is
equal to the weight of fifty grains of barely and two fifth of a grain. He

442

والوىا واعء د ود ود و مد عد .د وى قدو قدو ره عاو .د هد و .دقام ساقد فاع فاع هد م ماود هه ورا واه قاها اه ماود واوا وا واه .د يماع ما. د وا ودود و وا واهد فاع ماأزاعد. .اردع . .دا ماعد .د معد مد عمد م عدم رم م م 55

called him a servant of it because it [the dirham] is what is intended by his
deed, thus every one who orients himself to other than Allah (the Exalted),
has in fact joined in a partner with him in worshipping Him (the Exalted) as
the case of many people.

His saying: (Miserable is the worshipper of the black garment). Abu As-
Saadat said: It is a silk or wool labeled garment and it is said that it is not
called as such unless it is labeled and black.

His saying: (Miserable and set back) Al-Hafeth said he became sick
again. Abu As-Saadat said: That is to say he fell up side down. That is
invoking Allah (the Exalted) to fail him. At-Tibi said: It includes invoking
Allah (the Exalted) against him because if he becomes miserable, he will fall
on his face and if he is sent back he will fall on his head another time.

His saying: (If he is pricked by a thorn) that is to say if a thorn enters
under his skin (he cannot remove it) by means of tongs. This was said by
Abu As-Saadat.

What is meant here is that if such was his case, then he deserves that
Allah (the Exalted) invokes against him; and any one whose case was as
such, should find due to such invocations what harms him in his present
lifes as well as in his Afterlife.

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: The Holy Pro-
phet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) called him the worship-
per of the dinar and dirham the worshipper of the velvet and the worshipper
of the black silk garment and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) mentioned that which is considered invoking Allah (the Exalted)
against such person by saying: «Miserable is he and set back is he and it
was pricked by a thorn he cannot remove it». That is the case of the one
who is afflicted by evil that does not leave him and he does not succeed be-
cause he is miserable and is set back thus he could not get what he wants or
free himself from that which is hated, and that is the case of the one who
worships money, and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) de-
scribed him by «if he is given he will be pleased, and if not he will become
angry».

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And among them are
men who slander thee in the matter of (the distribution of- the alms: If the one
given part there of, they are pleased, but if not, behold! They are indigents!«
(9: 58) Thus they are pleased for other than Allah (the Exalted) and they be-
come angry for other than Allah (the Exalted), and that is the case of that

443

... blesses a servant...

who clings to a leadership or a picture or something similar to that who de-
sires; if he gets that thing he becomes pleased and if not he becomes angry.
Such is the servant of his desires; he is the slave of such things since Slavery
and servitude are in reality the slavery and servitude of the heart. Thus what-
ever enslaves the heart makes the heart its servant -till he said-.

The same thing goes for the money seeker, that also enslaves him and
such affairs are of two kinds: That which is needed by the servant as he
needs his food, drink, mate, habitat and the like, such person asks from ‏لم‎
‎lah (the Exalted) and resorts to Him (the Exalted). Thus for him money is
used by him to satisfy his need; it is like his monkey that he rides, and his
carpet on which he sits without being enslaved by it.

And one of them: What the servant does not need; his heart should not
cling to this; if his heart clings to it, he will become enslaved to it, and he
might become enslaved by and dependant on other than Allah (the Exalted),
thus neither real servitude to Allah (the Exalted) nor real dependance on
Him stay with him; rather, he possesses a branch of worship to other than
Allah (the Exalted) and a branch of dependance on other than Allah (the
Exalted), and that person is most deserving of the Holy prophet’s (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying, «Miserable is the
worshipper of the dinar; miserable is the worshipper of the dirham:
Miserable is the worshipper of the dirham, miserable is the worshipper of
black silk garment, and miserable is the worshipper of the thicket».

This person is a slave to such matters even if he demands them from
Allah (the Exalted); verily if Allah (the Exalted) gave them to him, he would
be pleased; if Allah (the Exalted) didnot give them to him, he would become
angry. Verily, Allah’s servant is someone who is pleased by what pleases Al]-
lah (the Exalted) and becomes angry by what makes Allah (the Exalted) an-
gry, and he loves what Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) love, and hates for A ‘aii (the Ex-
alted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him); he supports the holymen of Allah (the Exalted) and is hostile to the
enemies of Allah (the Exalted).» Such person is one who perfected his Faith.

His saying: (Blessed is a servant) Abu As-Saadat said: «Blessed» is fin
Arabic «Touba»] the name of the Garden and it was said a tree in the Gar-
den, and this is supported by what Ibn Wahab narrated after Abi Said who
said, «A man said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and

444

فالوا ود و وا واو واو و ود ماو واوا ورد وا واو ود واوا م فقاو قافا ودود عد هادف مهار م براعارا مدر و د و وا واه ‎SS‏ اواو م وا واو واأفدو وا ع قاف ود فادها عدو 6 . عد قدا قدا فا .دام فاع 6 م

peace be upon him) what is Touba [Blessings]? He (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said: It is a tree in the Garden, the size of which is
the walking distance of one hundred years; the clothes of the people of the
Garden come out of its sleeves».

333 - And it was narrated by Imam Ahmad: We were told by Hasan
ben Mousa that he heard Abdullah ben Louhai‘ say that Darra; Abu Samah
said: Abu Al-Haitham told him after Abi Said Al-Khidri after Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). «Verily a man
said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) blessed is the one who saw you and believed in you. He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said: Blessed is the man who saw me and
believed in me, and blessed, and blessed and blessed is the one who believed
in me without seeing me. A man told him: What is blessing [Touba]? He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: It is a tree in the
Garden the size of which is the walking distance of a hundred years; the
clothes of the people of the Garden come out of its sleeves».

This Honourable Hadith has evidence in the two Saheeh, as well as in
others. Also Ibn Jarir narrated a strange Honourable Hadith. Wahab (May
Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, «Verily there is in the Garden a tree
called Touba; a riding person rides in its shade for a hundred years without
reaching the end: its flowers are thin garments and its leaves are thin gowns,
its branches are amber, and its base is corundum, its soil is camphor, its dirt
is musk, rivers of wine, milk and honey came out of its base and it is a
place for the people of Garden to sit around; while they are sitting angels
who came to them from their Lord leading excellent horses tied to gold
chains their faces are as beautiful as lamps, their skin is as soft as silk, their
saddles are made from gold and their clothes are from sarcenet and brocade;
they would make it kneel down and say: Verily our Lord (the Exalted) has
sent us to you so that you may visit Him (the Exalted) and salute Him (the
Exalted). He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: They
would ride them. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said
that they are faster than the bird and smoother than butterflies. Trotting
without being trained, the rider rides next to his brother while talking to
him and whispering to him, not an ear of those riding horses would hit the
ear of another nor would one kneel even a tree would move away from their
way in order not to separate between a man and his brother.

He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Thereupon
they reached the Most Merciful, Most Compassionate and He (the Exalted)

445

المع لع مم عمج م فاه عمج م مج ماه قعاه عام اماه رهم قا قو ماله قار ةا مام وا رو رم عار ره اعد ناجم .د ماعد عد عه فعا مد عد عد 6د 5 ع 6د 65د 6ج 5 5 5 2 5 5 6 95 5 5 5 55 5 5 555

shows them His generous face so that they may look at Him and when they
would see Him (the Exalted) they would say: O Allah (the Exalted): You are
the Peace and from You the Peace; You deserve all Glory and Honour. He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said then Allah (Be He
blessed and raised above) would say: I am the Peace, from Me the Peace,
and on you My Mercy and Love. Welcome My servants who fear and obey
Me without seeing Me . He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said: Thereupon they would say: O Our Lord (the Exalted) we did not wor-
ship You as You should be worshipped, and we did not appreciate You as
we should. Thus permit us to prostrate in front of You. He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said: Then Allah (the Exalted) would say:
This is not an abode of hard work or worship; rather, it is an abode of com-
fort and I verily freed you from the hardships of worship. Thus ask Me
whatever you want such that every man among you has a wish, so they
would ask Him (the Exalted), even the one who has the shortest wish will
say: O My Lord, the people of the present life competed among each other
and they were disturbed because of that, so give me every thing they had
from the day you created the present life till the day You ended it.

Thereupon Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) would say: Today
you asked a short wish and you asked something lower than your rank; that
is from Me to you and I will bestow upon you with My rank because there
is not misery or shortage of benefaction. He (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said: He (the Exalted) would say: Show My servants
what their wishes did not reach and what no one thought about. He (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Thereupon they would show
them till they feel that their wishes in their souls were short among those
things they were shone as if complied Jades on each four there is a bed
made of one ruby and on every bed a horrible gold dome and in every
dome there is a furniture of the Garden and in every dome there are two
maids each is wearing two of the garments of the Garden. There is not a
color in the Garden but found in them; there is not a nice smell but from
them; the light penetrates their faces through the dome so that who sees
them thinks that the dome does not exist. Their brain could be seen through
their legs like a white line in a red ruby. They see his virtue as compared to
his companions as the virtue of the sun is compared to stones or better. And
he sees in them the same. Then he enters to where they are so they salute,
kiss and hug him and say: By Allah (the Exalted) we never thought that
Allah (the Exalted) would create someone like you..Then Allah (the Exalted)

446

فاع اه ع .ا وام عد عد عر واوا و ده ونقاوا ناه
«افا ع لاش قفاو وا هع ققافاه فقاقاه »> اواو ع واوا واو واوا فاع وا قاف و قفاوا واه و وا ها واو وا واه ما واوا و > عاو تفاع ع و واو و واو و وا عا ماه واه

commands the angels so they lead them to the Garden in one line till each
of them reaches his prepared rank».

This Honourable Hadith was narrated by Abi Hatem and referred to
Wahab ben Manbah, and he added, «Thus look at the gifts of your Lord
who endowed you [with those gifts]; and then there are domes at the upper
comrade and rooms built from pearls and their doors are made from gold
and their beds from rubies, their mats from silk and brocade and their pul-
pits from light; light like the ray of the sun radiates from their doors and
courts, they are like the twinkling planet in day light, and there are great
laces in the highest places made from rubies which also shine. Had it not
been subjugated, eyes would have been dazzling; all that is in those places is
made from white rubies and furnished with white silk; and that which 15
made from green rubies is furnished with green silk, and that made from yel-
low rubies is furnished with assorted green esmerald, red gold and white sil-
ver, their angles and legs are made from jewels and their balconies are
domes of pearls and their towers are rooms of. When they went to get what
their Lord gave them Jades made of white rubies were brought to them; life
was breathed into them; under them there are immortal scions, each scion
has in his hand the rein of a jade of those jades as well as its bridles which
are made from white silver on which pearls and rubies are arranged, beds
set and covered by silk and brocade. Those jades took them while they ob-
serve the gardens of the Garden, so when they reach their houses, they will
find angels sitting at platforms made from light waiting for them to visit
them and shake hands with them and congratulate them on the honour
granted by their Lord. Thus when they enter their palaces they find them all
that they request and ask for; at the door of every palace of those palaces
there are four gardens; two of these have plants that have branches and two
green gardens, in them there are two flowing springs and there are two pairs
of every kind of fruit, also there are young maids limited to tents, so when
they enter their houses and settle down their Lord would tell them (Did you
find that what your Lord promised you?). They said: By our Lord (the Ex-
alted), yes. He (the Exalted) would say: Did you accept your Lord’s reward?
They said: O Our Lord (May Allah be pleased with him), we are pleased,
may Thou be pleased with us. He (the Exalted) would say, My being pleased
with you, I placed you in My abode and I let you look at My face. Then
they said: (Praise Allah (the Exalted) who freed us from sadness, verily our
Lord (the Exalted) is Most Merciful Most Grateful, He places us in this
abode because of His benefaction. We are not afflicted by fatigue, nor do

447

... Who rode his horse for Allah’s sake, his hair is unkempt, his feet are
dusty, if he is guarding then he is guarding, and if he is in the rear lines,
then the is in the rear lines; if he asks for permission he is not allowed and

if he intercedes, he was not granted intercession».

‘we feel exhausted). That is a strange text and parts of it are mentioned in
the two Saheehs.

. Khaled ben Maadan said, «Verily there is in the Garden a tree called
Touba [Blessing] all of it is udders, it suckles the boys of the people of the
Garden and that the miscarried babies of women are in a river of the rivers
of the Garden living in it till the Day of Judgment, when he is resurrected as
a forty years old man.» It was narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem.

His saying: (Riding his horse for Allah’s (the Exalted) sake) that is to
say going for the Holy struggle.

His saying: (Unkempt) that is to say Holy Struggle kept him busy thus
he did not have time for enjoying oils or combing his hair.

His saying: (If he were guarding then he would be guarding that is to
Say protect the army from the attacks of an enemy.

His saying: (Then he would be guarding-) that is to say he was not ne-
glectful or unaware and such terms are used to describe the one who per-
forms his jobs perfectly.

His saying: (If he were in the rear lines, then he is the rear lines) that is
to say in the rear lines of the army, moving himself from one position to an-
other for the sake of Holy Struggle. Thus every position or rank that he oc-
cupies whether by day or by night, desiring Allah’s reward and seeking to
please and to obey Him (the Exalted).

Ibn Al-Jawzi (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: He is unknown
and does not aim at gaining prestige.

Al-Khilkhali said: It means that he follows the orders given to him and
Stays where he is asked to stay; he does not lose his position; rather, he men-
tioned guarding the rear lines because they are the most difficult positions.
It also includes the virtue of guarding for the sake of Allah (the Exalted) .

His saying: (If he asks for permission, he was not granted permission)
that is to say if he asks for the permission of the princes and those similar
in position and authority to them, he is not granted permission because he
does not have a high rank or position relative to them. All that is because
he did not demand having a high rank; rather, he demands what Allah (the

448

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: The man desiring the present life by working for the After-

life.
The second: The interpretation of the Holy verse of Hud.

The third: Naming the Moslem Man, the worshipper of the dinar, dir-
ham, and thicket.

The fourth: Interpreting that if he were given, he would be pleased; if
he were not given, he would become angry.

The fifh: His saying: «Miserable and set back».

The sixth: His saying: «If he were pricked by a thorn he could not re-
move it».

The seventh: Praising the one who goes to Holy struggle and possesses
these qualities.

Exalted) has to give without directing his act to other than Him (the Ex-
alted).

His saying: (and if he intercedes) (he would not be allowed). That
means if his case requires his intecession concerning something loved by AI-
lah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) his intercession is not accepted by princes and the like.

334 - Imam Ahmad and Moslem narrated after Abi Huraira, «May an
unkempt person motivate by hand the sworn to Allah (the Exalted), He
would answer him».

335 - Also it was narrated by Imam Ahmad after Mousaab ben Az-
Zoubeir, he said: Othman (May Allah be pleased with him) said- while in a
sermon- «I will verily tell you an Honourable Hadith that I heard from AI-
lah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). Noth-
ing prevented me from telling it to you but my suspect in you. I heard
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) say-
ing: Guarding one right for Allah’s (the Exalted) sake is better than a thou-
sand nights in which one prays and fasts during their days».

Also it was narrated by Al-Hafeth Ibn Assaker in the interpretation of
Abdullah ben Al-Moubarak; Abdullah ben Muhammad, the judge of Nous-
seibeen, said that Muhammad ben Al-Moubarak told him, dictated the fol-
lowing Verses in Tartous in the year 177 A.H.

449

مداع مد عد د هد عد .د ودود 6 9ه مدرو دواع عد مد عدوا و فد ودار ود رد و ود واو عد فده فاو واو ف وامدو ها عه ‎OS‏ راق فا واء د و رد و رو رو فا و و و را ل را را ماده

He said: Thereupon I met Al-Fad! through what he wrote at the Holy
Mosque, when he read it his eyes were filled with tears. He said: Abu Ab-
dur-Rahman told the truth and he advised me. Then he said: You are
among those who write the Honourable Hadith? I said: Yes, he told me:
Write down this Honourable Hadith and Al-Fadl ben Ayyad told me: We
were told by Mansour ben Al-Moutamir after Abi Saleh after Abi Hurayira.

336 - «Verily a man said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) teach me something which I win with the re-
ward of those who struggle for the sake of Allah (the Exalted). Thereupon
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Can you pray with-
out saying and fast without breaking the fast? Thereupon he said: O Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) I am weak-
er than being able to do that, then the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said: By the One who possesses my soul, if I were
to tolerate that, I would not reach the virtue of those who struggle for the
sake of Allah (the Exalted), do not you know that the horse of the one who
fights for the sake of Allah (the Exalted) will be followed in his power and
thus good deeds would be recorded for him?».

450

Chapter

(He who obeys religious authorities and princes in proscribing what
Allah (the Exalted) allowed or allowing what Allah (the Exalted) proscribed,
then he has taken them as lords besides Allah (the Exalted)).

[bn Abbas said, «Stones from the sky are about to fall upon you; I say:
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said
and you say: Abu Bakr and Omar said?».

Chapter

His sayisng: (He who obeys the savants and princes in proscribing what
Allah (the Exalted) allowed, then he had taken them as lords besides Allah
(the Exalted).

Allah (the Exalted) has said: «They take their priests and their anchorites
to be their lords in derogation of Allah, and (they will take as their Lord)
Christ the son of Mary; Yet they were commanded to worship but one God
there is no God but He. Praise and Glory to Him: (Far is He) from having the
partners they associate (with Him)» (9: 31). The explanation of this Holy
Verse was mentioned above by the Honourable Hadith of Adi ben Hatem
(May Allah be pleased with him).

His saying: (And Ibn Abbad (May Allah be pieased with them) said:
Stones from the Heaven are about to fall on you. I say: Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said and you say:
Abu Bakr and Omar said?»).

His saying: (Are about) that is to say approaching fast.

This saying after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them) is the
response to the one who said to him: «Verily Abu Bakr and Omar (May
Allah be pleased with them) do not consider relishing Umra [Minor Hajj]
and Hajj.

This saying after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them) is the

451

ولقامد وه قافا ود قا م قافا فى فاو و هم زواعو عاقا. ودقاواع قاقد ف ود ود قاعد قدو ‎SS‏ واد لامر قار وا ند و وأقداق د قدى ا هد مد عد مداه د يداع قاع فم

response to the one who said to him: «Verily Abu Bakr and Omar (May
Allah be pleased with them) do not consider relishing Umra [Minor Hajj]
and Hajj; rather, they consider that it is better to exclusively go to Hajj». Or
that which has the meaning of this. Ibn Abbas believed that enjoying the
Minor Hajj when going to Hajj is an obligation and he used to say:

337 - «If one circumambulates around the House [Kaaba] and walks be-
tween As-Safa and Al-Marwa seven times, then he would be free from his
Minor Hajj whether he likes or not». It was narrated after Souraka ben
Malek, when they were ordered by the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) to perform the Minor Hajj and to be free when
they circumambulate around the House and walk between As-Safa. He said:
«O Allah’s Holy Messenger(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him),
does this apply to this year only or shall we apply it for ever? He (May AI-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Rather once for ever.» The
Honourable Hadith is mentioned in the two Saheehs.

Then there is no excuse here for the one who asks for the opinions of
the creeds of the savants and what each Imam used as a reference and takes
from their saying what is shown by evidence if he has the faculties that en-
ables him to do that. Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «If ye
differ in anything among yourselves, refer it to Allah and His Apostle, if ye
do believe in Allah and the Last Day: that is the best and most suitable for
final determination». (4: 59).

338 - It was narrated after Al-Bukhary, Muslim and others that the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Had I
confronted what turned my back to, I would have never guided, and had
not I got the sacrifice with me I would have freed myself». That is how it
was said by Al-Bukhary after A’isha (May Allah be pleased with her). The
same Honorable Hadith was said by Jaber: «Do what I ordered you to do,
had not I got the sacrifice, I would have done as you were ordered». There
are many Honorable Hadiths that support Ibn Abbas.

In general that is why Ibn Abbas said with the opinion of Abu Bakr
and Omar (May Allah be pleased with them) when the people objected to
this Honourable Hadith. They (May Allah be pleased with them) said,
«Stones from the sky are about to fall unto you... till the end of the Hon-
ourable Hadith».

Imam Malek (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said, «There is none
among us but is a respondant and responded to, but the one who is buried

452

Imam Ahmad said, «I am surprised by a people who knew [Honorable
Hadith] and realized that it is truthful, and they go and ask for Abi Su-
fyan’s opinion while Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Then let those beware

who withstand the Apostle’s order, lest some trial befall them, ...

in this grave (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)».

The discussions of the savants concerning this, are plenty.

339 - The savants still give their personal opinions about incidents and
developments; he who is right will have a double rewarded, and he who
makes a mistake will be rewarded once, as has been mentioned in the Hon-
ourable Hadith.

However, if the evidence becomes clear to them, they would adapt it
and leave their own opinion. But in case the Hobourable Hadith did not
reach them or was not proved that it was said after the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), or if it was proved yet it was con-
tradicted or objected against by someone. Then it is permissible for the
Imam to give his own religious opinions. During the time of the four Imams
(May Allah’s Mercy be upon him), the Honourable Hadiths used to be
asked of those who had them through hearing and lecturing, and a man
would travel through countries for several years seeking to hear the Honour-
able Hadiths.

Then the Imams took care of the books and gathered those Honourable
Hadiths in books and narrated them with references and showed that which
is truthful that which is good and that which is weak. Religious jurists classi-
fied and wrote books about every creed and they mentioned the evidence of
those who gave their opinions. Thus it was made easy for the one who
sought knowledge. Every Imam mentions the opinion and its proof or evi-
dence. In what Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them) said there is
the evidence and does not work according to it - imitating the Imam- then
this should be denied by being rough because he contradicted the evidence.

Imam Ahmad said: We were told by Ahmad ben Omar A]-Bazzaz that
they were told by Ziad ben Aiyoub, that Abu Oubeida Al-Haddad told
them after Malek ben Dinar after Ikrama after Ibn Abbas: «There is none
among us but one who adapts from his sayings and leaves other than the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)».

Thus according to this, he should reject the one who leaves the evidence
as to the saying of one of the savants: No matter who he is; the Imams say

453

.. OF a grievous Penalty be inflicted on them» (24: 63). Do you know what

trial is? Trial is polytheism.

this, verily imitation is not permissible but in matters of opinion whereby
there is no evidence that can be used as reference such as the Holy Koran
and the Sunna. What is meant by some of the savants, when he said: Mat-
ters of opinion are not rejected. As for the one who contradicts the Holy
Koran and the Sunna, such person should respond to what was said by Ibn
Abbas, Ash-Shafi’, Malek and Ahmad, and that is unanimously agreed
upon, as was mentioned above by Ash-Shafi (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him).

His saying: Imam Ahmad said, «I an surprised by a people who rea-
lized that it is truthful and they go and ask for Abu Sufyan’s opinion while
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Then let those be aware who withstand the
Apostle’s order, lest some trial befall them or a grievous penalty be inflicted
on them.» (24: 63).

Do you know what the trial is? The trial is polytheism, perhaps had he
repeated some of his sayings, some would have remained in his heart so he
would perish».

This was said by Imam Ahmad (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) and
it was narrated after him by Al-Fad]! ben Ziad and Abu Taleb. Al-Fadl said
after Ahmad: «I thought over the Holy Koran and I found obeying the
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) mentioned
in thirty-three places. Then he started to rehearse: «Then let those beware
who withstand the Apostles’s orders, lest some trial befall them... till the end
of the Holy verse». (24: 63) And he mentioned: The trial which is polythe-
ism - till he said - would perish». Then he started rehearsing this Holy verse,
«But no, by thy Lord, they can have no (real) Faith, until they make thee
judge in all disputes between them, and find in their souls no resistance
against thy decisions, but accept them with the fullest conviction» (4: 65).

And Abu Taleb said after Ahmad and it was said to him: «Verily a peo-
ple who leave the Honourable Hadith and refer to the opinion of Sufyan
and others. Thereupon he said: I am surprised by a people who hear the
Honourable Hadith and know the evidence and realize its truthfulness and
they abondon it and resort to the opinion of Abu Sufyan and others. Allah
(the Exalted) has said, «Let those beware who withstand the Apostle’s order,
lest some trial befall them, or a grievous penalty be inflicted on them» (24:
63). Do you know what the trial is? The trial is disbelief. Allah (the Exalted)
had said: «Tumult and oppression are worse than slaughter». (2: 217) There-

454

> + > ع > خ ع > > ع ع ح خ خخ ع يي يي ا ا ا 0 0 ا 0 0 0 0 0 د د د 23 23 ف ف :. . :. : 3 :. : :د : : : : : : « ‎١ < : : : : : : : < : < " : « " « « « A‏ 7

upon they left the Honourable Hadith said by Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and they were overwhelmed by
their desires to resort to an opinion.» This was mentioned by Sheikh AI-Is-
lam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

His saying: (They knew the evidence) that is to say the references of the
Honourable Hadith and its truthfulness. Thus if the reference is truthful,
then it is considered a truthful Honourable Hadith by the authorities of the
Honourable Hadith as well as by other savants.

And Sufyan is: Ath-Thawri the ascetic, reliable, worshipper, and juris-
prudent Imam. He had Companions who learned after him and is a famous
creed and his mention by the savants in the books such as «At-Tamhid» by
Ibn Abdel-Barr and «Al-Istithkar» and «Kitab Al-Ashraf Ala Mathahib AI-
Ashraf» by Ibn Al-Munthir, «Al-Muhalla» by Ibn Hazm, «’Al-Mughni» by
Abi Muhammad Abdullah ben Ahmad ben Qudama Al-Hanbali and many
others.

Thus when Imam Ahmad (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: «I
am surprised by a people who know the evidence and its truthfulness... etc..»
he rejected that. And he indicated hesitation of the heart which makes the
person a disbeliever. This affliction has become widespread specially among
those who are educated and they in turn played their tricks for preventing
people from adapting the Holy Koran and the Sunna and they prevented
people from following the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him), aggrandizing his orders or forbidding; an example of that
what they said: Only they are who seek guidance by the Holy Koran and
the Sunna, and Opinion has been suspended. And he said: This very person
whom you imitate knows about the Honourable Hadith better than you,
and there are many such sayings which aim at making people stop following
the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) who do
not talk because of desire; and they drive them ‘to depend on the opinion of
those who may make mistakes; other Imams contradict him; his opinion is
suspended with an evidence; there is not an Imam but possessing a part of
the knowledge rather than all of it. Thus it is the duty of every responsible
person, if that evidence from Allah’s Holy Book and the Sunna of His Holy
Messager (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) reach him and he
understands its meaning, he should work accordingly in spite of those who
contradict him, as Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Follow (O men!) the revela-
tion given unto you from your Lord, and follow not, as friends or protec-
tors, other than Him. Little it is ye who remember of admonition». (7: 3).

455

تالماع م فاح قم ودع مد مد دقام و قد عا قال ردقا مام ده فار و وان زان راو فا رار وا قاراه ماقا وان وام ما زان مار مام م امدنع فنع د د م مام 6 6 م م م ع ع 5خ ع 5 > 5ت 5 5 5 5 5 555

He (the Exalted) has also said: «Is not enough for them that we have
sent down to thee the Book, in it 1s Mercy and a Reminder to those who be-
lieve» (29: 51).

The story of the consensus has already been mentioned above; and it has
been shown that he who copies is not considered among the people of
knowledge, and it was also narrated by Abu Omar Ibn Abdel-Barr and
others that such matter is unanimously agreed upon.

I said: No one contradicts that but those ignorant imitators, 6
they are ignorant of the Holy Koran and the Sunna, and because they turn
away from it. Those people, even if they thought that they followed the Im-
ams, in reality they contradicted them and followed a course different from
theirs. As we mentioned earlier after Malek, Ash-Shafi and Ahmad, yet Ah-
mad’s (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) discussion shows that copying be-
fore having evidence is not dispraised; rather, it is rejected for the one who
has evidence and it is contradicted, because of an opinion of one of the Im-
ams, and that starts by turning away from thinking about Allah’s Holy Kor-
an and the Sunna of His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) and resorting to the books of those who came after and being
satisfied with such books regardless of the two revelations, that resemble
what happened to the people of the Book about whom Allah (the Exalted)
said, «They take their priests and their anchorites to be their Lords in dero-
gation of Allah» (9: 31).

As will be discussed in the Honourable Hadith of Uday ben Hatem.
Thus the one who is wise should if he reads the books of the savant and
thought about them and realized what they said refer to the Holy Koran
and the Sunna, since every religious authority who has as opinion as well as
those who follow him and adapt his creed must mention him in his refer-
ence, and the truth about this issue is one, and the Imams are rewarded for
their opinion; the writer considers thinking what they say a way to know
about different issues and to keep them in mind and to distinguish between
right and wrong by using evidence mentioned by those seeking knowledge,
and through this one recognizes he who is worthier than the savants because
of the evidence, and the evidence of the original from Allah’s book and
from most of the Honourable Hadith, as was said by Abu Suweid after
some people among Mouath’s companions.

340 - «Verily when Allah’s Holy Messenger intended to send Mouadth
to Yemen he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: How
would you rule if you were asked to judge? He answered: I judge by Allah’s

456

ا ااا ا ا ‎OD‏

Holy Book; he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: If you
do not find what you want in Allah’s (the Exalted) Holy Book? He said:
Then I refer to the Sunna of Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him). He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said: If you do not find what you want in the Sunna of Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger nor in His (the Exalted) Holy Book? He said: I give my own opinion
without hesitation. He said: so Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) stroke his chest and said: Praise Allah (the
Exalted) who guided the messenger of Allah’s Holy Messenger to what
pleases Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him)». And he supported this by what was said by Al-Hareth ben Omar
after some people of Mouath ben Jabal’s companions, «Verily sent him to
Yemen... etc...».

All the Imams (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) did not neglect or re-
frain from explaining things; rather, they forbade people from imitating
them in case the Sunna was clear because they realized that the knowledge
was always something that they did not know about and that knowledge
might reach others; and examples about that are plenty as it cannot be con-
cealed from the one who read the discussions of the savants.

Abu Hanifa (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: If the Honourable
Hadith after Allah’s Holy Messenger(May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) was mentioned then it is highly esteemed and respected and if it
was narrated after the Companions (May Allah be pleased with them) then,
it is also highly esteemed and respected, but if it was narrated after the fol-
lowers, then we say, we are men and they are men.

And he said: If I say something and the Holy Book of Allah contra-
dicts it, then leave it and follow what Allah (the Exalted) said in His Holy
Book. It was said: If what Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said contradicts it? He said: Leave what I said and
follow what Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said. It was said: If the Companions contradict it? He said: Leave
what is said and follow what the Companions said.

Al-Rabi‘ said: I heard Ash-Shafi‘ (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
saying: If you find in my Book what contradicts Allah’s Holy Messenger’s
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) Sunna then follow and leave
what I said.

And he said: If there is a righteous Honourable Hadith that contradicts
what I have said, then drop what I have said.

457

It was narrated after Uday ben Hatem that he heard the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) rehearsing this Holy verse,
«They take their Priest...

Malek said: From everyone there are sayings that are adopted while
others are dropped with the exception of Allah’s Holy Messenger (May AI-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

Something like this was also mentioned after him earlier, thus there is
no excuse for any imitator after this. And if we interprete all that was said
by the savants about this issue we would not be brief; what we mentioned is
sufficient for the seeker of guidance.

His saying: (Perhpas if he rejects some of what he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said, to say what Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said. (Some aberrance might
take place in his heart thus he might perish-. He (May Allah’s Mercy be
upon him)warned that rejecting what the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said is a cause for the aberrance of the heart
and that is perishing in the present life as well as in the Afterlife, as Allah
(the Exalted) has said: «Then when they go astray, Allah let their hearts go
wrong. For Allah guides not those who are rebellious transgressors». (61: 5).

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said concerning the
meaning of Allah’s (the Exalted) saying: «Then let those beware who wit-
nessed the Apostle’s order (24: 63). Thus if the one who contradicted His
(the Exalted) command was warned against disbelief and polytheism; or
from painful torture, that would show that it might lead to disbelief and
painful torture, and it is well known that leading to the painful torture is
merely due to committing an act of disobedience only. Thus leading to dis-
belief is rather because of disparaging the truth is associated with it as was
done by Ibliss, may Allah (the Exalted) curse him.

Abu Jaafar ben Jarir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said after Ad-
Dahhak: «Let those who disobey His command be afficted with the tur-
moil». He said, «{Allah (the Exalted)] would install in his heart so he would
not believe, verily disbelief would appear through his tongue and his neck is
beaten».

His saying: (Or a grievous penalty be inflicted on them) in the present
life a painful torture from Allah (the Exalted) because they contradicted and
disobeyed the orders of Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him).

His saying: (It was narrated after Uday ben Hatem (May Allah be
458

... and their anchorites to be their lords in derogetion of Allah, and (They
take as their Lord) Christ the son of Mary; yet they were commanded to
worship but One Allah: There is no God but Him. Praise and glory to Him:
(For is He) from having the partners they associated (with Him).» (9: 3) So
I told him; «We do not worship them. He said: «Donot they proscribe what
Allah (the Exalted) allowed and in turn you proscribe it; do not they allow
what Allah (the Exalted) proscribed and you allow it? So I said: Yes. He
said: That is worshipping them». It was narrated by Ahmad and At-Tir-
mithi.

pleased with him) that he heard the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) reciting the following Holy verse, «They take their
priests and their anchorites to be their lords in derogation of Allah, and
(They take as their Lord) Christ the son of Mary....» (9: 31).

So I said, «We do not worship them. He said: Do not they proscribe
what Allah (the Exalted) allowed and you proscribe it; and they allow what
Allah (the Exalted) proscribed and you allow it? I said: Yes. He said: That
is worshipping them». It was narrated by Ahmad and At-Tirmithi).

341 - This Honourable Hadith was narrated in many ways; it was nar-
rated by Ibn Jarir, At-Tabarani, Ibn Mardawaih and Al-Baihaqi.

His saying: (It was narrated after Ouday ben Hatem) that is to say the
famous At-Tai. Hatem is Ibn Abdullah ben Al-Hashraj a person famous for
his generosity. He came to the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) in the month of Shaaban in the year 9 A.H. He em-
braced Islam and lived for one hundred and twenty years.

The Honourable Hadith includes evidence that obeying priests and an-
chorites in matters of disobedience to Allah (the Exalted) is considered wor-
shipping them in derogation of Allah (the Exalted) and it is classified under
major polytheism that is not pardoned by Allah (the Exalted) as mentioned
at the end of the Holy verse, «Yet they were commanded to worship but
One, Allah: There is no God but Him. Praise and glory to Him: (Far is He)
from having the partners they associate with Him.» (9: 31). He (the Exalted)
also said something similar in the following Holy verse: «Eat not of (meats)
on which Allah’s name hath not been pronounced: That would be impiety.
But the evil ones ever inspire their friends to contend with you if ye were to
obey them, ye would indeed be Pagans.» (6: 121).

Many people have fallen in this along with those who identified with
them because they never took into consideration the evidence if it contra-

459

This chapter discusses many issues:
The first: The interpretation of the Holy verse of An-Nour.
The second: The interpretation of the Holy verse of Bara't.

The third: Drawing attention to the meaning of worship that was de-
nied by Ouday.

The fourth: Likening Ibn Abbas by Abi Bakr and Omar; and likening
Ahmas by Sufyan.

The fifth: Changing conditions to reach this end till worshipping an-
chorites became for most the best deed and it was called guardianship; and
worshipping anchorites was considered knwoledge and jurisprudence; then
the situation changed till those who were not righteous were worshipped be-
sides Allah (the Exalted). And worshipped those who were ignorant.

dicted the copier, and it is classified under such polytheism. And there is
among them those who went too far and believed that adapting the evi-
dence under such circumstances is hated or proscribed, thus the trial be-
came more grievous. And he said: They know about evidence better than
we do, and no one adapts the evidence but he who has an opinion and
may be they verbalized dispraising the one who works according to the
evidence; and there is no doubt that such is considered among the things
that alienated the Islam as our Sheikh (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
said in Al-Masail: |

So circumstances changed and reached this end. Thus worsipping an-
chorites became for most among the best deeds, and they called it guardian-
ship, and worshipping anchorites was considered knowledge and
jurisprudence. Then the situation changed till those who were not considered
righteous used to be worshipped, and worshipped those who are ignorant.

As for obeying the princes and following their path on matters that con-
tradict what Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) legislated, then such an act led in the past as
well as in the present to affliction in the rules of most rulers after the Ortho-
dox Caliphs and so on. Verily Allah (the Exalted) has said: «But if they
hearken not to thee, know that they only follow their own lusts: And who is
more astray than one who follows his own lusts, devoid of guidance from
Allah? For Allah guides not people given to wrong-doing» (28: 50).

It was narrated after Ziad ben Houdair that he said: Omar (May Allah
be pleased with him) told me, «Do you know what destroys Islam? I said:

460

.الوع ا قاع قاع نرق د .د و ود و دواع عد ع ده قار و راد فد عد فد عد هدو ماود ع قاع فاقد ف ود قا واه فادرا ع قار و رد ما مد ردقاو قفاوا فاه قدقادفد قاع فا5د قداو يا تقد فده ماود ود تاقد رام نا تار ما مد رام تاراح مد

No. He said: It 15 destroyed by the mistake of a savant, a discussion by a

hypocrite, and the rule of wrong-doing Imams». It was narrated by Ad-Dira-
nl.

May Allah (the Exalted) make us among those who are guided by the
Truth and to be just with it.

461

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Hast thou not turned thy vision to those
who declare that tney believe in the revelations that have come to thee and
to those before thee? Their (real) wish is to resort together for judgment (in

their disputes) to the evil one, though they were ordered to reject him...» (4:
60)...

Chapter

Chapter (Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Hast thou not turned thy vision
to those who declare that they believe in the revelations that have come to
thee and to those before thee... till the end of the Holy verse.» (4: 60).

Al-Imad Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: The Holy
verse dispraises those who turned away from the Holy Book and the Sunna
and they resorted to others concerning matters of justice; that 15 what is
meant by the evil here.

What the savant Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said
concerning the definition of the evil, has been mentioned before; it is all
behavior through which the worshipper exceeded his limits concerning a
worshipped, followed, or an obeyed; thus every one who resorts for
judgment for other than the Holy Book of Allah (the Exalted) and the
Sunna of His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him), then he has resorted to the evil whom Allah (the Exalted) has
commanded His believing servants to reject, since resorting for judgment is
only to the Holy Book of Allah (the Exalted) and the Sunna of His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and to those who
judge by resorting only to them; thus he who resorts for judgment to others,
has exceeded his limits and dropped what Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) legislated and put
him in a position which he does not deserve.

The same thing goes for the one who worships someone or something

462

... but the Shaitan’s wish is to lead them astray far away (from the Right)»
(4: 60)...

besides Allah (the Exalted); he verily has worshipped the evil one; thus if the
worshipped is righteous then the act of worship performed by the worship-
per and directed towards him, went to the Shaitan, the one who ordered
him to perform it. Concerning Allah (the Exaited) has said: «One Day shall
we gather them all together. Then shall we say to those who join gods (with
Us), to your place. Ye and those ye joined as partners. We shall separate
them, and their partners shall say: We arenot whom ye worshipped! Enough
is Allah a witness between us and you: We certainly knew nothing of your
worship of us.» There will every soul prove (The fruits of) the deeds it sent
before: They will be brought back to Allah to their rightful Lord, and their
invented falsehoods will leave them in lurch». (10: 28 - 30) and He (the Ex-
alted) has also said, «One Day He will gather them all together, and say to
the angels, arenot you that these men used to worship? They will say:
«Glory to thee our (tie) is with Thee as Protector- not with them. Nay, but
they worshipped the Jinns: Most of them believed in them». (34: 40 -41).

And if he were among those who called others to worship him or if it
were a tree, a stone, a tombstone or others such as those things taken by
polytheists as images carved according to the shapes of the righteous, angels
or other subjects, that is then considered an evil doing that Allah (the Ex-
alted) commanded His worshippers to reject in worship and to free them-
selves from; He (the Exalted) commanded them to worship any other but
Allah (the Exalted) no matter what that thing was, and all that is a result of
the Shaitan’s works, and seduction, since he is the one who called people to
perform all that which is wrong and he beautified it for whomever per-
formed it, and that contradicts unification which constitutes the meaning of
«There is no God but Allah». Thus Monotheism is rejecting all that which is
evil and wrong worshipped by worshippers besides Allah (the Exalted).

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «There is for you an
excellent example (to follow) in Ibrahim and those with him, when they said
to their people, we are clear of you and of whatever ye worship besides
Allah. We have rejected you, and there has arisen, between us and you,
enmity and hatred for ever, -unless ye believe in Allah and Him Alone». (60:
4) Among them who worship other than Allah (the Exalted) has in fact
gone beyond his limits and performed towards this person worship that he
does not deserve.

Imam Malek (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: «Evil is that
463

... When it was said to them, «Come to what Allah hath revealed, and to
the Apostle». Thou seest the hypocrites avert their faces from thee in dis-
gust. How then, when they are seized by misfortune, because of the deeds
which their hands have sent forth? Then they come to thee, swearing by Al-
lah; we meant no more than good- will and conciliation!» (4: 61-62)...

which is worshipped regardless of Allah (the Exalted)».

Also, the one who seeks the judgment of other than Allah (the Exalted)
and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) has
is fact abandoned what the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) brought, avoided and joined a partner with Allah (the Exalted)
in matters of obedience and contradicted what Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) brought that is which Allah (the
Exalted) commanded him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
when He (the Exalted) said: «So judge between them by what Allah hath
revealed, and follow not their vain desires, diverging from the Truth that hath
come to thee» (5: 51) and He (the Exalted) has also said, «But no, by thy
Lord, they can have no (real) Faith, until they make thee judge in all disputes
between them, and find in their souls no resistance against Thy decisions, but
accept them with the fullest conviction». (4: 65) Thus he who contradicts
what Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) commanded that is to say by judging between people by
resorting to other than what Allah (the Exalted) sent down or if he desires
following his desires and wants, then such a person has removed the religion
of Islam and Faith from around his neck.

If such a person claims that he is a believer, verily Allah (the Exalted)
rejects that and calls them liars when He (the Exalted) said «Declare»; verily
«Declare» is mostly said to those who claim something and then contradict it
by performing the opposite; this is verified through His (the Exalted) saying,
«And they were commanded to reject it» because rejecting evil is the pillar of
Monotheism, as mentioned in the Holy verse of Al-Baqara if this pillar was
not accomplished, then this person wouldnot be considered a monethiest, and
then unification is the essence of faith through which all deeds become right
and without which all deeds become invalid. That is evident in His (the
Exalted) saying, «Whomever rejects Evil and believes in Allah hath grasped
the most trustworthy hand-hold... till the end of the Holy verse». (2: 256).
That is, seeking Judgment of the evil is believing in him.

His saying, (but the Shaitan’s wish is to lead them astray for among
(from the Right) (4: 60) Allah (the Exalted) shows in this Holy verse that re-

464

.. «when it is said to them, «Make not mischief on the earth». They say,

“Why we only want to make peace!» (2: 1))...

sorting to the judgment of the evil concerning that which the Shaitan com-
mands and beautifies for those who obey him; and He (the Exalted) shows
that that is among the delusions of the Shaitan; that shows that such delu-
sion is among the most serious among delusions, and the farthest from the
right path.

There are four issues in this Holy verse:

The first: It is the Shaitan’s desire.

The second. It is delusion.

The third: Confirming it.

The fourth: Describe it as far from the right path and truth.

Thus praise Allah (the Exalted) how great this Holy Koran is and How
Eloquent it is! It shows that it is the Lord of the world’s words, He (the Ex-
alted) revealed it to His most honourable Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) and taught it to His truthful and honest
servant (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

His saying: (When was is said to them, Come to what Allah has re-
vealed and to the Apostle. Thou seest the hypocrites avert their faces from
thee is disgust) (4: 61) Allah (the Exalted) has shown that such is a quality
of the hypocrites, and that the one who does so asks for it, even though he
claims to be a believer he is verily far from Faith.

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said: That constitutes an evidence that he was called to ask for the
judgment of the Holy Koran and the Sunna and his refuse is considered
among the hypocrites.

His saying: (avert their faces) means they. turn away and reject. How
plenty are those who possess such qualities, especially those who claim to be
learned. They verily turn away from that which is required by the evidence
brought by AlJah’s Holy Koran and the Sunna of His Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and he resorts to the opinions of
those who commit many mistakes; those who relate to the four Imams by
identifying with those that may not be identified with, and through depend-
ing and relying on the opinion of those whose opinion may not be adapted;
they adopt the opinion of those people which contradict the text of the Holy
Koran, the Honourable Sunna, and the fundamental rules of religion. Thus
the followers of the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be

465

ااام اي ااا ااا 0

upon him) become estranged among those people, as has been mentioned
and warned from in the previous chapter.

So think about those Holy verses as well as about those to follow, you
will realize what has befallen most people of averting from the Truth and of
dropping work according to it in most cases. Allah’s helps is sought from
Himself.

His saying: «When it was said to them: Make not mischief on the earth,
they say, why, We only want to make peace!» (2: 11) Abu Al-Aliya said
about this Holy Verse: It means that you should not disobey Allah (the Ex-
alted) on earth, because he who disobeys Allah (the Exalted) on earth or or-
ders others to disobey Allah then he commits mischief on earth, because
peace on earth and in Heaven can be accomplished by obeying Allah (the
Exalted) and His Holy Messneger (May. Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him). And verily Allah (the Exalted) has told about the brothers of Yousuf
[Joseph](May Allah’s peace be upon him) who said, «They shouted out, O
Crier, O ye (in) the caravan! Behold! Ye are thieves, without doubt! They
said, turning towards them, What is it that ye miss? Then said, «We miss
the great breaker of the king; for him who produces it, is (the reward of) a
camel load’ it will be bound by it. (The brothers) said: By Allah! Well ye
know that we came not to make mischief in the land, and we are no
thieves» (12: 70 - 73). Thus this Holy verse showed that every act of disobe-
dience is considered mischief on earth.

This Holy verse fits the interpretation in the following sense: Verily
seeking Judgment to other than Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is classified among the deeds
of hypocrites and it is considered as mischief on earth.

The Holy verse includes: Warning against being inticed by the sayings
of the people of desires even though they decorated them by Swearing. It
also includes warning against being deceived by an opinion if its truth has
not been supported by evidence from Allah’s Holy Koran and the Sunna of
His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). So
how plenty are those who believe that which is untruthful and disbelieves
that which is truthful; such is mischief on earth and it results in much cor-
ruption that lead who commit it away from Truth and leads him to that
which is invalid. He asks Allah (the Exalted) to forgive and grant us con-
stant health, both concerning religion, the present and the Afterlife.

So think and you will find that such is the case of most people except

466

... «Do no mischief on the earth, after it hath been set in order, but call on
Him with fear and longing (in your hearts): For the Mercy of Allah is (al-
ways) near to those who do good.» (7: 56).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Do they then seek after a judgement of
(the Days of) Ignorance? But who for a people whose faith is assured, can
give better judgment than Allah?» (5: 53).

those who are guarded and protected by Allah (the Exalted) and are en-
dowed with the Strength of faith; those who are endowed with a sound
mind: those whose desires are driven away from them; those endowed with
insight to drive away that which is similar to the truth is untruthful; that is
benefaction of Allah (the Exalted); He grants it to whomever He desires. O
Allah (the Exalted) possess all Great Benefaction.

His saying: «Do no mischief on the earth after it hath been set in or-
der». (7: 56) Abu Bakr ben Ayyash said concerning this Holy verse: Verily
Allah (the Exalted) has sent Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) to the people of the earth when they were corrupt and doing
mischief, and Allah (the Exalted) reformed them through Muhammed (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). Thus he who calls for that which
contradicts what Muhammed (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) brought is classified among those doing mischief on earth.

Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Most
interpreters said: Do not do mischief on it [Earth] by disobeying [Allah (the
Exalted)] and by obeying other than Allah (the Exalted) after Allah (the
Exalted) has reformed it by sending messengers, revealing religion and
calling [people] to obey Allah (the Exalted). Verily worshipping other than
Allah (the Exalted) and calling for other than Him (the Exalted) and joining
in partners with Him (the Exalted) are considered as the most serious kinds
of mischief on earth; rather, mischief on earth is in reality through joining in
partners with Him (the Exalted) and contradicting His commands, since
joining in partners with Him (the Exalted) and calling for other than Allah
(the Exalted) and erecting another object of worship, as well-as following
other than Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) are considered the most serious mischiefs on earth; no reform can
take place for it or for its people unless Allah (the Exalted) Alone is
worshipped and obeyed and called for; while His Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is followed and obeyed; others
should be obeyed [only] if they order others to obey the Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

467

_ It was narrated after Abdullah ben Amr (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon

him) said: «The one among you does not believe...

If this person orders people to disobey him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) and contradicts his religion, then this person should
never be obeyed. He who thinks about the state of the world, finds that all
reform and righteousness on earth are a consequence of unifying Allah (the
Exalted) worshipping Him (the Exalted) and obeying His Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him); and that every disturbance,
affliction, draught, Seeking up an enemy as the absolute master, and many
other such things, is caused by contradicting His Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) as well as by calling for other than
Him (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him).

This interpretation fits the Holy verse in the following manner: Verily
seeking the judgment of other than Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is considered among
the deeds that cause most serious corruption; there is no reform or correc-
tion of the state of affairs but though seeking the Judgment of Allah (the
Exalted) and the Sunna of His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) and that is the path of believers, and the people of
faith. In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «If anyone contends
with the Apostle even after guidance has been plainly conveyed to him, and
follows a path other than that becoming to men of Faith, we shall leave him
in the path he has chosen, and land him in Hell, what an evil refuge!» (4:
115).

His Saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Do they then seek after a
judgment of (the Day of) Ignorance? But who, for a people whose faith is
assured, can give better judgment than Allah?» (5: 53).

Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: He (the Exalted) re-
jects everyone who turns away from Allah’s judgment that encompasses all
that which is good, proscribes all that which is evil; He rejects everyone who
turns away to other ideas, desires and terms laid by men without referring
to Allah’s religion, as the people of Pre-Islamic times used to judge through
ignorance, delusions as the Tatarians judged or ruled through the policies
adapted after Jenkis Khan who wrote the «Al-Yasiq» which is nothing but a
book including judgments adapted from different religions, such as Judaism,
Christianity and Islam, and which also includes many judges which are abso-

468

until his desire fits that which I brought». An-Nawawi said: That is a
truthful Honorable Hadith which we narrated in the book «Kitab Al-Hiy-

jah» with proper reference.

lutely his personal opinion and desires. So it became something legal that is
preferred to judging through the Holy Koran and the Honourable Sunna.
Thus he who does that is considered a disbeliever and fights till he returns
to the Judgment of Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Al-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him); he would not judge by using any
other reference whether rare or frequent.

His saying: (But who, for a people whose faith is assured, can give bet-
ter judgment than Allah? (5: 53) This is an interrogation that carries the
meaning of rejection, that is to say there isnot better than His Judgment.
That is a sort of using comparison of adjectives when the other party does
not exist; that is to say and who is more just than Allah (the Exalted); he
who realizes the religion of Allah (the Exalted) and believes in Him and rea-
lizes that He is the best Judge and more merciful with His Servants than a
mother is with her child; he recognizes and knows the best interest of His
servants, He (the Exalted) who is able to do every thing, the wise in what
He (the Exalted) says, does, legislates and predestines?.

And the Holy verse includes; warning against the rule and judgment of
ignorant and people [Pre-Islamic judgment] and chosing it or preferring it to
the judgment of Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him); thus he who had done that, would have
left or turned away from that which is better, that is the truth, which contra-
dicts the invalid .

342 - His saying: (It was narrated after Abdullah ben Amr (May Allah
be pleased with them): Verily Allah’s Holy Messenger(May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said: [The one among you does not believe until his
desire fits that which I brought». An-Nawawi said: That is a truthful Hon-
ourable Hadith which we narrated in the book «Kitab Al-Hijjah». with
proper reference»).

This Honourable Hadith was narrated by Ash-Shafi in the book, «Al-
Hujja, Ala Tarik, Al-Hujjah». with proper reference as was narrated by the
writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) after An-Nawawi. It was also nar-
rated by At-Tabarani, Abu Bakr ben Assem and Al-Hafeth Abu Naim in
«Al-Arba-in» (the forty Hadiths) the condition that they should be truthful.
As a reference and witness to that in the Holy Koran is what Allah (the Ex-
alted) has said, «But no, by thy Lord, they can have no (real) Faith, until

469

اا ا يا ا ا لم ااا ا ا ا لاا ل ا ااا

they make thee judge in all disputes between them...» (4: 65) and. «It is not
fitting for a believer, a man or a woman, when a matter has been decided
by Allah and His Apostle, to have any option about their decision...» (33:
36) and «But if they hearken not to thee, know that they only follow their
own lusts...» (28: 50) as well as other similar Holy verses.

His saying: (The one among you does not believe) that is to say is not
considered among the people of perfect and required faith for which Allah
(the Exalted) promised its people to admit them into the Garden and to save
them from Hell-Fire. Such a person might have the rank of disobedience
and wrong-doing among the people of Islam.

His saying: (Till his desire fits what I brought). «Desire» is what he
loves and have a tendency to; so if you love, like or have tendency to, and if
you perform what Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) brought, he will not perform that which contradicts him (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). Such is the attribute of the people
of absolute Faith; and if he contradicts that whether in some of his states or
in most of them, requires perfect Faith cannot be attributed to him as was
mentioned in the Honourable Hadith of Abi Huraira.

343 - «An Adulterer is not considered adulterer unless he commits adul-
tery while he is a believer; a thief is not considered a stealer unless he steals
while he is a believer». This means that by committing an act of disobe-
dience; the attributed of required perfect Faith is denied for him and his be-
lief diminishes. Thus the attribute Faith cannot be said about him unless
associated with the act of disobedience or immorality. Thus it is said: A dis-
obedient believer, or it is said: A believer in as far as his Faith is concerned,
yet he is immoral as far as an act of disobedience in concerned; thus he has
aboslute Faith without which his Islam becomes invalid as Allah (the Ex-
alted) has said, «... he should free a believing slave...» (4: 92) and evidence
on the state of those among this nation who came before as well as its Im-
ams: Verily Faith is that which is verbalized, done, and intended; it is in-
creased by obedience and decreased by disobedience: Examples on that from
Allah’s Holy Book and the Sunna of His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) are more than can be counted; however, an
example from the Holy Koran, «... and never would Allah make your faith
of no effect...» (2: 143) That is to say, your prayer directed at Beit Al-Maq-
diss [Jerusalem] before it was changed to the Qibla [in Mekka], [a nother ex-
ample is] the Holy prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
saying to the delegation of Abdel-Qais.

470

ع جاع 5 > م ع م عد عدج .د م مدع ‎ee‏ ده 5ع عد ‎ee ee he ee‏ ود اهمده قاس ‎ee‏ وا ماقا فاه ‎ee‏

344 - «I order you to believe in Allah (the Exalted) Alone, do you
know what believing in Allah (the Exalted) Alone is? It is the witness that
there is no God but Allah». Till the end of the Honourable Hadith. It is
mentioned is the two Saheehs as well as in As-Sunnan.

Also the evidence that Faith may increase is what Allah (the Exalted)
has said, «... and the believers may increase in Faith...» (74: 31) and «...
Yea, those who believe, their faith is increased, and they do rejoice...» (9:
124) that is contrary to those who said: Verily faith is that which is said,
they are Al-Murji’a and he who said: Part of Faith is to believe, such as Al-
Ash‘arites. And it is very well known both mentally and religiously that the
intention of truth is believing, and working according to it is believing and
saying that which is truthful is believing, and the people of innovations do
not have that which contradicts what the people of the Sunna and consensus
say, all thanks and grace belong to Allah (the Exalted). Allah (the Exalted)
has said, «It is to righteousness that ye turn your faces towards East or
West; but it is righteousness to believe in Allah and the Last Day... Such are
the people of truth...» (2: 177) that is to say the overt and the secret deeds
they performed in this holy verse. What the Arabs say is a witness on that:
A truthful campaign. And Allah (the Exalted) has named the desire which
contradicts that which the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) brought, a god, so He (the Exalted) has said, «Seest thou such
4 one as taketh for his God his own passion (or impulse)?» (25: 43) Some in-
terpreters said: One does not have passion without committing it.

Ibn Rajab (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: As for the meaning
of the Honourable Hadith: Verily man does not require perfect Faith till his
passion becomes in accordance with what the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) came with such as the commands, the for-
bidden arid others. So he likes what he was ordered to perform and hates
what he was forbidden from; such a meaning was mentioned in the Holy
Koran in more than one place; He (the Exalted) dispraised the one who
hates what Allah (the Exalted) likes, or likes what Allah (the Exalted) hated,
as He said: «This is because the followed, called forth the wrath of Allah,
and they hated Allah’s good pleasure; so He made their deeds of no effect»
(47: 28). Thus every believer has the duty to like what Allah (the Exalted)
likes, performing all the ritual; if the loving increases till he performs what is
required of him, that will be considered benefaction; if he hates what Allah
(the Exalted) prohibited him to abstain from what Allah (the Exalted) has
proscribed; if this hatred increases till it necessitates abstaining from per-

471

Al-Sha’bi said, «There was a man among thee hypocrites and an other
Jewish man between whow there was a conflict. Thereupon the Jewish said:
Let’s go to Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and
ask him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to judge between
us, because he knew that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
does not take bribes; the hypocrite said let’s go to the Jews to Judge between
us, because he knew that they can be bribed. So they agreed to go to a
priest in Jouheina and ask him to judge between them, so the Holy verse,
«Hast thou not turned thy vision to those who declare...» (4: 60).

forming that which is hated, that will be considered benefaction.

Thus he who loves Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) a heartly and truthful love, that
necessitates or requires of him to love with his heart what Allah (the Exalted)
and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) love,
and hate what Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) hate, and he accepts what Allah (the
Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) accept and becomes wrathful at what makes Allah (the Exalted) and His
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) wrathful,
and he should perform by his senses according to such love or hate, so if he
performs through his senses something that contradicts that, such as
committing some of what Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) hate, and drops what Allah and His
Holy Messenger love while able to do it; that indicates that his love is deficiet,
thus he has to repent and resume perfecting this necessary love with a pillar
of worship if it is perfected. Thus all sorts of disobedience arouse from
preceding passions of the soul to the love of Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him).

Allah (the Exalted) has described the polytheists by following desires, in
many parts of His Holy Koran. He (the Exalted) has said: «But if they hear-
ken not to thee, know that they only follow their own lusts: And who is
more astray than one who follows his own lusts, devoid of guidance from
Allah?» (28: 50). Also innovations develop from preceding passions and de-
sires to religion. That is why those people were called the people of lusts or
the people of passion and desires, the same thing goes for acts of disobe-
dience, they develop through preceding passion and lust to the love of Allah
(the Exalted) and the love of what He loves; the same thing also goes for
the love of persons: Such love should be according to what the Holy Mes-

472

And it was said: I reached two conflicting men. One of them said: Let
us go to the Holy Prophet (May Alilah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
to judge between us, the other said, let us go to Ka‘b ben Al-Ashraf then
they went to Omar; one of them told him what happened so he came to the
one who rejected Allah’s Holy Messenger’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) judgment: Is that so? He said: Yes. So he hit him with the
sword and killed him».

senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) brought. Thus the be-
liever should love what Allah (the Exalted) loves among angels, messengers,
Prophets, 11821160115 men, martyrs and believers in general, that is why
among the signs of faith are: Verily a man loves only for Allah (the Exalted)
thus it becomes proscribed to support the enemies of Allah (the Exalted) as
well as those hated by Allah (the Exalted) in general; thus by doing this, all
religion becomes to Allah (the Exalted); he who loves; gives and prevents for
Allah (the Exalted), has perfected Faith, and he whose love, hate, giving and
prevention because of personal desires, such is considered a defect in his ne-
cessary Faith. Thus repentance is necessary.

This Honourable Hadith fits the interpretation in the following manner:
It shows the difference between the people of Faith and the hypocrites and
those who commit acts of disobedience in their deeds, sayings and inten-
tions.

345 - His saying: (Ash-Sha’bi said) He is Amer ben Shourahil Al-Koufi,
an authority of his time. He was among those who memorized [the Holy
Koran and the Honourable Hadith]. He used to say, «I never wrote on pa-
per». [Became of his very strong memory, he could do without writing]. He

witnessed many of the [Holy Prophet’s] Companions and lived over eighty
years. This was said by Ath-Thahabi.

Some of what was said by Ash-Shabi is that which shows that a hypo-
crite hates the judgment of Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) most and more than the
Christians and Jews. Also he has more enmity than those towards people of
Faith. As the case during these times and before them such as giving aid to
enemies against Moslems, and their being keen to extinguish the light of Is-
lam and Faith. And he who thinks about history and about the events and
battles that has taken place, realizes that such has been the case of hypo-
crites at present as well as in the past. And Allah (the Exalted) has warned
His Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) from

473

ا ‎ee ee bebe ee eben‏ ةم ةم مم ةم م ةم ةم ءءء ‎eee ene eee‏ ممم م مر ةيمد ا

them and from approaching him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him). He (the Exalted) urged him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) to set the Holy Struggle against them in many places of His Holy Koran.

Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said: «O Prophet1! Strive hard
against the unbelievers and the Hypocrites, and be firm against them...» (66:
9). And in the story of Omar (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) and his kill-
ing the hypocrite who requested the judgment of the Jewish Kaab ben AI-
Ashraf an indication that he who shows disbelief and hypocrisy must be
killed, and Kaab ben Al-Ashraf showed extreme enmity and harm toward
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). Thus it is
legal to kill such a person. Also Moslim narrated in his Saheeh after Omar.

346 - I heard Jaber saying: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said: «Who would kill Kaab ben A]-Ashraf?
Since he has hurt Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him); Muhammad ben Muslima said: O Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) do you like
me to kill him? He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:
Yes. Thereupon he said: Allow me to speak, he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said: Speak; he approached towards him and mentioned
what happened between them and said: Verily this man wanted alms and he
tormented us, when he heard him he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said: By Allah (the Exalted) you would also become bored. He
said: Now we have followed him and we hate to let him go before knowing
what would happen to him. He said: I wanted you to grant me a loan. He
said: What would you give me as a lien? He said: What do you want? He
said: I accept your women as a lien? He said: You are the most beautiful
among the Arabs, shall we give you our women in lien? He said: I want
your children? He said: The one of us is cursed by saying: He was given as a
mortgage against two measures of dates. However, we give you our weapons
as mortgage. He said: Yes. And he promised to bring him Al-Hareth, Abi
Abs ben Jaber and Oubada ben Bushr. He said: They came at right and he
descended to meet them. Sufyan said, Amr said: The women told him: I
hear a voice that resembles that of Adam. He said, rather, that is Muham-
mad ben Muslima and Roudai‘a and Abu Naila, verily if the generous were
invited to stab him at night he would answer.

Muhammad said: When he comes I would catch him from his head, so
when I firmly hold him you can kill him. He said: When he descended he
was wearing his clothes loosely, and they said: We can smell scents, he an-

474

0 ‏ااا ام م م م ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ل ا ا ا ا‎ IAS

swered yes, I have such and such wives and the best woman among Arab
women to apply scent. He said: Do you allow me to smell? He said: Yes. So
he smelled, and said: Can I go back now. He said: Thereafter he caught his
head and said: Come and kill him and they killed hin».

Omar’s (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) story shows that the hypo-
crite when he manifests his hypocrisy should be killed as was mentioned in
the two Saheehs and in others.

347 - Verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) abandoned killing who overtly manifested his hypocrisy. He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: «That the people
would not say that Muhammed is killing his companions». May Allah’s
peace and blessings be upon him.

475

Chapter

He who rejects some of the naines and attributes. And Allah (the Ex-
alted) nas said, «Yet do they reject (Him), the Most Gracious! Say, He 1s
my Lord! There is no God but He! On Him is my trust, and to Him do I
turn!» (13: 30).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter concerning he who rejects some of the names and
attributes. And Allah (the Exalted) has said, yet do they reject (Him), the
Most Gracious. Say, He is my Lord! There is no God but He! On Him is
my trust, and to Him do I turn!» (13: 30).

The reason for sending down this Holy verse is known and men-
tioned in the interpretation of books as well as in others. That is other
polytheists of Quraish rejected the name «Most Merciful» because they
were obstinate, and He (the Exalted) has said: «Say, Call upon Allah or
call upon the Most Gracious: By whatever name ye call upon Him (it is
well): To Him belongs the Most Beautiful Names...» (17: 110) And «Ar-
Rahman» [The Most Merciful] is His name and His attribute; this name
indicates that Mercy is His attribute, and that is among the attributes of
perfection, so if the polytheists rejected one of His names, and it is one
of the names that pointed at His perfection, then rejecting the meaning of
that name and other similar names is as such, verily Jahm ben Safwan
and those who followed him claimed that it did not point at a permanent
attribute of Allah (the Exalted); they were followed by groups of Mutazi-
la, Al-Asharites and others. That is why they were declared unbelievers by
many of the people of Sunna.

Those Juhmites as well as those who agreed with them concerning sus-
pension, rejected that which Allah (the Exalted) used to describe Himself
with such as they attribute of His perfection and Exaltedness, and they built
this suspension on invalid bases that they erected. Thereupon they said:

476

It was mentioned in the Saheeh of Al-Bukhary that Ali said, «Talk to

people about what they know; do you want Allah (the Exalted) and His
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to be given.

the lie?».

These attributes are used to describe physical bodies, thus they necessitate
that Allah (the Exalted) has a body; that is the origin of their delusions;
they did not understand by Allah’s attributes but that which they have con-
ceived of from the attributes of creatures, so they drew similarities in the be-
ginning between Allah (the Exalted) and His creatures then they suspended
the attributes of His perfection, and compared Him (the Exalted) to those
imperfect; material and nonexisting objects. First they compared then they
suspended. They compared Him (the Exalted) to every imperfect and non-
existing. They dropped what the Holy Koran and the Sunna indicated an
evidence that Allah (the Exalted) used to describe Himself or to describe His
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) with that
which fit His Greatness and Exaltedness. That is what this nation as well as
its Imams who came before have agreed on. They verily confirmed to Allah
(the Exalted) what His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) has confirmed without using similitude or integrity without sus-
pension. Since verily discussing attributes is a branch of discussing the es-
sence which is identified with. As those suspending attributes [of Allah (the
Exalted) ] confirm that Allah (the Exalted) has an essence that does not re-
semble any other essence. The people of Sunna believed in this and con-
firmed the attributes that Allah (the Exalted) used to describe Himself and
that His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
used to describe Him; attributes concerning His Perfection, Exaltedness and
which do not resemble any of the attributes of His creatures. Since verily
they have been endowed with the Holy Book [Holy Koran] of Allah (the Ex-
alted) and the Sunna [Honorable Hadith] of His Holy Messenger (May AI-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and they havenot fallen into
contradictions, while those suspending the attributes, have denied and re-
jected what has been mentioned in the Holy Book and the Sunna concerning
those attributes and they have fallen into contradictions. So logic and re-
ported narrations have made what they said obsolete, grave and praise, also
their claims have been made obsolete by the consensus of the people of the
Sunna such as the companions, the followers, their followers and the Imams
of the Moslems.

Religious authorities (May Allah’s Mercy be upon them) while respond-
477

اا ااا اا ااا ا ‎EET‏

ing to the Juhmites, Mouattila [Those suspend the attributes of Allah (the
Exalted)], Moutazila, Al-Asharites and others, concerning invalidating or re-
jecting those innovations and the contradictions and disintegration they in-
cluded are: Imam Ahmad and his famous Tesponse, «Kitab As-Sunna» by
Abi Abdullah Al-Marouzi, Othman ben Said’s response to the «Stubborn
Disbeliever» that is to say Bishr Al-Marisi, «Kitab At-Tawhid» by the leader
of Imams, Muhammad ben Khouzeima Ash-Shafi, «Kitab As-Sunna» by
Abi Bakr Al-Khallal, Abi Othman As-Sabouni Ash-Shafi, Sheikh Al-Islam
Al-Ansari Abi Omar ben Abdelbarr An-Nimri, and many people among the
companions and followers of the four Imams as well as the people of Sunna
and those who came later such as Abu Muhammad Abdullah ben Ahmad
ben Kodamah, Sheikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya and his companions and fol-
lowers as well as others. Thereupon to Allah (the Exalted) alone belongs all
praise and grace because the people of Sunna still exist even though desires
and opinion have become varied and diversed. And Allah (the Exalted)
knows best.

348 - His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh of Al-Bukhary after
Ali(May Allah be pleased with him), «Talk to people about what they
know; do you want Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to say lie?».

«Ali» is the prince of believers; he is Abu Al-Hassan Ali ben Abi Taleb,
one of the Orthodox Caliphs. The reason for his saying and Allah (the Ex-
alted) knows best is what happened during his Caliphate; many people
wanted to learn and discuss the Honourable Hadith. Many narrators and
preachers existed: They used to include in their narration Hadiths, not
known previously. Some people might have objected against them and re-
jected them [the alleged Honorable Hadiths]. However, some of them might
have some basis or truthful meaning, so some mistakes and corruption used
to take place because cf that. The Prince of Believers (May Allah be pleased
with him) guided them by telling them not to discuss with people but that
which is known to benefit people concerning their religion and its rules, such
as showing that which is allowed and that which is proscribed which they
were assigned to learn and apply without getting busy in what might reject
truth which in turn would lead to be lie [Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)] especially at a
time when people conflicted, contradicted and their arguments and discus-
sions were extensive.

Our Sheikh (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him), the writer of this book,
478

Abdur-Razzak narrated after Mouammar after Ibn Tawus after his
father after Ibn Abbas, «Verily he saw a man trembling when he heard an
Honorable Hadith after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) concerning attributes - as an objection against that- so he
said: What made those [people] afraid? They feel at ease with very well de-
fined matter [or Holy verse] and become terrified with every ambiguous
one.

did not like someone to read to people but that which benefited their reli-
gion, worship and interaction with each other, matters that they cannot do
without; he used to prohibit them from reading in books such as the books
of Ibn Al-Jawzi: At-Tabsira because they drop that which is more required |
and more beneficial, also they include what Allah (the Exalted) knows best
that it should not be believed. He who is safeguarded [from such mistakes]
is one who is safeguarded by Allah (the Exalted).

Also the Prince of Believers, Mouawiya ben Abi Sufyan used to prevent
the narrators from narrating, because of the strange matters they narrated as
well as because of leniency in copying narrations and many other causes; he
used to say:

349 - «The only person who is allowed to narrate is an Amir or a per-
son ordered by the Amir. All this was done in order to keep the straight
path straight in knowledge, in deed, in intention, and drop every thing that
is considered a means to leave it. [The straight path] such as innovations
and their means, and Allah (the Exalted) is the One who guides to the right
thing; there is no strength or ability but through Allah (the Exalted) .

350 - His saying: (It was narrated by Abdur-Razzak after his father
from Ibn Abbas: «Verily he saw a man trembling when he heard an Honor-
able Hadith after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) concerning the attributes, as an objection against that. He said:
What made those people distribute? They fell at ease with every very well
defined matter [or Holy verse] and become terrified with every ambiguous
one»).

His saying: (It was narrated by Abdur-Razzak). He is Ibn Hammam
As-Sanai Al-Muhaddith [a narrator] the narrator of Al-Yaman and the com-
piler of «At-Tasnifs» of books. He narrated much after Mouammar ben Ra-
shid the writer of Az-Zuhri. He is Sheikh Abdur-Razzak who narrated much
after him.

Mammar is Abu Ourwa ben Abi Amr Rashid Al-Azdi Al-Hirrani then
479

ااا ا ‏ ا > 272 ا ااا1ا1- 1ل يبي يبيب بيب يي يرن

Al-Yamani. He is one of the scholars among the companions of Muhammad
ben Shehab Az-Zuhri. Many narrations are narrated after him.

His saying: (After Ibn Tawus), He is Abdullah ben Tawus Al-Yamani
Mammar said: He was the best to know about the Arabic language. Ibn
Ouyina said he died in the year 132 A.H.

His saying: (After his father). He is Tawus ben Kaysan Al-Jundi, the
Imam. It was said: His name is Thakwan; this was said by Ibn Al-Jawzi.

I said: He is one of the Imams of interpretation [of the Holy Koran
and Honourable Hadith] as well one of the most learned people. He said in
«Tahthib Al-Kamal», after Al-Waleed Al-Mokari after Az-Zuhri. He said:
«I went to Abdel-Malek ben Marwan. He said: © Zuhri! Where did you
come from? He said. I said: From Mecca. He said: Who did you leave to
rule it and rule its people? I said: Ata ben Abi Rabah. He said: Is he an
Arab or is he one of the non-Arab supporters? I said: He is among the non-
Arab supporters. He said: How did he rule? He said, I said: By religion and
narration. He said: Verily the people who know their religion [Islam] and
narration [Honorable Hadith] must become rulers. He said: Who rules the
people of Yeman? I said: Tawus ben Kaysan. He said: Is he an Arab or is
he one of the non-Arab supporters? He said, I said: He is one of the non-
Arab supporters. He said: How did he rule them? I said: He did what Ata
had done. He said: That should happen. He said: Who rules the people of
Egypt? I said: Yazid ben Habib. He said: Is he an Arab or is he a non-Arab
supporter? He said, I said: He is a non-Arab supporter. He said: Then who
rules the people of Ash-Sham? I said: Makhoul. He said: Is he an Arab or 15
he one of the non-Arab supporters? I said: He is one of the non-Arab sup-
porters, a Noubian slave, set free by a woman from Houthail. He said: Then
who rules the people of the Peninsula? I said: Mayman ben Mihrawan. He
said: Is he an Arab or is he one of the non-Arab supporters? I said: He is
one of the non Arab supporters. He said so who rules the people of Khura-
san? He said, I said: Ad-Dahhak ben Mouzahim. He said: Is he an Arab or
is he a non-Arab supporter? He said, I said: He is a non-Arab. He Said:
Who rules the people of Al-Basra? He said, I said: Al-Hasan Al-Basri. He
said: Is he an Arab or is he a non-Arab? I said: He is a non-Arab. He said:
Woe unto you! And who rules the people of Al-Koufa? He said, I said: Ibra-
him An-Nakhii, he said: Is he an Arab or is he a non-Arab supporter? He
said, I said: O Zahir, woe unto you; you made me feel relieved, by Allah
(the Exalted) non-Arab supporters would rule over Arabs in this country
and they would stay as such till orators deliver speeches for them while the

480

واوا ماه ماع .م ها هد قاع عا ماع »ا سد واوا جا وه عه عس ا فاه واوا ها وج م مام عع عد واي به جماإجام ع ما وام م واج فوع مام . وام وم جد م ودود رياح .امد رار و ماما. د معد عمد مد مامد م عع مد جع 6 606

Arabs are under them. He said, I said: O prince of Believers; rather, this is a
religion: He who keeps it and preserves it, would rule; he who loses it would
faib».

351 - His saying: (After Ibn Abbas) he was introduced before, he was
the authority of this nation and the interpreter of the Holy Koran; the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) invoked Allah (the
Exalted) for his sake and said, «O Allah (the Exalted) teach him religion
and interpretation».

His companions, the Imams of interpretation, narrated after him: Such
as Moujahid, Said ben Joubeir, Ata ben Abi Rabah, Tawus and others.

His saying: (What made those people afraid). He is asking his
companions: He points at some people who attend his general meetings; if
they hear something from the Holy Koran which is well understood and
which has clear meaning they become afraid; if they hear something from
the Honorable Hadiths concerning attributes, they would tremble and shake
like those denying it; thus the required Faith which Allah (the Exalted)
requested from His believing servants did not take place. Ath-Thahabi said:
Waki‘ narrated about Israel the following, «If the Lord is seated on the
Chair». Thereupon a man who was at Waki’s trembled, and Waki became
angry and said, «Al-Amash and Sufyan reached us narrating such narrations
without rejecting them». This was narrated by Abdullah ben Ahmad in the
book «Ar-Rad Ala Al-Johmiyya». They might drop that which must be
believed in case it was not accepted; so their case resemble the case of those
about whom Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Then is it only a part of the
Book that ye believe in, and do ye reject the rest?» (2: 85). Thereafter no
one would be saved from disbelief but those who work according to what
has been required of him such as believing in Allah’s Holy Book all, and
being sure about that.

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said, «He who has sent down
to thee the Book: in it are verses basic or fundemental (of establishing mean-
ing); they are the foundation of the Book: others are allegorical. But those
in whose hearts is perversity follow the part there of that is allegorical, seek-
ing discord, and searching for its hidden meanings, but no one knows its
hidden meanings except Allah. And those who are firmly grounded in
knowledge say: «We believe in the Book; the whole of it is from our Lord:»
and none will grasp the Message except men of understanding.» (3: 7) Those
whom Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with him) had abandoned what is
due on them of faith by that which they did not understand from the Holy

431

يي بي يي يي يا يا يي ا يي يا ا ع ع ا ع ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا يي ا ا ا ا اا ا ا ا ل الاي ايا ل اي ‎a‏

Koran which in fact is absolute Truth that no believer should suspect or
doubt. And some of them understand from those texts other than the in-
tended meaning; that meaning intended by Allah (the Exalted) so they
would give this text another different meaning as has happened to the peo-
ple of innovations such as the Kharijites, Rafidites and Kaderites, as well as
others similar to them who use their innovation in order to interpret the
Holy Koran. They had in fact gone astray from the straight path; that
which is done by the people of innovations, their reality and their distortion
and changing the meanings of Holy verses manifest what Ibn Abbas had
said. |

The cause of all those innovations is the ignorance and stupidity of the
people who made them, as well as adapting the religious teachings as they
appear or those teachings through those people guided by Allah (the Ex-
alted) to the intended meaning, bringing into agreement two texts and decid-
ing that they do not contradict each other and turn that which are to judge.
That is the method of the people of Sunna and consensus at every time and
in every place; so Praise be to Allah (the Exalted).

(Mentioning what was mentioned by the authorities who came before con-
cerning that which is allegorical).

He said in «Ad-Durr Al-Manthoum: Al-Hakem said:

352 - On the authority of Ibn Masoud from the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), «The First Holy Book was
descended in one chapter and one accent, then the Holy Koran was
descended in seven chapters and seven accents: prevention, command,
allowable, proscribed, perfect, allegorical, allow what it allowed, proscribe
what it proscribed, do what you were commanded to do, prohibit what you
were prevented to do, learn from its examples, do according to its perfect
Holy verses, and believe that which is allegorical and say we believed, all
cores from our Lord».

He said: Abdul-Hamid narrated after Kutadah concerning the Holy
verse, «But those in whose hearts is perversity follow the part there of that
as allegorical...» (3: 7) He said: People tried to interpret [this Holy Verse]
they committed mistakes and reached trouble; they tried to interpret that
which is allegorical and they perished.

Also, Abd ben Hamid, Ibn Jarir, and Ibn Abi Hatem narrated after Ibn
Abbas concerning His saying (Verses that are basic or fundamental). He
said: Among them is His saying, «Say, come, I will rehearse what Allah

482

And when Quraish heard Allah’s Holy Messenger mention «The Most
Gracious» they rejected that. Thereupon Allah (the Exalted) sent about
them, «Yet do they reject (Him) the Most Gracious!» (13: 30).

hath (really) prohibited you from...» (6: 151-153) and, «Thy Lord hath de-
creed that ye worship none but Him...» (17: 23-39)I.

Also Ibn Jarir narrated from of Abi Malek who narrated after Abi
Saleh after Ibn Abbas, after Mourra after Ibn Masoud and some people of
the companions (May Allah be pleased with them) said: «The basic and fun-
damental [Holy verses] are those annuling [others] and which people [are re-
quired] to work accordingly; those allegorical are those annulet».

And Abd ben Hamid, Ibn Jarir, and Ibn Abi Hatem narrated after
Ishaq ben Souweid that Yahya ben Ya’mar and Aba Fakhita discussed the
following Holy verse, «In it are verses basic and fundamental» (3: 7) so Abu
Fakhita said, «They are the opening terms of the Holy Suras, from them the
Holy Koran is extracted such as, «ALM This is the Book» from this the
Holy Sura of cow was extracted and from «ALM Allah! There is no God
but He...» (3: 2) the Holy Sura of Al-I’ -Imran was extracted. However, Ya-
hya said: They are the Holy verses that include religious obligations, that
which is allowable, that which is not allowable and the limits and the pillar
of religiom».

Also Ibn Jarir narrated after Muhammad ben Jaafar ben Az-Zoubeir.
He said: «Basic and fundamental Holy verses include the wisdom of the
Lord and the virtue of servants, wording off enemies and that which is obso-
lete, they [The Holy verses] do not possess an additional authority and
«other [Holy verses] which are allegorical» concerning truth, they can be in-
terpreted; Allah (the Exalted) has afflicted the servants by them as He has
afflicted them by that which is allowable and that which is not allowable;
they do not lead to that which is obsolete nor do they deviate from Truth».

Ibn Al-Hatem narrated after Moukatel ben Hayyan who said: (In it are
verses basic and fundamental) because there doesnot exist a person who is
believing who does not accept them and (others are allegorical) meaning
what reached us such as «ALM», «ALMS» and «ALMR».

I said: There is not in those references or others similar one what makes
one feel that the names of Allah (the Exalted) and His attributes include an
allegorical aspect; what those denying names and attributes had said such
claiming that they constitute similitude, is just a claim without proof.

His saying: (When Quraish heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) mention the Most Gracious, they rejected

483

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: One becomes an unbeliever if he denies or rejects one of the
[Beautiful] names or attributes of Allah (the Exalted).

The second: The interpretation of the Holy verse of Raad. [Thunder].
The third: Dropping discussions that do not benefit the listner.

The fourth: Mentioning the reason [for the third issue]; it leads to giv-
ing the lie to Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) even though that was not intended by the one
denying or rejecting [Those names or attributes].

The fifth: The discussion of Ibn Abbas concerning the one who denies
or rejects one of those attributes or names and telling that that made him
perish.

that Allah (the Exalted) sent down the following Holy verse about them,
«Yet, do they reject (Him) the Most Gracious!» (13: 30). Ibn Jarir narrated
after Kutada: Yet, do they reject (Him) the Most Gracious! He mentioned
to us that Allah’s Holy Prophet at the time of Houdaybiyya when he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) reconciled with Quraish, he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) wrote, «That is what Muhammad,
Allah’s Holy Messenger, has reconciled. Thereupon the polytheists of Qura-
ish said: Had you been Allah’s Holy Messenger and we fought you, we
would have done wrong to you, thus write: That is what Muhammad ben
Abdullah has reconciled... So Allah’s Holy Messenger’s (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) Companion said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) let us fight them. So he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: No. Just write what
they want: I am Muhammad ben Abdullah, then when the writer wrote (In
the name of Allah, Most Gracious Most Merciful) Quraish said: As for the
Most Gracious, we do not recognize. And the people of Pre-Islamic times
used to write, In your name, Allah. So his (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) Companions said: Let us fight them. He (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said: No! Just write what they want».

It was also narrated after Mujahid who said, Allah (the Exalted) has
said, «Thus have we sent thee amongst a People before whom have (other)
people (gone and) passed away; in order that thou mightest rehearse unto
them what we send down into thee by inspiration. Yet do they reject (Him),
the Most Gracious! Say: «He is My Lord! There is no God but He! On Him
is my trust, and to Him do I turn!» (13: 30) He said, that is what happened

484

between Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) and Quraish at Houdaybiyya; he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) wrote (In the name of Allah, Most Gracious Most Merciful).
They said: Do not write the Most Gracious; we do not know what the Most
Gracious is? We write only! In your name Allah. Allah (the Exalted) has
said, (Yet, do they reject (Him), the Most Gracious!...).

Also it was narrated after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them)
who said: «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah be pleased with them) used
to invoke while prostrating: O Most Gracious, O Most Merciful. So the
polytheists said: That person claims that he 15 invoking one while he is in-
voking two, so Allah (the Exalted) sent down the following Holy Verse,
«Say, Call upon Allah, or call upon Rahman: By whatever name ye call
upon Him, (it 1s well): For to Him belongs the Most Beautiful names...» (17:
110).

485

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «They recognize the favours of Allah; then
they deny them; and most of them are ungrateful (creatures)». (16: 83).

Moujahid’s saying means, «It is the man saying: That is my money and
property, I inherited them through my fathers».

Awn ben Abdullah’s saying, «They say; had it not been for so and so,
such and such a matter would not have happened».

Koutaiba said, «They say: That [took place] because of the intercession
of our gods».

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter: Allah (the Exalted) has said, «They recognize the
favours of Allah; then they deny them, and most of them are ungrateful
(creature)» (16: 83).

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) mentioned some of what
was mentioned by the savants concerning its [The Holy Verse] meaning. Ibn
Jarir said: Verily those experts in interpretation conflicted over that which is
meant by the term «favours». Thereupon Sufyan mentioned after As-Sadi
(They recognize the favours of Allah; then they deny them). He said: [It
means] «Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)» while
others said; rather, it means that they know that the favours which Allah
(the Exalted) listed are from Allah (the Exalted) and that Allah is the One
who sends His favours to them, but they deny this and claim that they in-
herited them through their fathers.

It was narrated after Moujahid, «They recognize the favours of Allah;
then they deny them». He said: [These favours] are houses, animals and
whatever they earn through them, also iron and clothes; the unbelievers of
Quraish recognized this yet they deny it by saying: That had belonged to
our fathers and inherited them. Others said: When the unbelievers are asked:

486

Also Abu Al-Abbas said after Zaid ben Khalid’s Honorable Hadith in
which he mentioned that Allah (the Exalted) has said, There have become
among My servants a believer in Me and a disbeliever...» and it has already
been mentioned: this has been so much mentioned in the Honorable Hadith
and the Holy Koran: [Allah (the Exalted)] dispraises the one who attributes
His (the Exalted) favours to someone else and joins in partners with Him

(the Exalted).

Some of those who came before said: That is like their saying: The
wind was good and the sailor was skillful, and many other such examples
that 15 said by many people.

Who benefacted you? They acknowledged that Allah (the Exalted) is the
One who benefacts them then they deny that by saying: We were benefacted
through the intercession of our gods.

The writer mentioned something similar after Kutaiba: He is Abu Mu-
hammad Abdullah Ad-Dainouri the judge of Egypt; he was a linguist and
wrote interesting and beneficial books which included much knowledge. He
worked at Baghdad and heard the Honorable Hadith from Ishaq ben Raha-
wayh and those of the same rank. He died in the year 276 A.H.

Others said: What the writer mentioned (after Awn ben Masoud AlI-
Hathfali), Abu Abdullah Az-Zaid after his father, Aisha and Ibn Abbas at
whom Kutada, Abu Az-Zubeir and Az-Zuhri and he was trusted by Ahmad
and Ibn Mouin. Al-Bukhary said: He died after the age of 120 (They recog-
nize the favours of Allah; then they deny them). He said: «Denying those fa-
vours takes place when the man says: Had it not been for so and so, such
and such a matter would not have taken place; had it not been for so and
so, I would not have attained such and such». Ibn Jarir chose the first say-
ing; others decided that the Holy verse encompasses all that which -was said
by the savants about it. That is which is correct and Allah (the Exalted)
knows best.

His saying: (Moujahid said) he is the Sheikh of interpretation the Imam
Ar-Rabbani, Moujahid ben Jabr Al-Makki, a Mawla (freedslave) of Bani
Makhzoum. Al-Fadl ben Maymoun said: I heard Moujahid saying: I
showed the Holy Koran to Ibn Abbas several times; I stopped at every Holy
verse and asked him: Why was it sent down? How was it sent down? What
does it mean? He died in the year 102 A.C. He (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) was 83 years old.

His saying: (Abu Al-Abbas said) He is Sheikh Al-Islam Ahmad ben Ab-
487

وأعا ها ع هد ود هده عه هاه ماه ع ماشه ع هاه هي ها عاو ورا هد جاه هه هه > اسع يمه ساهاهس ها هد هس هاه هس هده 6 © هه © هساهه هه واه هسه هاه عا قاع هام هت » عامه هاه وهاه ‎ae ee ee‏ لعا

dulHaleem ben Abdes-Salam Ibn Taymiyya the honorable Imam(May ‏آذ‎
‎lah’s Mercy be upon him)- After the Honorable Hadith of Zaid ben Khalid.
He said: That was mentioned much in the Holy Koran and in the Honor-
able Sunna; He (the Exalted) dispraises the one who attributes His favours
to other than Him (the Exalted) and joins in partners with Him (the Ex-
alted). Some of those who came before said: It is like saying: The wind is
good and the sailor is skillful, and other similar terms that are used by
many people.

The discussion of Sheikh Al-Islam indicates that the application of this
Holy verse is general concerning those who attribute favours to other than
Allah (the Exalted), or attribute their causes to other than Him (the Ex-
alted), as has been mentioned in the discussions of interpreters, some of
which is mentioned here.

Our Sheikh (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: This stance leads to
conflicting feelings in the heart; such terms are called denying favours.

This Chapter discusses many issues:

The first: The interpretation of the meaning of favour and denying it.
The second: Knowing that this is said by many people.

The third: Calling this speech as denying favours.

The fourth: Combining between contradictions in one heart.

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said. «Then set not up rivals unto Allah when
ye know (the truth).» (2: 22).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter: Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Then set not up riv-
als unto Allah when ye know (the truth)» (2: 22).

A rival is the one who is equal and setting a rival unto Allah (the Ex-
alted) is a sort of worship or some of it for other than Allah (the Exalted)
such as the case of those who worship Pagans who believe in that which
they invoke or plead that he can benefit them or drive away harm or inter-
cede for them. This Holy verse fits this context; He (the Exalted) has said,
«O ye people! Adore your Guardian-Lord who created you and those who
came before you, that ye may have the chance to learn righteousness; who
has made the earth your couch, and the Heavens your canopy; and sent
down rain from the Heavens; and brought forth there with fruits for your
sustenance; then set not up rivals unto Allah when ye know (the truth).» (2:
21-22). Imam Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said in his inter-
pretation: Abu Al-Aliya said: (Set not up rivals unto Allah) that is to say
equals and partners. The same thing was said by Al-Rabi ben Anas Kutada,
As-Sadi, Abu Malek and Ismail ben Abi Khaled.

Ibn Abbas said: (Then set not up rivals unto Allah when ye know (the
truth) that 15 to say, not to join in any partners with Allah (the Exalted); riv-
als that can neither benefit nor harm, and you know that He (the Exalted) is
your Lord; you do not have any Lord by Him (the Exalted) to benefact
you, and you have come to know that which Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) calls for such as Monotheism, is
the Truth which cannot be doubted. The same thing was said by Kutada. It
was also said after Kutada and Mujahid (Then set not up rivals unto Allah)
that is to say men who are highly qualified and able and whom you obey in

489

وما ما ساعد و عا ود و اه ماو عا .ا و ود عد ود ود واه هد ود قث هاعد فاه واو هد م وافا وا فاه ماع ها .دارا م واع. د واو وان واوا واوا راو ها واف راو رد م وا و ‎a‏ زعا عمد ترد ع ماع 6ع م :5 5 5 5 *

disobeying Allah (the Exalted).

Ibn Zaid said: Rivals are gods which they joined [in worship] with Him
(the Exalted) and which they treated as they treated Him (the Exalted). It
was said after Ibn Abbas (Then set not up rivals unto Allah) that is to say
those that you consider as similar to Him (the Exalted), and Mujahid said:
(Then set not up rivals unto Allah, when you know (the truth). He said:
You know that He is One God as has been mentioned also in the Old and
New Testament. Then he mentioned an Honorable Hadith concerning the
meaning of this Holy verse; it was taken from Ahmad’s Musnad.

353 - It was narrated after Al-Hareth Al-Ashari that Allah’s Holy Pro-
phet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: «Verily Allah (the
Exalted) commanded Yahya ben Zakariyya (May Allah’s Peace be upon
Him) to perform five deeds and to order Bani Israel to perform them, and
he almost lagged behind, so he was told by Issa (May Allah’s Peace be upon
Him): Verily Allah (the Exalted) has commanded you to do five, and to or-
der Bani Israel to do them, so either you inform them or I do it myself. He
said: O brother, I fear that if you preceded me, I would be tortured or dis-
graced. He said: So Yahya ben Zakariyya gathered Bani Israel at Beit Al-
Makdiss, until the Mosque was full, and people stood on the balconies.
Then he thanked Allah (the Exalted) and praised Him (the Exalted) then he
said: Verily Allah (the Exalted) has commanded me to do five, and I order
you to do them: The first: To worship Allah (the Exalted) without joining
any partner with Him (the Exalted). That is like a man who bought a slave
by his money and gold, and this slave in turn used to work [in his master’s
Land] giving all revenue to other than his master; who among you would be
happy to have such a slave? Verily Allah (the Exalted) has created you and
benefacted you so worship Him (the Exalted) and do not join in partners
with Him (the Exalted).

Also I order you to pray since verily Allah (the Exalted) looks at His
servants face if the servant does not turn sideways, so when you pray donot
turn sideways. I order you to fast; this is like the example of a man who has
a package of musk and he is with a group, so all the group can smell musk,
and verily the smell of a fasting man’s mouth is considered by Allah (the Ex-
alted) as much better than that of musk. Also I order you to pay the [Sada-
ka]. Verily that is like the example of the man captured by enemies who tied
his hands to his neck and brought him to be beheaded so he told them:
May I pay a ransom to save myself? He paid to set himself free. And I or-
der you to invoke Allah (the Exalted) much; verily that is like the example

490

Ibn Abbas said about the Holy verse, «Rivals means here polytheism
[Joining in partners with Allah (the Exalted)] which is more concealed that
the sound of walking ants on a black ground on a very dark night. It is like
saying: By Allah (the Exalted), O So and So by your life, by my life and
say: Had not been to this dog, thieves would have come to us. And had it
not been to ducks found in our house, thieves would have come to us. And
like a man telling his friend: What Allah (the Exalted) and you wish, and
the man saying: Had it not been to this man and Allah (the Exalted).
Allah». This was narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem.

of the man wanted by an enemy running after him, so he went to a strong
fortress and hid there; verily the servant is protected from the Shaitan most
when he invokes Allah (the Exalted), He said: And Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: And I order you to
perform five which Allah (the Exalted) commanded me to perform. Obeying
consensus, obedience and immigration, and fighting for the sake of Allah
(the Exalted) [Holy struggle]. Verily he who drops consensus by one span,
has in fact released himself from Islam, and he who calls for Pre-Islamic
practices, will kneel down in Hell-Fire. They said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and even if he prays and
fasts? He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) answered: Even if
he prays and fasts and claims to be a Moslem, so call the Moslems by the
names that Allah (the Exalted) named them with: The believing Moslems are
Allah’s (the Exalted) servants».

This Holy verse shows that the unification of Allah (the Exalted) by
worship, He (the Exalted) is Alone; He (the Exalted) has no partners. Many
interpreters used it as an evidence on the existence of the Creator; and the
Holy verses in the Holy Koran that show this are plenty.

His saying: (It was narrated after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased
with them) about the Holy verse: Rivals means here polytheism, it is more
concealed than the sound of ants walking on black ground on a dark night.
It is like saying by Allah (the Exalted) and by so and so, by your life, by my
life and say: Had it not been to this dog, thieves would have come to my
house. And had it not been to the ducks found in our house, thieves would
have come to us. And like a man telling his friend what Allah (the Exalted)
and you wish and the man saying: Had it not been to this man and to Allah
(the Exalted). All this includes polytheism». This was narrated by Ibn Abi
Hatem).

491

It was narrated after Omar ben Al-Khattab (May Allah be pleased with
him) that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said, «He who swears by other than Allah (the Exalted), has
either become a disbeliever or a polytheist». It was narrated by At-Tirmithi
and improved and corrected by Al-Hakem.

Ibn Masoud said, «I would rather swear by Allah (the Exalted) while ly-
ing, then swearing by another while telling the truth».

Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them) shows that all of this is
considered polytheism and it is the reality and the case now-a-days of many
people who neither know unification nor polytheism: So beware of such
matters. They are considered among that which is seriously rejected which
people should be ordered not to perform because it is among the most ser-
ious of major sins. And that is from Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased with
them).

354 - (It was narrated after Omar ben Al-Khattab (May Allah be
pleased with him) that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said: «He who swears by other than Allah (the Ex-
alted) has either become a disbeliever or a polytheist». It was narrated by
At-Tirmithi and improved and corrected by Al-Hakem].

His saying: (Has either become a disbeliever or a polytheist). Thus this
person has disbelieved and joined in partners. It is disbelief which is under
major disbelief and it is considered minor polytheism as well. Something si-
milar to this was narrated after Ibn Masoud, as the following.

355 - His saying: (And Ibn Masoud said: «I would rather swear by
Allah (the Exalted) while lying. That swear by another while telling the
truth»).

It is known that swearing by Allah (the Exalted) while telling a lie is
considered among the major sins, but committing polytheism is the most ser-
ious major sin. Even though it might be insignificant 25 1935 mentioned be-
fore; if that is the case of minor polytheism, how is the case of major
polytheism which requires abiding in Hell-Fire? [Major Polytheism] such as
invoking other than Allah (the Exalted) and seeking refuge with him, ap-
proaching him, asking ones needs from him, as is the case of most people of
this nation at these times as well as before them: Such as aggrandizing
graves and taking them as Pagans and building constructions on them, tak-
ing them as praying places and building tombstones carrying the name of
the dead person in order to worship that person and aggrandize him, and in

492

والرا عا .د و وا ود و وا عد و وار را ور و راو رو رفاو ا م واواو در وار ار روود مار ووه تاراح وداه ددم مانام عد ند مده زر م تعد م ع عع 5 ‎١‏ 5ع د م 5 دع ‎٠١‏ > 5ت هد عي ‎١ ١‏ ع د ‎١‏ 5 9 *

order to approach him by the hearts, sayings and deeds. The affliction be-
came great through this major polytheism which Allah (the Exalted) does
not forgive; they turned away from what the Holy Koran taught such as for-
bidding people to commit such polytheism as well as whatever leads to it.
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Who is more unjust than one who invents a
lie against Allah or rejects His Signs? For such, their portion appointed
must reach them from the Book (of Decrees): until, when Our messenger,
(of death) arrive and take their souls, they say: Where are the things that ye
used to invoke besides Allah? They will reply: They have left us in the lurch.
And they will bear witness against themselves, that they had rejected Allah»
(7: 37).

Allah (the Exalted) considered them unbelievers because in the present
life they used to invoke other than Him (the Exalted). Also He (the Exalted)
has said, «And the places of worship are for Allah (alone): so invoke not
any one along with Allah» (72: 18). And He (the Exalted) has also said,
«Say, I do no more than invoke my Lord, and I join not with Him any
(Falso god). Say: «It is not in my power to cause you harm or to bring you
to right conduct» (72: 20-21) Those polytheists reverse the state of affairs so
they contradict what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) in-
formed the nation, and they treated him by doing what he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) forbade them to perform such as joining
in partners with Allah (the Exalted) and clinging to other than Allah (the
Exalted) .

Thereupon observe that great ignorance whereby a person thinks that
he cannot be saved but by asking for the help and by seeking refuge with
other than Allah (the Exalted); observe this great complementing which has
gone beyond normal side; such complementing was forbidden by Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) when he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Do not complement
me as the Christians have complemented the son of Mariam; rather, I am a
servant, so say Allah’s servant and Holy Messenger». It was narrated by
Malek as well as by others. Verily Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say, I tell
you not that with me are the Treasures of Allah, nor do I know what is hid-
den, nor do I tell you I am an angel» (6: 50).

So observe this serious opposition to the Holy Koran and the Honor-
able Sunna as well as the challenge of Allah (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him).

493

It was narrated after Houthaifa (May Allah be pleased with him) that
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Do
not say what Allah (the Exalted) and So and So wish; rather, say what Al-
lah (the Exalted) wishes then So and So wishes». It was narrated by Abu
Dawud with correct reference.

And it was narrated after Ibrahim An-Nakai‘ «He hates to seek refuge
with Allah (the Exalted) and with you. It is allowable to say: By Allah (the
Exalted) then by you. He said and he says: Had it not been to Allah (the
Exalted) then to So and So. And do not say: Had it not been to Allah (the
Exalted) and to So and So».

357 -His saying: (It was narrated after Houthaifa (May Allah be pleased
with him) that Allah’s Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said, «Do not say what Allah (the Exalted) wishes and So and So
wishes; rather say what Allah (the Exalted) wishes then that So and So
wished». It was narrated by Abu Dawud with a fine chain of transmission).

That is so because the noun coming after «and» becomes equivalent to
the noun coming before it; equating the creator and the creature is polythe-
ism, if it was minor -like this- then it is minor, and if it was major then it is
major. Concerning that Al'ah (the Exalted) has said: «By Allah, we were
truly in a manifest error, when we held you as equals with the Lord of the
worlds» (26: 97-98).

His sayig: (It was narrated after Ibrahim An-Nakhai, «He hates a man
to say: I seek refuge with Allah (the Exalted) and with you. It is permissible
to say: By Allah ( the Exalted) then by you. He said: He says: Had it not
been to Allah (the Exalted) then to So and So. Do not say had it not been
to Allah (the Exalted) and So and So).

The difference between that which is allowable and that which is not
has been discussed before. That is concerning the person who is alive and
has ability to perform and cause things to happen. He is the one treated as
such. As for the dead, who do not feel those invoking them or possess the
ability to benefit or harm. Nothing is said about them from that. Thus it is
not allowable to cling to him whatsoever, the Holy Koran shows that and
tells that such treatment would turn them into gods especially if they were
asked something or if someone approaches them: Through his overt or secre-
tive deeds, thus he who thinks about the Holy Koran and is endowed the
ability to understand it, would have insight concerning his religion. And suc-
cess is granted by Allah (the Exalted) .

494

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: The interpretation of the Holy Sunna of Baqara concerning

rivals.

The second: That verily the Companions interpret the Holy verse which
descended concerning major polytheism and they generalize it to minor poly-
theism.

The third: That verily swearing by other than Allah (the Exalted) is
polytheism.

The fourth: That verily if it is sworn by other than Allah (the Exalted)
while saying the truth, is considered as more serious than swearing by Allah
(Glory be to Him) while not telling the truth.

The fifth: The difference in meaning resulting from the use of «and»
and «then».

And that which is more important than this is the one who is endowed
by Allah (the Exalted) the ability to understand and memorize; he worked
hard in earning such knowledge, He (the Exalted) leads whomever of His
servants to success. Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said, «And [He]
taught thee what thou knowest not (before): and great is the Grace of Allah
unto thee». (4: 113).

495

Chapter

(What was mentioned about the one who is not convinced by swearing
by Allah (the Exalted)

It was narrated after Ibn Omar that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Do not swear by your
fathers; he who was sworn to by Allah (the Exalted), should believe. He
who was sworn to by Allah (the Exalted), should accept; he who does not
accept is not from Allah (the Exalted)». This was narrated by Ibn Maja with
good reference.

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter concerning what was mentioned about the one
who is not convinced by swearing by Allah (the Exalted) ).

358 - (It was narrated after Ibn Omar (May Allah be pleased with
them) that verily Allah’s Holy Messenger said: «Do not swear by your
fathers; he who was sworn to, should believe; he who was sworn to by Allah
(the Exalted) should accept; he who does not accept is not from Allah (the
Exalted)». It was narrated by Ibn Maja with good reference).

His saying: (Do not swear by your fathers) forbidding swearing by
other than Allah (the Exalted) in general has already been discussed.

His saying: (He who swears by Allah (the Exalted), should believe) that
is what Allah (the Exalted) requires of His servants and urges them to per-
form in His Holy Book. He (the Exalted) has said: «O ye who believe! Fear
Allah and be with those who are true (in word and deed).» (9: 119) and,
«For true men and women». (33: 35) and, «It were best for them if they
were true to Allah». (47: 21) and that 1s the case of the people of piety, as
Ailah (the Exalted) has said: «But it is righteousness to believe in Allah and
the Last Day, and the angels, and the Book, and the Messengers.... such are
the people of truth, the Allah-fearing» (2: 177).

496

This chapter discusses many issues:
The first: Forbidding swearing by fathers.

The second: Commanding the person who is sworn to, by Allah (the:
Exalted) to accept.

The third: Warning the person who does not accept.

His saying: (He whom it is sworn for him by Allah (the Exalted),
should accept; he who does not accept is not from Allah (the Exalted). But
if he did not have according to the rule of religion against his opponent to
swear and he asked him to swear, then he should accept that. It was among
the daily matters that happen between people such as appologies or the like;
that is the right of a Moslem; if another Moslem swears, appologizing or
clearing himself of a certain event, this Moslem should accept and to assume
that the other party has good will if he does not see otherwise, as was nar-
rated after Omar (May Allah be pleased with him), «Do not doubt that an
evil word said by a Moslem while you can find for it a place in that which
is good».

It also includes: Humbleness, friendliness and loving as well as other
benefits loved by Allah (the Exalted) which cannot be concealed from the
one who has good intelligence and understanding. That is among the rea-
sons that make the hearts gather in agreement to obey Allah (the Exalted),
then it is classified under good manners which is the heaviest thing placed in
the balance of a servant; it was mentioned in the Honorable Hadith that it
is considered among nobility of character.

O you wise person, contemplate about what reconciles you with Allah
(the Exalted) such as performing whatever is His rights as well as the rights
of His servants and making the Moslems happy and pleased, and dropping
secluding oneself from them or looking down on them. That encompasses
harm that no one thinks or imagines. Such matters are discussed in ethics
books as well as in others. Thus he who is endowed with what should be
done, is highly religious and his mind is perfect. Allah (the Exalted) grants
success and helps the weak and poor servant. And Allah (the Exalted)
knows best.

497

Chapter

His saying, «What Allah (the Exalted) wishes and what you wish»

It was narrated after Kutaila, «Verily a Jew came to the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and said: You are commit-
ting polytheism; you say: What Allah (the Exalted) wishes and what you
wish, and you say: By the Kaaba. So the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) ordered them if they wanted to swear to say:
By the Lord of the Kaaba, and to say: What Allah (the Exalted) wishes then
what you wish.» It was narrated by An-Nasai.

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter concerning his saying, «What Allah (the Exalted)
wishes and what you wish».

359 - (It was narrated after Kutaila, «Verily a Jew came to the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and said: You are
committing polytheism; you say: What Allah (the Exalted) wishes and what
you wish, and you say: By the Kaaba. Thereupon the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ordered them to say if they
wanted to swear: By the Lord of the Kaaba, and to say: What Allah (the
Exalted) wishes then what you wish.» It was narrated by An-Nasai).

His saying: Accepting that which is truthful from any one. Also show-
ing that it is forbidden to swear by the Kaaba, even though it is the «House
of Allah (the Exalted)» and it is an obligation to set for it, in order to per-
form the minor or the major Hajj. This shows that forbidding joining a part-
ners with Allah (the Exalted) is general and that nothing of it is accpetable;
neither for an angel nor for a sent messenger, nor for the Kaaba which is
the House of Allah (the Exalted) on His land. That is while you can observe
the people now adays swearing by the Kaaba and asking from it what only
Allah (the Exalted) can give. It is very well known that the Kaaba can

498

Also he narrated after Ibn Abbas, «Verily a man told the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him): What Allah (the Exalted)
wishes and what you wish; he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said; have you made me Allah’s rival; rather say, what Allah (the Ex-
alted) Alone wishes».

neither harm nor benefit. Rather Allah (the Exalted) legislated for His ser-
vants the circumambulation around it and worshipping Him during that
time ; He (the Exalted) made it a Qibla [People direct their prayers towards
it] for the nation [of Islam]: thus circumambulating is allowable while swear-
ing by it and invoking with it are proscribed. So you should distinguish be-
tween that which is permissible or that which is proscribed, even though
some people may contradict ycu; some people who are like the cattle;
rather, they are those who have went astray.

His saying: (You are committing polytheism: You say what Allah (the
Exalted) wishes and what you wish) and the servant, even though he has a
wish, his wish follows that of Allah (the Exalted) he does not possess the
ability to wish something unless Allah (the Exalted) has wished it. Concern-
ing that Allah (the Exalted) has said, «(With profit) to whoever among you
wills to go straight: But ye shall not will except as Allah wills the Cherisher
of the worlds». (81: 29) and, «This is an admonition: whosoever will, let him
take a (straight) Path to his Lord. By ye will not, except as Allah wills; for
Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom» (76: 29).

These Holy verses and Honorable Hadiths include the following: Re-
sponding to Al-Qadisiyya and Al-Mu‘tazila; those who deny determinism
and confirm to the servant a wish that contradicts that which Allah (the Ex-
alted) desires and wishes from the servant. What invalidates their beliefs will
be discussed in «Chapter on what was mentioned concerning those who
deny determinism». If Allah (the Exalted) wishes; they are the Magus of this
nation.

As for the people of the Sunna and consensus, they adhered to the
Holy Koran and the Honorable Sunna regarding this issye as well as other
issues. They believed that the servant’s wish follows that of Allah (the Ex-
alted) concerning everything that agrees with what Allah (the Exalted) has
legislated or contradicted of the deeds and words of the servants. Everybody
is covered by Allah’s (the Exalted) wish and volition. Thus that which agrees
with His iegislation is accepted and loved by Him (the Exalted); That which
contradicts it, is hated to be performed by the servant.

Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said, «If ye reject (Allah), truly
499

It was narrated by Ibn Maja after At-Toufail Aisha’s maternal brother,
«I dreamed that I passed by a group of Jews and I said: Verily you would
have been the people had not you said Ouzair is Allah’s (the Exalted) son.
They said: And verily you would have been...

Allah hath no need of you; but He liketh not ingratitude from His ser-
vants...» (39: 7) It also includes: Showing that swearing by the Kaaba is
polytheism since verily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) agreed with the Jew in his saying, «You are committing Poly-
theism».

360 - His saying: (Also he narrated after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with them), «Verily a man told the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him), what Allah (the Exalted) wishes and what
you wish. Thereupon he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said: Have you made me Allah’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) rival? Rather say: What Allah (the Exalted) Alone wishes.»).

That confirms what has been mentioned before; that is considered poly-
theism.

361 - His saying: (Have you made me Allah’s rival). This shows that he
who equates a servant with Allah (the Exalted) ever in minor polytheism,
has in fact made him Allah’s rival, whether he likes it or not. That is contra-
ry to what the ignorant say concerning that which differentiates Allah (the
Exalted) from His servants and those are of the two types of polytheism
that should be prohibited. When Allah (the Exalted) wishes that which is
good for someone, He (the Exalted) teaches him religion.

362 - His saying: (Ibn Maja narrated after At-Toufail, Aisha’s maternal
brother who said: «I dreamed as if I passed by a group of Jews, and I said:
Who are you? They said: We are the Jews, I said: You would have been the
people, had not you said Ouzair is Allah’s son. They said: And verily you
would have been the people had not you said: What Allah (the Exalted)
wishes and what Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) wishes; then I passed by a group of Christians, and said: Who are you?
They said: We are the Christians. I said: Verily you would have been the
people, had not you said Christ is Allah’s son. They said: Verily you would
have been the people, had not you said: What Allah (the Exalted) wishes
and what Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
wishes. When I got up in the morning I told about it then I went to the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and told him.
He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ‏.د‎ 1: Did vou tell

500

... the people, had not you said: What Allah (the Exalted) wishes and what
Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) wishes. Then I
passed by a group of Christians and 1 said: Verily you would have been the
people. Had not you said: Christ is Allah’s son. They said: And verily you
would have been the people, had not you said: What Allah (the Exalted)
wishes and what Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) wishes. So when I got up in the morning I told some people about it.
Then I went to the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) and told him. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:
Have you told any body about it? I said: Yes, he (May Allah’s blessings a: i
peace be upon him) thanked Allah (the Exalted) and praised Him (the F~-
alted) then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: And
now verily Toufail had a dream about which he told some of you, ...

anybody about it? I said: Yes. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) thanked Allah (the Exalted) and praised Him then he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said: And now verily Toufail had a dream
that he told some of you, and you said a word that such and such a thing
prevented me from forbidding you from saying it. So do not say: What
Allah (the Exalted) wishes and what Muhammad (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) wishes; rather say what Allah (the Exalted) Alone
wishes»).

His saying: (After At-Toufail, Aisha’s maternal brother), he is At-Tou-
fail ben Abdullah ben Sakhbara, Aisha’s maternal brother, a Companion
after whom Ibn Maja narrated, and that is what the writer mentioned in the
chapter [we are discussing].

This dream was accepted by Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) who also worked according to it. Thereafter
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) forbade them from say-
ing: What Allah (the Exalted) wishes and what Muhammad (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) wishes, and ordered them to say, «What
Allah (the Exalted), Alone wishes».

He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ordered them in this
Honorable Hadith as well as in the one preceding it to say: «What Allah
(the Exalted) Alone wishes». There is no doubt that such is more perfect as
far as faith is concerned and it is farther from polytheism than saying: «And
what so and so wishes», because in the former [What Allah (the Exalted)
Alone wishes] declares unification that rejects joining in rivals in all its as-
pects. So he who has insight choses for himself the highest ranks of perfec-

501

... and you said a word that such and such a matter prevented me from for-
bidding you. So do not say: What Allah (the Exalted) wishes and what Mu-
hammad (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) wishes; rather, say:
What Allah (the Exalted) Alone wishes».

This chapter discusses many issues:
The first: That the Jews knew about minor polytheism.

The second: That a human being is able to understand if he has an in-
clination.

The third: His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying,
«Have you made me Allah’s rival». So how is the case of the one who said,
«I have no one else but one to seek refuge with».

The fourth: That this is not major polytheism because he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Such and such a matter prevented
me».

The fifth: A righteous dream is considered a branch of revelation.

The sixth: It [dream] may be a good cause for legislating some rules.

tion as far as Monotheism and faithfulness are concerned.

His saying: (Such and such a matter prevented me from forbidding you
from saying it). It was mentioned in some references that «He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be apon him) was prevented by shyness». Then after this
dream of At-Toufail, he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
strictly forbade them; he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
kept on teaching them till Allah (the Exalted) perfected His religion and
completed His favour and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) informed people about the manifest message, may Allah’s peace and
blessings be upon him and on his kinsfolk and Companions altogether.

It also includes the meaning of what he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said.

363 - «A virtuous and true dream is one part out of forty-six parts of
prophecy».

I said: And if it were a dream, then it would be considered revelation
that confirms what revelation [perse] confirms in as far as orders and prohi-
bitions are concerned. And Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

502

Chapter

(He who curses Time [or the vissitudes of Time] is considered to have
done wrong to Allah (the Exalted).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «And they say, «What is there but our life
in this world? We shall die and we live, and nothing but Time can destroy
us». But of that they have no knowledge: They merely conjecture». (45: 24).

Chapter

His saying: (Chapter concerning he who curses Time [or the vissitudes
of Time] is considered to have done wrong to Allah (the Exalted)].

Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And they say: «What is that but our life
in this world? We shall die and we live, and nothing but Time can destroy
us». But of that they have no knowledge: The merely conjecture» (45: 24)).

Ibn Kathir said in his interpretation: Allah (the Exalted) informs about
atheism of the unbelievers and those who agreed with them among the poly-
theists of the Arabs rejecting the idea of resurrection (And they say, what 15
there but our life in this world? We shall die and we live, and nothing but
time can destroy us). There is nothing but this present life; people die and
others live; there is no resurrection neither at the Last Day. That is what the
polytheists among the Arabs believed in, those who deny resurrection. The
philosophers discussing theology among them believed in this and they deny
the beginning and resurrection. The atheist philosophers who believed in per-
iodicity and deny the existence of the Creator believe that every thirty-six
thousand years every thing returns to what it was on. And they claimed that
the night is repeated endlessly; so they stubbornly contended with that which
is reasonable and denied that which is reported, that is why they said: (And
nothing but Time can destroy us) however, Allah (the Exalted) has said (but
of that they have no knowledge: They verely conjective) that is to say ima-
gine and fancy. As for the Honorable Hadith narrated by the writers of As-
Saheeh, Abu Dawud and An-Nasai.

503

الم ع ةد م رم مف ءار م مه مف فده مه مم قن مه رو ممه وله م واو وا ره فوا م م رو و مم رم وجا م مج 0 ج66 6م 6ه م6 85 6 25 5 5 ع 5 2 تت ل 5 5 5 05

364 - It was narrated after Sufyan Ibn Ayyina after Az-Zuhri after Said
ben Al-Musyeb after Abi Huraira who said: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Allah (the Exalted) says:
Ibn Adam is doing wrong to Me; he curses Time and I am the Time; all is
in My Hands; I alternate the day and night».

365 - And in another narration, «Do not curse Time since I am Time».

366 - And in another narration, «Ibn Adam should not say: Time has
let us down; verily I am Time; I send the day and night; if I wish, I stop
them».

He said in «Sharh As-Sunna»: It is an agreed upon Honorable Hadith:
it is also truthful and they narrated it after Muammar in many different
ways after Abi Huraira. He said: It means that the Arabs used to curse
Time during hard times or disasters because they used to attribute disasters
that happened to them and they would say: They were afflicted by adversi-
ties of Time, and Time has contradicated them; so if they added to Time
whatever had afflicted them, they would curse the cause and this goes back
to Allah (Glory be to Him) since He (the Exalted) is in reality the doer of
all things that they do, so they forbade cursing Time.

Also Ibn Jarir narrated it within a strange context, he said, «Pre-Islamic
people used to say: Verily the day and night destroy us, and He (the Ex-
alted) is the one who destroys us, takes us in death and gives us life. Thus
Allah (the Exalted) has said in His Holy Book (And they say, what is there
but our life in this world? We shall die and we live and nothing but Time
can destroy us) and they curse Time, so Allah (the Exalted) said, «Ibn
Adam does wrong to Me; he curses Time and I am Time; all is in My
Hands; I alternate the day and night».

It was also narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem after Ahmad ben Mansour after
Soureij ben An-Naaman after Ibn Ayyina. They narrated something similar.
Then he narrated after Younes after Ibn Wahab after Az-Zuhri after Abi
Salma after Abi Huraira: I heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) saying: «Allah (the Exalted) says: Ibn Adam
curses Time, and I am the Time; all power over the day and night is in my
hands». It was also narrated by the writer of as-Saheeh and An-Nassai after
Younes ben Yazid’s Hadith.

367 - Muhammad ben Ishaq said after his father after Abi Huraira that
verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon

304

And in another narration, «Do not curse Time; Verily Allah (the Ex-
alted) is the Time».

This chapter discusses many issues:
The first: Forbidding to curse Time.
The second: Calling it as doing wrong to Allah (the Exalted).

The third: Contemplating in his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) saying, «Verily Allah (the Exalted) is the Time».

The fourth: Verily one might be cursing even though deep in his heart
he does not mean it.

him) said, «Allah (Glory be to Him) says: I asked My servant for money,
and he did not give me; he curses Me by saying: Oh Time, and I am the
Time».

Ash-Shafi, Abu Oubeid and other Imams said interpreting his (May
Allah's blessings and peace be upon him) saying: «Do not curse Time; verily
Allah (the Exalted) is the Time». The Arabs in Pre-Islamic times and at
times of distress and disaster used to say: O Time has let us down, so by
this they used to attribute those actions to the Time and curse it; rather, the
doer is Allah (the Exalted). It is as if he cursed Allah (the Exalted) because
in reality He (the Exalted) is the doer. That was forbidden, to curse Time as
such because Allah (the Exalted) is Time whom they mean or to whom they
attribute those actions. That has been the best thing said concerning its
interpretation -and that is the wanted- and Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

Ibn Hazm and those who followed him of the Thahiriyya have com-
mitted a mistake in considering «Time» among the Beautiful Names by de-
riving from this Honorable Hadith.

An he showed the meaning of «I alternate the day and night». That He
(the Exalted) alternates, is to say controls them by making people experience
what they like or hate.

And in this Honorable Hadith there is an addition which was not men-
tioned by the writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) which is, «All is in
My Hands». |

His saying: (And in another narration, «Do not curse Time since verily
Allah (the Exalted) is the Time»).

The meaning of this is the following: That is what He (the Exalted) de-
clared in the Honorable Hadith by saying, «I am the Time; I alternate the
day and night». This means that whatever goes on during the passage of

505

#الوا قاو واوا ود عد ود و وا عاه واو عام وأقاعاع وأواع قادماعا ها ساعد ناهد ماع م اماع قاف فقا هاعد لاود ها اماع وا واه عاوا مه جد ما عاو جا ما وعد يد عاعا واه عد واعد و فازردى راود ه فافاد. تدج فد عد د م عاد ير

time whether good or evil happens through Allah’s volition and manage-
ment; He (the Exalted) knows about it and controls it; there is no body to
share Him (the Exalted) this. Whatever He (the Exalted) wishes, takes place
and comes into existence, and whatever He doesnot wish, will never happen
or come into existence. Thus it is an obligation to thank Him (Glory be to
Him) in both cases and turning to Him in repentance.

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «We have tried them with
both prosperity and adversity: Inorder that they might turn (tolls)» (7: 168)
and He (the Exalted) has also said, «... And We test you by evil and by
good by way of trial. To us must ye return» (21: 35), and attributing the ac-
tion to Time and cursing time has become frequent as in the poems of some
poets such as Ibn Al-Mu’taz, Al-Mutanabbi and others. Describing the years
as tough is not considered as such, in that connection Allah (the Exalted)
has said, «Then will come after that (Period) seven dreadful (years)...» (12:
48).

506

Chapter

(Naming such as the Judge of Judges and other similar matters)

It was narrated in the Saheeh after Abi Huraira after the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said, «The most degraded name according to Allah
(the Exalted), is a man called the owner of estates; there is no owner but
Allah (the Exalted)».

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter concerning the judge of judges and other similar
matters).

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) mentioned this interpreta-
tion in order to point at that calling judge of judges includes similitude in
meaning so it is forbidden.

368 - His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh after Abi Huraira (May
Allah be pleased with him) after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said: «The most degraded name according to Allah (the Exalted) is a
man called the owner of estates; there is no owner but Allah (the Exalted)».

Verily this term truly fits Allah (the Exalted) because He (the Exalted)
is the owner of everything; there is no king mightier or greater than Him;
He is the owner of all dominion, all Glory belongs to Him (the Exalted). All
possessions are granted by Allah (the Exalted) to whomever He (the Ex-
alted) desires from among His servants. He is Allah (the Exalted), He re-
moves the king from his kingdom once and another time He removes the
kingdom from the king, so his reality would become only a name whose
name was removed. As for the Lord of the worlds, His dominion is perma-
nant, and perfect, it does not end; He controls lot; He increases or decreases

507

Sufyan said, «This is like Shahan Shah [The emperor of emperors].

And in another narration, «He is the man that stirs Allah’s wrath most
on the Last Day; he is the Worst».

His saying: «The most degraded» means the meanest.

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Forbidding to call others by the owner of estates.
The second: Verily it means as Sufyan said.

The third: Being aware of strict warning against that as well as other si-
milar things in addition to the fact that deep inside the person did not mean
it.

The fourth: Being aware that this is for Allah (Glory be to Him) sake.

it and preserves for His servants their deeds; all is covered by His knowledge
and whatever the writer [in Heaven] assigns to them. So He (the Exalted) re-
wards eacn worker by his deeds; if the deed is good then the reward would
be good, if it were evil, then the reward would be evil. As was mentioned in
the Honorable Hadith, «O Allah (the Exalted) all praise belongs to You; all
dominion belongs to you; You Possess all that which is good and to you be-
longs all command. 1 ask You from that which is good, and I seek refuge
with You from all evil».

His saying: (Sufyan said)he means Ibn Ayyina (the example of Shahan-
shah of the Persians means the owner of estates. That is why Sufyan used it
as an example because it is a persian term.

His saying: (And in another narration, «The man who stirs Allah’s
wrath most on the Last Day; is the worst».

His saying: (Wrath) means anger and hate; such man is hated by Allah
(the Exalted).

His saying: (The worst) also shows that Allah (the Exalted) is concerned
and such person is mean, thus all these matters gathered round him because
he aggrandizes himself and aggrandizes people by this term which is the
greatest means of aggrandizing, so his self aggrandizement and his aggran-
dizing of people with what is not theirs, places him in such position on the
Last Day. Thereupon he becomes the meanest, most hated and worst among
Allah’s creatures, because the mean person who is hated by Allah (the Ex-
alted) is on the Day of Judgment the meanest and the worst among people
because he used to look down on the creatures of Allah (the Exalted) while
he was enjoying the favours of Allah.

508

هلى ا »ا راع » ورا فاع فقاو ود و فوا فد و واوا عدو عا م.ا واو و ماو مد و م م عد وو وام و و اماه وأفاق د ‎٠‏ فاع قاف قد وامد ع واود فا ع فدا فاو ود قاع وعد يام وا واف . دقاو ود فد عد ع مد عدا عدار مد عد .د م 5 م,

His saying: (The most degraded means the meanest) that is the meaning
of «most degraded» and it adds to the meaning of «He is the man that stirs
Allah’s wrath» that he is mean and hated by Allah.

It also includes warning against all that includes aggrandizement. Abu
Dawud narrated after Abi Mujliz; he said.

369 - «Mouawiya (May Allah be pleased with him) set for fighting Ibn
Az-Zoubeir and Ibn Amer, so Ibn Amer stood up and Ibn Az-Zoubeir sat
down, so Mouawtya told Ibn Amer: Sit down; I heard Allah’s Holy Messen-
ger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying: He who loves
men to stand up for him, they would be seated in his place in Hell-Fire». It
was also narrated by At-Tirmithi; he said: It is a fine hadith.

370 - It was narrated after Abi Oumama (May Allah be pleased with
him) who said: «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) came to us leaning on a stick, we stood up [to help him (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)] and he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said: Do not stand up as non-Arabs do; they aggrandize
each otherm. It was narrated by Abu Dawud.

His saying: (He 15 the man that stirs Allah’s (the Exalted) wrath most)
such 1s among the adjectives that pass as it came; it is nothing that was men-
tioned in the Holy Koran and the Honorable Sunna. Otherwise one must
follow the Holy Koran and the Honorable Sunna concerning that and con-
firm what fits Allah’s Glory and Exaltedness; confirming without compari-
son and desdaining without suspension as was mentioned before. That is
what the people of Sunna and consensus from among the Companions and
the followers then those surviving seventy-three groups. This diversity and
contradiction rather took place at the end of the third century and the cen-
turies coming after; what happened to the nation of diversity, contradiction
and going astray cannot be concealed. We seek help from Allah (the Ex-
alted).

509

Chapter: (Revering Allah’s (the Exalted) names and changing the

name because of that)

It was narrated after Abi Shouraih that he used to be called Aba Al-
Hakam. Thereupon the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) told him, «Verily Allah (the Exalted) is Al-Hakam [Judge] and to
Him (the Exalted) belongs all the reign.

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter revering Allah’s names and changing the name be-
cause of that).

371 - (It was narrated after Abi Shouraih that he used to be called Aba
Al-Hakam [the ruler’s father]. Thereupon the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) told him, «Verily Allah (the Exalted) is
Al-Hakam [Judge or ruler] and to Him (the Exalted) belongs all judgement.
He said: Verily when my people (conflict about something they would come
to me and I would judge between them and both parties would be satisfied.
Thereafter he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: How
good is that! Do you have children? I said: Shourath, Moslim and Addullah.
He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Who 15 the eldest? I
said: Shouraih. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:
Then you are Abu Shouraih». It was narrated by Abu Dawud and others).

His saying: (It was narrated after Abi Shouraih) he said in «Khoulasat
At-Tahthib»: He is Abu Shouraih Al-Khouzai‘; his name is Khouweilid ben
Amr; he embraced Islam on Al-Fath Day. He has twenty Honorable Ha-
diths, they agreed on the Honorable Hadiths and Al-Bukhary. Abu Said AI-
Mikbari, Nafi‘ ben Joubeir and others narrated after him. Ibn Saad said: He
said in Al-Medina in the year 68 A.H. The interpreter said: His name is
Hani‘ ben Yazid Al-Kindi; this was said by Al-Hafeth. It was also said: Al-
Hareth Ad-Dababi; it was said by Al-Mizzni.

510

فدقاع ما قا عد عاو ماج وام هاه وأفا. واواه عاو و وا فاه اه ‎i‏ وا فقاو 46 ه»اإقافاع قافا وا فا واجاع د عد عد ما نع ها عانا ند و ود واه ‎a‏ ها .

His saying: (He used to be called- that is to say what was begun by
Abu or Umm [Mother] or something similar, while a nickname is not as
such; it is like Zein Al-Abideen for example. [The best among worshippers].

The Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) say-
ing, «Verily Allah (the Exalted) is Al-Hakam [Judge or ruler] and to Him be-
longs the judgement». He (Glory be to Him) is the Ruler in the Present life
as well as in the Afterlife; he rules among His creatures through His revela-
tion that He sent down on His Prophets and Messengers; O there is not a
case but Allah (the Exalted) has sent down a rule or judgment concerning it
on His Holy Prophet (the Exalted), judgment from the Holy Koran. Allah
(the Exalted) has facilitated such knowledge to most savants of this nation;
they never unanimously agreed on that which is delusion; verily, the savants
even though they conflicted about some rules, one of them must be right.
Thus he who has been endowed by Allah (the Exalted) the ability to under-
stand and to discriminate that which is right from the sayings of religious
authorities, He (the Exalted) facilitated that for him as a favour and as bene-
faction. O how great is that endowment. We ask Allah to endow us from
His Grace and favour.

His saying: (To Him belongs all rule in the present life and in the
Afterlife). Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Whatever it be
wherein ye differ, the decision, there of, is with Allah: such is Allah my
Lord: in Him IJ trust, and to Him I turn» (42: 10) and, «O ye who believe!
Obey Allah, and obey the Apostle, and those charged with authority among
you. If ye differ in anything among yourselves, refer it to Allah and His
Apostle, if ye do believe in Allah and the Last Day: That is best, and most
suitable for final determination». (4: 59) Thus rule and final decision belong
to Allah (the Exalted); the decision goes to His Holy Book and to His Holy
Messenger (May Ailah’s blessings and peace be upon him) during his life
and his Sunna after his death.

372 - He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) told Mouath
when he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) sent him to Yeman,
«What would you use to rule? He said: Allah’s Holy Book. He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said: If you don’t find [what you want]? He
said: Allah’s Holy Messenger’s Sunna. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said: If you do not find [what you want]? He said: I would judge to
my own opinion. Thereupon he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said: Praise to Allah (the Exalted) who granted the messenger of Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to whatever pleases
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him».

511

So he said: Whenever my people conflicted over something they would
come to me and I would judge between them and both parties would be
pleased. So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: How
good is that! Do you have children? He said: Shouraih, Moslem and Abdul-
lah. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Then who is
the eldest? I said: Shouraih. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said: Then you are Abu Shouraih». It was narrated by-Abu Dawud
and others.

Thus Mouath is one of the most important savants among the
Companions of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him); he knows about the rules and about that which is proscribed and that
which is allowable as well as the ruijes of the Honorable Sunna and the Holy
Koran. That is why he was allowed to give his personal opinion whenever he
did not find a decision in the Holy Koran or Allah’s Holy Messenger’s
Honorable Sunna. That is contrary to what happens now adays or even
before it by the learnt people concerning the rules; those people are ignorant
of Allah’s rules and decisions mentioned in His Holy Koran or the Honorable
Sunna of His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him). He thinks that he is allowed to give a personal opinion even though he
is ignorant of the rules of the Holy Koran and the Honorable Sunna.

As to the Day of Judgment, no one judges or rules among people but
Allah (the Exalted) when He descends to rule and judge among His ser-
vants; He (the Exalted) would judge between people by His Knowledge. He
(the Exalted) is the One that nothing of the deeds of His creatures can be
concealed from Him. Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said: «Allah is
never unjust in the least degree: If there is any good (done), He owns a
great reward». (4: 40) And the judgement on the Day of Judgment is by that
which 15 good and that which is bad so it is taken from the oppressor for
the sake of the oppressed in as much as he oppressed in case he had good
deeds. If he did not have good deeds it would be taken from the evil deeds
of the oppressed.

His saying: (Whenever my people conflicted over something, they would
come to me and I would rule among them and both parties would be
pleased. Thereupon he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:
How good 1s this!).

This means- and Allah (the Exalted) knows best- that when the people
of Abu Shourath realized that he was just and knew what pleased the two
parties they accepted that and that was a reconciliation because it aims at

512

This chapter discusses many issues:
The first: Revering Allah’s (the Exaited) names and attributes.
The second: Changing the name because of that.

The third: Closing the eldest son’s name as an aagnomen.

acceptance rather than imposing; it is neither built on priests, or the people
of the book of the Christians and the Jews, nor on refering to the state of
Pre-Islamic times who used to refer to their eldest or those who came before
them who rule and decisions contradict the rules of the Holy Koran and the
Honorable Sunna. As frequently happens these days such as the case of the
dictators or tyrants who do not refer to the rules of Allah (the Exalted) or
His Holy Messenger (May Alliah’s blessings and peace be upon him). Rather
when they refer to their personal opinions, passions and desires.

Some imitators may follow those imitated and drop that which is just
and proper that agrees with the fundamentals of the Holy Koran and the
Honorable Sunna. We seek Allah’s help.

And Allah’s Holy Messenger’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) saying: (Do you have children? He said: Shouraih, Moslem and
Abdullah. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Who is
the eldest? I said: Shouraih. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said: Then you are Abu Shourath). This means that the eldest is pre-
ceded concerning the agnomen. This meaning was mentioned in more than
one Honorable Hadith. And Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

513

Chapter

(He who talks lightly about something that includes Allah’s name, the
Holy Koran or the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him).

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «If thou dost question them, they declare
(with emphasis), «We were only talking idly and in play. Say, was it at
Allah, and His signs, and His Apostle, that ye were mocking?» (9: 65).

CHAPTER

His saying: (He who talks lightly about something that includes Allah’s
name, the Holy Koran or the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him)] is an infidel.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said: «If thou dost question them,
they declare (with emphasis), We were only talking idly and in play. Say,
was it at Allah, and His Signs, and His Apostle, that ye were mocking?» (9:
65).

The religious authority Ibn Kathir (May Allah be pleased with him)
said in his interpretation: Abu Maashar Al-Madani said after Muhammad
ben Kaab Al-Kurthi and others, «They said: A man from among the hypo-
crites who are the most greedy among us, the best liars and turn away when
one comes across them. So that was reported to Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) while he (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) was riding his (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) camel. The man said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) we were just playing and discuss-
ing things because the travel was long and we forget our hardships of travel.
So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, (Did you mock
at Allah (the Exalted) His signs and His Holy Messenger? Do not appolo-
gize; you have disbelieved after believing; if we forgive a group of you we
torture a group because they were wrong doers) and his feet will be burnt

514

It was narrated after Ibn Omar, Muhammad ben Kaab, Zaid ben
Aslam and Kutadah -their discussions were- that a man at the invasion of
Tabouk said, «We never saw like our Present readers; they are the most
greedy, the best liars and most coward at fighting; he meant Allah’s Holy
Messenger and his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) Compa-
nions who rehearse the Holy Koran. So Malek ben Awf told him: You are a
liar, yet you are a hypocrite; I will tell Allah’s Holy Messenger. Thereupon
Awf went to Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) telling him, but he found that the Holy Koran reached first. So
that man came to the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) who had ridden his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) camel and set out; hé said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) we were only discussing matters lightly
and trying to kill time during this long road.

Ibn Omar said: It is as if I were looking at him hanging from Allah’s
Holy Messenger’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) camel and
[Hot] stones burning his feet while he was saying: We were playing and dis-
cussing matters lightly, and Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) telling him (Do you mock at Allah (the Exalted),
His Holy signs and His Holy Messenger? Do not appologize; you have dis-
believed after believing). Without turning to him).

with [hot] stones and the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) will not turn to him while he is hanging from Allah’s Holy
Messenger’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) camel».

373 - Abdullah ben Wahab said: Hisham ben Saad told me after Zaid
ben Aslam after Abdullah ben Omar,;-«A man at the invasion of Tabouk
said at an assembly; we did not see like our readers; the most greedy, the
best liars, and the most coward at fighting. Thereupon a man at the assem-
bly said: You are a liar; yet you are a hypocrite. I will tell Allah’s Holy
Messenger. That reached Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) and the Holy Koran [concerning that] was revealed. Ab-
dullah ben Omar said: And I saw him hanging from Allah’s Holy Mesen-
ger’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) camel while being hit
by stones and saying: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) we were only joking and discussing matters lightly and
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) told
him: (We are at Allah, and His signs, and His Apostle, that ye were mock-

515

يي ع ع يح ا ع ع ع ع يع ا م ع احم م ل لي ا ا ا 0 ا 0 يي ا ا ا ا 1 م يي ا ا اي ل ا الال الال اي الال اي يي اي ل ا م

ing? Make no excuses: Ye have rejected Faith after ye had accepted it). It
was also narrated by Al-Laith after Hisham ben Saad).

Ibn Ishaq said: «A group of hypocrites among whom was Wadia ben
Thabet the brother of Bani Oumayya ben Awf, and a man among the most
courageous allies of Bani Salma who used to be called Moukhshy ben Hi-
myar; they were pointing at Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) while going to fight at Tabouk and tell each other:
Do you consider fighting Bani Al-Asfar like the fighting that takes place be-
tween the Arabs? By Allah (the Exalted) as you will tomorrow adhere to the
montains in order to frighten and terrify the believers. So Moukhshy ben Hi-
myar said: By Allah (the Exalted) I hope that I was a judge to whip each
one of us one hundred times; we expect a Holy verse to be sent down be-
cause of what you said. And Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said concerning that to Ammar ben Yasser: Those
people realized that they would burn [in Hell-Fire] so ask them about what
they had said; if they denied tell them; rather, you said such and such a
thing, so Ammar went and told them that. They came to Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) in order to appolo-
gize. So Wadia ben Thabet said while Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) was riding his camel- and he started say-
ing while taking hold of its reigns: Or Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) we were rather playing and lightly discuss-
ing matters, so Moukhshy ben Himyar said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), my name and my father’s
name have failed me; so what he meant was what He (the Exalted) has said,
«If we pardon some of you, we will punish others amongst you...» (9: 66)
Mouhkhshy Ibn Himyar was called Abdur-Rahman and he asked Allah (the
Exalted) to be killed as a martyr without anybody finding his body; so he
was killed on the battle of Yamama and he was never found».

Ikrama said concerning the interpretation of this Holy verse, «A man
among those -if Allah (the Exalted) wishes- Pardoned used to say: O Allah
(the Exalted) verily I can hear a Holy verse; I mean one that makes people
shudder and the hearts dread. O Allah (the Exalted) make me die killed for
your sake; no one should say that I was washed, wrapped in a shroud or
buried. He said: He was hit at the battle of Yamama; none of the Moslems

was not found but him».

His saying: (Make no excuses; Ye have rejected faith after ye had ac-

516

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Which is the most serious- verily the one who mocks by this
is a disbeliever.

The second: That this is the interpretation of the Holy verse concerning
the one who does such a thing no matter who he was.

The third: The difference between reporting and advising for the sake of
Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him).

The fourth: The difference between forgiving is liked by Allah (the Ex-
alted) and being rough to the enemies of Allah (the Exalted).

The fifth: That there are cases where making excuses is not acceptable.

cepted it). That is to say through what you said mocking (If we pardon
some of you) that is to say Moukhshy ben Himyar (we will punish others
amongst you) that is to say not every body will be pardoned; some of you
have to be punished (For that they are at sin) that is to say because of this
wrongful and dissolute discussion.

Sheikh Al-Islam said: Allah (the Exalted) has verily commanded him
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to say (Ye have rejected
Faith after ye had accepted it) and it is said: They rejected faith after they
had accepted it through their tongues (verbally) with their disbelief through
their hearts first: This is not proper because expressing Faith verbally while
heartily disbelieving is associated with disbelief. So it is not said: You infidel
after you had believed; verily they are still disbelieving; if it was meant that
you became infidel after believing; they did not show but to those prominent
people; and with them they are still as such. This term does not show that
they are still hypocrites.

He (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said in another place: He (the
Exalted) has informed that they disbelieved after believing when they said:
Rather we talked that which is considered disbelief without thinking that it
was disbelief; rather, we were playing and discussing matters lightly. He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) showed that mocking at
Allah’s Holy verses, commiting an act of disbelief. Had faith been in his
heart, it would have prevented him from saying such a thing. The Holy
Koran shows that faith deep in the heart necessitates manifest performance
according to it.

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «They say, We believe in
Allah and in the Apostle, and we obey»: But even after that, some of them

517

ا ا ا ا ا ا ااا اا اي ا ا ااا ااا ا ا ل ا ا ل ل ا ‎TE‏

turn away... the answer of the believers, when summoned to Allah and His
Apostle, in order that they may judge between them, is no other than this:
They say, «We hear and we obey.»: It is such as these that will attain feli-
city» (24: 47-52).So He (the Exalted) denied that those who donot obey the
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) are faithful
and informed that if the believers were summoned by Allah (the Exalted)
and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to
judge among them; they would listen and obey; He (the Exalted) showed
that this is among the requirements of faith.

It also includes: Showing that man may commit an act of disbelief by
Saying a term or doing an act. The most serious is that which is willed by
the hearts. It is like the sea which has no coast. It denotes great hypocrisy.
Verily Allah (the Exalted) determined and affirmed for those faith without
Saying what they said, as was said by Ibn Abi Moulaika.

374 - «I caught up with thirty of Allah’s Holy Messenger’s (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) Companions, all of whom fear
hypocrisy and fear to become a hypocrite». We ask Allah (the Exalted) to

grant us peace, forgiveness, and good health in the present life as well as in
the Afterlife.

318

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «When we give him a taste of some mercy
from Ourselves, 21161 some adversity has touched him, he is sure to say,
«This is due to my (merit): I think not that the Hour (of Judgment) will
(ever) be established; but if I am brought back to my Lord, I have (much)
good (Stored) in His sight! But we will show the Unbelievers the truth of all
that they did, and we shall give them the taste of a severe Penalty». (41: 50).

Moujahid said, «That is through my action and I am responsible for
it».

His saying: (He said, This has been given to me because of a certain
knowledge which I have». (28: 78) Kutada said, «This has been given to me
because of a certain knowledge that there are benefits».

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter: Allah (the Exalted) has said: «When We give him
a taste of some mercy from Ourselves...» (41: 50).

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said after Ibn Abbas and
other interpreters about the meaning of the Holy verse and whatever after it
that which satisfies the meaning and satisfies ones thirst.

His saying: (Moujahid said: That is through my actions and I am re-
sponsible. And Ibn Abbas said: «This has been given to me because of a cer-
tain knowledge which I have». (28: 78) Kutadah said, «This has been given
to me because of a certain knowledge that there are benefits». Others said,
«Allah (the Exalted) knows that I am qualified for that». That is the mean-
ing of Moujahid’s saying: I was granted it for an honor).

What they mentioned does not conflict; rather; it is intending purpose.

The religious authority Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
concerning the meaning of the Holy verse, «... But when we bestow a favour
upon him as from ourselves, he says, «This has been given to me because of

519

4 هل

Others said, «Allah (the Exalted) knows that I am qualified for that».
This is what Moujahid meant when he said, «I was endowed this because of
my qualifications».

It was narrated after Abi Huraira that he heard Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying, «Verily, three among
Bani Israel: A leper, a hairless, and a blind. Allah (the Exalted) wanted to
try them. Thereupon He (the Exalted) sent them an angel. This angel came
to the leper...

a certain knowledge (I have)! Nay, but this is but a trial, but most of them
understand not» (39: 49). He (the Exalted) informs that when Man is hurt
and suffering, humiliates himself to Allah (the Exalted) and pleads and in-
vokes Him, then if He bestows him a certain favour, he will become tyrani-
cal and will do wrong. He said: «This has been given to me because of a
certain knowledge which I have». That is to say because Allah (the Exalted)
knows that he deserves and is qualified; had not I been lucky from Allah
(the Exalted), He (the Exalted) would not have endowed me with this. He
(the Exalted) has said: «Nay, but this is but a trial». (39: 49). That is to say
the case is not as it was claimed; rather, we have endowed him with this fa-
vour to try him concerning our endowment; would he obey or disobey? That
is in addition to our preceding knowledge that «Nay, but that is but a trial».
That is to say a test (but most of them understand not) that is why they say
what they say and invoke what they invoke. (Thus did the generations) be-
fore them say!) (39: 50) that is to say many of those who came before said
this, claimed such things and invoked such an invocation. (But all they did
was of no profit to them) (39: 50) that is to say what they said was not
truthful, nor did it benefit them.

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) said telling us about Qarun, «... Be-
hold, his people said to him, «Exult not, for Allah loveth not those who ex-
ult (in riches), but seek, with the (wealth) which Allah has bestowed on thee,
the Home of the Hereafter, nor forget thy position in this world: But do
thou good, as Allah has been good to thee, and seek not (occasions for) mis-
chief in the land: for Allah loves not those who do mischief». He said: «This
has been given to me because of a certain knowledge which I have». Did he
not know that Allah had destroyed, before him, (whole) generations, -which
were superior to him in strength and greater in the amount (of riches) they
had collected? But the wicked are not called (immediately) to account for
their sins.» (28: 76-78). He (the Exalted) has also said..

And we are not the ones to receive pains and Penalties!» (26: 138).

520

.... He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: What is it that
you like best? He said: A good color and good skin that rids me of what
caused the people to call me filthy. He said so and he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) cleaned him, and the dirt was eradicated and he
was given a good color and good skin.

He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be uvon him) said: Which kind of
property do you like best? He said: Camels or cows -Ishaq doubted- So he
was given a pregnant camel, that was about to deliver] and said: May Allah
(the Exalted) bless it for you. He said: Then the hairless man came, and he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) asked him: What is it that
you like best? He said: Good hair that rds us of what caused the people to
call me filthy. So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) wiped
him, and he was given good hair. Then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said: Which kind of property do you like best? He said: Cows
or camels. So he was given a pregnant cow. He (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said: May Allah (the Exalted) bless it for you.

Then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) approached the
blind and said: What is it that you like best? He said: I would like to have
my eyesight back, so that I may see people. So he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) wiped him and he was given back his eyesight. He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: What kind of property
do you like best? He said: Sheep. So he was given an ewe that has already
delivered. So the camel and the cow delivered, and one had a valley of ca-
mels, the other a valley of cows, and the last also a valley of sheep. He said:
Then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) came to the leper in
his previous image. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:
I am a poor man who is dettached from his kinsfolk while travelling; I will

375 - (It was narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with
him) that he heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) saying, «Verily three...».

(It was narrated by both) by Al-Boukhary and Moslem. And the preg-
nant camel.

His saying: (So it produced) and in another narration (so it produced) it
means he took care of it during the delivery process; such person to a camel
is like a midwife to a woman.

His saying: (I do not put much stress upon you) that means: I do not

521

not be able to reach my people but through Allah (the Exalted) then
through you. I ask you by the One who gave you good color and good skin
and property, to give me a camel so that I may be able to continue my tra-
vel. Thereupon he said: The rights are many. Thereupon he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said it is as if I had known you before,
were not you a leper people look at you as poor and filthy. Allah (the Ex-
alted) gave you property, so he said: Rather, I inherited this property from
my fathers. Thereafter he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said: If you were a liar, may Allah (the Exalted) turn you back to your pre-
vious state. Then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) went to
the hairless man in the image of a hairless man; he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) told him the same as he told the leper and the lat-
ter gave him a similar answer. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said: If you were a liar, may Allah (the Exalted) turn you to your pre-
vious state. He said: Then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) went to the blind in the image of a blind man. He (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said: I am a poor man and a traveller. I am
dettached from my kinsfolk during my travels and I will not be able to
reach my people unless through Allah (the Exalted) then through you. I ask
you by the One who gave you back your eyesight an ewe that helps me con-
tinue my travel. He said: I was blind and Allah (the Exalted) gave me back
my eyesight, so take whatever you want and leave whatever you want, and
by Allah (the Exalted) I will not subject you to great stress concerning any-
thing that you take for Allah’s sake. So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said: Cling to your property; verily you were tried and verily
Allah (the Exalted) is satisfied with you and wrathful with your friends». It
was narrated by both.

make it unbearable for you to return something that you take or ask from
my money. It was mentioned by An-Nawawi.

This great Honorable Hadith has a theme: Verily the first two denied
the favour of Allah (the Exalted); they did not acknowledge Allah’s favour,
nor did they attribute the favour to the one who gave it to them, nor did
they perform that which is Allah’s right. Thus Allah’s wrath descended upon
them. As for the blind men he acknowledged Allah’s favour and attributed
it to the one who endowed it and paid that which is Allah’s right. So he de-
served Allah’s satisfaction through his thanking Allah (the Exalted) for the
favour because he mentioned the three pillars of thanking Allah (the Ex-

322

This chapter discusses many issues:
The first: The interpretation of the Holy verse.

The second: The meaning of (... he is sure to say, This is due to my
(merit)).

The third: The meaning of (... He said, This has been given to me be-
cause of a certain knowledge which I have).

The fourth all the great them included in this strange store.

alted) without which cannot be accepted. That is acknowledging favours, at-
tributing them to the one who gave it, and spending it the way he desires.

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said: At the essence of being grateful is acknowledging the favours of
who gave them through submitting to him, loving him and being humble in
front of him. Thus he who doesnot kncw the favour; rather, he was ignor-
ant of it, wouldnot be grateful; he who acknowledges it and did not know
the one who granted it, would not also be thankful. He who acknowledges
favours and the one who granted them, but he denied it in the same way the
one who dented favour, then he would be considered as rejecting it. He who
acknowledges favors and the one who grants them and does not reject it,
but he does not submit to the benefactor, love him or accept him or thank
him; he who knows it and knows the one who grants it and submits to the
one who grants it, loves him and accepts him and uses it as a means of lov-
ing him and obeying him; that is the grateful. Thus to be grateful, it is ne-
cessary for the heart to know and the person to perform accordingly. It is
the tendency to the one who grants favours, loving him and submitting to
him.

His saying: (The people called one filthy as a way of expressing hatred
to see or approach him).

523

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «But when He giveth them a goodly child,
they ascribe to others a share in the gift they have received: But Allah is ex-
alted high above the partners they ascribe to Him». (7: 190).

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter: Allah (the Exalted) has said, «But when He giveth
them a good child, they ascribe to others a share in the gift they have re-
ceived: But Allah is exalted high above the partners they ascribe to Him» (7:
190).

Imam Ahmad (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said about the mean-
ing of this Holy Verse: We were told by Abdes-Samad after Omar ben Ibra-
him after Kutadah after Al-Hasan after Samourah from the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), who said,

376 - «When Hawwa [Eve] delivered, Iblis walked around her and her
children used to die after birth, Iblis told her: Call him Abdel-Hareth, he
will live. She called him Abdel-Hareth and he lived. That was an inspiration
from the Shaitan and of his command». That was also narrated by Ibn Jarir
after Muhammad ben Bashshar Bundar after Abdus-Samad ben Abdul-War-
ith. It was also narrated by At-Tirmithi in the interpretation of this Holy
Verse after Muhammad ben Al-Muthni after Abdes-Samad. And he said:
That is a good and strange Honorable Hadith; we know it only through
Omar ben Ibrahim. It was also narrated by some others after Abdes-Samad.
It was narrated by Al-Hakem in his «Mustadrak» after Abdes-Samad, and
he said that it is an Honorable Hadith that has good references. They [Mos-
lem and Al-Bukhary] did not narrate it. It was also narrated after by Imam
Abu Muhammad ben Abi Hatem in his interpretation after Abi Zaraa Ar-
Razi after Hilal ben Fayyad after Omar ben Ibrahim.

And Ibn Jarir said: We were told by Ibn Waki‘ after Souhail ben You-
suf after Amr after Al-Hasan (they ascribe to others a share in the gift they

524

Ibn Hazm said: They agreed to proscribe every name enslaved [called
Abed] to other than Allah (the Exalted). Such as Abed Omar, Abdul-Kaaba
and the like...

have received). He said: «That was the habit of some of the people of some
creeds and it was not Adam». And we were told by Bishr ben Mouath after
Yazid after Said after Kutada who said: Al-Hasan used to say: «They [The
creeds] were the Jews and the Christians; Allah (the Exalted) endowed them
with children and they Judaized and Christianized». That has a good refer-
ence after Al-Hasan(May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

The religious authority Ibn Kathir said in his interpretation: As for the
reports: Muhammad ben Ishaq said after Dawud ben Al-Houssein after Ik-
rama after Ibn Abbas that, «Hawwa [Eve] used to give birth to Adam’s chil-
dren and she used to call them Allah’s servants such as Abdullah,
Oubeidallah and the like; however, they used to die shortly after birth; so
Iblis came to them and said: Had you called them by other names, they
would have survived. So when she gave birth to a baby boy, he called him
AbdulHareth.

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) sent down the following Holy
verse, «your Guardian-Lord, who created you from a single Person...» (4: 1)
and Al-Awfi said after Ibn Abbas, «Then the Shaitan came to them and
said: Do you know what will be born for you? Or do you know whether it
is going to be a beast or not? Then he adorned that which is bad and un-
truthful for them; he is a skillful linguist; before that she had given birth to
two children who later died. Thereupon the Shaitan told them: Verily if you
do not call your child after me, he will not be born normal; he will die as
the preceding one died. So they called their son Abdel Hareth, thus Allah
(the Exalted) has said: «But when He giveth them a goodly child, they as-
cribe to others a share in the gift then a goodly child, they ascribe to others
a share in the gift they have received: but Allah is exalted high above the
partners they ascribe to Him» (7: 190)».

Something similar was mentioned after Sad ben Joubeir after Ibn Ab-
bas. It was also narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem. He received this Tradition
[Honorable Hadith] after Ibn Abbas a group of his Companions such as
Moujahid, Ikrama and Sad ben Joubeir. And from among the second rank
(of narrators]: Kutadah, As-Sadi and a group of those who came after. And
among the interpreters and those to follow uncountable groups have nar-
rated it. The religious authority Ibn Kathir said: Its origin -and Allah (the
Exalted) knows best- was taken from the people of the book.

525

... with the exception of Abdul Muttaleb.

I said: That is very unlikely.

His saying: (Ibn Hazm said: They agreed to proscribe every named en-
slave [called Abed] to other than Allah (the Exalted) . Such as Abed Omar,
Abdel-Kaaba and the like, with the exception of Abdel-Muttaleb).

Ibn Hazm: He is a religious authority from Andalus. He is Abu Mu-
hammad Ali ben Ahmad ben Sad ben Hazm Al-Kurtobi Ath-Thahiri. He is
the writer of «At-Tasanif» He died in the year 456 A.H. and he was 72
years old.

AbdelMuttaleb is Allah’s Holy Messenger’s grandfather. He is Ibn Ha-
shim ben Abed Munaf. Doubtlessly they are the descendants of Ismail ben
Ibrahim Al-Khalil (May Allah’s peace be upon them).

He (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) narrated the consensus of the sa-
vants concerning proscribing all names enslaved to other than Allah (the Ex-
alted) because it is polytheism in Lordship as well as in Divinity. That is so
because all creatures belong to Allah (the Exalted) and are His servants; He
enslaved them to worship Him Alone and in order to unify Him (the Ex-
alted) in His Lordship and Divinity. Some of them worshipped Allah (the
Exalted) Alone in as far as His Lordship and Divinity are concerned; some
others joined in partners with Him in as far as His Divinity is concerned
while acknolwedged His Lordship, names and attributes, while His predeter-
ministic rules definitely apply to them.

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «But one of the beings in
the Heavens and the earth but must come to (Allah) Most Gracious as a ser-
vant» (19: 93). That is general slavery. As for private slavery, it is particular
to the people of faith and obedience. In that connection He (the Exalted)
has said: «Is not Allah enough for His servant?» (39: 36) and the like.

His saying: (With the exception of Abdel-Muttaleb) that is an exception
from the general because the origin of this name lies in slavery. That is so
because Al-Muttaleb Hashim’s brother came to Medina and his nephew
«Shaiba» had already grown up with his uncles [His mother’s brothers] Bani
An-Najjar from Al-Khazraj because Hisham had married one of their wo-
men; she delivered this son and when he grew up with his uncles and be-
came a teenager; his uncle Al-Muttaleb took him to Mekka his father’s city
and the home of his clan. He brought him to Mekka and when people there
saw him after his skin color changed due to travel in the sun, they thought
that he was Al-Muttaleb’s slave. So they said that is Abdel-Muttaleb, and

526

It was narrated after Ibn Abbas concerning the Holy verse, «He said
when Adam has intercourse with Hawwa, she got pregnant. So Iblis came to
them and said: I am your friend who led you out of the Garden; you must
obey me otherwise I will make to your son the horns of a deer and he will
come out of your belly by cutting it, and I will do such and such, and such
and such. So call him Abdul Hareth. They refused to obey him, and the
child was born dead. Then she got pregnant again, so he came to them and
repeated what he had said and they refused to obey him and once again the
child was born dead. Then she got pregnant again so he came to them and
repeated what he had said; they were overwhelmed by the love of having a
child, so they called him Abdul Hareth, that is why Allah (the Exalted) has
said, «... they ascribe to others a share in the gift they have received». It was
narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem.

And he narrated with good reference after Kutada, «Partners in obey-
ing Him; not in worshipping Him».

And he narrated with good reference after Moujahed concerning (If
thou givest us a goodly child) (7: 189). He said: «They feared that it might
not be a human being.» And he mentioned its meaning after Al-Hassan said
and others.

this name stuck to him and he was only called by it. Also the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said.

377 - «I am the son of Abdel-Muttaleb and he has became aggrandized
among Quraish and among the Arabs, he is the Master of Quraish and the
most honorable in Pre-Islamic times; he is the one who dug [the well] Zam
Zam and watering belonged to him and to his progeny after him. And
«Abdullah» is Allah’s Holy Messenger’s father and he is one of Abdel-Mut-
taleb’s sons. He died while his father was still alive. Al-Hafeth Falah Ed-Din
Al-Alai‘ said in the book «ad-Durra as-Sunnyya fi Mawlid Khair Al-Bar-
1yya». When his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) mother
Amenah became pregnant with him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) his father’s age was eighteen. The latter went to Medina to buy
dates for his family and he died there while he was at his uncles Bani An-
Najjar; the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
was a foetus then,

I said: When his mother gave birth to him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) his grand-father, Abdel-Muttaleb, supported him (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). Al-Hafeth Ath-Thahabi said: His

527

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Proscribing every name enslaved to other than Allah (the Ex-
alted).

The second: The interpretation of the Holy verse.

The third: Verily this kind of polytheism is merely naming the reality of
which was not intended.

The fourth: Verily it is a favour of Allah (the Exalted) when He gives
him a normal baby girl.

The fifth: Those who came before mentioned the difference between
joining in partners in obedience and joining in partners in worship.

(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) father Abdullah died while
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was
twenty-eight months old; it was said that he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) was even younger. It was said: He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) was a foetus. He died in Medina where he
was buying dates and it was said: He was passing by it on his way back
from Ash-Sham and that he lived twenty-five years. Al-Wakidi said: That
confirmed what was said about his age and his death. His mother Amenah
died in Al-Abwa‘ while returning with him (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) to Mekka after visiting the uncles of his (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) father, Bani Adi ben An-Najjar; he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) was then six-years and one
hundred days old; it was said he was four years old. So when his mother
died Um Ayman, and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
was supported by him till he died and the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) was eight years old; then he was
supported by his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) uncle Abi
Taleb. .

His saying: (It was narrated after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be pleased
with them) concerning the Holy verse: We have already discussed something
similar after [bn Abbas.

His saying: (And he narrated with good reference after Kutada, «Part-
ners in obeying; not in worshipping Him (the Exalted).») Our Sheikh (May
Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Verily that is joining in partners in merely
naming and they did not mean its reality desired by Iblis.

528

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «The most beautiful names belong to

Allah: So call on Him by them; but onun such men as use profanity in His
names...» (7: 180).

CAPTER

His saying: (Chapter: Allah (the Exalted) has said: «The most beautiful
names belong to Allah: so call on His by them; but shun such men as use
profanity in Him names...» (7: 180).

378 - It was narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with
him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said: «Verily Allah (the Exalted) has ninety-nine names; one hundred
but one. He who learns them, will be admitted into the Garden. And He
(the Exalted) is One and He loves the odd number». It was narrated by both
in the two Saheehs after Sufyan Ibn Ayyina. It was also narrated by ‏الى‎
‎Bukhary.

379 - It was narrated after Abi Al-Yaman after Abi Az-Zinad after Al-
Araj and was reported by Al-Jawzani after Safwan ben Saleh after Al-Walid
ben Moslem after Shouaib with similar reference. And he added, «He loves
the odd number.» : He is Allah (the Exalted) whom there is no God but
Him, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful, the [one and only] king, the
Holy, Peace, Absolute Master, the Cherished, Almighty, the Proud, the
Creator, the Fashioner, the Subduer, the Donor, the Provider, the Opener
[of the gates of Profit], the Omniscient, the controlling, the Kind, the Low-
erer, the Raiser, the Humiliator, the All-Hearing, the All-seeing, the Judge,
the Just, the Most kind, the all knowing, the tolerant, the All-Forgiving, the
Appreciative, The Most High, the Great, the Guardian Lord, the Nourisher,
the Sufficient, the Exalted, the Generous, the observer, the Responding, the
Rich, the Wise, the Nice, the Glorious, the Inducer, the Witness, the Truth,
the Truster, the Strong, the Enduring, the Harmless Lord, the Reckoner, the

529

Ibn Abi Hatem mentioned after Ibn Abbas, «... use profanity in His
names...» (7: 180) that is to say join in partners».

After Him (the Exalted) they derived the name Lat that is to say from
Ilah, and Uzza from Aziz.

It was narrated after Al-Aamash, «They include in them what is not
really included».

Originator, the Restorer, the Resurrector, the One who takes in Death [the
Deadly], the All-Living, the Eternal, the Exalted Wrathful, the One, the
Matchless, the Singular, the Everlasting, the Capable, the Able, the Advan-
cer, the Delayer, the Last, the Overt, the Covert, the Governor, the Su-
preme, the Charitable, the Most Forgiving, the Most Revengeful, the
Forgiver, the Most Compassionate, the Possessor of all Dominion, to whom
all Exaltedness and Honor belong, Fair, the All-Inclusive, the self-Sufficient,
the Benefactor, the Giver, the Forbidder, the Harmful, the Light, the
Guider, the Maker, the Eternal, the Inheritor, the Wise, the Patient». Then
At-Tirmithi said: That is a strange Honorable Hadith.

380 - It was also narrated after Abi Huraira, we do not know in many
reports the mentioning of names but in this Honorable Hadith. And that
which a group of memorizers [of the Holy Koran and Honorable Hadith] re-
lied on, is that the listing of names is included in it. It is so as was narrated
by Al-Walid ben Moslim and AbdelMalek ben Muhammed who said that it
reached him from many authoritative sources that they said so. That is to
say, that collected [Those beautiful names] from the Holy Koran as was nar-
rated after Jaafer ben Muhammed and Sufyan and Abi Zaid Al-Laghawi
and Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

That was what the religious authority Ibn Kathir mentioned in his inte-
pretation. Then he said: Let it be known that the beautiful names are not
limited to ninety-nine in number. As an evidence for that we mention what
Ahmed narrated after Yazid ben Haroun after his father after ben Masoud
after the Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) who said,

381 - «No one who was afflicted by sorrow or grief and said: O Allah
(the Exalted) I am your servant the son of your servant, the son of our fe-
male servant, you control me; Your rule is executed on me. Your Judgment
and Justice pass on me; I ask You, O’ Allah (the Exalted) by every name
You Possess; you called yourself with or sent down in Your Holy Book or
taught to one of Your creatures or kept unknown to us, to make the Holy
Koran the spring of my heart and the light of my chest and relief of my

530

وى رو فاو رار و واوا و و وها عد و وا ورا. قا را فد عاو عاقاه وراود زر » وقاواه ا عد قاع 8 »د ماود وا ها قا مهو وق قار عا عقاواه قاع بقاع م قفقاع واقافد د قاع فاه اهدو واوا فد فاع ود قا عد يدع .د فدفاع ا مام

grief and the removal of my worry and gloom; Allah (the Exalted) will defi-
nitely remove his worry and grief and replace them by happiness. Thereupon
it was said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him): Shall we learn them? He (May Allah’s biessings and peace be
upon him) said: Yes. The one who hears them should learn them.» It was
narrated by Abu Hatem and Ibn Hibban in his Saheeh.

Al-Awfi said after Ibn Abbas concerning Allah’s (the Exalted) saying,
«Shun such men as profanity in His names...» (7: 180) He said, «Profanity
of atheists if they called Lat with Allah’s (the Exalted) names». Ibn Juraij
said after Moujahid, «Shun such men as use profanity in His names...» He
said: They derived Lat from Allah (the Exalted) and the Uzza from AI-
AZIZ».

Kutada said: «Use profanity: Commit polytheism» and Ali ben Abi Tal-
ha said after Ibn Abbas, «Use profanity: giving the lie to».

And all the [beautiful] names of the Lord (the Exalted) are names and
attributes that define Allah (the Exalted) to His worshippers and indicates
His exaltedness and perfection (Glory be to Him).

He (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Profanity and atheism take
place either by rejecting or by denying them; Either by rejecting their mean-
ings and suspending them or by changing them from that which is correct
and deviating them from the Truth by interpretations, or by making them
names of those creatures, such as the Profanity of the people of Al-Ittihad.
Verily they made them the names of this universe; that which is praised and
that which is dispraised. Till their leader said: He (the Exalted) is the named
by every name that is praised both from a logical point of view, religious
and traditional point of view; and by every name that is dispraised logically,
religiously and traditionally. May Allah (the Exalted) be raised high above
what they say.

I said: And that which is the case of the people of the Honorable
Sunna and consensus; those of them who came before and those who came
later: They confirm the attributes which Allah (the Exalted) used to describe
Himself and which Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) used to describe Him with what fits His Exaltedness
and Majesty; affirming without comparison or likening; desdaining without
suspension. Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said: «There is nothing
whatever like unto Him and He is the One that hears and sees (all things)»
(42: 11). Verily discussing attributes is a branch of discussing the essence
and it follows its example. As it is a must to know that Allah (the Exalted)

531

والقاقاع قفاو فافداق د هاو ده و فاع نا فايع قاع عد عفدف قا فوع ‎SS‏ قاف يفار مقاع وفوا ماف واو ‎DS‏ واورادو ها راود و .ا راع راف مد فاع 6د م

is a true essence that resembles anything of the essence of those created [by
Him (the Exalted)], He possesses true attributes that do not resemble the
attributes of creatures. Thus the one who rejects any attributes that Allah
(the Exalted) used to describe Himself or used by His Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to describe Him, or if this person
interpretes this attribute to mean other than what its meaning is; this person
is a Juhmite and has followed a path other than that of the believers.

In that connection Allah (the Exalted) has said, «If anyone contends
with the Apostle even after guidance has been plainly conveyed to him, and
follows a path other than that becoming to men of Faith, we shall leave him
in the path he has chosen, and land him in Hell, -What an evil refuge!» (4:
115).

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said also:

(A significant Advantage).

That which passes from month to month concerning an attribute of a
report about Allah (Glory be to Him) is divided into sections:

The first: What is related to the very essence, such as your saying: An
essence and existing.

The second: What is related to His (the Exalted) attributes and quali-
ties, such as the All-knowing, the capable, the All-Hearing and the All-see-
ing.

The third: What is related to His (the Exalted) actions such as the Crea-
tor and the Benefactor.

The fourth: Absolute desdaining. It is inescapable, since there is no per-
fection in absolute non being, such as the Peace and the all-Holy.

The fifth: It was not mentioned by most people- it is the name
indictating a group of various attributes that does not specialize in a specific
attribute, rather, it indicates many meanings such as the Glorious, the
Mighty and the Everlasting. Verily the Glorious is the one who has many
and varied attributes of the attributes of perfection; he is a subject to
increase ability and greatness. It is said (the Glorious Lord of the Throne)
as an attribute of the Throne due to his ability, greatness and honor. Just
imagine how this name was associated by Allah commanding the Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) to pray as he
taught us because He is in the rank of requesting more; the request included
a name that He (the Exalted) requires; as you say: [O Allah (the Exalted)]

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Affirming the [Beautiful] names [of Allah (the Exalted)].

The second: [Those names] being beautiful.

The third: Commanding us to call on Him (the Exalted) by using them.
The fourth: Teaching those ignorant and atheist opposses.

The fifth: Explaining atheism through them.
The sixth: Warning and threatening those who are atheists.

forgive me, and be merciful to me; you are the All-Forgiving and Most
Merciful. That is interceding by using His names and attributes and that is
among the fastest means of intercession and mostly loved by Allah (the
Exalted). In that connection the following Honorable Hadith was narrated.

382 - «Seek refuge by: O’ You to whom all Glory and all Honor be-
long». and,

383 - «O’ Allah I ask you by all Praise which belongs to You; there is
no God but You; You are the Benefactor, the Creator of Heavens and
earth; O’ You who possess all Glory and all Honor». That is a request
pleading Him through praising and by saying that there is no God but Him;
the Benefactor who is pleading to Him by using His names. O how that
pleading deserves to be answered and how great it is. That is a very impor-
tant door of the doors of Monotheism.

The sixth: An additional attribute that takes place by associating two
names or two attributes. That incerases their meaning; for example, the All-
Forgiving the Able, The Glorious, the Harmless and the rest of the attri-
butes associated with other attributes and names associated with other
names in the Holy Koran. Verily the Rich and the Glorious are attributes of
perfection. When they are associated they lead to another perfection; He is
praised through His richness and through His Glory and is praised through
their association; the same goes for the All-Forgiving, the Able, the Mighty,
the Wise, and the Glorious, the Harmless. So think about Him; He (the Ex-
alted) is the most Honored of knowledge.

533

Chapter

It cannot be said, «May peace be upon Allah (the Exalted)».

It was narrated in the Saheeh after Ibn Masoud (May Allah be pleased
with him), «We were with the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) praying. We said: The salutations be upon Allah (the
Exalted) before His servants; may peace be upon so and so. So the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Do not say
peace be upon Allah (the Exalted). Verily Allah (the Exalted) is the Peace».

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter: It cannot be said, «May peace be upon Allah (the
Exalted)»).

His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh after [bn Massoud... etc)
This Honorable Hadith was narrated by Al-Bukhary, Moslem, Abu Dawud,
An-Nasai and Ibn Maja.

384 - It was narrated after Abdullah ben Masoud (May Allah be
pleased with him), «We sat with Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) in order to pray and we said: May peace be
upon Allah (the Exalted) before it is upon His servants; May peace be upon
so and so ... till the end of the Honorable Hadith». And at its end the last
testification: [There is no God but Allah (the Exalted) and Muhammad 1s
Allah’s Holy Messenger] was mentioned. It was narrated by At-Tirmithi
after Al-Aswad ben Yazid after Ibn Masoud.

385 - He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) mentioned in
the Honorable Hadith the reason for such prohibition by saying, «Verily
Allah (the Exalted) is the Peace and all Peace comes from Him.» And the
Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) used to ask
for Allah’s forgiveness after each required prayer by saying, «O Allah, You
are the Peace and all peace comes from You; be raised far above of You to

534

يي يي يع يي ع ع ع ع ع ع ع م م م ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا اي ا ‎a‏

whom all Glory and all Honor belongs».

386 - It was mentioned in the Honorable Hadith, «Verily this is the
greetings of the people of the Garden to their Lord may He be blessed and
raised far above».

387 - In the «Holy Verses] sent down that which indicates that the Lord
may He be blessed and raised above greets them in the Garden. In that con-
nection He (the Exalted) has said,

His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying: «Verily
Allah (the Exalted) is Peace». Means that Allah (the Exalted) is complete of
all deficiency and all similitude; He (the Exalted) is described as possessing
all perfection, high above any defects.

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim said in «Badai Al-Fawaid»:
There are two famous sayings:

The first: Verily Peace here is Allah (Glory be to Him) and this means:
May His (the Exalted) blessings descend on you. So this meaning was cho-
sen from His names; the names «Peace» regardless of other names.

The second: Verily peace means safety and soundness and that is re-
quired and used at salutation. Those who believe so give the following rea-
soning: Verily it is not used with a definite article [The] so the Moslem
would say: «Peace be upon you». Had it been one of Allah’s names, it
would not have been used as such. Another reason they give: This meaning
is not intended; rather, that which is intended is announcing safety both by
informing about it as well as by good wish.

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said: The final decision is: Both opinions are right; it is correct to com-
bine the two; verily that is shown in a principle which is: Verily it is the
right of who invokes Allah (the Exalted) by His beautiful names to ask for
anything and intercede by using the name required for the specific matter;
the invoker asks for the intercession of Allah (the Exalted) and pleads to
Him. He said: O my Lord forgive me and pardon me, You are the All-for-
giving the All-Pardoning. This person has asked for two matters and
pleaded by using two names of His names which are necessary for that to

happen.

388 - He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) told Abi Bakr
(May Allah be pleased with him) when he asked him (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) to teach him a phrase he may use to invoke Allah

535

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Explaining Peace.

The second: It 15 a way of greeting.

The third: It is invalid to direct it to Allah (the Exalted).

The fourth: The reason for that.
The fifth: Teaching them the greeting suitable for Allah (the Exalted).

(the Exalted), «Say: O Allah I have verily done much wrong to myself; none
can forgive sins but You, may Thou grant me forgiveness from You and be
merciful to me You are the All-Forgiving, the Most Gracious».

Thus when the context is that of requesting safety which is more impor-
tant to a man, it was requested through saying one of the names of Allah |
(the Exalted) namely «Peace» from whom safety is requested. Thus the term
«Peace» denotes two meanings: The first: Invoking Allah (the Exalted); the
second: requesting safety and that is the aim of a Moslem. Thus the term
«May Peace be upon you», includes one of Allah’s names as well as request-
ing safety from Him. Thereupon think about this advantage. Its reality is:
Innocence, salvation, and safety from evil and deficiencies.

389 - «O My Lord save, save». It is also said Sallam [Derived from
peace and safe meaning handed in] That is to say he received it and does
not share it with anybody. He (the Exalted) has said, «That is to say exclu-
sively his; no one shares ownership with him. Also the term peace which is
the opposite of war is derived from it: Because each one of the fighting par-
ties is saved from the harm of the Other. Also the sound [as-Salim] heart
means the heart which is pure from impurities. It really means: This heart is
purely for Allah (the Exalted), it is safeguarded against polytheism and
other impurities as well as against sins and infringements; this heart is
straight, truthful concerning its love [of Allah (the Exalted) ] and the good
treatment. Such guarantees safety from Allah’s torture and secures winning
His miracles. From this term, the term Islam was derived, it means surren-
dering and submitting oneself to Allah (the Exalted) and getting rid of impu-
rities of polytheism; so he is safeguarded only to his Lord (the Exalted), like
a slave who is kept only for his master without being shared with other con-
flicting partners. That is why Allah (the Exalted)has given these examples to
the Moslem who is Faithful to his Lord and to the one joining in partners
with Him (the Exalted).

536

Chapter

His saying: «O Allah (the Exalted) forgive me if you wish».

It was narrated in the Saheeh after Abi Huraira that Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, [Let none of
you say: O Allah (the Exalted) forgive me if you wish; O Allah (the Exalted)
be Merciful to me if you wish; rather, let him resolve the matter [without
saying: If you wish] since verily there is no one who can curse Allah (the Ex-
alted)».

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter: Saying, «O Allah (the Exalted) forgive me if you
wish».

This means that it is not allowable because forbidding it has been men-
tioned in the Honorable Hadith of this chapter.

390 - His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh after Abi Huraira that
verily Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said: «Let none of you say: O Allah (the Exalted) forgive me if You
wish; O Allah (the Exalted) be merciful to me if you wish rather, let him re-
solute the matter [without saying if You wish], since verily there is no one
who can detest Allah (the Exalted)». That is in contradistinction to the ser-
vant; he would respond to the one asking him to do something either be-
cause he needs him, or because he fears him or because he hopes or expects
something from him; he would satisfy the other’s need while he hates to sa-
tisfy it. Thus it is suitable for the one asking for something from another
creature to suspend the fulfilment of this need on the volition of the respon-
sible person out of fear of giving him whatever he requests unwilingly’; that
is in contradistinction to the Lord of the worlds (the Exalted), since that is
not suitable to be said about Him because of His self- sufficiency, and per-
fection of generosity; all are in need of Him, they cannot do without Him

537

ever for a blink of an eye.

391 - It was narrated in the Honorable Hadith, «Allah’s (the Exalted)
right hand is full [with what to give]; it is not diminished by charge, it gives.
during the day and night. Have you seen what He has spent since He cre-
ated the Heavens and earth? What is in His right hand has not diminished;
in His (the Exalted) other hand there is which He (the Exalted) lowers or
raises». He (the Exalted) grants because of His wisdom and holds back be-
cause of His wisdom; He is the All-knowing, All-Wise. So it is proper for
the one who asks Allah (the Exalted) for something to resolute the matter
[without saying if you wish] since He (the Exalted) does not endow His ser-
vant unwillingly nor because of the importance of a certain issue.

Verily a servant once give and many times holds back and He may give
unwillingly; stinginess is more prevailing [as a quality of his]..As for his pre-
sent state, whatever he gives is not great. As for what Allah (the Exalted)
gives to His servants, such is permenant and continuous. He endows even
without asking since the sperm has been put in the womb. So His favours
on the foetus which in his mother’s womb are plenty; He develops; when his
mother delivers him, his parents will be kind to him and He (the Exalted)
brings him up till he becomes independent; he enjoys Allah’s favours all
through his life. If his life was full of Faith and Piety, Allah’s favours would
be increased for him after he is taken into death times and those favours he
enjoyed in the presentlife. Favours that cannot be counted but by Allah (the
Exalted). Those are [The favours] from what Allah (the Exalted) has pre-
pared for His pious and believing servants.

Every thing that a servant gets during his present life even though some
of them reach him through another creature; they reach him after Allah’s
permission, volition, and benefaction granted to His servant. Verily Allah
(the Exalted) is the Praised and thanked for all these favours; He (the Ex-
alted) is the One who desires them, predestine them, bestow them [upon His
servants] because of His generosity and benefaction. All favours belong to
Him; all grace belongs to Him; and all good praise belongs to Him (the Ex-
alted).

Concerning that He has said: «And ye have no good thing but is from
Allah: and moreover, when ye are touched by distress, unto Him ye cry with
groans». (16: 53) He (the Exalted) may detain when He is asked by His ser-
vant only because of a wisdom and knowledge with what corrects His ser-
vant; He (the Exalted) might delay giving His servant what he asked, till the

538

And Moslem said, «Let one ask for something great; verily there is
nothing great for Allah (the Exalted) to give».

This Chapter discusses many issues:

The First: Forbidding exclusion while invoking Allah (the Exalted).
The second: Showing the reason for that.

The third: His saying, «Let him resolve the matter.

The fourth: Making that which 15 desired greater.

The fifth: Rationalizing this.

predestined time reaches, or may be to give him more. Blessed is Allah; the
Lord of the worlds.

392 - His saying: (And Moslem said, «Let one ask for something great»
That is to say while asking his need from his Lord (the Exalted); He verily
gives that which is glorious and magnificent because He is generous, open-
handed and graceful. Verily there is nothing magnificent or glorious in front
of Allah even though the creature sees it as magnificent or glorious, because
the one who asks a creature, does not ask him but that which is easy for
him; that is in contradistinction with the Lord of the worlds since verily His
gift is volition. He has said: «Verily, when He intends a thing, His command
is «Be», and it is! » (36: 82). Thereupon Glory be to the one who predeter-
mines lots for the creatures, there is no God but Him and no Lord but Him
(the Exalted).

539

Chapter

(One should not say: My slave and my female slave).

It was narrated in the Saheeh after Abi Huraira that Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «None of you is
to say feed your Lord or clean your Lord; he should say my Chief and my
Master. None of you should say: My slave and my female slave; he should
say my boy or my girl».

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter: One should not say: My slave and my female
slave).

He mentioned the Honorable Hadith narrated in the Saheeh (It was
narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with him) that Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:

393 - «No one of you is to say feed Your Lord or perform ablution to
your Lord; he should say my master and my chief. None of you should say
my slave and my female slave; he should say my boy and my girl and my
lad»).

These are the forbidden terms even though linguistically they exist. Ve-
rily the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) pro-
scribed them in order to verify and block the way for all the rationalizations
of polytheism because those terms denote joining in partners [with Allah
(the Exalted)]. That is so because Allah (the Exalted) is the Lord of all ser-
vants, no if it was generalized to other, this person would share Him the
name. Thus such is forbidden even though committing polytheism concern-
ing the Lordship has not been intended; Lordship which is an attribute of
Allah (the Exalted). However, the meaning says that such person also pos-
sesses such an attribute, thus proscribing it in order to resolve the issue of
comparison [committing polytheism] between the Creator [Allah (the Ex-
alted)] and the created [Man] as well as to achieve Monotheism and getting

540

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Forbidding people from saying: My slave and my female
slave.

The second: A servant should not say: My Lord or feed your lord.

The third: Teaching the first to say my boy, my girl and my lord.

The fourth: Teaching the second to say my master and my chief.

The fifth: Drawing attention to the goal; it is achieving unification even
in using terms.

away from polytheism even in the use of terms. That is among the best
goals of legislation because of the aggrandizing of the Lord and because it is
far away from comparing Him to the creatures; consequently, he (May Al-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) guided them to what stands for those
[proscribed] terms. That is saying, «My master and my chief». The same
thing goes for his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying:
«None of you should say my slave and my female slave». Because slaves are
Allah’s (the Exalted) slaves only and female slaves are Allah’s (the Exalted)
female slaves only.

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Not one of the being in
the Heavens and the earth but must come to (Allah) Most Gracious as a ser-
vant» . (19: 93). Thus attributing those two terms to other than Allah (the
Exalted) is joining in partners. Thereupon he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) forbade them from that in order to aggrandize Allah
(the Exalted) as good manners and departing from polytheism while achiev-
ing unification. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) guided
them to say: «My boy, my girl, and my lad». That is his (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) way of protecting unification; verily he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) taught his people all that benefits
them and forbade them from performing all that leads to deficient religious
practices. There is no good but he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) guided them to it especially when unification is concerned; there is no
evil but he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) warned them
against, especially if it brought them closer to polytheism whether it were by
words or not intended. All success is through Allah (the Exalted) .

541

Chapter

(The one who asks by Allah (the Exalted) is not to be turned down)

It was narrated after Ibn Omar (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said, «He who asks by Allah (the Exalted) should be given...

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter: The one who asks by Allah (the Exalted) is not to
be turned down).

394 - The literal meaning of the Honorable Hadith is forbidding to turn
down the one who asks if he asks by Allah (the Exalted). However, this gen-
eral and apparent meaning needs clarification and explanation according to
what was mentioned in the Holy Koran and in the Honorable Sunna. Thus
if the one requesting something that is his right such as the treasury, should
be given as such as he needs and deserves; that is an obligation. Also is the
one in need asks from a person who has extra money, this person should
give him relative to state and case of the one asking for money, especially if
he asks someone who does not have extra money; it is recommendable that
this person gives him relative to his own state in a way that does not cause
harm to him or to his own family and tf he were much in need he should
give him what dispels his need.

The rank of spending is among the highest ranks of religion; people
vary concerning it in as much as their nature possess of generosity and open-
handedness the opposite of which are stinginess and avarice. The first 15
praised by the Holy Koran and the honorable Sunna while the second is dis-
praised. Verily Allah (the Exalted) nas urged His servants to spend because
of the importance of its benefit and the ampleness of its reward.

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «O ye who believe! Give
of the good things which ye have (honourably) earned, and of the fruits of

542

الم لع م جام ما فاه مده و و وا قاو فوا واه قافا ها راود ف و .ا هارا واو او فاراوار ارام اواو مار واو و ف فاي و فارامام ا مد ود .انافاه مد عع مد فارع ددج تدع ع م 5ت ع د جد ع9 5 9595 *

the earth which we have produced for you, and do not even aim at getting
anything which is bad, in order ye may give away something, when ye your-
selves would not receive it except with closed eyes. And know that Allah is
Free of all wants, and worthy of all praise. The evil one threatens you with
poverty and bids you to conduct unseemly. Allah promiseth you His forgive-
ness and bounties. And Allah careth for all and He knoweth all things». (2:
267-268). He (the Exalted) has also said: «And spend (in charity) out of the
(substance) whereof He has made you heirs» (57: 7). Such spending is con-
sidered among the characteristics of piety mentioned in His saying: «It is not
righteousness that ye turn your faces towards east or west; but it is rightous-
ness to believe in Allah and the Last Day, and the angels, and the Book,
and the Messengers; to spend of your substance, out of love for Him, for
your kin, for orphans, for the needy, for the wayfarer, for those who ask...»
(2: 177).

Thus He (the Exalted) mentioned it (spending) after mentioning the fun-
damentals of Faith and before mentioning the prayer. That - and Allah (the
Exalted) knows best - because its benefit is excessive. Allah (the Exalted) has
also mentioned it among the deeds which He (the Exalted) commanded His
worshippers to perform, and He (the Exalted) considered it among the acts
of worship and promised them great reward [if they performed it]. He (the
Exalted) has said, «For Muslim men and women, for believing men and wo-
men, for devouted men and women, for true men and women, for men and
women who are patient and constant, for men and women who humble
themselves, for men and women who give in charity, for men and women
who fast (and deny themselves), for men and women who guard their chas-
tity, and for men and women who engage much in Allah’s praise, for them
has Allah prepared forgiveness and reward». (33: 35).

The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) used
to urge his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) Companions to
give charity, even women; he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
guided the nation of Islam to what benefits them whether sooner or later.
Allah (the Exalted) has commanded Al-Ansar [supporters of the Holy Pro-
phet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)] because they favor
[others to themselves]. Thereupon Allah (the Exalted) has said, «But give
them preference over themselves, even though poverty was their (own lot).
And those saved from the covetousness of their own souls, -they are the
ones that achieve prosperity». (59: 9) And preference is considered among
the best habits of the believer as the mentioned Holy verse says.

543

... and he who seeks refuge by Allah (the Exalted), should be helped; he who
called upon you should be answered and he who did something good to you
should be rewarded; verily if you could not find what to reward him with,
invoke [Allah (the Exalted)] for his sake till you fancy that you have re-
warded him». This was narrated by Abu Dawud and An-Nasai and is sup-
ported by truthful reference.

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Helping the one who seeks refuge with Allah (the Exalted).
The second: Give the one who asks Allah (the Exalted).

The third: Answering the call.

The fourth: Rewarding a favour.

The fifth: Verily invoking Allah (the Exalted) can be a reward if one
cannot reward with maternal things.

The sixth: Saying: Till you fancy that you have rewarded him.

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And they feed, for the
love of Allah, the indigent, the orphan, and the capture, (saying), we feed
you for the sake of Allah, Alone: No reward do we desire from you, nor
thanks». (76: 8).

The Holy verses and the Honorable Hadiths concerning the virtue of
charity are plenty; he who works for the Afterlife desires in that and en-
courages others to do it. All success is through Allah (the Exalted) .

His saying: (He who calls upon you should be answered) that is among
the rights that Moslems mutually share: Responding to the call of a Mos-
lem; that is among the causes of love and unity among the Moslem.

His saying: (He who do a favour should be rewarded). He (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) charged them with rewarding others for
favours since verily a reward for a favour is considered of the dignity loved
by Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) as was shown by this Honorable Hadith. No one
ignores a reward in return of a favour but those who are mean and ignoble;
some mean people reward others by doing harm to them in return of fa-
vours. We ask Allah (the Exalted) for forgiveness, and good health in the
present life and in the Afterlife. The people of Faith and piety verily drive
away harm and evil doing by performing charity as in obedience to Allah
(the Exalted) and performing what He (the Exalted) loves and accepts for
them.

544

sss se : : : : : : : : : : : : : me ee : : : em "٠ ‏د د د دس دنس س يده‎ we ee ‏اي ا ا‎ ee ee et ee

Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said: «Repel evil with that which
is best: We are well acquainted with the things they say. And say, O My
Lord! I seek refuge with thee from the suggestions of the evil ones. And |
seek refuge with Thee, O my Lord! Lest they should come near me» (23: 96-
97) and He (the Exalted) has said, «Repel [Evil] with what is better: Then
will he between whom and thee was hatred become as it were thy friend and
intimate! And no one will be granted such goodness except those who exer-
cise patience and self-restraint, none but persons of the greatest good for-
tune». (41: 34-35) and those are whom Allah (the Exalted) has already
granted happiness.

His saying: (So if you couldnot find something to reward him with, in-
voke [Allah (the Exalted)] for his sake), he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) guided them that invoking Allah (the Exalted) for the sake of
the one who has done them a favour in case they did not fancy that the re-
ward for the favour was enough; he would invoke Allah (the Exalted) a rela-
tive to the favour.

His saying: (Fancy that you have rewarded him) or maybe you know
[That you have rewarded him. What was mentioned in the Sunan of Abi
Dawud after Ibn Omar supports that.

395 - «Till you know».

296 - «You should answer the request of the one who asks you by
Allah (the Exalted). And Abi Dawud said in the narration of Abi Nouhaik
after Ibn Abbas,.

397 - «Give whoever asks you for the sake Allah (the Exalted). And in
Oubeid Allah Al-Qawariri’s narration of this Honorable Hadith,

398- «Give whoever asks you by Allah (the Exalted)» as was narrated
in Ibn Omar’s Honorable Hadith.

545 .

Chapter

(Nothing can be asked for the sake but the Garden) of Allah (the Ex-
alted).

It was narrated after Jaber: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said, «Nothing can be asked for the sake of
Allah (the Exalted) but the Gardem». It was narrated by Abu Dawud.

CHAPTER

[115 saying: (Chapter: Nothing can be asked for the sake of Allah (the
Exalted) but the Garden).

Jaber said -It was narrated by Abu Dawud after Jaber: Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:

399 - «Nothing can be asked by the face of Allah (the Exalted) but the
Gardem».

Here is a question: It was mentioned in the Holy Prophet’s (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) invocation when he left At-Taif
when they be lied to him and to those Meccan residing in At-Taif.
Thereupon the Holy Prophet (May Alliah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
used the reported invocation.

400 - «O Allah (the Exalted) to You I express my weakness, insuffi-
ciency of my strength and the people’s humiliating me; you are the Lord of
the oppressed and You are my Lord; to whom do You assign me? To a far
awav person who frowns at me or to an enemy whom you made him con-
trol me? If you werenot wrathful at me, then I would not complain; how-
ever, Your protection is more ample for me» and at the end of this
Honorable Hadith he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said,
«I seek refuge with the light of your face, from which all darkness becomes
bright and the state of the present life and the Afterlife become straight, to
save me from Your Wrath, and anger. [O Allah (the Exalted)] blame me till
You become satisfied and there is no strength or might but by You.

546

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: Forbidding people from asking by Allah’s face but for the
most significant of requests.

The third: Confirming the attribute of face.

401 - «O Allah (the Exalted) You are the One who deserves to be in-
voked most and who deserves to be worshipped most- and at its end- I seek
refuge with your light coming from Your face for which the Heavens and
the earth have brightened.» And in another version of this Honorable Ha-
dith, «I seek refuge with Allah’s generous face and with Allah’s magnificient
name and with His perfect words, against the evil of the poisonous and the
evil eye and against any evil that You created. O! Lord, and against the evil
of this day and the days to come and against the evil of the present life and
that of the Afterlife». Such examples in the Honorable Hadiths are reported
and supported by truthful or good references which are plenty.

Thereupon the answer: Verily what has been mentioned from that is a
request concerning what brings one closer to the Garden or prevents him
from committing acts that prevent him from entering the Garden. This he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) has asked by Allah’s face
and by the light shining from Allah’s (the Exalted) face what brings him clo-
ser to the Garden as has been mentioned in the Honorable Hadith.

402 - «O Allah (the Exalted) I ask You to admit me into the Garden
and to endow me with whatever act or words that bring me closer to it and
I seek refuge with You against Hell-Fire and whatever acts or words that
bring me closer to it». That is in contradistinction with what is related to
the present life such as asking for money, prosperity, livelihood and afflu-
ence as an expression of desires of the present life; that is regardless of the
fact that he wanted whatever helps him in his Afterlife. It is doubtless that
the Honorable Hadith indicated that it-is forbidden to ask for the present
life needs by using Allah’s face. Accordingly there is no contradiction be-
tween the Honorable Hadiths; this can not be concealed. And Allah (the Ex-
alted) knows best.

The Honorable Hadith mentioned in this chapter is among the evidence
frequently reported in the Holy Koran and the Honorable Sunna confirming
Allah’s face. Verily it is a quality of perfection: And negating it is the ut-
most degree of deficiency and comparison by those deficient. It is like their
negation of all qualities or some of them so they got caught in something
more serious than that from which they escaped from. May Allah be raised
far above what those wrong doers say. The way of the people of Sunna and

547

Ce ‏ةا ران راس رار رو رار ل ري زر ور‎ ee eee OE ‏رم مراف واو و عا لف ةد‎ EE Re EEE Re Dee He EH eee Ee Ee Ee ‏م هد د‎ EE ‏ع ع ع عه م ع‎ 5 ee

consensus whether those who came before or those who will come after is
the following: Believing in whatever Allah (the Exalted) used to describe
Himself in His Holy Book as well as in whatever His Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) used to describe Him (the Exalted)
in his Sunna in a way appropriate for His Glory and Exaltedness. Thus they
confirm to Him what he confirmed to Himself (the Exalted) in His Holy
Koran and what His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) confirmed; they deny that He (the Exalted) resembles any crea-
ture. As the essence of the Lord (the Exalted) does not resemble other es-
sences, His attributes do not resemble other attributes of creatures. Thus he
who rejects them has negated or denied His perfection.

Chapter

(What was mentioned about «If»)

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «They say (to themselves): If we had had
anything to do with this affair, we should not have been in the slaughter
here». (3: 154).

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter: What was mentioned about «If»).

That is to say warning against it and prohibiting it when one faces hate-
ful matters, such as disasters when brought by destiny because it [If] denotes
impatience and sorrow for what happened; that which cannot be recovered.
Verily one’s duty is to accept and surrender to destiny and perform required
worship which is staying patient about that hateful matter that afflicted the
servant. And believing in destiny is one of the six fundamental bases of
Faith. The writer introduced the definite article to «if» thus saying «The if»
and this does not denote a definition.

His saying: (Allah (the Exalted) has said, «They say (To themselves): If
we had had anything to do with this affair, we should not have been in the
slaughter here». (3: 154).

Some of the hypocrites said on the day of the Battle of Uhud: Because
of their fear, worry and weakness.

Ibn Ishaq said: Yahya ben Az-Zoubeir told me after his father Abdul-
lah. Az-Zoubeir said, ‏ش‎

403 - «I was with Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) when we were so much frightened when Allah made us
to sleep. There was not a man among us but his beard was touching his
chest. He said: By Allah (the Exalted) I can hear what Mou‘tab ben Kous-
hair is saying; I can hear it as if I were dreaming: If we had had anything to
do with this affair, we should not have been in the slaughter here. So I

549

And He (the Exalted) has said, «(They are) the one that say, (of their
brethren slain), while they themselves sit (at ease), If only they had listened

to us, they would not have been slain.» (3: 168).

memorized it, then Allah (the Exalted) sent the following Holy verse con-
cerning it, «They say (To themselves): If we had had anything to do with
this affair, we should not have been in the slaughter here». (3: 154).» It was
narrated by Ibn Abi Hatem.

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say: Even if you had remained in your
homes, those for whom death was decreed would certainly have gone forth
to the place of their death...» (3: 154).

The religious authority Ibn Kathir said: (They are ithe ones that say of
their brethren slain, while they themselves sit (at lase). If only they had lis-
tened to us, they would not have been slain, that is to say had they listened
to our advice by staying home and not going [to fight] they would not have
been killed with those who were killed. Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Say:
Avert death from your own selves, if ye speak the truth» (3: 168). That is to
say if sitting at ease saves the person from killing and death, then you
would not die while death is surely coming to you even if you live in towers
built up strong and high, so dispel death if you were truthful.

Mujahid said after Jaber ben Abdullah: «This Holy verse was sent
down concerning Abdullah ben Oubay and his companions». This means
that he is the one who said so. Also Al-Baihagi said after Anas that Abu
Talha said, «We felt sleepy while we were preparing for the battle of Uhud;
my sword fell from my hand and I picked it up and it fell and I picked it
up. He said: While the other party - the hypocrites - were only concerned
with themselves; the most coward and frightened people (Moved by wrong
suspicions of Allah- suspicions due to ignorance. (3: 154) They are definitly
people suspicious of Allah (the Exalted)».

His saying: (... was stirred to anxiety by their own feelings) that is to
say they cannot sleep due to worry, anxiety and fear (Moved by wrong sus-
picions of Allah -suspicions due to ignorance).

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: When he men-
tioned what Abdullah ben Oubay said during the battle of Uhud. He said:
When he was led down on the day of the battle of Uhud he said: «He drops
my opinion and takes the opinion of youngsters?» Or as he said... many peo-
ple turned the Moslems down and left the battlefield many of whom were
not hypocrites before. Those were Moslems and they were believers and that

550

{It was narrated in the Saheeh after Abi Huraira that Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Seek whatever

benefits you and ask for Allah’s help and never become powerless»...

is the light which Allah (the Exalted) gave as an example. Had they died be-
fore the affliction and before hypocrisy. They would not have died as Mos-
lems and they wouldnot have been considered true believers as those
believers who were tried and stuck to their belief during the affliction, nor
among the true hypocrites who rejected faith. That is the case with many
Moslems in our times or may be most of them who when afflicted by disas-
ter which shakes the faith of those who are faithful; their faith diminishes
much and many of them became hypocrites. Among them are those who
overtly declared dropping Islam in case the enemy was winning and we have
seen examples about that and others have learned lessons. And if good
health or if the Moslems were out numbering their enemies they would be-
come Moslems and they believe in messengers both covertly and overtly;
however, it is a faith that does not hold during affliction; that is why those
people more frequently drop their religious duties and do that which is pro-
scribed those are the people who said we believed and they were told.

That is to say absolute Faith; that Faith of the true believers. Verily
that is the faith which was absolutely mentioned in Allah’s Holy Koran, as
have been indicated by the Holy Koran and the Honorable Sunna, so they
did not become suspicious at times of affliction that decreases Faith from
the hearts.

His saying: And we have seen examples about that and others have
learned lessons.

I said: We also have learned lessons from that when the enemy won;
they helped the enemy against the Moslems, suspected religion and criticized
it, showed enmity and did their best to put off the light of Islam and to ex-
tinguish the Moslems and the list is long. All aid is from Allah (the Ex-
alted).

His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh) that is to say the Saheeh of
Moslem who narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with him)
that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said:

404 - «Seek...the Hadith».

The writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) had briefly introduced
this Honorable Hadith; in full it says: It was narrated after the Holy Pro-

551

... and if you were afflicted with something do not say: Had I done such
and such a thing, such and such would have happened; rather, you should
say: Allah (the Exalted) has predestined; He (the Exalted) has done whatever
He wishes. Verily the term <if opens the way for the Shaitan to interfere».

phet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) that he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said, «A strong believer is seen by Allah
(the Exalted) as better than a weak believer, he is loved by Allah (the Ex-
alted) more as well. Concerning all that is good, make whatever benefits
you». That is to say concerning your living and your Afterlife. What is de-
sired here is to seek doing all that which leads to the benefit of the servant
in his present and Afterlife; all that Allah (the Exalted) has allowed His ser-
vants to perform; all those matters preferred, required and allowed.

In case he behaved as such the servant would be asking for the help of
Allah (the Exalted) regardiess of all others so that benefit can be achieved,
while only depending on Allah (the Exalted) because He is in the One who
created the cause and the effect; no cause can benefit such person unless
Allah (the Exalted) benefits him with it. Thus his dependence in seeking the
cause is on Allah (the Exalted) and seeking the cause is a Sunna and
depending on Allah (the Exalted) is unification. So if the person does them
both, he will get what he desires after Allah’s permission.

His saying: (And never become powerless) He (May Allah's blessings
and peace be upon him) forbade him from becoming weak and he dispraised
weakness. Weakness is religiously and logically dispraised. It was mentioned
in the Honorable Hadith.

405 - «The shrewd person is a person who opposes his desires and
works for the Afterlife; the weak is the one who follows his desires and asks
Allah (the Exalted) to give him his desires». Thereupon he (May Allah's
blessings and peace be upon him) guided him through this Honorable Ha-
dith not to say when afflicted: Had I done such and such a thing, this or
that would not have happened; rather, he should say: Allah (the Exalted)
has predestined and He (the Exalted) has done whatever He (the Exalted)
wished. That is to say, the destiny determined by Allah (the Exalted) and
the duty is to surrender to destiny, accept it and be rewarded for that.

His saying: (Verily the term «If» opens the way for the Shaitan to inter-
fere). That is to say because of regretting what passes and lamenting and
blaming fate, and that is incompatible with acceptance and patience; Pa-
tience in duty; believing in destiny is an obligation. Concerning that Allah
(the Exalted) has said: «No misfortune can happen on earth or in your souls

552

وأوا ىا وام قد ود ما عد م قاف .د ودر قد ها راف ماه ها وا زا رام دقان فوا مان را و واه نا مار قا واه جالا فاو عار ماع ند وام فا عا لاه مد تعد عد م مج مدع 5 > 6ع عت > ‎٠.‏ 5 5 5 ع ع د 5 5 5 5

but is recorded in a decree before we bring it into existence: That is truly
easy for Allah: In order that ye may not despair over matters that pass by
you nor exult over favours bestowed upon you. For Allah loveth not any
vain glorious boaster». (57-22-23).

The prince of all believers, Ali ben Abi Taleb (May Allah be pleased
with him) said, «Patience is a type of Faith; it is as important as the head is
to the body». Imam Ahmad said: «Allah (the Exalted) mentioned patience in
ninety places of the Holy Koram».

Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said and he men-
tioned the Honorable Hadith mentioned in this chapter in full- then he said
concerning its meaning, «Never fail to perform a command; never fear in
front of fate; some people combine the two evils, so the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ordered [People] to seek that
which is beneficial and to ask for Allah’s (the Exalted) help. Command ne-
cessitates obligation; otherwise, preference; he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) forbade (people) to be feeble and said:

406 - «Verily Allah (the Exalted) blames for weakness». And the weak
and disabled is the opposite of (Those who win) thus commanding people to
be patient and forbidding them from becoming weak are two things that AI-
lah (the Exalted) commanded people to qualify with in many places of the
Holy Koran. That is so because man is between two commands: A com-
mand that he was commanded to perform; thus he must perform and adhere
to it and ask for Allah’s help without becoming weak; a command which af-
flicted him without performing it; he must be patient and never become ter-
rified by it. That is why some reasonable persons said -Ibn Al-Mougqaffa
and others- Commands are of two kinds: One what has energy and which
you donot fail unable to perform; another which has no energy so do not be
terrified to face. That is in all cases but for the case of the believer: That
which has strength is that which Allah (the Exalted) has commanded [peo-
ple] to perform. Verily Allah (the Exalted) has not commanded him but to
do that which he is able and powerful enough to perform; since verily Allah
(Glory be to Him) does not place a burden on a soul greater than it can
bear; He (the Exalted) commanded him to perform all benefaction that he is
able to perform.

That which he is not able to perform is that which afflicted him with-
out doing it. And the names of good deeds and bad deeds discuss two sec-
tions: Deeds such as He (the Exalted) has said: «He that doeth- good shall
have ten times as much to his credit: He that doeth evil shall only be recom-

553

This chapter discusses many issues:

The first: The interpretation of two Holy verses in the Holy Sura of Al-
Imran.

The second: Forbidding people to say «If» if something happens to
them.

The third: Rationalizing this by saying that it opens the way for the
Shaitan to interfere.

The fourth: Guiding [people] to good talk.

The fifth: Ordering [people] to seek all that benefits them in addition to
seeking Allah’s (the Exalted) help.

The sixth: Forbidding the opposite of that; that is to say becoming dis-
abled.

pensed according to his evil». (6: 160) And: «If ye did well, ye did well for
yourselves; if ye did evil, (ye did it) against yourselves». (17: 7) and «The re-
compense for an injury is an injury equal there to (In degree)» (42: 40), and
«Nay, those who seek gain in Evil, and are girt round by their sins...» (2:
81) as well as many other Holy verses with similar meaning and Allah (the
Exalted) knows best.

The second section: What happens to the servant not because of his ac-
tions whether they be favors or afflictions. Concerning that Allah (the Ex-
alted) had said: «Whatever good, (O man!) Happens to thee, is from Allah’
but whatever evil happens to thee, is from thy (own) soul...» (4: 79) and the
Holy verse preceding it; thus «good» mentioned in these two Holy verses:
Favours; and evil: Affliction and disasters. That is the second of the two sec-
tions.

And I think that Sheikh Al-Islam (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
mentioned this in this site and it might be that the one who reported or cop-
ied it dropped it; Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

Then he (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Verily Mankind is not
commanded to view destiny when he is commanded to perform; rather,
when he is afflicted by disasters which he does not possess the power to
drive away; thus whatever happens to you because of other Mankind or
without them should make you patient, and you should be patient and ac-
cept it. Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said, «No kind of calamity
can occur, except by the leave of Allah: And if any one believes in Allah,
He guides his heart (a right)...» (64: 11) that is why Adam told Mousa;

554

العام وام قاقد هم ماع قا فد وام ما ماه موا هد نام و م واه مهم فاه نر وام وان .ا ناماو وا راو و ناماه نواه معد زا واعا. ماج دق ود م ود تعد تكد م هد كد ته م6 تت ع د د د ‎١‏ د و 5 تع 5 ع د عت ع 559

407 - «Do you blame me for a matter that Allah (the Exalted) has
predestined to happen before I was born by forty years? Thereupon Adam
convinced Mousa». Because Moussa told him, «Why did you bring us and
yourself out of the Garden». Then he [Moussa] olamed him for the disaster
that took place because of his performance; not because it [his performance]
is considered a sin. As far as it is considered a sin- as many people think -
that is not the goal of the Honourable Hadith since verily Adam (May
Allah’s peace be upon him) has repented the sin and the one who repents is
like someone who is sinless. It is not allowable to blame the one who has
repented. This is agreed upon by all people.

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said: This Honorable Hadith has included significant fundamental rules
of faith. The first: Verily Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) possesses
the attribute of love and He (the Exalted) really loves. The second: Verily
He (the Exalted) loves whatever is required of His names and whatever fits
them. He is the Most powerful and loves the Powerful believer; He is one
and He loves the odd number; He is beautiful and loves beauty; He is All-
knowing and loves scholars and scientists; He is clean and loves cleanliness;
He is believing and loves believers; He is Benevolent and loves benevolents;
He is patient and loves those who are patient; He is thankful and loves
those who are thankful.

His love is in degrees; so He loves some people more than He loves
others.

Verily the happiness of Mankind lies in his seeking all that benefits him
in his present and Afterlife. Seeking is working hard and doing ones best. So
if he comes across that which benefits him; if he seeks that which does not
benefit him or if he performed what benefits him without being keen, then
his perfection is relative to what he missed. Verily all good lies or is found
in seeking that which benefits.

And when mankind’s seeking and performance are acheived by Allah’s
aid, volition and guidance, he is commanded to seek Allah’s help, that he
may reach the rank of «Thee do we worship, and Thine aid we seek». (1: 5)
Verily he seeks what benefits him in worshipping Allah (the Exalted). That
cannot be accomplished but through His help; thus to seek His aid. Thus
the one who seeks what benefits him; the one who seeks Allah’s aid against
failure, that is guiding him before that which predestined takes place to that
which is more serious and more important than the causes of its happening;

555

.لها فاح قدا فاو عدقداواو ود واوا و قافا ها فاع قفا قاقد ود قاعاء .د ع مد وا ما ع رد قافا اه وا مد واه تفار ود واعا م قاع ده ود قار قاف ها وا فده واه جر فد فا فاده عع فاعاعد ود و ماودو ورأرد و و فاعر د ردن ‎Pe‏

that is seeking in addition to seeking the aid of the One who is in control of
all things.

If he misses what was predestined for him, then he has two states: Fail-
ure and disability. That is the key to the actings of the Shaitan; so failure
would lead him to say «if» and «if» does not benefit here; rather, it is the
key to blame, failure, anger, being sorry and sorrow, and all that is the re-
sult of the acts of the Shaitan. Thereupon he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) forbade the man from starting his performances by this
and ordered him to perform the second case which is viewing destiny and
observing it and believing that had it been predestined for him, he would
not have missed anything, nor would any one have preceded him. So there
is nothing left here for him more beneficial than predestiny and the Lord’s
volition that is valid and effective, which requires and necessitates that
which is predestined. If it was not there he would not be existing, that is
why he said, «If you were overcome by something donot say: If I had done
such and such a thing; rather, say: Allah (the Exalted) has predestined and
has done whatever He wished». Thus he (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) guided him to that which benefits him in the two cases: The
case of achieving that which is wanted and the case of missing it. That is
why this Honorable Hadith has been among those Honorable Hadiths indis-
pensible for the servant; rather, he is in bad need for it and it includes con-
firming destiny, gaining, choosing and performing overt and covert worship
whether that which is wanted takes place or not. All guidance and success is
through Allah (the Exalted).

556

Chapter: (Forbidding the cursing of the wind)

It was narrated after Oubay ben Kaab (May Allah be pleased with him)

that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said, «Do not curse the wind; 11 you come across what you hate, say: 0 Al-
lah (the Exalted) we ask you to give us the good of this wind, the best that
it carries; the best that it has been commanded to do. We seek refuge with
You against the evil of the wind, the evil it carries and the evil it was com-
manded to do». It was corrected by At-Tirmithi.

This Honorable Hadith discusses many issues:

The first: Forbidding the cursing of the wind.

The second: Guiding to beneficial talk if Mankind sees what he hates.
The third: Telling people that it is commanded.

The fourth: It might be commanded to do that which is good or that
which 15 evil.

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter: The forbiddance from the wind).

It was narrated after Oubay ben Kaab (May Allah be pleased with him)
that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said.

408 - «Do not curse the wind; 11 you come across what you hate, say: O
Allah (the Exalted) we ask You to give us the good of this wind, the best
that it carries, and the best that it has been commanded to do. We seek re-
fuge wiih You against the evil of the wind, the evil it carries, and the evil it
was commanded to do». It was corrected by At-Tirmithi.

Because it - that is to say the wind - rather blows because Allah (the

557

5 ع ع 5 ع ع ع ع ع ‎ee ee‏ جد د د م تج تدع عد ‎EEE HEE Ee‏ قدو ‎ERE EH‏ قاعار .د .ناواو ةيه ‎eee eT RRO‏ مه ففجم عا ‎ee mee we eee‏ وان لاي ملل ل ور و ره ل و م

Exalted) has created and commanded it. Because He is the One who
brought it into existence and commanded it.Thus cursing it, is cursing the
one who created it and He is Allah (Be the blessed and raised above). The
forbiddance from cursing time has been discussed before and this resembles
it; it is not done but by those people who are ignorant of Allah (the Ex-
alted) and of whatever He (the Exalted) legislated for His (the Exalted) ser-
vants. Thereupon he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) forbade
the people of Faith from saying what the people of ignorance and refused to
say and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) guided them to
what should be said when the wind blows. Thus he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said: «If you see what you hate, say: O Allah (the
Exalted) we ask you to give us from the good of this wind and from the
best that it has been commanded to do». That is to say, if you see what you
hate then the wind blows, then turn to your Lord by Unification and say:
«O Allah (the Exalted) we ask You to give us from the good of this wind,
from the best that it carries and from the best that it has been commanded
to do; we seek refuge with You against the evil of this wind, the evil it car-
ries and the evil it has been commanded to do». This includes servitude to
Allah (the Exalted) and obedience to Him (the Exalted) and to His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) as well as driving
away evil by seeking refuge with Him (the Exalted) and it shows His bene-
faction and favours; this is the case of the people of unification and faith;
that is in contradistinction with those people who stray away from the right
path and disobey those who are deprived of the taste of unification which is
the reality of Faith.

558

Chapter

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «... moved by wrong suspicions of Allah -
suspicions due to ignorance. They said, «What affair is this of ours?» Say
thou, «Indeed, this affair is wholly Allah’s». They hide in their minds what
they dare not reveal to thee. They say (to themselves), «If we had anything
to do with this affair, we should not have been in the slaughter here». Say,
«Even if ycu had remained in your homes, those for whom death was de-
creed wou.d certainly have gone forth to the place of their death»; but (all
this was) that Allah might lest what is in your breasts and purge what is in
your hearts. For Allah knoweth well the secrets of your hearts». (3: 154).

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter: Allah (the Exalted) has said: «... moved by wrong
suspicious of Allah -suspicious due to ignorance. They said, what affair is
this of ours?» Say, Thou, indeed, this affair is wholly Allah’s ....» (3: 154).

This Holy verse was sent down by Allah (the Exalted) within the con-
text of what He said concerning the battle of Uhud, «After (The excitement)
of the distress, He sent down calm on a band of you...» (3: 154) He (the Ex-
alted) means the people of Faith, stability, and truthful dependence; they are
those who determined that Allah (the Exalted) would grant victory to His
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and make
him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) attain his goal. That is
why He (the Exalted) has said, «While another band was stirred to anxiety
by their own feelings...» (3: 154) that is they cannot sleep because of horror,
fear and anxiety (they moved by wrong suspicious of Allah -Suspicions due
to ignorance...).

Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said: «Nay, ye thought that the
Apostle and the believers would never return to their families; this seemed
pleasing in your hearts, and ye conceived an evil thought, for ye are a peo-
ple last (in wickedness)». (48: 12). Thus those thought that when the polythe-

559

And Allah (the Exalted) has also said, «Men and women, who imagine
an evil opinion of Allah. On them is a round of evil..'» (48: 6).

Ibn Al-Qayyim said about the first Holy verse: This suspicion was inter-
preted that He (Be the blessed and raised above) doesnot grant His Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) victory and that
his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) call would decline and
he explained that what afflicted him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) was not due to Allah’s predestination and wisdom, and it was in-
terpreted as rejecting wisdom, rejecting destiny, and rejecting that His Holy
Messenger’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) call would be
accomplished and that Allah (the Exalted) would grant it victory over all
other religions.

Such suspicions is the suspicion of the hypocrites and polytheists men-
tioned in the Holy Sura of Fath. Rather, that was considered suspicion be-
cause it is improper for Allah (the Exalted), His wisdom, praise and
Truthful promise. Thus he who suspects that He (the Exalted) changes that
which is obsolete to that which is truthful in a way that declines truth, or re-
jects that which has happened because of His predestination or rejects that
His predestination is due to some wisdom of His (Be the blessed and raised
above) for which He (the Exalted) deserves to be praised and exalted; rather,
he claims that it happened because of an abstract volition.

ists appeared that time, they are the winners and that the Islam and its peo-
ple will be extinguished. That is the state of the people of suspicion and
doubt when one of those bad incidents happen to them. It was narrated
after Ibn Jouraij: It was said to Abdullah ben Oubay, «Banu Al-Khazraj
were killed today? He said: «Is what happened our affair?».

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) discussed what happened during the battle of Uhud: He explained this
suspicion that isnot proper for Allah (Be the blessed and raised above) that
He (the Exalted) will not grant His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) victory and that he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) was declining and that He (the Exalted) would let him
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) be killed. He interpreted
their suspicions that what happened to them was not due to Allah’s
predeterminism and destiny and that He (the Exalted) doesnot have a
wisdom behind that. It also includes rejecting wisdom, predestiny, and that
His Holy Messenger’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) call

560

$.

Cuch is the suspicion of those who disbelieved. So woe unto those who
disbelieved; they are going to be admitted into the Garden.

And most people suspect Allah (the Exalted) with evil suspicions as far
as they are concerned and as far as what He (the Exalted) does to others;
no one is clear from such suspicion but the one who knows Allah (the Ex-
alted), His beautiful names and His attributes, and whatever requires His
wisdom and Praise. So let the one who is reasonable and intelligent take
care of himself and let him repent and ask for Allah’s forgiveness he who
suspects evil of his Lord. If you search you would find him obstinate against
destiny and blaming it and that he should have been so and so. So think
about yourself, are you clear?

would not be completed or He (the Exalted) wouldnot grant nim (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) victory over all other religions.
That is suspicion which was thought by hypocrites and polytheists
mentioned in the Holy Sura of Faith where He (the Exalted) has said: «And
that He may punish the hypocrites, men and women, who imagine an evil
opinion of Allah. On them is a round of evil: The wrath of Allah is on
them: He has cursed them and the Hell is ready for them: And evil is it for
a destination» (48: 6) rather, that was suspicion, the suspicion of ignorance
and Pre-Islamic times- that is attributed to the people of ignorance- it is the
untruthful suspicion because it isnot what fits His beautiful names and
exalted attribute and essence cleared from every defect and evil; that is
contradictory to what fits His wisdom.

Praise, Lordship and Divinity, or what fits His word sent to His mes-
sengers and which says that He (the Exalted) grants them victory and never
lets them down, as well as to His soldiers that they are going to be victor-
ious. Thus he who suspects that He (the Exalted) does not grant victory to
His messengers or complete their call or support them and their party, and
grants them victory over their enemies and that He does not support His re-
ligion and His Holy Book, and that He changes unification into polytheism
and that which is truthful into that which is obsolete such as unification and
truth will be declined in a way after which they will not be erected any
more.

Then such a person had suspected Allah (the Exalted) badly and attrib-
uted to Him that which does not fit His Exaltedness, Perfection, Attributes
and qualities. Verily praising Him (the Exalted), His Glory, Wisdom and Di-
vinity reject that and refuse to see His soldiers and party become humiliated
and hate to see His polytheist enemies being victorious.

561

سس ا ع ع ع م ع ع م م مالالا 1111ل ل ل ل ل ل د دس دس د د« :5 < ذ« < ذا 1 < " ذ < " " : « : ‎١‏ << : :<< << :ا

Thus he who suspects Him (the Exalted) in fact did not know Him, His
names, His perfection and His attributes. Also he who denies that which
happens by His predestiny and determinism is considered and treated as has
been mentioned above. He does not know Him (the Exalted) nor does he
know His Lordship (the Exalted), His Dominion and His Glory. Also he
who denies that He (the Exalted) has predetermined what He (the Exalted)
predetermined because of a major wisdom and commanded, for which He
deserves all Praise. And they think that it has come from a volition, seper-
ated from Him; from a needed aim that is more loved by him than missing
it, and that all those reassured leading to it and hated by him its importance
doesnot exceed wisdom because it leads to whatever he loves even though he
hates it; He has not determined it in vain, nor has He wished it, nor has he
(the Exalted) created it uselessly. Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said:
«That wereth thought of unbelievers! But woe to the unbelievers because of
the Fire (of Hell)!» (38: 27).

And most people think about Allah (the Exalted) other than that which
is right; evil taught concerning matters that concern them, and concerning
what He (the Exalted) does to others. No one is clear from this but the one
who knows Allah (the Exalted), His beautiful names and His attributes and
knows His wisdom and praised Him (the Exalted). Thus he who despairs of
His mercy, and despairs of His compassion, has infact thought evil of Allah
(the Exalted). And he who allows himself to think that He punishes His sup-
porters even though they are faithful and benevolent and equates between
them and His enemies, then he has thought evil of Him (the Exalted). And
he who thinks that He lets His creatures in vain without commands or pro-
hibitions and that He does not send them messengers or send down His
Holy Books; rather, He (the Exalted) leaves them like riding animals and
beasts, then he has thought evil of Allah (the Exalted); he who thinks that
He (the Exalted) will not gather His servants after their death in order to re-
ward or to punish them in an abode where the benefactor is rewarded by his
benefaction and the wrong -doer by his evil doings and He (the Exalted)
shows His creatures the reality of what they conflicted over and shows to all
the people His Truth and His Messengers’ Truth and that His enemies were
the liars since they thought evil of Him.

And wastes their good and righteous deeds they performed purely for
Him (the Exalted) and in order to obey Him, that He (the Exalted) would
invalidate their deeds without any reason made by the servant, and that He
(the Exalted) would punish him for what he did not commit or chose to

562

This Honorable Hadith discusses many issues:
The first: The interpretation of the Holy Sura of Al-Imran.
The second: The interpretation of the Holy Sura of Al-Fath.

commit or had the ability to commit or the will to commit; rather, He (the
Exalted) would punish him for what He (Be the blessed and raised above)
had done, or if he thought that He (the Exalted) might support His lying
enemies by miracles with which His Prophet and messengers are supported
by Him and which He (the Exalted) executes through them in order to de-
lude His servants; and that every thing is expected from Him (the Exalted)
including torturing those who spent their lives in obeying Him (the Exalted)
by putting them forever in Hell-Fire, and that he who had spent his life de-
clared enmity against Him (the Exalted) and His Messengers and religion,
would be admitted into the Garden.

Also he who thinks that Allah (the Exalted) informed about Himself,
His attributes and actions in a way that is concerned by delusions, similitude
and comparison and that He (the Exalted) dropped that which is truthful
and never informed people about it; rather, He figuratively mentioned it in-
stead of declaring it; He always informed in a way full of comparison, simili-
tude and delusions and that He wanted His creatures to use their minds,
powers and thought, distorting His words and interpreting His orders in a
different way and they require various probabilities and possibilities which
are hated and which constitute puzzles that resemble more visions and style
and refer them for knowing His names and attibutes to their minds and opi-
nions rather than to His Holy Koran.

Rather, he did not want them to consider His words in relation to the
language they know even though He (the Exalted) is able to report that
which is Truthful and that which should be reported, and relieves them from
the terms. That makes them believe in that which is obsolete and He (the
Exalted) does not do that; rather He (the Exalted) guided them to a path
which is opposite to the path of guidance. Such person has thought evil of
Allah (the Exalted). Thus if he aids: He is verily unable to express that
which is truthful by plain terms which he and those who came before him
used to express. Then this person has thought that failure and disability as
His qualities even though He says that He ( the Exalted) is able without
showing it and he turned away from showing and from stating that which is
truthful to that which is deluding; rather, He (the Exalted) guides to the im-
possible delusion and invalid belief, then he thought evil about His wisdom
and Mercy.

563

The third: Telling that this is of types that can not be counted.

The fourth: No one is clear from that but the one who learns the beau-
tiful names, attributes and knows himself.

He who thinks that he and those who came before him expressed that
which is Truthful regardless of Allah Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) and that guidance and truthfulness are in their speech
and terms while from Allah’s terms, comparison and similitude and delusion
are taken from its literal meaning. While the literal meaning of those con-
fused is guidance and Truthfulness. Such is the worst suspicion in Allah (the
Exalted).

All those suspecting Allah (the Exalted) and those who think about
Allah (the Exalted) other than truthfulness are similar to those of Pre-
Islamic times.

And he who thinks what is Allah’s dominion there is that which He
(the Exalted) does not wish or that which He (the Exalted) is unable to cre-
ate or bring into existence, such has thought evil of Allah (the Exalted) .

And he who thinks that Allah (the Exalted) has been suspended from
eternity to perpetuity, not to be done and he is not described then with the
ability on the doing, then he is able to perform it, after his disability, then
he has thought with bad thinking.

He who thinks that Allah (the Exalted) neither hears nor sees or knows
about the existence of things, number of skies and stars, Mankind and their

deeds and movements, or objects existing in essence; such a person has sus-
pected Allah (the Exalted) .

He who thinks that Allah (the Exalted) does not possess hearing, sight,
knowledge, volition, and terms and that He (the Exalted) does not talk to
any one of the creatures and that He (the Exalted) never talks, talked and
that He neither commands or forbids; such a person has suspected Allah
(the Exalted).

He who thinks that Allah (the Exalted) is not above His skies, on His
Throne distinct from His creatures and that relating Himself to His Throne
is like relating it to the lowest ranks and to the places which He (the Ex-
alted) shuns from mentioning and that He is down in the same way He (the
Exalted) is up and that he who says: Glory to my Lord the Lowest, is like
saying: Glory to my Lord, the highest such a person has suspected Allah
(the Exalted). O how evil is such suspicion.

He who thinks that He (the Exalted) loves disbelief, “-<ination and dis-
564

9ع جم ع ع م ع عد م جد ع ع م عد جد .د مد ع م جد مدع عد عد مد عد فاع ع6 مادم مد عد وام دقام م معام م وقد فاع هد تدند ف بهد قفد يدف فاراه ا ‎OO‏
‏لاع تع عدت ع ‎ee‏ قا ووم

obedience and that He (the Exalted) loves corruption in as much as He
loves Faith, obedience, piety and making right, such a person has suspected
Allah (the Exalted).

He who thinks that He (the Exalted) neither loves nor accepts; neither
becomes wrathful nor angry; neither supports nor declares enmity; neither
approaches one of His creatures nor is He (the Exalted) approached by
them and that verily the essence of the Shaitans in apporaching His essence
is like the essence of those close to Him (the Exalted) and those successful
supporters, such a person has suspected Allah (the Exalted).

He who thinks that He (the Exalted) equates between opposites, or «"'s-
criminates between those who are equal in every respect, or that He (the Ex-
alted) frustrates and turns down the obedient life long performances which
are purely done for His sake because of one following major sin and thus
He (the Exalted) sends the doer of those obedient performances to eternal
torture in Hell-Fire just because of that major sin, and that He, because of
it, turns down all those pious performance and tortures him eternally in the
same way He (the Exalted) tortures the one who has not believed in Him
(the Exalted) even for the duration of the blink of an eye, and spent his life
performing all that which makes Him (the Exalted) angry and wrathful and
in doing all that is against His messengers and religion; such a person has
suspected Allah (the Exalted).

He who thinks that He (the Exalted) has a child who shares things with
Him (the Exalted) or that there exists someone who intercedes at Him (the
Exalted) without His permission or that between Him (the Exalted) and His
creatures there are intercessors that relay their needs to Him (the Exalted)
and that He (the Exalted) assigned righteous men for His servants to carry
His favour regardless of Him (the Exalted), and to approach Him (the Ex-
alted) through them, and to play the role of intercessors between Him (the
Exalted) and them; thus they invoke, fear them and plead to them; such a
person has suspected Allah (the Exalted), and such is the worst type of sus-
picion and doubt.

He who thinks that he can get what Allah (the Exalted) gives by ais-
obeying and contradicting Him (the Exalted) in the same way he can get it
by obeying and approaching Him. Then such a person has suspected Him
contrary to His wisdom and contrary to what His names and attributes
mean and require. That is also evil suspicion.

He who thinks what if he gets something for His sake, He would not
give him better than it in recompense, or if he does something for His sake

565

اوور لاو ور رار وه را رده هه فج ع 0ه 1005
لي ةي ع ‎etre‏ ع ع ع ع ا ا ل ‎we‏ ا ا ا ا ا ‎tt ha‏ ا ا ا ا ا ‎SPs tpt rtp eat‏ .

86 (the Exalted} would not give him better than it: such a person suspects
Allah (the Exalted).

He who thinks that He (the Exalted) may become wrathful with His ser-
vant and punishes him without committing a crime, a sin or without a rea-
ovn that the servant has donc but just because He wanted and desired this
then he has suspected Allah (the Exalted).

He who thinks that if he believes Him (the Exalted) concerning wish
and fear, and pleaded and asked Him and depended upon Him (the Exalted)
that He might let him down and not to give him what he asks for them such
a person has suspected Allah (the Exalted) and that contradicts His qualities
and what He (the Exalted) really deserves.

He who thinks that Allah (the Exalted) will reward him in case‘he dis-
obeys Him (the Exalted) in the same sense He rewards him when he dis-
obeys Him (the Exalted) and if he asks that whiie invoking Him then this
person has thought about Allah (the Exalted) that which contradicts His
wisdom and praising Him (the Exalted); in contradiction to what He (the
Exalted) deserves or does.

He who thinks that he makes Him angry and wrathful and disobeys
Him and takes others regardless of Him (the Exalted) and invokes besides
Him an angel or a living or dead humanbeing hoping that he would benefit
him and free him from the torture of his Lord; such a person has suspected
Allah (the Exalted).

Thus most creatures; rather all of them -but what Allah (the Exalted)
wishes- think about Allah (the Exalted) other than that which is truthful; ve-
rily most of the sons of Adam think that they are withheld their lacking
luck and that they deserve more than what Allah (the Exalted) wishes or
gives. He says: My Lord (the Exalted) has done wrong to me and prevented
me from getting what I deserve and his soul witness that while he verbally
denies and doesnot dare declare it overtly. He who searches inside himself
and goes deep in knowing its secrets, will find that aspect in it latent and
concealed like fire in the gunlock. Thus pull the trigger of whomever you
wish and he will tell you what is in his gun lock. And if you search whom-
ever you search you will find hid obstinate (and blaming) destiny and sug-
gesting to get other than what he has already got of happened and that it
should be such and such; search yourself! Are you free from this?

So let the shrewd person to take care of this and let him turn to Allah
(the Exalted) and repent and ask for His forgiveness at every time, he who

566

ep eae wearer © 2 2 5 3 2 0 err ‏ال ا ا ا ل لك ا ا ل ل ل ا ا ا ا ل ا ا‎ we tr te mw he oe

suspects Allah (the Exalted) and let such a person suspect himself which is
the medium of every evil and the source of every evil; it is built on ignor-
ance and wrong doing. It deserves to be suspected more than the most just
among judges; the most merciful among merciful people, the one who does
not need anybody and the one who deserves all Praise, all perfect praise and
perfect wisdom belong to Him (the Exalted); He is above all evil related to
His essence, attributes, deeds, and names since His essence has absolute per-
fection from every aspect; the same goes for His attributes and deeds which
are full of wisdom, benefit, and justice. His names are all beautiful.

His saying: (Who imagines an evil opinion of Allah). Ibn Jarir said in
interpreting (and that He may punish the hypocrites, men and women, and
the polytheists, men and women, who imagine an evil opinion of Allah that
He (the Exalted) will not support you and those who believe in you against
your enemies and that He will not grant His word victory over the word of
the unbelievers. That was because of their evil opinions that Allah (the Ex-
alted) has mentioned here. He (the Exalted) says: Those hypocrites, men and
women; polytheists, men and women who imagined this evil opinion are
themselves evil; that is to say they will be tortured.

His saying: (The wrath of Allah is on them: He has cursed them) that is
to say: He harmed them by His wrath and has cursed them. He (the Ex-
alted) says that He (the Exalted) moved them far away and deprived them
of His Mercy (and got Hell ready for them), He (the Exalted) says: He pre-
pared Hell for them on the Day of Judgment (and evil is the destination).
He (the Exalted) says: Hell Fire is the worst place, that those hypocrites and
polytheists, men and women would reach.

The religious authority Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
said: (And that He may punish the hypocrites, men and women, and the
polytheists men and women, who imagine an evil opinion of Allah). That is
to say accuse Allah (the Exalted) of being unjust and suspect the Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and his Companions
would be killed and completely eradicated. That is why He (the Exalted) has
said, (On them is a round of evil) and he said about the meaning of the
other Holy verse something similar to what Ibn Jarir said (May Allah’s
Mercy be upon him).

His saying: (Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said that
which was mentioned by the writer in the original text has been introducted
by me from the beginning till the end.

567

Chapter

(What was mentioned concerning those who deny Predestination).

Ibn Omar said, «By the One who possesses Ibn Omar’s soul, had any-
one of you an amount of gold as big as the Mount of Uhud and he had
spent it for Allah’s (the Exalted) sake, He wouldnot accept it from him till
he believes in predestiny». Then he referred to what the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Faith is believing in Allah
(the Exalted), His angels, books, messengers and the Last Day, as well as be-
lieving in predestiny; its good and evil aspects.» It was narrated by Moslem.

CAPTER

His saying: (Chapter: what was mentioned concerning those who deny
destiny) that is to say the strong threat and the like.

409 - Abu Dawud narrated after Abdul Aziz ben Abi Hazm after
Omar’s son (May Allah be pleased with them) from the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), «Fatalists and determinists are the
Magus of this nation; if they get sick, do not visit them; if they die, do not
walk in their funeral procession and do not pray for them».

And after Omar, Ghoufra’s friend, narrated after a man among the An-
sar from Houthaifa. He is Ibn Al-Yaman (May Allah be pleased with them),
he said: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said,

410 - «Every nation has its Magus; the Magus of this nation are those
who say: There is no destiny; so donot attend the funeral of the one who
dies among them and do not visit the sick of them; they are the party of the
deceiver; it is Allah’s right to make them join the deceiver».

His saying: (And Ibn Omar said: By the One who possesses my soul
etc...) Ibn Omar’s Honorable Hadith was narrated by Moslem, Abu Dawud,

568

+ ع ع عع > 5 > > ع ع ع 5 ع > عدج عد ع > مد .د مث عد عد م م عمد عع دي مد مد مدع .د ديدم م و6 م قوا ره قامه قدعايم مام ماقام م تاماه هد فاو م وما ند كدوام ماما ‎OD DS‏ رار راون

At-Tirmithi, An-Nasai and Ibn Maja after Yahya ben Yamar who said:

411 - «Maabad Al-Jouhanni was the first to discuss fate and determin-
ism at Al-Busra. Once Houmaid ben Abdur-Rahman Al-Himyari and I set
aff far Hai or Minor Hajj. We said: We wish if we meet one of the Compa-
nions of Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) to ask him about fate and determinism. Thereupon Allah (the Exalted)
guided us to Abdullah ben Omar while entering the Mosque. My friend and
I approached him. I thought that my friend would ask me to talk, I said: I
am Abdur-Rahman, verily we faced people who rehearse the Holy Koran
and seek knowledge, yet they claim that destiny does not exist and that such
matt2rs are looked down upon. Thereafter he said: If you meet those people
(again), tell them that I cleared myself of them and they have nothing to do
with me. And by the One whom Abdullah ben Omar swears, had any one
of them an amount of gold as big as the Mount of Uhud and he spent it for
the sake of Allah (the Exalted), Allah (the Exalted) would not accept it un-
less he believes in the destiny».

Then he said: Omar ben Al-Khattab (May Allah be pleased with
him) said: «While we were sitting at Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him), a man wearing white clothes appeared
in front of us, his hair was dark black, and no trace of travelling ap-
peared on his face. No one recognized him. He approached the Holy Pro-
phet and reclined his knees against his (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) and put his palms on his (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) thighs. Then he said: O Muhammad tell me about Islam.
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said: Islam is to testify that there is no God but Allah (the Exalted) and
that Muhammad is Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him), pray, pay charity [Zakat], fast the Holy month of
Ramadan and perform the Hajj if you were able [Physically and finan-
cially] to do so. He said: You told the truth. We were astonished, that
man asks him then he tells that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) has told the truth. Then he said: Tell me about Faith. He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: It is to believe in
Allah (the Exalted), His angels, His books, His Messengers and the Last
Day and to believe in the destiny; its good and evil aspects. He said: You
told the truth. Then he said: Then tell me about good deeds, he (May Al-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: To worship Allah (the Ex-
alted) as if you could see Him (the Exalted); if you did not see Him,

569

It was narrated after Oubadah ben As-Samet that he told his son. «O
my son you would not realize the taste of Faith till you learn that what had
happened to you, would not have missed you and that what had missed
you, wouldnot have happened to you. I heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying: Verily Allah (the Exalted)
created the pen first, then He commanded it and said: Write. It said: O My
Lord what shall I write? He said: Write the fate of everything till the
moment the Hour starts. O my son I heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May

Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying: He who dies not believing
‘in this does not belong to my nation».

then He (the Exalted) sees you. He said: Then tell me about the Hour.
He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: The one who is
asked does not know more than the one who is asking. He said: Then
tell me about its signs. He said: Verily when the female servant gives
birth to her mistress; when you see those naked barefooted poor shep-
herds climb up buildings. He said: Then go ahead. He stayed for three
and in another narration for a long period of time, then he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said: O Omar do you know who is ask-
ing? He said: Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) know best. He (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said: He is Gibrail; he came to you in order to
teach you your religion».

This Honorable Hadith states that believing in destiny is among the six
pillars of Faith. Thus he who does not believe in faith; its good and evil as-
pect is considered to drop and reject one of the pillars of religion; and the
following Holy verse would apply to them, «... Then is it only a part of the
Book that ye believe in, and do ye reject the rest?...» (2: 85).

His saying: (It was narrated after Oubadah). He was already introduced
in the chapter of the value of unification. This Honorable Hadith was nar-
rated after him by Abu Dawud and Imam Ahmad. He said: We were told
by Al-Hasan ben Siwar that Laith told them after Mouawiya who said: I
visited Oubadah and he was sick that I thought he was going to die. I said:
O my father advise me and give me your opinion. He said: Help me sit. He
said: O my son you will never realize the taste of Faith nor achieve the rea-
lity of Allah (the Exalted) unless you believe in the destiny; its good and
bad aspects. I said: O my father, how shall I learn about the good and bad
aspects of destiny? He said: You should know that what has missed you,

370

And in another narrative by Amad, «Verily Allah (the Exalted) created
the pen first. Lic commanded it: Write. So it wrote in that hour what will

take place till the Day of Judgment».

And it was narrated by Ibn Wahab that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «He who does not believe in
ihe poud and bad aspects of destiny will be burnt by me ta 11-41

It was narrated in Al-Musnad and As-Sunnan after Ibn Ad-Dailami, «I
came to Oubay ben Kaab and said: I have something to ask about destiny,
so tell me something may Allah (the Exalted) remove that from my heart.
So he said: If you spend gold as much as Uhud, Allah (the Exalted) would
not accept till you believe in destiny and till you learn that whatever hap-
pened to you would not have missed you and whatever missed you would
not have happened to you. If you die not believing in that, you would be-
come one of the people of Hell-Fire. He said: So I came to [bn Masoud,
Houthaifa ben Al-Yaman and Zaid ben Thabet and all of them told me
something similar after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him).» This is a righteous Honourable Hadith narrated by Al-Ha-
kem in his Saheeh.

would have never happened to you; and what had happened to you, would
have never missed you.

412 - 0 My son I heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) saying: «Verily Allah (the Exalted) created the pen
first; and commanded it: Write, and it wrote what will happen till the Day
of Judgment. O My son, if you die not believing in that, you would be ad-
mitted into Hell-Fire.» It was narrated by At-Tirmithi after Ata ben Abi Ra-
bah after Al-Walid ben Oubadah from his father. He said: This Honorable
Hadith is righteous and strange.

This Honorable Hadith and those similar to it: Show the
comprehensiveness of Allah’s knowledge and encompassing of what had been
and what will happen, both in the present life and in the Afterlife. Concerning
that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Allah is He who created seven firmaments
and of the earth a similar number. Through the midst of them (all) descends
His command: That ye may know that Allah has power over all things, and
that Allah comprehends all things in (His) knowledge» (65: 12).

Imam Ahmad (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said when he was asked
about the destiny, «Destiny is the power of the Most merciful.» Ibn Akil con-
sidered what Ahmad (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said as good.

571

This Honorable Hadith shows many issues:

The first: Showing that believing in destiny is an obligation.
The second: Showing the nature of Faith.

The third: Defeating the deeds of those who do not believe in it.

The fourth: Telling that no one realizes the taste of Faith unless he be-
lieves in it.

The fifth: Mentioning the first thing that was created by Allah (the Ex-
alted).

The sixth: That it wrote destinies from that hour till the Day of Judg-
ment.

The seventh: What he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) is
clear of those who do not believe in it.

This means: Nothing can prevent or stop Allah’s (the Exalted) power.
Those who reject and deny destiny have rejected Allah’s (the Exalted) ability
and power thus they went astray. Some of those who came before saia’ Ar-
gue with them by using [religious] knowledge. If they consent then they are
defeated, and if they reject it, then they disbelieved.

413 - His saying: (And it was mentioned in Al-Musnad and Sunan Abi
Dawud after Ibn Ad-Dailami). He was Abu Bisr and it was said Abu Bishr,
His name was Abdullah ben Fairouz. Abu Dawud also narrated it. He said:
«If Allah (the Exalted) tortures those living in His Heavens and on His
earth; He (the Exalted) tortures them without doing them wrong or oppres-
sion. And if He (the Exalted) is merciful with them, His mercy is going to
be in excess to theirs deeds.

And if you spend an amount of gold that is as much as the mount
of Uhud, He (the Exalted) will not accept it from you unless you believe
in destiny and realize that what have missed you, and wha: had missed
you would not have happened to you. And if you die not believing in
this, you would be one of the people of Hell-Fire». He said: So I went to
Abdullah ben Masoud and he said something similar then I went to
Houthaifa ben Al-Yaman and he said something similar; he said then I
went to Zaid ben Thabet. He said: He told me something similar after
the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). It was
narrated by Ibn Mayjah.

372

The eighth: The custom of those who came after of asking the religious
authories about obscure similar matters.

The ninth: Verily the savants gave him the answer that removes his
doubt. That is they attributed the discussion to Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) only.

The religious authority Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
said after Ali ben Abi Taleb (May Allah be pleased with him) that Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:

414 - «A servant is not considered a believer unless he believes in
four things: To witness that there is no God but Allah (the Exalted) and
that I am Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) sent by Him (the Exalted) to inform about the Truth, believes
in reserruction after death and believes in destiny; its good and bad as-
pects». Something similar was narrated by At-Tirmithi after An-Nadr ben
Shoumail after Shouba after Mansour. And he narrated it from the Hon-
orable Hadith from of Abi Dawud At-Tailisi after Shouba after Roubi‘
from Ali.

It was confirmed in Moslim’ Saheeh who narrated it after Abdullah ben
Wahab and others after Ibn Hani Al-Khoutani after Abdur-Rahman A]-Hu-
bla after Abdullah ben Amr who said: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said:

415 - «Verily Allah (the Exalted) has written the lots of creatures be-
fore He created Heavens and earth by fifty thousand years -[bn Wahab
added- and His (the Exalted) Throne was on water». It was narrated by
At-Tirmithi and he said: This is a fine and strange Honorable Hadith.

All these Honorable Hadiths and what they carry of serious warning
against not believing in destiny and they are the proof against those who
deny destiny such as the Moutazila and others. They said: Those disobeying
people are going to stay in Hell-Fire eternally. What they thought is among
the most serious of major sins and acts of disobedience.

In reality, if we consider establishing a proof against them by using
texts from the Holy Koran and Honorable Sunna that are frequently men-
tioned, then they have caused themselves to stay in Hell-Fire eternally, un-
less they repent. That is necessary, since they have contradicted what was
freuquently mentioned by the Holy Koran and Honorable Sunna proving

573

‎se‏ هد 5د ع و5 :وهو و .فدهو و ودوع ووو ع وهاو و و عمو. مع قواء ‎wen‏ امم م مم مما مام شام م عا .ا ما لال ل نا

‎destiny and about those unifiers (who believe that Allah (the Exalted) is
One] who would not remain eternally in Hell-Fire.

‎574

Chapter

(That was mentioned about those who draw images).

416 - It was narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with
him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said, «Allah (the Exalted) said: No one has done wrong more than the
one who tried to create creatures like Mine. Let them increase an atom, a
seed or let them create one seed of barley.» It was narrated by both.

417 - They also narrated after Aisha (May Allah be pleased with her)
that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said, «The people who are going to be tortured most on the Day of Judg-
ment are those who compare their works with that of Allah (the Exalted)».

418 - They also narrated after Ibn Abbas that he said: I heard Allah’s
Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying,
«Every image drawer is going to be put in Hell-Fire; for every picture he
draws, he will be assigned a soul to be tortured in Hell».

419 - They also narrated, «He who in the present life draws a picture is
asked to breathe life into it; he is not able to do that».

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter concerning what was mentioned about those who
draw images) that is to mention the severe punishment that Allah (the Ex-
alted) subjects to as well as tortures them.

And the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
mentioned the reason: It is comparing what they draw with Allah’s creatures
because Allah also possesses the ability to create and command; He (the Ex-
alted) is the Lord and Possessor of every thing. He (the Exalted) is the Crea-
tor of every thing; He (the Exalted) is the One who fashioned all creatures
and put in them souls that make them alive. Concerning that He (the Ex-

375

And Moslem narrated after Abi Al-Hayyaj, he said, «Ali (May Allah be
pleased with him) told me: Shall I teach you what Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) taught you? Do not leave a
picture without buying it, nor a built grave without bringing it down to

earth».

alted) has said, «He who has made everything which He has created most
Good: He began the creation of man with (nothing more than) clay, and
made his progeny from a quintessence of the nature:

But He fashioned him in due proportion, and breathed into him of His
spirit. And He gave you (the faculties of) hearing and sight and feeling (and
understanding) little thanks do ye give!» (32: 7-9). Thus when the image ma-
ker fashions the 1mage according to what Allah (the Exalted) has created
such as Man and animals, he became compatible with Allah’s (the Exalted)
creation. Thus whatever he fashioned will be his torture on the Day of Judg-
ment and he would be assigned to breathe the spirit into it while he is un-
able to do that. So he would receive the most serious torture because his sin
is among the greatest.

So if this person has drawn a picture similar to animals that Allah (the
Exalted) has fashioned, so how would be the case of the one who equates
the creature with the Lord of the worlds and compares Him with His own
creature and performed towards that sort of worship for which Allah (the
Exalted) has created creatures; to worship Him Alone, that is which others
do not deserve of every act loved by Allah and accepted by Him (the Ex-
alted).

Thus equating the created with the creature by performing that which
belongs to Him (the Exalted) to others among His creatures who do not de-
serve it, and by joining with Him a partner in as far as what is exclusively
His (the Exalted). That is considered the greatest sin through which Allah
(the Exalted) is disobeyed. That is why He sent His messengers and sent
down His Holy Books to show this polytheism and to forbid people from
performing it, and in order to faithfully worship Allah (the Exalted); He sal-
vaged His messengers and those who followed them and made those who re-
jected unification and persisted on polytheism perish. O! How great is that
sin, «Allah forgiveth not that partners should be set up with Him; but He
forgiveth anything else to whom He pleaseth». (4: 48 and 116) and «... if
anyone assigns partners to Allah, he is as if he had fallen from Heaven and
been snatched up by birds, or the wind had swooped (like a bird on its
prey) and thrown him into a far-distant place». (22: 31).

576

This chapter discusses many issues:
The first: Talking about image makers with roughness.

The second: Warning people against the cause which is dropping good
manners with Allah (the Exalted). He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said, «No one has done wrong more than the one who tried to
create creatures like Mine».

His saying:

_ 420 - (It was narrated after Moslem after Abi Al-Hiyyaj Al-Asadi- Hay-
yan ben Houssain- He said: He is Ali ben Abi Taleb (May Allah be pleased
with him) the prince of the believers.

His saying: («Shall I teach you what Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) taught me? Do not let an image
without burying it, nor a built grave without bringing it down to earth»).

This includes the declaration that the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) sent Ali for that purpose. As for the pictures,
it is because they are compatible with Allah’s creatures. As for bringing
down to earth all built graves it is because erecting them means that one is
fascinated by those buried in them and that one aggrandizes them. That is
considered among the rationalizations and means of polytheism. Thus devot-
ing ones effort to such matters and others similar to them is 12 the best in-
terests of religion, as well as its goals and duties. When people become
lineant concerning such matters they fell in that which is forbidden; fascina-
tion by those lords of the graves became great and those graves conse-
quently became the goal of those travelling and aggrandizing worshippers.
So they performed towards them most acts of worship such as invocation,
asking for help, seeking refuge, pleading, sacrificing, vowing and many other
performances classified under proscribed polytheism.

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said: He who compares between Allah’s Holy Messenger’s (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) Sunna concerning graves and
what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ordered people to
do and what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ordered
people to refrain from doing and what was the custom of his (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) Companions and between what most
people perform those days; he would see that they contradict each other
and oppose each other such that they can never be combined in one
practice.

377

The third: Drawing attention to His ability and their disability by say-
ing, «let them create an atom or a seed or a seed of barley».

«Let them create an atom or a seed or a seed of barley».
The fourth: Declaring that they will be tortured most severely.

The fifth: Verily Allah (the Exalted) creates souls comparable to the
number of pictures and tortures the drawer of pictures in Hell-Fire.

The sixth: Verily he is commanded to breathe life into them.

The seventh: Ordering their burial if they were found, or discovered.

Thus Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) forbade praying at graves; and those people pray for them. He (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) also forbade taking them as pray-
ing places; and those build Mosques on them and call them tombstones in
order to be compatible with the houses of Allah (the Exalted). He also for-
bade lighting candles and lanterns at them; and those light lanterns at them.
He (the Exalted) also forbade having a feast at them and those take them as
place of celebration and meet at them as if they were meeting for a holiday
or more and He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ordered
people to level them down to the earth.

421 - Also Moslem narrated in his Saheeh after Abi Al-Hiyyaj Al-Asa-
di- He mentioned the Honorable Hadith in this chapter- and the Honorable
Hadith of Toumamah ben Shoufay and this Honorable Hadith is narrated
by Moslem as such, «We were with Foudalah ben Oubeid in the land of the
Romans in Dardas, when our friends died, so Foudalah ordered us to level
his grave with the earth and it was done. Then he said: I heard Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ordering people
to level them (graves).» And those exaggerate in contradicting these two
honorable Hadiths and they erect tombs above the earth level as if they
were houses and they built domes above them. He forbade using clay or
building on a grave.

422 - Also Moslem narrated in his Saheeh after Jaber (May Allah be
pleased with him, «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) forbade using clay in graves, building domes on them or
building on them». He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) also
forbade writing on them as was narrated by Abu Dawud in his Sunan. It
was narrated after Jaber that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings

and peace be upon him) said,

578

وأوام قفاوا ءا قاع م ها ود و وا مه فاو هم وا راو وا ‎a‏ ع5 ع د ‎١.‏ د ‎5١95‏ 5 5 *

423 - «I had forbidden from using clay in graves or writing on them».
At Tirmithi said: It is a good and fine Honorable Hadith. Yet these people
erect boards on them, write the Holy Koran and other than it; he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) forbade adding to them other than
their own dust and dirt.

424 - Also it was narrated by Abu Dawud after Jaber that verily
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
forbade people to use clay on a grave, writing on it or adding [more than
necessary dirt] on it.» And those add to it clay bricks and stones. Ibrahim
An-Nakii said: They used to hate to put bricks on their graves.

What is meant is the following: Verily those who aggrandize graves and
celebrate around them lighting lanterns at them, building Mosques and
domes at them contradicting the orders of Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) challenging what he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) brought; the most serious is taking them
as Mosques and lighting candles at them. That performance is among major
sins and the savants among the companions of Ahmad as well as many
others have considered such practice as proscribed.

Abu Muhammad Al-Makdissi said: Had lighting lanterns at them been
allowed, he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) wouldnot have
cursed the one doing that. And because such practice includes losing time
and money in vain and because such practice, aggrandizing graves, is similar
to aggrandizing images. He said: That is why it is not allowable to build
Mosques at graves, and because the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said:

425 - «Allah (the Exalted) curses the Jews and the Christians since they
took of their prophet’s graves places of prayers. You are warned not to do
the same as they did». It is an agreed upon Hadith, because praying at
graves resembles aggrandizing images and approaching them. And we have
already said that worshipping images started by aggrandizing the dead by
erecting their images, staying and praying at them.

Those deluded polytheists ended up legislating or allowing people to
perform the Hajj to those places and the set procedures for that till those ex-
tremists among them wrote a book and called it «Procedures of Hajj to
Tombstones and Graves», including Bait Al-Haram and it is not a secret
that such a practice contradicts the religion of Islam and enters the realm of
worshipping idols. So look at this great contradiction between what was le-

579

ورا ءا قاف هد مد قاع قفاوا قا. هاعد رد 4 قد ف قاف جامد قا عام جار و زان ما وان راو ناوا و رما واو زد وا هما فد مدنا رار .د ما ماع 6د فاه 6د 6 6 5د 6د 5 م 5 5ه 5 :5 95دع5ع ع > " ‎5*١‏ 5 55

gislated by Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) and what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
meant by forbidding what was mentioned above concerning attitudes to-
wards graves and tombstones and between what those people legislated and
meant. There is no doubt that it includes corruption that cannot be counted.

For example: Aggrandizing sites, making feasts around them, setting for
them, being similar to worshipping idols through the performance done
when staying at them, living near them, hanging curtains and serving them.
Those worshipping them prefer staying at them to stay at Al-Masjid Al-Har-
am and they think that their servants and guards as higher in rank and bet-
ter than those serving Mosques. Woe to them the night the hanging lantern
is blown off vowing for them and for their servants the polytheist’s thinking
that through them affliction is removed and victory over enemies is
achieved, rain is brought down, depressions removed, needs granted, the op-
pressed supported, and the frightened helped and many other things such as
being cursed by Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) because one erects Mosques on them and
lights lanterns, and finally such practice leads to major polytheism.

Other examples are: Harming those buried in them because of what the
polytheists do at their graves; they are verily harmed by what is performed
at their graves; they extremely hate those practices as Christ hates what the
Christian perform at his grave.

The same thing goes for other prophets, holymen and Sheikhs who are
harmed by what the Christians perform at their graves. On the Day of Judg-
ment those Prophets, holymen and Sheikhs will clear themselves of such peo-
ple. Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «The Day He will gather
them together as well as those whom they worship besides Allah, He will
ask: Was it ye who led these My servants astray, or did they stray from the
Path themselves?» They will say, Glory to thee! For us that we should take
for protectors others besides Thee: But thou didst bestow, on them and their
fathers, good things (in life), until they forgot the Message: For they were a
people (worthless and) lost». (25: 17-18). Allah (the Exalted) has told the
polytheists, «(Allah will say): «Now have they proved you liars in what ye
say...» (25: 19). He (the Exalted) has also said, «And behold! Allah will say,
«OQ Jesus the son of Mary‘ Didst thou say unto men, worship me and my
mother as gods in derogation of Allah? He will say, Glory to Thee! Never
could I say what I had no right (to say)....» (5: 119) He (the Exalted) has
also said, «One Day He will gather them all together, and say to the angels,

380

واو ع اعد هو قا ءرد فاع تاقد واف فا واو فقاود ع قود را واه هاه ردقا رد ود ود و وود فاج وأفقاف د و فقاعد يد قاع ود قانا. عفاودو واو هد راو ورا زواع وا رد هد فاو وا وا قد ود وام عاعد عا. قا ع قاع نياع را عد هراعد مد نه

«were you that these men used to worship» They will say, «Glory to Thee!
Our (tie) is Thee- As Protector- not with them. Nay, but they worshipped
the Jinns: Most of them believe in them». (34: 40-41).

Others examples are: Extinguishing the Sunnan and bringing innova-
tions.

Other examples are: Prefering those graves to the best sites and most
loved by Allah (the Exalted). Since verily grave worshippers set oft for them
aggrandizing them, respecting them, revering them, being kind to them, stay-
ing at them; this is something that does not take place in Mosques, nor
something similar or close to it.

Another example: Verily that which has been allowed by Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) when visiting
graves does not exceed the goal of reminding the visitor of the Afterlife, in-
voking Allah and, asking Him (the Exalted) for his sake, asking Allah to be
merciful with him and to forgive him.

Thus the visitor turns out to be benevolent towards himself as well as
towards the dead. But those polytheists have reversed those facts and
contradicted religion by making the goal of the visit joining the dead as a
partner of Allah (the Exalted), invoking Him, seeking refuge with Him,
asking Him to satisfy their needs, asking for his blessing, and victory over
enemies and the like. So they have done wrong to themselves and to the
dead. And Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) has forbidden men from visiting graves in order to block the way
in front of rationaliztions. But when unification became stable in their hearts
he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) permitted them to visit
them in as far as they followed what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) has legislated. He (the Exalted) forbade them to use obscene
language; among the most severe uses of obscene language: Committing
polytheism at graves, both orally and in action.

426 - It was narrated in the Saheeh of Moslem after Abi Huraira (May
Allah be pleased with him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said: «Visit graves; such a visit reminds you of
death». And after Abi Abbas (May Allah be pleased with them).

427 - «Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) passed by the graves of Medina; so he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) approached them and faced them and said: O peo-
ple of graves: May Allah’s peace be upon you, may Allah (the Exalted) for-

581

.ا م ماع و مد ماع و .و ود وعد مهد عد هد قافد .د واد راع هد عد عد هد رار هاود و ود .دود هد ود اواو .د .اماي عدوا هد فاع قفا فاه وا واوا و فاج .اعم .داه عاو اواو رلرا و واو و راو رد و ترا ف اه وار ل ور و واو

give us and you, you came before us and we followed you». It was narrated
by Ahmad and At-Tirmithi.

Such visit allowed by Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) to his people and which was taught by him (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him): Do you find in it anything that is
practised by polytheists and innovators? Or do you find it contradicting all
what they believe in and practise? How fair is what Malek ben Anas (May
Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: «Nothing would reform the last genera-
tion of this nation but that which reformed its first one». But the weaker the
nations adhere to the covenants of their prophets and the more they violate
their faith, they compensate for it by polytheism which they innovated.

Those righteous people who came before safeguarded unification till
even if one salutes the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) and then wanted to invoke Allah (the Exalted) he would turn his
face to the Qibla and his back to the grave and then invoke. This was stated
by the four Imams: Verily one should turn his face towards the Qibla when
one invokes. so that he may not invoke at a grave; verily invoking at graves
is considered worship.

428 - At-Tirmithi and others said: «Invocation is worship». Thus those
who came before exclusively worshipped Allah (the Exalted) and did not
perform at graves but that which was allowed by Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) such as invoking Allah (the
Exalted) for the sake of those buried in them and asking Him to grant them
Mercy. Abu Dawud narrated after Abi Huraira: Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:

429 - «Do not make your houses graves, do not take a feast around my
grave; but bless me for your blessing reaches me where ever you are». This
Honorable Hadith has good and reliable references; refering to his (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying, «Do not make your houses
graves». That is to say do not make them invalid as places for prayer,
invocation. Thus do not make it as equivalent to graves; he (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) ordered people to pray in their houses and
forbade them to pray at graves; that is against what the Christians and
those similar to them perform.

Moreover, verily aggrandizing graves and taking them places of feasts is
among great acts of corruption that are not known but by Allah (the Ex-
alted).

582

ثلمام معد راث را فد عد قد فد رام عدف رد ها وان رد ف را وام هن نراق را ناوا قا را رار واوا وا واوا نا وازاة ناماه فلار مار راجا قاقد رد كردم جد م ده ف ردت تدج عد دبع 6 ع د م ع م كح د ع 0ت 5 0 5 5 5 55 *

Examples of corrupt acts: Taking those places to make feasts and pray
around them and to circumambulate around them, kiss them and cover their
cheeks with their dirt, worship those buried in them, seeking refuge with
them, asking them to grant them victory, benefaction, health, and relief.
Their depression help them and other requests that used to be requested by
image worshippers. So if you see those extremists who assign a feast for
them, when they get off their riding animals when they see it from afar, so
they assign them collectors and kiss the earth, uncovered their heads, their
voices and noises became loud, they cried aloud and saw that they gained
from those visiting such places and sought the help of those who are unable
to start a life or end it and they called yet from afar till they reached them.
They would pray at the grave and they think that they have achieved a re-
ward yet he who prays to two Qiblas will not receive a reward !! So you can
observe them bowing down and prostrading seeking favours and acceptance
from the dead; they verily have filled their palms with loss and failure.

It is to other than Allah (the Exalted) -rather to the Shaitan- that those
tear drops fall, their voices are raised, needs are asked from the dead, reliev-
ing depression, seeking refuge making those poor rich, making those ill,
healthy then they start circumambulating around the grave, as if it were the
Sacred House what was rendered by Allah (the Exalted) blessed with gui-
dance to all people. Then they start to kiss and become dependant. Did you
see the Black Stone and what those coming to the Sacred House do to it?
Then they would cover their foreheads and cheeks with its dust which Allah
(the Exalted) knows that they were not covered with dust for Him (the Ex-
alted) during prostration, then they continued the procedures of visiting the
grave by shaving their hair, and sacrificing at that image and their prayer
and sacrifice were to other than Allah (the Exalted) . Therupon if you see
them congratulating each other saying: May Allah (the Exalted) reward you
and us generously; when they return those extremists would ask them to sell
the reward of visiting the grave because they could not go and visit the
Sacred House. Thereupon he would say no no, by your Hajj every year.

So far discussing them we have not gone beyond, or told all their inno-
vations and delusions since they are beyond what one can imagine or think.
That is the principle of worshipping images as was practised by the people
of Noah. And any one who smelled the least amount of knowledge and reli-
gious knowledge, realizes that among the most important issues is blocking
the way to rationalization this forbidden matter. And that the Legislator
knows about the consequences of practising what was forbidden more than

583

.ا ع ‎OHH Hee HAH ee‏ دده م ,دم ويد ود ‎eRe er EO HP HOHE‏ يه ‎EHR‏ ده واود و مهاه واو ‎ene‏ واو وار 4 ‎mE DE‏ ما فاع راف رد فاه ‎CORO HOO‏ تار و رام ور را و و ‎pe ee rere‏

any one else, and that good and guidance are achieved by following it, and
evil and delusion are achieved by disobeying and contradicting him.

584

Chapter

(That which was mentioned about frequent swearing).
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «... but keep to your oaths...» (5: 89).

It was narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with him) that
he heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) saying that «Swearing pushes the sale commodity yet it wipes out the
gain». It was narrated by both.

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter on that which was mentioned about frequent oath
taking (swearing). That is to say forbidding it and warning against it.

(Allah (the Exalted) has said, «... but keep to your oaths..» (5: 89)).

Ibn Jarir said: Do not have it without considering those who frequently
swear as unblievers. Other interpreters mentioned after Ibn Abbas that this
is telling people: Do not swear. Others said: Keep to your oaths that 15 to
say do not break them. It was mentioned by Ibn Abbas in his book. Verily
the two interpretations are inseparable since frequent swearing means taking
it lightly and not aggrandizing Allah (the Exalted) as well as other things.
That contradicts the perfection of required unification.

(It was narrated after Abi Huraira (May Allah be pleased with him)
who said: I heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) saying:

430 - «Swearing sells the commodity, yet it exhausts gain». It was nar-
rated by both.

That is to say Al-Bukhary and Moslem. It was also narrated by An-Na-
sai‘. It means the following: Verily if one swears about his commodity, by
saying that he was offered such and such a sum of money or that he bought
it for such and such a sum of money; the buyer might think that he is tell-
ing the truth with such swearing; he would buy it for more than its actual

585

It was narrated after Salman that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said,

«There are three people that Allah (the Exalted) would not talk to nor

value while the seller is lying because he wants the extra price. By doing this
he disobeys Allah (the Exalted) and he would be punished by eradicating
prosperity and when prosperity goes, he would suffer Shortage greater than
that increase he gains by swearing; and may be the price of that commodity
would be eradicated. What Allah (the Exalted) has cannot be achieved but
by obeying Him (the Exalted) and even if the present life is decorated for
the disbeliever, its consequences decline, decay and perish.

His saying: (It was narrated after Salman (May Allah be pleased with
him) that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Aliah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said:

431 - «Three people that Allah (the Exalted) would not talk to nor puri-
fy and they would suffer severe and painful punishment: An adulterous with
grey hair, a haughty needy person, and a man who turns Allah (the Exalted)
as a commodity; he buys and sells only by his oath» It was narrated by At-
Tabarani with a good reference).

Salman may be he is Salman Al-Farisi Abu Abdullah. He witnessed the
battle of Khandaq. Abu Othman An-Nahdi, Sharhabil ben As-Samet and
others narrated after him. The Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said:

432 - «Salman is considered one of us, the people of the house, verily
Allah (the Exalted) loves from among my Companions four: Ali, Aba
Tharr, Salman, and Al-Mokdad». It was narrated by At-Tirmithi and Ibn
Maja. Al-Hasan said: Salman was a prince ruling thirty thousand people. He
used to address them on Friday sermon wearing a gown half of which he
wore and half of which he spread on the ground. He died during the Cali-
phate of Othman (May Allah be pleased with him). Abu Obeida said in the
year 36 A.H. It is possible that he is Salman ben Amer ben Aws Ad-Dabbi.

His saying: (Three people Allah (the Exalted) would not talk to these
disobeyers this is an indication that He (the Exalted) will talk to those who
obey Him. And that speech is one of the qualities of His (the Exalted)
perfection. The evidence on that is taken from the Holy Koran and the
Sunna. And that is the way of the people of Sunna and consensus those
researching Allah’s performance of actions and that verily the action takes
place by His will and volition and His ability and He still possesses this
quality. He is unique, eternal, as said by the people of Honorable Hadith

586

purify and they would suffer severe and painful punishment: an adulterous
grey haired, a haughty needy person, and a man who turned Allah (the Ex-
alted) into a commodity of his; he never buys without swearing nor does he
sell without swearing». It was narrated by At-Tabarani with right reference.

and others among the Companions of Ash-Shafi, Ahmad and other sects.
Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Verily when He intends a
thing, His command is, Be, and it is!» (36: 82). Thus He (the Exalted)
mentioned the many letters indicating receiving, and actions indicating state
and receiving as well. Such examples in the Holy Koran are numerous.

Sheikh Al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said:
If they tell us that He (the Exalted) means those who deny the attributes of
Allah (the Exalted): This requires that accidental qualities exist as part of
Him (the Exalted). We said: He who denies this before you from those who
came before and those Imams? The text of the Holy Koran and the Honor-
able Sunna encompasses this along with clear thought. The term accidental
is general it might mean performances and contradictions, while Allah (the
Exalted) is clear from all these matters- but He (the Exalted) does whatever
He wishes from what He (the Exalted) says or does, an example about that
is the following: That which has been indicated by the Holy Koran and the
Sunna. The correct thing to say is- it is what the people of religious knowl-
edge and Honorable Hadith say: Allah (the Exalted) talks and still has the
ability to talk if He (the Exalted) wishes so, as was said by Ibn Al-Moubar-
ak, Ahmad ben Hambal and others of the Imams of Sunna.

I said: Accidents are existing with Him (the Exalted) means: His ability
to create them and make them happen and exist by His volition and com-
mand. And Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

His saying: (Nor would He (the Exalted) purify them and they would
suffer severe and painful punishment). When their guilt became great, their
punishment became great, thus they were. punished by these three [Punish-
ments] which are the greatest types of punishment.

His saying: (An adulterous with grey hair that is to say because the rea-
son for committing sin has become weak and it indicates that the motive for
adultery is the love of disobedience and fornication and not his fear of Allah
(the Exalted). When the reason for disobedience is weak and if one commits
it, then that necessitates making the punishment more severe and more pain-
ful that is in contradistinction to the case of the young man whose strength
of the motive of [sexual] desire may get over him even though he fears Allah
(the Exalted) and he might repent and blame himself for being disobedient
and stops committing it.

587

It was narrated in the Saheeh after Imran ben Housein (May Allah be
pleased with him): Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said, «The best among my nation are those who come in my
generation then those who come after them, then those who come after
them -Imran said: I donot remember whether he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said after his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) generation twice or thrice? Then after you come a people who witness
but not die in battles for the sake of Allah (the Exalted), betray...

The same goes for the haughty needy because he does not allow him to
be haughty because the motive for haughtiness is mostly having a lot of
money, prosperity and leadership. And the needy poor does not have the
reason for being haughty. Thus his haughtiness with the absence of a reason
for that indicates that haughtiness is a part of his character and nature, re-
siding in his heart, thus his punishment becomes great because the reason
for haughtiness does not exist, that is why it is classified among the greatest
sins.

His saying: (And a man who swears by Allah (the Exalted) to sell his
commodity), thus making Him (the Exalted) his commodity for associating
Him (the Exalted) with the goods he sells and buys. These deeds show that
the one performing them, if he were a unifier, his unification is weak and his
deeds are weak, according to what he believed in and according to what his
tongue said and he performed those serious acts of disobedience while there
was no reason or motive for them. We ask Allah (the Exalted) to save and
grant us health and we seek refuge with Allah (the Exalted) from commit-
ting any act that He (the Exalted) does not love or accept.

His saying: (It was narrated in the Saheeh) that is to say Moslem’s Sa-
heeh. It was also narrated by Abu Dawud, At-Tirmithi and Al-Bukhary.

His saying: after Imran ben Housein (May Allah be pleased with him):
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said:

433 - «The best among my nation are those living in the same genera-
tion, then those who came after them, then those who come after them- Im-
ran said: I do not remember whether he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said after his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) gen-
eration twice or thrice -then verily there will come a people after you who
witness but do not die in battles fighting for the sake of Allah (the Exalted),
betray and cannot be trusted, vow and donot fulfil their vows; among them
appears those who are fatty».

588

_.. and cannot be trusted, vow and do not fulfil their vows; among them ap-
pears those who are obsene.

His saying: (The best among my nation are those people of my genera-
tion) because of the virtue of that century in matters of religious knowledge,
faith and righteous deeds for which people competed and rivaled for prece-
dence so the good overwhelmed and good people become plenty while evil
people declined and Islam and faith were more glorious; religious authority
and religious teaching were more (than those who came after them) they
were preferred to those who came after them, because the Islam appeared
during their time as well as those calling people for it. And the innovations
that appeared during the first generation were rejected and eradicated like
the innovation of the Kharijites, Kadarites, Rafidites; such innovations, even
though they appeared, those believing in those innovations lived in humility,
disgrace and fear of being killed when they were stubborn and did not re-
ject.

His saying: (I do not remember whether he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said after his generation twice or thrice) this is doubted
by the narrator of the Honorable Hadith, Imran ben Houssein (May Allah
be pleased with him). What is known in the narrations: Verily the preferred
generations are three. However, the savants were available and Islam was
evident and Holy struggle existing. Then he mentioned the aversion from re-
ligion and following ones desires that took place.

So he said, «Then after you there will come people who witness but
who do not die in Holy struggle», because they took the matter of dying in
Holy Struggle lightly and they never searched for that which is truthful that
is so because their Faith was not perfect and their Islam was weak.

His saying: (They betray and can not be trusted) this indicates that ve-
rily betrayal overwhelms many of them or even most of them (those vow
and do not fulfil their vows) that is to say they do not perform that which is
their obligation, so the appearance of those ugly and disgraceful acts indi-
cates the weakness of Islam and unbelief.

His saying: (Among them appears those who are fat) due to their desire
in the present life, enjoying it and forgetting about the Afterlife and working
for it. Anas said:

A434 - «There will never come a time on people but the one after it 1s more
evil; this will continue as such till you meet your Lord (the Exalted)».

Anas said: I heard this from your Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him); evil still increases in this nation till polytheism ap-

589

Also it was narrated after Ibn Masoud that the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «The best among people are
those living in my generation then those who come after them, then those
who come after them, then those who come after them. Then comes a
people whose witness precedes his oath and his oath is his witness».

{brahim said, «They used to beat us».

This Honorable Hadith denotes many issues:

The first: Advising people to keep their oaths.

The second: Informing that swearing promotes a commodity and eradi-
cates prosperity.

The third: Serious warning to the one who constantly swears when he
buys and sells.

The fourth: Warning that a sin becomes more serious when it is com-
mitted in the absence of necessity.

The fifth: Dispraising those who swear and ask others to swear.

The sixth: His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) praising
the three or four generation coming after him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) and mentioning what will happen.

The seventh: Those who came before used to be their children to say
the witness.

pears and innovations among many of them even among those who belong
to the world of knowledge, teaching, and books.

I said: Rather, they called for polytheism, delusion and innovations,
and they wrote in that books and poems. We seek refuge with Allah (the Ex-
alted) from whatever makes Him wrathful.

His saying: (It was narrated after Ibn Masoud (May Allah be pleased
with him) that the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said:

435 - «The best among people are those living in my generation, then
those who come after them, then those who come after them. Thereafter
comes a people whose witness precedes their oath and their oath precedes
their witness».

I said: That is the case of he who turns his desires to the present life
and forgets the After life. Thus he took witness and swearing lightly because
he is care free and fears Allah (the Exalted) less and that is the case of most

590

eee ‏م م ااا ل ل‎ EEE EE EE EEE ET EET ‏ا‎

of them. And all is sought from Allah (the Exalted). Thus if this happened
during the begining of Islam then that which happened later is much greater
than that. Thereupon the people were careful.

His saying: (Ibrahim said- he is An Nakhi- they used to beat us.

That happened because those followers [of Islam] had abundant reli-
gious knowledge and strength of Faith of their Lord (the Exalted) and per-
forming the duty and ordering people to do that which is kind and
forbidding them from doing that which is hated because it is among the best
of Holy Struggle and because religion can not be but by it. This includes a
desire to train the children to obey their Lord and to refrain from doing
that which harms them. That is Allah’s (the Exalted) benefaction, He (the
Exalted) grants it to whomever He (the Exalted) desires and all benefaction
belongs to Him (the Exalted).

591

Chapter

(What was mentioned about Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)). |

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Fulfil the covenant of Allah when ye en-
ter into it, and break not your oaths after ye have confirmed them: indeed
ye have made Allah your surety...» (16: 91).

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter concerning what was mentioned about protection
by Allah (the Exalted) and protection by His Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) and Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Fulfil
the covenant of Allah when ye have entered into it, and break not your
oaths after ye have confirmed them; indeed ye have made Allah your sur-
ety...» (16: 91).

The religious authority Ibn Kathir said: That is what Allah(the Exalted)
commands [People to perform] to fullfil their promises and covenant and to
keep Faith. That is why He (the Exalted) has said, (and break nct our oaths
after ye have confirmed them) and there is no contradiction between this,
«And make not Allah’s (name) an excuse in your oaths» (2: 224) and be-
tween, «... that is the expiation for the oaths ye have sworn. But keep to
your oaths». (5: 92). That is to say do not leave them without expiation and
between what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said as has
been mentioned in the two Saheehs.

436 - «Verily by Allah (the Exalted) if He wishes I do not swear about
something without expiating myself from it when I see that other options
are better - and in another narration- and I expiated my oath». There is no
contradiction between all this and between the here mentioned Holy verse
(and break not your oaths after ye have confirmed them) because the oaths
meant here are those concerned with convenants and promises and not those
concerned with forbidding [others from doing something or inducing and
motivating them to do something]. That is why Moujahid said about the

592

It was narrated after 8011132103, «Whenever Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) assigned a prince [Ruler]
over an army, he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) used to ad-
vise him to revere Allah (the Exalted) and fear Him to be good and kind
with the Moslems who are with him. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) said: Invade in the name of Allah (the Exalted); for the sake
of Allah (the Exalted) fight those who do not believe in Him.

Holy verse: It is concerned with swearing; the swearing practised in Pre-Isla-
mice times. He is supported by Imam Ahmad after Joubeir ben Matam who
said: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said:

437 - There is no swearing in Islam; rather swearing used to be a Pre-Is-
lamic practice which was made stronger by Islam». The name was narrated
by Moslem.

It means that Islam doesnot need to be associated with swearing that
Pre-Islamic people practised; verily adhering to Islam is sufficient.

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «.... For Allah knoweth all that ye do».
(16: 91) is warning and threatening he who breaks oaths after confirming
them.

His saying: (It was narrated after Bouraida) he is Ibn Al-Housaib Al-
Aslami. And this Honorable Hadith has been narrated after his son Soulei-
man after him who mentioned it in [his book] «al-Moufhim».

His saying: (He said: whenever Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) assigned a prince [Ruler] over an army or
a battalion, he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) used to ad-
vise him to revere and fear Allah (the Exalted).

Al-Harbi said: A battalion may reach a number of four hundred horse-
men. An army is whatever is more than that in number. Revering Allah (the
Exalted) and fearing Him and being careful in obeying Him (the Exalted) in
order to avoid His Punishment.

1 said: And that is materialized by doing what Allah (the Exalted) has
commanded us to do and refraining from doing what He forbidden us.

His saying: (And be good and kind with the Moslems who are with
him) that is to say he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ad-
vised him to treat them in a good way: To be kind to them, be friendly to
them and be humble with them and not to treat them haughtily.

593

Invade yet donot be extremists, nor cheat, deceive, maim or kill. If you
meet your polytheist enemies call them to three habits or dispositions and to
whichever they respond to accept from them and donot fight them any
more. Then ask them to embrace Islam, if they respond positively, then ac-
cept from them, ask them to move from their homes to the homes of immi-
grants, and tell them that if they did so, they would get what the immigrants
get and they will pay what the immigrants have to pay.

Then if they refuse to move tell them to be like the Moslem Arabs, sub-
dued to the rule of Allah (the Exalted), they do not get war gains unless
they join Holy struggle with the Moslems. If they refuse then ask them to
pay Jizya [Tribute], if they agree, then accept it and stop fighting them, and
if they refuse ask for Allah’s help and fight them.

His saying: (Invade by the name of Allah (the Exalted) that is to say
start your invasion asking for the help of Allah (the Exalted) and being
Faithful to Him.

His saying: (Fight those who do not believe in Allah (the Exalted). This
general statement encompasses all the disbelievers; those fighting as well as
those who are not. And he (May Allah's blessings and peace be upon him)
intended among them those who were protected, priest and women and
those under age and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:
And do not kill a friary; rather, he forbade killing priests and women be-
cause they mostly do not fight and when they fight they usually get killed or
escapage.

I said: The same goes for children and dividing it saying:(Do not gain
without nor cheat or maim) that is to say do not take it without dividing it
among other fighters. Cheating is breaking a covenant. Maiming is mutilat-
ing the killed person like cutting off his nose, ear or other organs. There is
no conflict over proscribing taking gain without dividing it among fighters
or cheating and hating mutilation.

His saying: (And if you meet your polytheist enemies call them to three
habits or characters). Habits or characters in this context are the same.

His saying: (For whichever they respond to, you should accept and stop
fighting them) that is to say accept whichever they accept.

His saying: (Then ask them to embrace Islam), this text was mentioned
in the same way in all the copies of Moslem’s book «then call them» adding
«then» and the correct thing is to delete it. It was also narrated in books
other than Moslem’s such as Abu Dawud’s, and «Kitab Al-Amwal», by Abi
Oubaid because that was the beginning of the interpretation of the three ha-

594

And if you besiege a people in a fort and they want you grant them the
protection of Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him), then do not grant...

bits.

His saying: (Then ask them to move to the homes of immigrants) he
means to Medina. At the very start every one who embraced Islam had to
immigrate to Medina and this shows that the immigration used to be an ob-
ligation on every one who becomes a believer among the people of Mecca
and other cities.

His saying: (Then if they refuse to move) he means that if someone em-
branced Islam and did not immigrate or join in the Holy Struggle, would
not be given from the fifth (Zakat), or from Al-Fai (war gains). And Ash-
Shafi (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) did not see that they deserved to
get something of Al-Fai. Rather, they only deserved alms taken from their
rich and given in turn to their poor. Also, the people of Holy struggle and
the soldiers of Moslem do not have the right to get alms from those people;
every sort of money should be spent only for the sake of its people. Malek
and Abu Hanifa equated between the two kinds of property and allowed it
to be given to the weak.

His saying: (So if they refuse, then ask them to pay (Jizyah tribute) this
shows a reason and a proof for Malek, his companions and Al-Ouzai con-
cerning the necessity of taking tribute from every unbeliever an Arab or a
non-Arab who believes in a Holy Book or not. Abu Hanifa said that it
should be taken from all but Arab disbelievers and Arab Magus. Ash-Shafi
said: It should not be taken from the people who have a Holy Book
whether Arabs or non-Arabs. This was said by Imam Ahmad; it should be
taken from the Magus.

I said because the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) took it from them and said:

438 - «Apply on them the Sunna of the people of the Holy Book».

However, they conflicted concerning the ration of that tribute. Thus
Malek said: Four dinars should be paid by the people of Gold; four dirhams
should be paid by the people of paper; shall the weak pay less or not? There
are two opinions about that Ash-Shafi said: One dinar should be paid by
the poor and by the sick. Abu Hanifa said as well as the people of Kufa:
The rich should pay forty-eight dirhams the average should pay twenty-four
dirhams and the poor twelve dirhams. That is what Ahmad ben Hanbal
(May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said.

595

... then the protection of Allah (the Exalted) or the protection of His Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him); rather, grant them
your protection and the protection of your companions. Verily it is easier
and more suitable to guard what you protect than to guard what Allah (the
Exalted) and His Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) guard. And if you besiege a fort, and they want you to let them settle
in accordance with Allah (the Exalted), let them settle according to your
rule. Verily you do not know whether you do that correctly or not? This
was narrated by Moslem.

This Honorable Hadith encompasses many issues:

The first: The difference between Allah’s (the Exalted) protection, His
Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) protection
and the Moslem’s protection.

The second: Guiding [people] to the least dangerous issue:

The third: His saying: «Invade in the name of Allah (the Exalted) and
for the sake of Allah (the Exalted)».

The fourth: His saying: «Fight those who disbelieve in Allah (the Ex-
alted)».

The fifth: His saying: «Seek Allah’s (the Exalted) help and fight them».

The sixth: The difference between Allah’s (the Exalted) judgment and
that of religious authority.

And Malek and all other Moslem religious authorities believe that only
the adult free slave men should pay it; rather it is taken from those reigned
by the Moslems and not from those far away and it should be sent to the
Moslem countries or wars fought by Moslems.

His saying: (And if you besiege people inside a fort) the speech contains
a proof for those religious authorities and fundamentalists who say: In mat-
ters of opinion the correct opinion is one. That is known after the creed of
Malek and others and they say so because the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) stated that Allah (the Exalted) has a cer-
tain specified judgment concerning opinions. Thus he who agreed with Him
(the Exalted), is the one who is right, and the one who disagreed with Him
(the Exalted) is the one who is mistaken.

439 - His saying: (If you besiege a people inside a fort and they want
you to grant them protection of Allah (the Exalted) and the protection of
His Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)...) Protec-
tion is # covenant and abrogate not to be revoked: As if he said: If revoke
takes place from someone going beyond limits and hostile, that would be

596

The seventh: That the companion rules when need exists by a rule that
he does not know whether it agrees with that of Allah’s (the Exalted) or not.

considered revoking the covenant or promise between creatures and that is
easier than revoking Allah’s covenant. And Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

His saying: (and Nafi said when he called on people to embrace Islam
before fighting them and he mentioned that the creed of Malek combines be-
tween the Honorable Hadiths concerning calling to Islam before fighting. He
said that Malek said: The disbelievers should not be fought before calling
them to embrace Islam and they should not be touched before the call of Is-
lam reaches them. Then it is allowable to fight them and the conclusion of
Malek is the correct one because the benefit of the call 15 to let the enemy
realize that Moslems do not fight for the present life or for fanaticism;
rather, they fight for religion. Thus when they learn that that night be a rea-
son for their inclination towards the Truth in contradistinction to those who
do not learn about the intent of Moslems. Thus some might think that they
fight for the sake of a kingdom and the present life so they would become
more stubborn. And Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

597

Chapter

(What was mentioned concerning: Giving the Oath to Allah (the Ex-
alted)).

It was narrated after Jundub ben Abdullah (May Allah’s Mercy be
upon him) who said that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said, «A man said, May Allah (the Exalted) not forgive
so and so, thus Allah (the Exalted) said, Who is it that gives the oath to Me
that I shouldn’t forgive so and so? Verily I have forgiven him and failed
you». This Honorable Hadith was narrated by Moslem.

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter [on] what was mentioned concerning giving the
oath to Allah (the Exalted) ).

The writer mentioned an Honorable Hadith. (It was narrated by Jun-
dub ben Abdullah (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) that Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:

440 - «A man said, «By Allah (the Exalted) may He not forgive so and
so. Thus Allah (the Exalted) said: «Who is it that gives the oath to Me that
I should not forgive so and so? Verily I have forgiven him and failed you».
This Honorable Hadith was narrated by Moslem).

His saying: (Give the oath to Allah (the Exalted) ) that is to say swear.
Al-Baghawi said in «Sharh As-Sunna» that Abi Huraira said -and he used
Ikrama ben Ammar as a reference- He said, «I entered the Mosque of Medi-
na, and a sheikh called on me saying: O Yamami, come here. I did +
know the man before. He said: Do not say to a man: By Allah (the Ex-
alted), may Allah (the Exalted) not forgive you nor admit you into the Gar-
den. I said: And who are you (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)? He said:
Abu Huraira. Thereupon I said: Verily such a term is told by one of us to
his family members when he is angry, or to his wife or to his servant. He

598

And it was narrated after Abi Huraira: «Verily the one who Says 15 a
worshipping man. Abu Huraira said: He said a word that ruined his present
life as well as his Afterlife.

said: Verily I heard Allah’s Holy Messenger saying:

44] - Verily there were two men among Bani Israel who loved each
other, one of them was a very good worshipper while the other as if he said
that he was guilty. So he started saying: Stop what you are doing. He said :
Let me and my Lord Alone. He said: Then came a day when he found him
committing a great sin. Thereupon he said: Stop what you are doing. He
said: Leave me and my Lord Alone. Were you sent to watch me. So he said:
By Allah (the Exalted) may He not forgive you nor admit you into the Gar-
den. He said: So Allah (the Exalted) sent on them an angel who took them
in death then they met at Him (the Exalted); He told the guilty man: Be ad-
mitted into the Garden by virtue of My Mercy; and He told the other one:
Can you prevent My Mercy from reaching My servant? He said: O Lord.
No. He (the Exalted) said: Take him to Hell-Fire. Abu Huraira said: By the
one who possesses my soul he said a word that ruined his present life as
well as his Afterlife.

It was narrated by Abu Dawud in his «Sunnan». The following is Abi
Huraira’s (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) narration, «There were two
brotherly friends among Bani Israel; one of them used to commit gullts
while the other was a good worshipper. The worshipper always saw the
other committing guilt and he used to say: Stop doing that. So one day he
saw him committing a sin, and he told him: Stop doing that. The other man
said: Leave me and my Lord Alone; were you sent to observe me? He said:
By Allah (the Exalted), may He (the Exalted) not forgive you or admit you
into the Garden. So He (the Exalted) took them in death then they met at
the Lord of the worlds. So He (the Exalted) told the good worshipper: Did
you know all about Me, or were you able to control what I control? So He
(the Exalted) told the guilty: Go and be admitted into the Garden, and he
told the other one: Take him to Hell-Fire».

His saying: (It was mentioned in Abi Huraira’s Honorable Hadith that
the narrator is a worshipping man) indicates as to his saying in this Honor-
able Hadith «One of them is a good worshipper», and these Honorable Ha-
dith show the dangers of the tongue and that shows that one has to be
careful what to say. Concerning that we mention the Honorable Hadith of
Mouatu.

442 - «I said 0 Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him); are we to be judged for what we speak? He (May

599

ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ل ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ا ل ا ا ا ا ا ا ا اا ا ا ا ا الل ايا ا ا م

Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: May your mother be
bereaved of you, O Mouath, would people be thrown into Hell-Fire on their

faces and on their roses -but as a consequence of what they say. And Allah
(the Exalted) knows best».

This Honorable Hadith encompasses many issues: |

The first: Warning against giving the oath to Allah (the Exalted).
The second: Hell-Fire being closer to the one of us than his shoe-lace.
The third: The same thing goes for the Garden.

The fourth: There is an evidence for his saying, verily a man says the
word...».

The fifth: Verily a man may be forgiven because of something that he
hates most.

600

Chapter

(Allah (the Exalted) cannot be called on to intercede for the sake of His
creatures).

It was narrated after Joubeir ben Moutam (May Allah be pleased with
him), «An Arab came to the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) and said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) the people are exhausted, children and women are
hungry, the property is ruined. Thereupon ask your Lord (the Exalted) for
our sake for we intercede with Allah (the Exalted) through you and
intercede with you through Allah (the Exalted). Thereupon the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Praise Allah
(the Exalted), Praise Allah (the Exalted) and he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) kept on...

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter [about] Allah (the Exalted) cannot be called on to
intercede for the sake of His creatures).

And he [The writer] narrated this Honorable Hadith and the text of Abi
Dawud in his «Sunan» in a way which is more perfect and complete than
that narrated by the writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him).

(It was narrated after Joubeir ben Moutam after his father from his
grandfather who said, «An Arab came to Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) and said: O Allah’s Holy
Messenger, people are exhausted, children and women are hungry, the
property is ruined, riding animals are extinguished, may you ask Allah (the
Exalted) to send us rain since we verily ask you to intercede with Allah (the
Exalted) for our sake; Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said: Woe on you. Do you realize what you say? Then
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)

601

... praising till that was realized in the faces of his Companions. Then he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Woe unto you, do you
know what is Allah (the Exalted). He is verily greater than that. Verily it is
not allowable to intercede with Allah (the Exalted) for the sake of one of
His creatures». It was narrated by Abu Dawud.

praised Allah (the Exalted) and kept on praising Him (the Exalted) till he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) realized that on the faces of
his Companions, then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
said: Woe on you, it is not allowable to intercede with Allah (the Exalted)
for the sake of one of His creatures; Allah (the Exalted) is much greater
than that. Woe on you, do you know what Allah (the Exalted) is? His
Throne on His Heavens is as such- Then he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) drew a dome in the air by his (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) finger- and it is to make a sound like the sound of
the camel when one is riding on it.

443 - Ibn Bashshar said in his Honorable Hadith, «Verily Allah (the Ex-
alted} is above His Throne and His Throne is above His Heavens.

Al-Hafeth Ath-Thahabi said: It was narrated with good reference when
responding to the Juhmites after an Honorable Hadith by Muhammad ben
Ishaq ben Yasar.

His saying: (Woe on you, it isnot allowable to intercede with Allah (the
Exalted) for the sake of one of His creatures). Verily He (the Exalted) is the
Lord and Possessor of every thing. All good and benefaction belong to Him;
no one can prevent people from taking what He (the Exalted) gave or give
what He kept; nor there is any one who can remove what He (the Exalted)
predestined; there is nothing in Heavens or on earth that can make Him be
disabled; He (the Exalted) is All knowing and All-Mighty. Rather, if He (the
Exalted) wants something to happen He (the Exalted) will say be and it is.
Allah creatures and all what they possess belong to Him (the Exalted); He
manipulates them the way He likes and, He accepts intercession of interce-
ders, that is when He (the Exalted) rejects what the Arab said.

His saying: (... and he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
praised Allah (the Exalted) and glorified Him a lot, because it is improper
to talk about the Creator as such. Praise be to Him (the Exalted) verily
Allah (the Exalted) is greater and above all that.

Meanings hidden in this honorable Hadith: Proving that Allah (the Ex-
alted) is above all His creatures and that His Throne is above His Heavens.
It also includes interpreting the term «sit firmly» to m2 + above as was ex-

602

This Honorable Hadith encompasses many issues:

The first: It is rejected to say: We intercede Allah (the Exalted) over

you.

The second: His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) change
because of this in a way that was realized by his Companions.

plained by the Companions [of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him)], the followers, and the Imams, that is contrary to what
the Juhmites and suspenders (Mouattila] and Moutazila and those learning
after them believe in, such as the Asharites and those following them su: 1
as those disbelieving in the names of Allah (the Exalted) and in His att*'-
butes and those intended for them which confirm His Perfection. Such is the
belief of those righteous who came before and the Imams, as well as those
following them among those adhering to the Sunna since they confirm what
Allah (the Exalted) has confirmed for Himself and what His Holy Messen-
ger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) confirmed for Him of
the attributes of perfection that fit His glory and exaltedness without com-
paring Him to others.

The religious authority Ibn Al-Qayyim (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said in his book «Mouftah As-Saada»- after a discussion preceding
that about what makes the servant know himself and his Lord through the
wanders of His creatures. After that he said:

And the second: Is to go beyond that to looking through the insight so
the doors of Heavens open to him and he would roam its regions and be-
tween its angels; then a door after door opens to him till the march of the
heart reaches the Throne of the Most Merciful where he would observe its
vastness, glory, exaltedness, highness, and greatness; he would see the seven
Heavens and the two earths as a ring thrown in an uninhabited land; he
would see the angels close to the Throne Praising, Thanking, Glorifying and
Eulogizing while the commands [of Allah (the Exalted)] descend unto them
through rulers and soldiers known only by their Possessor and Lord.

Thus the command to bring certain people to life and like other into
death, to support certain people and to humiliate others, to erect a kingdom
and to destroy another, to move a certain favour from one place to another,
to fulfil various types of needs: [such as] compensating for a broken hearted,
enriching a poor, healing a sick person, removing grief, forgiving a sin, re-
moving harm, supporting an oppressed, guiding a lost person, educating an
ignorant, returning a traveller, pacifying a frightened person, helping an as-
ker for help, aid the weak, rescuing the one asking for help, help the dis-

603

The third: Verily he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) did
not reject his saying, «We ask you to intercede for us...».

The fourth: Drawing attention to the interpretation of «Praise Allah».

The fifth: That verily Moslem may ask him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) for rain.

abled, revenging of an oppressor, stopping aggression; they are the lives of
Justice and benefaction, wisdom and Mercy, executed in all regions of the
world.

He (the Exalted) can not be distracted from them by anything else, nor
can He (the Exalted) be mistaken due to the vast number of problems and
needs of various types, languages and times; nor are His (the Exalted) stores
decreased by an atom; There is no God but He (the Exalted) the Most
powerful the Most Wise. Then the heart stands between the hands of the
Most Merciful, keeping silent out of fear of His Glory, and Power, so he
prostrates himself between His hands one prostration from which he does
not rise till the Day of Judgment; that is the travel of the heart while it is
still in its place. That is among the greatest signs of Allah (the Exalted) as
well as the greatest marvels of His creation. On what a travel, how blessed it
is, how truthful it is, how great is the gain it returns, how exalted is its bene-
fit and consequence. The life of Spirits is travel, the key to happiness, the
gain of minds and heacts; it is not like travel which is a piece of torture.

As for asking for the intercession of Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) during his life time; what is meant
here is asking for his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
invocation, and not something special; rather, ever living righteous creatures
desires that his request be answered thus there is no objection if he (May
Allah’s biessings and peace be upon him) is asked to intercede for that
which ts general and particular.

444 - As the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said to Omar when he wanted to perform the Umra, «O our brother,
do not forget to invoke Allah (the Exalted) for our sake». As for the dead,
verily it is allowable to invoke Allah (the Exalted) for his sake during his
funeral and at his grave and in other than that. That is which is allowable
concerning the dead, as for calling on him, that is not allowed: rather, that
was indicated by the Holy Koran and the Sunna that it is not allowable and
warned against. Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said, «... and those
whom ye invoke besides Him have not the least power. If ¥e invoke them,
they will not listen to your call, and if they were to listen, they can not an-

604

شام هام نخد مه مداع دواع مام عام ماعدا» وم سد ها م م م ما عا م عا مام 6 قم ما ما عع م قم م عم مدق مامه معام فالا فم مع نيعا ب ماران ع ملام لاماي بر انارو ل ري يي ل لل لا لل

swer your (prayer). On the Day of Judgment they will reject your Partner-
ship» (35: 13-14).

Thus He (the Exalted) has shown that invoking he who does not hear
or answer is polytheism that classifies the doer on the day as a disbeliever
that is to say He (the Exalted) will reject this person and become the enemy
of the one who does so. In that connection He (the Exalted) has said in the
Holy Sura of Ahqaf, «And when mankind arc gathered together (at the res-
urrection) they will be hostile to them and reject their worship (al to-
gether)»(46: 6). Thus every dead person or absent person, neither hears,
answers, benefit or harms and the Companions (May Allah be pleased with
them) [of the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)}
especially those who came before such as the Orthodox Caliphs. It was
never reported that they or others invoked the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) after his (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) death to satisfy their needs even at times of drought.

445 - As has happened to Omar (May Allah be pleased with him) when
he went in order to ask Allah for rain he took with him Al-Abbas, the Holy
Prophet’s uncle. So he asked him to ask Allah (the Exalted) to send rain be-
cause he is present and alive and can invoke his Lord (the Exalted). Had it
been allowable to ask someone to ask Allah (the Exalted) to send rain after
his death, he would have asked Omar (May Allah be pleased with him) and
those who came before. Through this the difference between he who is dead
and he who is alive is made evident, because he who 15 alive can invoke ‏لذ‎
‎lah (the Exalted) wherever he is present verily in reality they asked Allah
(the Exalted) by asking someone who invokes and pleads Him (the Exalted);
they also invoke their Lord (the Exalted). Thus he who went beyond that
which is allowable to that which is allowable, will be lost and will make
others lost. Had the invocation of a dead person be good, the companions
would have deserved it more. Thus he who adheres to Allah’s Holy Book
will be saved, and he who leaves it and depends merely on his mind, will
perish. All success is achieved through Allah (the Exaited).

Chapter

(What was mentioned about the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) protection of unification and his (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) blocking the paths of polytheism).

It was narrated after Abdullah ben Ash-Shakhir (May Allah be pleased
with him) that he said, «I let the delegation of ben Amr to Allah’s Holy
Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) thereupon we
said: You are our master. So he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon

CHAPTER

(His saying: Chapter on what was mentioned about the Holy Prophet’s
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) protection of Monotheism
and his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) blocking the Paths
of Polytheism).

His (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) protection of unifi-
cation from what contaminates it such as sayings and deeds along which
unification weakens or becomes deficient. That is frequently quoted after
him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), for example.

446 - «Do not praise me as the Christians have praised the son of Mar-
iam; rather, I am a servant. Thus say: Allah’s servant and Holy Messenger».
He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) also said:

447 - «It is not allowable to seek my help; rather, you 201110 seek
Allah’s help.» And the like. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) forbade people to praise each other and strengthens that by saying to
the one who praised another man.

448 - «Woe unto you! You have cut the neck of your friend...» It was
narrated by Abu Dawud after Abdur-Rahman ben Abi Bakr after his father,
«Verily a man commanded another man in the presence of the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) so he (May Allah’s blessings

606

him) said: The Master is Allah (Be the blessed and raised above). We said:
You are the most virtuous among us, and the most powerful among us. He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Say what you say or
part of it but do not follow the Shaitan». It was narrated by Abu Dawud
with good reference.

It was narrated after Anas (May Allah be pleased with him) «Verily
some people said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him), O the best among us and the son of the best among us,

and peace be upon him) told him: You have cut the neck of your friend...
He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) repeated it three times».
Then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said:

449 - «lf you meet commanders then throw dirt into their faces». It was
narrated by Moslem, At-Tirmithi, Ibn Maja after Al-Mokdad ben AI-As-
wad.

In this Honorabe Hadith, «He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) forbade people from saying: You are our master, then he (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: The Master is Allah (Be the
blessed and raised above)». And he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) forbade them to say, «and the most virtuous among us and the
most powerful among us». And he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said:

450 - «Do not follow the Shaitan».

451 - Also he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said in an
Honorable Hadith narrated by Anas after him (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him), «Verily some people said: O Allah’s Holy Messenger
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him). O you are the best among
us and the son of the best among us...» He (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) hated to be praised or commanded out of fear that they
would go to exaggeration. The commanded by his praise- even though it ap-
plies to him- is considered among the deeds of the Shaitan because of ag-
grandizing that the love of praise may lead to and that contradicts the
perfection of unification, since verily worship can not be established but
through its pole without which it cannot run and that is being extremely
humble and loving and the perfection of humility requires submission, fear
and depending on Allah (the Exalted) and to see oneself only in a state of
criticizing and blaming it in as far as worshipping his Lord (the Exalted) is
concerned. Also loving cannot be achieved unless one loves what Allah (the

607

our master and the son of our master. So he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) said, «O people, say what you say and do not follow
the Shaitan; I am Muhammad, Allah’s servant and Holy Messenger. I do
not like you to raise me above my rank assigned to me by Allah (Be the
blessed and raised above)». It was narrated by An-Nasai with good refer-
ence.

This Honorable Hadith encompasses many issues:
The first: Warning people against exaggeration.
The second: What the one who is told: You are our master should say.

The third: His saying, «Do not follow the Shaitan». even though they
said nothing but the truth.

The fourth: His saying, «I do not like you to raise me above my rank».

Exalted) loves and hates what Allah (the Exalted) hates of sayings, deeds
and wants.

Loving the praise by the servant contradicts what Allah (the Exalted)
wants him to be while the commander seduces him. Thus he would become
a wrong doer, thus the rank of slavery requires hating praise. As well as for-
bidding them in order to protect and maintain this rank. Thus whenever the
servant behaves humbly in front of Allah (the Exalted), his deeds become
pure and correct and whenever he introduces to it what contaminates it this
rank of worship becomes corrupt and deficient if praise lead him to conceit
and that contradicts the essence of worship as has been mentioned in the fol-
lowing Honorable Hadith.

452 - «Pride and glory are My garment and exaltdness is My wrap
around; thus he whoever contends with Me about them, I will torture him».
And it was narrated in another Honorable Hadith:

453 - «He who has in his heart as much as the weight of an atom of
haughtiness will not be admitted into the Garden» love of praise may be the
cause and the ladder on which such deficiets climb. Conceitedness eats good
deeds like the fire eats wood; as for the one who commands, such command
might lead him to placing the commanded in a rank that he does not de-
serve, also there is in their poems that exaggeration which the Holy Messen-
ger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) prohibited and warned
against, verily many people have fallen in this till they declared polytheism
in Lordship, Divinity and Rule as has been mentioned before. And the Holy
Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), when Allah (the
Exalted) perfected the rank of worship for him (May Allah’s blessings and

608

وأعا واو عردو واو اه قا ود و واوا فاه قارا م عاعد عد د و واوا ع عه عدف وا عاو و واو واج هد هد راواه رادها راهشا وام هع لاه قاع عدوا عار م وا ما نا فاح عفاود .د عافد عاءودا مد هد عدوداعدا ند عدو ودود يداد قاد 5د 6ء

peace be upon him). He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) ha-
ted to be commanded in order to protect and maintain this rank and he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) guided the nation to quit
that practice advising them and protecting the rank of unification from cor-
ruption or from being weakened by polytheism and its means. Concerning
that Allah (the Exalted) has said, «But the transgressors changed the word
from that which had been given them...» (2: 59) and they saw that doing
what he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) prohibited them
from doing [Not Performing that which is unallowable] is the best means of
approaching [Allah (the Exalted)] and a benefaction among the best!

As for calling the servant «Master», the religious authorities have con-
flicted over that.

The religious authority [bn Al-Qayyim said in his book «Badai Al-Fa-
waid». The people disagreed as to whether calling mankind «Master» is al-
iowable or not; wrong people prohibit it and he narrated after Malek and
they used what the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) said when they told him, «O Our master, he (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) said:

454 - «The Master is Allah (Be the blessed and raised above)» while
other people who allowed it, and used the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) discussion with the Ansar as an evidence.

455 - «Rise to your Master». This Honorable Hadith is more correct
than the first one. Those people said: It is not allowable to use this term
[Master] in order to address Allah (the Exalted); when the term is used to
address Him (the Exalted) then He (the Exalted) is in the rank of Possessor,
Lord and Supporter and it does not carry the meaning meant when applied
to mankind.

I said: Thus what has been narrated after Ibn Abbas (May Allah be
pleased with him) is true and correct concerning the meaning of the followng
Holy verse, «Say, shall I seek for (my) Cherisher other than Allah». (6: 164).
That is to say a God and a Lord. And he said about the Holy verse, «Allah
the Eternal Absolute..» (113: 2) «He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) is the Master who encompasses all kinds of perfection». Abu Wael
said: «He (the Exalted) is the Master whose has come to an end». As for their
refering to the Holy Prophet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
saying to the Ansar, «Rise to your Master». It appears that the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) did not face Saad thus there
is no preference and Allah (Glory be to Him) knows best.

609

Chapter

(What was mentioned concerning the Holy verse, «No just estimate
have they made of Allah, such due to Him: On the Day of Judgment the
whole of the earth will be but His handful and the Heavens will be rolled up
in His right hand: Glory to Him! High is He above the partners they attri-
bute to Him!«» (39: 67).

It was narrated after Ibn Masoud (May Allah be pleased with him) that
he said, «One of the bishops came to Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) and said: O Muhammad, we verily
consider that Allah (the Exalted) places the Heavens on one finger and the
earths on one finger,...

CHAPTER

His saying: (Chapter on what was mentioned concerning the Holy verse,
«No just estimate have they made of Allah, such as is due to Him: On the
Day of Judgment the whole of the earth will be but His handful and the
Heavens will be rolled up in His right hand: Glory to Him! High is He
above the partners they attribute to Him!» (39: 67) that 15 to say the Honor-
able Hadiths said concerning the meaning of the Holy verse.

The religious authority Ibn Kathir (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
said: Allah (the Exalted) says: The polytheists did not estimate Allah (the
Exalted) justly till they reached the stage of worshipping others along with
Him (the Exalted) while He is the Most Glorious, the One able to do every-
thing, the One who possesses every thing, the One who subdues every thing.

Mujahid said: This Holy verse was send down concerning Quraish. As-
Sidi said: They did not glorify Him (the Exalted) as He should have been
glorified. Muhammed ben Kaab said: Had they justly estimated Him they,
wouldnot have to be lied to Him. And Ali ben Abi Talha said after Ibn Ab-
bas: They are disbelievers, those who did not believe in Allah’s power over

610

... and the trees on one finger, and water on one finger, and the earth on
one finger, and the rest of the creatures on one finger. Then he (the Exalted)
would say: I am the king. Thereupon the Holy prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) laughed till his molar became apparent believ-
ing what the bishop said. Then he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) rehearsed, «No just estimate have they made of Allah, such as is due
to Him; on the Day of Judgment the whole of the earth will be but His
handful...» (39: 67).

Also it was narrated by Moslem, «and the mountains and trees on one
finger, then He (the Exalted) shakes them and say: I am the Possesser, I am
Allah».

Also it was narrated by Al-Bukhary, «He (the Exalted) places the Hea-
vens on one finger, water and soil on another, and the rest of the creatures
on one finger». It was narrated by both.

them. Thus he who believed that Allah (the Exalted) is able to do every
thing, such a person would estimate Allah (the Exalted) justly; those who
did not believe in that, did not estimate Allah (the Exalted) justly.

456 - Many Honorable Hadiths connected to this Holy verse were men-
tioned; it was interpreted as it was descended without adaptation or distor-
tion- the Honorable hadith narrated by Ibn Masoud as well as by the writer
(May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) in this chapter when he said: It was also
narrated by Al-Bukhary in more than one place of his Saheeh. Also it was
narrated by Imam Ahmad, Moslem At-Tirmithi, An-Nasai. All of whom
narrated after Suleiman ben Mihran Al-Amash after Ibrahim after Oubeida
from Ibn Masoud.

Imam Ahmad said: We were told by Muawiya: We were told by Al-Aa-
mash after Ibrahim after Alkama after Abdullah who said, «A man from
among the people of the book came to the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) and said: O Aba Al-Kassem did you know
that Allah (the Exalted) would place all creatures on a finger, Heavens on a
finger, the earths on another, trees on a finger, soil on a finger and the rest
of the creatures on a finger and then He (the Exalted) would say: I am the
king? So Allah’s Holy Messener (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) laughed till his molars appeared in believing what that bishop said. He
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «No just estimate...»
(39: 67). Thus it was narrated by Al-Bukhary, Moslem, An-Nasai after Al-
Aamash.

611

It was narrated by Moslem after Ibn Omar, «On the Day of Judgment
Allah (the Exalted) would roll the Heavens then take them by His right
hance then say, I am the king where are the mighty? Where are the arrogant?
Then He (the Exalted) would roll the seven earths, then He (the Exalted)
would take them by His left arm, then say: I am the king where are the
mighty? Where are the arrogant?».

It was narrated after Ibn Abbas that, «The seven Heavens and seven
earths are nothing in the palm of the hand of the Most Gracious but like a
seed of mustard in the palm or the hand of one of your.

Imam Ahmad said: We were told by Al-Hussein ben Hasan Al-Ashkar
that they were told by Abu Kudainah after Ata after Abi Ad-Duha after Ibn
Abbas who said: «A Jew passed by Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) while he (May Allah’s biessings and peace
be upon him) was sitting [and discussing matters with people]. He said: O
Aba Al-Kassem how do you say: On the day that Allah (the Exalted) would
place Heavens on -this and he pointed at his index finger- and the earth on
this, and the mountains on this and the rest of the creatures on this? Saying
all that while pointing with his finger. Thereupon Allah (the Exalted) sent
down the Holy verse, «No just estimate... The same was narrated by At-
Tirmithi in the interpretation with reference after Abi Ad-Duha Moslem ben
Sabih. He said: [This Honorable Hadith] is righteous and good we only know
it in this version. Then Al-Bukhary said: We were told by Said ben Oufair
that Al-Laith told him that Abdur-Rahman ben Khalid ben Mosafer told him
after Ibn Shehab after Abi Salma ben Abdur-Rahman that Abi Huraira (May
Allah be pleased with him) said: I heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) saying: Allah (the Exalted) would
seize the earth and roll the earth with His (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) right one, where are the kings of the earth?» Moslem narrated
this Honorable Hadith in another way.

Also Al-Bukhary said: We were told by Mukdaem ben Muhammad
that his uncle Al-Kassem ben Yahya told them after Oubeidallah after Ibn
Omar (May Allah be pleased with him) who said: Verily Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said, «Verily on the
Day of Judgment Allah (the Exalted) would seize the earths and put them
on one finger while the Heaven on His right hand, then He (the Exalted)
would say: I am the king». It was narrated by Moslem in another way.

457 - It was also narrated by Imam Ahmad through another source and
in another version which is easier than this one however, longer. Thus he

612

Ibn Jarir said: I was told by Younes that Ibn Wahab told them: Ibn
Zaid said: My father told me: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said, «The seven Heavens as compared to the
Throne are nothing but like seven dirhams thrown into a shield».

459 - He said: Abu Tharr (May Allah be pleased with him) said that he
heard Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon

him) saying, «The chair is nothing compared to the Throne but like an iron
ring thrown in a desert».

It was narrated after Ibn Masoud that, «Between the lowest Heaven
_and that which comes directly after it, five hundred years, and between
every Heaven there are five hundred years and between the seventh Heaven
and the Throne, five hundred years, and between the Throne and water five
hundred years and the Throne 15 above water. And Allah (the Exalted) is
above the Throne, nothing of your deeds can be conceiled.» It was narrated
by Ibn Mahdi after Hammad ben Soulam after Asem, after Zarr after Ab-
dullah.

said: We were told by Affan that they were told by Houmad ben Salam that
Ishaq ben Abdullah ben Abi Talha told them after Oubeidallah ben Mak-
sam after Ibn Omar that Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) one day read this Holy verse while on pulpit, «No just
estimate have they made of Allah, such is due to Him: On the Day of Judg-
ment the whole of the earth will be but His handful, and the Heavens will
be rolled up in His right hand: Glory to Him: High is He above the partners
they attribute to Him!» (39: 67) and Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) said that while moving his (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him) hand to and fro the Lord glorifies Himself
saying: I am the all-Mighty, I am the arrogant, I am the king, I am the all-
Powerful, I am the Generous. So the pulpit shaked with Allah’s Holy Mes-
senger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) till we said: It would.
fall.

458 - His saying: (It was narrated by Moslem after Ibn Omar...) that is
to say Moslem narrated it as such. Al-Houmaidi said that it is more perfect.
Moslem narrated it after Salem who narrated it after his father. It was also
narrated by Al-Bukhary after Oubaidallah after Nafeh after Ibn Omar (May
Allah be pleased with them) who said, «Verily on the Day of Judgment
Allah (the Exalted) would seize the earths while the Heaven is in His right
hand». It was also narrated by Moslem after Oubaidallah ben Maksam.

613

460 - It was also narrated by Ibn Masoud in a similar way after Asem
after Abi Wael after Abdullah.

Al-Hafeth Ath-Thahabi (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: It was

narrated in several versions.

I said: All those Honorable Hadiths show the Glory and Might of
Allah (the Exalted) and the greatness of His creatures. He (Be the blessed
and raised above) learned about His servants through His attributes and
wonders of His creatures all of which point at His perfection and show that
He Alone is the worshipped not having a partner nor in His Lordship or in
His Divinity. It indicates that the attributes are confirmed to be His in a
way that suits His Glory and Exaltedness, confirmed without comparison
and that is indicated by the texts of the Holy Koran and Honorable Sunna
and the texts which have been followed and obeyed by those who came
before of this nation and its Imams and all who have followed them and
identified with them as far as their Islam and faith are concerned.

Just contemplate those Honorable Hadiths in which the Holy Prophet
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) aggrandized his (May Al-
lah’s blessings and peace be upon him) Lord by mentioning the attributes of
His perfection in a way that suits His Exaltedness and believing what the
Jews said about Allah (the Exalted) when those attributes point at His
Glory, just think about how they confirm that Allah (the Exalted) is High
above the Throne; the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) never said about any of them: Verily superficial meaning is not
wanted and that it indicates likening the attributes of Allah (the Exalted) to
the attributes of His creatures. Verily Allah (the Exalted) perfected religion
by this and“completed favours, so he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon hin) taught people the clear Message. May Allah’s blessings be on
him and on his family and Companions and all those who follow them till
the Day of Judgment. The Companions (May Allah be pleased with them)
received after the Holy Prophet (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) all that he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) used to de-
scribe his Lord (the Exalted) such as the attributes of perfection and exalted-
ness so they believed in him (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
and in Allah’s Holy Book and all their Lord’s attributes that it encuiu-
passed.

Concerning that Allah (the Exalted) has said: «And those who are
firmly grounded in knowledge say: «We believe in the Book; the whole of it
is from our Lord...» (3: 7) and the same goes for those who followed them

614

يي ع ع ع ع ع ‎a‏

kindly and the Imams; those religious authorities all of whom used those at-
tributes to describe Allah (the Exalted) and He used them to describe Him-
self and His Holy Messenger. They did not reject any of those attributes and
non of them said: That its superficial meaning is not wanted or that it neces-
sitates likening; rather, they rejected those strongly and while responding to
those concepts they wrote large volumes that are between the hands of the
people of the Sunna and consensus.

Sheikh Al-Islam Ahmad ben Taymiyya (May Allah’s Mercy be upon
him) said: And Allah’s Holy Book from its beginning till the end as well as
the Sunna of His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) and discussions of the Companions and the followers, as well as discus-
sions of various Imams are full with experts that say that Allah (the Ex-
alted) is above every thing and that He is above the Throne, over the
Heavens and straightening on the Throne.

Concerning that He (the Exalted) has said: «To Him mount up (All)
words of Purity: He who exalts each Deed of Righteousness». (35: 10) and,
«.... O Issa! I will take thee and raise thee to Myself». (3: 55) and, «Nay,
Allah raised him up unto Himself..» (4: 158) and, «... Lord of the Ways of
Ascent . The angels and the Spirit ascend unto Him...» (70: 3-4) and «He
rules (all) affairs from the Heavens to the earth: At the end will (all affairs)
go up to Him...» (32: 5), and, «They all revere their Lord high above
them...» (16: 50) and, «He who hath created for you all things that are on
earth; moreover his design comprehended the Heavens, for He gave order
and perfection to the seven firmaments...» (2: 29) and, «Your Guardian-
Lord is Allah, who Created the Heavens and the earth in six days, and is
firmly established on the Throne (of authority): He draweth the night as a
veil over the day, each seeking the other in rapid succession: He created the
sun, the moon, and the stars, (all) governed by laws under His command.

Blessed be Allah, the Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds!» (7: 54)
and «Verily your Lord is Allah, who created the Heavens and the earth in
six days, and is firmly established on the Throne (of authority), regulating
and governing all things. No intercessor (can plead with Him) except after
His leave». (10: 30) He (the Exalted) has mentioned unification in this Holy
verse.

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Allah is He who raised the Heavens with-
out any pillars that ye Can see; is firmly established on the Throne (of
Authority )». (13: 2) and «A revelation from Him who created the earth and
the Heavens up high. (Allah) Most Gracious is firmly established on the

615

وم .اهاعد وا مهدا وداه واه »ا قاقد واه .هاوقاهد هاه واعداماعه فافع عاقده قاوواعر و ها واه فاه هو »> ماعاعد و دواع واعاعد قاع واو فواع واود ود و .د م وهاه واأفاعا ها قدعقاع قاعدا هاف قاع هاو ردقام م انار وام

Throne (of authority)». (20: 4-5) and. «And put thy trust in Him who lives
and dies not; and celebrate His praise; and enough is He to be acquainted
with the faults of His servants; He who created the Heavens and the earth
and all that is between, in six days, and is firmly established on the Throne
(of authority): Allah Most Gracious: Ask thou, then, about Him of any ac-
quainted (with such things)». (25: 58-59) and, «Allah who has created the
Heavens and the earth, and all between them, 112 six days, and is firmly es-
tablished on the Throne (of authority): Ye have none, besides Him, to pro-
tect or intercede (for you): Will ye not then receive admonition? He rules
(all) affairs from the Heavens to the earth: Tell the end, «will (all affairs) go
up to Him, on a Day, the space where of will be (as) a thousand years of
your reckoning.» (32: 4-5) and,

«He who created the Heavens and the earth in six Days, and is moreover
firmly established on the Throne (of authority). He knows that what enters
within the earth and what comes forth out of it, what comes down from Hea-
ven and what mounts up to it. And He is with you wheresoever ye may be.
And Allah sees well all that ye do». (57: 4). He (the Exalted) mentioned His
knowledge, ability, and vision. He (the Exalted) has also said: «Do ye feel se-
cure that He who is in Heaven will not cause you to be swallowed up by the
earth when it shakes (as in an earthquake)? Or do ye feel secure that He who
is in Heaven will not send against you violent tornado (with showers of
stores), so that ye shall know how (terrible) was My warning?» (67: 16-17)
and, «It is sent down by one Full of Wisdom, Worthy of all Praise». (41: 42)
and «The revelation of the Book is from Allah the Exlated in Power, Full of
wisdom» (45: 2) and, «Pharaoh said, O Haiman! Build me a lofty palace, that
I may attain the ways and means- the ways and means of (reaching) the Hea-
vens, and that I may mount up to the God of Moses: But as far as I am con-
cerned I think (Moses) is a har!» (40: 36-37).

I said: And the Imams (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) mentioned in
their books that they wrote in response to those who deny attributes such as
the Juhmites, Muttazila, Asharites and the like. For example, what was men-
tioned by Al-Hafeth Ath-Thahabi in his book «al-Ulum» as well as in other
books supported with correct references after Umm Salma the Holy Pro-
phet’s (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) wife who said con-
cerning His (the Exalted) saying, «(Allah) Most Gracious is firmly
established on the Throne (of authority)» (20: 5). She said: «The straighten-
ing is not unknown, accepting it is believing, rejecting it 1s disbelief».

It was narrated by Ibn Al-Munthir, Al-Lalkai and others with correct
616

.عام عد عد عمد عد هج لارام .د غامد د مد رد .د رام مد رامد. د .و قدقدعد ةي وا وام ودود ود قارد د .د مد ودقا رد رد فد قازده عدفاعر واتد عد قاقد ها قافاع ثاردفد فاع رار رد را ف راو رار رو و رار رار رو و ماو

references. He said: It was confirmed that Sufyan ben Aiyina (May Allah’s
Mercy be upon him) said: When Rabia ben Abi Abdur-Rahman asked: How
is it possible to be established [on the Throne]? He said: Being established is
not unknown, the manner is not conceived, and from Allah (the Exalted) we
get the Message, and the Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) has to inform, we have to believe. Ibn Wahab said: We were
at Malek’s when a man entered and said: O Abu Abdullah «(Allah) Most
Gracious is firmly established on the Throne (of autority)» (20: 5). How was
He (the Exalted) established? So Malek (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him)
thought for sometime and said: (Allah) Most Gracious 1s firmly established
on the Throne (of authority); that is how He described Himself and it can
not be asked how? Saying how about Him is rejected and you came with an
innovation. Take him out». It was narrated by Al-Baihaqi with correct reter-
ence after Ibn Wahab. It was also narrated by Yahya ben Yahya who said:
Straightening is not unknown, the manner is not possible, believing is an ob-
ligation, and asking about it 1s an innovation.

Ath-Thahabi said: Look at how they confirmed that Allah (the Exalted)
straightens on the Throne, and informed that it is understood and does not
need any further explanation and they rejected the mechanism. Al-Bukhary
said in his Saheeh; Mujahid said (reestablished) means that He (the Exalted)
is above the Throne. Also Ishaq ben Rahaweih said: I heard more than one
of the intepreters saying (Allah) on the Throne) that is to say He (the Ex-
alted) is raised above. And Muhammad ben Jarir At-Tabari said about His
(the Exalted) saying: (Allah) Most Gracious is firmly established on the
Throne) that is to say raised above.

Also, Ad-Darimi, Al-Hakem and narrated after Ali ben Al-Hussein ben
Shakik. He said: I heard Abdullah ben Al-Mubarak saying: «We know that
our Lord is above His seven Heavens firmly established on the Throne, and
we donot say what the Juhmites say». Ad-Darimi said we were told by Al-
Hasan ben As-Sabbah Al-Bazzar that they were told by Ali ben Al-Hussein
ben Shakik after Ibn Al-Mubarak: He was told: «How can we know our
Lord (the Exalted)? He said: By that He (the Exalted) is above the seventh
Heaven on the Throne.

We have already mentioned what Al-Ouzaii said: We were -and the fol-
lowers present- saying: Verily we believe in what was mentioned in the Sunna.

Abu Omar At-Talamanki said in «Kitab Al-Ousoul»: The people of the
Sunna have unanimously agreed that Allah (the Exalted) straightens on the

Throne essentially.
In the same book he also said: The people of the Sunna have unani-

617

ع ع ح خ ح ح يح ح ح ح حي يا ا ا ا ا ا اا ا ا 1 1 111 011111 0111 11 1 111 1 0 ا ل ا ل ل ا ا ل ا ل ال ل ا ا لا يالا ل ا ا ال ا اي لي ل ا لا

mously agreed that verily Allah straightens on the Throne in reality not me-
taphorically; then he supported his discussion by what Malek said: Allah
(the Exalted) is in Heavens and His knowledge is every where; then he said
in this book: The people of the Sunna have unanimously agreed that the
meaning of the following Holy verse «... and He is with you wheresoever ye
may be» (57: 4) and like Holy verses mentioned in the Holy Koran: That is
His knowledge, and that verily Allah (the Exalted) is above Heaven) essen-
tially straightens on His Throne as He (the Exalted) wished. That is how he
said it.

Sush discussions are frequently found in the discussions of the Compa-
nions, followers and Imams; they confirmed what Allah (the Exalted) has
confirmed in His Holy Book through His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s
blessings and peace be upon him); that is to say the reality that meets His
exaltedness and Glory; they rejected saying that He (the Exalted) is similar
to the creatures; they did not say how; we have already discussed this in this
chapter.

Al-Hafeth Ath-Thahabi said: The first time I heard the saying of the
one who denied that Allah (the Exalted) is above His Throne: He is Al-Ja‘d
ben Dirham. He also rejected all the attributes. He was killed by Khalid ben
Abdullah Alj-Kisri. His incident is very much famous. However, this was
adopted after him by Al-Jahm ben Safwan the Imam of Juhmites, so he
overtly discussed it and supported it by obscure evidence. That was during
the last period of the followers. Thus the Imams of that time rejected his
opinion, such as Al-Ouzai, Abu Hanifa, Malek, and those Imams of gui-
dance that followed them. Thus the Ouzai, the Imam of the people of Sham
said when this opinion appeared: We were told by Abdul-Wasi Al-Abhari
with reference to Abi Bakr Al-Baihaqi: We were told by Abu Abdullah AI-
Hafeth, I was told by Muhammad Ali Al-Jawhari -in Baghdad- we were
told by Ibrahim ben Al-Haitham, we were told by Muhammad ben Kathir
Al-Mussaissi that he heard Al-Ouzai saying: We- and the followers- were
saying: Verily Allah (the Exalted) is above His Throne. We believe in His at-
tributes mentioned in the Honorable Sunna. This was narrated by Al-Baiha-
qi concerning the attributes. The narrators are reliable.

Imam Ash-Shafi (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) said: Allah(the Ex-
alted) has names and attributes that no one can reject or deny and he who
contradicts them after being given evidence, had in fact disbelieved. As be-
fore being given evidence, then he would be excused dve to his ignorance
and we confirm these attributes and reject likening Him , .. Exalted) to any

618

It was narrated after Al-Abbas ben Abdul Muttaleb (May Allah be
pleased with him) that he said: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s bles-
sings and peace be upon him) said:

461 - «Do you know the distance between the earth and Heavens? We
said: Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings
and peace be upon him) know best. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be
upon him) said: The walking distance of five-hundred years exists between
them, and between each two Heavens there exists the walking distance of
five-hundred years and the thickness of every Heavens the walking distance
of five-hundred years and between the seventh Heavens and the Thr: ie
there exists a sea the depth of which is equal to the distance existing ‏دع‎
‎tween the earth and Heaven; Allah (the Exalted) is above all that; nothing
of the deeds of Bani Adam can be conceiled from Him (the Exalted).» This
Honorable Hadith was narrated by Abu Dawud and others.

other as He (the Exalted) has rejected likening Himself to any thing else.
Concerning this He (the Exalted) has said, «... There is nothing whatever
like unto Him, and He is the One that hears and sees (all things)». (42: 11).

His saying: (It was narrated after Al-Abbas ben Abdul-Muttaleb) the
writer (May Allah’s Mercy be upon him) just summarized this for us; that
which was mentioned in Abi Dawud’s «Sunanm»: It was narrated after A]-Ab-
bas ben Abdul-Muttaleb that he said: I was in the desert with a group with
Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him)
when a cloud passed by us, so he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon
him) looked at it and said: «What do you call that?» They said: Clouds, he
(May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: And it is said: Rain
cloud. Thereupon they said: Rain cloud.

Abu Dawud said: I did not completely understand the last term very
well- he (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: Do you know
the distance existing between the earth and Heaven? They said: We do not
know. He (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) said: The distance
existing between them is either one or two or seventy-three years, then ‘he
same thing goes for the Heavens above, till he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) counted seven Heavens. Above the seventh there is a
sea the depth of which is equal to the distance existing between two Hea-
vens, then above that eight ibex between their hoofs and knees there exists
the distance equal to that existing between one Heaven and the other. Then
on their backs they carry the Throne the height of which is equal to the dis-

619

This Honorable Hadith encompasses many issues:

The first: Interpreting His (the Exalted) saying (... the whole of the
earth will be but His handful).

The second: Such knowledge and the like is known by the Jews living at
his (May Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him) time. They did not deny
or interpret it.

The third: Verily when the bishop talked to the Holy Prophet (May
Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him), he (May Allah’s blessings and
peace be upon him) believed him and the Holy verses was sent down
confirming that.

The fourth: Allah’s Holy Messenger (May Allah’s blessings and peace
be upon him) laughed when the bishop mentioned this great knowledge.

The fifth: Stating the existence of hands and that the Heavens are in the
right hand, while the earths are in the other.

The sixth: Stating that it is called left (hand).
The seventh: Mentioning those who are haughty and arrogant.

The eighth: Saying like a seed of mustard in the palm of the hand of
one of you.

The ninth: The greatness of the chair relative to the sky.
The tenth: The greatness of the Throne relative to the chair.

The eleventh: That verily the Throne is not the same as the chair and
water.

tance existing between one sky and another. Then Allah (the Exalted) is
above all that». It was narrated by At-Tirmithi, and Ibn Maja.

At-Tirmithi said: This 15 a strange yet good Honorable Hadith. Al-Ha-
feth Ath-Thahabi said: It was narrated by Abu Dawud with good reference.
Also At-Tirmithi narrated something similar after Abi Huraira saying: «The
distance existing between one Heaven and the other is five-hundred years»,
and there is no contradiction between the two Honorable Hadiths because
estimating that by five-hundred years is related to the speed of a Caravan,
for example, and seventy years, something as far as the speed of mail is con-
cerned, because it is correct to say: Between Egypt and our country there ex-
ists the distance of twenty days considering normal walk; and three days
considering mail speed. Sharik also narrated part of this Honorable Hadith
after Sammak.

620

The twelfth: The distance existing between the seventh sky and the

chair.
The thirteenth: The distance existing between one sky and the other.
The fourteenth: The distance existing between the chair and water.
The fifteenth: That verily the Throne is above water.
The sixteenth: Verily Allah (the Exalted) 15 above the Throne.
The seventeenth: The distance existing between the earth and Heaven.
The eighteenth: The thickness of every sky is one-hundred years.

The nineteenth: Verily the sea existing above the skies has a depth of
five-hundred years and Allah (the Exalted) knows best.

Praise be to Allah the Lord of the worlds and May His blessing be
upon our Master Muhammad as well as upon his family and Companions
altogether.

621
46

52
72
86
95
112
140
150

171
178

184

189

223
234

252

264

INDEX

Preface .......ccccccccceeeeeceeeeeseeceseeeseeenens OSE DEC RCO EPEC OGo Dee OSE Ee RORO nn Gee onc areenor
The Book of Unification ..... 0.0.0006. 0 ‏فمممم مم امم ممما ممم ممم ةمي ممم ممم م ممم ةنم ء نمم .مم 66م‎
Benefits of Unification and that which protects Mankind and covers their

The discussion of savants concerning the meaning of «There is no God
Dut ‏ممم مم ممم ممم م مم 0 666000006006000 6.6.6666 «188[لث‎ eee seeoeeneseeneenenesgesneseeneaeen es
That who attained Monotheism stage, enters Paradise with no account .....
The fear from Polytheism ‏قمعم ممم مم ممم ممم ممم مم مم ممم ممم ممم ةمل ملم ةم ممم مزل م .مم نموم ...نا‎
Calling people to witness there is no God But Allah... eee ese
Explaining Unification and his testification that there is no God but Allah
What was mentioned about Incantations and Amulets....................:.ceceeee:
He who asks the Blessing of a Tree or a stone or something similar..........
It is not allowable to sacrifice in a place where sacrifices are slain for
other than ‏ممم ممصم ممصم ممم ممم ممم مم ممما ممم مم ممم ممم م .ممم م 0م6000 ...اث تطهللى‎ ees
It is polytheism to vow for other than Allah 000066600606606 ‏ممم ممم ممم م6600‎
Resorting to other than Allah (the Exalted) is considered an act of
oY) 67 de <1 111) Qeeresesnboreeeoouc0ddbss0 BoBE pee Hon uno pooocrgOOL ono 556055 0—0~ 000000 553s 505
It is polytheism to seek the help of other than Allah (the Exalted) or to
invoke other than Allah ن٠... ‏فممممم ممم ممم ممم ممم امو ممم ممم مم ممم مم م ممم مم مم‎
Allah has said «So far (is this the case) that, when terror is removed from
their hearts (At the Day of 11108126 .000066 006666666600666 ‏مم ممم ممم ممم م‎
0 ‏ال‎
‎Allah (the Exalted) has said «It is true thou will not be able to guide
every one whom thou lovest; but Allah guides those whom He
5771 1S ‏امام موقم ممم وف ةمث ةن ...ءءء‎ S00 ‏ققم ممم مم ممصم ةمهمو ممم ممم ممم مم همهم ممم ةمهمل ري منرم‎
The reason behind the children of Adam’s abandoning their religion is
their exaggeration concerning those who are righteous ................66
What was mentioned concerning someone who worshipped Allah (the
Exalted) at a righteous man’s grave, so how would it be if he
worships that 0
(What was mentioned concerning exaggeration about the righteov’ r.:en’s
graves, turns them into pagans worshipped regardless of Allah (the
Exalted) .......c:cssscossccossssvcssrocsseccsansccasencessccnsssesssssnaascrsnsecnesseascoosnss
What mentioned concerning the Holy Prophet’s (Al-Mustapha means
KThe ChOSEM» ........ccceccsccscnccsccscoecsesereeesnescsereesscenceesseseeneeesaeesenereres
What was mentioned concerning: Verily some of this nations worship
PARAS 200... ececceeerererssnscenescesevevesessneneneccceceesserenesseeeeesereseonsesereeeeeas
What was mentioned about MaZQic.............ceccssesseecsecsereceeenersereseeeeeeeeeseeees
Showing some kind Of Magic .........::cccseeeeseeecteeeeeneneeteeeseeeeesaaeeseeseeenane eens
383

399

410

418

423
432

438

451

462

476

486

489

496
498

503
507

510

514

What was mentioned concerning priests and those similar to them............

What was mentioned about incantationS......................ccc cence ‏ممعم ممعم ممم‎ ees
What was mentioned about flying birds in order to see an evil omen.........
What was mentioned about Fortune-telling (Astrology or augury).............
Concerning what was mentioned about asking for rain from the moon......
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «Yet there are men who take (for worship)
others besides Allah, as equal (with Allah): They love them as they
Should love ‏ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم م ملم ممم م ...م00 ...0 «طقالث‎ 23120100
«It is only the evil one that suggests to you fear of his votaries: Be ye not
afraid of them, but fear Me, if ye have Faith» 00.0.0000 ‏ممم م‎
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «But on Allah put your trust if ye have
FAHY ooo ccc ecccncceeeeeeceneseneeeeeeeeeeeneneeeeeeseeeeas eeu eeeeeeeeeseneseneeseneeanes
Did they then feel secure against the Plan of Allah? But no one can feel
secure from the Plan of Allah, except those (Doomed) to ruin» .......
Among the Characteristics of Faith in Allah (the Exalted): Being patient
with what Allah (the Exalted) predestined ٠.6.6.6666 06666666606606 ‏ممم‎ tenes
Concerning what was said about hypocrisy ‏ممم ممم ممم مم 060600000066006 .0ن‎
A man desiring the present life through his deeds is among polytheistic

He who obeys religious authorities and princes in proscribing what Allah
(the Exalted) allowed or allowing what Allah (the Exalted)
proscribed, then he has taken them as lords besides Allah (the
Exalted) .o... ccc cece eee eee ‏ممم انتم ممم ممم مم‎ EEE EEE ‏ممم‎ GREE ‏ممم ممم‎ SHEE ‏ممم ممم‎

Allah (the Exalted) has said: «Hast thou not turned thy vision to those
who declare that they believe in the revelations that have come to
thee and to those before thee? .......... cece ‏ممم ممم ممم مم م ممم ممم نمم و م م‎

He who rejects some of the names and attributes. And Allah (the Exalted)
has said «Yet do they reject (Him), the Most Gracious! Say, He is
my Lord! There is no God but He! On Him is my trust, and to
Him do [ turn! oo... cece cec cece renee e tence eee ee ee ene eea see neeeeaeaeaseene sees

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «They recognize the favours of Allah; then
they deny them; and most of them are ungrateful (creatures)».........

Allah (the Exalted) has said «Then set no up rivals unto Allah when ye
Know (the truth) ........00 000660060660 ‏ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممما ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم مم‎

What was mentioned about the one who is not convinced by swearing by
ALLAN 606666660606060 ‏بممم ممه م ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممصم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم مم ممم ممم ممم م م ممم‎

His saying, «What Allah (the Exalted) wishes and what you wish»............

He who curses Time (or the vissitudes of Time) is considered to have
done wrong to Allah (the Exalted)... cece ‏فمم ممم ممم مم ممم م‎

Naming such as the Judge of Judges and other similar matters .................

Revering Allah’s (the Exalted) names and changing the name because of
that 0... ccc cccecneneceeenereeceneseeeeeeeeneeaeeaseeeneseeeeteeteeenes ‏قلع مهمه مهم‎

He who talks lightly about something that includes Allah’s name, the
Holy Koran or the Holy Messenger ............ccccccceceeeeeceeeteessesseeeeceees

Allah (the Exalted) has said «When we give him a taste of some mercy
FLOM OULSELVES ..........cccec cesses ecec nee ee ee nee ‏اا‎
524

529
534
537
340
542

549
557

559
568
575
585
592
598

601

606

Allah (the Exalted) has said, «But when He giveth them a goodly child,
they aovribe to others a share in the gift they have reccived.............
Allah (the Exalted) has said, «The most beautiful names belong to Allah:
So call on Him by them; but shun such men as use profanity in His

TLAMES...»>. oe. cecaccccccccacccccceccteecececceencvececseacseeceeeustsueeeatesaseteceteucusureens 1

It cannot be said «May peace be upon Allah (the Exalted) ....... ‏ل‎
‎His saying: «O Allah (the Exalted) forgive me if you wish».......................
One should not say: My slave and my female slave ‏ممما ةلومم ممم ...ا‎
The one who asks by Allah (the Exalted) is not to be turned down...........
Nothing can be asked for the sake but the Garden) of Allah (the Exalted).
What was mentioned about «1f ‏فوم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم 006660660000 ...ل‎
Forbidding the cursing of the Wind .....66660060000060 0060000 ‏ممم مم وم ممم م‎
Allah (the Exalted) has said «... moved by wrong suspicions of Allah-

suspicions due to ignorance. They said «What affair is this of

QUES) oie eee ‏ا ااا‎
What was mentioned concerning those who deny Predestination ...............
That was mentioned about those who draw images. .................ccccceseceseeeues
That which was mentioned about frequent swearing..................ccseceeeeeeeees
What was mentioned about Allah (the Exalted) and His Holy Prophet......
What was mentioned concerning: Giving the Oath to ‏ل لفالف‎
Allah (the Exalted) cannot be called on to intercede for the sake of His

ممم ممما ممم م ةف ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم مم لمم ةمرفم ممت ممم ممم مم ممم امم ءلم .انث ‎an‏ 0162611168
‎What was mentioned about the Holy Prophet’s protection of unification‏

and his blocking the paths of polytheism.......................ceeeeeeeeeeneees
What was mentioned concerning the Holy verse, «No just estimate have

they made of Allah, such due to Him ......... eee ‏ممم ممم ممم ممم ممم‎

624
