‎Taymiyyah‏ مط[

‎51 16 15 4 1-1 MAN

‎BOOK OF FAITH

‎Translated by
Salman Hassan Al-Ani
Shadia Ahmad Tel

KITAB AL-IMAN

Ibn laymiyyah

ع

KITAB AL-IMAN

BOOK OF FAITH

Translated and edited with introduction and notes by
Salman Hassan Al-Ani
Shadia Ahmad Tel

iBT.

Islamic Book Trust
Kuala Lumpur
Copyright © 2009 Iman Publishing House

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced.
stored in any retrieva! system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise
without the prior permission of the publisher.

First published 1999
Iman Publishing House,
Indiana, U.S.A.

This Malaysian edition 2009
Islamic Book Trust

607 Mutiara Majestic
Jalan Othman

46000 Petaling Jaya
Selangor, Malaysia

rewee [bthooks.cont

Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia Cataloguing-in-Publication Data

Ibn Taymiy yah, Ahmad ibn ‘Abd. al-Halim, 1263-1328.
Book of Faith : kitab al-Iman / by lbn Taymiyyah; translated and
edited with introductian and notes by Salman Hassan Al-Ani
Shadia Ahmad Tel.
ISBN 978-967-5062-28-5
ISBN 978-967-5062-29-2 (pbk.)
Includes index
Bibliography: p. 444
1. Faith (Islam)--Early works to 1800. ‏.ل‎ Salman Hassan Al-Ani
11. Shadia Ahmad Tel. IL. ‘Title.
297,22

This edition is not for sale in the United States of America.

Printed in Malaysia by

Vinlin Press Sdn Bhd

2, Jalan Meranti Permai 1
Mcranti Permai Industrial Park
47100 Puchong, Selangor.
To the Memory of
Our Beloved Parents
CONTENTS

Acknowledgments .. 0.0... ‏م م م ل م م‎ ccc ccc te ene teens

Introduction: [bn Taymtyyah and Kitab Al-Iman .......00.0000000 000000.
Ibn Taymiyyah: His Life and Character. ... 0.0.00... ‏ع‎ cece eee
The Mihan, Trials, of Ibn Taymiyyah .......0.0 2000.00.00 cee ee eee
The Objectives of Kitab Al-Iman ‏ا‎ ccc cee
Major Concepts and Themes of Kitab Al-Iman .. 0... 0... ‏ل‎

The Concepts of Iman, Islam, and Ihsan ................
Iman Is Both Saying and Work... 0.0... ee
The Increase and Decrease of Iman ...............0....
Literal and Figurative Meanings .................0.000.
The Semantic Theory of Absolute and Conditioned .......
The Concept of Exception ...............0 00.2 cece
Editions of Kitab Al-Iman

Chapter Two: Adherence to the Words of Allah and His Messenger

Dispute Concerning the Authenticity of Certain Hadiths ....
The Consensus of the Believers Is Used asa Proof ........
Connotation of the Book, the Sunnah and ljma‘ as One .....

Some of the Signs of [man 2.0... 0. cee
The Relationship Between Obedience and Disobedience
With Regard tolman .......... 00.00.00 eee eee

Chapter One: The Difference Between Iman, Islam, and Ihsan
The Three Ranks of Religion: Islam, Iman and Ihsan .......
Explicit Deeds Are Part of Iman 2.606.206 000000600600
Iman and Islam as Cited inthe Qur’a4n ............00.0...

Chapter Three: The Meanings of The Terms Unbelief, Hypocrisy
and Polytheism 2... ‏ا‎ eee ne
viii CONTENTS

Chapter Four: The Meanings of the Terms Righteous, the Witness

and the Sincere ‏ا‎ 00... . cece cee eee
Chapter Five: The Meanings of Disobedience, Sin and Unbelief.......

Chapter Six: Wrong: Its’ Kind and Meaning ......................

Chapter Seven: The Meanings of the Terms Righteousness

and Corruption ‏ا ا‎ cece eee ete

Chapter Eight: Literal Meaning and Figurative Meaning .............

Chapter Nine: The Ash‘arites’ and Other Sects’ Opinion of Iman and

a Refutation by the Author «00... 2... ce ee es
The Ash‘arites’ Opinion of Iman as Stated by Al-Baqillani ....
The Reply of Orthodox Muslims to the Ash‘arites ............
Ibn Taymiyyah’s Refutation of the Ash‘arites’ Opinion........

Chapter Ten: The Opinion of Al-Bagillani On Iman and Islam ........

Chapter Eleven: Absolute Iman Requires Works ...............00--

Chapter Twelve: The Meaning of Conditioned Iman When Associated

with Other Terms ‏ا‎ 0.0.0 cece ee te tenes
Chapter Thirteen: Association of Words and Phrases ...............
Chapter Fourteen: Connotations of Absolute Iman .................

Chapter Fifteen: Attributes and Terms With Specific Connotations ....

The Invalidity of the Idea That Iman Is Mere Assent

And Knowledge of the Heart 2.2.0.0... 0.00... eee eee eee
The Two Basic Errors of the Murjiites .. 00... 022 eee
The Murji7ites Opinion of Iman .. 0.6660 666020006000000 066 ‏2ل‎
‎The Murji’ites Errors in Understanding Iman .................
213

216

219

230

239

244

286

312

315
315
321
325
326
329

CONTENTS

Chapter Sixteen: The Murji’ites’ Views on Iman, Works and Religion ...

The Murji*ites’ Views on Works:

Are They Part of Iman or Religion? ...................0..

Judgement Concerning the Hypocrite

Who Conceals His Atheism 00.0.0... eee eee
Chapter Seventeen: Iman Either Increases or Diminishes ............
Chapter Eighteen: Aspects of Increasing {man.................00..

Chapter Nineteen: Iman and Islam and the Difference Between Them ...

Chapter Twenty: Understanding Iman and Islam:

Interpreted by the Messenger As the Ultimate Authority .........

Chapter Twenty-One: The Difference Between the Five Pillars of Islam

and Other Duties... 0.000.000 000. cee eens

Chapter Twenty-Two: The Concept of Iman and Related Issues .......
The Association of Belief with Work ..............0 ‏م‎
‎Unbeliefin Allah’s Grace and the Unbelief of Polytheism ......
The Two Kinds of Wrong ......... ‏م م م ا م ا‎ ene
The Two Kinds of Sin 2... 0 ‏مل م‎ ete
The Opinion of Abu Talib Al-Makki on Islam andIman .......

The Response to Abu Talib Al-Makki for Not Making a Clear

Distinction Between Iman andislam ....................
Ranking People with Regard to Iman and AIl Acts of Obedience ..
Response to the View of Abu Talib Al-Makki ...............
Further Differences Between Islam andIman ................
Further Aspects That Differentiate Between Islam and Iman ....
Can an Individual Have Both Iman and Hypocrisy? ...........

The Necessity of Going Back to the Book and the Sunnah

To Clarify the Meanings of Imanand Islam ...............
The Opinion of Ibn Salah Concerning Iman and Islam .........

The Opinion of the Author Concerning the Statement

Oflbn Salah 0 eee eee
x CONTENTS

Al-Marwazi Does Not Differentiate Between Islam and Iman
Explaining the View of Al-Marwazi and Responding to lt .......
People’s Levels With Respect to Iman and Islam ..............
Abu ‘Abd Allah Ibn Hamid Explains the Views of Muslim Scholars
Concerning Iman and {slam ........00 0000000000000 ‏م‎
‎The Reply to Those Who Do Not Differentiate Between
Imanand Islam ‏ا‎ Lee eens

The Opinion of Abu Thawron Iman .............. 000000005.
The Response to the Views of Abu Thawr Concerning Iman .....
The Letter of Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal to Al-Juzjani

On the Question of Iman .......0..0000.000 0000 0c cece eee
The Views of the Murji’ites, the Kullabites and the Karramites

On Iman and the Response to Them ...................00.

Chapter Twenty-Three: ExceptioninIman ...............00 000005.
Excessive Usage of Exception .........0 00000 ‏م‎ cece eee
The Ash*‘arites’ Opinion on the State of Belief at the Time
Of One’s Death and the Response to it ...... ee
The Concept of ‘Exception’ According to Ahmad Ibn Hanbal
The Desirable Aspects of Exception and the Response
To Those Who Disagree... 666662066626600 00600 eee

Selected Bibliography ‏ا ا ا‎
Index of Qur’anic Citations .. 6. ‏م م ل م ملم‎ ee eens
Index of Personal Names ... 06 06 ‏م م 000 م م م م0‎ cece cee eee
Index of Arabic Terms ..... 00.0000
Index of English Terms .... 00000000000 00000000 ‏ةنم 0م‎ eee
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

It is with pleasure and gratitude to acknowledge those who rendered assistance
throughout the lengthy process of translating Kitab al-iman. The first draft was
completed when Dr. Shadia A. Tel spent the 1992/1993 academic year at Indiana
University as a visiting Fulbright scholar. Since then several revisions have been
made. Indiana University encouraged and supported this project through small
grants from the Departments of Near Eastern Languages and Cultures, Middle
Eastern Studies, and the Research University Graduate School.

We are deeply grateful to many of the people who assisted with this translation.
Atika Ahmad al-Tel and Nawaf Obeidat from Irbid, Jordan who helped with the
first draft; Dr. Sherman Jackson who read part of the manuscript and provided
some materials on Kitab al-iman; Dr. Abdulrahman al-Shamrani who read a
portion of the translation and made valuable comments; Fahd bin Salmeh and
Said al-Ghailani who both supplied copies of Kitab al-/man; Dr. Janet Powell
Yedes, Lynne Thornton and John Erickson for editing and offering important
improvements and suggestions. We are especially indebted to Nancy R. Roberts
for the inestimable time she spent working on revision, editing, and rendering a
translation of certain portions of the manuscript. It is noted here that the
translators assume full responsibility for the material in this translation.

A special thanks goes to Umm Dawid who labored faithfully for many long
months typing, editing and correcting the manuscript. Two of the largest and most
time consuming tasks were formulating the camera-ready copy and the indices.
These tasks were handled skillfully and professionally by Abu Abdullah (Salim
S. Al-Ani).

introduction

Ibn Taymiyyah and Kitab Al-iman

This volume is the first complete English translation of the important and well-
known Kitab al-Iman by the renowned thirteenth-century Muslim scholar Ibn
Taymiyyah. The Book of Faith was an attempt to explain the concept of Iman
which, throughout its history, has been one of the cornerstone aspects of Islam.
Iman has served to define the nature of Muslim life and the essence of the religion
as a whole. During Ibn Taymiyyah’s lifetime, and for a few centuries before, the
concept of Iman became a major point of controversy among rival Islamic sects,
each of which advocated their own interpretation of its nature. Ibn Taymiyyah’s
own deep conviction and understanding of this concept is based on the true
interpretation of the Qur’4n, hadith, sayings and deeds of the Prophet Muhammad
peace be upon him (pbuh) and the conduct of the pious ancestors of the first three
Islamic centuries. Throughout history the concept of Iman developed into a major
undertaking theologically, linguistically, and even politically. From the beginning
Ibn Taymiyyah stated that he did not want to be involved in the dispute
concerning the concept of Iman that was raised and discussed by the various
Islamic sects. This introduction intends to give a brief and precise biography of
Ibn Taymiyyah to highlight the principle ideas presented in Kitab al-Iman, and to
identify its various recensions.

IBN TAYMIYYAH: His LIFE AND CHARACTER

Ibn Taymiyyah (Taqi al-Din Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad Ibn ‘Abd al-Halim Ibn
Taymiyyah)' was born in Harran, Syria on 10 Rabi‘I 661/22 January 1263. When

' There are two references that attempt to explain the name Taymiyyah. Muhammad Ibn Ahmad
Tbn ‘Abd al-Hadi al-Hanbalt, in his book a/-‘Ugid al-Durriyyah, Cairo, 1983, mentioned that
the great grandfather of Ibn Taymiyyah, Muhammad Ibn al-Khidir, stopped at Tayma‘ in
2 INTRODUCTION

he was about six years old, his family fled to Damascus as the Mongols were
preparing to invade his home town Harran. The family traveled at night with their
bare essentials, mostly books, and hid during the day. His father, Shihab al-Din
Abu al-Mahasin ‘Abd al-Haltm (d. 682/1283), was a learned man from a family
that was long recognized as a house of learning and that traditionally belonged to
the Hanbalt Madhab, school of law. Upon arriving in Damascus his father
established himself 25 a respectable scholar and later became the Shaykh of hadith
studies at the renowned Sukkariyyah Madrasah, school, where he resided with his
son, Taqi al-Din. In addition to his father, Ibn Taymiyyah’s teachers included
Shams al-Din ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Maqdisi (d. 682/1283), who was the first
Hanbali to hold the prestigious position of Qadi al-Qudat, chief judge, in Syria.

The young Ibn Taymiyyah was blessed with a sharp memory and acute
intelligence “as if Allah had bestowed upon him the gift of fast and lasting
memorization.’ At a very early age he memorized the Qur’4n; he also studied and
memorized large portions of hadith with his father, who specialized in the subject.
Among the books of hadith he studied were the two Sahihs of al-Bukhari and
Muslim as well as other major collections, such as the Musnad of Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal. He also thoroughly studied the Hanbali Madhab and the doctrines of other
schools of jurisprudence. One subject in which he was especially interested was
the Arabic language, focusing on both prose and poetry. In addition, he was
guided by Sibawayh’s al-Kitab and also studied tafsir, interpretation, of the
Qur’an. Although he was particularly interested in the history and opinions of the
pious ancestors, especially those of the first four Orthodox Caliphs, he also
studied such diverse subjects as mathematics, Sufism, and different Islamic sects.

northwest Arabia on his way to pilgrimage. There he saw a baby girl. When he returned home
he found his wife had given birth to a baby girl and he said: "Ya Taymiyyah, Ya Taymiyyah,"
Oh Taymiyyah, Oh Taymiyyah, thus the great grandfather received the nickname Taymiyyah.
According to Ibn al-Najjar, another explanation of the name (on page 4 of the same book), is that
the great grandfather’s mother’s name was Taymiyyah. She was an elderly pious woman and thus
the family was named after her. The same information is related in a footnote by Muhammad
Abu Zahrah in his book /bn Taymiyyah: His Life and Times (17). Reference will be made to this
book throughout the text as Abu Zahrah.

? “Umar Ibn ‘Ali al-Bazzar, al-A ‘lam al-‘Aliyyah fi Managib Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah, (al-
A ‘lam), edited by Salah al-Din al-Munajjid, Beirut, 1976, ‏.م‎
IBN TAYMIYYAH AND KITAB AL-IMAN 3

Those early intellectual pursuits contributed a great deal to his future lectures and
writings.’

Ibn Taymiyyah remained close to the members of his immediate family, and his
father continued to be his mentor and teacher until his death. He was kind to his
mother, Sitt al-Mun‘im bint ‘Abd al-Rahmaan al-Harraniyyah, who was known for
her piety, and lived a long life after the death of her husband. She died in
716/1316. Ibn Taymiyyah’s affection for his mother is evidenced by several
endearing letters that he wrote to her while in Egypt. Her influence over her son
lasted throughout her long life.‘ Ibn Taymiyyah’s brothers were also learned
scholars and remained close to him, especially during his several mihan, trials.
When he was in prison, in both Cairo and Damascus, one brother was always
there to take care of him.

After his father’s death, Ibn Taymiyyah, at the age of twenty-two, assumed the
respected teaching position formerly held by his father at the Sukkariyyah
Madrasah. Among those present at his first lesson at this renowned center of
learning were notable scholars such as the chief Qadi, Ibn al-Zaki al-Shafi‘i, and
Shaykh Taj al-Din ai-Fazari, who was so impressed by the content and delivery
of Ibn Taymiyyah’s lesson that he recorded it in his own handwriting. From this
young age until his death, Ibn Taymiyyah’s scholarly contributions continued to
grow and resulted in numerous books and treatises. Many consider Ibn Taymiyyah
as the second most famous Hanbali theologian and jurisconsult after Imam
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal (d. 241/855), the founder of the Hanbali Madhab, school of
law.’ During his lifetime Ibn Taymiyyah adhered so strongly to his views and

3 See Abu Zahrah, pp. 20-28; al-Bazzar, pp. 21-22; and Victor E. Makani, fbn Taymiyyah’s
Ethics: The Social Factor, Chico, California: Scholars Press, 1983, pp. 21-29.

* Henri Laoust, "Ibn Taymiyyah’s Academic Life and His Thoughts" (in Arabic), Mahrajan, in
Usbu ‘ al-Figh al-Islami, ‏.م‎

3 The basic sources used in this work for the background of the life and character of Ibn
Taymiyyah are the following: Muhammad Abu Zahrah’s /bn Taymiyyah; Mahrajan in Usbiat al-
Figh al-Islami; Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn ‘Abd al-Hadi al-Hanbali’s a/-‘Ugiid al-Durriyyah
min Managqib Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah (al-‘Uqid); H. Laoust’s Essai sur les doctrines
sociales et politiques de Taki-D-Din Ahmad Ibn Taimi a, Cairo, 1939; also Laoust in
Encyclopedia o f Islam, 2d ed., Leiden, Brill (EI.2), vol. 3, pp. 951-55; ‘Umar Ibn ‘AIi al-
Bazzar’s al-A ‘lam al-‘Aliyyah fi Manaqib Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah, (al-A‘lam) edited by
Salah al-Din al-Munajjad, Beimut, 1976; and Ibn Kathir’s al-Biddyah wal-Nihayah fi al-Tari kh
(al-Bidayah), vols. 13-14, Beirut, 1987. In addition, the introductions to the various copies of
Kitab al-Iman were also utilized. A list of these books appears at the end of this introduction.
4 INTRODUCTION

opinions that most of the people of his time in both Syria and Egypt, especially
scholars of the different sects and madhabs, became either ardent supporters or
staunch opponents. Included among the latter were some of the Mamluk rulers of
Egypt and Syria.

Ibn Taymiyyah’s style of teaching was intended to instruct the people about the
basic tenants of Islam, emphasizing the Qur’an and the Sunnah as the primary
foundation of the Islamic religion and the Shari‘ah. He thus had a large following
among the masses, both in Syria and Egypt. During the long period of his active
life he also gave special lectures to small groups of his followers. Two
distinguished students emerged from these groups. Perhaps the most celebrated
was Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah (691/1292~75 1/1350), who was so close to Ibn
Taymiyyah that occasionally they were even imprisoned together. After the death
of Ibn Taymiyyah, Ibn Qayyim continued actively lecturing and writing in the
same basic manner as his teacher, but with a much calmer approach. He wrote
several important works, one of which is Madarij al-Salkin, in three volumes.°
This work is considered one of the best documents on Hanbali thought. The other
distinguished student was ‘Imad al-Din Isma‘il Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Kathir
(700/1300—774/1373), a good friend of Ibn Taymiyyah who, even though he was
a Shafi‘, fell under the influence of his teacher. Ibn Kathir is considered one of
the greatest historians. This is clearly demonstrated by his renowned book al-
Bidayah wal-Nihayah. The latest edition was published in 1987 in 14 vols.’

THE MIHAN, TRIALS, OF IBN TAYMIYYAH

The period in which Ibn Taymiyyah lived witnessed political, social, and religious
unrest. In fact, one of the greatest blows was directed against the institution of the
Caliphate, which emerged only a few years before the birth of Ibn Taymiyyah.
During the fall of Baghdad in 656/1258, the Mongols under Hulagu wreaked mass
destruction and brutal murder throughout the city and the area around it. This
calamity, which also brought about the death of the ‘Abbasid Caliph and the

©“ Laoust, E/ 2 (Ibn Kathir), vol. 3, pp. 817-18 and Abu Zahrah, pp. 526-28.
7 Laoust, E72 (Ibn Kayyim al-Djawziyya), vol. 3, pp. 821-22 and Abu Zahrah, pp. 527-28.
IBN TAYMIYYAH AND KITAB AL-IMAN 5

suspension of the Caliphate for several years, brought chaos to the ummah,
Muslim community, throughout the lifetime of Ibn Taymiyyah.*

In his writing Ibn Taymiyyah followed the Hanbalite school of thought and many
times came into direct conflict with the prevailing religious scholars. “As a class
they [the religious scholars} were nearly all mainly interested in their own
promotion in their academic or judicial careers; and, since promotion was in the
hands of the rulers, they were subservient to the rulers. Ibn Taymiyyah, following
in the tradition of Ibn Hanbal, stood up for what he believed to be right, regardless
of the suffering it might bring upon him personally.”” Undoubtedly Ibn
Taymiyyah encountered more than his share of trouble throughout his active life.

In the year 693/1293 an unusual event took place. Ibn Taymiyyah took a public
stand against a Christian from Suwayda’ named ‘Assaf al-Nasrani who, some
people testified, had cursed the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh). Ibn Taymiyyah’s
intransigence led to his imprisonment for a short period. Later that year ‘Assaf
became a Muslim and on his way to Hijaz, near Madinah, was killed by his own
nephew. Also in 693/1293, Ibn Taymiyyah wrote his book al-Sarim al-Maslil
‘ala Shatim al-Rasil.'°

Some people in the city of Hamat in Syria asked Ibn Taymiyyah to write on the
question of the attributes of Allah and in 698/1298 he produced a treatise known
as al-Hamawiyyah al-Kubra. His ideas in this treatise apparently disagreed with
the position of certain scholars in Damascus, particularly the Ash‘arites, who
accused him of tashbth, anthropomorphism, with regard to his interpretation of
those attributes. The Ayyiibids, who ruled over Syria and Egypt before Ibn
Taymiyyah’s time, were great supporters of the Ash‘arites, who based their
argument on philosophical reasoning, in contrast to Ibn Taymiyyah’s theology,
which was based more directly on the teachings of the pious ancestors. A council
of jurists, set up to examine the accusations against Ibn Taymiyyah, decided that

5 Ibn Kathir, vol. 13, pp. 213-26, Laoust, (E/ 2) and Laoust’s Essai.

" Montgomery Watt, Islamic Philosophy and Theology. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
1985, p. 142.

.951 .م ‎and Laoust (EI.2),‏ 355 .م ,13 ‎Ibn Kathir, vol.‏ ا
6 INTRODUCTION

the Hamawiyyah contained nothing contradictory to the Qur’an or the Sunnah and
therefore vindicated him of any wrongdoing."

Some of Ibn Taymiyyah’s enemies, however, intensified their attacks and
succeeded in influencing the authorities in Damascus to hold a council on what
became known as the al-WAsitiyyah,'” a treatise that Ibn Taymiyyah wrote on the
request of a man from the city of WAsit in Iraq. The treatise, as became obvious,
adhered to traditional Islamic teachings and, as a result, his enemies raised some
questions about his religious views. Two other councils were held on the same
account, but in both cases he again was vindicated. However, the matter did not
stop there and he was summoned to Cairo by the Sultan of Egypt.

Against the advice of his close friends and the viceroy in Damascus, Ibn
Taymiyyah was determined to go to Cairo and face the consequences. His trip to
Egypt in 705/1305 was full of the triumphs and tribulations that he experienced
throughout his life. Upon his arrival in Cairo the council of judges of the different
madhabs, schools, met with Ibn Taymiyyah at the Citadel. The Maliki, chief
judge, Ibn Makhlif, a strong opponent of Ibn Taymiyyah’s Hanbali way of
thinking and teaching, would not allow him to defend himself. A decree issued by
the council resulted in the imprisonment of Ibn Taymiyyah and two of his brothers
for almost two years. During this period the Hanbalis, in both Egypt and Syria,
were treated harshly and some were even imprisoned.

Upon Ibn Taymiyyah’s release from prison he was allowed to return to Syria on
the condition that he refrain from openly attacking rational thinking, Sufism, and
other nontraditional Islamic thinking. He declined this offer, however, and was
once again imprisoned several months later, this time in Alexandria, although he
was released and honored soon afterward when the Sultan, Malik al-Nasir

١١ Al-‘Uqiid, pp. 132-37; Watts, ‏.م‎ 143; Laoust (EI.2), ‏.م‎ 951; and Qamar-ud-Din Khan, The
Political Thought of Ibn Taymiyyah. Islamabad: Islamic Research Institute, 1973, pp. 3-4.
Sherman Jackson, in an article entitled "Ibn Taymiyyah on Trial in Damascus,” translates a
"memoir written by Ibn Taymiyyah himself.” This translation is a well-documented account of
the Damascus trial. Published in Journal of Semitic Studies, vol. 39.1, 1994, pp. 41-85.

For further details, see Merlin Swartz’s translation of this treatise, with brief introductory
remarks, entitled "A Seventh-Century (A.H.) Sunni Creed: The ‘Aqida Wasitiya of Ibn
Taymiya," Humanioura Islamica 1, eds. H. W. Mason, R. L. Nettler, and J. Waardenburg. The
Hague: Mouton, 1973, pp. 91~103.
IBN TAYMIYYAH AND KITAB AL-IMAN 7

Muhammad [bn Qalawin, regained his authority in Egypt in 710/1311. The Sultan
had great respect for Ibn Taymiyyah as both a person and a scholar. The next two
years that Ibn Taymiyyah spent in Egypt were probably the happiest and most
productive of his life. During this period he wrote one of his most important
treatises, Kitab al-Siyasah al-Shar‘iyyah. In the year 712/1313 he returned to
Damascus."

In Damascus he continued writing, teaching, and issuing fatwas, formal legal
opinions. Some of these fatwas agitated Ibn Taymiyyah’s opponents and they
began to criticize him. Still, it was his fatwa on divorce, which contradicted even
the Hanbali’s prevailing doctrine on this matter, that landed him in prison again
by order of the Sultan. After about five months, again by order of the Sultan, he
was released from prison.

Other incidents occurred when Ibn Taymiyyah wrote his treatise concerning
ziyarat al-qubur, visits to tombs. In 726/1326, because of this treatise and his
icessant issuing of fatwas on various matters, he was arrested and held in the
Citadel of Damascus without trial until his death on 20 Dhi al-Qa‘dah 728/26
September 1328. During the last few months of his life he was forbidden to have
paper, ink, or anything with which to write. However, his brother, Zayn al-Din,
was allowed to take care of him in prison. Ibn Kathir gives a detailed, emotional
description of Ibn Taymiyyah’s death and funeral in which he asserts that the
whole city of Damascus, even women and children, took part in the funeral
procession.'* Ibn Taymiyyah is buried in a small graveyard on the southern edge
of the campus at the University of Damascus. On his marble tombstone is written:
“Here lies Shaykh al-Islam Taqi al-Din Ibn Taymiyyah, 728 A.H.”'5

THE OBJECTIVES OF KITAB AL-IMAN

[bn Taymiyyah’s main objective in writing Kitab al-Iman was to explain the
concept of Iman and to correct its prevailing misconceptions. He wanted to
explain the concept of Iman in accordance with and on the basis of the Qur’an and

* The seven years that Ibn Taymiyyah spent in Egypt is fully detailed by Ibn Kathir, vol. 14, pp.
37-70; Abu Zahrah, pp. 49-75; and Laoust (EI.2).

* Ibn Kathir, vol. 14, pp. 141-45.
* Adnan al-Khatib, "Ibn Taymiyyah," Mahrajan 1963, p. 653.
8 INTRODUCTION

the Sunnah (the sayings and deeds of Prophet Muhammad). He also sought to
refute some of the popular ideas advocated by the various Islamic sects—--such as
the Mu‘tazilites (Mu‘tazilah), Ash‘arites (Asha‘irah), and Murji’ites (al-
Murji?ah}—whose ideas, he believed, were primarily based on al-‘ulum al-
‘aqliyyah, rational thinking. Ton Taymiyyah was convinced that fundamental
Islamic concepts must be interpreted from the ustl, roots, that are found in the al-
‘ulim al-naqliyyah and are traditionally based on the Qur’an and the Sunnah.
These concepts are also based on the understanding and interpretation of the al-
salaf al-salih, the pious ancestors. The doctrine of Ibn Taymiyyah is a “synthesis
of conciliation—the happy mean (wasat}—which would accord to each school its
rightful place in a strongly hierarchical whole in conformity with the precepts of
the Kur?dn and the Sunna.”'® Thus he wrote Kitab al-Jman and most of his other
books and treatises as a means to explain Islamic principles and as a response to
the threats and challenges that faced the Muslim community. In addition he
wanted to expound on the concept of Iman and its relationship to Islam, lhsan,
perfection (in religion),"’ and tasdiq, assent. He was especially interested in
explaining what constitutes Iman. He also wanted to make his own views clear to
both his supporters and opponents and was concerned about how Islam was
practiced during his lifetime and about the influence exerted by some of the
influential religious scholars. Ibn Taymiyyah believed that some members of the
Muslim community were under the influence of various Islamic sects that had
changed the practice of Islam from the ways of the Prophet (pbuh), the
Companions, their Successors, and the pious ancestors of the first three Islamic
centuries. All these issues were discussed, analyzed, and made abundantly clear
with supporting evidence and documentation from the Qur?an, the Sunnah, and
writings of the scholars from those first three centuries in which the Hanbali
school tradition was emphasized.

According to Ibn Taymiyyah, the discord among the Muslims, originated when
the Kharijites seceded from the other sects. This was the beginning of dissension
among the various Muslim sects—a dispute that included the Mu‘tazilites,
Murji’ites, Jahmites (Jahmiyyah), Ash‘arites, Shi‘ites (Shi‘ah), and various Sufi
groups.

‘6H. Laoust E/ 2, vol. 3, p. 953.

"The word Ihsan is better translated as perfection [in religion] rather than beneficence or
righteousness, as it usually is. See Izutsu, pp. 58-62.
IBN TAYMIYYAH AND KITAB AL-IMAN 9

Of further concern to Ibn Taymiyyah were the political tensions and uncertainties
of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. When Ibn Taymiyyah’s birthplace, Harran,
was threatened by the Mongols, his family moved to Damascus. He was directly
involved in defending the city and its people. Both the theological and political
problems were of immediate concern to a man of Ibn Taymiyyah’s status. As
noted above, in Egypt and Syria Ibn Taymiyyah challengéd both the religious
scholars of the various schools and sects as well as the ruling authorities. He was
convinced that the weakness and division in the Muslim community were the
result of a failure to observe Islam as it had been practiced by the Companions and
al-salaf al-salih, the pious ancestors.

Furthermore, Ibn Taymiyyah’s objective in writing Kitab al-Iman was to connect
the believer directly with the benefit obtained from the words of Allah and His
Messenger. Thus he was interested in restoring true Islam to the people. And
although he did not want to write about the controversies among the people of his
time, he admitted that he could not avoid doing so. The best way to resolve these
disputes, he felt, was through the correct understanding of the words of Allah and
His Messenger. Consequently, every issue Ibn Taymiyyah discussed was always
supported by quotes from the Qur’an and the sayings of the Prophet (pbuh).

MAJOR CONCEPTS AND THEMES OF KITAB AL-IMAN

A detailed account of all the concepts in Kitab al-Iman would constitute a book
by itself. Here it is only possible to highlight its most significant issues. The
central theme is the concept of Iman. One clear characteristic of the writings of
Ibn Taymiyyah is his repetitious style. This is probably due to his desire to make
sure that the points under discussion were fully understood. In reading Kitab al-
man, for example, one gets the impression that he did not just sit down and write
it, but rather that it is a collection of lectures and lessons once delivered to his
students and then organized in the form of a book.

The Concepts of Iman, Islam, and Ihsan

Ibn Taymiyyah believed that Islam and Iman constitute the Islamic religion as a
whole and that all disputes concerning the religion should be resolved primarily
on the basis of the Qur’an and the Sunnah of the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh). The
10 INTRODUCTION

disputes started with the Kharijites (Khawarij)'* and were later intensified with the
emergence of other Islamic sects, such as the Mu‘tazilites, Ash‘arites, and
Murji’ites. Also, the theological differences that existed between orthodox Islam
(i.e., the four major schools) and the Shi‘ites contributed to a growing division
among Muslims.

In addition to the concepts of Iman and Islam, Ibn Taymiyyah introduced the
concept of Ihsan, perfection (in religion). Of the three concepts he judged Ihsan
to be the highest, followed by Iman and then Islam. In his discussion he did not
dwell much on the concept of Ihsan; the main focus of his book is on the concepts
of Iman and Islam. He said that every Muhsin, man of Ihsan, is a Mu’min,
believer, and every believer is a Muslim, but the converse of both statements is
not necessarily true. Ibn Taymiyyah’s discussion concerning the difference
between Iman and Islam is essentially based on the Angel Gabriel’s hadith and the
Qur’anic verse about al-A ‘rab, the desert Arabs. Allah says: “Al-A‘rab say: “We
believe.’ Say: ‘You have not yet believed; but only say: We have submitted [to
Islam] . . .”” (49:14). Numerous other Qur’anic verses and hadiths were also
utilized by Ibn Taymiyyah in his discussion on Iman and Islam.

Iman Is Both Saying and Work

Ibn Taymiyyah took issue with other Islamic sects on what constitutes Iman. He
affirmed that Iman, is both qawl, saying, or utterance, and ‘amal, work, or deed.'”
He devoted almost two entire chapters to this issue as well as references to it
throughout the book. Among the adversaries with which he took issue were the
Murji’ite and the Jahmite sects.”” The Murji’ites believed that ‘amal, was not

'® Unlike the other sects, the Kharijites did not have any direct influence on these disputes during
the lifetime of Ibn Taymiyyah. However, they did play a very important role in the early
development of Islamic theology. See Watt, 1985, pp. 7-13.

‎The term ‘amal, wor, and it’s plural a‘mal, works, both occur frequently throughout the book‏ "ا
‎and are translated work and works respectively. They also have the sense of actions or deeds.‏

‎20 The discussion presented here is not intended to give a detailed and thorough analysis of the
concept of Iman and other related issues. There are several studies that deal with this concept,
the most comprehensive is the work by the late Toshiko Izutsu which discusses the various
aspects of the theory of the Iman of Ibn Taymiyyah. Izutsu compares and contrasts the different
opinions of the Islamic sects on the concept of Iman. His book is entitled The Concept of Belief
in Islamic Theology: A Semantic Analysis of Iman and Islam. Yokohama: Yurindo Publishing,
1965.
IBN TAYMIYYAH AND KITAB AL-IMAN 11

considered a necessary aspect of Iman. They stated: “Iman is tasdiq, assent, in the
heart and a saying of the tongue but does not include works.” They further
asserted that Iman is mere tasdiq, assent, and ‘ilm, knowledge, without work.
Therefore if someone is judged to be an unbeliever who will abide in Hell for
eternity, it is because he lacked knowledge and assent in his heart. According to
the Jahmites, a person can commit all sorts of blasphemous acts and still be called
a believer as long as he has Iman in his heart. Jahm Ibn Safwan considered such
behavior as mere acts of unbelief that did not nullify Iman in one’s heart. On this
issue Ibn Taymiyyah was in complete disagreement with the Murji’ ites, Jahmites,
and any other Islamic sects that agreed with them.

The Karramites views of Iman focused on qawl, saying, whereas the Jahmites and
Murji’?ites emphasized knowledge. Both of these groups, however, did not
consider ‘amal, work, as an essential part of Iman. Ibn Taymiyyah argued strongly
against the view of the Murji’ites, who affirmed that Iman is mere tasdiq, assent.
He said that was one of the gravest errors they ever committed. The concept of
Iman is even more comprehensive and universal than most Islamic sects were
willing to consider or imagine. It includes work, saying, and intent, followed by
the Sunnah.

The Increase and Decrease of Iman

The issue of whether Iman can be increased or diminished was discussed by Ibn
Taymiyyah, and, as in his customary method, he cited Qur’anic verses and a
number of hadiths that supported his discussion. In this regard the Murji7ites
questioned how this issue applied to ‘amal, work. This is an important issue
because Ibn Taymiyyah considered work to be an essential constituent of Iman.
He judged the Murji’ites’ view of Iman as mere tasdiq, assent, and ‘ilm,
knowledge, without any reference to work, to be one of their gravest errors.
Another error, according to Ibn Taymiyyah, is that the Murj’ ites judged someone
to be an unbeliever who abides in Hell forever if he lacks assent and knowledge
in his heart. The Murji’ites also believed that Iman, which lies in the heart,

~ In regard to this sect, W. Madelung states: "The identification of faith with true belief to the
exclusion of acts, which later became the essential trait of irdja’, was clearly implied, though not
the central theme, in the earliest Murji’ite’s teachings." E/ 2, vol. 7, pp. 605-7; also referred to
in Abu Zahrah, pp. 175-78, and in Izutsu, pp. 159-79.
12 INTRODUCTION

became complete with the revelation, and that no one’s Iman is greater than
anyone else’s.

Furthermore, Ibn Taymiyyah, taking a stronger position, challenged the
Kharijites’ claim that if the Iman of someone diminishes, that person should be
charged with unbelief. This contradicts the position of the Orthodox Muslims. In
this regard, the Prophet (pbuh) said: “He (Allah) will remove from Hell whoever
has an atom’s weight of Iman.” Another Islamic sect, the Mu‘tazilites, were also
challenged by Ibn Taymiyyah concerning their position with regard to Iman. They
were considered in a manzilah bayna al-manzilatayn, in-between state (i.e., they
were neither believers nor unbelievers). Ibn Taymiyyah emphatically opposed
their view.

This raises the question of tafadul, variation in degrees, with regard to Iman. In
discussing Ibn Taymiyyah’s thesis of increasing and decreasing Iman and its
varying degrees, Izutsu said: “The pivotal point of this theory is the inclusion of
‘work’ in the concept of man. The thesis that Jman allows many degrees and
individual differences is but a natural consequence of this understanding of

Iman.”

Literal and Figurative Meanings

Ibn Taymiyyah devoted a sizeable chapter to issues of language and linguistics,
with the main focus on the dichotomy between the concepts of haqiqah and majaz,
literal and figurative. These two terms, throughout their history, are almost
always treated jointly. In the opinion of Ibn Taymiyyah, this division, which is a
terminological istilah, convention, was not alluded to by the Companions of the
Prophet, their Successors, or any of the well-attested religious scholars. He further
emphasized that the division between haqiqah and majaz was not even mentioned
by the early Arab philologists and grammarians. The division between these two
terms did not become an issue until after the third century of the Hijrah, when it
was adapted and debated by some Islamic sects. Ibn Taymiyyah said that the most
prominent among these sects were the Mu ‘tazilites.

22 Tzutsu, ‏.م‎ 185. In addition to the discussion of increase and decrease of Iman in Kitab al-Iman,
see Izutsu’s analysis where he brings in the different points of view expressed by other scholars,
such as fbn Hazm and Taftazani.
IBN TAYMIYYAH AND KITAB AL-IMAN 13

The important issue regarding the dichotomy between haqiqah and majaz was
discussed by Wolfhart Heinrichs in an article entitled “On the Genesis of the
Haqiqa-Majaz Dichotomy.””’ Heinrichs specifically traced the history of majaz
to the early Islamic period. He asserts that this term is not confined to the Qur’an
and the hadith but is also found in the poetry and speech of the Arabs. He
discusses this term as it was treated by the various religious scholars, notably Abu
‘Ubaydah in his book Majaz al-Qur’an.**

In addition to chapter eight of Kitab al-Jman, which Ibn Taymiyyah devoted to the
dichotomy of the terms haqiqah and majaz, he also wrote a treatise on the same
theme.”°

Another linguistic issue discussed by Ibn Taymiyyah was the mabda? al-lughat,
origin of languages.” He raised the question of how language theories were
perceived by different scholars. Abu Hashim al-Jubba’1, al-Ash‘ari2’ and other
scholars were of the opinion that language is istilahiyyah, conventional. However,
al-Ash‘ari later retreated from this position and disagreed with the Mu‘tazilites
on several fundamental issues, including the origin of language. He held the view
that language is tawqifiyyah which is based on learning and experience. The
language theory most favored by Orthodox Muslims is the revelationist theory,
which is based on the idea that language was originally revealed to man by Allah.
Thus Allah inspires human beings with speech just as He does other creatures.
Furthermore, as stated in the Qur’an, Allah taught Adam the names of all entities

* See Studia Islamica 59, 1984, pp. 111-40. Also, on this important topic, see John Wansbrough’s
book Qur’anic Studies: Sources and Methods of Scriptural Interpretation. London: Oxford
University Press, 1977 and his earlier article "Majaz al-Qur’an: Periphrastic Exegesis" in Bulletin
of the School of Oriental and African Studies, 33. London, 1970, pp. 247-66. Also see Ella al-
Magor, “The Early Meaning of Majaz and the Nature of Abu ‘Ubayda’s Exegesis," Studia
Islamica, 1979, pp. 307-26. All these studies emphasize the early history of the term “majaz.’

* Majaz al-Qur’4n (2 vols.), Cairo, 1962, was edited by Fu’ad Sezgin.

** This treatise is included in his Majmii‘ Fatawa Ibn Taymiyyah, vol 20. Collected and edited by
“Abd al-Rahman Ibn Muhammad Ibn Qasim with the assistance of his son Muhammad.
Published by Matba‘at al-Ma ‘Arif, Rabat, Morocco, n.d., pp. 400-97.

** This issue was discussed by Bernard G. Weiss in "Medieval Discussions of the Origin of
Language,” ZDMG (1974): 33-41.

* Al-Ash‘ari, Abu al-Hassan ‘Ali Ibn Isma ‘fl (260-324 A.H), was a theologian and founder of the
school of orthodox theology that bears his name. He is a descendent of Abu Miisa al-Ash‘ar. [E/
2, ‏.م‎ 694 and al-Zirikli, vol. 5, p. 69.]
14 INTRODUCTION

and presented those names to the Angels. Ibn Taymiyyah emphasized that Allah
did not teach Adam all the languages that everyone would ever speak. The
different languages of the world would, of course, be spoken by Adam’s
offsprings and they would only pass their own language on to their children.

The Semantic Theory of Absolute and Conditioned

Ibn Taymiyyah, in defining and analyzing the terms associated with key concepts,
introduced and applied a unique semantic theory that distinguished between what
he called the mutlaq, absolute usage and the muqayyad, conditioned usage. An
illustration of this approach is the difference between the terms ma‘ruf, good, and
munkar, evil. When these two terms are used in a mutlaq, absolute, sense they
encompass everything morally good and evil, respectively. However, when they
occur in a muqayyad, conditioned, sense they indicate a restricted or qualified
context.”* Ibn Taymiyyah stated that to fully understand the shades of meaning of
words in the Qur’an and the Sunnah—especially between such polar opposites as
ma‘ruf and munkar—it is essential to analyze them according to the dichotomy
between absolute and conditioned usage. This theory was also rigorously applied
to the analysis of the concept of Iman.

The Concept of Exception

One of the issues debated in Islamic theology is whether or not to use the
conditional clause “In sha’a Allah,” if Allah wills, after the affirmative clause “ana
mu’min,” J am a believer. Allah says: “Do not say of anything: ‘I shall do it
tomorrow’ except [with the saying] ‘if Allah wills’ . . .” (18:23-24). The
realization of actions and their execution in the future are dependent on Allah’s
will. This issue came to be known as istithna’, exception. The Murji’ites,
Jahmites, and those who agreed with them considered Iman as an entity which a
person acknowledged in his heart. Thus, if one said that he uttered the Shahadah,
testimony, or “I am a believer,” he would need to say the exception as it is
acknowledged in the heart. Therefore they believed that those who use the

25 This semantic theory of absolute and conditioned is briefly discussed in Izutsu, pp. 71-74.
IBN TAYMIYYAH AND 1788 AL-IMAN 15

exception, with regard to Iman, have raised an element of shakk, doubt, about
their belief and are thus referred to as the al-shakkakah, the doubters.

The pious ancestors, such as Ibn Mas‘ud, used to make the exception “if Allah
wills” with regard to Iman. Their position was not that they had uncertainty about
their Iman but simply used it to affirm the statement “I am a believer,” and there
was no other connotation beyond that. As Ahmad Ibn Hanbal emphasized, Iman
is both a saying and work. The exception used by the pious ancestors was not
directed to the saying but rather to the element of carrying out the obligations
since absolute Iman includes the performance of all that Allah commands and the
abandonment of all that He prohibits. At the same time, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal
disliked the question, “Are you a believer?” because he thought that it was a
heresy introduced by the Murji‘ites to defend their position that Iman, particularly
absolute Iman, is mere tasdiq, assent. In this case, Ahmad, who represented the
orthodox Muslim position, refrained from using the exception.

One of the issues raised about the exception with regard to Iman is al-muwafat,
the state of belief at the time of one’s death.’? Ibn Taymiyyah explained the
position of the Kullabite sect with regard to al-muwafat as the state in which a
man dies. Every man is either a believer or an unbeliever at the time of his death
and nothing of essence prior to this time matters. In other words, if one’s Iman is
followed by a state of kufr, unbelief, and he dies suddenly, he dies as an
unbeliever. Ibn Taymiyyah opposed the use of exception in the state of the al-
muwafat because he believed that the Kullabite sect did not understand the view
of the pious ancestors concerning this matter.

EDITIONS OF KITAB AL-IMAN

Kitab al-Iman is a valuable and basic source on the topic of faith. It has a wide
readership and, as a result, there have been several Arabic editions published. The
accuracy of these editions varies from one edition to another, some are abridged
and others contain the full text. For the purpose of this translation seven different
editions were consulted, most based on what is usually referred to as the Indian
edition (1311 A.H.). Two of these were adapted as the main source on which this

29 See Izutsu, chapter 10, “I Am A Believer, If God Wills,” pp. 194-203.
16 INTRODUCTION

translation is based: the editions published by Dar al-Kitab al-‘ Arabi (1st ed.) and
al-Maktab al-Islami (2d ed.). The seven editions of Kitab al-Jman utilized are
listed below by publisher and edition.

Al-Maktab al-Islami, 1 st ed., 408 pp., Damascus, 1381 A.H. (Referred to as MI.!.)
This edition has a very brief introduction by Zuhayr al-Shawish and is based on
the Indian edition. Numbers for the Qur’nic verses appear in footnotes. However,
the numbering is not always accurate. The hadiths that occur in the text are
carefully edited by the well-known scholar ofhadiths Nasir al-Din al-Albani. This
edition does not contain any chapter titles or subtitles and the divisions are
indicated only by the heading fasl, chapter. It contains a table of contents in which
detailed subheadings are given along with a brief table of errors at the end of the
book. Overall, the footnotes are brief and few in number.

Al-Maktab al-Islami, 2d ed., 455 pp., Beirut, 1392 A.H. (Referred to as MI.2.)
This edition also features a brief introduction by Zuhayr al-Shawish. The volume
contains twenty-three chapters of varying lengths. For instance, chapter 22 is
about a hundred pages long. This edition is basically the same as the first, with
only a few improvements. For example, numbers for the Qur’anic verses appear
in brackets immediately following the quotation. The table of contents, placed at
the end of the text, does not correspond exactly with the titles and subtitles of the
first edition. Both of these editions are considered very reliable.

Dar al-Tiba‘ah al-Muhammadiyyah at al-Azhar, Ist ed., Cairo, n.d., 404 pp.
Edited by Muhammad Khalil Harras. (Referred to as MKH.) Basically the main
text is similar to al-Maktab al-Islami, 2d ed. However, the division of paragraphs
is different. The volume is clearly printed and has a short introduction by the
editor. No numbers are provided for the Qur’anic verses, but references for the
hadiths appear in parentheses. The editor provides notes, but for the most part,
they are not much help.

Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah, Ist ed., Beirut, 1983, 398 pp.(Referred to as DKI.)
This edition contains a one-page introduction and a brief biography of Ibn
Taymiyyah with a list of sixteen of his well-known works. The Quranic verses
are enclosed in parentheses and their verse numbers are placed in the footnotes.
The references for the hadiths are in small double parentheses. Footnotes and
subtitles are limited and are not based on the style of the above editions. There is
IBN TAYMIYYAH AND KITAB AL-IMAN 17

no index, but the volume does contain a table of contents that includes
subheadings.

Dar Ihya’ al-‘Ulum, Ist ed., Beirut, 1984, 350 pp. Edited by Shaykh Husayn
Yisuf al-Ghazal. (Referred to as GHA.) Shaykh Ghazal has heavily edited and
summarized some of the chapters. For instance, in the original edition chapter 8
is about thirty pages, but in this edition it is summarized into a little over three.
In all, the original text has been reduced by about seventy pages. Long notes have
been inserted into the text in brackets. In a lengthy introduction, Shaykh Ghazal
attributes his summarization and extensive abridgement to a desire to make the
language more accessible for the reader. The convenient and attractive
layout—including subheadings, footnotes, and numbering of Qur’anic
verses-—will appeal to the reader.

Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi, Ist ed., Beirut, 1993, 459 pp. Edited by Muhammad al-
Zabidi. (Referred to as MZ.) This edition, was received after the first draft of this
translation was completed, is by far the best and was used extensively in the
several revisions and refinements of the work. In the introduction, the editor
included a biography of Ibn Taymiyyah based on some of the basic original
sources. One attractive feature, not included in the other editions, is the volume’s
ten indices, including an index of the occasional verses of poetry that occur in the
text. The last chapter of the book contains a minor typographical error. A few
lines that should have appeared on page 378 were mistakenly switched with lines
on page 376. The editor also added subheadings. Compared to the twenty-three
chapters of MI.2, this edition contains only nineteen. The editor has taken the
liberty of combining some of the short chapters.

Kitab al-Iman is included as volume 7 in Majmu‘ Fatawa Ibn Taymiyyah,
collected and edited by ‘Abd al-Rahman Ibn Muhammad Ibn Qasim with the
assistance of his son Muhammad. Published by Matba‘at al-Ma‘arif, Rabat,
Morocco. n.d., 460 pp. As indicated by the editors in the introduction, volume 7
includes only a running text with no footnotes, index, or references for Qur’anic
verses. The editors refer to it as Kitab al-Iman al-Kabir, The Major Kitab al-Iman.
This edition includes additional material that the editors have called Kitab al-
Iman al-Awsat, The Middle Book of Faith (pp. 461-686). Some of the topics
discussed in this section relate to the major theme of Iman and, of course, are not
included in this translation.
Chapter One

The Difference Between Iman, Islam, and Ihsan

In the Name of Allah
the Most Beneficent the Most Merciful!

Praise be to Allah. We seek help and forgiveness from Him. We take refuge in
Him from the evils of our souls and from our bad deeds. One whom Allah guides
to the right path will never go astray and he who goes astray will never find the
right way. We testify that there is no god but Allah, and He has no associate; and
we testify that Muhammad (pbuh) and his family, is His servant and Messenger. '

Know that Iman, belief; and Islam combine to form religion as a whole.
However, there has been much discussion, dispute, and confusion among people
about the essence of Iman and about Islam, and many volumes have been written
in regard to this. The dispute concerning this matter emanates from the time when
the Kharijites seceded from other sects.

We explain what may be applicable from the words of Allah, the Exalted, along
with the words of the Prophet (pbuh), so that the believer will arrive at the essence

' Ibn Taymiyyah, in his book Kitab al-Jman, did not use titles for the chapters, rather he used only
the word fasl, chapter. The different editors of the Arabic copies of this book used various
methods for chapter headings and subheadings. The approach adopted in this translation is
actually a combination of these methods together with some modifications. We have basically
used the chapter headings and subheadings from Kitab al-Iman MZ.

? Throughout the translation the term Iman is understood to mean faith in certain general contexts,
and belief in more specific contexts. However, the precise meaning of Iman, whether translated
as faith or belief, is determined in context. In the Qur’an there is more tendency for the word to
be understood as faith when it is used in a mutlaq, absolute, sense. This level of Iman is attained
when a person fulfills all the obligations that Allah commands. When the word is used in a
muqayyad, conditioned, sense it connotes a specific type of Iman.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 19

of the words of Allah and His Messenger. Indeed, this is the purpose. We do not
want to mention the disputes of the people at the beginning. Rather we address
that topic within the explanation of the benefits obtained from the words of Allah
and His Messenger. The best way to resolve the sources of the disputes is by
referring them to Allah and His Messenger, both in this world and in the
Hereafter.

We state that the Prophet (pbuh) differentiated among the concepts of Islam,
Iman, and Ihsan, perfection (in religion), in the hadith of the Angel Gabriel. The
Prophet said: “Islam means that you must testify that there is no god but Allah and
that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, you must perform salah, prayers, you
must give zakah,’ you must fast during the month of Ramadan, and you must
make pilgrimage to the Sacred House, if you can afford it.” He [the Prophet] also
said: “Iman is affirming your belief in Allah, His Angels, His Books, His
Messengers, the Day of Judgment, and believing in qadar, predestination, both in
its good and its evil.” Indeed the difference between Islam and Iman, which is
mentioned in the hadith of ‘Umar,’ is recorded only by Muslim.>

١ The word zakah is usually translated as charity, poor due, tithe, alms giving, and so on, but in
Arabic it suggests both growth and purification.

* The translators of this book find it useful to list the hadith of “Umar Ibn al-Khattab since the
author based his argument on it. “Umar Ibn al-Khattab, the Blessings of Allah be on him, said:
“Once we were sitting with the Prophet (pbuh) when there came upon us a man with snow-white
clothes and jet-black hair. There were no signs of fatigue from traveling, yet he was a complete
stranger to all of us. Then he sat before the Prophet with his own knees parallel to his knees and
his hands on the thighs of the Prophet." Then he said: “Oh Muhammad, tell me about Islam." The
Prophet said: "It is to testify that there is no god but Allah, to observe regular prayers, to give
zakah, to fast the month of Ramadan, and to perform Pilgrimage to the Sacred House, if you can
afford it." Then the stranger said: "You have spoken the truth." We wondered why he asked him
and then told him what he had said was true. Then again he asked: “Tell me about Iman." The
Prophet answered: "It is to believe in Allah, His Angels, His Books, His Messengers, the Day
of Judgement and to believe in predestination, both, in its good and its evil." The stranger said:
“You have spoken the truth.” Then he asked: "Tell me about Ihsan." The Prophet replied: "It is
to worship Allah as if you were seeing Him, though you do not see Him, He sees you." Again
he asked: "Tell me about the Day of Judgement." The Prophet answered that he knew no more
about it than his questioner. But when he asked him about its signs, the Prophet answered: “It
is when a slave girl gives birth to her own mistress and when you see the barefooted and tattered,
needy shepherds of goats vying with each other to erect high buildings.” When the stranger
departed, the Prophet (pbuh) was silent for a long while, and then said: "Oh “Umar, do you
recognize the questioner?" I [“Umar] replied: "Allah and His Messenger know best." Then the
Prophet said: “It is Gabriel: He has come to teach you your religion." (Narrated by Muslim).

١ Muslim, Abu al-Husayn (202-261 A.H.), was one of the most well-known collectors of hadith.
His collection, Sahih Muslim, is probably the most famous book of hadith after Sahih al-
Bukhari. [El 2, vol. 7, pp. 691-92].
20 CHAPTER ONE

In the hadith of Abu Hurayrah,° reported by both al-Bukhari’ and Muslim, it is
said that the Angel Gabriel came to him [the Prophet] in the image of an Arab
person from the desert and asked him about Islam, Iman, and Ihsan. But in the
hadith of “Umar he came in the image of an Arab from the desert.

Also, he [the Prophet] explained the meaning of Islam in the famous hadith of Ibn
“Umar. He said: “Islam is based on five pillars: testifying that there is no god but
Allah and that Muhammad is His servant and Messenger, performing prayers,
giving zakah, making pilgrimage to the Sacred House, and fasting during
Ramadan.”

THE THREE RANKS OF RELIGION: ISLAM, IMAN, AND IHSAN

Gabriel’s hadith indicates that Islam, built on five pillars, is the true Islam. In
other words, Islam is considered the structure upon which the five pillars are
based. The Prophet (pbuh) indicated that religion has three darajat, ranks, of
which the highest is Ihsan, the middle is Iman, followed then by Islam. Thus,
every Muhsin, man of Ihsan, is a Mu’min, believer, and every believer is a
Muslim. However, not every believer is a Muhsin nor is every Muslim a believer,
as will be indicated in sha’a Allah, if Allah wills, later in the sayings of the
Prophet (pbuh). As in the hadith, narrated by Hammad Ibn Zayd* on the authority
of Ayyub’ on the authority of Abu Qilabah”® on the authority of a man from Syria
on the authority of his father, the Prophet (pbuh) said to him: “Embrace Islam and
you will be in peace.” The man then asked: “What is Islam?” The Prophet replied:

6 Abu Hurayrah, al-Dawsi al-Yamani (?-59 A.H.)}, was a Companion of the Prophet and one of
the most famous narrators of hadith. He narrated over 3,500 hadiths, many of which appear in
both the Sahths of Bukhari and Muslim. [E/ 2, p. 129.]

’ Al-Bukhari, Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad Ibn Isma‘il (194-256 A.H.), was the most famous
collector of hadith and his book a/-Sahih, which is published in nine volumes, is the most widely
used book on hadith. [E/ 1, vol. 1, pp. 1296-97.]

8 Hammad, Abu Isma‘il Ibn Zayd Ibn Dirham al-Azdi (98-179 A.H.), was one of the trustworthy
compilers of hadith who lived in Basrah. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 29 and al-Zirikli, vol. 2, p. 301.]

° Ayyiib, Abu Bakr al-Sakhtiyani (66-131 A.H.), was a collector of hadith, a jurist, and a reciter
of the Qur’an. [AI-Zirikli, ‏.م‎ 382 and Studies in Early Hadith Literature by M. M. Azami. Beirut,
1968, p. 81.]

'° Abu Qilabah, ‘Abd Allah Ibn Zayd Ibn ‘Amr al-Basri (?-104 A.H), was a trustworthy man of
hadith and law. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 29.]
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 21

“The submission of your heart to Allah and the protection of Muslims from your
tongue and hand.” The inquirer asked: “Which Islam is the best?” He [the
Prophet] replied: “Iman.” The inquirer asked: “Which Iman is the best?” The
Prophet answered: “To affirm your belief in Allah, His Angels, His Books, His
Messengers, and in life after death.” The inquirer asked: “What of Iman is best?”
The Prophet answered: “hijrah, forsaking.” The inquirer asked: “What is hijrah?”
The Prophet replied: “‘Forsaking evil.” The inquirer asked: “Which hijrah is the
best?” The Prophet replied: “jihad, struggle to attain the best.” The inquirer
asked: “What is jihad?” The Prophet answered: “To fight and battle against the
unbelievers wherever you find them and not to be unfaithful or cowardly.” Then
the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) said: “ Of all deeds, two deeds are the best, or
deeds of similar value.” He mentioned this three times. The two deeds that are
fully rewarded are performing hajj, pilgrimage, or ‘umrah, minor pilgrimage. It
was narrated by Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal]'' and Muhammad Ibn Nasr al-Marwazi.””
That is why the Prophet mentions the four ranks in his saying: ““A Muslim is one
who does not harm other Muslims with his tongue and his hand. A believer is one
people trust with their lives and property. A muhajir is one who abandons evil
deeds. And a mujahid is one who strives in the Cause of Allah.” This is from the
Prophet (pbuh) on the authority of ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr’? on the authority of
Fudalah Ibn “Ubayd"* and others with a sound chain of transmission. It is also
mentioned in the Sunan, the books of hadiths, and a portion of it is narrated in the
two Sihihs [of Bukhan and Muslim).

" Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Abu ‘Abd Allah (164-241 A.H.), was a celebrated theologian, a jurist, and
a traditionalist. He was the founder of the Hanbali School of law. [E/ 2, vol. 1, p. 192.] He is
cited frequently in Kitab al-Iman and his name may appear either as Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Ahmad
only, and sometimes Abu ‘Abd Allah.

? Al-Marwazi, ‘Abd Allah Muhammad Ibn Nasr Ibn al-Hajjaj (7-294 A.H.), was a preferred
disciple of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal. He played an important role in transmitting the hadiths that were
collected by Ibn Hanbal. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 30.]

“Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr (Ibn al-‘As) (?-63 A.H.) was a Companion of the Prophet and one of the
first compilers of hadith. His book is entitled a/-Sahifah al-Sadiqah. Some people objected to his
collecting and writing hadith. He requested the Prophet’s permission to do so, and the Prophet
granted it to him. [M. M. Azami, ‏.م‎ 43.]

* Fudalah Ibn ‘Ubayd al-Ansari (?-53 A.H.) was one of the Companions of the Prophet,
participated in several of the expeditions, and was appointed Judge of Damascus during the
Caliphate of Mu‘awiyyah. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 30.]
22 CHAPTER ONE

It is also authentically narrated from the Prophet, through different chains of
transmission, that he said: ““A Muslim is one who does not harm other Muslims
with his tongue and his hand and a believer is one in whom people entrust their
lives and property.” It is well known that whoever is trusted with lives and
properties the Muslims are surely safe from the harm of his tongue and hand—that
is, had one not saved the Muslims from the harm of his tongue and hand, they
would not have trusted him. Also, this is mentioned in the hadith narrated on the
authority of “Ubayd Ibn ‘Umayr'* through ‘Amr Ibn ‘Absah.'°

In the hadith of ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Ubayd Ibn‘Umayr"’ on the authority of his father,
on the authority of his grandfather, the Prophet (pbuh) was asked: “What is
Islam?” The Prophet replied: “Providing food and saying gracious words.” The
inquirer asked: “What is Iman?” The Prophet replied: “Tolerance and patience.”
The inquirer asked: “Who among the Muslims is the best?” Upon this the Prophet
replied: “The one from whose tongue and hand the Muslims are safe.” The
inquirer asked: “Who among the believers possesses superior Iman?” The Prophet
answered: “The one with the best morals.” The inquirer asked: “Which hijrah is
the best?” The Prophet replied: “Forsaking what Allah prohibits.” The inquirer
asked: “Which prayer is best?” The Prophet answered: “Til al-qunut, a /ong silent
prayer in which one is completely devoted to Allah.” The inquirer asked: “Which
sadaqah, alms, are best?” Upon this the Prophet said: “Jahdu mugill, when a man
who possesses little property can afford to give in payment the poor rate as
required by law.” The inquirer asked: “Which jihad is best?” The Prophet replied:
“To strive in the Cause of Allah with your property and life until your horse is
wounded and your blood is spilled.” The inquirer asked: “Which of al-sa‘at, (the
hours) the time, are best?” The Prophet answered: “The last part of the night.”

It is well known that the various maratib, ranks, are arranged one above the other.
Thus, every muhajir, forsaker, is a believer and so is a mujahid, striver for the
sake of Allah. For the Prophet said concerning Iman: “It is tolerance and

5 Ubayd Ibn “Umayr (?-74 A.H.) was born during the lifetime of the Prophet (pbuh) and was
considered one of the trustworthy Successors. He was interested in hadith and tafsir, Quranic
interpretations. [Kitab al-lman MZ, p. 31.]

© “Amr Ibn ‘Absah (2-60 A.H.) was one of the Companions of the Prophet and one of the leaders
in the Yarmitk battle. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 31.]

٠” “Abd Allah “Ubayd Ibn ‘Umayr (2-113 A.H.) was a man of hadith and transmitted hadith from
Ibn ‘Abbas and ‘A’ ishah. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 31.]
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 23

patience,” and concerning Islam: “It is providing food and saying gracious
words.” Indeed, Iman is considered a prerequisite of Islam but not the reverse.
Accordingly, a believer, as opposed to a Muslim, is patient and tolerant.
Sometimes a Muslim may pretend to behave like a believer, but his actual manner
is not tolerant and patient. The Prophet also said: “The best of Muslims is one
from whose hand and tongue the Muslims are safe.” He added: “The best of
believers is the one with the best morals.” It is well known that the latter [Islam]
implies the former {Iman], for if one has good morals, then other Muslims are safe
from his hand and tongue.

EXPLICIT DEEDS ARE PART OF IMAN

Al-Hassan al-Basri'* was asked: “What are good morals?” He replied: “Badhlul-
nada, generosity, kafful-adha, refraining from doing harm, and talaqatul-wajh,
cheerfulness.” Thus, he considers refraining from doing harm as a part of good
morals. The following are some of the ahadith sahihah, sound sayings, of the
Prophet in which he considered al-a‘mal al-zahirah, explicit deeds or behaviors,
as a manifestation of Iman. He said, for example: “Iman has over seventy
branches, the highest of which is saying: ‘There is no god but Allah,’ and the
lowest is the act of removing what is perilous from the road.” And the Prophet
said to a delegation of the people of ‘Abd al-Qays: “I command you to have Iman
only in Allah. Do you really know what Iman only in Allah is? It is testifying that
there is no god but Allah, that He is alone and has no partner, performing prayers,
giving zakah, and paying one-fifth of the spoils you acquire.”

It is well known that nothing has been reported to signify that deeds, tolerance,
and patience can constitute Iman in Allah unless one has a believing heart. For it
has been narrated, by many authorities, that having a believing heart is a necessity
for having Iman in Allah. In the Musnad of Anas {Ibn Malik]'° narrated that the
Prophet (pbuh) said: “Islam is explicit and Iman is implicit in the heart.” The
Prophet also said: “There is a mudghah, small piece, in the human body. If it is

'® Al-Hassan al-Basri (21-110 A.H.), was a pious man of learning who was born in Madinah and
later settled in Basrah. He was one of the Successors and a brave and religious scholar. [E/ 2, vol.
3, p. 247 and al-Zirikli, vol. 2, p. 242.]

9 Anas Ibn Malik, Abu Hamzah(?-93 A.H.), was one of the Companions of the Prophet and a
compiler of hadith. [Al-Zirikli, vol. 1, ‏.م‎ 365 and E/ 2, vol. 1, p. 282.]
24 CHAPTER ONE

pure, the whole body becomes pure. However, if it is corrupt, the whole body
becomes corrupt. Indeed, it [the mudghah] is the heart.” Thus, he whose heart is
pure certainly has a pure body, but not the reverse.

Sufyan Ibn ‘Uyaynah”’ said: “Scholars used to write to each other the following
words of advice: ‘He who purifies his inner thoughts, may Allah purify his outer
thoughts and actions. And he who purifies the relationship between himself and
Allah, Allah may purify the relationship between him and other people; and he
who works for the Hereafter, may Allah reward him in his worldly affairs.” This
hadith was narrated by Ibn Abi al-Dunya”' in the book of al-[kh/as.

Therefore it is well known that, if the heart is purified by Iman, then the body is
purified by Islam, which is part of Iman. This is indicated in Gabriel’s hadith
where the Prophet said {to his Companions]: “This is Gabriel, who has come to
instruct you in matters of your religion.” He [the Prophet] regarded religion as
Islam, Iman, and Ihsan. Thus, it is obvious that our religion is a combination of the
these three concepts. But they are arranged into three ranks: Muslim, Mu’min, and
Muhsin. As Allah, the Exalted, says: “Then We have given the Book for
inheritance to such of Our servants as We have chosen. But there are among them
some who wrong their own souls, some who follow a middle course, and some
who are, by Allah’s permission, foremost in good deeds . . .” (35:32). He who
follows a muqtasid, middle course, and he who is foremost in good deeds, but not
he who wrongs his own soul, will enter Paradise without punishment. Hence,
whoever applies the outward obligation of Islam with tasdiq, assent, of the heart
but fails to perform the obligation of al-Iman al-batin, inward belief, will be
subject to future punishment, as will be illustrated later, in sha’a Allah.

Ihsan is a more inclusive concept than Iman, but it also has a more specific sense
than Iman. Iman, in turn, is a more inclusive concept than Islam. Thus, Ihsan
includes Iman, which in turn, includes Islam. Consequently, al-muhsinun, the

20 Sufyan Ibn ‘Uyaynah, Abu Muhammad (107-198 A.H.), was a scholar of hadith. a jurist, and
a reciter of Qur'an. [Al-Zirikli, vol. 3, ‏.م‎ 159 and al-Fihrist, vol. 1, p. 547.) ‘

21 Ibn Abi al-Dunya, Abu Bakr ‘Abd Allah Ibn Muhammad (208-281 A.H.). was an ascetic, a
scholar, and one of the compilers of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, pp. 32-33, al-Zirikli. vol. 4, p.
260; and al-Fihrist, vol. 2, p. 982.}

22 Ibn Taymiyyah often selects only a certain portion of a Qur’anic verse to document the point

under discussion. The quoted portion could be taken from the beginning, middle. or end of the
verse. In such cases the translators have inserted three dots to signify missing parts.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 25

people of Ihsan, are more distinguished than al-mu’minun, the believers, and the
believers are more distinguished than the Muslims. The same analogy can be
applied to the concepts of Message and Prophethood. Prophethood is
encompassed in the Message, when the term Prophethood is used in a generalized
sense. On the other hand, this term has more restrictive sense when it is used by
itself. Therefore every messenger is a prophet, but not the reverse. Prophets are
more generalized than messengers. Prophethood is part of the Message because
the Message includes Prophethood plus other matters, but not the reverse.

Indeed, the Prophet (pbuh) interpreted Islam and Iman through his answers to the
questions put to him. For example, when he was asked: “What is ghibah,
backbiting?” He replied: “Mentioning something about your brother in his
absence that he abhors.” The Prophet also said in another hadith: “Arrogance is
disdaining the truth and despising people.” Disdaining the truth means denying it,
and despising people means looking at them with disrespect and contempt. In
sha’a Allah, it will be reported later why the Prophet produces diverse answers to
suit different situations and why all of them are haqq, true.

”
5

However, what is meant by the Prophet’s saying: “Islam is built on five [pillars]
is similar to [the meaning of] his saying: “Islam is the five [pillars],” as indicated
in Gabriel’s hadith. Namely, if a matter is composed of parts, its collective
structure is naturally built on those parts and composed of them. That is, Islam is
built on, as well as composed of, these pillars. We will explain later, in sha’a
Allah, that these five [pillars] form the essence of Islam and Islam is built on
them. It will also be explained why, among the duties, these pillars are especially
designated.

In his hadith to the delegation from the people of ‘Abd al-Qays, he [the Prophet]
interpreted Iman in a way similar to his interpretation of Islam (as illustrated
above), with only one exception. Pilgrimage was not mentioned in his
interpretation of Iman, even though it is generally agreed that the pilgrimage is
part of belief. He said: “I command you to have belief only in Allah. Do you really
know what belief only in Allah is?” They replied: “Allah and His Messenger know
best.” He said: “Testifying that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah, performing prayers, giving zakah, fasting during Ramadan,
and paying one-fifth of the spoils that you acquire.”
26 CHAPTER ONE

In some other versions of this hadith it was narrated: “Belief in Allah and
testifying that there is no god but Allah.” This differs from the first version of the
hadith and is not as well known. In Abu Sa‘id’s {al-Khudri]”’ version he said: “I
command you to do four things and 1 command you not to do four things. Worship
Allah alone and do not associate anything with him.” In the famous hadith of the
branches of Iman, he explained Iman as follows: “Iman consists of more than sixty
or seventy branches, the best of which is saying, La ilaha illa Allah, there is no
god but Allah, and the least of which is the removing harm from the road, and
haya’, modesty, 15 one branch of Iman.”

The Prophet said: “Modesty is a branch of Iman.” This was affirmed by many
narrators, such as [‘Abd Allah] Ibn ‘Umar,” Ibn Ma‘siid,?* and ‘Imran Ibn
Husayn. He [the Prophet] also said: “None of you is a believer until I am dearer
to him than his child, his parents, and all people.” He said: “None among you truly
believes until one loves for his brother that which one loves for himself.” He also
said: “I swear by Allah that one never has belief, I swear by Allah that one never
has belief, I swear by Allah that one never has belief.” The Prophet repeated it
three times. He was asked: “Oh, Prophet! Who is that?” The Prophet replied: “He
whose neighbor is not secure from his harmful conduct.” The Prophet also said:
“If anyone among you should see something wrong, he should correct it with his
hand; and if he is not able to, then with this tongue; if he is not able to, then with
his heart. And that is the weakest of Iman.” And the Prophet said: “Never before
has a Prophet been sent by Allah to his ummah, community, who among his
people had no disciples and companions who followed his ways and obeyed his
commands. Then after them come their successors, who say one thing but do
another, and practiced not what they were commanded to do. Thus, he who strove
against them with his hand is considered a believer; and he who strove against
them with his tongue is considered a believer; and he who strove against them

3 Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri, Sa‘d Ibn Malik (?-74 A.H.), was considered one of the main narrators of
hadith from the Prophet. He felt that hadiths should not be written down and forbid his students
to do so. [Al-Zirikl1, vol. 3, p. 150 and M. M. Azami, ‏.م‎ 39.]

24 <Abd Allah Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ibn ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab (?-73 A.H.) was the son of the
second Caliph, an excellent transmitter of hadith and was considered to be a model of a pious
person. [E/ 2, vol. 1, pp. 53-54 and al-Zirikli, vol. 4, p. 246.]

25 <Abd Allah Ibn Mas‘ad (?-32 A.H.) was a famous Companion of the Prophet and a reciter of
Quran. [E/ 2, vol. 3, pp. 873-75.]
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 27

with his heart, he is also considered a believer. Beyond that there is no belief even
to the size of a habbat khardal, mustard seed” (narrated by Muslim only). .

Muslim also narrated that the Prophet said: “By Him in whose hand is my soul,
you will never enter Paradise until you believe and you will never believe until
you love one another. Should I not direct you to a thing which, if you do it, will
foster love among you? Practice frequently saying among you, al-salamu
‘alaykum, peace be upon you.” He [the Prophet] said in the hadith whose
narration is agreed upon and narrated by Abu Hurayrah. Al-Bukhari reported the
hadith of Ibn ‘Abbas’® that the Prophet (pbuh) said: “The fornicator who
fornicates is not a believer as long as he commits it; a drunkard who drinks wine
is not a believer as long as he drinks it; no thief who steals is a believer as long as
he commits theft; and no plunderer who plunders al-nuhbah, the valuable thing,
that which attracts the attention of people, is a believer as long as he commits this

59

act.

IMAN AND ISLAM AS CITED IN THE QUR°AN

The word Iman is cited in the Quran by itself and not in conjunction with the
word Islam nor with the phrase ‘righteous work’ or other such words or phrases.
Sometimes the word Iman is cited as being linked to the word Islam as indicated
in Gabriel’s hadith: “What is Islam and what is Iman?” and in Allah’s saying: “
Indeed Muslim men and women, and believing men and women . . .” (33:35) and
He says: “AI-A ‘rab, the desert Arabs, say: ‘We believe.’ Say: ‘You have no faith’;
but you only say: ‘We have submitted our wills to Allah. . .”” (49:14); Allah also
says: “So We brought out from therein the believers who were there. But We
found only one house with Muslims in it” )51:35-36(. The word Iman was also
mentioned in conjunction with the phrase “righteous works,” as indicated in the
many verses of the Qur’an. For example, Allah, the Exalted, says: “Indeed, those
who have belief and do righteous works . . .” (2:277).

The word Iman may also be linked to those endowed with knowledge. Allah says:
“But those endowed with knowledge and belief will say . . .” (30:56). Allah also

26 ‏و5[‎ ‘Abbas, Abu al-‘Abbas ‘Abd Allah (?-68 A.H.), was considered one of the greatest scholars
of the first Islamic generation. He was also regarded as the father of Qur’anic exegesis. [Al-
Zirikii, vol. 4, ‏.م‎ 228 and E/ 1, vol. 1, p. 40.]
28 CHAPTER ONE

says: “. . . Allah will raise up, to suitable ranks and degrees, those of you who
believe and who have been granted knowledge . . .” (58:11). Whenever He
mentions those who believe in Him, those who are endowed with knowledge are
included, for they are the best of believers. Allah says: “. . . And those who are
firmly grounded in knowledge say: ‘We believe in it [the Book]; the whole of it
is from our Lord . . .”” (3:7). Allah also says: “. . . Those among them who are
well-grounded in knowledge, and the believers, believe in what has been revealed
to you and what was revealed before you . . .” (4:162).

The word al-mu’minun, believers, is also mentioned in the Qur’an in conjunction
with those who follow the Jewish, Christian, and Sabian [religions]. Allah says:
“Indeed! Those who believe and those who are Jews and Christians, and Sabians,”’
whosoever believes in Allah and the Last Day and does righteous work, shall have
their reward with their Lord, on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve”
(2:62). Thus [Allah differentiates], in the first part of the verse, between the
believers and the other three groups. However, in the second part of the verse,
“whosoever believes in Allah,” the word believe is generalized to speak of those
who believe in the Qur’an, who follow the Jewish scriptures, the Christians, and
the Sabians. This generalization is also cited in Allah’s saying: “Indeed those who
believe and do righteous works are the best of creatures” (98:7). This issue will
be explained fully later, in sha’a Allah.

The intended difference here is a matter of generalization and particularization
of the external and internal aspects of Iman. However, the generalization
regarding the milals, religious communities (as cited in 2:62)” is a different issue.
Whenever Allah mentions Iman jointly with Islam, He regards the latter as the

27 The name Sabians occurs in three different verses in the Qur’an-2:62, 5:69 and 22:17. It is a
religious community whose several thousand probable descendants live in Southern Iraq on the
banks of the Euphrates and Tigris Rivers. They dress in white and believe in frequent immersion
in water and are often called baptisers. Their religious book is Ginza and is written in the
Aramaic language. There was another group also referred to by the name Sabians of Harran, a
city today belongs to Turkey. They were star worshipers and famous astrologers and had
hellenistic tendencies. E/: Vol.8, 675-79 and Fihrist: Vol.2, 745-72.

28 The text of Kitab al-iman does not quote the first part of this verse, “shail have their reward with
their Lord." However, the discussion that follows makes it necessary to quote the entire verse.
Also, in all the recensions of Kitab al-Iman consulted, this verse is cited as Surat al-Ma’idah,
verse number 69. The correct reference is Strat al-Baqarah, verse 62, as cited above.

°° The Jewish, Christian, and Sabian religions.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 29

external works (i.e., testifying that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad
is His Messenger, performing prayers, giving zakah, fasting during Ramadan, and
performing the pilgrimage). However, He regards Iman as that which is at the
heart of belief in Allah, His Angels, His Books, His Messengers, and in the Day
of Judgment. This difference is affirmed in the hadith narrated by Ahmad [Ibn
Hanbal] on the authority of Anas from the Prophet (pbuh), who said: “Islam is
explicit and Iman is in the heart.”

Thus whenever the word Iman is cited alone it implies both Islam and righteous
works, as is mentioned in the hadith of the branches of Iman which says: “Iman
consists of more than seventy branches, the highest of which is saying, La ilaha
illa Allah, there is no god but Allah, and the least of which is the removing of
harm from the road.” This applies to all sayings of the Prophet in which all
righteous works are mentioned as part of Iman.

If Iman is negated by abandoning [righteous works], then they are considered as
obligations for Iman. However, if the virtue of someone whose righteousness is
mentioned, provided that his belief is not negated, then these [righteous works] are
considered to be desirable for Iman. For Allah and His Messenger do not negate
an obligation they command unless one fails to perform part of that obligation. For
example, the Prophet said: “No prayer is complete without reciting umm
al-Qur’an, the opening chapter, and no true belief can be ascribed to one who has
no loyalty, and no religion is complete for the one who does not abide by his
commitment.”

However, if one’s deed is deemed more desirable in worship than another deed,
the worship will not be negated if the desirable deed is lacking. If this is true, then
it would be possible to negate from all of the faithful the title of Iman, prayer,
charity, and pilgrimage because there are works that are better than others and no
one can do righteous works in the exact same way the Prophet (pbuh) did them,
even righteous persons like Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. So, if we were to negate them
[righteous works] from these individuals because they cannot perfect them, then
we can negate them from all Muslims throughout history. And this conclusion
cannot be reached by a wise person.

It follows that it is right to say that perfection of belief is negated if one fails to
perform part of an obligation for the neglect of which he is to be blamed or
30 CHAPTER ONE

punished. But, this is not the case if he fails to perform a desirable work.
Supporting the Prophet’s command to an Arab who did not perform prayer in the
right manner, the Prophet said: “Go back and perform [your prayer] as it should
be performed for it is not complete.” He also commanded the man who prayed
alone, behind the prayer line, to pray again by saying: “‘No prayer is accepted from
someone who prays alone behind the line.” Indeed, the Prophet said that because
both men neglected an obligatory act. Further support comes from the following
saying of Allah: “Only those are believers who have believed in Allah and His
Messenger and have never since doubted, but have striven with their belongings
and their lives in the Cause of Allah; such are the sincere ones” (49:15). This
saying indicates that striving [in the Cause of Allah] is an obligation, and
abandoning doubt is an obligation. It is clear from the saying that although jihad,
striving in the cause of Allah, is considered an obligation to be performed by some
believers, all of them are commanded to believe in its being an obligatory act and
to have true intention to strive whenever it is due. For the Prophet (pbuh) said:
“Whoever dies before he invades, in the cause of Allah, or intends to invade will
die as a hypocrite” (recorded by Muslim). This means that he who does not have
an intention to strive in Allah’s Cause will have a certain degree of hypocrisy. It
is inevitable that a believer must practice at least one aspect of jihad.

Allah says: “The believers are those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor

in their hearts, and when they hear His Verses rehearsed, find their belief
strengthened, and put all of their trust in their Lord; who establish regular prayers,
and spend freely of the gifts We have given them for sustenance; such in truth are
the believers” (8:24). All the acts mentioned above are obligatory. That is,
putting trust in Allah is a great obligation, as is sincerity to Allah and love of Him
and His Messenger. In fact, His command to “put trust in Him” is stressed even
more than that of performing the rite of ablution and of taking a bath when in the
state of uncleanliness. In contrast, putting trust in anyone but Allah is prohibited.
For Allah says: “. . . Then worship Him, and put your trust in Him. . .” (11:123).
Allah also says: “Allah! there is no god but Him. In Allah, therefore let the
believers put their trust” (64:13). He also says: “If Allah helps you, none can
overcome you; if He forsakes you, who is there, after that, that can help you? In
Allah, then, let believers put their trust” (3:160). Allah also says: “Moses said:
‘Oh, my people! If you do really believe in Allah, then in Him put your trust if you
are Muslims’” (10:84).
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 31

Allah says: “For, believers are those who, when Allah is mentioned, fee! a tremor
in their hearts, and when they hear His Verses rehearsed, find their belief
strengthened . . .” (8:2). It is said that the presence of some intentions and works
in one’s heart is a permanent necessity for having belief in Allah. That is, a
believer will continue performing these [works] without deliberately striving to
do so. However, the absence of these intentions and works indicates that true Iman
has not yet been achieved by one’s heart. This is illustrated in the following saying
of Allah: “You will not find any people who believe in Allah and the Last Day,
loving those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, even though they were their
fathers or their sons, their brothers, or their kindred. For such He has written belief
in their hearts, and strengthened them with a spirit from Himself ...” (58:22). This
saying indicates that you never find a believer who loves those who oppose Allah
and His Messenger. For Iman itself precludes love for those who oppose Allah and
His Messenger in the same way that opponents stand against one another. Thus,
if Iman is in the heart, its opponent, namely, loving those who oppose Allah and
His Messenger, is negated. Likewise, if one loves those who oppose Allah and His
Messenger, his loving signals that his heart lacks true belief.

Similar is His saying in the following verse: “You see many of them turning in
friendship to the unbelievers, Evil indeed are the works which their souls have
sent forward before them, with the result that Allah’s wrath is on them, and in
torment will they abide. If only they had believed in Allah and the Prophet and in
what has been revealed to him, never would they have taken them for friends and
protectors, but most of them are wrong-doers” (5:80-81). In these verses, there is
a conditional sentence which requires that when a condition is present, then a
conditional clause will be introduced by the Arabic particle ‘ law’, which means
if when combined with the conditional clause, requires the negation of the
conditional sentence. For Allah says: “If only they had believed in Allah and the
Prophet and in what has been revealed to him, never would they have taken them
for friends and protectors . . .” (5:81). This indicates that the aforementioned
Iman, belief, precludes taking unbelievers for friends and protectors. It also
indicates that belief cannot be found together with taking unbelievers for friends
and protectors in one’s heart. Moreover, it indicates that the heart of whoever
takes unbelievers for friends and protectors is devoid of true belief in Allah, His
Prophet, and in what has been revealed to him.
32 CHAPTER ONE

Likewise Allah says: “... Take not the Jews and the Christians for your friends
and protectors: they are but friends and protectors to each other. And he among
you who turns to them for friendship is one of them. . .” (5:51). Indeed, Allah
means in these verses that he who takes them [Jews and Christians] as friends is
not a believer. He also affirms that he who is a friend of one of them is one of
them. For indeed in the Qur’an the verses are in harmony with and support of one
another. Allah says: “Allah has revealed the most beautiful Message in the form
of a Book consistent with itself, yet repeating its teaching in various aspects: The
skins of those who fear their Lord tremble with it . . .” (39:23). He [Allah] also
says: “Indeed the believers are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger and
when they are with him on a matter that requires a collective action, they will not
depart until they ask for his permission . . .” (24:62). This is an indication that
departure without seeking the Prophet’s permission is not allowed. One should not
leave until seeking permission, for indeed, one who departs from the Prophet’s
presence without seeking permission abandons some of what is obligated upon
him of Iman. Therefore, to do so would negate Iman. That is because the particle
innama, verily, affirms the obligation and negates the rest.

Some of the usuliyyin, religious authorities, say that the particle inna, indeed or
verily, is used [grammatically] for affirmation and the particle ma, not, is used for
negation. When both of these particles are used jointly, they indicate both negation
and affirmation. However, this is not so with the Arab grammarians. Those who
know this matter well know that the particle ma is called ma al-kaffah, and that
it bars the particle inna and its sisters from governing. Thus inna specializes in
governing nominal clauses, but when it conjoins with ma, its grammatical function
is nullified. Consequently, inna, along with ma, can now precede both nominal
and verbal clauses simultaneously. As a result, both the function and meaning of
inna have changed by suffixing ma to it. The same [grammatical] rule applies to
other similar particles such as ka’annama, as if

Likewise Allah says: “They say: ‘We believe in Allah and in the Messenger, and
we obey.’ But even after that, some of them turn away. They are not really
believers. When they are summoned to Allah and His Messenger, in order that He
may judge between them, some decline to come. But if the right is on their side,
they come to Him with all submission. Is it that there is an affliction in their
hearts? Or do they doubt, or are they in fear, that Allah and His Messenger will
deal unjustly with them? No, it is they themselves who do wrong. The answer of
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 33

the believers, when summoned to Allah and His Messenger, in order that He may
judge between them, is no other than this, they say: ‘We hear and we obey: It is
such as these that will be successful.’” (24:47-51).

It is true to say that a true believer is he who performs the obligations and
abandons forbidden deeds. For Allah says: “Truly those are the believers . . .”
(8:4). And He does not mention more than five requirements for belief. In another
verse, Allah says: “The true believers are those who believe in Allah and His
Messenger, and have never since doubted, but strive with their belongings and
their lives in the Cause of Allah: Such are the sincere ones” (49:15). Allah also
says: “*... Those who ask for your permission are the ones who believe in Allah
and His Messenger. . .” (24:62).

The question raised here is, has belief only five requirements? Two answers are
proposed: the assumption is that the five mentioned requirements imply what is
not mentioned. For Allah mentions the following requirements: feeling a tremor
in one’s heart when Allah is mentioned, the strengthening of belief upon hearing
Allah’s verses, complete reliance on Allah, establishing regular prayer in
accordance with Allah’s ordinance, and spending the property and gifts Allah has
given. It is clear that these five requirements imply unspecified actions. For
example, the feeling of a tremor in the heart when Allah is mentioned implies that
one apprehends and fears Him. The interpreters of the Qur’an have explained that
the verbs wajilat and fariqat, fear, both mean “to fear Allah.” Ibn Mas‘id, in his
Quranic reading of this verse, read farigat instead of wajilat: “When the name of
Allah is mentioned, their hearts are full of fear [fariqat].” This is valid. For indeed,
the meaning of al-wayjal, linguistically speaking, is khawf, fear, in accordance with
the saying ‘the redness of shyness and the pallor of fear’. Allah says: “And those
who give that which they give with their hearts full of fear (wajilatun), they will
return to their Lord” (23:60). ‘A’ishah asked: “Oh, Messenger of Allah! Does the
one who fornicates and steals feel fear of punishment?” Upon this the Prophet
answered: “No, daughter of al-Siddiq,” it is the one who prays, fasts, and spends
the gifts given to him and fears [that these righteous deeds] will not be accepted
from him.”

* Abu Bakr al-Siddiq was the first Caliph. His daughter ‘A’ishah, one of the wives of Prophet
Muhammad (pbuh), related a fairly large number of hadiths. [E/, vol. 1, pp. 307-8.]
34 CHAPTER ONE

Al-Suddi interpreted the Qur’anic verse, “When Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor
in their hearts,” as referring to the one who, whenever he intends and tries to do
harm, refrains from doing it. Allah, the Exalted, says: “As for the one who feared
to stand before his Lord and restrain his soul from lust, indeed the Garden will be
his abode” (79:40-41). Likewise is His saying: “And for he who fears the stand
of His Lord, there will be two Gardens” (55:46). Mujahid and other interpreters
said: “A man starts to commit a defiant act then immediately remembers that he
stands before Allah, and he abandons committing this act out of fear of Allah.”

Since feeling a tremor in the heart when Allah is mentioned implies fear and
apprehension of Allah, then this feeling requires one to do what he is commanded
and refrain from what he is forbidden to do. Sahl Ibn ‘Abd Allah’! said: “There
is no barrier between Allah and His Servant thicker than being in no need of
Allah, and there is no path closer to Allah than being in need of Him.” The
essence of the good in this life and the Hereafter is the fear of Allah, as indicated
in His saying: “When the anger of Moses subsided, he took up the Tablets whose
text contained Guidance and Mercy for all those who fear their Lord” (7:154).
This verse indicates that guidance and mercy are for those who fear their Lord.

Mujahid” and Ibrahim™ said: “He who fears Allah is the one who, when he
intends to commit a sin, remembers Allah and spontaneously refrains from doing
it.” It was narrated by Ibn Abi al-Dunya on the authority of Ibn al-Ja‘d,* on the
authority of Shu‘bah,°> on the authority of Mansir® and both of them [Mujahid
and Ibrahim]. This is indicated in the following verse of the Qur’an. Allah says:
“But for him who fear the standing before his Lord, there will be two Gardens”

3 Sahl Ibn ‘Abd Allah, Abu Muhammad Ibn Yanis al-Tastari (200-283 A.H.), was a Safi scholar
who wrote a book on the interpretation of the Qu’ran. [Al-Zirikli, vol. 3, p. 210 and Kitab al-
Iman, MZ, pp. 40-41).

2 Mujahid Jon Jabr al-Makki (21-102 A.H.) compiled a commentary on the Qur’an that was used
by many scholars after him. He was one of the Successors and was connected with the school
of tafsir of Ibn ‘Abbas. [E/ 2, vol. 7, p. 293 and M. M. Azami, p. 69.]

33 Thrahim Ibn Yazid (?-96 A.H.) was a scholar of hadith and tafsir and one of the Successors.
[Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 41]

4 > ‏جزم‎ Ibn al-Ja‘d (2-230 A.H.) was a scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 41.]

‎Shu ‘bah Ibn al-Hajjaj (82-160 A.H.) was one of the great scholars of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ‏ كد
‎and al-Zirikli, vol. 3, p. 241.]‏ 41 .م

‎36 Mansur Ibn al-Mu‘tamar (2-132 A.H.) was considered an authority on and a scholar of hadith.
[Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 41.]
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 35

(55:46). Those who fear their Lord are those who will prosper, as stated in the
saying of Allah: “Those [people] depend on guidance from their Lord, and it is
those who will prosper” (2:5). They are the believers and the Allah-fearing ones,
who are mentioned in Allah’s sayings: “Alif. Lam. Mim: This is the Book which
contains no doubt. It is a guidance to those who fear Allah” )2:1-2(. He also
mentions in the verse of al-Birr, Righteousness: “. .. Those are the people of truth,
and they are the Allah-fearing” (2:177). They are the ones who follow the
Guidance of the Book, as indicated in Allah’s saying: “. . . Whosoever follows My
Guidance will not lose his way nor fall into misery” (20:123). Thus, he who does
not lose his way is a follower of Allah’s Guidance and he who does not fall into
misery is blessed. Those are the followers of the straight path upon whom Allah
has bestowed His Grace. They include prophets, righteous ones, martyrs, and
virtuous people, whose path is not anger, nor that of those who go astray.
Accordingly, they deserve Paradise without punishment because they are true

believers.
Illustrating this point is the following saying of Allah: “... Those who truly fear
Allah, among His Servants, who have knowledge . . .” (35:28). This verse means

that whosoever truly fears Allah has knowledge, as indicated in another verse.
Allah says: “Is one who worships devoutly during the hours of the night
prostrating himself or standing [in adoration], who takes heed of the Hereafter,
and who places his hope in the Mercy of his Lord [like one who does not]? Say
[to them, Oh, Muhammad]: Are those who know equal to those who do not
know? . . .” (39:9). The word fear implies to fear Allah and to expect reward from
Him; otherwise it would mean despair. Whereas, expectation requires fear;
otherwise, it would mean safety. Thus, those who fear and make supplication to
Allah are the knowledgeable praised by Him.

It was reported that Abu Hayyan al-Taymi said: “The knowledgeable persons are
three: a person who is knowledgeable about Allah but not His Commandments,
a person knowledgeable about Allah’s Commandments but not about Him, and a
person knowledgeable about Allah as well as His Commandments. A person
knowledgeable about Allah is the one who fears Him, anda person knowledgeable
about His Commandments is he who knows what is required and what is
prohibited.” It was recorded in the a/-Sahih collection of hadiths, from the Prophet
(pbuh), that he said: “I swear by Allah that, among you, I hope, I will be the most
36 CHAPTER ONE

fearful of Allah and the most knowledgeable about His Commandments.” If those
who fear Allah are the knowledgeable persons, then they should not be criticized
because they perform what they are asked to do. This is illustrated in the following
verses. Allah says: “. . . But their Lord inspired [this Message] to them: “Indeed
We shall cause the wrong-doers to perish!’ and ‘Indeed We shall cause you to
dwell in the land after them.’ This is for anyone who fears My position and fears
My threat.” (14:13-14) Allah also says: “But for anyone who fears the position of
his Lord, there will be two Gardens” (55:46). Those who fear Allah are promised
victory in life and reward in the Hereafter because they performed the obligations.
Thus fear of Allah requires performing the obligations. This is said to the fajir,
man of bad conduct, who does not fear Allah, as indicated in the meaning of the
following verse. Allah says: “Allah accepts the repentance of those who do evil
in ignorance and repent soon afterward . . .” (4:17).

Abu al-‘Aliyah®’ said that he asked the Companions of Muhammad about this
verse: “Allah accepts the repentance of those who do evil in ignorance and repent
soon afterward,” and they told me that everyone who disobeys Allah is ignorant
and everyone who repents before death is a repenter of short notice, and so said
other interpreters. Mujahid said: “Every disobedient person is considered ignorant
[at the time he is being disobedient].” Al-Hassan [al-Basri], Qatadah,” ‘Ata’,””
al-Suddi,*° and others said: “They are called ignorant not because they are in the
state of being disobedient but because they do not recognize that they are being
disobedient.” Al-Zajjaj*’ said: “This verse does not mean that they do not know
that it is evil, for if a Muslim does an evil act and he does not recognize it as an
evil act, he will be considered as if he did not do it.” However, al-Zajjaj proposed
that this verse bears two possible interpretations. One is that they have done evil,

37 Abu al-‘Aliyah, Rufay‘ Ibn Mihran al-Riyahi (?-93), was one of the first generation of
commentators of the Qur’4n and a collector and transmitter of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 43
and E/ 2, vol. 1, ‏.م‎ 104.]

38 Qatadah Ibn Di‘amah al-Saddisi (61-117 A-H.) transcribed hadith and wrote commentary on
the Qu’ran. [M. M. Azami, p. 98.]

°° ata? Ibn Abi Rabah (27-117 A.H.) was a scholar of hadith. He encouraged and assisted his
students in transcribing hadith. [M. M. Azami, p. 80.]

45 Al-Suddi, Abu Muhammad Isma‘il Ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman (2-128 A.H.), was famous for his
Quranic interpretation. [Sezgin, vol. 1, pp. 77-78.]

41 A1-Zajjaj, Abu Ishaq Ibrahim Ibn Muhammad al-Ansari (?-922 A.D.), was a grammarian who
composed a book on the meaning of the Qur’an. [al-Fihrist, vol. 1, pp. 131-33.]
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND iIHSAN 37

not recognizing its bad consequences. The other is that they do evil, knowing its
bad consequences, preferring this life to the Hereafter. Hence, they are called
ignorant for their preference of getting the little over the abundant and eternal
comfort. Al-Zajjaj viewed jahl, ignorance, as either not knowing the consequences
of doing evil or bad judgement. Both these issues are interlaced. This issue is
addressed in detail in the dialogue with the Jahmites.

Accordingly it can be said that anyone who disobeys Allah is ignorant and anyone
one who fears Allah is knowledgeable and obedient to Allah. An individual is
ignorant for lacking fear of Allah. For if he fears Him, he does not disobey Him.
Supporting this point is the saying of [bn Mas‘iid (may Allah be pleased with
him): “Fear of Allah is complete knowledge and Allah’s deception is complete
ignorance.” For indeed having a perception of fear entails fleeing from it, and
having a perception of something you desire entails pursuing it. If one does not
flee from fear and does not demand the desired, it indicates that one does not have
a true perception of it. One may perceive information about it, but having a
perception of that information and believing it and even memorizing it letter by
letter is different from the perception of the object itself. Likewise, if the
perceived entity is neither desired nor disliked, then one starts to believe what is
fearful for others as well as liked for others. This does not result in either fleeing
from it or requesting it. The same thing applies if one is informed about something
either desired or disliked. The informer does not tell a lie but rather recognizes his
truthfulness. However, his heart is occupied with other matters beyond the
perception of what he is being informed about. The result of all of this initiates
neither fleeing nor demanding.

According to a well-known statement by al-Hasan al-Basri, the Prophet (pbuh)
said: “Knowledge is of two kinds: knowledge of the heart and knowledge of the
tongue. Knowledge of the heart is useful while knowledge of the tongue is Allah’s
proof against His Servants.”

Abu Musa” narrated that the Prophet (pbuh) said: “The believer who recites the
Qur’an may be likened to a pear: It tastes good and has a pleasant aroma.

* Abu Misa al-Ash‘ar ‘Abd Allah Ibn Qays (?-44 A.H.) was a Companion of the Prophet and a
military leader. He was in favor of writing and collecting hadith. [E/ 1, 695, al-Zirikli, vol. 4,
p. 254 and M. M. Azami, p. 39.]
38 CHAPTER ONE

However, a believer who does not recite the Qur’an may be likened to a date: It
tastes good but has no smell. The hypocrite who recites the Qur’an is like al-
rayhanah plant: It has a nice smell and bitter taste, while a hypocrite who does not
recite the Qur’4n is like al-hanzalah, the colocynth: It has a bitter taste and no
smell.” This was recorded in Sahih Muslim and Sahih Bukhari. According to this
saying, the hypocrite who recites the Qur’an, memorizes it, and understands its
meanings may believe that it is the words of Allah and that the Messenger is the
truth, yet he will not be a believer. The Jews know that it is the words of Allah and
that the Messenger is the truth, just like they know their own children, but they are
not believers. Such is the case with Iblis, the devil, Pharaoh, and others. All such
people will not attain complete knowledge and understanding, for that inevitably
entails that one must behave accordingly. Thus it is said of the one who does not
make use of his knowledge that he is ignorant, as was stated earlier.

What is said about the word ‘fear’ [of Allah] is applicable to the word al-‘aql, the
intellect. This word is a verbal noun derived from the verb ‘aqala, to have
intelligence. Hence, no one is called intelligent except he who knows and does
good, and abandons evil. That is why the companions of the Fire said that Allah
says: “Had we but listened or used our intelligence, we should not now be among
the companions of the Blazing Fire!” (67:10). Allah says about the hypocrites:
“They would think they were united, but their hearts are divided. That is
because they are a people devoid of wisdom” (59:14). For, if one does what he
knows harms him, then such a person has no intellect. Since fear of Allah requires
knowing Him, then knowing Him requires fear of Him, which in turn requires
obeying Him. Thus, he who fears Allah does whatever He commands and refrains
from whatever He prohibits. This is what we intend to clarify. Supporting this
point is Allah’s saying: “Therefore remind. Perhaps reminding will benefit [the
hearer]. Then the one who fears will heed. But it will be avoided by the most
unfortunate ones, who will enter the Great Fire” (87:9-12).

In this verse, Allah says that whoever fears Him remembers. Remembrance
requires worshiping Him. Allah says: “He it is Who shows you His Verses, and
sends down sustenance for you from the sky: but only those receive admonition
who turn [to Allah}” (40:13). And He says: “For an insight and reminder to every
servant turning [to Allah]” (50:8). That is why the many interpreters explained
His saying: ‘The admonition will be received by those who fear [Allah],’ meaning
that only those who fear Allah will take a lesson from the Qur’an. They also
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 39

interpreted His saying: “But only those receive admonition who tum to Allah,
meaning that only he who receives admonition tums to Allah’s obedience.” This
is because receiving admonition requires doing what one is admonished to do. For
example, if one remembers something he likes, he pursues it, but if he dislikes
something, he flees from it. Allah also says: “It is the same to them whether you
warn them or not; they will not believe” (36:10).

Allah the Almighty says: “You warn the one who follows the Message and fears
the Beneficent in secret . . .” (36:11). The negation of warming is in harmony with
Allah’s saying: “ It is the same to them whether you warn them or not; they will
not believe” (36:10). Warning is affirmed in one sense and negated in another.
Warning is informing about fearful things, since warning is like instructing and
intimidation. Therefore, he whom you instruct will learn and his learning will be
complete. Likewise it was said that I instructed him and he did not learn and I
intimidated him and he became afraid. On the other hand, for one who is
intimidated but does not become afraid, his intimidation is not complete. As when
one shows the right way to someone and he accepts guidance, then his guidance
is complete, as in Allah’s saying: “. . . Guidance is for the righteous ones” (2:2).
And to the one who is shown the right way but does not accept it, Allah says: “As
for the Thamud, We gave them guidance but they preferred blindness [of the
heart] over guidance .. .” (41:17). In conclusion, one’s guidance will not be
complete, as is usually stated: You gave advice and it was accepted or you gave
advice and it was denied.

A perfect cause must have an effect. However, it is incomplete if it does not have
an effect. An act, if it has a suitable setting, is accomplished; otherwise it is not.
Having knowledge about something one likes means that he will seek it. Likewise,
having knowledge about something one does not like means that he abandons it.
This type of knowledge is called 21-0361, the seeker. It is said that the seeker with
the power of knowing requires the existence of the things he seeks as a
prerequisite. This happens, provided one has good intent. If one has bad intent,
he does not enjoy even pleasant things, but gets hurt by them. Instead, due to his
ill intention, he enjoys that which is harmful. In fact, ill intent implies both
practical and mental power, and both outward and inward [power], like an ill
person who finds everything he tastes is bitter, even honey. His senses are
40 CHAPTER ONE

damaged to the point that he no longer perceives things as they are. The same
applies to the one whose inner being is corrupted.

Allah says: “. .. But what will make you [Muslims] realize that even if special
Verses came, they would not believe? We shall confound their hearts and their
eyes, even as they refused to believe in this at first: We shall leave them in their
trespasses, to wander in distraction” (6:109—10).

Allah also says: “And [remember] when Moses said to his people ‘O my people!
Why do you persecute me, when you know that I am the messenger of Allah [sent]
to you? Then when they [the unbelievers] went wrong, Allah let their hearts go
wrong...” (61:5); and He also says “. . . And their saying: ‘Our hearts are ghulf,
covered with wrappings. No, Allah has placed a seal on their hearts for their
unbelief. . .’” (4:155). In this verse the word ghulf is a plural of aghulaf, a cover
that is wrapped in another cover, just as in an uncircumcised person. Accordingly,
the unbelievers’ statement that their hearts are covered means that their hearts
have been created wrapped up. In response to them Allah says: “. . . No, Allah’s
curse is on them for their unbelief” (2:88) and “. . .He [Allah] sealed their hearts
for their unbelief and little is it which they believe” (4:155). And also Allah says:
“And among them are those who listen to you [Muhammad] until they exit from
your presence; then they would say to those who have received knowledge: ‘What
was that he said just now?’ Those are the ones whose hearts Allah has sealed, and
they follow their own desires” (47:16).

The unbelievers said that Allah says: “Oh, Shu‘ayb! Much of what you say we do
not understand! .. .” (11:91). About this, Allah says: “If Allah found in them any
good, He would indeed have made them listen . . .” (8:23). That is, Allah would
have made them understand what they listened to. He also says: “... They would
have turned away, averse [to the truth]’” (8:23). For indeed their innate nature was
corrupted. Hence, they did not understand. Had they understood, they would not
have done it. Accordingly, Allah denied them their intellectual and physical
powers. He [Allah] says: “Or do you think that most of them listen or understand?
They are only like cattle; nay, they are farther astray from their way” (25:44).
Allah also says: “Many are the Jinns and men We have made for Hell: They have
hearts but they understand not, eyes but they see not, and ears but they hear not.
They are like cattle; nay, but they are worse! For they are heedless [of warning]”
(7:179). And He says: “The parable of those who reject belief is as if one were to
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 41

shout like a goatherd to things that listen to nothing but calls and cries: Deaf,
dumb, and blind, they are void of wisdom” (2:171); and He says that the
hypocrites are: “Deaf, dumb, and blind; they [the hypocrites] will not return [to
the path]” (2:18).

Some people may say that they did not benefit from hearing, speaking, seeing, and
they were made deaf, dumb, and blind. And when they turned away from hearing,
seeing, and speaking they became like the deaf, the blind, and the dumb. This is
really not so. Rather, their own hearts became blind, deaf, and dumb, as Allah, the
Exalted, says: “... Truly it is not the eyes that are blind but the hearts that are in
their breasts” (22:46). Consequently, the heart is considered the king and the other
organs are its soldiers. Thus, when the heart is pure the whole body is pure, and
if it is corrupt, the whole body is corrupt. Therefore, one would continue to hear
the sounds with the ears just like the animals hear, but he does not understand the
meaning. Indeed, even when he does understand something, he will not
comprehend it completely. For complete understanding requires an affect on the
heart by the thing that is loved and hating the thing that is disliked. When people
become like animals complete perception is not accomplished, then it becomes
permissible to negate it. For indeed, what is not completely comprehended is
negated, as in the Prophet’s saying to the person who made a mistake while he
was performing his prayer: “Go and pray again, you did not pray correctly.” In
conclusion, Iman is negated when it is not in the heart.

Allah has characterized the believers as those who when He is mentioned, feel a
tremor in their hearts, and when they hear His Verses rehearsed, find their belief
strengthened. Al-Dahhak* understood this to mean that their Iman was increased
and strengthened. While al-Rabi‘ Ibn Anas“ interpreted it to mean fear of Allah.
Yet, Ibn ‘Abbas interpreted it as confirming belief in Allah. The two
characteristics of feeling a tremor and strengthening the belief of a believer are
mentioned in many verses of the Qur’an. For example, Allah says: “Has not the
time arrived for the believers that their hearts in all humility should engage in the
remembrance of Allah and of the Truth that has been revealed [to them], and that

4 Al-Dahhak Ibn Muzahim (40-105 A.H.) wrote a commentary on the Qur’an. [M. M. Azami, p.
64,]

“ Al-Rabi‘ Ibn Anas (2-139 A.H.) was a narrator and collector of hadith and worked on Qur’anic
interpretation. (Fu’4d.Sezgin, Ta’rikh al-Turath al-‘Arabi, vol. 1, pp. 79-80.]
42 CHAPTER ONE

they should not become like those to whom the Book was given before; but a long
time has passed and their hearts have grown hard? For many among them are
grave sinners” (57:16).

The word khushi‘, Aumility, implies two meanings: One is humility and
submissiveness, while the other is calmness and tranquility, which require a
tenderness of the heart that is contrary to harshness. Thus, a humble heart implies
its worship of Allah as well as tranquility, hence, humbling oneself in prayer
implies both humility and tranquility. The word ‘humble’ cited in the verse:
“Those [the believers] who humble themselves in their prayers” (23:2) means to
Ibn “Abbas that the believers are in a state of submissiveness; according to
al-Hassan and Qatadah, they are ina state of fear while praying before Allah. Also
they are, according to Mugatil,*’ in a state of humility. To ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib* this
means humility in the heart, showing that one’s disposition should be tender
toward fellow Muslims, and that while praying one should not turn to the right or
to the left. Mujahid said it means to lower the gaze and to be responsive. When a
man gets up and is ready to pray he will be ina state of humbling himself to Allah,
his gaze will not wander, and he will not busy himself thinking about worldly
matters. ,

<Amr Ibn Dinar” stated that the word humility does not only mean bowing down
or prostrating but it means tranquility and perfection of performance in prayer. Ibn
Sirin®® and others narrated that while praying the Prophet (pbuh) and his
Companions used to raise their eyes toward the sky and turn to the right and left
until the following verse was revealed. Allah says: “The believers are indeed the
successful ones. Those who humble themselves in their prayers” (23:1-2).
Afterward they turned their faces toward wherever they prostrated and, from then
on, none of them was seen looking at anything except the ground where they
prostrated. ‘Ata’ said that being humble in prayer means not making any gesture

45 Mugati] Abu Hassan Ibn Sulayman (?-150 A.H.) compiled several books and a commentary on
the Qur’an. {M. M. Azami, p. 157 and Sezgin, vol. 1, pp. 85-86.]

4 > ‏زاح‎ Ibn Abi Talib (?-40 A.H.) was a cousin and son- in-law of the Prophet, and was the Fourth
Caliph. [E/ 2, vol. 1, pp. 381-86 and M. M. Azami, p. 47.]

47 «amr Ibn Dinar, Abu Muhammad (46-126 A.H.), transmitted hadith and was a scholar of figh.
[Al-Zirikli, vol. 5, ‏.م‎ 245 and M. M. Azami, p. 79.]

4 Muhammad Ibn Sirin (33-110 A.H.) was a scholar of hadith. It was reported that he opposed
writing down hadith. [M. M. Azami, p. 94.]
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 43

with any part of your body while praying. When the Prophet (pbuh) saw a man
making a gesture with his beard while praying, He said: “Had he had a humble
heart, all the parts of his body would have been humble too.” The word khushu‘,
humility, will be explained later, in sha’a Allah.

A humble body follows a humble heart, if one is not two-faced [tries to show what
is not really in his heart]. It has been narrated: “Seek refuge in Allah from the
hypocrisy of humbleness” [having a humble body but not heart]. For Allah
Himself urges the believers by saying: “Has not the time arrived for the believers
that their hearts in all humility should engage in the remembrance of Allah and of
the Truth . . .” (57:16). He commands them to have humble hearts every time He
and His Book are mentioned. He [Allah] also forbids them from being like those
to whom revelation was given in earlier times, but ages passed and their hearts

grew hard. Allah says: “. . . Those, when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their
hearts when His Words are mentioned and find their belief strengthened . . .”
(7:2).

Allah says in another verse: “Allah has revealed the most beautiful Message in the
form of a Book consistent with itself. The skins of those who fear their Lord
tremble, then their skins and their hearts soften with their remembrance of
Allah. . .” (39:23).Thus, those [believers] who fear their Lord, they are the ones
who, when Allah is mentioned, their hearts tremble.

When it is said that it is an obligation to have a humble heart when Allah and His
revelation are mentioned, the response would be in the affirmative. However,
people who humble themselves in their prayers belong to two groups. One follows
a middle course and the other surpasses others in good deeds. The latter group
includes people who perform desirable deeds. However, the former group
represents all the believers who deserve Paradise. Whosoever is not a member of
either of these two groups wrongs his soul. In the following sound hadith the
Prophet (pbuh) said: “Oh, Allah, I seek refuge in you from useless knowledge, a
heart that is not humble, a dissatisfied soul, and an unanswered prayer.”

Allah also condemns hard-heartedness, which is contrasted with a humble heart,
in many verses of the Qur’an. He says: “Then were your hearts hardened: then
they became like a rock, and even worse, in hardness . . .” (2:74). Al-Zajjaj said
that the verb qasat, linguistically speaking, means it became thick, dry, and
44 CHAPTER ONE

withered. Thus, hard-heartedness implies a lack of tenderness, mercy, and
humility of the heart. The person with the harsh and weak heart is the one with the
stiff and hardened heart. Ibn Qutaybah said: “The following verbs—gqasat, ‘asat,
and ‘atat—all mean yabisat, become dry. The blessed power of the heart is
different from the condemned harshness of the heart. For indeed the heart ought
to be strong but not harsh, tender but not weak, as in the tradition which states that
hearts are the vessels of Allah on His earth; the most beloved to Him are the most
firm, the most tender, and the most pure. This resembles the hand, it is strong yet
tender. This is in contrast to the hardened stub, which is dry and lacks tenderness
even though it possesses strength. Allah the Almighty mentions that the heart
trembles at the time of His remembrance. The belief will increase both in
knowledge and in deed when reciting the Book of Allah.

It is necessary to put one’s complete reliance and obedience in Allah for whatever
one can do and cannot do. The basis of this is the performance of prayer, giving
zakah, and fulfilling the remaining five [pillars], as Allah commanded. A servant
of Allah has to obey Him by doing what He commands, by fulfilling all the
obligations, one of which is prayer. Prayer, if performed well, prevents one from
committing evil. As narrated on the authority of Ibn Mas‘td and Ibn “Abbas:
“Prayer forbids and restrains one from disobeying Allah. Thus, he whose prayer
does not restrain him from evil, the more he prays, the more his prayer draws him
away from Allah.” The meaning of the latter part of this saying, “draws him away
from Allah,” is that if a person abandons the obligatory prayer, it is of greater
harm than the deeds he has performed. Abandoning the obligatory prayer drives
him away from Allah even if he performs little of the obligatory duties, as stated
in the following sound hadith of the Prophet (pbuh): “Such is the prayer of the
hypocrite; he observes the sun until it sets between the two horns of Satan, then
he stands up to pray and makes four genuflections in which he scarcely holds
Allah in remembrance at all.” Allah says: “The hypocrites, they think they are
deceiving Allah, but He will overreach them: When they stand up for prayer, they
stand without earnestness, to be seen of men, but little do they hold Allah in
remembrance” (4:142). ‘Ammir narrated that the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Allah may
record only one-half, one-third, or even one-tenth of His Servant’s prayer. For
when he prays, little does he hold Allah in remembrance.” Ibn “Abbas also
narrated: “You get nothing from your prayer except that you hold Allah in
remembrance.” Nevertheless, if while praying, one holds Allah little in
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 45

remembrance, although he is not obliged to pray again, he is commanded to make
up for the loss of his incomplete prayer by performing other voluntary deeds. And
it is well-known that whoever strictly guards and humbles himself implicitly and
explicitly in his prayers and fears Allah, as he is commanded, performs the
obligations. The believer will never commit a kabirah, grave sin. For he who
commits grave sins such as adultery, theft, or drinking wine, it is inevitable that
fear, humility, and light will abandon his heart, even though he still has the
essence of tasdiq, assent, in his heart. Committing a grave sin will remove Iman
from him. This is indicated in the Prophet’s\(pbuh) saying: “The fornicator who
fornicates is no longer a believer as long as he continues to commit it, and no thief
who steals is a believer as long as he continues to commit theft.” For indeed those
fear Allah, as Allah described them in His saying: “Those who fear Allah, when
a thought of evil from Satan assaults them, bring Allah to remembrance. Lo! they
are able to see ” (7:201) Thus, when a thought of evil assaults the believers’
hearts, they will remember Allah and become aware of their sins.

Sa‘id Ibn Jubayr’ said: “When in a state of rage a believer remembers Allah, he
will then suppress his anger.” Layth” narrated on the authority of Mujahid: “The
believer is a man who, when at the point of committing a sin, remembers Allah,
then does not commit the sin. Lust and anger are the initiators of sin. He who
heeds would refrain.” Concerning the unbelievers, Allah says: “But their brethren
[the evil ones] plunge them deeper into error, and never relax [their efforts]”
(7:202). That is, Satan plunges their brothers deeper into error, and never relaxes
his efforts. Ibn ‘Abbas said: “Neither men nor Satan relax their efforts.” Thus, if
one does not remember Allah when he intends to commit evil, he does not see
right; and Satan plunges him deeper into error. Thus, he becomes just like the one
who, when he closes his eyes, becomes unable to see although he is not blind. So
he whose heart is full of sin, does not see righteousness although he is not blind
like an unbeliever.

4” Sal Ibn Jubayr al-Asdi (46-95 A.H.) compiled a commentary on the Qur’4n and also recorded
hadith, especially the hadiths that were reported on the authority of Ibn “Abbas and Ibn‘ Umar.
[AI-Zirikli, vol. 3, ‏.م‎ 145 and M. M. Azami, ‏.م‎ 70.]

° Tayth Ibn Abi Sulaym (7-138 A.H) was a well-known scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p.
51]
46 CHAPTER ONE

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal reported from the book of hadiths on the authority of Yahya,”
on the authority Ash‘ath”’, on the authority ofal-Hassan [al-Basri] that the Prophet
(pbuh) said: “Iman will be taken away from him and when he repents it will be
restored to him.” Also, Ahmad said, that Yahya reported on the authority of
‘Awf® that al-Hassan said: “Iman will stay away from him as long as he continues
to commit sins; if he reconsiders, Iman will come back to him.” Ahmad also said
on the authority of Mu‘awiyyah,”™ on the authority of Abu Ishag,* on the authority
of al-Awza‘l,” that Ahmad said to al-Zuhri*’ when he mentioned the following
hadith: “The fornicator does not fornicate while he is a believer,” then they said:
“Ifhe is not a believer then what is he?” He replied: “He ignored that and disliked
my question about it.” Ahmad also stated on the authority of ‘Abd al-Rahman Ibn
Mahdi, on the authority of Sufyan, on the authority of Ibrahim Ibn Muhajir,** on
the authority of Mujahid, on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, that he said to his
ghulman, boys: “He who among you desires to get married, we will arrange it.
Furthermore, anyone from among you who will commit an act of fornication,
Allah will deprive him of the light of Iman. If Allah desires to restore Iman to him,
He will; but if He wishes to deprive him of it, He will.” Abu Da?id al-Sijistant®”

‎Yahya Ibn Zakariyyah )0- 148 A.H.) was considered one of the trustworthy scholars of hadith‏ أذ
‎and a reciter of the Qur’an. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 52.]‏

‎* Ash‘ath Ibn Sawwr al-Kindi (80-136 A.H.) was a scholar and compiler of hadith. [Kitab al-
Iman MZ, p. 52.]

‎53 <Awf Ibn Abi Jamilah (59-146 A.H.) was a scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 52 and M.
M. Azami, p. 81.}

‎34 Mu ‘awiyyah Abu ‘Amr Ibn al-Muhllab al-Azdi (2-214 A. H.) was a scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-
Iman MZ, p. 52.]

‎** Abu Ishaq al-Fazari (?~188 A.H.) was a scholar of hadith and transmitted hadith mostly from al-
Awza‘i, who also transmitted hadith on his authority. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 52.]

‎°° Al-Awza‘l, Abu ‘Amr ‘Abd al-Rahman Ibn ‘Amr (88-157 A.H.), was the main representative
of the Syrian school of religious law. [£7 2, vol. 1, p. 772 and al-Zirikli vol. 4, p. 94.}

‎3” Al-Zuhni, Muhammad Ibn Muslim Ibn Shihab (51-124 A.H.), was a well-known scholar of
hadith and many of his students made collections of hadith based on his books and lectures. [M.
M. Azami, pp. 88-89.]

‎** [brahim Ibn Muhajir Abu Ishaq (n.d.) was a scholar of hadith who transmitted hadith from both
Mujahid and Ibrahim. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 53.]

‎* Abu Da’id al-Sijistani, Sulayman Ibn al-Ash‘ath (202-275 A.H.), was a well-known scholar of
hadith and his principle work, Kitab al-Sunan, is considered one of the six canonical books of
hadith. [EJ 2, vol. 1, p. 114.]
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN IMAN, ISLAM AND IHSAN 47

said that ‘Abd al-Wahab Ibn Najdah” reported on the authority of Bagiyyah Ibn
al-Walid,°' on the authority of Safwan Ibn ‘Amr, on the authority of ‘Abd Allah
Ibn Rabi‘ah al-Hadrami, that he had informed him on authority of Abu Hurayrah
that the Prophet used to say: “Iman is like a garment, one puts it on at one time
and takes it off at another.” It was also narrated by ‘Umar, with full isnad, chain
of transmission. In addition, it was narrated on the authority of al-Hassan from the
Prophet (pbuh) as a hadith mursal.* Supporting this point is a saying of the
Prophet (pbuh) narrated by Abu Hurayrah: “When the fornicator fornicates, Iman
leaves him and it becomes like a shade. If he abandons sin, Iman will be restored
to him.” The transmission of this hadith is marfu‘.® This will be fully explained
later, in sha’a Allah.

® “Abd al-Wahhab Ibn Najdah (2-232 A.H.) was a traditionalist and a scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-
Iman MZ, p. 53.]

6 Baqiyyah Ibn al-Walid (110-196 A.H.) was a scholar of hadith and transcribed hadhith from
many sources, without discrimination. [M. M. Azami, p. 125.]

* A hadith designated mursal has its isnad, chain of transmission, from a Successor directly to the
Prophet, and not through a Companion.

® A hadith designated marfi‘, has an isnad that can be traced back to the Prophet, though it may
be broken somewhere.
Chapter Two

Adherence to the Words of Allah
and His Messenger

DISPUTE CONCERNING THE AUTHENTICITY OF CERTAIN HADITHS

Some people have disputed the authenticity of certain hadiths. Among such
sayings is: “No prayer is accepted without ablution and no ablution is accepted
without mentioning Allah’s name.” The first part of this hadith is to be understood
as in the Prophet’s saying: “There is no prayer without tuhir, purification.”' This
is agreed upon among Muslims since tuhur is obligatory before performing prayer.
If the obligatory tuhur, is negated, then the prayer is negated. Concerning the
second part of the hadith, there is a well-known dispute about whether it is
obligatory to mention Allah’s name or not when performing ablution. Most
scholars of the Maliki, Hanafi, and Shafi‘I schools do not consider it obligatory.
This is, however, one of the two opinions on the authority of Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal]
that has been accepted by al-Khirgi,? Abu Muhammad’ and others. The second,
which is also on the authority of Ahmad and is accepted by some scholars, makes
mentioning Allah’s name when making ablution obligatory. Among them are Abu

The complete text of this hadith reads: The Prophet (pbuh) said: "No prayer is accepted without
purification and no charity is accepted from the ghulul, dishonest person."

* Al-Khirgi, “Umar Ibn al-Husayn Ibn ‘Abd Allah Ibn Ahmad (?-334 A.H.), was a famous Hanbali
jurist from Baghdad. [Ibn Badran, ‘Abd al-Qadir. al-Madkhal 13 Maghab al-Imam Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal, 2d. ed. Edited by ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Abd al-Muhsin al-Turki. Beirut, 1981 [this work is
referred to in the text as Tbn Badran, a/-Madkhal], pp. 416-17 and Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 54.]

Abu Muhammad, Muwaffaq al-Din Ibn Ahmad Ibn Muhammad al-Hanbali (?-620 A.H.), was
a scholar of fiqgh. He wrote two books about jurisprudence, a/-Kaff and al-Mugni‘. [Kitab al-
Iman MZ, p. 54.]

5
ADHERENCE TO THE WORDS OF ALLAH AND HIS MESSENGER 49

Bakr ‘Abd al-‘ Aziz and the judge Abu Ya‘la‘ and his followers. The Prophet also
said: “No prayer is accepted from the neighbor of the mosque except in the
mosque itself” (recorded by al-Daraqutni).° Some scholars consider this hadith
marfu‘; while other scholars consider it as the words of ‘Ali [Ibn Abi Talib], may
Allah be pleased with him. Still others among them, such as ‘Abd al-Haqq,° have
confirmed its authenticity. The Prophet also said: “No fast is accepted from the
one who broods the fast at night.” This hadith was narrated by scholars of the
books of al-Sunan, Books of Hadith, who said that it is not correct to consider it
marfu‘, but it is correct to consider it mawqif,’ on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar and
Hafsah.’ It is not right for anyone to attest to words of the Messenger in order to
fulfill a wish to negate a desire for perfection. Definitely if these words of the
Prophet were correctly and properly claimed, then they would fulfill an obligation,
otherwise they would not. For nothing can negate the essence of the Book and the
Sunnah. It is very important to know what is intended by the words of Allah and
His Messenger before anyone uses them in order to suit his own madhab, school
of law. The statements of the scholars should follow the words of Allah and His
Messenger, and not the reverse.

If there is a dispute concerning an obligatory matter among the religious scholars,
the words of Allah have clear significance in this regard. Then it is not permissible
to negate the well-known essence of the words of Allah and His Messenger by the
disputed sayings of the scholars. But some people grew up knowing only one line

* Abu Ya‘la, Muhammad Ibn al-Husayn (?-458 A.H.) was a well-known Hanbali jurist. He wrote
several books, among which are a/-Khilaf al-Kabir and al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah. {Ibn Badran
al-Madkhal, p. 417.]

* Al-Daraqutni, Abu al-Hassan ‘Ali Ibn ‘Umar (306-385 A.H.), was born in one of the large
quarters of Baghdad called Dar al-Qutn, where he obtained his nisbah. He was a man of wide
learning, including hadith, recitation of the Qur’an, and fiqh. He contributed greatly to the critical
study of hadith. Some of his well-known books are Kitab al-Sunan and Kitab ‘Ilal al-Hadith,
which deal with the causes and weaknesses of the study of hadith. [E/ 2, vol. 2, ‏.م‎ 136 and
Sezgin, vol 1, pp. 418-24.]

* ‘Abd al-Haqq, Abu Mihammad Ibn “Abd Rahman, also known as Ibn al-Kharrat (?~581 A.H.),
was a jurist and a scholar of hadith. He wrote a book entitled al-Mu‘tal Min al-Hadith
concerning weaknesses of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 54.]

’ Hadith mawqif is the type of hadith whose isnad, chain of transmission, goes back to a
Companion who received it from the Prophet (pbuh).

* Hafsah, daughter of ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab and wife of the Prophet, was born about five years
before Prophet Muhammad’s mission. [EJ 2, vol. 3, p. 63-65.]
50 CHAPTER TWO

of thought of a particular madhab. Those people believed that their opinion
constitutes the religion in its totality. It is like the person who prays alone and not
in congregation, thinking that he has completely fulfilled his obligation. The truth
of the matter is that scholars have two well-known opinions concerning the reward
of such a prayer. In the madhab of Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] two opinions on this
matter were expressed. The first opinion is of the older followers, represented by
the judge Abu Ya‘la, in explaining their madhab. The latter group, represented by
Ibn ‘Aqil’ and others, said: “It is permissible for one to pray the prescribed prayers
alone, without excuse; he is like the one who prays the noon Friday prayer. If he
could perform it in congregation after that, he should do so; otherwise it would
result in a sin similar to that of the one who abandons the Friday prayer. In this
case he could still receive repentance.” The source of this statement is tendered
by more than one among the scholars, and most of the reported traditions from the
earlier Muslims, Companions, and Successors also support this.

The religious scholars affirmed and based their opinions on the hadith of the
Prophet (pbuh), who said: “Anyone who hears the call for prayer [at the masjid]
and does not respond without having an excuse, his prayer will not be accepted.”
Some scholars responded by referring to hadith al-Tafdil,”° that it is in the realm
of al-ma‘dhir', the excused, who is permitted to pray alone. It was also affirmed
that the Prophet said: “The prayers of a man who performs [his prayers] while
sitting counts as only half of the prayer performed while standing, and the prayer
of the one lying down counts as only half of the prayer of the one who is sitting.”
What is meant by “the excused one” mentioned above is that if someone becomes
sick while praying, he will be excused. He also said that none of the earlier
Muslims permitted the voluntary prayer while lying down without an excuse and
none of them practiced this. However, it was permitted in one instance by the
madhabs of al-Shafi‘l'' and Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal], and its source from earlier

* Tbn ‘Aqil, Abu al-Wafa’ ‘Ali Ibn “Aqil (43 1-513 A.H.), was a well-known Hanbali jurist and
theologian and is considered one of the great scholars of Islamic religious thought. [£7 2, vol. 3,
pp. 699-700 and Ibn Badran, al-Mudkhal, pp. 410 and 416.]

© Hadith al-Tafdil, preference, is reported on the authority of Abu Hurayrah from the Prophet
(pbuh): "The prayer in congregation is preferred twenty-five {in some versions twenty-seven]
times over praying alone.”

١١ AL-Shafi‘’l, Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad Ibn Idris (150-204 A.H.), was the founder of the Shafi‘7
school of law anda scholar of figh and hadith. His most famous work is a/-Umm. {Al-Zinikli, vol.
6, p. 249 and E}, 010 edition 198), vol. 7, p. 252°)
ADHERENCE TO THE WORDS OF ALLAH AND HIS MESSENGER 0151

Muslims is not known. Indeed, this question could spread and bring calamity
among the Muslims. If it were permissible for every Muslim to perform his
voluntary prayer lying on his side when he is well, and not sick, it would be just
as permissible to perform voluntary prayer while sitting or while riding on a
camel. The Messenger (pbuh) would certainly have pointed this out to his
community and the Companions would have known it. Since there is a strong
desire to do good, it is inevitable that some would do it. However, no one of them
did that, thus this indicates that this practice was not allowed among the Muslims.
This will be explained more fully in the proper place.

What is intended here is that the Muslims should seriously value the words of
Allah and His Messenger, and no one is permitted to transmit the words of other
people except as they were originally intended, and not what they have been
interpreted to mean. Some people may interpret certain texts of the Qur’an that
express thoughts that are contrary to what they believe in terms that suit their
thinking and their behavior. The intention behind this is to use a certain text as a
proof, and this is wrong. We must believe in all that Allah and His Messenger
said, for indeed we cannot believe in some parts of the Book and disbelieve in
other parts. Thus, being careful of what is intended in one of the two versions of
a particular text, without considering the other, is not necessarily good. Therefore,
if the text is in harmony with what one believes, then follow what the Messenger
intended. The same is true for the interpretation of other such texts. What is
intended to be known is what the Messenger desired. This is what is intended in
the explanation and interpretation of any situation in which two different
meanings are possible. Anyone who merges the two into a single meaning, as is
often the case among the interpreters, considers ta’ wil to be like tafsir. But the real
meaning of ta’wil, with regard to the words of Allah and His Messenger, is
different from the meaning of tafsir, as commonly understood by the people, and
its meaning 15 also different from what is meant by later religious scholars. This
will be explained fully in its proper place.

Indeed everything that Allah and His Messenger negated concerning the
obligatory constituents—such as Iman, Islam, religion, prayers, fasting,
purification, pilgrimage, and other such obligation—was simply because the
practice of such obligatory constituents has been abandoned. Allah says: “But no,
by your Lord, they can have no belief, until they make you judge in all disputes
52 CHAPTER TWO

between them, and find in their souls no resistance against your decisions, and
submit with full submission” (4:65). This verse indicates that one’s belief is
negated if he does not regard the Messenger as a judge in all his disputes, and
hence it is an obligation for belief. On the contrary, whoever does not
acknowledge the Messenger as a judge should be punished, as he lacks the true
belief required for entering Paradise without punishment. It is well known that
whosoever performs some obligations but neglects others is subject to
punishment.

Also, Muslims unanimously agree that it is an obligation to regard the Messenger
as a judge in all disputes, both in matters pertaining to their religion and in their
worldly affairs. This applies to the essence of their religion as well as to its various
branches. Thus they should find in their souls no resistance to the Prophet’s
judgments in disputes between themselves, but accept those decisions with the
fullest conviction. Allah says: “Have you not turned your vision to those who
declare that they believe in the revelations that have come to you and to those
before you? Their real wish is to resort together for judgment in their disputes to
the taghut', the evil one, though they were ordered to reject him. But Satan’s wish
is to lead them far astray from the right. When it was said to them: ‘Come to what
Allah has revealed, and to the Messenger,’ you will see the hypocrites avert their
faces from you in disgust” (4:60-61).

His [Allah] saying, “to what Allah revealed” refers to the Book and Wisdom as
illustrated in the following verses. Allah says: “. .. Remember Allah’s favors to
you, and that He revealed to you al-Kitab wal-Hikmah, the Book and the Wisdom,
for your instruction . . .” (2:231); and“. . . For Allah has revealed to you the Book
and the Wisdom and taught you what you did not know: and great is the grace of
Allah unto you” (4:113). The call to acknowledge what Allah reveals indicated in
“come to what Allah revealed, and to the Messenger,” requires the call to
acknowledge the Messenger, which in turn requires the call to accept what Allah
reveals. Such a mutual connection is found between obedience to Allah and to His
Messenger. That is, whoever obeys the Messenger obeys Allah, and whoever
obeys Allah obeys the Messenger.

This connection is also found in the following verse. Allah says: “If anyone
opposes the Messenger, even after guidance has been plainly conveyed to him, he
ADHERENCE TO THE WORDS OF ALLAH AND HIS MESSENGER = 53

follows a path other than the believers’ way . . .” (4:115). Thus, whoever opposes
the Messenger, even after guidance has been plainly conveyed to him, follows a
path other than that becoming to men of belief; and whoever follows a path other
than that becoming to men of belief, opposes the Messenger even after guidance
has been plainly conveyed to him. This asserts the mutual connection between
Allah and His Messenger. Therefore, if one thinks that he is following the way of
the believers while he is wrong, he will be in the same position of the one who
thinks that he is following the Messenger, yet he is wrong too.

THE CONSENSUS OF THE BELIEVERS IS USED AS A PROOF

The above mentioned Qur?anic verse, “If anyone opposes the Messenger even
after guidance has been plainly conveyed to him, and follows a path other than
that becoming to men of belief,” indicates that the believers ijma‘, consensus of
opinion, is used as a proof. Therefore, disagreement with them is mutually
connected to disagreement with the Messenger, because whatever the believers
unanimously agreed on was based on nass, words or evidence, from the
Messenger. Thus, every unanimously resolved issue is certainly true, while
disagreeing with such unanimity leads to unbelief, exactly like disagreeing with
al-nass al-bayyin, the clear text [Qur’an]. However, if unanimity is not decisive,
then disagreeing with it may not lead to unbelief. For it may happen that the
indecisive unanimity is false and that the truth is something else.

A question was posed concerning ijma‘, consensus of opinion. Does it mean
qat‘iyyun, definitive, or zanniyyun, mere assumption? Some people use it in the
affirmative and some in the negative. The truth is clear, it is considered as a
consensus of opinion and, for certain, there is no dispute to begin with among the
believers. This matter must be decided upon justly. This is exactly what the
Messenger pointed out as al-huda, the guidance. This is explained fully elsewhere.

When specific aspects of an obligation are described with interconnected
attributes, this is an indication that any attribute will become a duty that must be
followed. This is the Sirat al-Mustaqim, Straight Path, which Allah commands us
to follow as guidance. Indeed, this means Islam, following the Qur’ an, and
obedience to Allah and His Messenger. It is also the way to worship Allah
54 CHAPTER TWO

correctly. All the attributes, regardless of how numerous they may be, eventually
lead to the obligation of worshiping Allah. These attributes are similar to the
different names of Allah, the Exalted, the names of His Book, and the names of
His Messenger. These are all like the names of His religion. Thus every
constituent and its attributes refer to one and the same thing.

Allah says: “And hold fast, all together, by the rope which Allah stretches out for
you, and be not divided among yourselves . . .” (3:103). In this verse, the phrase
habl Allah, Allah’s rope, has the following interpretations: Din al-Islam, the
religion of Islam, the Qur’an, Allah’s Covenant, Allah’s Obedience and
Commands, and the Muslim community. And all of these are haqq, true.

CONNOTATION OF THE BOOK, THE SUNNAH, AND IJMA‘ AS ONE

Accordingly, the three constituents--the Book, the Sunnah, traditions, and ijma‘,
consensus of opinion, should have the same connotation. For whatever is in the
Book is agreed upon by the Messenger, and the Muslim community in its totality
is in agreement on this matter. Indeed, all the believers must follow the Book as
an obligation. The same applies to the Sunnah. That is, whatever is in the Sunnah,
the Qur’a4n commands that it be followed; so do the believers. Similarly, whatever
Muslims unanimously agree on is nothing other than the truth consistent with what
is in the Book and the Sunnah. For Muslims learn about their religion from the
Messenger, who had true Revelations revealed to him: the Qur’4n and Wisdom.
The Messenger (pbuh) said: “I have received the Book, along with it, and the like
of it [wisdom].”

Hassan Ibn ‘Atiyyah’? said: “Gabriel used to descend to the Prophet (pbuh) to
teach him the Sunnah as well as to teach him the Qur’4n.” For not everything
included in the Sunnah is necessarily interpreted in the Qur’an. This is contrary
to what people of ijma‘ say must be inferred from both the Qur’an and the Sunnah.
For the Messenger was a mediator between Allah and the people by transmitting
His commands, His permission, and His prohibitions.

" Hassan Ibn ‘Atiyyah, Abu Bakr al-Muharibi (7-130 A.H.), was one of the scholars of hadith in
Syria and also one of al-Awza‘I’s teachers. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 59.]
ADHERENCE TO THE WORDS OF ALLAH AND HIS MESSENGER 65

SOME OF THE SIGNS OF IMAN

Illustrating the above point are the following sayings of the Prophet (pbuh): “A
person who believes in Allah and the Last Day never nurses a grudge against the
al-Ansar, the Helpers,” and “The love of al-Ansar is the sign of Iman, and hatred
against them is the sign of hypocrisy.” For whoever knows what al-Ansar did for
the Prophet, like obeying Allah and supporting His Messenger, and loves Allah
and His Messenger, definitely loves al-Ansar, which is in turn a sign of heartfelt
belief. However, for he who hates them, Allah has ordained no belief in his heart.

Whoever does not have hatred in his heart against what Allah and His Messenger
hate—what He prohibits like unbelief, sin, and rebellion—does not have true
belief in his heart. To put it differently, whoever does not hate what Allah
prohibits, does not have belief, as will be indicated later, in sha’a Allah. Likewise,
whoever does not love his brother, the believer, that which he loves for himself,
does not have true belief, for Allah does not negate one’s belief unless he
abandons part of that required belief. Hence, he will be one of those subject to
punishment, and he does not deserve Paradise without punishment.

The Prophet (pbuh) said: “Whoever cheats us is not one of us and whoever takes
up arms against us is not one of us,” for if one neglects an obligation or commits
what Allah and His Messenger prohibit, his true belief is negated and he is not one
of the believers who deserve Paradise without punishment.

Likewise, Allah says: “They say, we believe in Allah and in the Messenger, and
we obey: then after that, a group of them turn away: they are not believers. And
when they are summoned to Allah and His Messenger, in order that He may judge
between them, behold, a group of them decline. If the right is on their side, they
come to Him with all submission. Is it that there is an affliction in their hearts? Or
do they doubt? Or are they in fear that Allah and His Messenger will deal unjustly
with them? No, it is they themselves who are wrongdoers. The answer of the
believers, when summoned to Allah and His Messenger, in order that he may
judge between them, is no other than this. They say: ‘ We hear and we obey.’
Those are the successful ones” (24:47-5 1). Indeed, the word Iman, belief, if used
in an absolute sense in the sayings of Allah and His Messenger, indicates fulfilling
one’s obligations and abandoning what is prohibited. Thus, whoever Allah and His
Messenger declared to be without belief, must have abandoned an obligation or
56 CHAPTER TWO

committed something prohibited. Hence, he is subject to punishment and does not
deserve Paradise without punishment.

The same applies to Allah’s saying: “. . . Allah has endeared belief to you, and has
made it beautiful in your hearts, and He has made hateful to you unbelief, sin, and
rebellion: such indeed are the righteousness ones” (49:7).

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OBEDIENCE AND
DISOBEDIENCE WITH REGARD TO IMAN

Muhammad Ibn Nasr al-Marwazi said that some acts of disobedience can be
classified as unbelief but others cannot. Three kinds are noted: kufr, unbelief;
fusigq, sin, but not kufr; and ‘Isyan, rebellion, which is neither unbelief nor sin. All
these are made hateful to believers. And since all acts of obedience comprise one’s
belief, they are not divided into kinds. Allah endears belief, obligations, and all
acts of obedience to believers. Indeed, He combines them all by saying: “... Allah
has endeared belief to you. . .” (49:7). Here, the word belief implies all acts of
obedience. For example, Allah endears prayer, zakah, and all acts of obedience to
the believers. He says that He endears belief to them and has made it beautiful in
their hearts: “. . . Allah endears belief to you . . . (49:7). He also makes hateful to
the believers all acts of disobedience, whether unbelief or sin. The Prophet (pbuh)
said: ““Whoever’s good deed pleases him and his bad deed displeases him is a
believer.” For Allah endears good deeds and makes bad deeds hateful to believers.

Concerning this, the author remarks: making all kinds of disobedience hateful
requires liking all kinds of obedience. Thus, abandoning acts of obedience leads
to disobedience. It is inevitable that the heart should have a will. If one hates all
evil, then he must love the good. Whatever is a lawful act through good intent is
good, and by bad intent is evil. Thus an act is performed willingly and by one’s
own desire. The Prophet (pbuh) said: “The most beloved names to Allah are “Abd
Allah and ‘Abd al-Rahman, and the most sincere names are Harith and Humam,
and the ugliest of names are Harb and Murrah, as these two names mean war and
bitter respectively.”

The reason that the Prophet said that Harith and Humam are sincere names is
because every human being is Harith or Humam. The literal meaning of Harith is
the one who works and earns, and the literal meaning of Humam is the generous
ADHERENCE TO THE WORDS OF ALLAH AND HIS MESSENGER = 7

and heroic one. Every person ts considered sensitive by his own will. If one does
a lawful deed, he must have an ultimate goal related either to himself or to others.
For if his ultimate goal is worshiping none but Allah and if Allah is dearer to him
than anything else, then this will lead him to the love of Allah. Consequently, a
person is rewarded for his lawful deeds, through which he aims at obeying Allah,
as recorded in Sahih Muslim and Sahih al-Bukhari from the Prophet (pbuh), who
said: “What a man spends on his family is recorded by Allah as charity.” When the
Prophet visited Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas,'* who fell ill in Makkah, he said to him:
“Whenever you make an expenditure for the sake of Allah, you will be raised to
a higher degree, even when you place a morsel in the mouth of your wife.”
Mu‘adh Ibn Jabal'* said to Abu Misa: “Indeed, I am reckoning when I go to sleep
and I am reckoning when I get up.” A certain tradition also stated that the sleep of
a religious scholar is reckoning to [praising] Allah.

Nevertheless, if one’s basic goal is worshiping anyone other than Allah, good
things are not made lawful for him. For Allah makes good things lawful for the
believers among His servants. Indeed, unbelievers, criminals, and the sinful will
be questioned on the Day of Judgment about every kind of joy they indulged in,
without being grateful to Allah or worshiping Him. Allah says: “... You received
good things in the life of this world, and you took your pleasure out of them; but
today you will be recompensed with a penalty of humiliation: for you were
arrogant on earth without just cause, and that you ever transgressed” (46:20).
Allah also says: “Then, you will be questioned on that Day about al-na‘im, the
pleasure, you indulged in!” (102:8); that is, you will be questioned about praising
Allah. The unbeliever does not praise Allah for the pleasure he indulges in;
therefore, he will be punished. By contrast, Allah makes these pleasures lawful for
believers to indulge in and commands them to praise Him for this. He [Allah]
says: “ Oh you who believe! Eat of the good things that We have provided for you,
and be grateful to Allah...” (2:172).

١ Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqaqas, Abu Ishaq (?-675 A.D.), was a Companion of the Prophet, a military
leader, and a governor. [AI-Zirikl, vol. 3, p. 139.]

‘* Mu ‘adh [bn Jabal (2-18 A.H.) was a very close Companion of the Prophet, a great supporter of
Islam, and a transmitter of hadith. The Prophet sent him on missions, the most famous of which
was when he led a delegation to Yemen, where he was appointed (by the Prophet) as a judge of
that country. In addition, he helped to collect the revelations of the Qur’an. [M. M. Azami, p. 53
and al-Fihrist, vol. 2, p. 1045.]
58 CHAPTER TWO

The Prophet (pbuh) said: “May Allah be gracious to a servant of His who praises
Him when he eats food and praises Him when he drinks” (recorded in Sahih
Muslim). Similarly, in the Sunun of Ibn Majah and others, it is said: “The grateful
eater is in the same status as the one who fasts patiently.”

Allah says to the Messengers: “Oh Messengers! Eat all good things and do
righteous deeds. . .” (23:51). Allah also says: “. . . Lawful for you [as food] is any
livestock animal, with the exceptions named. What is not permitted are animals
of the chase while you are in the state of pilgrimage . . .” (5:1). Al-Khalil, [the
Prophet Abraham] said that Allah says: “... And feed His people with fruits, such
of them as believe in Allah and the Last Day . . .” (2:126); and Allah says: “... As
for the one who rejects belief, I will grant him his pleasure for a short period, but
will soon drive him to the torment of Fire, an evil destination indeed!” (2:126).
Thus, al-Khalil prayed that Allah would grant good things, particularly to the
believers; Allah permits livestock for food but forbids game. The believers were
ordered by Him to eat good things and to be thankful to Him. In this saying, Allah
distinguishes between addressing people in an absolute sense and addressing the
believers specifically. Allah says: “Oh, you people! Eat from what is on earth,
lawful, and good; and do not follow in the footsteps of Satan, for he is to you an
avowed enemy. For he commands you to do what is evil and shameful, and that
you should say of Allah that of which you have no knowledge. When it 15 said to
them: ‘follow what Allah reveals,’ they say: ‘No! we shall follow the ways of our
fathers.” What! Even though their fathers were void of wisdom and guidance?”
(2:168-70). These verses indicate that Allah permits people to eat what is on earth
on two conditions: if the food is good and if it is lawful. Then, He adds: “Oh, you
who believe! Eat of the good things that We have provided for you and be grateful
to Allah, if it is Him you worship. He has only forbidden you maytah, a dead
animal, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and that on which any other name has
been invoked besides that of Allah. . .” (2:172—73).'° Allah makes it permissible
for the believers to eat the good things and does not place a condition on
disbandment. Nothing was prohibited except what is specified above. Thus, other
than what has been specifically prohibited, the believers are permitted to eat

‎The word al-maytah, which is translated as dead meat, refers to the meat of an animal that dies‏ ذا
‎by itself. The meat which it is lawful to eat in Islam, is killed while pronouncing the takbir,‏
‎Allahu Akbar. Of course, this does not apply to some creatures of the sea, such as fish.‏
ADHERENCE TO THE WORDS OF ALLAH AND HIS MESSENGER 59

everything else. Even though He did not specify what is permissible in His words,
it falls in the realm of excuse [to eat what they desire]. As reported in the hadith
of Salman: “The permissible is what Allah makes permissible in His Book, the
prohibited is what Allah prohibits in His Book, and what He is silent about is what
He places in the realm of excuse.” This hadith is reported as mawquf, and may be
marfu‘.

Furthermore, it is reported by Abu Tha‘labah’* from the Prophet (pbuh): “Indeed
Allah decrees certain obligations, so do not neglect them; stipulates certain limits,
so do not go beyond them; and makes sacred ordinances, so do not violate them.
However, Allah is silent about certain things as a mercy for you, but He does not
forget, so do not go searching for them.”

Allah, the Exalted, also says: “Say: I find not in what is revealed to me any [meat]
prohibited to be eaten by anyone except that of the dead animal [maytah] . . .”
(6:145). What is not specified here is not negated by prohibition. Consequently,
what is not spoken about as prohibited, is excused. Permission needs to be through
the words [of Allah]; thus he says in the Surat al Ma’dah, Chapter of The Table,
which was revealed thereafter: “They ask you [Oh Muhammad] what is lawful for
them [as food]. Say: lawful to you fare all] things good and pure; and what you
have taught your trained hunting animals [to catch] in the manner directed to you
by Allah. Eat what they catch for you, but pronounce the name of Allah over it;
and fear Allah, for Allah is swift in taking account. ” (5:4). And He says: “This
day [all] good things are made lawful for you. The food of the people of the Book
is lawful for you and your food is lawful for them . . .” (5:5). So on the day of the
revelation of these verses, the good things to eat became permissible for them.
Before that, nothing was prohibited.

The Prophet (pbuh) prohibited eating the meat of predatory animals with canine
teeth, and of birds with claws. This is not invalidation of the Book. It is not simply
because the Book did not specifically permit this but because it is silent about
prohibiting it. So the start of the prohibition is also the start of its legislation. For
this reason, the Prophet (pbuh) said it in a hadith that is reported in different

© Abu Tha‘labah (?-75 A.H.) was a transmitter of hadith and a Companion of the Prophet. [Kitab
al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 64.]
60 CHAPTER TWO

versions. One of the versions is the hadith reported by Abu Rafi‘,’’ Abu
Tha‘labah, Abu Hurayrah, and others. The Prophet said: “I could see one of you
sitting with pride on his comfortable chair receiving my commands concerning
what is prohibited and what is allowed.” Then he continued: “The Qur’an stands
as {a judge] between us. Whatever we find in it is permissible, we accept it; and
whatever we find in it is prohibited, we forbid it. Indeed [1 am the one who
received the Book, along with it, and the like of it [wisdom].” In another version
of this hadith the Prophet said: “Indeed it [wisdom] is like the Qur’an and even
provides more details, indeed I prohibit [eating] the flesh of predatory animals
with canine teeth.” The Prophet made it clear that Allah revealed to him a
different kind of revelation. It is the Hikmah, the Wisdom, which is different from
the Book. Allah revealed to him {the Prophet] what is prohibited through this
revelation, and the Prophet informed the people of this prohibition. This is not an
abrogation of the Book since the Book did not permit this to begin with, but only
made the good things permissible to eat. The prohibited [items] are not considered
among the good things to eat. Allah says: “Oh, you who believe! Eat of the good
things that We have provided for you . . .” (2:172). The connotation of this verse
is not in the realm of an absolute sense, however Allah does not make the good
things permissible or prohibited. It is simply left in the domain of the ‘afw, excuse.
As for the unbelievers, Allah does not allow, permit, prohibit, or even excuse
anything for them to eat or not to eat. He says: “Oh, you people! Eat from what is
lawful and good on earth . . .” (2:168). The only condition is that they eat lawful
food—that which is permitted by Allah and His Messenger. Allah gives
permission regarding eating only to the believers, thus He does not give them
permission unless they believe. Consequently, their possessions do not belong to
them legally. To own something legally one must have the ability and permission
of the Prophet (pbuh), and he did not grant them the permission to deal freely with
their possessions. This permission comes only under one condition: Iman. Thus,
their possessions can be claimed by anybody. Consequently, when a group
conquers another group by force, it is legal in their religion to claim their
possessions and take them from them. The new owners then have the same claim
on the possessions. On the other hand, if the Muslims claim the property and

7 Abu Rabi‘ (2-40 A.H.) was a Companion of the Prophet and a transmitter of hadith. He was also
a source of information for the other Companions, such as ‘Abd Allah Ibn “Abbas, who used to
ask him about the deeds and the sayings of the Prophet with regard to certain events and
occasions. [M. M. Azami, ‏.م‎ 39.]
ADHERENCE TO THE WORDS OF ALLAH AND HIS MESSENGER 61

capture it by force, it becomes legally theirs because Allah makes the spoils
permissible for them and not others. They also allow their captives to be bought
from each other because this falls in the category of claiming permissible things.
Thus, Allah calls what is claimed of their possessions by the Muslims fay’, booty,
because He grants booty to those who deserve it (i.e. He returns it to the believers
who worship Him and seek His sustenance through worship). Allah creates
creatures in order to worship Him and creates this sustenance for them to help
them to worship Him. In addition to fay’, the word ghanimah may also be used
to mean booty. As the Prophet (pbuh) said with regard to the battle of Hunayn:
‘For me only one-fifth of the booty that Allah gave you, and even the one-fifth,
will be returned to you.” Allah says: “What Allah has bestowed on His Messenger
from them for this you made no expedition with any horses or riding camels...”
(59:6).The word fay’, as understood by the religious scholars, means: what has
been taken from the property of the unbelievers without ”1[81, engaging, horses or
riding camels. The word *yaf is used in the sense of making some kind of
movement.

However, if a believer does what is lawful because he is in need of doing it, as
well as not wanting to commit evil, he will be rewarded for it. This is illustrated
in the Prophet’s saying: “Allah will reward you for your sexual practice with your
wives.” When his Companions heard this they asked with astonishment: “Are we
even rewarded for fulfilling our sexual desires?” “Yes,” replied the Prophet. “Do
you not know that if you engaged in sex illegally, you would be punished for it?
Therefore, you will be rewarded if you engage in it legally” (recorded by Muslim).
Similar to this is the saying of Ibn ‘Umar from the Prophet (pbuh): “Allah loves
for the acts He has made lawful to be practiced and hates to be disobeyed”
(recorded by Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal], Ibn Khuzaymah’’ in his Sahih, and others). The
Prophet said that Allah loves His decisions to be carried out. For permissible acts
are made lawful in order to help the believers in the worship of Allah. Thus, Allah
loves the acts He permits to be practiced, for a generous one likes his charity to be
accepted. As the Prophet (pbuh) said [about shortening prayer from four to two
rak‘ahs]: “Allah granted you charity, so accept His charity.” For through this
charity, His worship and obedience are complete. As for unnecessary words and
actions of a person, these are recorded as against, not for him, as indicated in the

١” Ibn Khuzaymah (2-311 A.H.) was a scholar and a transmitter of hadith. [M. M. Azami, pp.
302-3.]
62 CHAPTER TWO

Prophet’s (pbuh) saying: “All the sayings of the son of Adam are recorded against
rather than for him, except commanding good or forbidding evil or remembering
Allah.”

It is reported in the two Sahihs that the Prophet (pbuh) also said: “He who believes
in Allah and the Last Day let him either say that which is good, or keep silent.”
That is, he commanded the believer either to utter good words or to keep silent.
It follows that to speak good is better than to keep silent, which in turn is better
than to speak evil. For Allah says: “Not a word does one utter but there is with him
a vigilant guardian” (50:18).

Indeed, interpreters have differed about the two guardians’ record. For example,
Mujahid and others said that these guardians make a complete record of every
word, thought, and act, even a moan when one is sick. ‘Ikrimah'® said that these
guardians record what one is rewarded or punished for. However, the Qur’an
indicates that the guardian makes a complete record of words, thoughts, and
actions. Allah says: “Not a word does he utter . . . ” which means that every single
word spoken is recorded by the guardian. Moreover, since he is rewarded or
punished for a given statement, then this implies that he should know what he is
rewarded or punished for, and in order to affirm the knowledge [of the guardian],
he should record it. Furthermore, he is commanded either to utter good words or
to keep silent. Thus, if he prefers to speak what he is commanded or to keep silent
about his statement, this will be recorded against him. For the Prophet (pbuh) said:
“For the goodness of one’s Islam is not to intrude in others’ affairs.” Thus, if he
speaks about what does not concern him, the goodness of his Islam decreases. For
his saying is recorded against him. However, this does not necessarily mean that
he will go to Hell. It only means that his rank is reduced. For Allah says: “. . . It
[the soul] gets every good that it earns, and it suffers every ill that it earns . . .”
(2:286). Hence, whatever one does is recorded for him; otherwise it will be
recorded against him and his rank will be reduced if the act does not deserve
punishment. By nature, the soul is always in a state of flux; it is not static.
However, Allah forgives the believers if their intention to speak evil is not carried
out or acted upon. When they do act upon it, it enters into the realm of command
and denial since Allah made all unlawful acts undesirable to the believers. Also,

'* Tkrimah (25-105 A.H.) was famous for his commentary on the Qur’4n and was a transmitter of
hadith. [M. M. Azami, ‏.م‎ 66.]
ADHERENCE TO THE WORDS OF ALLAH AND HIS MESSENGER 603

he endeared to them Iman, which entails adhering to all obedient acts unless they
are being opposed by the consensus of all the people. The Murji’ites do not
question that Iman, which is in the heart, leads to and necessitates an act of
obedience, and that obedience is one of its fruits and results. However, they do
question whether Iman necessitates acts of obedience. For indeed, if it [Iman] calls
for acts of obedience, there will be a mu‘arid, adversary, from the soul and from
Satan. Then if this adversary made it [Iman] undesirable to the believers, the need
for the actual obedience will consequently be safe from this adversary.

When believers hate all kinds of evil, nothing is left over except what is good or
lawful. The latter is only made legitimate for believers in order to help them
worship Allah; for He does not make lawful what enables one to disbelieve, to
commit sins, or to reject belief. An illustration is the Prophet’s (pbuh) putting a
curse on the one who presses wine, on the one for whom it is pressed, as well as
on the one who drinks it. Although the presser squeezes grapes into juice that is
lawful to drink and may be of benefit to one’s health, it is only when he intends
to make the juice into wine that he helps the drinker disobey Allah. The Prophet
put a curse on him because Allah neither makes it lawful to aid someone who
rejects belief in his disobedience nor does He make lawful anything that helps one
to reject belief. Indeed, nothing is made lawful unless it helps in doing good. And
it can be inferred that not doing evil means that only good deeds are done. The
Prophet (pbuh) said: “People who strive in this life are of two types. The first one
includes those who sacrifice their souls to attain salvation, whereas the second
type includes those who sacrifice to destroy themselves. Hence, he who is a
believer loves good and hates evil; therefore, he is pleased by doing good and
displeased by doing evil. However, if he does not do so, he lacks true belief.”

A believer may commit an evil act but later repent or perform good deeds to erase
it; or if a misfortune befalls him, that may erase it also. However, he must feel
hatred for it [evil], in order for Allah to redeem him. For Allah endears belief to
believers and He makes unbelief, sin, and rebellion hateful to them. Hence,
whoever does not have hatred for these three things is not among the believers.
However, Muhammad [bn Nasr [al-Marwazi] said: “ Al-fasiq, the sinner, hates
them as an act of belief.” In response to this it is stated that what is intended is that
he believed that his religion prohibited them and he loved his religion and these
are simply from among its totality; however, if he still disliked them, even when
64 CHAPTER TWO

he liked his religion in its totality and there was no hate in his heart for them, he
would be deprived from Iman in the same amount, as indicated in the Prophet’s
saying: “He who among you sees an evil act should change it by his hand; and if
he is not able to do so, then with his tongue, and if he is not able to do that, then
he should abhor it from his heart; and that is the weakest sort of belief.”

In another hadith (recorded in Sahih Muslim) the Prophet (pbuh) said: “He who
struggles against them with his hand is a believer, and he who struggles against
them with his tongue is a believer, and he who struggles against them with his
heart is a believer, and beyond that there is no belief even to the extent of the
weight of a mustard seed.”

Consequently, when one’s heart does not hate what Allah hates, then he does not
have the true belief for which he can be rewarded. His saying “and beyond that
there is no belief,” in the hadith above means absolute belief. That is, beyond these
three kinds of struggle there is no absolute belief, even to the extent of the weight
of a mustard seed. It also means that this is the end point of belief and no belief is
beyond it. However, it is worthy of note that this hadith does not mean that
whoever does not struggle against unbelievers with his hand, tongue, or heart, no
longer has belief. Thus the words of the above hadith refer to the first meaning.
Chapter Three

The Meanings of the Terms
Unbelief, Hypocrisy and Polytheism

In this chapter the discussion is focused on the meaning of the words kufr,
unbelief, and nifaq, hypocrisy. When the word “unbelief” is cited [in the Qur’an
and Sunnah] by itself, with regard to the warning concerning the Hereafter, it
implies hypocrisy, as indicated in the following verses of the Qur’an. Allah says:
‘.. If anyone rejects belief, fruitless is his work, and in the Hereafter he will be
in the ranks of the losers” (5:5); and “‘. .. Anyone who disbelieves in Allah, His
Angels, His Books, His Messengers, and the Day of Judgement, has gone far, far
astray” (4:136); and “None shall burn therein but those most unfortunate ones who
give the lie to truth and turn their backs” (92:15—16); and“... Every time a group
is cast therein, its keepers will ask: ‘Did no warner come to you?’ They will say:
“Yes, indeed, someone did come to warn us, but we rejected him and said: Allah
never sent down anything [of revelation]; you are in great error’” (67:89); and
“The unbelievers will be led to Hell in a crowd: Until they arrive there, its gates
will be opened and its Keepers will say: ‘Did Messengers not come to you from
among yourselves, rehearsing to you the Signs of your Lord, and warning you of
the meeting of this day of yours?’ Their answer will be: ‘Yes, but the word of
Punishment for the unbelievers is fulfilled!’ It will be said to them: ‘Enter the
gates of Hell, to dwell therein: And evil is [this] abode of the arrogant!’”
(39:71-72); and “And who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against
Allah or rejects the truth when it reaches him? Is there not a home in Hell for the
unbelievers?” (29:68); and “But whosoever turns away from My Message, indeed
for him life is narrowed down, and We shall raise him up blind on the Day of
Judgment. He will say: ‘Oh my Lord! Why have You raised me up blind, while I
had sight [before]?’ [Allah] will say: ‘Thus did you, when Our Signs came unto
you, and you disregarded them: so will you, this day, be disregarded. And thus do
66 CHAPTER THREE

We recompense him who transgresses beyond bounds and does not believe in the
Signs of his Lord: and the penalty of the Hereafter is far more grievous and more
enduring” (20:124~27); and “Those who reject [truth] among the people of the
Book and among the polytheists will be in Hellfire, to dwell therein [forever].
They are the worst of creatures” (98:6). There are many other verses in the Qur’an
in which unbelief is cited by itself.

In the Qur’anic verses mentioned above, the word “unbelief’ implies both
hypocrisy, wherein a hypocrite [inwardly] rejects belief and [outwardly] pretends
to behave as a Muslim; and unbelief, wherein an unbeliever rejects belief, openly
and explicitly. In His Book, Allah mentions that in the Hereafter, hypocrites will
be consigned to the lowest level of Hellfire. In some verses of the Qur’an, the
word “unbelief” is associated with the word “hypocrisy.” For example, in the first
section of Surat al-Baqarah, the Chapter of the Cow, Allah describes the traits of
the believers in four verses, of the unbelievers in two verses, and of hypocrites in
ten verses. Allah says: “. . . For Allah will collect the hypocrites and the
unbelievers, all in Hell” (4:140); and “On the day when the hypocrites, men and
women, will say to the believers: ‘Wait for us! Let us borrow [a light] from your
Light!’ It will be said: ‘Turn back to your rear! Then seek a light [where you can]!'
So a wall will be put up between them, with a gate therein. Inside it will be mercy,
and outside will be torment. [The hypocrites] will call the believers: ‘Were we not
with you?’ The believers will reply: “Yes! but you led yourself into temptations;
you doubted [in belief]; and you were deceived by false desires, until the
Command of Allah came to pass. And the chief deceiver [Satan] deceived you
with respect to Allah. This day no ransom shall be accepted of you, nor of those
who disbelieved Allah. Your abode is the Fire: that is the proper place to claim
you: and an evil refuge it is!”” (57:13—15);' and “Oh, Prophet! Strive hard against
the unbelievers and the hypocrites and be harsh against them...” (9:73); and “Do
you not see what the hypocrites say to their unbelieving brethren . . .” (59:11).

The meaning of the word al-mushrikin, the polytheists, may be associated only
with the People of the Book, or may be associated with the five communities, as

’ The author did not cite the complete text of these three verses. He started with half of the first
verse, said it was to be continued, and then cited the last verse. The translators felt that it is more
convenient for the reader to give the full text of all three verses.
THE MEANINGS OF THE TERMS UNBELIEF 67

indicated in the saying of Allah, the Exalted: “Those who believe [in the Qur’an],
those who follow the Jewish [scriptures], and the Sabians, Christians, Magians,
and Polytheists, Allah will judge between them on the Day of Judgement: For
Allah is witness of all things” (22:17). The word, polytheists, may also be
associated with the People of the Book, as indicated in the following verses of the
Qur’an. Allah says: “Those who disbelieve among the People of the Book and
among the polytheists, were not going to depart [from their ways] until there
should come to them Clear Evidence” (98:1); and “Indeed, those who disbelieve
among the People of the Book and among the polytheists, will be in Hellfire, to
dwell therein [forever]. They are the worst of creatures” (98:6); and“... And say
[Oh, Muhammad] to the people of the Book and to those who are illiterate: ‘Do
you [also] submit yourselves?’ If they do, they are in right guidance, but if they
turn back, then your duty is to convey the Message . . .” (3:20); There are only the
People of the Book and al-ummiyyin, the illiterate people, who are to be found
after the mission of the Prophet (pbuh). Every community not given a Book is
illiterate; like the illiterate Arabs, Khazar’, Slavs, Indians, al-Sidan, the Black
Africans, and other communities who do not have a Book. All these are illiterate,
and the Messenger was sent to them as well as he was sent to the illiterate among
the Arabs.

Allah says: “. . . [Oh, Muhammad!] Say to those who received the
Book .. .”(3:20). Here he is addressing those people who were present at this time.
This event took place after the abrogation of certain verses of the Qur’an, which
confirms that the people who are addressed in the above-mentioned verse are the
Jews and the Christians. The word, polytheists, therefore, is not restricted only to
those who adhered to this concept before abrogation. It also includes their
offspring and the offspring of others who are like them. They are all considered
unbelievers. Thus Allah addressed them as those who received the Book when He
says: “...[Oh, Muhammad!] Say to those who received the Book . . .” (3:20). The
address is directed to those to whom the Message was conveyed among the living
and certainly not to those who were dead. This is indicated in His saying: “The
food of those who received the Book is lawful to you. . .”(5:5). Religious scholars

* Khazar, a nomadic people in the Southern Russian Steppes who flourished in the early Islamic
period. [£./.2, vol. 4, p.1172.]
68 CHAPTER THREE

such as Malik? and Abu Hanifah* and all the recorded answers of Ahmad [Ibn
Hanbal] are in agreement on this matter. However, Ahmad advanced an opinion
concerning the Christian tribe of Taghlub. In one report it is stated that it is lawful
to marry their women and eat their meat, which is also the opinion of the
Companions. The other report states that it is not lawful, which follows the
opinion of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with him. This is not because
of their kinship but because they desired to stay with the ranks of the People of the
Book simply because they liked to drink wine and perform similar acts. It was
reported, on behalf of ‘Ata’, that some of the Successors thought it was because
of kinship. Such thinking was supported by al-Shafi‘l and by some of the followers
of Ahmad. Those who supported this idea discussed it in detail. This 1s especially
true among mixed marriages in which one of the parents comes from the People
of the Book. The claim that this line of thinking is supported by Ahmad and his
followers is completely wrong. He did not base his judgment at all on kinship.

The word al-mushrikiin, the polytheists, occurs alone as in the following Quranic
verse. Allah says: “Do not marry the polytheists [women] until they
believe . . .(2:221). Does this matter include and make reference to the People of
the Book? Religious scholars among the pious ancestors and later scholars
advanced two different statements in this regard. And those who generalize from
among them said: “It is muhakkamah,” prejudged. Among those who supported
this position was Ibn ‘Umar. The majority of the Muslims advocated the position
to give permission to marry the women from among the People of the Book, as is
mentioned in the above verse of the Qur°an, entitled al-Ma’idah, The Table. The
revelation of this verse occurred at a later time. There are some from among them
who said, with regard to this verse: “The prohibition of the marriage of the women
from among the People of the Book was abrogated.” However, there are some

3 Malik ibn Anas, Abu ‘Abd Allah (?-179 A.H.), was a well-known jurist and the founder of the
Maliki School of Law that is named after him. He was frequently referred to as the Imam of al-
Madinah. His famous work of hadith, Kitab al-Muwatta’ ,is considered the earliest surviving
book on hadith. [EJ 2, vol. 6, pp. 262-65 and al-Fihrist, vol. 2, p. 1037.]

4 Abu Hanifah, al-Nu‘man ibn Thabit (2-150 A.H.), was a famous jurist who founded the Hanafi
School of Law that is named after him. He died in Baghdad and was buried there. Both the
quarter and the mausoleum where he is buried are even today called al-A ‘“zamiyyah (i.e., al-Imam
al-A‘zam). [E.f. 2, vol. 1, ‏.م‎ 23 and al-Fihrist, vol. 2, p. 994.]
THE MEANINGS OF THE TERMS UNBELIEF 69

from among them who said: “What is meant by this is specific and no
generalization is intended by it.” Allah, the Exalted, reveals, after the peace
covenant of al-Hudaybiyyah: “. . . Likewise, hold not the disbelieving women as
wives . . ." (60:10). What is meant by this is that Allah forbids Muslims to stay
married to unbelieving women. And most people at that time were married to
either polytheists or idol-worshiping women. Therefore, women from the People
of the Book were not included.
Chapter Four

The Meanings of the Terms
the Righteous, the Witness and the Sincere

Each of the following words—al-salih, the righteous one, al-shahid, the witness,
and al-siddiq, the sincere one—may be cited [in the Qur’an or the Sunnah]
separately to refer to the Prophets. Allah says about al-Khalil [i.e., the Prophet
Abraham}: “‘... We granted him his reward in this life; and he is in the Hereafter
[in the company] of the righteous ones” (29:27); and“... We gave him [Abraham]
good in this world, and he will be, in the Hereafter, in the ranks of the righteous
ones” (16:122). Al-Khalil said: “Oh, my Lord! Bestow wisdom on me, and join
me with the righteous ones” (26:83). Yusuf [Joseph] said: “...[Oh, Allah] Let me
die as a Muslim and unite me with the righteous ones” (12:101). Sulayman
[Solomon] said: “... And admit me, by Your grace, to the ranks of Your righteous
ones” (27:19). The Prophet (pbuh) spoke to people who prayed reciting: “Peace
be upon Allah before His Servants, peace be upon the Angel Gabriel, peace be
upon the Angel Mtka’il [Michael], and peace be upon so and so.” The Messenger
of Allah said to us one day: “Indeed Allah is Himself Peace. When any one of you
sits during the prayers, he should say: ‘All services rendered by words, by acts of
worship, and all good things are due to Allah.’ Peace be upon you, Oh, Prophet,
and Allah’s mercy and blessings. Peace be upon us and upon Allah’s righteous
servants, for when he says this it reaches every righteous servant in Heaven and
on earth” (as recorded in Sahih Muslim).

33

The word, righteous, may be associated with other terms. Allah says:
Whosoever obeys Allah and the Messenger are in the company of those on whom
is the Grace of Allah, of the Prophets, the sincere ones, the witness, and the
righteous ones” (4:69), Al-Zajjaj and others said: “The righteous one is he who
fulfills the rights of Allah and His Servants.” In fact, the word, righteous, means
THE MEANINGS OF THE TERMS THE RIGHTEOUS 71

the opposite of the word al-fasid, the corrupt. Accordingly, when the word,
righteous, is used in an absolute sense it means one who works and stays righteous
without being corrupted. That is, he is one whose inward works and sayings
correspond exactly to his outward obedience to Allah. On this basis, righteous,
refers to the Prophets and those who are below them. In the verse mentioned above
(4:69), the words, the righteous ones, were used in conjunction with the phrase,
the Prophets, who in turn are described in different verses of the Qur’an as being
righteous ones. Allah says: ““Mentioned in the Book is the story of Abraham: He
was a Sincere man, a Prophet” (19:41) and “Also mentioned in the Book is the
case of Idris: He was a sincere man, a Prophet” (19:56).

The word al-shahid, witness, [in the same verse] is associated with the words “the
sincere ones” and “the righteous ones.” Allah says: “. . . The Prophets and the
witnesses will be brought forward; and a just decision pronounced between them”
(39:69). The word, witness, is attached to the people, and described the
community as a whole as in Allah’s saying: “Thus We made of you a community
justly balanced that you may be witnesses over mankind and the Messenger will
be a witness upon you...” (2:143). Such a witness is tied to the witness among
the people and is like the witness mentioned in Allah’s saying: “Why did they not
bring four witnesses to prove it? . . .” (24:13) and“... And get two witnesses of
your own men...” (2:282). In these two verses the connotation of the meaning of
the word, witness, is not intended to be the absolute meaning but rather as in
Allah’s saying: “. . . [Allah] may choose witnesses from among you .. .” (3:140).
Chapter Five

The Meanings of the Terms
Disobedience, Sin and Unbelief

In this chapter the focus will be on explaining the terms al-ma‘siyyah,
disobedience, al-fusuq, sin, and al-kuft, unbelief. Ifthe word, disobedience, is used
in an absolute sense with reference to Allah and His Messenger, then unbelief and
sin are implied, as indicated in the words of Allah. Allah says: “. . . For any that
disobey Allah and His Messenger, for them is Hellfire; they shall dwell therein
forever” (72:23) and: “Such were the people of ‘Ad; they rejected the Signs of
their Lord, disobeyed His Messengers and followed the command of every
powerful, obstinate transgressor” (11:59). This verse generalizes the use of the
term, disobedience, beyond that of the people of ‘Ad to all Messengers, although
they disobeyed only the Prophet Hid. This is because they rejected the idea that
Allah would send down any Messenger as indicated in this verse. Allah says: “. . .
But we rejected him and said: ‘Allah never sent down any (Message)’” (67:9).
Parallel to this sort of disobedience is that of the one who gives the lie to truth and
turns away, as indicated in Allah’s saying: “None shall reach it but those most
unfortunate ones who give the lie to truth and tum their backs” (92:15—16).
Therefore, he is the one who gives the lie to the truth of Allah’s sending down
Messengers and who turns away from obeying Allah. For people should believe
in what the Messengers have brought to them, and obey their commands.
Similarly, Allah says about Pharaoh: “But he rejected it and disobeyed (guidance)”
(79:21). About the unbeliever Allah says: “So he neither believed nor did he pray!
But on the contrary, he rejected truth and turned away!” (75:31-32). That is, an
unbeliever gave the lie to the truth of sending down the Messengers and turned
away from obedience to Allah. By contrast, Iman is believing in what the
Messengers have brought and obeying their commands. Allah says: “... Even 5
THE MEANINGS OF THE TERMS DISOBEDIENCE 73

We sent a Messenger to Pharaoh, Pharaoh disobeyed the Messenger . . .”
(73:15—16).

The expression al-tawalt, turning away (from obedience), is mentioned in different
verses of the Qur’an. For example, Allah says: “. . . You shall be summoned [to
fight] against a people given to vehement war; then shall you fight, or they shall
submit. Then if you show obedience, Allah will grant you a goodly reward, but if
you turn back, as you did before, He will punish you with a grievous penalty”
(48:16). In many verses of the Qur’an, Allah rebukes those who turn away from
obedience, thus indicating that obeying Allah and His Messenger, as well as
admonishing those who turn away from obedience, are obligations. Thus absolute
command requires complete obedience. In His saying: “But Pharaoh disobeyed the
Messenger . . .” (73:16);' Allah admonishes people who turn away from His
obedience, regardless of the kind of disobedience they commit. Indeed, it is said
that the eternal penalty mentioned in the Qur’&n is limited to warning unbelievers
who commit certain kinds of disobedience. Allah says: “If a man kills a believer
intentionally, his recompense is Hell, to abide therein forever, the wrath and the
curse of Allah are upon him, and a dreadful penalty is prepared for him” (4:93).
Regarding transgressing Allah’s limits by deviating from what He says about
dividing inheritance [Allah says]: “He who disobeys Allah and His Messenger and
transgresses His limits will be admitted to a Fire, to abide therein; and shall have
a humiliating punishment” (4:14). The disobedience expressed in this verse is
conditioned in a particular sense to those who disobey and transgress Allah’s
limits. Allah also says: “. . . Thus did Adam disobey His Lord, and allow himself
to be seduced” (20:121). This is also a particular kind of disobedience. Allah says:
“. . . until your courage failed you and you disagreed about the order, and
disobeyed after He showed you [ the spoils} which you love . . .” (3:152).
Disobedience in this verse makes reference to a specific event which is the
disobedience of al-rumat, marksmen, against the orders of the Prophet (pbuh). The
Prophet ordered them to hold their own positions even when they saw that the
Muslims were victorious. Thus, some of them disobeyed the order of their leader
and they were attracted by the prospect of the spoils. Allah also says: “... and He
has made hateful to you unbelief, sin, and rebellion . . .” (49:7). These three
attributes are given in sequence. Allah also says: “. . . [that believing women] will

' The reference to this verse is incorrect in strat al-Nisa’, Chapter 4, Verse 92 in MI.2. However,
the correct reference is as indicated above.
74 CHAPTER FIVE

not disobey you in any just matter . . .” (60:12). Disobedience in this verse has a
specific connotation; it is interpreted to mean the loud wailing of women. Ibn
“Abbas as well as Zayd Ibn Aslam’ relate on the authority of the Prophet (pbuh):
“Do not wail loudly, do not beat your cheeks, do not uncover your hair, and do not
tear your clothes [in grief].” Others, such as Abu Sulayman al-Dimashqji, said:
“Disobeying Allah in any just matter means disobeying Him in all of what he
commands [i.e., Islamic legislation and guidelines].” Accordingly, believing
women do not disobey the Messenger in any just matters. Disobedience to him
cannot be ignored in any just matter, as he does not command evil. This is an
indication that being obedient to those of authority requires kindness, as
exemplified in the following hadith: “Obedience is in kindness.” Similar to this is
the saying of Allah: “... Obey Allah and the Messenger when He calls you to that
to which you will give your life . . .” (8:24). Allah calls you only, for there is no
call except for that purpose and no command without kindness, as in the saying
of Allah: “. . . Force not your maids to prostitution when they desire chastity...”
(24:33). However, if they do not desire chastity, the forcing is negated. This makes
it clear that the judgment is suitable in this regard. Allah also says: “If anyone
invokes any other god besides Allah, he has no authority thereof and his reckoning
is only with his Lord. Lo! the unbelievers will not be successful” (23:117) and:
“. . . ‏لصف‎ they slay His Messengers without cause . . .” (2:61). The specifications
indicated in all the above citations are used simply for clarification and for no
other purpose. Grammarians state that definite attributes are used for the purposes
of clarification and specification, whereas indefinite attributes are used for
specification only. This means that definite attributes [or adjectives] do not need
any specification, as in Allah’s saying: “Praise the name of your Lord the Most
High who created and has given order and proportion” (87:1—2). He also says:
“And those who follow the Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, whom they find
mentioned in their own Scriptures, in the Torah, and the Gospel . . .” (7:157); and:
“Praise be to Allah! Lord of the Worlds, the Most Gracious and the Most
Merciful” (1:1-2). Attributes of the indefinite kind, when specified, are simply
used for the purpose of clarification. In the following verse the word “rebellion”
is being used in conjunction with the words “unbelief” and “sin,” as in His saying:
«Allah has made. hateful to you unbelief, sin, and rebellion . . .” (49:7). In
conclusion, it is known that the sinner is also rebellious.

2 Zayd ibn Aslam, Abu Usamah (?-136 A.H.), was the author of an early commentary on the
Quran and was also a transmitter of hadith. [a/-Fihrist, vol. 1, p. 75 and vol. 2. p. 1132.]
Chapter Six

Wrong: Its Kinds and Meaning

Self-wrong consists of wronging one’s self. When used in an absolute sense, this
includes all sins, which in turn are considered as wronging one’s self. Allah says:
“These are some of the stories of towns [communities] which We relate to you
[Oh, Muhammad]: Of them some are standing, and some have been destroyed. We
did not wrong them, but they did wrong themselves; and their gods on whom they
call beside Allah did not profit them when there came the Command of your Lord,
nor did they add anything [to their lot] but destruction!” (11:100—101). Allah also
says: “And remember Moses said to his people: ‘Oh, my people! You have indeed
wronged yourselves by your worship of the calf: so turn [in repentance] to your
Maker... .’” (2:54); and He says on killing one’s self: “Oh, my Lord! I have indeed
wronged myself? Do You then forgive me? .. .” (28:16). Balqis said: “... Oh, my
Lord! I have indeed wronged myself: I do [now] submit [in Islam], with Solomon,
to the Lord of the Worlds” (27:44). Adam (pbuh) said: “... Our Lord! We have
wronged ourselves: If You will not forgive us and bestow Your Mercy upon us,
we shall certainly be among the losers” (7:23). The concept of wrong may be
joined to some [but not all] sins, as Allah, the Exalted, says: ‏لصف‎ those who,
when they do an evil thing or wrong themselves .. .” (3:135); and “And whoever
does evil or wrongs himself but afterward seeks Allah’s forgiveness, he will find
Allah readily forgiving, Most Merciful” (4:110).

As for the meaning of the term al-zulm, unrestricted wrong, when used in an
absolute sense, it includes unbelief plus all other sins. Allah says: “Gather those
who wronged, along with their wives and the things they worshiped, besides
Allah, and lead them to the Way to the [fierce] Fire! But stop them, for they must
be asked: What is the matter with you that you do not help each other?”
(37:22—25). In this verse, the term, their wives, has the following interpretations:
76 CHAPTER SIX

According to ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab it means, their match, or their resemblers. To
Ibn ‘Abbas, Qatadah, and al-Kalbi it means: “that whoever does what they
do”—that is, the people of wine will be brought up with the people of wine, and
the people of adultery with the people of adultery. Al-Dahhak and Mugatil state
that it means “their demonic mates”—that is, every unbeliever will be brought up,
chained to his own demon. The same applies to Allah’s saying: “And when the
souls are joined with their bodies” (81:7). ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattéb, may Allah be
pleased with him, said: “The unchaste with the unchaste, and the righteous with
the righteous.” Ibn ‘Abbas said: “When people become three pairs.” Al-Hassan
and Qatadah said: “‘The truth is everyone is matched with his people—that is, the
Jew with the Jews, and the Christian with the Christians.” Al-Rabi‘ Ibn
Khuthaym! said: “A man is cast together with his mate, as it was recorded in
al-Sahih from the Prophet (pbuh). When he was asked: Why does a man like some
people but does not follow them?” the Prophet answered: “A man is joined to
whomever he likes.” He [the Prophet] also said: “Souls of the same type flock
together and those of opposite types do not.” He further said: “A man follows the
path of his friend, so one has to take care in choosing his friends.”

The mate of a thing is its match. The word al-sanf, category,’ is also called “pair”
due to the similarity of its mates, Allah says: “... Noble things of every pair We
have produced therein” (26:7) and “And everything We have created is in pairs:
that you may reflect” (51:49). Indeed, different interpreters have explained the
word “pairs” as referring to two different categories. Examples are: sky and earth,
sun and moon, night and day, land and sea, plain and mountain, winter and
summer, jinns and humans, unbelief and the faith, happiness and misery, truth and
falsehood, male and female, light and dark, sweet and bitter; and other such pairs.
The second part of the last verse, namely, “that you may reflect,” means that you
may understand that He who creates the pairs is One. However, the previously
mentioned verse, ‘Gather those who wronged, along with their wives...’ does not
mean that every husband will be joined with his wife. For a righteous wife may
have an unchaste or even an unbelieving husband, as in the case of Pharaoh’s wife.
A righteous husband may likewise have an unchaste or even an unbelieving wife,

١ Al-Rabi‘ ibn Khuthaym, Abu Yazid (?-63 A.H.), was a scholar of and transmitter of hadith.
[Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 80 and al-Fihrist, vol. 2, p. 1081.]

2 In the MKZ and MI.2 editions, the word al-nisf, half, is used. However, in MKH the word is al-
sanf.
WRONG: ITS KINDS AND MEANING 77

as in the case of the wives of Noah and Lot. However, if a wife happens to be of
her husband’s religion, then they will be included in the general category of
partners. That is why al-Hassan al-Basri said: “The word ‘wives’ mentioned in the
verse refers only to the unbelieving wives.” There is no doubt that this verse refers
to the unbelievers, as the context of the verse indicates: The fornicators will be
joined with the fornicators and the people of wine will be joined with the people
of wine. The same is true of the following narration: “On the Day of Judgement,
+t will be said: Where are the wrongdoers and their assistants [i.e., those who
resemble them]? They will be joined together in coffins of fire and then they will
be cast into Hell.” Some interpreters believe that the term ‘wrongdoer’s assistants’
refers to those who provide any kind of help to wrongdoers, even if he gives them
an ink pot or sharpens a pencil for them. Others used to say that it refers to their
[the wrongdoers’] wives, who wash their clothes that is, their helpers are their
mates, as suggested in the verse. It is clear that whoever helps a good cause
becomes one of the good people and whoever helps a bad cause becomes one of
the bad people. For Allah says: “Whoever intercedes in a good cause becomes a
partner therein; and whoever recommends and helps an evil cause, shares in its
burden . . .” (4:85). In this verse, the person who “intercedes and helps a good
cause” refers to one who helps another person and becomes an intercessor after he
has been alone. Hence, ‘good cause’ is interpreted by Ibn Jarir and Abu Sulayman
as helping the believers to fight against unbelievers, and ‘bad cause’ as helping
unbelievers to fight against the believers. However, al-Hassan, Mujahid, Qatadah,
and Ibn Zayd interpret the term ‘good cause’ as helping another person, either by
doing him a favor or by rescuing him from a calamity. Thus, the good cause is
helping [another] to do good, which Allah and His Messenger approve, benefitting
whoever deserves benefit and rescuing from evil whoever deserves to be rescued.
On the other hand, the bad cause is helping someone to do what Allah and His
Messenger hate, such as oppressing others or preventing them from receiving the
charity that they deserve. Other interpreters explain the term ‘good cause’ to mean
praying for the believers, and the bad cause means cursing them; or they interpret
the good cause as meaning reconciliation between two people. Thus, the helper is
the mate of the one who seeks help; for a helper either helps the help seeker fora
good cause or for a bad cause. If one went to the Prophet (pbuh) seeking help, he
[the Prophet] used to tell his Companions: “Help and recommend a good cause in
order to be rewarded by Allah. The sayings of His Prophet are fulfilled in
accordance with Allah’s wish.”
78 CHAPTER SIX

The verse “Gather those who wronged and the things they worshiped,” although
it refers to a wrongdoer who wrongs [self and others] by being an unbeliever, and
refers to minor sins as well. The second part of the verse, “and the things they
worshiped,” is illustrated in the many sayings of the Prophet (pbuh) recorded in
al-Sahth. For example, the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Condemn the dinar’s slave,
condemn the dirham’s slave, condemn the slave of velvet, condemn the slave of
silk; he is condemned and suffers a relapse, and if a thorn pricks him, may Allah
not let it come out [of his body], even with the help of a burin.” The Prophet also
said: “Any property owner who does not give zakah [would be spared punishment]
but his property would be made like a bald-headed poisonous male snake that
would grab the owner’s cheek and would say to him: I am your property, I am
your treasure.” In another version of this hadith: “On the Day of Judgement his
property will appear to him as a poisonous snake. He will flee from it, but it will
follow him until it wraps itself around his neck.” Then the Prophet (pbuh) recited
this verse: “. . . On the Day of Judgement the things which they covetously
withheld will be tied tightly around their necks. . .” (3:180). In another narration
of this hadith: “His property on the Day of Judgement will appear to him like a
bald-headed poisonous male snake that will follow him wherever he goes and he
will flee from it and the snake will say: ‘this is your property, which you did not
spend in the cause of Allah.” When he tries to escape from the snake, he puts his
hand in the snake’s mouth and the male snake gnaws his hand.” In another
version: “The snake will continue.to chase him and he will put his hand in the
snake’s mouth and the snake will gnaw it and then the snake will consume all of
his body.” Allah, the Exalted, says in another verse: “*... And there are those who
hoard gold and silver and do not spend it in the way of Allah. Announce to them
[Oh, Muhammad] a painful punishment. On the day when it [the hoarded
property] will be heated in the fire of Hell, so their foreheads, flanks, and backs
will be branded by it. This is the treasure which you hoarded for yourself, now
taste what you hoarded” (9:34-35).

In the Sahih, it is related that the Prophet (pbuh) said: “If any owner of property
does not give zakah, his property will be heated in the fire of Hell and it will be
made into plates that burn his sides and his forehead; then Allah will pronounce
judgement among His servants during a day that lasts for fifty thousand years, as
you people count them. He [the property owner] will then see his path, leading
either to Paradise or to Hell.” In the hadith of Abu Dharr he said: “Inform those
WRONG: ITS KINDS AND MEANING 79

who hoard wealth that a darf, heated stone, that has been heated in Hellfire, will
be placed on the nipples of their breasts until it pierces [their bodies] and comes
out from the bones of their shoulders; it will then be placed on the bones of their
shoulders and will pierce through the nipples of their breasts with a shivering
motion movement. And their foreheads, sides, and backs will be burned until the
heat enters their insides.” This was explained above in the Qur’anic verse and it
will happen to them only after they enter Hellfire. Hence, the wrongdoer who does
not give zakah will be joined together with others like him and with his property,
to which he has become a slave [rather than being Allah’s slave], which will be
the cause of his punishment, even though he is not one of the people who have
committed major blasphemy and who will reside in Hellfire forever. For in the last
portion of the saying, the Prophet (pbuh) said: “He will then see his path, leading
either to Paradise or to Hell.” This will happen after fifty thousand years of
punishment, as you count them, then he will enter Paradise.

The Prophet also said: “The polytheism in this community is more hidden than the
creeping of ants.” Ibn “Abbas and his companions interpreted this to mean as:
unbelief in derogation of unbelief, wrong in derogation of wrong, and sin in
derogation of sin. Allah says: “They take their priests and their anchorites to be
their lords beside Allah. And [they take as their Lord] Christ, the son of Mary; yet
they were commanded to worship but One Allah: there is no god but He. Praise
and glory to Him: [Far is He] from having the partners they associate [with Him]”
(9:31). Ina lengthy hadith related by ‘Uday Ibn Hatim [ and narrated by Ahmad,
al-Tirmidhi, and others] when he was a Christian, he heard the Prophet (pbuh)
reading this verse: “We do not worship them.” Upon this the Prophet remarked:
“Do not they prohibit what Allah makes lawful, so you prohibit it too: and they
make lawful what Allah prohibits, so you make it lawful too?” He replied: “Yes.”
The Prophet replied: “That is worshiping them.” Abu al-Bukhtari’ said: “As far as
they did not pray for them even when they ordered them to worship them and not
to worship Allah, they did not obey them. However, they ordered them and they
made what Allah permits prohibited but what He prohibits they made permissible
and they obeyed them. And that is al-rubibiyyah, worshiping entities other than
Allah.”

3 Abu al-Bukhtari, 5210 ibn Fayriz 21-1371 (-82 A.H.), was a Successor and transmitted hadith
from Abu Hurarah and Ibn ‘Abbas. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 84.]
80 CHAPTER SIX

Al-Rabi‘ Ibn Anas said that I asked Abu al-‘Aliyah “How was the al-rubiibiyyah,
of the children of Israel?” He answered that their kind of worship is that which
they found in the Book of Allah; and they were ordered to follow it but they did
not. They [the children of Israel] explained: “We will not contradict our disciples
in anything. Whatever they order us to do we do and whatever they ask us not to
do we do not. We adhere to their commands.” Thus they took the advice of men
and disregarded, behind their backs, the Book of Allah. It follows that the Prophet
(pbuh) indicated that worshiping them consisted of their making lawful what is
prohibited and prohibiting what is lawful; but not for praying or fasting to them,
nor for making supplication to them in derogation of Allah. For this is an example
of worshiping men in contrast to worshiping property, which was illustrated
previously, and which Allah calls polytheism. Allah says: “. .. There is no god but
He; praise and glory to Him: [Far is He] from having the partners they associate
[with Him]” (9:31). This kind of polytheism is included in ‘the wrong’ illustrated
in the following verse. Allah says: “Gather those who wronged along with their
wives, and the things they worshiped besides Allah . . .” (37:22—23). Thus the
wrongdoers and what they worship will be punished. For Allah says: “Indeed you
[unbelievers], and the [false] gods that you worship besides Allah, are [but] fuel
for Hell! To it will you [surely] come!” (21:98). The second part of the above
mentioned verse, “the false gods that you worship besides Allah,” includes all
false gods that are worshiped. Hence, it includes the Prophets who were
worshiped, such as Jesus and al-‘Uzayr. However, the verse “those for whom The
Good Record from Us has gone before, will be removed far therefrom” is intended
to exclude the worshiped Prophets who hated to be worshiped and obeyed, in
disobedience to Allah. Those Prophets are the doers of good, like Jesus, al-‘Uzayr,
and others. Hence they are far removed from the Fire.

Whoever agrees to be worshiped and obeyed for deeds that imply disobedience of
Allah, deserves to be warned, even if he does not order others to worship him. And
what if he orders others to worship him or to worship other than Allah? Such a
person is one of the wives in the previously mentioned verse. For “their wives”
may refer to their [the Prophets'] chiefs or followers. Indeed, they are their wives
and those like them, for they are similar in religion, as indicated in the following
verses. Allah says: “Gather those who wronged along with their wives, and the
things they worshiped besides Allah and lead them to the Way of the [fierce]
Fire!” (37:22—23). In this verse, the term dulliihum according to Ibn ‘Abbas as
WRONG: ITS KINDS AND MEANING 81

well as al-Dahhak, means “show them,” and according to Ibn Kaysan,* “introduce
them.” However, the true meaning 15 “guide them,” as a guide shows one the way.
Accordingly, the a‘naq, necks, are called guides because they lead the whole body.
Also, the leaders of the beasts are called guides. For Allah says: “But stop them,
for they must be asked: What is the matter with you that you do not help each
other” (37:24-25)? Namely, you helped each other to commit falsehood in the
world. Allah also says: “No, but that day they shall submit [to judgement]: And
they will turn to one another, and question one another. They will say: ‘It was you
who used to come to us from the right hand.’ They will reply: ‘No, you yourselves
had no belief! Nor had we any authority over you. No, it was you who were a
people in obstinate rebellion! So now it has been proved true, against us, the Word
of our Lord that we shall indeed [have to] taste [the punishment for our sins]. We
led you astray: for truly we were ourselves astray. Truly that day they will [all]
share in the penalty. Indeed that is how We shall deal with sinners.’ For they,
when they were told that there is no god except Allah, would puff themselves up
with pride, and say: ‘What! Shall we give up our gods for the sake of a poet
possessed?’” (37:26—36).

Allah also says: “He will say: enter you in the company of the peoples who passed
away before you, men and jinns, into the Fire. Every time a new people enters, it
curses its sister-people [that went before], until they follow each other, all into the
Fire. Said the last about the first: ‘Our Lord! It is these that misled us: so give
them a double penalty in the Fire.’ He will say: ‘Doubled for all: but this you do
not know.’ Then the first will say to the last: ‘See then! No advantage have you
over us; so taste you of the penalty for all that you did!’” (7:38-39). Allah also
says: “Behold, they will dispute with each other in the Fire! The weak ones [who
followed] will say to those who had been arrogant: ‘We but followed you: can you
then take [on yourselves] from us some share of the Fire?’ Those who had been
arrogant will say: ‘We are all in this [Fire]! Truly Allah has judged between [His]
servants!’” (40:47-48). Allah also says: “. . . Can you but see when the
wrongdoers will be made to stand before their Lord, throwing back the word [of
blame] on one another! Those who were deemed weak will say to the arrogant
ones: ‘Had it not been for you, we should certainly have been believers!’ The

* ‏م5[‎ Kaysan, Muhammad Ibn Ibrahim Abu al-Hassan (-299 A.H.) was a philologist and a scholar
of hadith. He wrote al-Muhadhdhab Fil-Nahw and Ma‘anial-Qur’an. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 85
and al-Fihirst, vol. 1, pp. 177-178.]
82 CHAPTER SIX

atrogant ones will say to those who were deemed weak: ‘Was it we who kept you
back from guidance after it reached you? No, rather, it was you who transgressed.’
Those who had been deemed weak will say to the arrogant ones: ‘No! It wasa plot
{of yours] by day and by night: Behold! You [constantly] ordered us to be
ungrateful to Allah and to attribute equals to Him! They are filled with remorse
when they see the penalty: We shall put yokes on the necks of the unbelievers: It
would only be a requital for their ill deeds’” (34:3 1—33).

The verse “For they, when they were told that there is no god except Allah, would
puff themselves up with pride” (37:35) refers to both unbelievers, the major and
minor sinners, as well as to those who puff themselves up with pride about what
Allah commands. For not puffing oneself with pride is part of affirming that there
is no god but Allah, Who alone deserves to be worshiped. And whoever puffs
himself up with pride about worshiping Allah, obeying and listening to other than
Allah, does not confirm [in this context] that there is no god but Allah.

Those who take their priests and their anchorites as their lords, whereas they make
lawful what Allah prohibits and prohibit what Allah makes lawful, such people are
of two groups: one group knows that they [priests and their anchorites] changed
the religion of Allah and [intentionally] followed them. Thus, they believe in
making lawful what Allah prohibits and prohibiting what Allah makes lawful as
part of following their leaders, though they know they have contradicted the path
of the Messenger. This is indeed unbelief, and Allah and His Messenger
considered it polytheism even though they did not pray or prostrate to them. He
who follows other than Him, contrary to religion, knowing for a fact that it is
contrary to religion, and believes in what he has said in derogation of what Allah
and His Messenger have said, is certainly considered a polytheist. The other group
has a strong belief in prohibiting the lawful and making lawful the prohibited. But
they obey their priests and their anchorites in rebelling against Allah exactly like
a Muslim who disobeys Allah although he knows that he is disobeying Him.
Accordingly, this group will be treated as sinners, as indicated in the following
saying of the Prophet: “Indeed, obedience should be to the good.” The Prophet
also said: “A Muslim can listen to and obey what he likes or hates unless he is
ordered to disobey Allah; no creature should be obeyed if he is ordered to disobey
Allah”; and: “Whoever orders you to disobey Allah, do not obey him.” These
hadiths are recorded in Sahih (al-Bukhari).
WRONG: ITS KINDS AND MEANING 83

Anyone who makes the lawful forbidden and the forbidden lawful and does it with
the intention of following the Messenger, and if the truth for some reason is not
known to him and he is righteous to Allah as much as he is able, Allah will not
punish him for his sin but will reward him for striving to obey his Lord. But
anyone who knows something is wrong and contrary to the Messenger’s teachings
and still commits that wrong, he will be considered among those who associate
with the people that Allah condemns. This is particularly the case when he follows
his desire and supports that desire with his tongue and hand, knowing for a fact
that he is contradicting the Messenger’s way. This is a situation where the one
committing it deserves punishment. Muslim scholars agree that anyone who
knows the truth is not permitted to imitate anything that contradicts that truth.
They disagree, however, on the permission of the one who is able to submit proof
even though he is unable to demonstrate the truth which one knows. This is
exactly like the one who knows that the religion of Islam is the truth while he is
still among the Christians. Thus, if he performs of the truth what he is able, he will
not be blamed for the things that he cannot do. This case will be similar that of the
King of Ethiopia, al-Najashi, and others. Allah has revealed, concerning their case,
verses in His Book. Allah the Exalted says: “And there are among the People of
the Book those who believe in Allah, in the revelation to you and in the revelation
to them. . .” (3:199). Allah also says: “And among the people of Moses there is
a group who guide and do justice in the light of the truth” (7:159); and: “When
they listen to the revelation received by the Messenger you will see their eyes
overflowing with tears for they recognize the truth . . .” (5:83).

As for the one who followed the one who is unable to know the truth in detail and
tried his best by striving to imitate him, such a person will not be blamed for his
sin. Anyone who imitates a person, choosing him over his opposite just for the
sake of his desire, as in the case of facing Makkah while praying, and he still
supports him both by his tongue and hand without knowing that he has the
knowledge of the truth, such a person will be considered to be among the people
of ignorance. This is the case even when the person he is following is in the right.
His knowledge will not be right, even when the one he follows is in the wrong;
then he would be committing a sin. This is simply like the one who renders his
own opinion about the Qur’an. Even if he is correct, he is still committing a wrong
and when he is wrong he will certainly have his abode in Hellfire. Such a person
will be like the one who does not give zakah and will be liable for punishment. He
84 CHAPTER SIX

will also be like those people who worship a dinar, a dirham, velvet, and silk. Such
a person who loved wealth to the point that it prevented him from worshiping and
obeying Allah and who becomes a slave of wealth, he will be among those who
commit minor shirk, association. He will receive the threat of punishment, in
accordance with the following hadith: “Even a slight hypocrisy is considered
polytheism.” This is explained, with supporting evidence, when unbelief and
polytheism are used in an absolute sense, with reference to many sins.

The absolute wrong implies [but is not limited to] unbelief. For it may refer to
unbelief as well as what is less serious than unbelief, such as committing minor
sins like wickedness and rebellion, as recorded in Sahih Muslim, on the authority
of ‘Abd Allah Ibn Mas‘tid, who said: “I said to the Messenger of Allah, which sin
is the gravest?” The Messenger replied: ““You who make a partner with Allah,
though it is He who has created you.” He [the inquirer] said: “Then what?” The
Messenger replied: “That you kill your child out of fear that he will share your
food.” He [the inquirer] said: “Then what?” He replied: “That you commit
adultery with your neighbor’s wife.” Then Allah reveals the following verses.
Allah says: “Those who invoke no other god, nor slay such life as Allah has made
sacred, except for just cause, nor commit fornication, for any that does this [not
only] meets punishment [but] the penalty on the Day of Judgment will be doubled
to him, and he will dwell therein in ignominy unless he repents, believes, and
works righteous deeds, for Allah will change the evil of such persons into good,
and Allah is forgiving, most merciful. And whoever repents and does good has
truly turned to Allah with an [acceptable] conversion” (25:68~71).

Thus, the complete warning refers to the three sins of polytheism, killing, and
fornication. Every sin contributes to its own portion. Hence, if one is a polytheist
but does not kill or fornicate, his penalty will be less than that if he commits all
three sins. Similarly, if he fornicates and kills but is not a polytheist, he will share
in the burden of penalty as indicated in the following verse. Allah says: “If a man
kills a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell, to abide therein: and the
wrath and the curse of Allah are upon him, and a dreadful penalty is prepared for
him” (4:93), In this verse, Allah does not mention that a killer will abide in Hell
forever. Indeed, it is said that the term al-ta’bid, forever, is not mentioned in the
Qur?an, except in the case of unbelief. Allah says: “The day that the wrongdoer
will bite at his hands, he will say, ‘Oh! Would that I had taken a [straight] path
with the Messenger! Ah! Woe is me! Would that I had never taken such a one for
WRONG: ITS KINDS AND MEANING 85

a friend! He did lead me astray from the Message [of Allah] after it had come to
me! Ah! The Devil is but a traitor to man!’” (25:27—29). No doubt these verses
refer to the unbeliever who does not believe in the Messenger. This is the reason
these verses were revealed. For the absolute wrong includes unbelieving plus other
lesser kinds of wrong. It follows that whoever takes one for a friend against what
Allah and His Messenger command will have to receive his share of the warning,
as illustrated in the following verses. Allah says: “Friends on that Day will be foes,
one to another, except the righteous ones” (43:67); and: “Then would those who
are followed clear themselves of those who follow [them]: they would see the
penalty, and all relations between them would be cut off’ (2:166). Al-Fudayl Ibn
“Ayyad? said that al-Layth narrated on the authority of Mujahid that the word
“friendship” means affection between friends that is not for the sake of Allah.
Indeed, friendship is expressed by way of loving and endearment. For the Prophet
(pbuh) said: “A man follows the path of his friend.” That is, each of the lovers
loves what the other loves. Thus, if one follows his friend who loves to do what
Allah and His Messenger hate, then the religion of both will diminish until it ends
up with grave polytheism. Allah says: “Yet there are men who take [for worship]
others besides Allah, as equal [with Allah]: they love them as they should love
Allah, but those of belief are overflowing in their love for Allah. . .” (2:165).

Those that love their treasure and the creatures they follow in preference to the
love of Allah and His Messenger will suffer accordingly from wrong and
polytheism. Hence, Allah makes them adhere to what they love, as in the hadith
where He says: “Is it not just of Me to appoint every man among you what he used
to be appointed to in the world?” Also, it is confirmed in a/-Sahih that the Prophet
(pbuh) said: “Every community should follow what they used to worship. Thus,
whoever used to worship the sun should follow the sun; whoever used to worship
the moon should follow the moon; whoever used to worship tyrant rulers should
follow their tyrant rulers; and Christ was made to appear to the Christians;
likewise ‘Uzayr was made to appear to the Jews. Thus, every community follows
what they used to worship, and this community would continue to have its

* Al-Fuday! ibn ‘Ayyad ibn Mas‘tid, Abu ‘Ali (-187 A.H.), was a trustworthy scholar of hadith
born in Samargand. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 89.]

® The editors of MI.2 and MKZ, editions have indicated, in footnotes, that they could not find a
reference for this hadith.
86 CHAPTER SIX

hypocrites.” This will be explained later. Indeed, those are the people of the major
polytheism.

Those who are slaves of treasure they own or of men they obey will be punished
in a manner less severe than that of the polytheists. Indeed, they will be punished
either in the courtyards of Resurrection or in Hell. Whoever loves anything other
than Allah will be punished by means of it. Allah says: “Oh, you who believe!
Spend out of [the bounties] We have provided for you, before the Day comes when
no bargaining [will avail], nor friendship, nor intercession. Those unbelievers are
the wrongdoers” (2:254). That is, absolute unbelief is the absolute wrong. Hence,
unbelievers and wrongdoers have no one to intercede for them on the Day of
Judgment. Intercession is also precluded in the following verses of the Qur’an.
Allah says: “Warn them of the Day that is [ever] drawing near, when their hearts
will [come] right up to their throats to choke [them]; no intimate friend nor
intercessor will the wrongdoers have who could be listened to. Allah knows of [the
tricks] that deceive with the eyes, and all that the hearts [of men] conceal”
(40:18-19); and Allah says: “Then they will be thrown headlong into the [Fire],
they and those straying in Evil, and all the hosts of Iblis together. They will say,
when they are quarreling therein: ‘By Allah, we were truly in error, manifested
when we held you as equal with the Lord of the Worlds, and our seducers were
only those who were steeped in guilt; now, we have none to intercede [for us], nor
a single friend to feel [for us]; now, if we only had a chance of return, we shall
truly be among those who believe!” (26:94-102). In the above-mentioned verse,
the phrase “we held you as equal” does not mean that they [polytheists] make what
they worship equal to Allah in every respect. For none of Adam’s sons claim such
a thing. None of the unbelievers claim that in this world there are two identical
Creators. Even the dualist ‘Zoroastrians’ who speak of two origins, ‘light’ and
‘darkness’ agree that it is better to worship the light than the evil darkness, which
deserves to be condemned and cursed. They also differ over whether darkness is
eternal or temporal. Hence, they do not consider light and darkness to be equal.
Likewise are the Arab polytheists, who agree on the fact that their gods do not
share with Allah in the creation of the heavens and the earth. However, they
acknowledge that Allah created the heavens, the earth, and what is between them,
as indicated in many verses of the Qur’an. Allah says: “If indeed you ask them
who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon [to
His Law], they will certainly reply, ‘Allah.’ How are they then deluded away
WRONG: ITS KINDS AND MEANING 87

[from the truth]? Allah enlarges the sustenance [which He gives] to whichever of
His servants He pleases; and He [similarly] grants by [strict] measure [as He
pleases]: for Allah has full knowledge of all things. And if indeed you ask them
who it is that sends down rain from the sky, and gives life therewith to the earth
after its death, they will certainly reply, ‘Allah!’ Say: ‘Praise be to Allah!” But
most of them do not understand” (29:61-63). He also says: “If you were to
question them, ‘Who created the heavens and the earth?’ they would be sure to
reply, ‘They were created by [Him], the Exalted in Power, Full of Knowledge’;
[Yes, the same that] has made for you the earth [like a carpet] spread out, and has
made for you roads [and channels] therein, in order that you may find guidance
[on the way]; that sends down [from time to time] rain from the sky in due
measure; and We raise to life therewith a land that is dead; even so will you be
raised [from the dead]; that has created pairs in all things, and has made for you
ships and cattle on which you ride in order that you may sit firm and square on
their backs, and when so seated you may celebrate the [kind] favor of your Lord,
and say: ‘Glory to Him Who has subjected these to our [use], for we could never
have accomplished this [by ourselves], and to our Lord, surely, must we turn
back’” (43:9-14).

It is worth mentioning here that the characteristics of the words of Allah are not
the complete response of the unbelievers. Allah says: “Say: ‘To whom belong the
earth and all beings therein? [Say] if you know!’ They will say to Allah: ‘Yet will
you not receive admonition?’ Say: ‘Who is the Lord of the seven heavens, and the
Lord of the Throne [of Glory] Supreme?’ They will say: ‘They belong to Allah
2” (23:84-87), Allah also says: “Say: Can you see yourselves, if the punishment
of Allah come upon you, or the Hour [that you dread], would you then call upon
other than Allah? [Reply] if you are truthful! No, on Him would you call, and if
it be His Will, He would remove [the distress] which occasioned your call upon
Him, and you would forget [the false gods} which you join with Him!” (6:40-41)
and: “... [Who] is better? Allah or the false gods they associate [with Him]? Or
Who has created the heavens and the earth, and Who sends you down rain from
the sky? Yes, with it We cause to grow well-planted orchards full of beauty and
delight: it is not in your power to cause the growth of the trees in them. [Can there
be another] god besides Allah? No, they are a people who swerve from justice. Or,
Who has made the earth firm to live on; made rivers in its midst; set thereon
mountains immovable; and made a separating bar between the two bodies of
88 CHAPTER SIX

flowing water? Can there be another god besides Allah? No, but most of them do
not know ” (27:59-61). This is a question which assumes a negative reply. The
answer will certainly be: there is no god but Allah who does this.

Any of the interpreters of the Qur’4n who say that what is meant by the above-
mentioned verse, “Is there another god besides Allah?” are mistaken. For they
used to have other gods besides Allah, as indicated in the following sayings of
Allah: “. .. Can you possibly bear witness that besides Allah there is another god?
Say: ‘No! I cannot bear witness! . . .”” (6:19). Allah also says: “. . . The deities,
other than Allah, whom they invoked, did not profit them...” (11:101) and: “Has
he made [all] the gods into one god? Truly this is a wonderful thing” (38:5).
Indeed, they admit that their deities do not share with Allah either in the creation
of the heavens and the earth nor in the creation of any other thing. But they used
to take them for intercessors and mediators, as Allah says: “They worship, besides
Allah, things that neither hurt them nor profit them, and they say: “These are our
intercessors with Allah. ..’” (10:18); and: “It would not be reasonable of me if I
did not serve Him Who created me, and to Whom you shall [all] be brought back.
’ Shall I take [other] gods besides Him? If [Allah] Most Gracious should intend
some adversity for me, of no use whatever will be their intercession for me, nor
can they deliver me” (36:22—23); and: “Give this warning to those in whose
[hearts] is the fear that they will be brought (to Judgment) before their Lord;
except for Him they will have no protector nor intercessor . . .” (6:51); and: “It is
Allah Who has created the heavens and the earth, and all between them, in six
Days, and is firmly established on the Throne [of authority]: you have none,
besides Him, to protect or intercede [for you]: Will you not then receive
admonition?” (32:4); and: “Say: [Oh, Muhammad] Call upon other [gods] whom
you fancy, besides Allah: they have no power, not the weight of an atom, in the
heavens or on earth: no [sort of] share have they therein, nor are any of them a
helper to Allah. No intercession can avail in His Presence, except for those from
whom He has granted permission . . .” (34:22-23). Hence He denies that anyone
besides Him possesses power or even a portion of power, or acts as His protector.
Nothing remains except intercession, which is not beneficial except for those to
whom Allah has granted permission, as illustrated in the following verses. Allah
says: “. .. Who is there who can intercede in His presence except as He allows

. .?” (2:255); and He, the Exalted, said about the Angels: “. . . They offer no
intercession except for those who are acceptable except for him with whom He is
WRONG: ITS KINDS AND MEANING 89

pleased . . .” (21:28). Allah says: “And there are many Angels in the heavens,
whose intercession will avail nothing except after Allah has given leave for whom
He wills and pleases” (53:26).

Thus, even this intercession, which the polytheists think they will be offered, will
be ruled out on the Day of Judgment as it is in the Qur’an. The Prophet (pbuh) was
told that [on the Day of Judgment] he would bow down to Allah and praise Him,
and would not ask first for intercession. When he prostrated and praised his Lord
with praises that Allah Himself bestowed upon him, then it would be said to him:
“Oh, Muhammad! Raise your head, and you will be heard; ask and it will be
granted; intercede and intercession will be granted.” Then the Prophet said: “Oh,
Lord of my people, but that a limit would be set for him.” He [the Prophet] would
make them enter Paradise. He [the Prophet] returned then and prostrated himself.
He then did the same thing a second and third time. Abu Hurayrah asked: “Who
enjoys the greatest share of your intercession on the Day of Judgment?” Upon this
the Prophet answered: “He who says there is no god but Allah with a sincere
heart.” It follows that intercession will not be granted, except with Allah's
permission, to those who are sincere. It will not be granted to anyone who
associates anything with Him. Indeed, it will not be granted except with His own
permission. Surely Allah will show favor to those who are sincere and believe in
the oneness of Allah. He [Allah] will forgive them through the intercession of the
Prophet (pbuh) who was kindly permitted to intercede, in order to honor Him and
obtain the praiseworthy position which inspires the envy of both leaders and
followers. Just as he [the Prophet] used to pray for them, this was indeed his
intercession on their behalf. Indeed, Allah kindly responded to his prayer and
intercession.

From the previous discussion it follows that wrong is of three kinds: the wrong of
polytheism, for which no intercession can be offered, and which is done by people
to each other. It is necessary that the person wronged be granted his rights. Indeed,
the right of the wronged party cannot be nullified either via intercession nor by any
other means. But the wronged individual may get (something) from the wrongdoer
or he himself may forgive the wrongdoer via intercession. Accordingly, the
absolute wrongdoer [the polytheist] has no effective intercessor, whereas whoever
believes in the oneness of Allah is not an absolute wrongdoer but a person who
wrongs himself via his sincerity to Allah; thus he benefits from intercession.
Indeed, the negation of intercession cited in the Qur’an is a negation of
90 CHAPTER SIX

polytheism. Namely,-6ne must not rely on the intercessor to the point of praying
to him instead of praying to Allah. It follows that prohibition of the intercession
that leads one to polytheism is a prohibition of polytheism. This means that
nothing but Allah must be worshiped, prayed to, or relied on, either in intercession
or in other matters. Thus, one must not rely on any [but Allah] to provide him with
the means of his own sustenance, which Allah provides through various means.

Similarly, he must not rely on any [but Allah] to forgive and grant him mercy in
the Hereafter, even if Allah forgives and grants him mercy through different
means, such as intercession. For the intercession absolutely repudiated in the
Qur’dn implies polytheism, which is also repudiated. Hence, Allah permits
intercession in some situations that the Prophet (pbuh) indicated are only to
benefit the sincere who believe in the oneness of Allah: To put it differently,
sinners who believe in the oneness of Allah will benefit, as He permits, from
intercession.

The muqayyad, conditioned, wrong includes wronging one’s soul and wronging
other people, as indicated in the sayings of Adam (pbuh) and Eve. Allah says: “. ..
Our Lord! We have wronged our souls . . .” (7:23); and Moses said: “. .. Oh my
Lord! I have indeed wronged my soul . . .” (28:16). Allah says: “And those who,
having done something to be ashamed of, or wronged their own souls, earnestly
bring Allah to mind, and ask for forgiveness for their sins . . .” (3:135). In these
verses, Adam and Moses are talking about well-known, specific, but not
widespread events that surely do not reflect unbelief. And thus it became known
that this is not unbelief, Praise be to Allah.

As for the saying of Allah: “And those who, having done something to be ashamed
of, or wronged their own souls . . .” (3:135).This is an indefinite condition that is
generalized to include every single thing that implies wronging one’s soul. If one |
repents, after having been a polytheist, Allah forgives him. As previously
mentioned, wronging one’s soul includes all sins, whether they are major or minor.
Allah says: “Then We have given the Book for inheritance to such of Our servants
as We have chosen: but there are among them some who wrong their own souls;
some who follow a middle course; and some who are, by Allah’s leave, foremost
in good deeds . . .” (35:32). Wronging oneself is connected with something else
and does not include the major wrong [polytheism]. It is narrated on the authority
WRONG: ITS KINDS AND MEANING 91

of Ibn Mas ‘id that when this verse: “It is those who believe and confuse not their
beliefs with wrong . . .” (6:82) was revealed, the Companions of the Prophet
(pbuh) found it difficult to believe. They said: “Who among us [is so fortunate]
that he does not wrong himself?” Upon this the Prophet answered: “This is
polytheism: do you not hear the saying of the righteous person [Luqman]: ‘Indeed,
polytheism is a grave wrong’” (31:13). Indeed, the Prophet’s Companions thought
that the conditional wrong mentioned in the verse “‘it is those who believe and
confuse not their beliefs with wrong” meant wronging one’s soul and that whoever
wrongs his soul is insecure and misguided. Therefore, the Prophet (pbuh)
explained to them that polytheism is one kind of wrong [whereas there is also
insecurity and misguidance], as cited in the Book of Allah. Thus, whoever does
not confuse his belief with wrong is someone who enjoys security and guidance.
He is also among those whom Allah has chosen, as indicated in His saying: “Then
We have given the Book for inheritance to such of Our servants as We have
chosen: but there are among them some who wrong their own souls; some who
follow a middle course; and some who are, by Allah’s leave, foremost in good
deeds; that is the highest Grace. Gardens of Eternity will they enter...”
(35:32-33). However, this is not to deny the fact that Allah will blame whoever
[among them] wrongs himself if he does not repent, as indicated in the following
verses. Allah says: “Then shall anyone who has done an atom’s weight of good,
see it! And anyone who has done an atom’s weight of evil, shall see it” (99:7-8)
and: “. .. Whoever works evil will be requited accordingly . . .” (4:123).

Abu Bakr [al-Siddiq] once asked the Prophet (pbuh) about the verse “whoever
works evil will be requited accordingly,” saying: “Oh, Messenger of Allah, who
among us does not commit evil?” He [the Prophet] answered: “Oh, Abu Bakr, do
you not feel fatigue? Do you not grieve? Does not calamity befall you? These are
what you will be requited for [Allah rewards you for them].” Thus, the Prophet
(pbuh) indicated that a believer who enters Paradise, if he repents, he may be
requited for his evil deeds by calamities that befell him in his life, as indicated by
the Prophet’s sayings (recorded in Sahih Muslim and Sahih al-Bukhari): “The
believer is like a bouquet of plants that is surrounded [controlled] by the wind. The
wind sometimes makes it stand erect and other times bends it. The hypocrite is
like a cedar tree which remains rooted in the ground then, all of a sudden, it 1s
uprooted; and: “Whatever the believer suffers such as illness, fatigue, calamity,
92 CHAPTER SIX

sadness, grief, harm, even if a thorn pricks him, Allah purges him of his sins.”
Likewise, Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqaias said: “Oh, Messenger of Allah, who among the |
people bears the most affliction?” He [the Prophet] replied: “The Prophets, then
the righteous ones, then those closest to perfection, then the typical. A man is
_ afflicted according to the degree of his faith. If he has a strong belief, Allah
strengthens his affliction. However, if he has a weak belief, Allah reduces his
affliction. The believer will remain afflicted until the time comes when he walks
on the street without sin” (recorded by Ahmad, al-Tirmidhi, and others). The
Prophet (pbuh) also said: “Sickness purges sins as a dry tree casts down its
leaves.” There are many such hadiths on this topic.

It follows that whoever safeguards himself against the three kinds of wrong’ is
[truly] secure and rightly guided. But, whoever wrongs his soul is [truly, but not
wholly] secure and rightly guided [namely, the sinners who believe in the oneness
of Allah are secure, and the guided enter Paradise, but only after punishment].
That is, whoever safeguards himself, will enter Paradise as Allah promises. For He
[Allah] shows the straight path, the result of which is Paradise. However, he is not
[wholly] secure and rightly guided, for he commits evil. The deficiency in security
and guidance is in accordance with the deficiency in his belief due to wronging his
soul. The Prophet (pbuh) does not mean by his saying: “Indeed it is polytheism”
that if this type of polytheism is not the major polytheism, then one has true
security and true guidance. For many verses of the Qur’an and many sayings of the
Prophet (pbuh) indicate that the people who commit major sins have reason to
fear. Thus, they are neither [truly] in security nor under right guidance, by which
they see the right path. This is the way of those—the Prophets, the sincere, the
martyrs, and the righteous ones—on whom Allah bestows His Grace with no
punishment; these will enter Paradise. However, if by the phrase “Indeed it is
polytheism” the Prophet (pbuh) meant the major polytheism, then his intention
was that whoever is not a polytheist is secure from the penalty that Allah warns
polytheists with [in the earth and Hereafter] and is rightly guided. However, if the

7 The three kinds of wrong are: the absolute wrong, which is polytheism, and two kinds of
conditioned wrong: wronging one’s soul and wronging others. The phrase "{true] security and
right guidance" refers to the following verse: "It is those who believe and confuse not their
beliefs with wrong that are [truly] in security, for they are under right guidance" (6:82).
WRONG: ITS KINDS AND MEANING 93

Prophet (pbuh) intended polytheism [in general], then it can be said that wronging
one’s soul is like being a miser, for the love of property due to his abandoning of
an obligation is a minor sort of polytheism. So also is one’s preference for his own
desires over the love of Allah. Thus he will prefer liking himself over the love of
Allah, and this is a minor polytheism. Such a man lacks [true] security and [right]
guidance due to his sin. And that is why the pious ancestors used to consider the
sins that may lead to wronging one’s soul.
Chapter Seven

The Meanings of the Terms
Righteousness and Corruption

This chapter focuses on the terms al-salah, righteousness, and al-fasad, corruption.
If the word “righteousness” is applied in an absolute manner, then it refers to all
good; likewise, “corruption” refers to all evil. The same applies to the terms: “the
righteous ones” and “the corrupt ones,” as indicated in the following verses of the
Qur’an. As Allah says in the story of Moses: “. . . Is it your intention to slay me
as you did to another soul yesterday? The intention is none other than to become
a powerful, violent man in the land and not to be one of the righteous ones”
(28:19); and “. . . Moses had charged his brother Aaron: ‘Act for me among my
people: do right, and follow not the way of the corrupt ones’” (7:142); and “When
it is said to them: ‘Make not corruption on the earth,’ they say: “Why, we only
want to make peace! Surely, they are the corrupt ones, but they do not realize it ””
(2:11—12). In the following, the pronoun “man,” who, refers to the hypocrites.
Allah says: “Among the people there are some who say: ‘We believe in Allah and
the Last Day;’ but they do not [really] believe” (2:8). This reference [to the
people] is used in a general way which refers to people at and after the time of the
Prophet (pbuh). For this reason Salman al-Farisi' said that by this verse, Allah
means a people that were not yet created when the verse was revealed, Al-Suddi
said, on the authority of his teachers, that the word fasad, corruption, is to be
interpreted to mean both unbelief and rebellion. And Mujahid said that corruption
means not following the commands and avoiding things that are prohibited. Both
of these statements mean one and the same thing. However, according to Ibn
‘Abbas, corruption means unbelief. The following is the statement by those who

١ Salman al-Farisi (7-32 A.H.) was a Companion of the Prophet and transmitted some hadith. [M.
M. Azami, p. 55.]
THE MEANINGS OF THE TERMS RIGHTEOUSNESS 95

said that hypocrisy is those who befriended the unbelievers and revealed to them
the secrets of the believers. But Abu al-‘Aliyah and Mugatil said that it is
practicing mischief. This last opinion is general in nature and agrees with the first
two opinions.

Indeed, their [the hypocrites’] saying: “. . . We only want to do good. . .” (2:11)
has two [true] interpretations as recorded by Ibn ‘Abbas: One is that they deny
what they are accused of. In this case, it is as if they are saying: “We are doing
what the Messenger orders us to do.” The other interpretation is that they are
saying: “We are only doing the righteous [deeds] and by it we intend to do good
.” In fact, they mention the former interpretation for one who does not know their
inner intentions, and they mention the latter for themselves and others who know
their inner intentions. It follows that the latter interpretation implies the former.
For their {the hypocrites’] observed behavior is the reverse of their inner
intentions; and they view this act as right [in the world]. Hence, if authority is in
the hands of the Prophet (pbuh), then they feel secure in following him, and if
authority is in the hands of the unbelievers, then they feel secure through their
friendship with them. Thus Allah says: “They are the corrupt ones, but they realize
[it] not” (2:12). That is, they realize that what they have done is a mischievous act,
not a right act. It may also mean that they do not realize that Allah has acquainted
His Messenger with their corruption. The second statement is inclusive in the first.
This is what is intended as illustrated in the following Qur’4nic verse. Allah says:
“Indeed My Protector is Allah, Who has revealed the Book, and He protects the
righteous ones” (7:196). He also says: “. . . Moses said: ‘What you have brought
is sorcery; Allah will surely make it of no effect. Indeed, Allah does not set right
the work of the corrupt ones” (10:81). Yusuf [Joseph] said. Allah says: ‏.“ا‎ . . Cause
me to die as a Muslim and join me with the righteous ones” (12:101).

A more general expression may be joined to a more specific one, as indicated in
the following verse. Allah says: “When he turns his back, his aim everywhere is
to spread corruption throughout the earth and destroy crops and cattle. But Allah
loves not corruption.” (2:205). In this verse it is said that the phrase “‘to spread
corruption throughout the earth,” implies unbelief as well as wrong [wherein both
interpretations are true]. Allah says: “That Home of the Hereafter [ Paradise], We
shall assign to those who rebel not against the truth nor spread corruption with
pride and oppression in the land . . .” (28:83); and “Indeed, Pharaoh exalted
himself in the land and divided its people into sects, weakening each group among
96 CHAPTER SEVEN

them, killing their sons and letting their females live. Indeed, he was one of the
most corrupt ones” (28:4). Allah also says: “On this account: We ordained for the
Children of Israel that if anyone slew a person—unless it be for murder or for
spreading corruption in the land—it would be as if he slew the whole people. . .”
(5:32). Thus, slaying a person is implied in corruption. The right to take revenge
for the slain person is for the guardian of the victim. Yet during the time of the
Wars of Apostasy, fighting, and fornication the right to take revenge was for all
the people. For this reason it was said that this right is for Allah, and for this
reason no one Is to be excused because it spread corruption at large. Allah says:
“The recompense of those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger and
spread corruption through the land is only that they shall be killed or crucified or
their hands and their feet be cut off on the opposite sides . . .” (5:33). It is said that
the reason for the revelation of this verse is because the ‘Araniyiin’ are those who
apostatized, rebelled, killed, and took property back from the Muslims [at the time
of the first Caliph, Abu Bakr]. Some say that the cause of the revelation of this
verse was that some people made a covenant, then they broke it and started to fight
back. Others say that this verse was revealed because of the polytheists, since it
is connected with the people of the apostasy and those who broke their covenant
and started to fight back. However, the majority of the pious ancestors and the
later Muslims believe that this verse dealt with highway robbers from among the
Muslims. In fact, this verse refers to all of the above.

Similarly, in many verses of the Qur’an, the terms salah, righteousness, and islah,
doing good, are associated with the term Iman. For example, Allah says: “Indeed,
those who believe and do deeds of righteousness . . .” (2:277); and “. . . Those who
believe and do good upon them shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve” (6:48).
It is well known that Iman is the most righteous deed and the best deed of
righteousness. This is indicated by the saying of the Prophet [recorded in a/-Sahih]
by those who asked him: “Oh, Messenger of Allah, which of all deeds is the best?”
The Messenger replied: “Belief in Allah is the best deed.” Allah says: “And
indeed, I am Forgiving to him who repents, believes and does righteous deeds, and
then remains constant in doing so” (20:82); and “Accepts those who repent and
believe and work righteousness. Such will enter Paradise . . .” (19:60); and
“Accepts those who repent and believe and do righteous deeds, for such persons,

2 These people are attributed to the tribe of ‘Araynah. This tribe embraced Islam after the death
of the Prophet (pbuh), then they rejected Islam and joined the Apostates.
THE MEANINGS OF THE TERMS RIGHTEOUSNESS 97

Allah will change their sins into good deeds . . ..” (25:70). And concerning gadhf,
false accusation, Allah says: “Accept those who repent after that and do righteous
deeds. Indeed, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful” (3:89). And concerning the thief,
Allah says: “But whosoever repents after his wrong and does righteous deeds then
indeed, Allah will pardon him . . .” (5:39); and “‘And the two persons [a man and
a woman] among you who commit sexual intercourse [illegally], punish them
both. And if they repent and do righteous good deeds, leave them alone. . .”
(4:16). The legal Muslim scholars, in one of their verdicts, stipulated a condition
in accepting of the testimony of the one who has made false accusation that he has
to show good conduct for approximately one year. This is in accordance with the
case that ‘Umar [Ibn al-Khattab] applied on Subayyigh Ibn ‘Asal, whom he made
wait fora year before restoring his status of good conduct. Following what ‘Umar
[Ibn al-Khattab] did with Subayyigh Ibn “Asal, Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] used the same
analogy with the case of the one who is calling for bid‘ah, innovation, that he must
also wait for a year to restore his status of good conduct.
Chapter Eight

Literal Meaning and Figurative Meaning

It has been said that the various semantic forms of a word are clear,
straightforward, and indisputable, whether used in an absolute sense or a
conditioned sense, in the speech of Allah and His Prophet or in the speech of
anyone else. But we say that the meaning of the word Iman, belief, when applied
to works, is used in a majaz, figurative sense. For the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Belief
consists of over sixty or seventy odd branches. The highest branch is: “There is no
god but Allah’ and the lowest is: ‘Removal of harm from the road.’” This is a
figurative use of speech. He [the Prophet] also said: “Belief is for you to believe
in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His Messengers” to the end of this saying.
This is a haqiqah, literal’ usage, and it is the foundation for the claims of the .
Murji’ites, the Jahmites, the Karramites and everyone who does not include works.
within the term Iman.”

To this controversy we offer two replies. First, there is general speech related to -
the terms haqiqah and majaz, literal and figurative; and second, there is speech
that pertains specifically to the topic at hand. Considering that one of the two uses:
of speech may be figurative, then how is one to determine which uses of speech

' In his scholarly article “On the Genesis of the Haqiqa-Majaz Dichotomy,” Studia Islamica 59, 1984,
pp. 111-40, Wolfhart Heinrichs presents the following sets of terms for the dichotomy of majaz versus
haqiqah (figurative versus proper or topical vs. veridical). He also stated that the term majaz is a
technical marked .term and has an older history before it became associated with haqiqah. Haqiqah is
translated here as /iteral and majaz as figurative. ‏ش‎

We would like to thank Dr. Awad al-Jemaey who teaches Arabic rhetoric at the University of
Umm al-Qura at Makkah for reading this chapter and making some useful comments. We also
would like to thank an anonymous reviewer who made valuable comments on this chapter and
other chapters throughout the book.

يم
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 99

are literal and which are figurative? Is literal speech that which is applied in an
absolute manner, or that which is used in a conditioned sense? Or, if both of these
usages are literal, if applied in an absolute sense, then how may one know what
the term “belief” refers to?

First it may be said that if the terms “literal” and “figurative” are used either with
respect to the meaning of words or the way in which their meanings are signified,
then the division of words and their various meanings into literal and figurative
may be said to fall within the claims made by later thinkers. But the most
widespread view is that both literal and figurative usages are min ‘awarid al-alfaz,
among the accident aspects of words. In any case, this division is an istilah hadith,
a recent convention, that was not agreed upon until three centuries after the advent
of Islam. It was never mentioned by the Companions of the Prophet or their
Successors nor by any of the well-known religious scholars, such as Malik, al-
Thawri,’ al-Awza‘l, Abu Hanifah, or al-Shafi‘i. In fact, it was not even mentioned
by philologists and grammarians, such as al-Khalil, Sibawayh,* Abu ‘Amr Ibn al-
‘Ala’, and others. The first person known to have spoken of the use of figurative
speech was Abu ‘Ubaydah Mu‘ammar Ibn al-Muthanna, who mentioned it in his
book.* However, by ‘figurative’ he did not mean that which is a counterpart of
‘literal.’ Rather, what he meant by the figurative sense of the Qur’anic verse,
majaz al-ayah, was that through which the meaning of the verse is expressed. For
this reason, religious scholars suchas Abu al-Husayn al-Basri and others have said
that we may distinguish literal from figurative meaning in various ways. Among
these is the method employed by philologists, who declare that this is literal, and
that is figurative. In relying on such a method one speaks without knowledge. For
he assumes that the philologists made such a distinction, whereas in fact, none of
them ever said such a thing. Nor had the pious ancestors or scholars of Islam.
Rather, it is a recent convention, introduced much later, and was most likely first
adopted by the Mu‘tazilites and other scholastic theologians. For such discussions

Sufyan al-Thawri Abu ‘Abd Allah Ibn Sa‘id (97-161 A.H.) was one of the best scholars of hadith. His

major works are a/-/ami‘ al-Kabir and al-Jami al-Saghir. [Al-Zirikli, vol. 3, p. 158.]

* Sibawayh, Abu Bishr ‘Amr Ibn ‘Uthman Ibn Qanbar (2-178), was the most celebrated grammarian
and was author of the famous book a/-Kitab. [Al-Fihrist, vol. 2, p. 1101.]

* Abu ‘Ubaydah (?-209 A.H.) was a very well-known grammarian of the school of Basrah. He wrote
Majaz al-Qur’an (edited by Fu’ad Sezgin) 2 vols., Cairo, 1962. For further information on Abu
‘Ubaydah’s point of view concerning the concept of majaz see the article by Wolfhart Heinrichs on
this subject.
100 CHAPTER EIGHT

cannot be attributed to any of the scholars of Muslim jurisprudence, commentators
on the Qur’an and hadith, or any of the pious ancestors. Al-Shafi‘l, the first to
write a book on the principles of Islamic jurisprudence, did not distinguish
between literal and figurative, nor did he discuss the terms haqiqah and majaz. Nor
did Muhammad Ibn al-Hassan,° whose writings on issues relating to the Arabic
language, including his book al-Jami‘ al-Kabir, are well known. As for other
religious scholars, the only one among them known to have used the terms ‘literal’
and ‘figurative’ is Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, who in his book The Refutation of the
Jahmites comments on the pronouns [inna and nahnu], two forms of the pronoun
we, and other such expressions found in the Qur’4n, that are used in the plural to
refer to the singular. He claims this to be a figurative use of language. If someone
says: “We shall give you,” inna sanu ‘tika, and inna sanaf<alu, “we shall do,” this
is a figurative use of language. On this basis some of his [fbn Hanbal] followers,
for example, the judge Abu Ya‘la and Ibn ‘Aqil, Abu al-Khattab,’ and others,
argued that the Qur’an contains figurative language. However, others of his
followers, such as Abu al-Hassan al-Jazri, Abu ‘Abd Allah Ibn Hamid, and Abu
al-Fadl al-Tamimi Ibn Abi al-Hassan al-Tamimi,’ denied the use of figurative
language in the Qur’an. It was also denied by Muhammad Ibn Khuwayzmandad"®
and others belonging to the Maliki school, as well as Da’ud Ibn “Ali, his son Abu
Bakr, and Mundhir Ibn 5310 Balliti,"' who wrote a book on the subject.

Two different accounts relating to this controversy have been passed down on
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal’s authority. As for all other Muslim authorities, none of them,
even among Ahmad’s early followers, claimed that the Qur’&n contains figurative
speech: neither Malik nor al-Shafi nor Abu Hanifah. Rather, the division of
words into literal and figurative did not become widespread until the fourth
century A.H. The earliest indications of this division began to appear in the third

6 Muhammad Ibn al-Hassan (?-189 A.H.) was a Hanafi jurist. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 101.]

” Abual-Khattab, Mahfuz Ibn Ahmad Ibn al-Hassan (7-510 A.H.) was a famous Hanbali scholar of figh.
_[Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 102.]

5 «Abd Allah Ibn Hamid (2-403 A.H.) was the Imam of the Hanbalites of his time. One of his books is
Usil al-Figh. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 102.]

" Abu Fadl al-Tamimi (?-401 A.H.) was a famous Hanbali jurist. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 102.]

١ Khuwayzmandad, Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr (n.d.), was a Maliki scholar of fiqh and Qur°an
interpretation. [Kitab al-Jman MZ, p. 102.]

١١ Al-Balliti, Mundhir Ibn Sa‘id (?-385 A.H.), was the chief judge of his time and a jurist in al-Andalus
(Spain). [Al-Zirikli, vol. 8, p. 229.]
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 101

century A.H., although the basic linguistic usages of this division can possibly be
found in the latter part of the second century A.H. Those who deny that Ahmad
Ibn Hanbal and others employed a division between literal and figurative usages
have argued that when Ahmad used the phrase, min majaz al-lughah, he did not
mean “figurative use of language,” but rather, “that which is permissible in
linguistic usage.” In other words, it is permissible for one enjoying a position of
power or prestige to say: “We did such and such” or “We are doing such and
such,” and the like. According to these people, Ahmad did not intend by this to say
that the word in question had been used to convey a meaning other than its
original signification.

Another group, including Abu Ishaq al-Isfara’ini'’, denied the use of figurative
language, either in the Qur’an or anywhere else. Those who disagreed with Abu
Ishaq claimed that their dispute with him was merely terminological. For if he
granted that a word may be used to convey a meaning other than that which it
conveyed originally and whose meaning may only be ascertained through the
context, then this is a figurative use of language, even if he did not refer to it as
such. His supporters, on the other hand, pointed out that those who classified word
use into literal and figurative said that literal usage refers to words that are used
to convey the same meaning that they conveyed originally, while figurative usage
refers to words that are used to convey a meaning different from what they
originally signified. The words asad, /ion, and himar, donkey, for example, may
either be used to refer to two kinds of beast, or to a valiant person and a dull-
witted one, respectively. Moreover, this division into literal and figurative usages
requires the word in question to already have been established as having a
particular meaning. Once this has taken place, the word may either be used with
its originally intended meaning, or with some other meaning. For this reason, it is
widely agreed upon among those who employ such a division that any word that
may be used figuratively must also have a literal meaning, though it is not
necessary for every word used literally to have a figurative meaning. However,
some who came later objected to this view, saying that a word established as
having a particular meaning before it is used is neither literal nor figurative,

" Al-Isfardyini, Abu Ishéq Ibrahim Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ibrahim (?-418 A.H), was one of the major
scholars of the Ash‘arites and was a contemporary of al-Baqilani, a major theologian. [Kitab a/-/man
MZ, p. 103; al-Zirikli, vol.1, ‏.م‎ 59; and £/ 2, p. 107.]
102 CHAPTER EIGHT

whereas if it is used to convey a meaning other than its original signification, then
it has a figurative usage without any literal meaning.

All the foregoing would be correct were it known that Arabic lexical items were
first established with certain meanings, then later were used in accordance with
these same meanings, in which case their established meanings would precede
their use. This would only be true in the case of someone who considered
languages to be based on an agreed convention, such that a group of sensible,
rational individuals had met together and agreed on what everything was to be
called, then made such meanings generally applicable to all languages. This is a
position that we know no Muslim to have taken prior to Abu Hashim al-Jubba’i."°
Both Abu Hashim and Abu al-Hassan al-Ash‘ari were students of Abu ‘Ali al-
Jubba’i. However, al-Ash‘ari retreated from the doctrines of the Mu‘tazilites, as
he disagreed with them over matters such as al-qadr wal-wa‘id, predestination and
the threat of damnation, the names and decrees of Allah, and the divine attributes.
The contradictions he exposed in their doctrines have become well known. Al-
Ash‘ari and Abu Hashim disputed over the principle of mabda? al-lughat, the
origin of languages. According to Abu Hashim, language 15 istilahiyyah, based on
established convention, whereas al-Ash‘ari held that language is tawqifiyyah,
based on learning and experience. Later on, others delved into this issue as well,
with some claiming that part of language is based on established convention, and
part is based on experience. Moreover, there is a fourth view, referred to as bil-
waqf, noncommittal.'*

What is intended here is that no one could say of the Arabs—nor for that matter
of any nation in the entire world—that a group of scholars met together and
established all the words to be found in their language, then proceeded to use those

١3 Abu ‘Ali al-Jubba’i, Muhammad Ibn al-Wahhab (?-916 A.D.), was a famous Mu'‘tazilite scholar. [A/-
Fihrist, ‏.م‎ 1025.] —

'4 Certain Muslim scholars, especially those of the tenth century, who dealt with the topic of mabda’ al-
lughah, the origin of language, have identified several theories. The “naturalist theory” claims that
language has its origin in a munasaba tabi ‘lya, natural affinity, between expression and the things they
signify. The “conventionalist theory” claims that language origin is based on social convention. The
third theory, which Orthodox Muslims favor the most, is called the “revelationist theory.” It is based
on the idea that language was originally revealed to man by Allah. The fourth theory is waqf,
noncommittal, which states that neither the conventionalist nor the revelationist theories can really
stand alone. Therefore, both of those theories must have equal possibilities. The essence of this
footnote, concerning the origin of language, is based on Bernard G. Weiss, “Medieval Muslim
Discussions of the Origin of Language,” ZDMG, 1974:33-41.
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 103

words after setting them down in such a fashion. Rather, what is known and what
has been passed down by successive numerous sources is that the words of the
language have been used with the meanings that people meant to convey by them.
And if anyone claims that he is aware of words having been established in the
language prior to their use, he is mistaken, since such a claim has never been
transmitted on any authority. Nor is it said: “We know this is so for ifno words are
established beforehand, then no use may be made of them.” To this it is said :
“Such is not the case. Rather, we know that Allah has inspired the animals with
sounds through which they may communicate with each other.” This has been
referred to as mantiq, /anguage, and qawl, speech, as in Solomon’s saying: “. . .
We were taught the language of the birds . . .” (27:16). It is also found in Allah’s
saying: ‘“. .. One of the ants said: ‘Oh, you ants, enter your abodes . . .”” (27:18),
and‘... Oh, you mountains and birds! Echo the praises of Allah with him [David]
...” (34:10). The same is true of human beings. For the child, after he begins to
distinguish among sounds, if he hears his parents or whoever is raising him
pronounce a word, will point to the object being referred to, since he has come to
understand that this word is used to express a particular meaning. That is to say,
the person who used the word intended to express that specific meaning. After
this, the child hears one word after another until he learns the language of the
people whom he has grown up among, without them having agreed with him
beforehand on established words and meanings. In fact, it takes place without
them having alerted him to the meanings of the words, although he may
sometimes ask about what certain words refer to in order to acquaint himself with
them. Similarly, an unfamiliar language may be translated for someone such that
he comes to know the meanings of some of its words, whereas if he lived among
the speakers of the language for a period of time, he would learn these meanings
without anyone pointing them out to him.

Of course, people may designate a name for something that comes into existence
for the first time and that, for this reason, no one was familiar with before. For
example, a son might be born to someone, after which he gives the child a name,
either after someone else, or one that has been improvised. Moreover, a person or
object named may be unique, the name not having been agreed upon by more than
one person; or people may happen to refer to the entity by the same name.
Similarly, someone might manufacture an instrument, write a book, or buildacity,
then give it a name, since it does not belong to any known class such that it would
104 CHAPTER EIGHT

have an agreed upon name in the common language. Allah says: “The Most
Gracious One; Who taught the Qur’an; He created man; He taught him intelligent
speech” (55: 1-4); and“... They say ‘Allah has given us speech Who gives speech
to everything. ..’” (41:21); and “Who created, then disposed, Who measured then
guided” (87:2—3). Thus, Allah inspires human beings with speech just as He does
other creatures. Moreover, if Allah taught Adam all names and presented all
entities named to the Angels as He states in the Qur’4n, then we know that He did
not teach Adam all the languages that all people would ever speak until the Day
of Resurrection. Rather, these languages would be spoken by his progeny after
him. For they [Adam’s descendants] speak nothing but their own languages, and
to claim otherwise is a patent falsehood. For Adam (pbuh) could only pass on his
own language to his children. However, in the year of the great flood, Allah
caused all of Adam’s progeny to drown except for those who were in the ark; and
the progeny of all those in the ark were cut off, except for Noah’s sons, but they
did not speak all the languages that would be spoken by nations after them. For
even a single language, such as Farsi, Arabic, Latin, or Turkish, contains within
it so many differences and variations that only Allah Himself could count them.
Among the Arabs themselves, each tribe has a lughah, dialect, that others may not
understand. This being the case, it is inconceivable that all these languages and
dialects could have been passed down from those who were in the ark when they
left no offspring behind. Rather, the offspring who survived were those of Noah
and all those who were descended from his three sons: Sam, Ham, and Japheth.
Allah says: “And we have caused his offspring to survive” (37:77). In other words,
Allah allowed no one to survive but his [Noah’s] offspring. As has been recorded
by Ahmad {Ibn Hanbal] and others on the authority of the Prophet (pbuh): “His
sons are three in number,” and of course these three sons could not have spoken
all the languages of the world so that they could be traced back to them. For those
who know one language will generally not be familiar with another. And if those
who passed on such languages were only three in number, then they taught their
children, and their children in turn taught their children, and if this had been the
case, there would have been continuity. However, we find that even among the
descendants of a single father, one tribe will speak a dialect that is
incomprehensible to other tribes. Nor would we say that this father taught one of
his sons one language while he taught his other son another. For a father may only
have two sons, while the languages spoken by his offspring far outnumber these
two sons.
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 105

And by virtue of the way Allah created them, human beings generally teach their
children the language in which they speak to them, or the language that others use
in addressing them. As for languages that Allah did not create speakers for, then
of course no one teaches these to his children. In addition, there are human beings
who utter words they have never heard from anyone else. On the authority of the
pious ancestors, learned scholars from among the commentators and others take
two different views regarding the names that [Allah] taught to Adam.

According to the first of these views, Allah taught Adam only the names of
rational beings. This view is based on Allah’s statement in the Qur’an: “... Then
He presented them to the Angels . . .” (2:31). Those who hold this view say that
the object pronoun used in this verse (i.e., hum, them) may only be used to refer
to rational beings. If reference were being made to nonrational beings, the pronoun
employed would have been ha, it or them, rather than hum. For this reason, Abu
al-‘Aliyah says that Allah taught Adam the names of the Angels, since at that time,
the only rational beings in existence were the Angels. Iblis had not yet separated
from the other Angels nor did he have any offspring. Another interpretation of this
verse, held by ‘Abd al-Rahman Ibn Zayd Ibn Aslam, is that Allah taught Adam the
names of his progeny. This is consistent with the hadith narrated by al-Tirmidhi
on the authority of the Prophet (pbuh), which says: “Adam asked his Lord to show
him images of his descendants who would be prophets. When he saw them, ra’a
fihim man yabussu, he saw one of them shining. He then asked: ‘Lord, who is
that?’ To which Allah replied: ‘He is your son Da’iid [David].’” Hence, Allah
revealed to Adam images of some of his descendants as well as their names, in
which case the names Allah taught him were proper names rather than common
names.

According to the second majority view Allah taught Adam the names of
everything. Among those who hold this view are Ibn “Abbas and his followers.
According to Ibn ‘Abbas, Allah taught Adam even words such as al-faswah, the
noiseless emission of wind from the anus, and al-fusayyah, the diminutive form of
al-faswah, as well as al-qas‘ah and al-qusay‘<ah, the large intestine and the small
intestine. In other words, He even taught abstract and concrete nouns, including
their regular and diminutive forms. Evidence for this view is found in the two
collections of sound hadiths, according to which the Prophet (pbuh) said in the
“hadith of intercession”: “People say: ‘Oh, Adam, you are the father of
humankind. Allah created you with His own hand, then breathed into you His
106 CHAPTER EIGHT

spirit and taught you the names of all things.” Likewise Allah’s saying, al-
>asma’a kullaha, all names, has a comprehensive, distinct reference that cannot
be particularized. This is also true of His saying: “He presented them to the
Angels,” in which the pronoun hum, them, includes both rational and nonrational
creatures, with the rational predominating. Allah says: “... For among them there
are those who creep on their stomachs, those who walk on two legs, and those who
walk on all four...” (24:45). According to ‘Ikrimah, Allah taught Adam the
names of classes, without the names of their particular members. For example, one
might say human, jinn, angel, and bird. And according to Muqatil, Ibn al-Sa’ib,
and Ibn Qutaybah, Allah taught Adam the names of riding animals, reptiles, and
birds that He created on earth.

Further evidence for the view that these languages have not been passed down
from Adam may be found in the fact that most languages lack elements found in
Arabic. For example, they do not have special names for children, houses, sounds,
and other concepts that are ascribed to animate beings; in fact, they only use the
idafah, annexation, in order to express such names and concepts. For if Allah had
taught Adam all names, He would have taught them to him proportionally in
correspondence to each other. We also find that every nation that lacks a holy
book also lacks words in its language for the days of the week; rather, its language
contains only words for day, month, and year, which may be discerned through
intuition and reason. Thus, such nations have assigned names to the concepts of
day, month, and year, since the expression of something always follows a mental
conception of it. As for the concept of the week, it was only recognized through
hearing a revealed message. That is, it only came to be known, through the reports
of the prophets, that Allah created the heavens and the earth and everything
between them in six days, then sat down upon the throne, who established
legislation according to which people were to gather one day every week in order
to worship Allah and to remember that very first week during which Allah began
to create this world. Hence, names for the days of the week exist in the languages
of the Arabs, the Hebrews, and those to whom their languages have been passed
down, whereas they are not found in the languages of the Turks and others, since
they did not recognize this concept. Thus it has come to be known that Allah has
inspired the human race to express through words those things that they desire and
conceive. The first person taught this was Adam, and other human beings have
been taught just as he was, albeit in different languages. For Allah sent His
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 107

revelation to Moses in Hebrew and to Muhammad in Arabic, but in both cases
what was revealed was the speech of Allah. In this way Allah has made clear what
He desires and requires of human beings, even though one language is distinct
from the other. Nevertheless, Hebrew is among the closest of all languages to
Arabic; in fact, it bears a closer resemblance to Arabic than that found between
other languages.

In sum, our purpose is not to prove the nonexistence of the matter mentioned
above. Rather, it is sufficient to say that it is not known whether it exists or not.
In fact ilham, inspiration, is a sufficient basis for an expression to come into
existence in languages without having been established beforehand. And if this
may be called learning through experience, let it be called so. Thus, whoever
claims that all categories and classes are laid down somehow before they are used
in languages, has spoken ignorantly. Rather what is known with certainty is actual
usage. Some also say that literal usage is distinguished from figurative usage on
the basis of whether one can discern the meaning of a word without the aid of a
surrounding context. That is, if a word clearly expresses a certain meaning even
when used in isolation, then we have a literal usage; whereas if the meaning of the
word only becomes manifest through the al-qarinah, context, then we have a
figurative usage. This issue is related to the use of a word within a given meaning,
but has nothing to do with the matter of establishing words in a language prior to
their usage.

It has also been said that the division of linguistic usage into figurative and literal
has no basis in reality, for there is no criterion on which to base the distinction,
which renders it meaningless. It is a distinction promoted by those who have no
understanding of what they are saying, so that they are introducing illegitimate
innovations into the law and are flouting both reason and common sense. For they
have said that literal usage refers to a word used with the same meaning with
which it was originally established, while figurative usage refers to the use of a
word to convey a meaning other than that with which it was originally established.
However, in order to justify this division, they must demonstrate that in fact words
are established with particular meanings prior to their usage, which is difficult
indeed. They then go further to divide literal usage into two types: lughawiyyah,
linguistic, and ‘urfiyyah, conventional, though most of them divide it into three
types: linguistic, conventional, and shar‘iyyah, /egal.
108 CHAPTER EIGHT

Conventional literal usage refers to words that have come to signify what they do,
not by virtue of the language per se, but by virtue of accepted practice or
convention. The signification of the word might at times be more general than its
strictly linguistic meaning, while at other times it may be more specific. Moreover,
the conventional and linguistic meanings may actually be different from one
another, although they are related in some manner because of which, the same
word was employed to convey two disparate meanings. An example of the first
case would be the words “neck,” “head,” and the like—words that were originally
employed to refer specifically to a particular member of the body, and that often
came to be used to refer to the entire body. The second case pertains to a word like
dabbah, a riding animal, such as a horse, mule, or donkey. This word originally
was used to refer to any creature that crept along the ground (since the word dabba
means to creep or crawl); then it came to be used by some people to refer to
animals that walk on four legs and by others to refer specifically to a mare or a
donkey. The third case includes words such as gha’it, feces, and za‘inah, riding
camel. The word gha’it, for example, in the Arabic language originally referred
to a low-lying area where people would go to dispose of bodily wastes; eventually,
the same word came to be applied to the bodily wastes themselves, by association
with the place where they had “come out.” The word za‘inah was originally used
to refer to a riding animal, and specifically a camel for riding, after which people
came to apply the same word to the woman who rides on the camel’s back on a
litter. ,

The point to be stressed here is that this type of conventional literal usage did not
come into existence because a particular group of people decided to introduce it
into the language. Rather, some speakers of the language simply began to use a
particular word to convey a meaning that had come to be understood through
conventional practice. Through this usage the word then took on this particular
meaning as the usage became more widespread. For this reason, the literal usages
of many words in a given language have been expanded over time. In fact, a
word’s meaning based on conventional usage may come to be more widely
recognized than its original linguistic signification, so that when used in an
absolute manner, the word evokes not its original meaning, but rather the meaning
it has acquired through conventional usage. In such a case, the word’s literal
meaning based on convention actually abnegates the meaning it originally
conveyed in the language. Moreover, this literal meaning came into being without
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 109

any establishment of its signification prior to its use; hence, appeal to such a prior
establishment of the meanings of words is not valid.

If they say: What we mean by a word’s original coining or creation is that for
which it was first used, we would reply by asking: How can one know for certain
that the words that the Arabs were using to communicate with before and at the
time the Qur’an was revealed had not been used previously to convey different
meanings? For if they are not certain that such words were not used differently at
a previous time, then neither is it possible to know whether they bear a literal
meaning, which is in conflict with what they have agreed upon. Moreover, it
follows necessarily from this that one can never state with certainty that any given
word is being used literally, which no sensible person would accept. We also
might find that someone who has taken the above position encounters words that
he does not know to have been used in any but a conditioned sense. He then utters
them in an entirely absolute sense, then claims that this represents their literal
meanings without knowing that he has stripped them of all restrictions, whereas
originally, they had been restricted. For example, one might say that the literal
meaning of “eye” is the organ of sight. Following this, the word ‘ayn, eye, might
be used in phrases such as ‘ayn al-_shams, the eye of the sun, al-‘ayn al-nabi‘ah,
the flowing spring, or ‘ayn al-dhahab, choicest gold, to express some aspect of
resemblance or comparison. However, the majority view is to consider this not as
an example of literal versus figurative usage but rather of common features among
different entities, such that they are likened to one another. The word ra’s, head,
for example, is said to be used literally in the ph rase ra’s al-’insan, the person's
head. It may also be used in other phrases with figurative meanings: for example,
ra’s al-darb, the head of the road, to mean its beginning; ra’s al-‘ayn, the head of
the spring, to mean its source; ra’s al-qawm, the head of the tribe, to mean its
chief; ra’s al-’amr, the head of the matter or issue; ra’s al-shahr, ra’s al-hawl, the
head of the month or year, to mean their beginnings, and other such phrases
through figurative usage. However, one finds nowhere here that the word ra’s,
head, is used in isolation, stripped of all restrictions. Rather, it has been used with
restrictions, even when it refers to the human head. Allah says: “. . . rub your
heads and [wash] your feet up to the ankles . . . (5:6). This restriction prevents
other meanings from being read into the word.

Thus if one says, ‘the head of the spring,’ ‘the head of the road,’ ‘the head of the
people,’ ‘the head of the matter,’ and so forth, then each restricted phrase is
110 CHAPTER EIGHT

distinguished from every other one in the overall meaning it conveys. However,
all these phrases share a common feature, as do various nouns that are all qualified
by the definite article. Moreover, if it is assumed that the speaker utters the phrase
‘the person's head’ first—since one tends to conceptualize his own head before
any other type of head, and since one generally expresses first that which he first
conceptualized—then the use of this possessive construction initially does not
preclude the use of the same word (i.e., head) later in another possessive
construction. Nor is this construction a type of figurative usage. If one said, for
example, ‘the son of Adam’ first, then later said, ‘the son of the mare’ or ‘the son
of the donkey,’ this would not necessarily convey figurative meaning. Likewise
if we said, ‘the man’s daughter,’ we would not be speaking figuratively if we were
to say, ‘the mare’s daughter;’ and if we first said, ‘the man’s head,’ we would not
be engaging in figurative usage if we said, ‘the mare’s head.’ The same would
apply to possessive constructions such as “his hand” or “his foot.”

If it were said: The meaning is literal when the word is used in a possessive
construction with an animal, we would reply: Considering this construction to be
literal makes no more sense than ascribing to the use of the word ‘head’ in a
possessive construction with ‘person.’ Moreover, a word might be placed in such
a construction with small animals that would not even occur to most speakers of
the language. And if one claims that the usage is literal in this case, then why
would it not likewise be literal in expressions such as ‘the head of the mountain,’
‘the head of the road,’ or ‘the head of the spring’? The same could be said of other
things that are placed in a possessive construction with human beings, such as the
parts of the body, one’s children, and one’s dwellings, which may be placed in the
same type of construction with nonhuman beings, including inanimate objects. For
example, one can say: ‘the head of the mountain,’ ‘the head of the spring,’ ‘the
nose (i.e., the spur) of the mountain,’ ‘the mouth of the riverbed,’ ‘the stomach
(i.e., the interior, or lower portion) of the riverbed,’ ‘the back ‏,.ع.1)‎ the top, or
upper portion) of the mountain,’ ‘the belly of the earth,’ ‘the back (i.e., the
surface) of the earth,’ and so on. These are used with the alif,'* which is the duality
of the al-zahir, outward, and the al-batin, inward, seen in many things. The
meaning in all uses is that the outward is that which is apparent and manifest,
while the inward is that which is hidden or unseen. Hence a man’s zahr al-’insan,

'5 Here “the alif? refers to the definite article.
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 111

back, is called such because it is visible, or easily seen; while a person’s batn al-
°insan, stomach, 15 called thus because it is internal and unseen. Hence if one said:
This is literal, and that is figurative, it would make just as much sense to say the
opposite. There are also nouns that speakers of a language commonly use in the
singular, such as ‘person’ or al-’insan, man. It may also be qualified by a
possessive construction, as in the expressions ’ins&n al-‘ayn, the pupil of the eye,
and *ibrat al-dhira‘, the tip ofthe arm. And assuming that linguistic usage includes
both figurative and literal, some have claimed that the constructions just
mentioned are figurative, which is incorrect. For figurative usage refers to the use
of a word to convey a meaning other than that with which it was originally
associated. Here, however, the word has not been ‘used’ in this manner; rather, it
has been compounded with another word, which has placed it in a new association
or, one might say, caused a new word to be coined by virtue of the idafah,
annexation. Hence, if a word were used in a construct phrase with a particular
meaning, then appeared in the same construct phrase with a different meaning, this
would indeed be a figurative usage. The place names Ba‘labak and Hadramawt,
for example, are both compound words in which two words placed in a construct
phrase were combined to create one new word. However, no one says that they
represent figurative uses of language. For as long as these names are used solely
in a construct phrase, it is more fitting not to consider them figurative uses of a

language.

Mention has been made of those who distinguish between literal and figurative
usages by saying that in literal usage, the meaning is conveyed without the aid of
a surrounding context; whereas in figurative usage, the meaning 1s understood only
through the surrounding context. Or they may say that a literal usage involves the
use of a word in an absolute, unrestricted sense; whereas a figurative usage
conveys the intended meaning only through restrictions on the word. Or, some say
that the literal meaning is that which springs to mind when a word is used in an
absolute sense; whereas the figurative meaning does not readily come to mind
when the word is employed in this manner. Still another might say that figurative
meaning may legitimately be denied, whereas literal meaning may not.

In response, one might just ask: What is meant by a word’s being accompanied by,
or stripped of, a surrounding context? If what is meant by “context” is the
surrounding words—as, for example, when a noun is used together with a
construct phrase or is accompanied by a definite article, or is restricted by virtue
112 CHAPTER EIGHT

of its being a subject or object of a verb, or the subject or predicate of a nominal
sentence—then there is virtually no noun in connected speech that is not
conditioned by a context. The same applies to verbs; for if one means by its being
conditioned by a context that it must have a subject, or that it may be conditioned
by a direct object, or adverbs describing time, place, purpose, or compliment
objects of accompaniment and circumstance, then a verb is never used in an
absolute manner. In the case of particles, the same principles apply even more
forcefully, since a particle is used precisely because of the meaning of some other
word in the utterance. Hence, generally speaking, there is no noun, verb, or
particle in any complete utterance that is used without some restrictions that
preclude its being understood in an absolute sense. Hence, if the context is what
prevents a word from being understood in an absolute, unrestricted sense, then
there is no word whatsoever in the language that people speak that is free from all
restrictions. This is true whether the Arabic sentence in question is nominal or
verbal. Therefore, both in Arabic and other languages, the single word has always
been used within a conditioned context, namely, the complete sentence, be it a
nominal, verbal, or exclamatory sentence—that is, if the vocative sentence is to
be considered a third category.

As for the abstract noun, verb, or particle that occurs because of a meaning that is
neither a noun nor a verb, this has never been called a word in the speech of the
Arabs; rather, calling this a kalimah, word, is simply a grammatical term. For
example, one category of words has been labeled fi‘l, verb, which they [the
grammarians] divided into past tense verbs, present tense verbs, and commands.
However, Arabic speakers never placed such labels on words; rather, such
appellations were agreed upon by grammarians, who named a given type of word
on the basis of the meaning it conveyed. A word expressing the idea of a fi‘l,
action, occurring in the past was called a fi‘l madin, past tense verb, and so it was
for other types of words. Whenever the term kalimah, word, appears in the Qur’an
or the hadiths—or for that matter in any of the Arabs’ speech, be it poetry or
prose~—-what is intended is the meaningful linguistic unit referred to by
grammarians as the complete sentence. An example may be seen in the following
Qur’anic verses. Allah says: “And to warn those who say ‘Allah has begotten a
son.’ No knowledge have they of such a thing nor had their fathers. Mighty is the
word that comes out of their mouths. They utter nothing but a lie” (18:45); and
“., . And may the word of those who disbelieve the lowermost, while it was the
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 113

Word of Allah that became the uppermost . . .” (9:40); and “. . . Come to a word
that is just between us and you . . .” (3:64); and “And he made it a Word lasting
among his offspring . . .” (43:28); and“... And made them stick to the word of
piety and they were well entitled to it and worthy of it... .” (48:26); and the saying
of the Prophet (pbuh): “The most truthful word ever uttered by a poet is that of
Labid, who said: ‘Indeed, everything apart from Allah is falsehood and futility.’”
The Prophet also said: “There are two words that are light on the tongue but
weighty in the balance, and precious to the Most Merciful One: Praise be to Allah
and Praise be to Allah Almighty!” He also said: “A man who speaks a word
pleasing to Allah does not suspect where his word will lead him, but through it
Allah shall decree His favor toward him until the Day of Resurrection. A man who
speaks a word evoking Allah’s displeasure likewise does not suspect where his
word will lead him, but through it Allah shall decree His wrath against him until
the Day of Resurrection.” Similarly he states: “I have uttered four words after you
which, were they weighed against what I have said from today onward, would be
ranked as follows: Praise be to Allah for the number of His creatures, praise be to
Allah for the weightiness of His throne, praise be to Allah for His soul’s good
pleasure, praise be to Allah for the ink in which His words are inscribed!” Thus,
if every noun, verb, and particle found in the language occurs with some sort of
restriction, then it is not permissible to say of the term ‘literal’ that it refers to the
meaning conveyed by a word that is used in an absolute sense, stripped of all
surrounding context.

If someone were to say that he was speaking of some contexts and not others, then
one would reply by asking him to specify the distinction between those contexts
that accompany a literal usage, and those that accompany a figurative usage.
However, he would not be able to provide any sort of sound, reasonable division
between these two alleged contexts. Evidence for what is said may be seen in the
fact that people disagree concerning something with general meaning that is then
used with a more specific meaning. Is its use then literal or figurative? Likewise
in the case of the words lafz al-’amr, command, if they are used to mean al-nadb,
mandate or commissioning, is this an example of literal or figurative meaning?
Concerning this question two opinions have been held by most sects: the followers
of Ahmad (Ibn Hanbal) hold two different views, as do the followers of al-Shafi‘t
and Malik.
114 CHAPTER EIGHT

There are those who believe that this dispute has to do with contiguous
specification, such as that found in the use of adjectives, conditionals, and words
expressing purpose and apposition. Concerning this someone has related the views
of those who make a distinction. For example, a group of scholars who have
composed works on the principles of Islamic jurisprudence. However, this is a
view that no one is known to have taken; that is, no one is known to have
considered a general word that has been conditioned with adjectives, purposes,
and conditions to be figurative. The person relating this view believed that it
applied to contigupis specification, whereas thinkers, such as those mentioned
above, were only dealing with a general word made more specific through a
noncontiguous word or phrase. In the case of a contiguous word or phrase,
however, they do not refer at all to a general word made specific, for the contiguity
prevents it from being general to begin with. This is a view shared by many
religious scholars; moreover, it is the correct view. It cannot be said that what has
been restricted by a condition or an adjective is included within general terms that
have been rendered specific. Rather, thus when it is conditioned, it is said to be a
contiguous specification, which is not included within absolute specification.

In general it may be said that if the above situation is an example of usage, then
the qualification of a verb by a direct object, or by an adverb of place, time, or
manner will be considered to have figurative meaning as well, as would anything,
for that matter, that was conditioned in any way. In this case, however, virtually
all speech would have to be considered figurative. And if this were the case, what
room would be left for literal meaning?

One might claim that a distinction is to be made between contiguous and
noncontiguous contexts such that a word accompanied by a contiguous context has
a literal meaning, whereas a word accompanied by a noncontiguous context is
figurative. To such a person one might reply: By “contiguous” do you mean that
which is contained in the word itself, or what was in existence at the time it was
spoken? If by it you mean what is contained within the word itself, then what is
known about the state of the speaker or the listener must then be considered the
noncontiguous context. For example, the definite article would be used with those
things that are known to both the speaker and the listener, as with the Prophet
(pbuh) because he is known to Muslims as the Messenger of Allah, and we say al-
Siddiq, the Truthful One, to refer to the Caliph Abu Bakr. And if someone said to
his friend: “Go to the Amir, the Judge, or the Governor,” he would use the definite
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 115

article to indicate that both he and his friend are familiar with the person to whom
reference is being made. Moreover, this is said to be an example of figurative
speech. Likewise, a pronoun is used to refer back to a known entity that is not
mentioned, as, for example, when Allah says: “Indeed We have revealed It [the
Qur’an]...” (98:1) and “. . . until it [the sun] was hidden in the veil [of the night]”
(38:32). But no one claims that these are examples of figurative speech. Moreover,
if one says of a valiant person: “This lion did such and such today,” or to a dull-
witted person: “This donkey said such and such today,” or of a learned or a
generous individual: “This sea [of knowledge] expounded on such and such a
topic today,” then in all such cases what we have is literal usage, since the word
is accompanied by a garinah lafziyyah, verbal context, such that there remains no
possibility of it being figurative.

Someone might say that contiguous contexts are more general or comprehensive
than this, including within them the situation existing at the time a statement was
made. To this one might reply: This view places you in an even more difficult
position than before. For anyone who speaks figuratively must accompany what
he says with the surrounding situation that clarifies what he means to say, since
otherwise it would not be possible to speak figuratively.

Someone might say: I deem it permissible to delay the elucidation [of the intended
meaning] until such time as this is needed. To this one might reply that most
people do not deem it permissible for someone to utter a word that conveys a
particular meaning when he does not intend that meaning, unless his intent is
obvious. However, they do deem it acceptable for one to delay the elucidation of
the meaning that was not conveyed by the word, such as mujmalat, general
concepts. We also declare that if you permit the declaration [of the intended
meaning} to be delayed, then this elucidation may occur within a complete
sentence, through acts of the Messenger [of Allah] or in some other way. Thus,
this delayed clarification would stand alone, without needing to be accompanied
by anything else. Hence, if you consider this to be figurative speech, then that
which requires elucidation in order to become effective, as it were, must also
necessarily be figurative. Allah says: “Take sadaqah, a/ms, from their wealth in
order to purify and sanctify them with it...” (9:103).

Someone might say: Now, even supposing such a thing to be logically possible,
it is nevertheless not found in Islamic law and everything that has been mentioned
116 CHAPTER EIGHT

with regard to it is false. For there are those who claim that in the case of an
expression whose actual meaning is not apparent on the surface, the elucidation
of the actual meaning may be delayed. Such people support their position by
referring to Allah saying: “. . . Allah commands that you sacrifice a cow .. .”
(2:67). They claim that the cow mentioned in this verse was actually a specific
cow, though its specification was not revealed until later. However, this is contrary
to what has been reported in detail on the authority of the pious ancestors, such as
the Companions and their Successors, to the effect that they commanded the
people to slaughter a baqarah mutlaqah, unspecified cow. And if they had taken
one of their cows and slaughtered it, then they would have been rewarded for their
action. But instead they were steadfast with their opinion, so Allah was severe
with them. The reference made in the verse is indefinite, since the statement has
no restrictions placed upon it. Moreover, the Qur’anic context indicates that Allah
condemns them for asking what particular cow was meant, whereas if what was
commanded had been specified, they would not have been considered
blameworthy. Moreover, such a thing never happened before with respect to the
commands of Allah or His Messenger. That is, it had never happened that Allah
commanded His servants to do a specific thing, then proceeded to render the
command incomprehensible to them time and time again rather than mentioning,
from the beginning, those distinguishing features by which it could be identified.
It has been argued that Allah delays the clarification of terms such as ‘prayer,’
‘zakah’ and ‘pilgrimage,’ and that such terms had meanings in the common
language that differed from those found in Islamic law. However, this claim is
incorrect; for Allah only commands the people to perform ritual prayers after they
are familiar with what they mean, and the same applies to zakah and pilgrimage.
Allah never delays the elucidation of any of the commands He gives to believers.
This entire issue has been treated elsewhere as well.

As for the claim that literal meaning is that which first springs to mind when a
term is used in an absolute sense, it is utterly groundless. It is claimed that if a
word is used only in a conditioned sense, then what first comes to mind in every
situation in which it is used is whatever meaning is indicated in that particular
situation. If, on the other hand, the term is said to be used in an absolute manner,
it must be remembered that no word is ever used in people’s speech in an entirely
absolute way; hence, in such a case it makes no sense even to ask whether
something comes readily to mind or not.
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 117

It also must be asked: What “mind” is being referred to here? What first springs
to the mind of the Arab who understands the Arabic language will not be the same
thing that first comes to mind of the Nabatean'® who has come to use certain
[Arabic] words to convey meanings they did not originally bear. And herein lies
an error that has been made by many people. For they have grown accustomed to
words being used to convey certain meanings, whether in the speech of the
common people among whom they live or that of the learned. If they then hear
these same words being used in the Qur’an or the hadiths, they assume that the
words are being used to convey the same meanings to which they have grown
accustomed, and they interpret the words of Allah and His Messenger in
accordance with their knowledge of the Nabatean language [dialect] and their
present customs. And this is among the things that have introduced error into
various sects. Hence, we are duty bound to be familiar with the language, customs,
and conventions that were set down in the Qur’an and in the Sunnah [words and
deeds] of the Prophet. We also need to know how the Companions understood
such terms when they were used by the Prophet. For it was through their language,
customs, and conventions that they were spoken to by Allah and His
Messenger—not through realities that came into existence at a later time.

Moreover, as we have shown elsewhere, there is no part of the Qur’an or the
hadith that Allah and His Messenger have not made clear to their hearers and
readers such that they would need some other source of information to elucidate
their meanings. It has also become clear that what some people speak of as a word
that is used in an absolute sense, without any restrictions, does not exist in outward
speech, but only in the mind of the speaker or the hearer, just as what logicians
refer to as an abstract concept free of all restrictions has no existence outside the

'€ Historically the Nabatean people lived and ruled in Petra until approximately 105 A.D. There were
two major branches of Nabateans, the Nabat of al-Sham (Syria) and the Nabat of al-‘fraq. The
Nabateans were known to be people of agriculture and are credited with developing the Arabic writing
system that the Arabs inherited and developed further. Later on, the term “Nabatean” applied to mixed
people who spoke a vernacular form of Arabic that did not adhere to the strict rules of literary Arabic.
This is the dialect that Ibn Taymiyyah refers to as al-Lughah al-Nabatiyyah, the Nabati language or
dialect. A form of poetry that does not adhere to the strict rules of literary Arabic, known as al-Shi‘r
al-Nabati, was found primarily in Arabia and is still popular today. For more information see The Rise
of the North Arabic Script and its Kur’anic Development, With a Full Description of the Kur’an
Manuscripts in the Oriental Institute by Nabia Abbott, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1938;
“Nabat” by D. F. Graf and T. Fahd and; “Nabati by P. G. Emery. ‏اط‎ 2, vol. 7, Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1992,

pp. 831-38.
118 CHAPTER EIGHT

human mind. Likewise it may be said that the division of knowledge into
tasawwur, imagination, and tasdiq, assent, where imagination is the naive
conceptualization of meaning free from all restrictions, does not exist. Nor do the
simple, absolute basa’t, elements, that go to make up classes and categories. As
for their claim that at the foundation of being there must necessarily be an absolute
existence unrestricted by any affirmed matter, it is false. For such abstract,
absolute properties must be known to the person who looks into these sciences,
and because of the supposition that they in fact exist, some sects have gone astray
into rational and perceptual concepts. Rather, if scholars of Islam refer to
“absolute” and “conditioned” entities, they mean that a particular entity either is
or is not conditioned by a particular restriction. For example, they say that the
word “neck” is used in an absolute sense in the “verse of atonement through an
oath” but conditioned in the “verse of killing.” That is, it is free of the restriction
that would be placed on it by belief. For otherwise the verse would have read “. . .
freeing of a neck . . .” (4:92), thereby being described as a single neck that exists
and that can be set at liberty. As for those who argue for the possibility of an
utterly absolute entity, they say that such an entity is neither described as being
one or many, as existing or as not existing, nor as possessing any other qualities.
Rather, it is considered to be reality in and of itself. This notion is mentioned by
al-Razi, who adopted it from Ibn Sina and other would-be philosophers. Elsewhere
we have treated the subjects of absolute and conditioned uses of language,
universals and particulars, and so on, and have elucidated the errors of thinkers
such as those mentioned above.

What is meant here is the use of a word that is free from all restrictions, which, as
we have asserted above, does not exist. Hence, no one utters any type of word but
that it is conditioned in some manner and integrally connected with other words
in the utterance, such that these restrictions render it impossible for one to
understand or use the word in utter isolation. It has also become clear that
someone who distinguishes between literal and figurative uses of language has no
reasonable basis for such a distinction. It follows likewise that there is no word in
the Qur’an or the Sunnah whose meaning is not elucidated by some sort of
restriction, nor do these books contain any words that are used figuratively.
Rather, they are to be understood in their entirety as bearing literal meaning. Thus,
when many later Muslim thinkers claimed that the Qur’an contained figurative
speech and cited Qur’anic verses to support their claim, their opponents were able
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 119

to refute their claims employing the very same verses. One of the best-known
verses cited is: “... A wall on the point of falling down...” (18:77). Commenting
on this verse they said: A wall is not a living being, and therefore cannot be
possessed of a will; therefore, the use of the word iradah, wi//, here in reference
to the condition of the wall must be figurative. To this we would reply that the
word iradah, will, has been used to refer to the kind of propensity that is
accompanied by awareness and feeling, namely, the propensity or inclination of
a living entity; but it has also been used to describe propensities that involve no
feeling or consciousness, namely, those of an inanimate object. This is a well-
known and widespread use of language. One might say, for example, ‘This roof
wants to fall down;’ ‘This ground needs to be plowed up;’ ‘This plant needs to be
watered,’ ‘This fruit is ready to be picked;’ ‘This robe needs to be washed;’ and
the like.

If a word is used to convey two or more meanings, then it will either be considered
literal with respect to one of the two meanings and figurative with respect to the
other, or each of them may be considered literal with respect to the element that
is specific to it alone. In the latter case we have two meanings that are expressed
by a single word. Or one might say that each use of the word is literal with respect
to the element that is common to both meanings. These are nouns that share some
common universal property, and nouns that refer to a general class or category.
The first must be considered figurative, while the second must be considered to
participate in a common universal meaning, with both of them differing from the
original usage or meaning such that they both are seen as sharing in a common
universal. On this basis one may recognize the common basis of all nouns
describing classes or categories. Otherwise, if someone said that when the word
“will” is used to refer to the propensity of an inanimate object, it is used literally,
whereas if it refers to the propensity of a living being, it is used figuratively, then
there would be no actual distinction between the two usages apart from the fact
that the word “will” is used more frequently to refer to the inclinations of living
creatures. It may be used in a conditioned manner, which makes clear that what
is intended is a reference to the propensity of a living creature, while here it has
been used with a restriction, which makes it clear that it refers to the inclination
of an inanimate object. The common element among the entities referred to by
nouns describing classes or categories is a comprehensive, universal concept that
has no existence apart from the mind. It is this same universal concept that is the
120 CHAPTER EIGHT

source of the divisions among classes of things. However, this general, universal
conception was something that philologists felt no need to express, since they only
concern themselves with entities that have external existence. As for that which
normally exists in the heart and which generally has no external existence unless
it is found in conjunction with something else, it does not exist abstracted in the
mind; that is, one only conceives of it in association with some other entity. This
is to be contrasted with words such as “man” or “mare,” which refer to entities that
have independent existence outside the mind and that, for this reason, people have
grown accustomed to conceptualizing without necessarily associating them with
some other entity. For example, the realities referred to by terms such as ‘will,’
‘knowledge,’ ‘ability,’ or ‘general, absolute existence’ do not exist in isolation in
the mind. For such entities have no independent referents; the word “will,” for
example, is never used without being associated in some way with a being that
does the willing, just as the word “knowledge” is used only in association with
some being who does the knowing, and the word “ability” is found only in
association with some entity which is ‘able’. The same is true of all nonessential
properties that must necessarily be associated with the entity in which and for
which no words exist in the language which would allow them to be spoken of
otherwise.

For in no language will you find that words such as ‘blackness,’ ‘whiteness,’
‘tallness,’ or ‘shortness’ are used without being associated in some manner with
actual entities that are black, white, tall, short, and the like. Such words occur free
from any restriction only in the writings of those who classify language and its
components, since they have understood what philologists mean by al-qadr al-
mushtarak, the common element, among entities in a given class. Allah says: “. . .
So Allah made it taste the garment of hunger and fear . . .” (16:112). There are
those who say that the word al-dhawg, taste, is literal when it refers to tasting with
the mouth, and that the word libas, garment, is literal when it refers to what is
worn on the body; as for the usages of these words in the verse quoted above, they
are both figurative. But this is not the case. Al-Khalil [Ibn Ahmad al-Farahidi]
once said that al-dhawag, taste, in the Arabic language refers to the existence of
something’s ta‘m, taste, which is indicated by the ways in which the word is used.
Allah says: “And indeed We will make them taste the lighter punishment before
the greater punishment . . .” (32:21); and “Taste this! Indeed, you are truly the
mighty, the generous” (44:49); and “So that it tasted the ill effects of its conduct
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 121

...” (65:9); and “. . . Taste the punishment for rejecting belief” (3:106); “So you
taste My punishment and My warning” (54:39); and “They will not taste therein
death except the first death . . .” (44:56); and “They will not taste therein neither
coolness nor [any] drink; except boiling water and a paralyzing cold” (78:24-25).
Moreover, the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Whoever accepts Allah as his Lord, Islam as
his religion and Muhammad as his Messenger shall know the dhaqa ta‘m al-Iman,
taste of belief.” And in one supplication the person praying says to Allah, “allow
us to taste the coolness of your pardon and the sweetness of your forgiveness!”

Hence, the word “taste” may be used to describe whatever one feels, whether it be
pleasurable or painful, and whoever claims that this term pertains only to what is
tasted in the mouth has made an arbitrary judgement in this regard. Rather, the use
of the word “taste” to refer specifically to tasting with the mouth is always
conditioned in such a way as to make clear that what is being spoken of is tasting
with the mouth in particular, as when one says: “I tasted the food,” or “I tasted this
drink.” At the same time, this word may also be used to sense what someone
experiences inwardly or outwardly; this even includes the temperature of
something one drinks. If, for example, a beverage were cold or hot one could say
that someone had “tasted” (i.e., felt) its hotness or coldness,

The word libas, garment, is used to refer to anything that covers a person or with
which he clothes himself. Allah says: ‘““And We have made the night as a libas,
covering” (78:10); and“... But the libas, covering, of righteousness, that is best
... (7:26); and“... They are libas, covering, for you and you are libas, covering,
for them...” (2:187). Or one might say that someone had labisa 21-2002 bil-batil,
clothed truth with falsehood, if he had confused one with the other until truth was
“covered” or concealed and therefore unrecognizable. Or hunger may be so severe
that its pain envelops the entire person, body and soul. Fear can likewise “clothe”
(1.€e., envelop) the entire body. Hence if one were to say that Allah causes someone
to “taste” hunger and fear, this would not mean that hunger and fear had enveloped
all parts of the hungry person. However, this would not be the case if one spoke
of “the garment of hunger and fear,” which implies a more comprehensive effect
on the individual. And if someone said: “He clothed them,” there would be
nothing in this phrase to indicate that they had “tasted” anything painful to them
except in the mind, insofar as it is known that the fearful, hungry person
experiences pain. This is in contrast to the expression “tasting hunger and fear,”
since this phrase points to the experience of what is painful. And if the word is
122 CHAPTER EIGHT

used in conjunction with something pleasurable, it likewise indicates the
experience of what is pleasurable. As the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Whoever accepts
Allah as his Lord, Islam as his religion, and Muhammad (pbuh) as his Prophet
shall know the taste of belief.”

Someone might ask: Why has not the bliss of Paradise been described by the use
of the word “taste”? The reason for this 1s that the word “taste” indicates the type
of sensation experienced. One might say, for example, “he tasted the food,” of
someone who had experienced the taste of the food even though he had not
necessarily eaten it. Those in Paradise, by contrast, experience a state of
blessedness from which nothing is lacking, and which is not limited to tasting. In
fact, the word “taste” has been negated both with respect to those in Hell and those
in Paradise. It is said of those, “ Nothing cool shall they taste therein, nor any
drink” (78:24); that is, they are not given even a taste of these things. As for those
in Paradise, it is said of them: “They will not taste therein death except the first
death .. .” (44:56).

Some have claimed that the attribution of such things as al-makr, craftiness or
deception, al-istihza’, derision, and al-sukhriyyah, scorn, to Allah in the Qur’an
is an example of the use of figurative language. However, this is not the case. In
fact, 1f the attitudes referred to by such words are directed toward someone who
does not deserve punishment, it is an injustice to him. If, on the other hand, they
are directed against someone as a punishment for similar acts or attitudes on his
part, then they are just and fair. Allah says: “. .. Thus did We contrive for Joseph
...” (12:76); that is, Allah plotted against him as his brothers had done when his
father said to him: “. . . Tell not your brothers of your vision lest they plot a plot
against you...” (12:5). Allah also says: “. . . Lo! they plot a plot [against you, Oh,
Muhammad]; And I plot a plot [against them]” (86:15—16); and “So they plotted
a plot, and We plotted a plot, while they perceived not; then see how was the end
of their plot! . . .” (27:50—51); and “Those who defame such of the believers who
give charity voluntarily, as well as those who give according to their means, so
they mock at them. Allah will throw back their mockery on them. . .” (9:79).
Hence, Allah’s “derision” of them deserves this very name. It has been related on
the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that: “A gate into Paradise opens up before those who
are in the fires of Hell. So they go scurrying toward it, only to have it close in their
faces. Then another gate opens for them; once again they go rushing toward it, but
it closes, and the believers laugh at them in derision.” Similarly Allah says: “But .
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 123

this Day those who believe will laugh at the unbelievers; on high thrones looking
[at all things]. Are not the unbelievers paid for what they used to do?” (83:34-36).

It has been related on the authority of Hassan al-Basri that: “On the Day of
Resurrection the fire will die down for them just as al-ihalah, the hot sun,'’ dies
down, so they walk along until Allah causes the earth to swallow them up.” On the
authority of Muqatil we read that: “A wall shall be built between them in which
there is a gate. Inside the gate there is mercy, while on the outside there is torment
and punishment. They remain in the darkness, then someone says to them, “Turn
back behind you, and seek light.’ Some have said that Allah’s mockery of them
is His way of seeking to win them over. Others have said that this is a description
of how their mockery [of Allah] has caused them to fall, and how their deception
and cunning has now come back on their own heads. Others have interpreted it to
mean that the appearance of things in this world is the opposite of what has been
concealed in the life to come. Still others have said that it refers to the way Allah
has caused them to remain ignorant and to fall into error in the things they have
done. All these interpretations are valid, and in all of them the derision they suffer
is spoken of literally.’

A well-known example cited by those who affirm that figurative language is used
in the Qur’4n is the verse that reads: “And ask the village . . .” (12:82). It has been
said that what is meant here by garyah, village, is its inhabitants. The word
“village” is assumed to be occurring in the idafah, annexation, ah] al-qaryah, the
people of the village. The first term [ahl] of the idafah is omitted, and the second

"7 Al-ihalah signifies, among the pre-Islamic Arabs, the sun goddess that they worship or the great
serpent. It also signifies the sun or the hot sun. This word is derived from the verb ’alaha, he
worshiped. See E. Lane, An Arabic-English Lexicon, vol. 1, pp. 82-83, and Ibn Manzur, Lisan al-
‘Arab, vol. 12, pp. 467-71.

'® The following footnote occurs in the MI.2 edition (p. 107), upon which the Indian edition of Kitab al-
Iman is based. On the margin of the Indian version the following text reads: According to some
traditions which have come down to us, Allah orders that some people be brought to Paradise. Then
when they have seen no glory and honor enjoyed by those who dwell there, Allah says to His Angels:
“Send them away. They shail enjoy no part of it.” Those being sent away then ask Allah: “Oh Lord,
if you had sent us to Hell before showing us what you have shown us, our torment would have been
mitigated.” Allah says: “I did this because [ wanted you to encounter other people with an attitude of
humility. However, when you were alone, you tried to compete with Me by committing glorious feats,
venerating people rather than venerating Me, and giving glory and praise to people rather than to Me.
So today I will give you a taste of my grievous torment and deprive you of my generous reward.” This
tradition was reported by Ibn Abi al-Dunya and others.
124 CHAPTER EIGHT

term [al-qaryah] assumes the meaning of the whole phrase, as in the above verse.
To this one might reply that the words “village,” “city,” “river,” “drainage pipe,”
and so on, contain reference both to a condition and a place in a single word.
Hence, in a given use of the word, reference might be to the al-hal, condition,
namely, the inhabitants or the al-mahall, place. Likewise, in the case of the word
for “river” or “canal,” one might say: hafrtu al-nahr, / dug the canal, referring to
the place where the water flows, or jara al-nahr, the canal flowed, referring to the
water in it. If one says: I laid the drainage pipe, wad‘tu al-mizab reference is made
to the location of the pipe, whereas if one says: the drainage pipe flowed, jara al-
mizab, reference is made to the water it contains. These examples resemble the
usage of the word village, al-garyah, in the verse mentioned above. Allah says:
“Allah sets forth an example of a village that dwells secure and content...”
(16:112); and “How many a village have We destroyed! Our punishment came
upon them at night or while they slept for their afternoon rest. When our
punishment took them no cry did they utter but this: ‘Indeed we did wrong’”
(7:45); and “Did the people of the villages then feel secure against the coming of
Our punishment by the night while they are asleep?” (7:97), thus referring to the
inhabitants of the villages with simply the word “villages.” Allah also says: “And
how many a village, stronger than your village [Makkah] [Oh, Muhammad] which
has driven you out, have We destroyed and there was no help for them” (47:13);
and “And these villages We have destroyed when they did wrong and We
appointed a fixed time for their destruction” (18:59); and “Or the like of him who
passed by a village all in ruins to its roots . . .” (2:259), referring not to the
inhabitants, but to the place. However it must also be noted that this place was
once inhabited, and a place is not called a village unless it was built for the
purpose of being dwelt in. The word garyah, village, is derived from the noun qari,
which means collecting. Hence one might say: qaraytu al-ma’a fil-hawd, /
collected water in the basin.

A counterpart to this can be seen in the word insan, person, which includes within
it references to both the body and the soul, while interpretation of the word’s
meaning sometimes points to one aspect and sometimes to the other. Thus, if a
village’s inhabitants are subjected to torment, the village itself may be said to have
been destroyed, just as if a village is destroyed, it brings great torment upon its
inhabitants. Whatever evil befalls one of them likewise befalls the other, and this
is equally true with respect to the body and the soul. Thus, in the verses that
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 125

contain the clauses “And ask the village . . .” (12:82) and “A village which was
secure...” (16:112), the word “village” refers to its inhabitants without assuming
that any words have been omitted or implied. This interpretation, however, is
based on the assumption that language includes figurative usages, of which there
are none in the Qur’an. In fact, the division of languages into literal and figurative
usages is a later innovation that was never advocated by the pious ancestors. As
for those who came later, they took two positions on the issue. The dispute over
this question is not merely a disagreement over words; rather, it may be said that
this very division is invalid, and that there is no way to distinguish between one
and the other. All distinctions that have been cited in this regard have been shown
to be false, and whenever anyone mentions a particular distinction, it is nullified
by the next person. The situation here is similar to that of the logicians who claim
that the permanent qualities that inhere in certain entities may be classified as
follows: those that are internal to the entity’s essence, which is stable and
unchanging from without; those that are external to the entity and yet a permanent
part of its essence; and permanent qualities that are necessary to the entity’s
existence. They thus mentioned three distinctions, all of which are false because
the entire division is baseless and has nothing to do with the truth. What they have
considered to be the internal qualities can be considered external, and vice-versa,
as we have demonstrated elsewhere.

We have already demonstrated the falsehood of the view that if a word conveys
its meaning without the aid of a surrounding context, it is to be considered a literal
usage, whereas if its meaning is only conveyed with the aid of such a context, it
is to be considered figurative. For there are no words that convey their meanings
in isolation from surrounding contexts, nor are there any words that require all
sorts of contexts without distinction. The most widely used examples to
demonstrate the existence of figurative language are the words asad, /ion, himar,
donkey, and bahr, sea, and the like to describe, in a metaphoric manner, the valiant
person, the dull-witted person, and a liberal, generous person, respectively. But
such words are only used in a conditioned manner—that is, in conjunction with
other words that qualify their meanings when they are used in a literal sense. This
may also be seen in what Abu Bakr al-Siddiq said about Abu Qatadah when
someone else wanted a slain man to be despoiled: “A lion of Allah who fights on
behalf of Allah and His Messenger will give you his spoils.” By saying: “a lion of
Allah who fights on behalf of Allah and His Messenger,” he is describing him as
126 CHAPTER EIGHT

being strong enough to engage in jihad, to strive in the Cause of Allah, on
[Allah’s] behalf, and he has referred to him in such a specific manner that there
could be no ambiguity. Similarly, the Prophet (pbuh) once said: “Khalid is a sword
of Allah, which Allah has unsheathed against the polytheists.”

Someone might say that verbal contexts are established by linguistic convention,
and the manner in which they convey their meanings is literal, where adverbial
[circumstantial] contexts are figurative. To this one might reply that a word is only
used in such a way that it is conditioned by verbal contexts. However, the
circumstance that reflects the state of both the speaker and the listener must be
taken into consideration in all speech. For if the speaker is known, then the listener
will derive from the things he says meanings that would not be apparent if the
speaker were not known. For example, the listener who knows a person’s
"customary manner of speaking will be better able to interpret what the speaker
means. This is especially so since a given word conveys its meaning in a way that
is Conscious, intentional, and voluntary. For the speaker intends for a given word
to convey a particular meaning. And if a speaker customarily employs a specific
word to express a specific meaning, then this forms part of his personal
“language.” For this reason, whoever has paid careful attention to the words of the
Prophet and what he meant by them will have come to know his customary
manner of speaking, and will be able to discern more of what the Prophet intended
to say than would someone else.

Therefore, if a word from the Qur’an or a hadith is mentioned, one must
deliberately call to mind counterparts to this particular word and what Allah and
His Messenger meant by them. In this way the listener or reader may become
familiar with the language peculiar to the Qur’an and the hadith, and the particular
manner in which Allah and His Messenger address Allah’s servants. Furthermore,
if the same word also has numerous parallels in the speech of others, then one can
conclude that a given manner of expression is common to both the Prophet (pbuh)
and his people. At the same time, however, one must not interpret the Prophet’s
words in light of customs or ways of speaking that came into existence only after
the time of the Prophet and his Companions; this is an error into which many
people have fallen. Such people may not realize that a given usage or manner of
speaking was nonexistent during the time of the Prophet. And while it is
permissible to employ the principle of al-qiyas, analogy, in the use of language,
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 127

it is not permitted when one seeks to infer or derive the meanings of words. For
example, it may be permissible for someone to use a given word to convey a
meaning that is comparable or similar to the meaning that the word has been used
to convey before. One may do so since the word’s prior meaning has become
clear, notwithstanding the fact that this meaning may be subject to some dispute.
However, it is not permissible for one to take up the use of words that are known
to have been used to express certain meanings, then invest them with meanings
that differ from those, saying that those who used these words before must have
intended such and such a meaning by analogy with the meaning that he has now
introduced. To so do is considered an illegitimate alteration and distortion of the
language. So if someone were to say: “The neighbor is the most deserving
because of his nearness,” then the word jar, neighbor, here refers in fact to a
neighbor, not to a sharik, partner, since the latter meaning of the word was not
recognized in the language at that time. At the same time, there is nothing in the
word that necessitates that he merits the right of preemption; rather, it indicates
that it is more fitting to sell to him. If one takes the word khamr, wine, for
example, it has been established through numerous texts and reliable transmissions
of accounts that this word was originally used to refer to any muskkir, intoxicating
beverage. Hence, the beverage we now know as nabith, wine, was not called
‘khamr’ [wine or any kind of spirits] by analogy. Similarly, the habbash,
graverobber, used to be referred to merely as a sariq, thief. As ‘A’ ishah once said:
‘He who robs our dead is like the one who robs our living.” As for the word 1a’t,
pederast, it was considered more offensive to them than one who commits
fornication with a woman. And in interpreting the Qur’an and the hadith, it is
imperative that one be familiar with those words that express the intent of Allah
and His Messenger and know how to understand their words. For knowledge of
the Arabic language with which we have been addressed, as well of the way in
which words express meanings, can aid us in understanding the intent behind the
words of Allah and the Prophet and can also aid us in knowing the connotation of
the words and their meanings. For the majority of the errors into which heretical
sects have fallen may be traced back to this area. Such sects began interpreting the
words of Allah and His Messenger to mean what they themselves claimed to be
their meanings, but the matter cannot be what they wished, labeling one phrase as
literal and another as figurative when in fact, their entire interpretation was
mistaken. An example of such an error is the way in which the Murji’ites took the
128 CHAPTER EIGHT

word Iman, belief, to be literal when it refers to mere tasdiq, assent, while
claiming that it is used figuratively when it includes works.

Someone might have said [to the Murji’ites] that if the division of speech into
literal and figurative is not valid, then there is no basis for their interpretation of
belief, whereas if it is a valid distinction, then it is more harmful to them than it
is helpful. For a word that is used literally is said to convey its meaning when
employed without any restrictions or surrounding context; whereas a word used
figuratively is said to convey its meaning only with the aid of an accompanying
context. Moreover, it has become clear that the word ‘belief,’ when used in an
absolute sense in the Qur’an and in the Sunnah, includes works, and that works are
excluded from it only when it is used in a conditioned sense. This in turn indicates
the truth of the Prophet’s saying: “Belief consists of seventy-odd branches.”

As for the hadith of the Angel Gabriel, if what he meant by ‘belief’ was a
condition that is associated with Islam, then so be it. For this is indubitably the
meaning intended by the Prophet (pbuh). Likewise when he mentioned doing
ihsan, perfection of (religion), he was referring to good works along with belief
and Islam. He did not intend to say that doing good can be divorced from belief
and Islam. And if it were assumed that what was meant by the word “belief” was
mere assent, then this would require it to be accompanied by a context, in which
case it would have to be considered figurative. This is something we affirm by
necessity, and which admits of no dispute once one has contemplated the Qur’an
and the hadith. Such, however, is not the case concerning the claim that the word
“belief” in the Arabic language is a synonym for mere tasdiq, assent, or the claim
that the Prophet did not change or transmit the word [on someone else’s authority],
but rather meant to convey the same meaning that had been conveyed through it
by other speakers of the language without further specification or restriction. For
neither of the above claims can be affirmed with certainty. How could they be
when we have ascertained the invalidity of both of them?

Moreover, the word ‘belief’ implies works that believers are commanded to
perform, including prayer, fasting, giving zakah, and going on pilgrimage. The
word ‘belief’ implies within itself such activities as these just as much as the
words ‘prayer,’ ‘fasting,’ ‘giving zakah,’ and ‘pilgrimage’ do. This is true whether
one says that the Prophet passed down the use of these words from those who
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 129

came before him or that he intended to issue a judgment without using the name,
or that he used the names [of such activities], treating them in the same manner as
was customary, or that he used the names in a conditioned rather than an absolute
sense.

Someone might say that the effect of activities such as prayer and the pilgrimage
is nullified even if they are only partially neglected. This, however, is not true of
belief, since according to the Companions of the Prophet and other Orthodox
Muslims, belief is not nullified merely because one has sinned. To this one might
reply that by “nullification” one means that one’s religious obligation is not
entirely fulfilled, then likewise in the case of obligatory belief, if one neglects
some part of it, then he has not fully met his religious obligations. But if by
“nullification” one means the necessity of reperforming an action, then this cannot
be said to apply in an absolute manner. For within the pilgrimage, for example,
there are duties that, if neglected by the believer, are not to be repeated, but
instead are to be atoned for with blood. So also in the case of prayer, most Muslim
scholars hold that 1f one neglects some of one’s prayer duties, either deliberately
or inadvertently, then one is obliged to repeat them. That is, they are to be repeated
if this is possible, otherwise they remain as an unfulfilled obligation such as
attending public prayers each Friday [once the day has passed]. If, however, what
one means by “nullified” is that one will not be rewarded for what he has done,
then this is not the case. Rather, it has been made clear by the Prophet (pbuh), in
the hadith pertaining to one who has committed any sort of transgression with
regard to his prayer obligations, that if one does not complete his prayers, he will
still be rewarded for the portion he has performed. He will not be considered like
someone who has not prayed at all. There are several hadiths according to one’s
religious obligations on Resurrection Day will be brought to completion through
the supererogatory acts one has performed. Hence, if religious obligations that
have not been completed are rewarded on the basis of supererogatory acts, this
indicates that the portions of such obligations that one has completed are reckoned
in his favor. So also is the case of belief. If one neglects some aspect of it that he
was obligated to perform, be it a forbidden act of which he has repented or a duty
he has not performed and therefore not fulfilled his obligation with respect to it,
he is still rewarded for the part he has fulfilled, as is the case with all other
required acts of worship. Moreover, texts of [the Qur’an and the hadith} indicate
130 CHAPTER EIGHT

that whoever has in his heart an atom’s weight of belief shall be delivered from the
fires of Hell.

On this topic the Murji’ites have departed from what is clearly taught in the
Quran, the Sunnah, and the sayings of the Prophet’s Companions and their
Successors. Instead they rely on their own opinions and the interpretations, at
which they have arrived based on their understanding of language, which is the
same approach followed by heretical sects. For this reason the Imam Ahmad [Ibn
Hanbal] used to say: “Most errors that people commit have to do with allegorical
interpretations and the application of the principle of analogy.”

For this reason we find that the Mu‘tazilites, the Murji’ites, the Rafidites, and
other heretical sects interpreted the Qur’an on the basis of their own opinions,
what they themselves found to be reasonable, and conclusions that they reached
concerning language. Therefore you will find that they did not rely on the
traditions of the Prophet (pbuh), his Companions, their Successors, or Muslim
leaders. For neither did they depend on the Sunnah, nor on the consensus or
writings passed down by the pious ancestors. They relied on reason and language,
not on the well-known books of tafsir, interpretation, hadith, and the traditions of
early Muslims; they relied rather on books of literature and scholastic theology
that were the products of their own minds. This is what atheists themselves do;
they take what is found in books on philosophy, literature, and language, while not
paying the least attention to the Qur’an, the hadith, or the writings of the pious
ancestors. Such people shun the texts of the prophets since, in their view, these
add nothing to knowledge. Then they interpret the Qur’an on the basis of their
own opinion and understanding without reference to the traditions that have come
down from the Prophet (pbuh) and his Companions. And as we have mentioned,
the words of Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] and others have decried this approach,
considering it to be no different from that of innovators and heretical thinkers.

And if one thinks carefully about their arguments, one will find them to be claims
without any supporting evidence. Judge Abu Bakr al-Baqillani’® expressed his
agreement with the view of Jahm [Ibn Safwan] on the question of belief, thus

"9 Al-Baqillani, Abu Bakr Muhammad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ja‘far (338-403 A.H.), was a judge and a
famous Ash‘arite theologian. [A]-Zirikli, vol. 7, p. 46.]
LITERAL MEANING AND FIGURATIVE MEANING 131

following the example of Abu al-Hassan al-Ash‘ari and most of his followers. As
for Abu ‘Abbas al-Callowness, Abu ‘Ali al-Thagafi,” and Abu ‘Abd Allah Ibn
Mujahid,”! the teacher of Judge Abu Bakr and a follower of Abu al-Hassan, all of
them supported the doctrines of the pious ancestors. Ibn Kullab, al-Husayn [bn al-
Fadl al-Bajli,”’ and others like them used to say: “Belief is both tasdiq, assent, and
qawl, a saying,” which is in accordance with the views of Kufan jurisprudents
such as Hammad Ibn Abi Sulayman” and his followers, such as Abu Hanifah and
others.

20 ‘A |-Thagafi, Abu ‘Ali Muhammad Ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab (?-328 A.H.) was scholar of fiqh of the Shafi
school. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, pp. 124-25.]

2 Abu ‘Abd Allah Ibn Mujahid, Muhammad Ibn Ahmad (?-370 A.H.), was a jurist of the Ash‘arite
school and a student of al-Bagillani. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 125.]

22 Aj-Husayn Ibn al-Fadl al-Bajli (2-282 A.H.) was a scholar of hadith and wrote a commentary on the
Qur'an. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 125.]

23 Hammad Ibn Abi Sulayman, Abu Isma‘il (7-120 A.H.), was a scholar of hadith and narrated hadith
from Anas Ibn Malik. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 125.]
Chapter Nine

The Ash‘arites’ and Other Sects’ Opinions
of Iman and A Refutation by the Author

Abu al-Hassan al-Ash‘ari supported Jahm Ibn Safwan’s view of belief, although
he also supported the well-known view transmitted on the authority of the people
of the Sunnah, according to which if one states, that ana mu’min, / am a believer,
he must add the clause, in sha>a Allah, if Allah wills. This is because al-Ash‘ari
supported the doctrine of the people of the Sunnah in that he did not declare any
of the people of the Qiblah to be unbelievers or claim that they would remain
forever in Hell. He also believed that intercession could be made on their behalf.
Moreover, whenever a dispute over any matter arose between Ahl al-Hadith, the
People of Hadith, and others, al-Asha‘ri always supported the view held by the
People of Hadith. At the same time, however, he was not well versed in their
arguments, and for this reason he tended to support their views on the basis of
principles that he himself had adopted from others, the result of which was the
appearance of contradictions that were disavowed by parties on both sides of the
dispute. Something similar occurred with respect to the issue of belief, in which
he supported the view of Jahm Ibn Safwan while at the same time supporting the
position of istithan’, exception, when speaking of belief—that is, he added the
conditional clause, “if Allah wills” whenever describing oneself or anyone else as
having belief. On account of this he was opposed by many of his followers over
the issue of exception, and we shall mention below the arguments upon which he
based his view in this regard.'In his acceptance of Jahm’s view of belief, however,
he was supported by most of his followers. Those who were only familiar with
books presenting scholastic theology and who were not aware of the views of the |
pious ancestors and leaders of Orthodox Islam in this regard may think that the
arguments they [the followers of al-Ash‘ari] cited represented the view of the
people of the Sunnah, whereas in fact it is a view that was never held by any
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 133

Orthodox Muslim leader. As for Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Waki‘, and others, they
declared all who supported Jahm’s and al-Ash‘ari’s views of belief to be
unbelievers. To Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and his followers, Jahm’s view on belief was
even more odious than that of the Murji7ites. For this reason, the Zaydites and
Mut‘tazilites sects, who held al-Shafi‘l in great honor, began to challenge many of
the views that were attributed to him [Abu al-Hassan al-Ash‘ari], saying: “Al-
Shafi‘l was neither a philosopher nor a Murji7ite, but here we have philosophers
who were both Murji’ites and supporters of al-Ash‘art.” Their purpose in saying
so was to criticize the position of the Murji’ites, and we mention their argument
because it was well known among many later thinkers who traced their views back
to the Sunnah. This is the argument that serves as the basis for support of Jahm’s
view on belief, and both the people of the Sunnah and others have offered various
answers to this question.

THE ASH‘ARITES’ OPINION OF IMAN AS STATED BY AL-BAQILLANI

In the book of al-Tamhid, al-Qadi Abu Bakr [al-Baqillani] said that if they said:
What is belief? Say: Belief is tasdiq, assent, in Allah; and it is knowledge. Assent
exists in the heart. If they said: What is your evidence for this? Say: All Arab
philologists agree that the meaning of belief is assent. This meaning was
confirmed even before the revelation of the Qur’an and the Message of the
Prophet (pbuh). Philologists do not recognize any other meaning for Iman. This
is confirmed by the saying of Allah: “... But you will never believe us! . . .”
(12:17). That is, believe in what we say. Further support 15 deduced from their
saying that this man believes in intercession but that man does not believe in the
torment of the grave after death—that is, he does not acknowledge its reality.
Hence, they regard the Iman in Islamic Law to be the same as the Iman known in
the Arabic language. For Allah neither changed nor transformed the Arabic
tongue. If he had done so our ancestors would have reported it and the Islamic
community would have adhered to it and kept its continuity. Also, its usage would
have dominated and this linguistic fact would not be hidden. But, to our
knowledge, this did not happen, which indicates that speech as a whole and words
that name things kept their continuity. A further indication is that the word Iman
used in Islamic Law is the same as it is in the Arabic language. In support of this
Allah says: “We never sent a Messenger except with the language of his own
CHAPTER NINE

134

people. . .” (14:4). He also says: ““We have revealed it as an Arabic Qur’an...”
(43:3). In this verse, Allah declares that He has revealed the Qur’an in the
language of the Arabs and has named things in Arabic. Hence, it is not permissible
to deny the apparent meaning of these verses without a strong argument, especially
_ the declaration that the Qur’an was revealed in Arabic. This indicates that Iman
is the essence of belief in Allah apart from all acts of obedience, both
supererogatory acts and required practices.

THE REPLY OF ORTHODOX MUSLIMS TO THE ASH‘ARITES

This is the argument that serves as the basis for support of Jahm’s views on Iman,
and both the people of the Sunnah and others have offered various answers to this
question:

There are some who disagree with Jahm’s view that the word Iman in the
Arabic language is synonymous with tasdiq, assent. Yet he insists that Iman
also means 10181, verbal confession or acknowledgment of belief, as well
as other meanings. |

There are those who say that linguistically the word Iman means assent.
Then such belief is manifested through the heart, the tongue, and all other
parts of the body as well. This is supported by the saying of the Prophet
(pbuh): “One’s tongue confirms or denies Iman.”

One may say that Iman is not absolute tasdiq, assent, but rather a specific
assent that is conditioned by qualifications attached to the term itself.
Moreover, this is neither a transmission nor a changing of the term, for
Allah does not command us to exercise an absolute Iman, but rather a
specific sort of belief that He has described and elucidated.

Even if Iman means tasdiq, perfect assent in the heart requires the
obligatory deeds of the heart and other parts of the body. For negation of
an obligation signals negation of the perfection of Iman. And we say: These
requirements are sometimes included in the referent of the term “belief,”
while, at other times, they are excluded from it.

1
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 135

There are those who say that the term Iman retains the same meaning it has
conveyed in the Arabic language, although the Prophet added regulations
and restrictions to it.

There are those who say that the term Iman still has its linguistic meaning,
but the Prophet (pbuh) used it in a metaphoric sense, so that it conveys a
literal meaning from the legal point of view, and a figurative meaning from
the linguistic point of view.

7. Some say that the term Iman is manqiil, transmitted.

We have enumerated seven different views, the first of which challenges the claim
that the word Iman means assent in the Arabic language, stating instead that it
means iqrar, verbal confession.

ibn Taymiyyah’s Refutation of the Ash‘arites’ Opinion

The Ash‘arites say that the people of the language [the Arabs] unanimously
agreed that before the revelation of the Qur’4n, Iman meant tasdiq, assent.
Against this, the author asks them: Who transmitted this total consensus of
opinion [on this matter]? And how do we know that? And in which book
was it mentioned?

Do you mean by the “people of language,” the transmitters such as Abu
‘Amr,’ al-Asma‘i,” al-Khalil,’ and others or its speakers? On one hand, if
they meant the transmitters, then one can argue that the transmitters did not
transmit everything before Islam on the basis of a chain of authority.
Instead, they transmitted what they heard from the Arabs living in their
own times and what they heard from collections of poetry and the speech
of the Arabs and others by chains of transmission. Hence, nobody knows

1.

١ Abu “Amr, Ibn al-‘Ala’ (?-154 A.H.), was a very well-known reciter of the Qur'an and a
philologist. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 128.]

* Al-Asma‘l, Abu ‘Abd al-Malik Ibn Qurayb (122-216 A.H.), was a famous philologist and a
scholar of Arabic literature and poetry. [E/ 1, ‏.م‎ 717 and al-Zirikii, vol. 4, pp. 307-8.]

3 Al-Khalil Ibn Ahmad al-Farahidi (?-175 A.H.) was a very famous Arab grammarian and
philojogist and the first to develop the rules of Arabic prosody. His major work was the first
Arabic dictionary entitled a/-“Ayn. [E/ 2, vol.4, p. 963 and al-Fihrist, vol. 2, p. 1030.]
136 | CHAPTER NINE

whether the term Iman was part of what they transmitted or not. On the
other hand, if they meant the pre-Islamic speakers of the term Iman, then
we did not hear them and none were transmitted.

3. It is not known that any of these [transmitters] said that the linguistic
meaning of Iman is tasdiq, assent; in fact, we do not know that any of them |
stated that. And even if it were suggested that one or two of them did, it
would not constitute a consensus of opinion concerning this matter.

4. There are those who say that pre-Islamic speakers of Arabic did not
transmit the information that a certain utterance meant such and such.
Instead, they transmitted the uttered speech of the Arabs and their
interpretation of it. Even if they transmitted a term from the Arabs that
revealed that Iman is tasdiq, assent, this is no more significant than all
Muslims having transmitted the Qur’4n from the Prophet (pbuh). And if,
in spite of this, some Muslims assumed that the Prophet intended certain
meanings that he did not, then how much more likely would it be for such
a thing to happen with respect to various words transmitted from the speech
of [pre-Islamic] Arabs?

5. One can argue that in this case the transmitters were very few, to the extent
that we should not rely on their transmission. And was this kind of
successive transmission available to all Arabs before the revelation of the
Qur’4n to indicate that the Arabs did not recognize any meaning for Iman
other than tasdiq, assent? |

If one argues that by this token the author refutes the knowledge of language
before the revelation of the Qur’an, he {the author] remarks: “There is no need to
know the language that was spoken before the revelation of the Qur’an, for it was
revealed in Arabic to the Arabs in the dialect of Quraysh, and those who were
addressed by it were the Arabs.” The Companions of the Prophet understood its
meanings and in turn transmitted its words and meanings to their followers until
it reached us. Therefore, there is no need for us to transmit that language [the
language spoken before the revelation of the Qur’an] in a way other than that in
which the Qur’an was transmitted, both in utterance and meaning. Since both the
words and the meaning of the Qur’an were transmitted in their [the Arabs]
language, we know that in their language the words: sama’, sky, ard, earth; layl,

THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 137

night; nahar, day; shams, sun; qamar, moon; and others have the same meaning
they have in the Qur’an. Otherwise, transmitting each of these words [without
referring to the Qur’an] would be a very difficult job. With respect to any and all
words, 1) would be difficult to ascertain, with certainty, that all Arabs meant to
convey a particular meaning via a particular word. However, knowledge of the
meanings contained in the Qur’an does not require that we ascertain such a thing.
The reason for this is that the Companions of the Prophet reported these meanings
along with the words that conveyed them. And supposing, for example, that a
community of people heard something said in a language other than Arabic, and
they then translated this utterance for us, there would then be no need for us to be
familiar with their original language.

6. The Ash‘arites did not cite a single piece of evidence from the speech of
the Arabs that supported their claim. That is, instead of citing evidence
from the Qur’an, they referred to people who said that this man believes in
intercession, and that man believes in Paradise and Hell; and this man
believes in torment of the grave, and that man does not believe in that. It is
well known that these are not the utterances of the Arabs before the
revelation of the Quran, but rather of Arabs who came after the
Companions of the Prophet (pbuh) and who were present at the time when
the heretics falsified the facts concerning intercession and the torment of
the grave. Those who said so did not mean mere belief of the heart, but also
the assent of the heart and the tongue. For the belief of the heart only
becomes known through the tongue.

7. Whoever says: Knowledge means tasdiq, does not mean acceptance of what
he hopes and fears without having true hope and fear. But he believes in
torment of the grave and fears it. He also believes in intercession and hopes
for it. On the other hand, if he believes in torment of the grave but has no
fear of it in his heart, he is not called a believer in it. Similarly, he is not
called a believer in Paradise and Hell unless he hopes to enter Paradise and
fears Hell. Likewise, Iblis, the devil, is not called a believer in Allah even
if he believes in the existence of Allah and His Oneness. Also, Pharaoh, to
whom Allah sent Moses in order to guide him to the right path, is not called
a believer although he has knowledge that Allah sent Moses as a Prophet
and that He has sent the revelation. The Jews do not believe in the Qur’an
or the Messenger even though they know that they are true just as they
138 CHAPTER NINE

know their own children. There is absolutely nothing in the speech of the
Arabs about someone who is aware of a thing he fears and hopes for and
ought to love and glorify, but, at the same time, he does not like it or glorify
it or aspire to it; rather he denies it and falsifies it with his own tongue.
Even if he believed in it with his heart and falsifies it with his tongue, they
would say: he is a musaddiq, confirmer of belief: However, if he believes
in it and acts contrary to that belief, they would not say: he believes in it.
This again confirms that there is not one single piece of evidence in the
speech of the Arabs to support their claim. Allah says: “. . . But you will
never believe us . . .” (12:17), which gives no indication that the word
musaddiq is synonymous with the word “believer.” For if the meaning is
valid in using either of two words, it does not mean that one word is
synonymous with the other.

8. With respect to the claim that “they know of no other sort of ‘belief? in the
Arabic language,” one may ask: On what basis can one make such a
sweeping negation? This is merely a claim made in ignorance.

9. There are those who claim that the word Iman, belief, was taken originally
from the word for ’amn, safety or security. Statements regarding this are
cited below, in sha’a Allah. However, the word “belief” has been passed
down in the language with a meaning that differs from this, as has been
noted in a statement* by the teacher Abu al-Bayan.°

10. It is stated that if we assume that the linguistic meaning of Iman is tasdiq,
assent, then of course it does not thereby mean the assent of anything and
everything without exception. Rather, it refers to belief in an assent of the
truths reported by the speech of the Legislator [the Prophet, pbuh].
Therefore, the meaning of Iman, when used by the Prophet, will be
narrower and more specific than it would be in the Arabic language in
general. As we know, a specific usage of a word will involve restrictions
and qualifications that are not found when a word is used in a more general

* According to the editors of the different editions of Kitab al-Iman, there is a blank here in the
original Indian edition, upon which the editors based the present volume, as well as in all other
editions we have consulted (especially MI.2, MZ, and MKH).

° Abu al-Bayan al-Shaykh, al-Qurayshi (?-551 A.H.), was the head of the al-Bayaniyyah Sufi
group in Damascus. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 130 and al-Zirikli, vol. 8, p. 320.]
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 139

sense. For example, the word for hayawan, animal, referring to a general
category, also includes specific species, one of which is the human species.
Hence, the single term “anima!” includes within it both a more general and
a more specific meaning. Likewise with regard to tasdiq, which is
understood as Iman, its minimum condition would be the existence of a
general sort of tasdiq, though its general and specific senses would not
correspond to one another without some change reflected in the tongue and
the heart [that is, in one’s utterances and inward state]. As for the general
use of the word Iman in the speech of the Legislator, it is composed of both
the general and the specific, as when we describe a person as being both an
animal and being natiq, capable of speech.®

11. The Qur’4n does not mention an undefined, absolute Iman but rather
remarks that the word Iman occurs as either conditioned, or absolute and
defined. An illustration of the conditioned Iman is indicated in Allah’s
saying: “. . . They believe in the unseen . . .” (2:3); and His saying: “But
none believed in Moses except the offspring of his people . ..” (10:83); and
of the absolute Iman in His saying: “For, believers are those who, when
Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their hearts . . .” (8:2); and “Only those
are believers who have believed in Allah and His Messenger, and have
never since doubted, but have striven with their belongings and their lives
in the Cause of Allah. Such are the sincere ones” (49:15); and “But no, by
your Lord, they can have no belief until they make you a judge in all
disputes between them and find in themselves no resistance against your
decisions, and accept them with full submission” (4:65), as well as other
similar verses. Thus, every instance of absolute Iman in the Qur’an shows
that man cannot be a believer unless he proves it by works accompanied by
assent. Allah shows in the Qur’4n that Iman requires works with tasdiq,
assent. A similar case has been made with regard to the words “prayer,”
“zakah,” “fasting,” and “pilgrimage” (i.e., they must be accompanied with
works and assent).

Someone might say: These words remain as they are, however, their referents have
come to include words that they did not include before, even though the words

© A commonly used Arabic epithet for the human, as distinguished from other animals, is al-
hayaw4n al-natiq, the talking animal.
140 CHAPTER NINE

themselves are unchanged. This is the position taken by Judge Abu Ya‘la and
others. And to this one may reply that if this claim is correct, then could not the
same be said concerning the word Iman? This question has been addressed to
some who hold the above view, but it has not been answered satisfactorily, and it
has been claimed that this matter has not been treated in the Qur’an, which ts not
the case. In fact, both the Qur’dn and the Sunnah are replete with references that
indicate that a person cannot justly be described as a believer unless his Iman
includes both works and assent. Moreover, this type of reference in the Qur’an is
found much more frequently than those referring to prayer and the giving of zakah.
For these latter terms are only explained in the Sunnah, whereas the meaning of
the word Iman is explained in both the Qur’an and the Sunnah and was agreed
upon unanimously by the pious ancestors.

12. If it was that the Legislator [the Prophet, pbuh] addressed the people in the
language of the Arabs, In that case he addressed them in their common
language. In their tradition, a name can be absolute and general, and a
restriction can be inserted to specify its meaning. They say: “He went to the
judge or to the governor or to the Amir,” when they are referring to a
specific person, while the definite article indicates that this person is
someone who is known. These nouns [judge, governor, and Amir] refer to
classes or categories, and do not normally indicate a specific person
belonging to one of those categories. So it is with words such as Iman,
salah, and zakah, which have been used by the Prophet with the definite
article. And the Prophet (pbuh) taught them that what is intended by the
meaning of Iman is the type of Iman whose attribute is such and such, and
by the meaning of supplication whose attribute is such and such in the
language of the Arabs as equivalent to assent. He explatned: “I am not
satisfied with the belief of the heart and the tongue rather than the belief of
the heart alone.” But something must act in accordance with that belief, as
Allah says: “Only those are believers who have believed in Allah and His
Messenger, and have never since doubted . . .” (49:15). He also says: “For
believers are those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their
hearts ... .” (8:2). There is also the saying of the Prophet (pbuh): “You do
not believe until you are such and such.” And Allah says: “You [Oh,
Muhammad] will not find any people who believe in Allah and the Last
Day, making friendship with those who oppose Allah and His Messenger
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 141

_..” (58:22). And He says: “If only they had believed in Allah and in the
Prophet and in what has been revealed to him, never would they have taken
them for friends . . .” (5:81). There are many other such references in the
Qur’an and the Sunnah. For example, the Prophet (pbuh) said: “The
fornicator who fornicates is not a believer as long as he commits it”; and
‘He whose neighbor is not secure from his harmful conduct is not a
believer.” The Prophet made clear to them that tasdiq without which a
person cannot be regarded as a believer is to be belief of this sort.
Moreover, he elucidated this fact in the Qur’an and the Sunnah without any
changing or transmitting of the language.

Their saying, had the Prophet (pbuh) done that, would have recurred on
successive occasions, can be answered when the Prophet (pbuh) shifted
some terms away from their linguistic origins into new meanings and
changed their connotations. It is stated repeatedly that the Prophet (pbuh)
intended the well- known meanings of ‘prayer,’ ‘zakah,’ ‘fasting,’ and
‘pilgrimage’. What the Prophet intended by the meaning of Iman is based
on its meaning in the Qur’an and the Sunnah, and a person will not be
considered a believer unless he believes in this type of Iman. Allah says:
“For the believers .. .” (8:2). This is attested frequently throughout the
Qur’an and the Sunnah. It is also attested in numerous independent sources
that no one was to be judged a believer who did not perform his religious
duties. Similarly, the Prophet said: “He who dies as a believer will enter
Paradise and will not suffer torment;” and “The sinner does not deserve this
[grace] but rather is subject to grievous punishment.” The Prophet has
given the term Iman and its meanings and conditions more attention than
any other subject. What sounder attestation could one ask for than this?
There also have been those who call for this to be transmitted and made
known. Praise be to Allah for this. No one can claim from the Prophet
(pbuh) anything that might contradict this statement. It was also reported
that the Prophet stated that anyone who has even something of Iman will
exit the Hellfire, and he did not say that the believer will enter it nor that
the sinners are believers. However, the name Iman is bestowed upon the
sinners in certain situations, just as it is with the hypocrites, but under
stricter conditions. On the other hand, absolute Iman, upon which Allah

13.
CHAPTER NINE

promised the believer to enter Paradise, will not apply to either these or
those [sinners or hypocrites].

There is no justification for departing from the obvious meanings of these
verses which indicate that it is Arabic. It would be said to a person that
these verses explain the word “believer” and negate belief for anyone who
does not perform good works. This evidence is even more explicit, clear,
and numerous that those other verses referred to. Moreover, if such verses
indicate that it was Arabic, then what has been mentioned [here] does not
preclude that. Hence, when he [the Prophet] spoke to them using the terms
“prayer,” “pilgrimage,” and other such [words] they [the Arabs] did not
say: This is not Arabic. In fact the Prophet addressed them by the term
“hypocrites,” a word which, according to Arab philologists, was not known
in pre-Islamic times. However, they did not say: It is not Arabic, since the
word munafiq, hypocrite, is derived from the verb nafaqa, to act contrary
to the dictates of one’s conscience. So if the term was derived from their
own language, and some liberties were taken with it, as was the custom
among speakers of the language, then this would not have excluded it from
being Arabic.

If it is assumed that such words are not in fact of Arabic origin, then
rendering these general terms more specific is no more significant than the
act of shifting the meaning of the term Iman away from what it signified
according to the Book, the Sunnah, and the consensus of the pious
ancestors. For the texts that exclude from Iman whoever does not love
Allah and His Messenger, does not fear Allah, fails to perform his
obligations, and embrace what Allah has forbidden, are both numerous and
explicit. So assuming that the meaning of certain words may conflict with
the connotation of a specific sense of Qur’anic verse, in this case, then
making a few general terms more specific is preferable to rejecting
numerous unambiguous and sound texts.

There are some who, although they are aware of the general nature of
certain terms, do not acknowledge their generality. However, the pious
ancestors said: The Messenger of Allah instructed us concerning the
meanings of the word Iman. Of necessity, he taught us what he meant by

142

14.

15.

16.
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 143

it. He also taught us with a certainty, admitting of no doubt that anyone
who believes (the Prophet), yet does not express his belief verbally, even
though he is capable of doing so, does not pray, fast, or love either Allah
or His Messenger, nor does he fear Allah—but rather, displays hatred and
enmity toward Allah’s Messenger and fights against him—s not a believer.
He also taught us that the unbelievers from among the polytheists, as well
as the People of the Book [i.e., Jews and Christians], who knew that he was
Allah’s Messenger yet still behaved like the unbelievers described above,
were unbelievers rather than believers. Matters such as these are far more
certain to us than the claim that the Qur’an contains no words or
expressions that are not of Arabic origin. Hence, if there were ever any
conflict [between these two teachings], we would choose to give
precedence to those beliefs that are the most certain and necessary.

Someone might say: Should it be known that the Prophet has declared someone
to be an unbeliever, then it is likewise certain that there is no tasdiq, assent, in his
heart. In response to this we would say: This is mukabarah, haughtiness. If they
mean that such a person is doubtful or skeptical, or that such a person’s belief is
not accompanied by assent such that he has practically no belief at all, then this
would be correct. If it is established that Iman means solely the assent and
knowledge of the heart, then one could justify the just conclusion (namely, that the
person is doubtful and skeptical, and in this sense lacks belief]. As for the second
conclusion, it may only be established if one acknowledges these prior
assumptions, of which this is one. For one’s claim cannot be established on the
basis of the other, despite the person’s unbelief. Someone else might say: We
know with a certainty that the Jews and others recognized that Muhammad was
the Messenger of Allah, and that he judged them to be unbelievers. Hence, we
know from the religion of the Prophet that despite the fact that it has been
established that someone believes with his heart in Muhammad’s Prophethood, the
Prophet must sievertheless declare him an unbeliever if this person does not act on
his behalf, loving and honoring the Prophet and submitting to the message that he
brought.

According to one of the arguments cited against this view, it has been said: If what
you have mentioned is true, then it would serve better as evidence in favor of the
views of the Murji’ites, or even those of the Karramite sect, than as evidence for
144 CHAPTER NINE

your own.’ The reason for this is that if Iman is as you have described it, then
tasdiq, assent, is simply a kind of speech. For the uses of the word kalam, speech,
and qawl, utterance, and the like have to do with both meaning and expression,
while the use of expressions to convey some meaning is more frequent in language
than the occurrence of some meaning abstracted from the word through which it
is expressed. In fact, one will never find the word “speech,” of any kind, used in
an absolute, unrestricted sense; this includes words such as khabar, report; tasdiq,
assent; takdhib, disbelief; >amr, command; and nahy, prohibition—none of which
are ever used without any restriction or qualification in the form of some
accompanying expression, gesture, or the like. And if Allah has revealed the
Qur’an in the language of the Arabs, then it must be remembered that this
language only recognizes the use of words such as tasdiq, assent, takdhib,
disbelief, and others as a kind of unit consisting of both meaning and verbal
expression, ora verbal expression that conveys a meaning. Therefore, Allah |
considers no one to have believed His Messengers simply on the basis of
knowledge, or the belief that resides in someone’s heart, until he expresses that
belief outwardly with the tongue. Nor will one ever hear a speaker of Arabic say:
So and so believed [or disbelieved] so and so, if the first person simply knows in
his heart that the other person is truthful or untruthful, but without voicing that
knowledge. Likewise one would not say: “he commanded him,” or “the forbade
him,” if the command or prohibition merely existed in the person’s mind without
being accompanied by some sort of verbal expression, gesture, or the like. The
Prophet (pbuh) said: “This prayer of ours is not beneficial in the least according
to what people say”; and he said: “Allah introduces whatever new commands He
wills, and among His new commands is that you should not speak while you
perform your ritual prayers.” Muslim scholars agree that if one speaks during
prayer without intending through what he says to benefit his prayer in some way,
then the effect of his prayer is nullified. They also agree that the belief residing in
one’s heart in regard to worldly matters and desires does not nullify prayer; rather,
what nullifies it is for one to speak of these things. Hence, there is agreement
among Muslims that such inward belief is not considered true speech.

Likewise in the two collections of sound hadiths we read that the Prophet (pbuh)
said: “Allah will overlook whatever. my people say to themselves in their hearts,

7 The editors of MI.2 and MZ remark in footnotes to their editions that, according to the Karramite
sect, Iman is nothing but the verbal expression of belief.
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 145

provided that they neither utter it aloud nor act upon it.” In other words, the
Prophet declares that Allah pardons a person for the things he says to himself,
provided that they are not spoken outwardly. Hence, he distinguished between
hadith al-nafs, talking with oneself, and actual kalam, speech, saying that one is
not held responsible for the former until or unless it becomes the latter. Muslim
scholars agree that what is meant here is that one is only held accountable for what
he utters with the tongue. Hence, it is certain that this is what “speech” means in
the Arabic language, because al-Shari‘, the Legislator [the Prophet], as he
determined to do, addressed us only in the language of the Arabs.

We also read in al-Sunan, the books of traditions, that Mu‘adh once said to the
Prophet: “Oh, Messenger of Allah! Are we considered blameworthy for what we
say?” To this the Prophet replied: “And are people cast into Hell on their faces”
or, he said, “on their nostrils, except as the harvest of [what their] tongues have
sown?” He thus makes clear that speech is what is expressed by the tongue. The
Prophet (pbuh) is also reported, in Bukhari’s Sahrh, to have said: “The truest word
spoken by a poet is that of Labid: ‘Indeed, everything apart from Allah is
falsehood and futility.’” And in the two collections of sound hadiths, he is reported
to have said: “There are two words that are light on the tongue but weighty in the
balance, and precious to the most Merciful One: ‘Praise be to Allah!’ and ‘Praise
be to Allah Almighty!’” Allah says: “And warn those who say ‘Allah has chosen
ason’ and He also says ‘No knowledge have they of such a thing, nor their fathers.
Mighty is the word that comes out of their mouths. They utter nothing but a
lie.””’(18:4-S). And we also read in al-Sahih that the Prophet (pbuh) said: “The
most excellent speech of the Qur’4n consists of four words [i.e., phrases] that are
themselves in the Qur’an: ‘Allah be praised,’ ‘Praise be to Allah,’ There is no god
but Allah,’ and ‘Allah is greatest!” (This was recorded by Muslim.) In addition,
Allah says: “. . . To Him ascend the good words, and the righteous work does He
exalt...” (35:10). And there are numerous similar statements.

On the whole, wherever Allah mentions any of the Prophets in His Book, or those
who have believed or disbelieved them, saying “They said... ,” “They say... ,”
“This is what they said... ,” and the like, what He intends in these references is
the meaning together with the verbal expression of that meaning. For the meaning
concerned, along with the various forms of verbal expressions which arise out of
it such as commands, verbs in the past and present tense, verbal nouns or active
participles derived from words suchas kalam, speech, qawl, a saying or utterance,
146 CHAPTER NINE

and so on, are all known in the Qur’an, the Sunnah, and all other forms of speech
among the Arabs. The same is true of the various other types of speech, such as
tasdiq, disbelief, commanding and prohibition. Moreover, examples of such
phenomena are something that no one can deny, for they are too numerous even
to count. There was no dispute over what is referred to by the word “speech”
among the Prophet’s Companions, their Successors, or their followers’ followers,
neither among ahl al-Sunnah, the Orthodox Muslims, nor ahl al-Bid‘ah, the
heretical sects. Rather, the first Muslim known to have considered the word
“speech” to refer solely to the meaning was ‘Abd Allah Ibn Sa‘id Ibn Kullab, a
later thinker who lived in the era during which Ahmad Ibn Hanbal suffered his
mihnah, ordeal.’ He was denounced for this view by both Orthodox and non-
Orthodox Muslim scholars, since it implies that speech is not the most manifest
characteristic of human beings. Allah says: ““And by Lord of the heaven and the
earth, it is the truth, just as it is the truth that you can speak” (51:23). Moreover,
the word “speech” contains innumerable facets that were not recognized by any
of the Prophet’s Companions, their Successors, or their followers’ followers until
there appeared someone who adopted a view of it that was unprecedented among
both Muslims and others.

Someone might say: Allah says: “... And say within themselves . . .” (58:8); and
“And you should remember your Lord within yourself humbly and with fear. . .”
(7:205) and the like. To this we would reply that if what is meant is that they
uttered these things secretly with their tongues, then no one could raise any
argument in objection. In fact, this is the interpretation that most commentators
have given for this verse. According to them, they used to say in their greeting:
sam ‘alayka, poison on you.° Then when they came out they would say to one

5 The Caliph al-Ma’min (?- 833 A.D.) adopted the Mu’ tazilites’ teaching that the Qur’n is
created. This doctrine became the official government stance. Furthermore, all who were found
to disagree with this teaching were subjected to a brutal inquisition that came to be known as al-
mihnah, the ordeal. Among those who suffered at al-Ma’miin’s hands for doctrinal reasons was
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, who refused to recant his belief in an eternal, uncreated prototype of the
earthly Qur’an.

° The greeting al-salamu ‘alayka (usually al-salamu ‘alaykum) is the normal greeting. However,
those who are greeting have used sam alayka, which is a corruption of the standard greeting
formula and may have a bad connotation. They are playing with the word al-salam, peace, using
sam instead which, when said quickly, sounds about the same but has the meaning to humiliate
or treat unjustly. The phrase sam ‘alayka, actually means poison upon you. The Prophet
responded by not repeating the full greeting but only using the words ‘alayka or “akaykum,
which mean upon you.
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 147

another: “if he were a prophet, he would torment us by what we say to him.” And
if it is assumed that the meaning intended here is that they spoke these things in
their hearts, then this would be an utterance restricted to the soul, as Allah’s says:
‘For what they have said to themselves . . .” (58:8). Hence, some of them have
said: “.. . lest Allah punish us for what we say.” Here the term qawl, a saying, is
used in an absolute sense and the reference is to what they have uttered with their
tongues. For it was secret conversations and greetings that they had been forbidden
to engage in. As in Allah’s saying: “Have you not seen those who are forbidden
to hold secret counsels, and afterward return to that which they have been
forbidden, and conspired together for sin, wrongdoing, and disobedience to the
Messenger, and when they come to you, they greet you with a greeting wherewith
Allah greets you not, and they say within themselves: ‘Why should Allah punish
us not for what we say? .. .”” (58:8). And although the correct interpretation is the
one accepted by most commentators and the one that is supported by parallel
Qur’anic verses, nevertheless the Prophet (pbuh) said that “Allah says: “Whoever
makes mention of Me in his soul, of him will I make mention in My soul. And
whoever makes mention of Me before a throng, of him will I make mention before
a better throng.’” What is meant here is not that the person does not speak of Allah
with his tongue, but that he has brought Allah to remembrance both in his soul and
with his tongue.

Likewise Allah says: “Make mention of your Lord within your soul in supplication
and fear, but without raising your voice aloud. . .” (7:205). Reference is made to
making mention of Allah al-jahr min al-qawl, uttered clearly with the tongue,
whereas that which is restricted to the soul is the expression lafz al-hadith, silent
conversation. Hence, use has been made of the phrase hadith al-nafs, the soul's
conversation or talking with oneself, however, one never hears kalam al-nafs, the
soul's speech. Thus the expression lafz al-hadith is usually used to express dreams
that one sees in his sleep. Moreover, the word hadith has been used to speak of the

statement by Jacob, as in Allah’s saying: “. . . Thus your Lord chooses you and
teaches you the interpretation of dreams . . .” (12:6). Likewise the statement by
Joseph in Allah’s saying: “... And you taught me the interpretation of dreams...”

(12:101). References such as these have to do not with the tongue but with the
soul, since the phrase lafz al-hadith may be restricted to what is in the soul, unlike
the word kalam, which is not known to have been used to refer to what is in the
soul alone.
148 CHAPTER NINE

Allah says: “And keep your talk secret or disclose it, verily He [Allah] knows all
of what is in the breasts [of men]” (67:13). This refers to words that are sometimes
kept secret so that no one else hears them, and that at other times are expressed
aloud so that they can be heard. By the same token one might say: ‘he read
silently’ or ‘he read aloud;’ or one might speak alternatively of silent prayer and
public prayer. Therefore, Allah did not say: “utter it with your tongues or with
your hearts.” For it is inconceivable that what is [only] in the soul should be
expressed aloud; rather, that which may be voiced aloud is what is on the tongue.

Allah says: “. .. He knows all of what is in the breasts [of men]” (67:13), and this .
is a kind of warning. It is as if to say: if Allah knows what is in the heart, how
would He fail to know also what is spoken? As Allah says in another verse: “And
if you [Oh, Muhammad] speak aloud then indeed He knows the secret and that
which is yet more hidden” (20:7). Here Allah declares that He knows what is
spoken aloud. This is indicated by the fact that He says: “And keep your talk secret
or disclose it, indeed He [Allah] knows all of what is in the breasts [of men]”
(67:13). Now, if He means by the word qawl, a saying, that which is in the soul,
having already declared that He knows what is in the breasts [hearts of men], He
would not have mentioned His knowledge of the other type—that is, what is
spoken aloud. And if someone were to say: “he was given a warning,” one might
reply: “yes, he was.” In fact, he was given a warning concerning both outward and
inward thoughts. Allah says “. . . Your sign is that you shall not speak to the
people for three days except with signals . . .” (3:41). It is also mentioned where
He says: “. . . Your sign is that you shall not speak to the people for three nights,
although you are not dumb” (19:10). In the second verse Allah makes no
exceptions whatsoever, although both verses are part of a single story. This in turn
indicates that the exception made is noncontiguous, while the meaning of Allah’s
saying: “Your sign shall be that you will speak to people only in signs,” is
consistent with parallel verses in the Qur’an. Moreover, Allah says “. . . And he
signified to them . . .” (19:11), which refers to his signaling to them. And if we
assumed that this signaling represented a contiguous exception, then it would be
included in the words that are qualified by the exception, as in Allah’s saying: “It
is not fitting for any human being that Allah should speak to him unless by
inspiration, or from behind a veil, or that He sends a Messenger to reveal what He
wills by His leave . . .” (42:51).
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 149

However, it does not follow necessarily from the above that this [i.e., the word,
ramz, signaling] is included in the word kalam, speech, used in an absolute sense.
For the language of the [Arab] people never included any indication that the words
“speech,” “utterance,” “assent,” or “disbelief,” when used in an absolute manner,
encompass that which is only in the soul. For it is a certainty that anyone who has
not verbally expressed his belief, despite his ability to do so, will not be referred
to as a believer in the normal usage of the language. This was agreed upon by the

pious ancestors, including the Prophet’s Companions and their Successors.

“Umar [Ibn al-Khattab ] may Allah pleased with him, once said: “I zawwartu,
rehearsed, in my soul something that I wanted to say.” This statement may be used
as an argument against them [i.e., those who claim that the word “speech” may
refer to what is only in the soul]. According to Abu ‘Ubayd, the word tazwir,
rehearsing, means the correction and preparation of some kind of utterance. Abu
Zayd commented on this word by saying: “An utterance that has been ‘rehearsed’
is the same as an utterance that has been formed as al-kalam al-muzawwagq, an
utterance pictured or visualized in the imagination; and both of them refer to an
utterance that has been amended and is beautiful.” Someone else said: “] inwardly
rehearsed an utterance;” that is, “I prepared something with the intent of saying
it,’ which implies that the person has inwardly evaluated what he wanted to say,
but did not say it. Hence, such inwardly visualized words cannot be considered an
actual qawl, utterance, unless they are voiced with the tongue. Prior to this it is not
an utterance, but rather, words presented inwardly in the soul and evaluated with
the intent to speak. Similarly, someone might determine or anticipate inwardly that
he will go on pilgrimage, pray, go on a journey, and so on. In each case, what the
person wants to say or do will appear as a visual image in his soul. However, it
will not be considered an actual gawl, utterance, or ‘amal, work, unless it comes
to have outward existence, just as a person does not earn the title of Hajji [a person
who has gone to Hajj or on pilgrimage] or become recognized as one who prays
until he performs outwardly the required acts. For this reason, forbidden words or
actions that a person may be about to speak or perform will not be held against
him unless he actually speaks or performs those words or actions, in which case
he will be punished for them. As for each commendable word or action that one
is about to speak or do, it will be reckoned as a single good deed, and if he actually
speaks such words and performs such actions, they may be reckoned to his account
as anywhere from ten to seven hundred praiseworthy deeds. As the Prophet (pbuh)
150 CHAPTER NINE

said: “Allah will overlook those words and deeds that My people have spoken to
themselves about, provided that they do not utter them aloud or perform them.”
Related to this is a verse of poetry attributed to al-Akhtal which says:

In the heart is true speech to be found
While the tongue is but a guide to the heart’s intent.

According to Abu Muhammad Ibn al-Khashshab,"° there are those who deny that
this verse can rightly be attributed to al-Akhtal. They say they have searched the
collections of his poetry and have not been able to find this verse, while others
have said that rather than kalam, speech, it should read bayan, declaration.

If someone argued for his point of view on a given issue by citing a hadith from
the two collections of sound hadiths on the authority of the Prophet (pbuh), one
could say that although this is a single report, it is among those sources that
scholars of Islam have agreed should be believed and accepted. As for this verse,
however, it has not been traced back to its originator through a reliable chain of
authority, nor has it even been accepted by Arab linguists. This being the case,
how could the most minor point concerning the language be established on the
basis of such a verse, much less the entity referred to by the word kalam, speech?
Besides this, it might be said that establishing the referents of words such as
“speech,” “utterance,” and so on, does not require a quotation from a poet, since
such matters have already been treated by Arab philologists, from the early days
of Islam to the present. Such scholars have already established the meanings of
such terms in the language, just as we are certain of the referents of such words as
“head,” “hand,” and “leg.”

Moreover, those who speak the language may argue in favor of the meanings of
words based on their usage of such words, not based on limitations that could be
mentioned. For no Arab linguist who is a speaker of the language has ever said:
“the head is thus and so,” “the hand 1s thus and so,” “speech is thus and so,” or
“color is thus and so.” Rather, they simply utter these words in such a way that
indicates their meanings, and one can become familiar with their language through
their usage of them.

'° Tbn al-Khashshab, ‘Abd Allah Ibn Ahmad (?-567 A.H.), was a well-known philologist and a
scholar of hadith and tafsir. His book on Arabic grammar is entitled al-Murtajal. [Kitab al-Iman
MZ, pp. 139-40.[
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 151

Now it is certain that if al-Akhtal was indeed the author of this verse, then he did
not intend by it to speak of the entity to which the word “speech” refers. Nor was
this the intent of any of the poets. Rather, what he meant—/f in fact he spoke these
words—was what commentators on poetry have taken him to mean, namely: that
speech originates in the heart, and that the essence of speech is meaning.
Therefore, if anyone says with his tongue what is not in his heart, then you should
place no confidence in him. This is similar to statements that Allah has made
concerning the hypocrites, who said, “say with their tongues what is not in their
hearts.” Therefore the poet said:

Do not be struck with wonder at exquisite oration

Until the orator, with his words, becomes noble and pure.
In the heart is true speech to be found,

While the tongue is but a guide to the heart’s intent.

The poet forbid his listeners to be filled with admiration for a speaker’s words as
they appear on the surface until they know for certain what is in the speaker’s
heart. This is why he said: “until the orator, with his words, becomes noble and
pure.” His saying ‘“‘with his words” indicates that he was referring to the outward
verbal expression as kalam, words, even though he is not certain whether the
inward meaning of these words resides within the speaker. These considerations
may be used as an argument against them in this way or that way, for these lines
of poetry contain both of these significant insights into the nature of speech. In
fact, the poet’s use of the phrase ma‘a al-kalam, with his words, is used in an
absolute sense. And by saying, “in the heart is true speech to be found,” he was
referring to the origin of speech and the meanings one intends to convey through
it. And to all these realities the tongue is a [mere] guide.

In summation, if anyone needs to discover the meanings of the words “speech,”
“mare,” “the Byzantines,” “the Turks,” and all other races of human beings
through quotations from poets, then no one could be further from an understanding
of the means of attaining knowledge! Furthermore, the poet cited here is not one
of the ancients, but a post-classical poet, not to mention his being a blasphemous
Christian who worships three gods in one! Not only that, but his very name-al-
Akhtal is derived from a word meaning “to talk nonsense”! And as if this were not
enough to discredit him, the Christians are known to have been mistaken in their
understanding of what is referred to by the term “speech”; after all, they consider
Jesus Christ to be self-existent and to be the very Word of God.
152 CHAPTER NINE

It has become clear that if the linguistic meaning of Iman is “assent,” and if the
Qur’4n means nothing by this term except that sort of assent that is a verbal
utterance rather than also considering works as a part of such assent, then one
must conclude that the only correct view is that of the Murji’ites—namely, that
Iman refers to verbal expression and the meaning that this expression conveys.
Alternatively, one must adopt the view of the Karramite sect, which considered
belief to be nothing but an utterance of the tongue, since referring to such a verbal
expression as a qawl, is more common in linguistic usage than referring to some
meaning in the heart as a saying. As Allah says: “. .. They say with their tongues
what is not in their hearts . . .” (48:11); and “And from among the people, there are
some [hypocrites] who say: ‘We believe in Allah and the Last Day,’ while in fact
they do not believe” (2:8). There are other similar statements that indicate a
distinction between the referent of the term “saying” on the one hand, and what
is only in the soul on the other; the latter is referred to as hadith, conversation. The
Karramites'' said that the hypocrite, though a believer, will abide eternally in Hell
because he believed outwardly but not inwardly. The only persons who shall enter
Paradise are those who have believed both outwardly and inwardly.

According to the Karramites, the evidence that indicates that even the hypocrite
can be described as a believer is that he is included in worldly judgments that
pertain to the term Iman, belief, or mu’min, believer, as in Allah’s saying: “. . . the
freeing of a believing slave . . .” (4:92). Outwardly speaking, the hypocrite speaks
out about al-Jum‘ah, Friday prayer, and taharah, purification, just as he does
about other characteristics that apply to those who have [truly] believed.

As for who has 9200308, believed, in his heart but has not expressed that belief
with the tongue, then no judgments pertaining to believers may be applied to him,
either in this life or the next. Nor is he included among Allah’s servants who are
addressed in the words: “Oh, you who believed! . . .” (2:104). But even though the

١١ The editor of MI.2 supplied this footnote from information in the margin of the Indian version
of Kitab al-Iman.The Karramite sect was named after its leader, Abu ‘Abd Allah, Muhammad
Ibn Karram al- Nisabiri. His father kept a karm (karmah), vineyard, and therefore he was given
the name Karram, vinedresser. This Abu ‘Abd Allah was originally an inhabitant of the city of
Nisabar, from which he was later expelled. He then moved to Jerusalem, where he resided until
his death in 244 A.H. (These facts were heard by ‘Ali Ibn Hajar, Ahmad Ibn Harb and others,
and transmitted on the authority of Ibrahim Ibn Muhammad Ibn Sufayyan, Ibrahim Ibn al-Hajjaj,
and others. In addition, Ibn Habban said: He suffered setbacks until he picked up the very worst
of the doctrines and the traditions with the weakest attestation.)
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 153

view of the Karramites on Iman was invalid and heretical and had never been
adopted by anyone before them, the view of the Jahmites was even more
groundless, since the Karramites relied more than the Jahmites on evidence from
the Arabic language, the Qur’an, and reason.

One point on which the Karramites, the Murji’ites, and the Jahmites agreed was
that all peoples’ belief is to be considered equal, and no exceptions are to be made
among them. Whoever displayed belief outwardly is described by them as being
truly a believer. But if the individual is a hypocrite, he will abide eternally in Hell,
since only those who believe both outwardly and inwardly shall enter Paradise.
Thus, whoever claims that the Karramites said that the hypocrite enters Paradise
has misrepresented their views. What they said is that the hypocrite is a believer,
but that belief is nothing but an outward expression. Others refer to the hypocrite
as a Muslim, saying that Islam is nothing but outward submission. As for the
claims of the Jahmites they were, without a doubt, even more baseless than those
of the Karramites, whether in relation to Islamic law, linguistics, or reason.

Someone might say: The views of the Karramites fell beyond the pale of the
doctrines agreed upon unanimously by the pious ancestors. To this one might
reply: The view of Jahm on belief was in conflict with what was unanimously
agreed upon by virtually all Muslims who came before him. In fact, the pious
ancestors declared anyone who adopted Jahm’s teachings to be an unbeliever with
regard to belief. Sound arguments have been presented in refutation of the views
of the Karramites; however, arguments of this sort against the views of the
Jahmites are even more numerous. Allah says, for example: “And from among the
people, there are some [hypocrites] who say: ‘We believe in Allah and the Last
Day,’ while in fact they believe not” (2:8). Hence, Allah has denied that hypocrites
may be said to have belief.

We are in agreement with this; the hypocrite is certainly not a believer, and
whoever describes him thus is in error. The same applies to anyone in whose heart
there resides knowledge and assent yet who at the same time displays ingratitude
and enmity toward the Messenger. Such were the Jews and others, whom Allah
declares to be unbelievers and never once referred to them as believers. Unlike the
hypocrites, the above-mentioned groups were not included in any outward,
worldly judgements pertaining to believers. However, Allah excludes from belief
those who believe, with their tongues and their hearts but do not perform works.
154 CHAPTER NINE

Allah says: “The desert Arabs say, ‘We believe.’ Say: “You have no faith; but you
[only] say, We have submitted our wills to Allah . . .”” (49:14). He also says:
“Only those are believers who believe in Allah and His Messenger, and have never
since doubted, but have striven with their belongings and their lives in the Cause
of Allah: Such are the sincere ones” (49:15). Hence, He confines Iman only to
those who have believed in Allah and His Messenger. Allah says: “They say, “We
believe in Allah and in the Messenger, and we obey,’ but even after that, some of
them turn away: they are not [really] believers.” (24:47). The term tawali, turning
away, means turning away from obedience, as Allah says: “. . . You shall be
summoned [to fight] against a people given to vehement war: Then shall you fight,
or they shall submit. Then if obedience is shown, Allah will grant you a goodly
reward, but if you turn away as you did before, He will punish you with a grievous
penalty” (48:16); and “So he did not believe, nor did he pray! But on the contrary,
he rejected truth and turned away!” (75:31—32); and “None shall enter it [Hell]
save the most wretched, who denies and turns away” (92:15—16). Moses and his
brother Harin said, as in Allah’s saying: “Truly, it has been revealed to us that the
torment will be for him who denies and turns away” (20:48), Accordingly, the
term ‘turning away; does not refer to disbelieving but to turning away from
obedience. For people must believe in what the Messenger said and obey what he
commanded. Indeed, the opposite of belief is disbelief, and the opposite of
obedience is turning away. That is why Allah says: “So he did not believe, nor did
he pray! But on the contrary, he rejected truth and turned away!" (75:31—32).
Allah also says: “They say: ‘We believe in Allah and in the Messenger, and we
obey,’ but even after that, some of them turn away: they are not [really] believers”
(24:47). In this verse, Allah denies Iman from the one who turns away from
working righteousness even if he has expressed belief verbally. Allah says: “Only
those are believers who believe in Allah and His Messenger: When they are with
him on a matter requiring collective action, they do not depart until they have
asked for his leave . . .” (24:62). He also says: “For believers are those who, when
Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their hearts . . .” (8:2).

The Qur’an and the Sunnah are full of verses that indicate that Iman is negated for
both the person who does not work righteousness and the hypocrite. However, he
who has knowledge of Iman in his heart but contradicts that knowledge with his
deeds and shows enmity toward Allah is never called a believer. In the view of the
Jahmites, anyone who has inward knowledge in his heart is a believer with perfect
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 155

belief. Indeed, his belief is as complete as that of the prophets themselves,
tegardless of what he says or does. Nor is it conceivable that such a person should
cease to have belief unless he ceases also to have inward knowledge in his heart.

As for the later thinkers in Islam who supported Jahm’s views, most of them
advocated the position of istithna’, exception, with respect to belief. According to
these thinkers, belief in Islamic law is “that through which the servant fulfills his
duties toward his Lord,” even though the meaning of “belief” in linguistic usage
is broader than this. So with regard to the issue of making an exception, they
considered the referent of the word “belief” to be the same as what they claimed
to be its referent according to Islamic teachings. In so doing, they departed from
the connotation of “belief” as generally used in language; so one wonders why
they did not do the same with respect to works. There are innumerable references
in Islamic teachings to indicate that obligatory good works form part of perfect
belief. These teachings do not indicate, however, that the only entity to be referred
to as belief is the state in which one dies; there is no support whatsoever for this
view in Islamic law. Rather, these teachings were a later introduction, and were
not advocated by any of the pious ancestors. However, those who supported
Jahm’s views thought that those among the pious ancestors who “made the
exception” with regard to belief did so on the basis of sucha teaching [i.e., that the
referent of “belief” is simply the state in which one dies]. But such thinkers were
not well versed in the teachings of the pious ancestors. As a result, they argued in
favor of the apparent meaning of the pious ancestors’ teachings by appealing to
doctrines that they had adopted from Jahmite scholastic theologians and other
heretical thinkers. Hence, what they were advocating appeared on the surface to
teflect the views of the pious ancestors, whereas its core consisted of the views of
the Jahmites, whose understanding of belief is more corrupt than that of virtually
anyone else. For this reason, when some of Abu al-Hassan [al-Ash‘ari’s] followers
began to discover the falsehood of Jahm’s views on belief, many of them took
issue with such views, and among these followers, some adopted the teachings of
the pious ancestors. And, Allah willing, we will make mention below of
statements made by the pious ancestors on the issue of “making the exception”
with respect to belief.

Abu al-Qasim al-Ansari, the teacher of al-Shahrastani, said in his interpretation
of the Book of al-Irshad [Yhe Counseling], written by Abu al-Ma‘ali, that Iman
consists entirely of acts of obedience. In other words, Iman is the practice of the
156 - CHAPTER NINE

commands of Allah and abstaining from what is prohibited. He also said that this
is what Abu ‘Altal-Thagafi and Abu al-‘Abbas al-Qalanisi believed. Also inclined —
to this way of interpreting belief was Abu ‘Abd Allah Ibn Mujahid, who said that
Malik Ibn Anas and most of the leaders of the pious ancestors used to say: “Iman
is the knowledge of the heart, the confession of the tongue, and performance in
accordance with the five pillars [of Islam].”

There are those who adopt the view of the Murji’ites, according to which belief
is both assent in the heart and [expression of that belief] with the tongue. In
addition there are those who, like Abu Ishaq al-Isfarayini, stipulate that if out of
obstinacy someone fails to express his belief in words, then according to Islamic
teachings, he is considered an unbeliever, even if in his heart he has both
knowledge and belief. Al-Ansari once said: I have seen in his writings that one is
only a true believer if he completes his belief with works of righteousness, just as
the scholar is only a true scholar if he acts on his learning and knowledge. In
support of this he cited Allah’s saying: “The believers are only those who, when
Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their hearts and when His verses are recited,
increase their belief; and they put their trust in their Lord. Who offer prayers and
spend out of that which We provided them, it is they who are the believers in truth
...” (8:2-4).”? Abu Ishaq al-Isfarayini said that linguistically, the word Iman
means tasdiq, which will not be realized except through knowledge and doing
what one is commanded to do. Furthermore, both signal and compliance may
function as utterances."

In his book, al-Asma Wa al-Sifat (Names and Attributes), Abu Ishaq
(al-Isfarayini] said that he who is judged as a believer has many attributes,
although there was no agreement either on some details of these traits or on some
additions that do not correspond to the general belief. Examples of what have to
be abandoned are: the attempted killing of the Messenger, inflicting harm on him,
and worshiping idols. Examples of what have to be done are: supporting and
defending the Messenger. All this constitutes what Iman implies, belief plus all the

'2 In the texts of the editions of MI.2 and MZ of Kitab al-Iman only the first part of verse 2 is
given, after which the citation picks up with the first portion of verse 4. For the reader’s
convenience, these verses are cited in their entirety.

3 The reference here is to people who cannot speak or hear. Signals and compliance are accepted
from them in place of normal utterances of speech.
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 157

above-mentioned conditions. Others have said that committing a major sin does
not exclude one from the domain of Iman, although it makes his Iman incomplete.

I have stated that neither of these two views reflects those of Jahm. Rather,
whoever takes either stance has acknowledged that belief is not mere assent in the
heart, nor does it consist of just one thing. Moreover, he [Abu Ishaq] stated that
Islamic law introduced changes into the meaning of belief that destroys the
foundation for the claims of the Jahmites. And for this reason the leading thinkers
among them, such as Jahm, al-Salihi, Abu Hassan {al-Ash‘ari], and Judge Abu
Bakr [al-Baqillani] stated that Iman will not be denied a person except with the
vanishing of knowledge from his heart.

In his chapter entitled “On the Mention of Names and Judgements,” Abu al-Ma‘ali
stated that our purpose in this chapter requires that we just make mention of the
true nature of belief, for this is a matter on which there have been differing
doctrines among Muslim thinkers. He then proceeded to relate the views of the
Khirijites, the Mu‘tazilites, and the Karramites. Abu al-Ma ‘ali said that for the
views of our followers, Iman is tasdiq, assent, and our Shaykh Abu al-Hassan
[al-Ash‘ari], may Allah have mercy on him, is of the same opinion. But he had a
different interpretation of tasdiq, which he defined once as a knowledge of Allah’s
Existence, His Eternity, and His Deity. At another time he defined tasdiq as a
qawl, utterance, as part of one’s inner self, except that it includes knowledge and
it is not right to exist without it. This is its requirement; for tasdiq and disbelief,
truthfulness and untruthfulness apply most directly to things that one says, rather
than to things one simply knows. Hence, 1285010 is an utterance made inwardly that
is then expressed outwardly with the tongue. This being the case, worship may be
described as a kind of 125010, since it is an expression of assent. Moreover, some
of our own supporters have stated that tasdiq is only realized through both verbal
expression and truthfulness; if these two occur together, they represent a single
instance of tasdiq. Some of our followers have said that 125010, assent, cannot be
achieved except by acknowledging it with al-qawl, speech, and truthfulness
simultaneously. If these two come together they form one tasdiq.

Some of them have said tasdiq can be defined as an abstention from what is
prohibited. Hence, he [al-Ash‘ari] did not consider iqrar, verbal confession, as one
of the two pillars of Iman, but said that Iman is assent in the heart and abstention
from what is prohibited, in accordance with the laws of Allah. Based on this, an
158 ‏ش‎ CHAPTER NINE

unbeliever may know Allah but does not abstain from what is prohibited, because
he has abandoned the most important pillar of Iman.

Based on this interpretation, the Jews were aware of Allah and the prophecy of our
Prophet Muhammad (pbuh), yet in spite of this, they disbelieved stubbornly,
unfairly, and jealously. As our Shaykh Abu al-Hassan said, of each individual
whose unbelief we judge, we say: He does not know Allah to start with, and he
does not know His Messenger or His religion.

His disciple Abu Qasim al-Ansari" stated that it is as if the meaning were that the
Islamic teachings acknowledge neither his belief nor his knowledge. To this I have
replied that the view we are discussing is not that which al-Ansari summarized,
but rather the view of those who stated that whoever obstinately resists Allah and
His Messenger is an unbeliever according to Islamic teachings. Thus, sometimes
unbelief is defined as the absence of inward belief, while at other times it is
defined as obstinate resistance. In the latter case, one who obstinately resists Allah
and His. Messenger is considered an unbeliever according to Islamic teachings
even if in his heart he possesses the essence of Iman, which is tasdiq. He must be
reckoned an unbeliever according to the teachings, even if he has belief like that
of the Prophets and the Angels. Skilled proponents of this view, such as al-Salihi,
Abu al-Hassan, Judge Abu Bakr, and the followers of Jahm who preceded them,
knew that this represented a contradiction that struck at the heart of their doctrine.
As a result they added that no one shall be judged an unbeliever unless he ceases
to have any belief in his heart. Moreover, they held that anyone judged by the
teachings to be an unbeliever must be someone in whose heart there is no
knowledge whatsoever of Allah and His Messenger. On account of this they were
renounced by the vast majority of prudent Muslim theologians, who accused them
of engaging in sophistry and clinging stubbornly to their own inconsistent
opinions.

They argued in favor of their stance by citing Allah’s saying: “You [Oh,
Muhammad] will not find any people who believe in Allah and the Last Day,
making friendship with those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, even though
they were their fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or their kindred. For such

* Al-Ansari, Abu al-Qasim Salman Ibn Nasir Ibn “Imran (?-512 A.H), was a scholar of figh and
a commentator on the Qur’an. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 144 and al-Zirikli, vol. 3, p. 200.]
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 159

has He written belief in their hearts . . .” (58:22). Concerning this verse they said
that one may understand that whoever does not act in accordance with belief’s
requirements does not have belief written in his heart.

If they claim that according to his interpretation, those mentioned in this citation
do not have belief of the sort that will be acknowledged and rewarded, or that they
do not perform the duties of those professing to have belief, then we would reply:
This is a general statement that may be applied more specifically only on the basis
of evidence.

Against this, the author argues: This verse denies Iman of those who love those

who resist Allah and His Messenger. Furthermore, those who do not love those
who resist Allah and His Messenger, Allah will instill Iman in their hearts and will
strengthen them with a spirit from Himself. This emphasizes the doctrine of the
earlier Muslims that says that in order to have Iman, you must have love in your
heart for Allah and His Messenger, and hatred for those who resist Allah and His
Messenger. Also, this verse of the Qur’an does not demonstrate that the
knowledge that is in their hearts indicates that Muhammad, who is the Messenger
of Allah, will ascend and nothing will remain of him. Iman, which is considered
obligatory, certainly is not mere knowledge and tasdiq. In fact, it is both tasdiq of
the heart and work of the heart. Allah says: “. . . And strengthened them with a
spirit from Himself. And He will admit them to Gardens beneath which rivers
flow, to dwell therein [forever]. Allah will be pleased with them, and they with
Him. They are the party of Allah. Truly it is the party of Allah that will achieve
Success” (58:22).

Allah has promised them Paradise, and it is agreed by all that the promises of
Paradise go to those who adhere to the rules of Allah and abstain from what is
prohibited. It is known that those whose hearts are filled with Iman and whom
Allah strengthens with a spirit from Himself have already performed their
religious duties, for which they deserve what Allah has promised the pure and the
religious. This also indicates that sinners are not included in this promise. Also
this verse of the Qur’dn indicates that no (true) believer would love the
unbelievers. Some people who have ‏ع‎ 125010 in their hearts believe in the Messenger
even though they still befriend the unbelievers. The pious ancestors said that
abandoning overt obligations is evidence of a lack of belief that radiates out from
the heart. But the elimination of the heart’s work, which is the love of Allah and
160 CHAPTER NINE

His Messenger, and the fear of Allah, does not require that the heart be void of any
tasdiq. But according to them [the Ash‘arites], if someone is proven by al-shar‘
Islamic law not to have Iman, this means that his heart is void of tasdiq to start
with. The majority of the knowledgeable consider this to be sophistry.

Ibn Firak,’° on the authority of Abu al-Hassan [al-Ash‘ari], related the view that
belief is the belief in the truthfulness of a report that someone has given, a belief
so strong as to be tantamount to certain knowledge; however, it may also include
a belief that is below the level of certainty. As for Iman in Allah, it is the belief in
Allah’s truthfulness, and this only applies to someone if he is certain about
reporting Allah’s truthfulness correctly. Moreover, this is so only if the individual
is certain that Allah speaks. And the knowledge that Allah speaks depends on the
knowledge that He is living, while the knowledge that He is living depends on the
certainty that He acts; and the certainty that He acts depends in turn on certainty
concerning the act itself, namely that the creation of the world is an act of Allah.
He also said that belief includes the certainty that Allah is Almighty, and belief in
His Almighty power; the certainty that Allah knows, and that Allah’s knowledge
exists; and that Allah wills and possesses a will. In other words, all the qualities
one must know in order to be said to know Allah are included in the requirements
of Iman.

To this we reply: This is among the questions on which al-Ash‘ari has held
different views, namely, whether or not ignorance of certain attributes of Allah is
tantamount to ignorance of the one possessing those attributes. Al-Ash‘art himself
took both positions [at different times]. However, the more valid of the two
views—which is also the view accepted by the majority—is the second, namely,
that ignorance of some attributes of a given entity does not necessarily entail
ignorance of that entity itself. Moreover, one of the points on which al-Ash‘ari
differed with Jahm concerned whether establishing the divine attributes is a
requirement of Iman; for Jahm went to extremes in denying not only the divine
attributes, but the divine names as well.

Abu al-Hassan said that what we heard from [the Prophet, pbuh] adds recognizable
conditions to belief. To illustrate, belief should not be associated with whatever

'S Tbn Farak, Muhammad Ibn al-Hassan Abu Bakr (2-406 A.H.), was a jurist of the Ash‘arite line
of thinking and a theologian who worked on tafsir. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, pp. 147-48.]
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 161

signals unbelief through what a person does or does not do. For example, the
shar‘, /slamic law, dictates abstention from the worship of idols and stones.
Hence, if someone does that, then such an action is an indication of his unbelief.
Also, killing a prophet or making fun of him indicates one’s unbelief. Also, not
respecting the Book and the Ka‘bah signals one’s unbelief. So if anyone commits
such actions [which are illegal acts} or if he abstains from deeds that are
commanded, then this is a proof that tasdiq, which is Iman itself, is lacking in his
heart. Also, for everything that one commits by way of interpretation, which is
contrary to Islamic belief, he will be considered an unbeliever, which is a further
indication that he has lost the Iman which is in his heart. It is impossible to accuse
someone of unbelief when he has both Iman and tasdiq in his heart.

The author refutes this argument by saying that no doubt, al-Shari‘, the Legislator
(the Prophet), does not judge an individual to be an unbeliever if his heart is
instilled with Iman, but to say that Iman is tasdiq even if it is devoid of all the
works of the heart, is considered wrong. Do you not see that the shart‘ah, /slamic
law, passed judgement on his unbelief and the shari‘ah will not pass judgement of
unbelief on a true and sincere believer? For this reason we say that the unbelief of
Iblis, the devil, was worse than that of every unbeliever. He [the devil] did not
know Allah with His attributes at all, neither did he have a true and real inner
Iman in Allah, even though he said he believed and worshiped. So, whenever we
consider unbelievers—the Jews, Christians, Magians, and other unbelievers—they
did not have true Iman in their hearts. Allah says: “If only they had believed in
Allah, in the Prophet, and in what has been revealed to him, never would they
have taken them for friends and protectors . . .” (5:81); and He says: “But no, by
your Lord, they can have no [real] belief, until they make you judge in all disputes
between them. . .” (4:65). Allah makes these matters a condition for the
confirmation of Iman, and it has been proven that Iman is the knowledge of
conditions, without which there is no Iman.

Now if you say: He added further conditions to the knowledge of the heart in order
for one to be judged a believer, then this would not represent Jahm’s view. Rather,
it would be consistent with the views of those who consider belief to be like prayer
or going on pilgrimage. For although linguistically speaking, “prayer” means
“supplication,” and “making pilgrimage” means “intending a given destination,”
the lawgiver [the Prophet] has nevertheless appended further conditions to each
of these. Such conditions may relate either to the judgment on such acts, or to both
162 CHAPTER NINE

such judgments and to the names that are used to refer to these acts. Moreover, the
proponent of this view acknowledged that no one may be judged a believer
according to the standards of the Book and the Sunnah merely on the basis of
tasdiq of the heart. Rather, the other conditions mentioned are also necessary. For
this reason, it is not possible to declare a fasiq, habitual sinner, to be a believer
unless there is evidence on the basis of which to do so. Moreover, that evidence
cannot be a mere statement on the part of such an individual that he possesses
tasdiq of the heart. Those who define belief as tasdiq of the heart say: No
unbeliever in Hell, be it Satan or anyone else, has the least tasdiq in Allah. For as
Allah says: “And, when they will dispute in the Fire, the weak will say to those
who were arrogant: ‘Indeed! We followed you, can you then take from us some
portion of the Fire’? Those who were arrogant will say: ‘We are all [together] in
this [Fire]! Indeed, Allah has judged between [His] slaves’” (40:47—48). Allah also
says: “The unbelievers will be led to Hell in a crowd until, when they arrive there,
its gates will be opened. And its Keepers will say, ‘Did not Messengers come to
you from among yourselves, rehearsing to you the Signs of your Lord, and warning
you of the Meeting of this Day of yours?’ Their answer is: ‘True: but the Decree
of Punishment has been proved true against the unbelievers!’” (39:71). The
unbelievers confess that the Messengers came to them, rehearsed to them the signs
of their Lord, and warned them of the meeting of this day of theirs. Thus, they
knew of Allah, His Messenger, and the Hereafter. But in the Hereafter they are
considered unbelievers. Allah also says: “. . . Every time a group is cast therein,
its keepers will ask: ‘Did no Warner come to you?’ Their answer is: “Yes, indeed;
a Warner did come to us, but we rejected him and said, Allah never sent down any
[Message] .. .’” (67:8-9). The unbelievers rejected the Warner and said that Allah
never sent down any Message. But in the Hereafter, they will know Allah, His
Messenger, and the Hereafter. Allah further says: “If you could see when they are
confronted with their Lord! He will say: ‘Is not this the truth?’ Their answer is:

‘Yes, by our Lord!’ He will say: ‘Taste you then the penalty, because you rejected |

the Punishment of what you were ungrateful about’” (6:30). Allah also says: “And
the agony of death comes in truth. This is what you have been avoiding” (50:19),
until where He says, as a continuation: “And the Trumpet will be blown, that will
be the Day whereofa Warning [has been given]. And every person will come forth
along with an [Angel] to drive [him] and an [Angel] to bear witness. [It will be
said to the sinners]: ‘Indeed you were heedless of this, now We have removed your
covering, and sharp is your sight this Day’” (50:20—22). There are many other
THE ASH‘ARITES’ AND OTHER SECTS’ OPINIONS 163

verses in the Qur’an which indicate that in the Hereafter the unbelievers will know
their Lord. Thus, if Iman is the mere knowledge of Allah, then they [the
unbelievers] are considered believers in the Hereafter. However, they [the
Ash‘arites] were correct in saying that Iman is not beneficial in the Hereafter
because one is rewarded for his Iman in this life; but if Iman is the mere
knowledge of Allah, then this fact remains unchanged. For, if works are not part
of Iman, then someone knowledgeable [about Allah] in the Hereafter would not
lose his Iman. Indeed they [the Ash‘arites] used to claim that an unbeliever when
he dies does not have any tasdigq in his heart about Allah. However, there are many
verses in the Qur’an that indicate that unbelievers know Allah in this life. Even
Pharaoh, who overtly rejected Iman, was, in his heart, admitting this fact. Allah
says: “And they rejected those Signs wrongfully and arrogantly, though their souls
were convinced thereof. . .” (27:14). Moses said to Pharaoh, as in the following
verse. Allah says: “You know well that these things have been sent down by none
but the Lord of the heavens and the earth as eye-opening evidence . . .” (17:102),
even though Pharaoh was not a believer. Indeed, Moses said, as in the following
verse Allah says: “. . . Deface our Lord, the features of their wealth, and send
hardness to their hearts, so they will not believe until they see the grievous
penalty” (10:88). Allah also says: “. .. Accepted is your prayer [Oh, Moses and
Aaron]! . . .” (10:89). And when Pharaoh said that in the following verse, Allah
says: “. . . 1 believe that there is no god except Him Whom the Children of Israel
believe in. . .” (10:90) and “Ah now But a little while before was though in
rebellion!—And you were one of the corrupt ones” (10:91). It is clear that Allah
described Pharaoh as someone who was disobedient but did not have inward
knowledge. Allah says: “But Pharaoh disobeyed the Messenger [Moses] . . .”
(73:16). The same applies to Iblis. Allah says: “So the Angels prostrated
themselves, all of them together. Not so Iblis: he was haughty, and became one of
the unbelievers” (38:73-74). Thus, Allah did not describe Iblis as
unknowledgeable but as reluctant, arrogant, and disobedient to the Command.
Indeed, Allah says that unbelievers admit that Allah is the Creator in many verses,
such as: “If you were to question them, ‘Who created them?’ They would be sure
to reply, ‘They were created by Allah! . . .’” (43:87).

One might reply by adding: If you say that belief is tasdiq in the heart, or the
tongue, or both, then is this a mujmal, general or overall, sort of 185010, or does
it need to be more detailed? For if someone believed, for example, that
164 CHAPTER NINE

Muhammad was the Messenger of Allah, yet did not know Allah’s attributes,
would he be a believer or not? And if someone were judged to be a believer, one
might say: If he then learned of these attributes yet disbelieved what he had heard,
then by agreement among Muslim thinkers, he would not be considered a believer
. in this respect. And in such a case, some instances of belief would be considered
more complete than others. However, if such a person is said not to be a believer,
then we are required not to consider anyone a believer until he comes to know
every detail of everything the Prophet ever said. But the fact is, of course, that the
majority of the Muslim communities likewise do not know every detail of what
the Messenger taught, and one Muslim’s belief is not considered superior to that
of another’s except by virtue of the individuals steadfastness over time.

Abu al-Ma‘ali said that someone might say: your assumptions [e.g., that
everyone’s belief is equal, or that belief is merely inward belief and or lip
profession] require you to consider the belief of an inveterate sinner as equal to the
belief of the Prophet himself (pbuh). And to this we would add: One person’s
belief may be considered superior to that of someone else due to the steadfastness
of his tasdiq and Allah’s protection of him from doubts and misgivings; however,
tasdiq is a nonessential characteristic that does not endure for most individuals.
The Prophet (pbuh) had belief that was continuous and uninterrupted, whereas for
others, belief may be constant at times, and waver at others. And while all levels
of tasdiq were possessed by the Prophet, others possess only some of them, which
means that the Prophet’s belief was superior to that of others. Hence, if one
describes belief as being capable of increase and decrease, then he has spoken
truly. Thus this is the basis on which, according to them, the Prophet considered
one person’s belief to be superior to another’s. And of course, this view is utterly
false in numerous respects, as we have demonstrated elsewhere.
Chapter Ten

The Opinion of Al-Baqillani
On Iman and Islam

Later thinkers who supported Jahm’s view on belief included al-Qadi Abu Bakr
{al-Baqillan], who said that if someone were to ask: What is Islam to you? We
would reply by saying that Islam means inqiyad, compliance, and istislam,
submission. Therefore, every act of obedience in which an individual submits to
Allah’s way and submits to His command is Islam. As for Iman, belief, it is one
of the khisal, attributes, of Islam. Every Iman is Islam, but not every Islam is
Iman. If someone were then to ask: Why have you described the meaning of Islam
in this way? We would reply that this description is based on Allah’s saying in the
Qur’an. Allah says: “The desert Arabs say: ‘We believe.’ Say: ‘You have no faith;
but you [only] say, We have submitted our wills to Allah. ..’” (49:14). By saying
this, Allah denies that these people have belief and affirms Islam to them-—that is,
that they had complied with His Ways and submitted to Him. We read elsewhere
in the Qur’an that Allah says: “... And offer you peace. . .” (4:90). Everyone who
has submitted to something is secure and ina state of peace, although this term is
used primarily to speak of someone who has submitted to Allah and to His
Prophet.

As for myself {Ibn Taymiyyah], I hold that the view mentioned above, besides
being untrue and in conflict with the Qur’dn and the Sunnah, is also full of
contradictions. For they considered belief to be an attribute of Islam. Moreover,
all acts of obedience are considered to be Islam, while the only Iman included
therein is tasdiq, assent. As for the Murji’ites, although they held that belief
encompasses Islam, they also held that belief is merely assent in the heart and
expression of the tongue. The Jahmites, on the other hand, defined Iman as being
no more than tasdiq in the heart, so that neither making the Shahadatan, nvo
166 CHAPTER TEN

Confessions, nor prayers, nor giving zakah, nor any other outward gestures are
considered to be part of Iman. We have already discussed what both Allah and His
Messenger made clear, namely that Islam is part of Iman such that no one may be
a believer unless he is also a Muslim. Iman in turn is part of Ihsan, perfection (of
religion); thus no one could be a muhsin, man of Ihsan, unless he is a believer.

As for the contradictions referred to above, what I mean is this. If it is claimed that
Iman is one of the attributes of Islam, then whoever has belief will have some
attribute of Islam, but not Islam in its totality, which it is one’s duty to have. And
in such a case, a person will be a Muslim only when he has all of the attributes of
Islam. Likewise, a person can only be a believer when he possesses Iman in its
totality. Hence, whoever has some belief [according to this view] will not be a
believer; in fact, he will be considered to have no belief at all. And the same
would apply to whether one is a complete Muslim or not. Every Iman is Islam, but
not every Islam is Iman. However, if they mean by this that every instance of Iman
represents the Islam which Allah commands, then this is in conflict with their
statement that belief is only one attribute of Islam, but not coextensive with it. On
the other hand, perhaps what they mean is that every instance of belief is also an
instance or expression of Islam in the sense of a particular act of obedience to
Allah is part of the Islam that is required of us. However, if this were the case,
then there would be as many Islams as there are acts of obedience. The two
Testimonies of the creed would, in and of themselves, be Islam; prayers alone
would be Islam; zakah would be Islam; as would every dirham one gives to a
needy person, every prostration, every day one fasted, every word of praise to
Allah in prayer, and so on.

Furthermore, if one can only be a Muslim by doing everything that has been
labeled as Islam, then 21-1015530, major sinners, must likewise not be considered
Muslims, even though they are considered believers. Based on the position such
people have adopted, those whom they consider to be believers with perfect Iman
are not Muslims, which is even worse than the view of the Karramites. It also
follows that major sinners among the People of the Qiblah are not to be considered
Muslims, a position more odious than the views espoused by the Kharijites, the
Mu‘tazilites, and others. And if we look upon every act of obedience, be it a
religious duty or a supererogatory act of devotion, to be Islam then anyone who
neglects acts of obedience is thereby not a Muslim.
THE OPINION OF AL-BAQILLANI ON IMAN AND ISLAM 167

But this is inconsistent with the argument they have advanced based on Allah’s
words to the Bedouin Arabs: “... You believe not but you only say we submit...”
(49:14), thereby affirming that they were Muslims while denying that they had
Iman. But to exclude major sinners from being Muslims, if they do in fact thus
exclude them, is a more heinous offense than excluding them from Iman. By so
doing they fall into an error worse than that for which they have condemned the
Mu(‘tazilites. For according to the Qur’an and the Sunnah, to deny that someone
is a believer is more momentous than to deny that he is a Muslim, since Iman in
both the Book and the Sunnah is greater. Perhaps they would say that everyone
who performs some act of obedience will be called a Muslim. If so, however, then
anyone who engaged in some act of obedience, yet did not confess the Muslim
creed, would still be a Muslim, as would anyone who believed in his heart yet did
not voice his belief with his tongue, since Iman as they understand it is Islam, so
that whoever has belief also has Islam. Likewise, someone may be a believer even
if he simply utters the two testimonies without engaging in any good works
whatsoever.

Based on the Qur’anic verse that reads: “The desert Arabs say: ‘We believe.’ Say:
“You believe not but you only say we submit. . .”” (49:14). They noted that Allah
denied that these people had belief while affirming that they were Muslims.
However, one might see this verse as evidence against their views rather than in
favor of them. For when Allah affirms their being Muslims, yet without having
belief, this indicates that Iman is not, in fact, part of Islam. For if it were, then
these people could not have been Muslims without belief. They might argue that
what they actually meant to say was that Allah affirmed that they had “a kind of
Islam,” since in their view, every act of obedience called for by Islam is a kind of
Islam. However, in this case we would reiterate the objection we raised above to
the effect that if this were the case, then every day one fasts, every dirham one
gives in alms, and so on is likewise to be considered Islam.

They said that every believer is a Muslim, but that not every Muslim is a believer.
Moreover, it is claimed that this position is based on the use of the terms Muslim
and “believer” in an absolute sense, whereas when they are spoken of in more
specific terms, belief is viewed as one attribute or aspect of Islam and religion, but
not Islam or religion in their entirety. For Islam is submission to Allah by
undertaking all acts of obedience that He commands. Belief is the weightiest
attribute of Islam, while Islam comprises all acts of obedience through which one
168 CHAPTER TEN

is lead toward Allah, including Iman, 125010, religious duties, and supererogatory
acts of devotion. However, none of the various acts of obedience will be
efficacious in bringing one closer to Allah unless it is preceded by belief. As some
have observed: the word al-din, religion, is derived from the word al-tadayyun,
indebtedness, piety or religiousness, which is close in meaning to Islam.

To this I would reply: If they truly hold this position, then their claim that every
believer is a Muslim but that not every Muslim is a believer is in conflict with this.
For the Muslim is one who is obedient to Allah, but no obedience is efficacious
without belief. Hence, it is impossible for anyone to have performed even the most
minor act of obedience pertaining to Islam except as a believer. Every Muslim
must be a believer whether what one means by Islam is the performance of all
required acts of obedience, or the performance of simply one of them, for in
neither case would these acts have any effect if they were done without belief.
Also, this verse [mentioned above], is evidence against their position rather than
in favor of it.

With regard to the claim that every believer is a Muslim, if by “belief” what they
mean is the tasdiq of the heart alone, then even the man who neither makes the
two testimonies of the creed nor does any of the works that have been commanded
is still a Muslim. However, this is known with certainty to be false with regard to
the religion of Islam. In fact, even most Jews and Christians know that no one is
a Muslim unless he utters the two testimonies of faith or ma yaqumu
maqamuhuma, what could stand for their equivalent.' They held that every
believer is a Muslim, including someone who has neither uttered the two
testimonies nor performed any of the other five pillars of Islam, since such an
individual [in their view] is obedient inwardly; however, this is not the Muslim
recognized in the Book and the Sunnah, nor that recognized by either the earlier
or the later authorities on Islam. Moreover, in support of their claims they cited the
above verse in which they note that Allah affirmed that they were Muslims
without their having belief. Whoever did not know the reality of the situation

' The two Testimonies must be spoken aloud by a person as a Testimony of his sincerity about
entering into the realm of Islam. Normally Muslims, in the practice of their religion, utter the two
Confessions on a regular basis during prayer and on other occasions. "Equivalent" here refers to
the case of those who are either deaf or dumb or have other afflictions preventing them from
saying the two confessions aloud. Therefore, a substitute will be accepted from them if it is
offered with good intention
THE OPINION OF AL-BAQILLANI ON IMAN AND ISLAM 169

would think that this represented the view of the pious ancestors, which is
supported by the Book and the Sunnah, and that according to these authorities,
every believer is a Muslim though not every Muslim is a believer. However, there
is a world of difference between the two [i.e., between this view on one hand, and
that of the pious ancestors on the other]. The views of the Mu‘tazilites on Iman
and Islam were much closer [to those of the pious ancestors] than are those of the
Jahmites. However, the Mu‘tazilites’ belief that the People of the Qiblah abide
eternally in Hell was further away from the teaching of the pious ancestors than
the views of the Jahmites. Later Islamic authorities, who supported Jahm’s view
on the matter of belief, expounded the teaching of the pious ancestors on this
question as well as on that of istithna’, making the exception, and on the absence
of the Iman that is in the heart wherever the Qur’an denies its presence. All of this
is superficially consistent with the views of the pious ancestors; however, in reality
their views are utterly in conflict with the pious ancestors’ teachings. In fact,
nothing could be further from the views they actually held. The views of the
Mu‘tazilites, the Kharijites, and the Karramites concerning the terms Iman and
Islam were closer to the views of the pious ancestors than are those of the
Jahmites. However, the Mu‘tazilites and the Kharijites claimed that disobedient
people shall abide eternally in Hell, which is the furthest one could depart from the
view of the pious ancestors. They {the Mu‘tazilites and the Kharijites] were closer
to the pious ancestors concerning Iman and Islam yet farther from them in the
judgments at which they arrived. In this respect the Jahmites were closer to the
pious ancestors, since they held that major sinners do not abide eternally in Hell.
Nevertheless, their views on the true nature of Islam and Iman and their realities
represented the greatest possible departure from the Book and the Sunnah, while
their [teachings] were more in conflict with reason, Islamic law, and the rules of
the Arabic language than those of any other sect.
Chapter Eleven

Absolute Iman Requires Works

There is a clear indication in the Qur’an that absolute Iman requires works. Allah
says: “Only those believe in Our Verses who, when they are recited to them, fall
down in adoration, and celebrate the praises of their Lord, nor are they [ever]
puffed up with pride” (32:15).Then He illustrates the fact that absolute Iman
requires works. Thus, He does not acknowledge Iman as belonging to those who,
when reminded by the Qur’dn, do not perform the required prostration, for
prostration during the five prayers is obligatory. However, prostration during
recitation is controversial. Some may use the above verse to validate their point
of view [that prostration is obligatory]. However, this is not the place to discuss .
this issue. Likewise, Allah says in the following verses: “Only those are the
believers who have believed in Allah and His Messenger, and afterward doubt not
but strive with their belongings and their lives .. .” (49:15); and“... The believers
are only those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their hearts . . .”
(8:2); and “Only those are believers, who believe in Allah and His Messenger;
when they are with him on a matter requiring collective action, they do not depart
until they have asked for his leave . . .” (24:62); and also Allah says: “May Allah
forgive you [Oh, Muhammad]. Why did you grant them exemption until those who
told the truth were seen by you in a clear light, and you had proved them liars?
Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day ask you for no exemption from
fighting with their goods and persons. And Allah knows well those who do their
duty. Only those who ask you for exemption believe not in Allah and the Last Day,
and whose hearts are in doubt, so that they are tossed in their doubts to and fro”
(9:43-45).

These verses are like what Allah says in the following verse: “You [Oh,
Muhammad] will not find any people who believe in Allah and the Last Day,
ABSOLUTE IMAN REQUIRES WORK 171

making friendship with those who oppose Allah and His Messenger . . .”(58:22).
And He also says: “If only they had believed in Allah and the Prophet
[Muhammad] and in what has been revealed to him, never would they have taken
them [the unbelievers] as protectors . . .” (5:81). Allah shows that Iman has
requirements and counter-requirements. It requires fulfilling the requirements and
rejecting the counter-requirements, which requires affirming its requirements and
negating its counter-requirements. Among some of the aspects of its counter-
requirements are befriending those who oppose Allah and His Messenger and
asking permission from the Messenger to abandon the struggle against the
unbelievers. Indeed, it is clear that asking his [the Prophet’s] permission stems
from those who do not believe in Allah and the Last Day, as indicated in His
saying: “. .. Allah knows well the righteous ones” (9:44). Indeed, the righteous
ones are the believers.

Further evidence is found in the following sayings of the Prophet (pbuh): “The
fornicator who fornicates is no longer a believer as long as he commits it”; and
“He is not a believer whose neighbor feels insecure from his injurious conduct”;
and “You will not believe until you love each other”; and “None of you is a
believer until I am more beloved to him than his son, his father, and all of
mankind”; and also his saying: “No one is a believer from among you until he
loves for his brother that which he loves for himself’; and “He who cheats us is
not from among us, and he who attacks us with weapons is not from among us.”
Chapter Twelve

The Meaning of Conditioned Iman
When Associated With Other Terms

If the word Iman is used in a conditioned sense by being associated either with
Islam or with righteous deeds, it may unambiguously refer to Iman that is in the
heart. For example, when the following two phrases are conjoined, “those who
believe and work righteousness,” both these righteous deeds are implied in Iman.
But when they are joined with Iman, two possible interpretations arise. One is that
the conjunction of the deeds (which are specific) with Iman (which is absolute)
indicates that Iman implies deeds as well as other matters. The other interpretation
is that Iman is peculiar to the heart and does not include righteous deeds. The
same is true of other words in general, with varying gradations of an absolute or
a conditional sense. Examples are the words “good” and “evil” if used as in the
sayings of Allah. Allah says: “. . . He will enjoin on them that which is right and
forbid them that which is wrong . . .” (7:157); and “You are the best of peoples,
evolved for mankind, enjoining what is right, forbidding what is wrong .. .”
(3:110). Allah also says: “The believers, men and women, are friends of each
other, they enjoin good and forbid evil . . .” (9:71). This indicates that the word
“good” encompasses all that is good, and that the word “evil” implies all that is
wrong. However, if the words “good” and “evil” are joined to something more
specific, as in the following saying of Allah, then they could be joined with what
is more specific. Allah says: “In most of their secret talks there is no good: but if
one exhorts to a deed of charity or good or conciliation between people . . .”
(4:114). The words “good,” “charity,” and “conciliation” are differentiated from
each other in the same way that the words Iman and deeds are. The same token
applies to Allah’s saying: “... For prayer restrains from shameful and unjust deeds
...” (29:45), wherein He differentiates between shameful and unjust deeds, as in
His saying: “. . . and forbid evil . . .” (9:71). And then He mentions, along with evil
THE MEANING OF CONDITIONED IMAN 173

deeds, two other concepts: justice and perfection. Allah says: “Indeed Allah
enjoins justice and perfection in performing [religious duties], giving to kinsfolk,
and forbidding evil [deeds], what is wrong and acts of oppression . . .” (16:90).
The word “oppression” stands in contrast to the two positive concepts mentioned
in the verse. Furthermore, in this verse, the word munkar, evil deeds, is cited along
with “oppression” and “what is wrong.”

Another term that belongs tn this discussion is al-‘ibadah, worship. When there is
an absolute command to worship Allah, that worship includes everything Allah
commands us to do—for example, depending on Allah and seeking Allah’s aid.
Such actions are implied, as in the following Qur?anic verses. Allah says “I have
created both jinn and humans only to worship Me” (51:57). Allah also says: “And
worship Allah and associate nothing with Him in worship . . .”' (4:36); and “Oh
people worship your Lord who created you...” (2:21); and “Indeed we have sent
down the Book to you [Oh, Muhammad] in truth: so worship Allah by doing
religious deeds sincerely” (39:2); and “Say [Oh, Muhammad] ‘I worship only
Allah by doing religious deeds sincerely for His Sake only’” (39:14); and “Say
[Oh, Muhammad] ‘Do you order me to worship other than Allah, Oh you ignorant
ones?’” (39:64). The term “worship” might be associated with other words as well,
as in the verses which read: “You we worship and You we seek help from” (1:5);
and “. . . So worship Him [Oh, Muhammad] and put your trust in Him. . .”
(11:123); He also says: “And worship Allah and fear Him and obey me” (71:3).
Likewise, when the phrase, ta‘at Allah, obedience to Allah, occurs alone it
includes everything that Allah commands. Also included within this is obedience
to the Messenger. Similar to these is the term al-taqwa, piety or fear of Allah,
which encompasses doing all that is commanded and abandoning everything that
is forbidden.

According to Talag Ibn Habib, taqwa, piety, is defined as “acting in obedience to
Allah by the light of Allah and in hopes of Allah’s mercy, as well as abandoning
all disobedience to Allah, by the light of Allah, and in fear of Allah’s retribution.”
This is consistent with the verse that reads: Allah says: “Indeed the pious ones will
be in the midst of Gardens and Rivers [Paradise]. In a seat of Truth [i.e., Paradise],
near the Omnipotent King” (54:54-55). This term, taqwa, may also be associated

' In the MI.2 edition (p. 155) this portion of this verse is repeated twice. It is obviously a simple
typographical error.
174 CHAPTER TWELVE

with other concepts, as in the following verses. Allah says: “. .. And whosoever
fears Allah will make a way for him to get out. He will provide him from [sources]
he never could imagine. And whosoever puts his trust in Allah, then He will
suffice him . . .” (65:2—3); and “. . . Indeed, he who fears Allah with obedience to
Him, and is patient, then surely, Allah makes not the reward of the good-doers to
be lost” (12:90); He also says: “. . . And fear Allah through Whom you claim your
mutual [rights], and the wombs [that bore you] . . .” (4:1); and“... Fear Allah and
speak always the Truth” (33:70); and “. . . Fear Allah and be with those who are
true [in words and deeds]” (9:119); and “. . . Fear Allah as He should be feared
and die not except in a state of being Muslims” (3:102); and so forth.

Thus Allah’s saying: “. . . Fear Allah and be with those who are true [in words and
deeds]” (9:119) is similar to His saying: “Believe in Allah and His Messenger and
spend of that which He has made you trustees of . . .” (57:7). Allah also says: “The
Messenger believes in what has been revealed to him from his Lord, as do the men
of belief. Each one [of them] believes in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His
Messengers. We make no distinction [they say] between one and another of His
Messengers. And they say: ‘We hear, and we obey’” (2:285), [shameful deeds] are
implied in unjust deeds. Their saying, ‘we hear, and we obey’ is conjoined with
Iman [each one of the believers believes in Allah and His Angels] as well as the
phrase “directed to the right,” associated with fearing Allah in the previous verse,
and it is well known that the phrase “fear of Allah,” if used alone, implies the
“word directed to the right.” Likewise, the word Iman, if used alone, implies
hearing and obeying Allah and His Messenger. Similarly Allah says: “Believe in
Allah and His Messenger . . . :” (57:7). If the term “belief in Allah” is used in an
absolute sense in connection with Muhammad’s community of belief, then it
includes belief in Muhammad as the Messenger of Allah, based on the verse that
reads: “. .. Each one [of them] believes in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His
Messengers . . .” (2:285). We may conclude that if we speak in an absolute manner
of belief in Allah, it implies within it belief in such subordinate realities as those
mentioned here [namely, Allah’s Angels, His Books and His Messengers]. The
same truth is affirmed in the following verses. Allah says: “And those who believe
in that which has been revealed to you [Oh, Muhammad], and in that which was
revealed before you . . .” (2:4); and Allah also says: “Say [Oh, Muslims], “we
believe in Allah and that which has been revealed to us and that which has been
revealed to Abraham. . .”” (2:136).
THE MEANING OF CONDITIONED IMAN 175

We may conclude, based on the following saying of Allah: “. . . So believe in
Allah and His Messenger [Muhammad], the Prophet who could neither read or
write . . .” (7:158), that belief in Allah’s Messenger includes belief in all His
Books and Prophets. Similarly, Allah says: “. . . And believe too in His Messenger,
He will give you a double portion of His Mercy . . .” (57:28). He also says:
“Believe in Allah and His Messenger and spend of that whereof he has made you
trustees . . :” (57:7). This indicates that belief in Allah and His Messenger implies
belief in all these related promises and commands. The command to spend one’s
wealth as Allah’s stewards is also found in another verse. Allah says: “Believe in
Allah and His Messenger . . .” (57:7), just as the command to speak rightly is
implied in the verse which reads: “. . . And indeed, We have recommended the
people of the Scripture before you . . .” (4:131).

The same applies to the word al-birr, righteousness, which, if used in an absolute
sense, implies all of what Allah commands, as illustrated in the following verses.
Allah says: ‘“‘As for the righteous ones, they will be blessed; and the wicked, they
will be in the Fire” (82:13-14); and“... It is a virtue if you fear Allah...”
(2:189); and “. . . But it is righteousness to believe in Allah and the Last Day, and
the Angels, and the Book, and the Prophets; to spend of your substance, out of
love for Him, for your kin, for the orphans, for the needy, for the wayfarer, for
those who ask, and for the ransom of slaves; to be steadfast in prayer, and practice
regular charity; to fulfill the contracts you have made; and to be firm and patient,
in pain [or suffering] and adversity, and throughout all periods of panic. Such are
the people of piety” (2:177). The word al-birr, righteousness, ifused in an absolute
sense, implies al-taqwa, fearing Allah. Likewise, al-taqwa, fearing Allah, if used
in an absolute sense, implies righteousness. But it is no longer the case if they are
used in conjunction with each other, as in Allah’s saying: “. . . Help you one
another in righteousness and fearing Allah .. .” (5:2).

Likewise, the vord ithm, sim, when used in an absolute sense, encompasses all sins
and misdeeds. At times this term is associated with the concept of al-‘udwan,
aggression, as in the verse: “. . . And do help one another in sin and aggression
... (5:2). The term dhunub, sins, when used in an absolute sense, includes the
neglect of any duty and the commission of any forbidden act, as may be seen in
Allah’s saying, “. . . Oh, My slaves who have transgressed against themselves!
Despair not of the Mercy of Allah, indeed Allah forgives all sins . . .” (39:53). The
same word may be found in conjunction with other related concepts. For example,
176 CHAPTER TWELVE

Allah says: “. .. Our Lord! Forgive us our sins and our transgressions . . .” (3:147).
With respect to the term al-huda, guidance, when used in an absolute sense, it
includes both the knowledge with which Allah sent His Messenger, as well as
acting on the basis of such knowledge. For this reason it comprises everything that
Allah has commanded, as Allah says: “Guide us to the Straight Way” (1:6), which
- is a prayer both to know the truth with certainty and to be enabled to act on it.
Similarly, what is meant in the following verse: “. .. Guidance belongs to the God-
fearing” (2:2), is that such individuals both have knowledge of what Allah’s
guidance consists of and act based on that knowledge, on account of which they
have prospered spiritually. The concept of guidance appears also in the words
spoken by those in Paradise. Allah says: “. . . Praise be to Allah Who guides us for
this . . .” (7:43), for Allah has guided them by inspiring them with beneficial
knowledge and.the wherewithal to do good works. The notion of guidance may
_also be linked with that of al-ijtiba’, choosing or election. Allah says: “. . . We
chose them, and We guided them to a straight path” (6:87); and “[He was]
thankful for His Graces. He chose him and guided him. . .” (16:121); and“...
Allah chooses for Himself whom He will, and guides unto Himself who turns to
Him in repentance and obedience” (42:13); and “He it is Who has sent His
Messenger with guidance and the Religion of Truth [Islam] . . .” (48:28). In this
last verse, “guidance” refers to belief, while “the religion of truth” refers to Islam.
And if the term “guidance” is used in an absolute sense, then the term “belief” is
used in a similar fashion; it includes both true guidance and adherence to Islam.

As for the word al-dalal, error (i. e., to go astray), when used in an absolute sense, _
it refers to anyone who has strayed from right guidance, whether deliberately or
out of ignorance. Moreover, such a person must suffer torment. Allah says:
“Indeed, they found their fathers on the wrong path, so they [too] made haste to
follow in their footsteps” (37:69—70); and He also says: « . . And they will say:
‘Our Lord! Indeed, we obeyed our chiefs and our great ones and they mislead us
from the [right] way. Our Lord! Give them double torment and curse them with
a mighty curse!’” (33:67-68). Allah also says: “. . . Then whoever follows My
guidance shall neither go astray, nor fall into distress and misery” (20:123). This
term may also be associated with the concepts of al-ghayy, transgression, and al-
ghadab, wrath. Allah says: “Your companion [Muhammad] has neither gone
astray nor has erred” (53:2); and “The Way of those on whom You have bestowed
Your Grace, not(the way) of those who earned Your anger nor of those who went
THE MEANING OF CONDITIONED IMAN 177

astray” (1:7); and “Indeed the criminals are in error and will burn in the Hellfire
in the Hereafter” (54:47). The word ghayy, likewise, if used in an absolute
manner, includes any act of disobedience against Allah. This may be seen in
Aliah’s saying concerning Satan: “. . . I shall mislead them all. Except Your
chosen, slaves among them” (15:39-40). Moreover, it may also be paired with the
word dalal, to go astray, as in the verse: “Your companion [Muhammad] has
neither gone astray nor has erred” (53:2).

Similarly, if the word faqir, poor, is used in an absolute way, implies miskin,
needy, which in turn, if it is applied in an absolute sense, it implies “‘poor,” as in
the following sayings of Allah: “. . . But if you conceal them [acts of charity], and
make them reach those [really] in need, that is best for you. . .” (2:271); and“...
For expiation, feed ten needy persons . . .” (5:89). But if both words are joined
together, they have distinct meanings, as illustrated in Allah’s saying: “Alms are
for the poor and the needy . . .” (9:60).

With regard to those nouns whose significations differ according to whether they
are used in a mugayyad, qualified, versus a mutlaq, absolute, manner, or in tajrid,
isolation, versus in iqtiran, conjunction, with another word, one finds at times,
when one of two words that were previously paired is used in isolation from the
other, it takes on a more inclusive meaning than it did when it was paired.
Examples of words thus used in context with one another are: Iman, belief, and
ma‘rif, commendable work; al-‘amal, work, and al-sidg, truthfulness, or al-
munkar, bad act, al-fahsha’, abomination, and al-baghi, injustice; and so on. At
other times, however, two or more words are equally general or specific, as are
Iman, belief, birr, piety, and taqwa, righteousness; or the words faqir, poor, and
miskin, needy. Any of these sets of words, when employed in an absolute sense,
take on whatever meaning is borne by the other. The same applies to the term
tilawah, recitation; if this word is used in an absolute sense, as in the following
verse. Allah says: “Those to whom We gave the Book recite it as it should be
recited . . .” (2:121). This verse includes the sense of carrying out the recitation.
This is how it has been interpreted by the Companions of the Prophet and their
Successors, among them Ibn Mas‘id, Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, and others, who said
“The clause yatliunahu 22002 tilawatihi, recited is as it should be recited, means
that they follow it [the Book] as it ought to be followed, allowing that which it
permits and banning what it forbids, obeying those commands whose meanings
178 CHAPTER TWELVE

are clear and unequivocal, and accepting on belief those words in it which are
obscure to them.” Others have said that recitation here means “carrying out” or
“following,” as in the verse: “And by the Moon as it follows it [the sun]” (91:2).
Hence, it includes those who have not read the Book. Still others have stated that
for someone to undertake a perfect reading or recitation [of the Book], he must
understand its meaning and conduct himself on that basis. As Abu ‘Abd al-
Rahman al-Sulami’ said: “Those who used to teach us the Qur’an related to us that
“Uthman Ibn ‘Affan, ‘Abd Allah Ibn Mas‘iid, and others, whenever the Prophet
(pbuh) taught them ten verses of the Qur’an, would not go on to any other verses
until they had mastered both their meanings and their applications. Hence they
used to say: “We have memorized the Qur’dn, gained understanding of its
meaning, and learned how to put it into practice.”

In the verse quoted above, in which Allah says: “Those to whom We gave the
Book recite it as it should be recited . . .” (2:121), the word “Book” has been
interpreted by some to mean the Qur’4n, and by others to refer to the Torah [i.e.,
the Jewish scriptures]. Muhammad Ibn Nasr related through a reliable chain of
authority that according to Ibn ‘Abbas, the phrase “they recite it as it should be
recited” means that they follow it perfectly. Another interpretation of the same
phrase, also attributed to Ibn ‘Abbas, is that they permitted what it [the Book]
allows, they forbade what it disallows, and they did not distort its meanings.
According to the view attributed to Qatadah, its meaning is that they believed in
it; those who believed in it were Muhammad’s Companions, who believed in
Allah’s Book, permitting what it allows, forbidding what it disallows, and
practicing what it teaches. It has been mentioned to us that Ibn Mas‘td said: “Its
correct recitation means that one permits what it allows, forbids what it disallows,
recites it in the way in which it was revealed by Allah, and does not distort its
meaning.” According to the view attributed to al-Hassan [al-Basri]: “they recited
it with a true recitation” means that they obeyed all its teachings whose meanings
are clear and accepted, on belief, those teachings that are of likeness to each other,
entrusting all those parts whose meanings are unclear to them to the One who has
complete knowledge. And according to the view attributed to Mujahid, it means
that they followed it perfectly and also, according to him, practiced it fully.

2 Abii ‘Abd al-Rahmén al-Sulami (2-74 A.H.) was born during the Prophet’s lifetime and studied
the Qur’an from the Caliphs ‘Uthmian and ‘Ali. He was also a scholar of hadith. [Al-Fihrist, vol.
2, page 1104 and Kitab al-Iman MZ, page 162.]
THE MEANING OF CONDITIONED IMAN 179

The term “recitation” may also be used in context with other words as well, as
may be seen in the following verse. Allah says: “Recite [Oh, Muhammad] what
has been revealed to you of the Book, and offer prayers. Indeed, prayer prevents
abomination and wicked deeds . . .” (29:45). According to Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and
others, “recitation of the Book” means practicing complete obedience to Allah,
besides which specific mention is made of prayer, as Allah says: “And as to those
who hold fast to the Book and offer prayers perfectly . . .” (7:170); and“... So
worship Me, and offer prayers perfectly for My remembrance” (20:14). Similarly,
the phrase ittiba‘u ma anzala Allah, following what Allah has revealed,
encompasses all acts of obedience, as in the following verses. Allah says: “Follow
what has been sent down unto to you from your Lord, and follow not any
protectors who order you to associate partners besides Him...” (7:3); and“. ..
Then whoever follows My guidance shall neither go astray nor fall into misery”
(20:123); and “And indeed, this is My Straight Path, so follow it, and follow not
other paths for they will separate you away from His Path. . .” (6:153). This term
[recitation] may also be used in context with other, related words, as in the verses
that read: ‘“‘And this is a blessed Book which We have sent down, so follow it and
fear Allah, that you may receive mercy” (6:155); and “Follow what has been
inspiring to you (Oh, Muhammad] from your Lord; no god is worthy to be
worshiped except Him and turn aside those who join others and worship with
Him” (6:106); and “And [Oh, Muhammad], follow the inspiration sent you, and
be patient until Allah gives judgement. And He is the best of judges” (10:109).

Similar to this is the term al-Abrar, the Righteous Ones, which if used in an
absolute sense implies everyone who fears Allah, whether he follows a middle
course or is among the foremost. Allah says: ‘“‘As for the Righteous Ones, they will
be blessed; and the wicked ones, they will be in the Fire” (82:13-14). But it is no
longer the case if the term “Righteous Ones” is Joined to “those nearest [to
Allah].” Allah says: “. . . Indeed the record of the Righteous Ones is {preserved]
in ‘Tliyyan. And what will make you know what ’Illiyyiin is? [There is} a register
[fully} inscribed, to which bear witness those nearest [to Allah]” (82:18—21).

To best understand the denotations and connotations of the words of the Book and
the Sunnah, one has to take into consideration their conditioned and absolute
usages as well as the general and specific usage of their meanings. For in this way,
many controversies will be resolved, one of which is the issue of Islam and Iman.
This was the first controversial question over which people differed in the
180 CHAPTER TWELVE

interpretation of the Book and the Sunnah, to the point where they accused each
other of being unbelievers. And they fought with each other, as has been explained
elsewhere. What we aim at is explaining the words of Allah and His Messenger
in a way that indicates that guidance is received from the words of Allah and His
Messenger. This can be accomplished by citing only the sayings that are based on
the Words of Allah and on the authoritative sayings of His Messenger [excluding
those with weak attestation].

An illustration of this point is the interpretation of the pious ancestors and Muslim
jurists of the Sunnah of the word Iman. At one time they said that Iman is: “a
saying and work;” at another time, “a saying, a work, and an intent;” and at still
another time, “a saying, a work, an intent, and a following of the Sunnah;” and
also, “a saying with the tongue, a belief in the heart, and an act by the parts of the
body.” Indeed, all these interpretations are correct. For if they said: “Iman means
saying and work,” then an act of speech, if used freely, implies the action of both
heart and tongue; and works imply both overt and covert deeds. With regard to
what is referred to by the terms kalam, speech, and qawl, saying, when used in an
absolute sense, four positions have been taken. The position adopted by the pious
ancestors, scholars of Islamic jurisprudence, and the majority of other people is
that such terms refer to both a saying itself and the meaning it bears, just as the
term al-insan, person, refers to both the spirit and the body. Others, however, have
held that what these terms refer to is nothing but the saying alone, whereas the
meaning does not form part of the referent. Rather, the meaning is the signification
that the referent bears or conveys, rather than being part of the referent itself. This
second view was held by many scholastic theologians among the Mu‘tazilites and
others, as well as some Orthodox Muslims. It is also the view adopted by
grammarians, whose profession concerns itself with words [and matters relating
to them]. According to the third view, these terms refer only to the meaning.
Moreover, when one uses the term kalam, speech, in an absolute manner to refer
to the utterance itself, one is using it figuratively. It is also the view held by Ibn
Kullab and his followers. As for the fourth view, it holds that the terms kalam,
speech, and qawl, saying, refer to the utterance and the meaning [i.e., after the
manner of a single word that simultaneously bears more than one meaning]. This
final view was the one held by later followers of Ibn Kullab. Moreover, in addition
to the third and fourth views cited here, the followers of Ibn Kullab proposed a
third position (related on the authority of Abu al-Hassan [al-Ash‘ari]), according
THE MEANING OF CONDITIONED IMAN 181

to which such terms are figurative when used to refer to Allah’s words, and literal
when used to refer to human words. This is because the words uttered by human
beings inhere in them in such a way that speech may not exist apart from the
speaker, whereas this is not the case with regard to the words of the Qur’an, which
do not inhere to Allah as to be considered His speech. (This matter is discussed
elsewhere.)

What is meant here is that those among the pious ancestors who said that belief
consists of both a saying and a work were referring to the saying of both the heart
and the tongue, and to the work of both the heart and body parts. As for those who
meant [mere] al-1‘tiqad, submission, they held that the term qawl, saying, should
be understood to mean nothing but what one utters outwardly, although some by
contrast, include belief in the heart. And if they said: “Iman is a saying, a work,
and an intent,” then the saying implies both belief and expression with the tongue,
while a work may not imply an intent; therefore, they added “intent” to their
interpretation. Moreover, their addition of the phrase “following the Sunnah” to
their interpretation of Iman 15 attributed to the fact that a saying, a work, and an
intent are not pleasing to Allah unless they follow the Sunnah. In fact, the intent
behind all this is to refute the Mujuri’ites, who restricted Iman to a saying only.
Those who define Iman as four parts: a saying, a work, an intent, and a following
of the Sunnah, interpret it in the way Sahl Ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Tustari’ did when he
was asked about it. He said: “Iman is a saying, a work, an intent, and a Sunnah.”
For if Iman is a saying without works, it will be considered unbelief; if it is a
saying and a work but without an intent, it will be considered hypocrisy; and if it
is a saying, a work, and an intent but without Sunnah, it will be considered
innovation.

3 Al-Tustan, Abii Muhammad Sahl Ibn ‘Abd Allah Ibn Yiinus (7-896 A.D.), was a Sufi who used
allegorical interpretations of the Qur’dn and was famous for his austerity. [Al-Fihrist, vol. 2,
1088.)
Chapter Thirteen

Association of Words and Phrases

The association of one word or phrase with another by means of a conjunction
such as the word “and,” whether in the Qur’an or any other form of speech,
requires that there be some sort of dissimilarity or contrast between the first term
mentioned and the one conjoined to it, while at the same time the two terms must
share jointly in the meaning attributed to a larger statement of which they are a
part. There are varying levels of dissimilarity that may exist between two such
terms, the highest being that they are entirely dissimilar such that neither of the
two is synonymous with the other, neither of them makes up any part of the other,
nor does either of them bear a logically necessary connection to the other. An
example of this situation may be seen in the following verses. Allah says: “He
Who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days...
.” (25:59); and “. . . Gabriel and Michael . . .” (2:98); and “. . . And He sent down
the Torah and the Gospel, before this, as a guidance to mankind, and He sent down
the Criterion . . .” (3:34). This is the most common type of occurrence. The next
level of contrast is seen when there is a type of luziim, necessary link, between the
two terms, as in the command, Allah says: “And mix not truth with falsehood, nor
conceal the truth . . .” (2:42); and “And whoever contradicts and opposes the
Messenger [Muhammad] after the right path had been shown clearly to him, and
follows other than the believer’s way . . .” (4:115); and “. . . And whosoever
disbelieves in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His Messengers. . .” (4:136). For
whoever has disbelieved in Allah has likewise disbelieved in all these other things
as well (i.e., Allah’s Angels, His Books, and His Messengers). Hence, the second
term bears an essential link to the term with which it is conjoined. In the verse
preceding this, the first term necessarily includes the second term associated with
it; that is, whoever sets himself against the Messenger, even after the path of right
ASSOCIATION OF WORDS AND PHRASES 183

guidance has been made clear to him, has thereby followed a path other than that
of the believers. However, concerning this second type of linkage there is some
disagreement. Allah says: “And mix not truth with falsehood, nor conceal the truth
...” (2:42). In this verse, the first and second phrases are necessarily linked; for
whoever confuses the truth with falsehood has thereby rendered the truth obscure
such that falsehood becomes manifest while truth is hidden. Moreover, whoever
conceals the truth must put falsehood in its place; and in this sense he confuses,
or “clothes” truth with falsehood, as it were. For this reason, any of the People of
the Book (1.e., Jews or Christians) who conceal what Allah reveals must by
necessity bring falsehood to the fore.

Similarly, in the case of heretical sects, you will not find anyone who has
abandoned some aspect of the teachings of the Sunnah that must be believed in
and acted on but that he has fallen into some sort of heresy. And conversely, you
will not find anyone professing a heretical belief but that he has rejected some part
of the Sunnah. As is stated in the tradition related by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal: “No
community has devised a heretical teaching but that they have rejected some
corresponding aspect of the Sunnah.” Allah says: “... But they forget a good part
of the Message that was sent to them. So we planted among them enmity and
hatred .. .” (5:14). When they forgot part of that which they had been reminded
of, they replaced it with something else, with the result that enmity and hatred
sprang up among them. Allah also says: “And whosoever turns away from the
remembrance of the Beneficent, We appoint for him a Satan to be a close
companion to him” (43:36). The dhikr, remembrance, mentioned here refers to the
message that had been sent down by the Most Beneficent One. Allah says: “. . .
Then whoever follows My guidance shall neither go astray, nor fall into misery.
But whosoever turns away from My Reminder, indeed for him is a life of hardship,
and We shall raise him up blind on the Day of Resurrection” (20:123~24); and
“Follow what has been sent down to you from your Lord, and follow not any
protectors beside Him. Little do you remember” (7:3). Hence, Allah commands
that we follow what He sends down and forbids us to do whatever is contrary to
this, one aspect of which is following awliya’, protectors, other than Him. For
whoever does not follow one of the two must necessarily be following the other.
For this reason Allah says: “. . . And follows other than the believers’ way .. .”
(4:115). According to Islamic scholars, whoever is not following the path of the
believers must necessarily be following some other path; from this they concluded
184 CHAPTER THIRTEEN

that following the path of the believers is a duty. Moreover, no one is permitted
to depart from those tenets on which such Islamic authorities have unanimously
agreed.

Similarly it may be said that whoever has not done what is commanded has
thereby done some of what is forbidden, just as whoever has done what is
forbidden has not done all that is commanded. For it is not possible for someone
to do all of what has been commanded while also doing some of what is forbidden,
nor is it possible for someone to abandon all of what has been forbidden while also
neglecting some of what has been commanded. For abandoning that which is
forbidden is part of what has been commanded, and is thus itself commanded; and
part of what is forbidden is the neglect of what has been commanded. Hence also,
everything that distracts someone from doing his duty is forbidden, and everything
without which one cannot undertake one’s duties must therefore be done. It is for
this reason that the term “command,” when used in an absolute manner, includes
prohibition, and if it is used in a conditional sense with prohibition, then this
prohibition is similar to what has been mentioned above. Thus, Allah says,
concerning the angels: “... . Those who did not disobey Allah of what He
commands them to do . . .” (66:6), this includes the notion that if He forbids them
to do something, they will avoid it. And as for the what He [Allah] says: “. . . They
do what they are commanded” (66:6), it has been interpreted to mean that they do
not go beyond what they have been commanded to do. Another interpretation of
this statement is that they do what they are commanded at the proper time; that ts,
they do it neither earlier nor later than they are commanded to do so.

It might be said that Allah did not say that they do nothing but what they are
commanded. Allah says: “They speak not until He has spoken, and they act on His
command” (21:27). It has been said that this means that they do not disobey the
commands He has given them in the past, and they do what they have been
commanded to do in the future. It might [also] be said that this verse is a statement
of fact concerning what will be in the future. What they have been commanded to
do here does not apply to the past; rather, it all pertains to the future. Allah says:
“.. Protect yourselves and your families from the Fire . . .” (66:6), where that
with which they protect themselves applies to the future. It might also be said that
one may neglect what He has been commanded to do either as a result of
disobeying a command, or due to an inability to perform it. Hence, if one is both
able and willing, then there must exist that which is both commanded and
ASSOCIATION OF WORDS AND PHRASES 185

practicable. For the clause “they do not disobey” means that they do not refrain
from obeying; and Allah’s saying: “... They do what they are commanded” (66:6)
means that they are capable of doing what is commanded, and are not unable to
do any of it; in fact, they perform all of it without exception, which necessitates
the existence of everything they have been commanded [to do]. Implied in this
may be the understanding that they do nothing but that which is commanded. One
might say, for example, “I do what I was commanded,” that is, “I do it without
going beyond it either by way of addition or omission.”

Allah says: “... Those who did not disobey Allah in what He commanded them
to do . . .” (66:6), if Allah forbids them to perform some action, then this
prohibition would be part of His command. Moreover, if He does not forbid them
to do such a thing, they would not be considered blameworthy for doing what they
had not been forbidden to do.

The point being made here 15 that the term al-amr, command, if used in an absolute
sense, implies some prohibition. This may be seen in the following command.
Allah says: “. .. Obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and those of you who are in
authority . . . (4:59). Those referred to here as uliy al-amr, people of authority, are
those with the authority to issue commands, and anyone with the authority to issue
commands likewise has the authority to issue prohibitions, and must be obeyed in
his prohibitions no less than in his commands. Moses said to al-Khidr, Allah says:
“He [Moses] said, if Allah wills, you will find me patient, and I will not disobey
your command. He [al-Khidr] said, then, if you follow me, ask me not about
anything until I, myself, mention it to you” (18:69-70). He [Moses] is forbidden
to ask al-Khidr any questions until he mentions it to him. However, when al-Khidr
pierces the ship, Moses says to him, Allah says: “. . . Have you scuttled it [the
ship} in order to drown its people? Indeed, you have done a dreadful thing”
(18:71), thus asking him a question before al-Khidr mentions it to him. This is the
case also when al-Khidr kills the young man and Moses says, Allah says: “. . .
Have you killed an innocent person who had killed none? Indeed, you have done
a prohibited thing” (18:74). When al-Khidr builds the wall, Moses says to him,
Allah says: “. . . If you had wished, surely, you could have taken wages for it”
(18:77). This statement of Moses bears the sense of a question, since both
questions and requests may be stated in the form of a conditional statement. One
might say, for example, “if you stayed with us, you would honor us” or “if you
spent the night with us, you would be doing us a favor.” This form of expression
186 CHAPTER THIRTEEN

may be seen in Adam and Eve’s words, Allah says: “. . . Our Lord! we have
wronged ourselves. If you forgive us not, and if you do not bestow Your Mercy on
us, we shall certainly be the losers” (7:23); and in Noah’s statement: “. . . Oh my
Lord! I seek refuge with You from asking You that of which I have no knowledge.
And unless You forgive me and have Mercy on me, I would indeed be one of the
losers” (11:47), and numerous other examples. Moses said to al-Khidr, Allah says:
“... If Task you anything after this, keep me not in your company . . .” (18:76),
thus indicating that he has asked him the three questions before thereby disobeying
the prohibition which was implied in his assertion: Allah says: “. . . And I will not
disobey your command” (18:69). And as we have seen, whoever disobeys a
prohibition has also disobeyed a command. This may also be seen in the
following. Allah says: “. . . Surely, His is the Creation and Commandment . . .”
(7:54), where the giving of prohibitions is implied in the giving of commands. The
same may be inferred from the following verses. Allah says: “. . . And let those
who oppose his [Muhammad’s] commandment beware . . .” (24:63) and “It is not
for a believer, man or woman, when Allah and His Messenger have decreed a
matter that they should have any option in their decision . . .” (33:36).

Islamic jurists have been in disagreement over the most correct interpretation of
a man’s statement to his wife: “if you disobey my command, you shall be
divorced.” The question being: if he forbids her to do something and she disobeys
him, is this situation included in the conditional statement above? Two different
answers have been proposed to this question. Some have held that the situation
described here is not covered by the man’s statement on the grounds that a
command is one thing, and a prohibition is another. Others, however, have insisted
that it is indeed covered by it, since it is customarily understood from a command
that it implies some prohibitions. [I hold that] the latter view is the correct one; for
the customary understanding referred to here is consistent with both linguistic
usage and Islamic law. For if it is said: “obey so-and-so’s command,” or “so-and-
so obeyed so-and-so’s command,” or “he does not disobey his command,” these
all encompass prohibitions. After all, the one who forbids is commanding that one
abandon that which is forbidden. Thus, Allah says: “And mix not truth with
falsehood, nor conceal the truth while you know it” (2:42). He did not say: “do not
conceal the truth.” There was no need for two prohibitions to be stated, since each
prohibition was necessarily implied by the other. The “and” in the verse quoted is
not a waw al-jam‘, conjunction of addition, referred to by Kiufan linguists as a
ASSOCIATION OF WORDS AND PHRASES 187

waw al-sarf, morphological conjunction, as some might assume it to be. For if it
were, then the meaning of the verse would have been: “‘do not combine these two
activities [that is, confusing the truth with falsehood and concealing the truth],”
the implication of which would be that engaging in either of them by itself would
not be forbidden.

Moreover, this only comes into play if the distinction becomes apparent. Allah
says: “. . . Before Allah tests those of you who fought and tests those who
remained patient” (3:142); and “Or He may destroy them because of that which
their [people] have earned. And He pardons much. And those who dispute with
regard to Our Signs may know that there is no place of refuge for them”
(42:34~-35). An example of the conjunction of two terms where one of the two is
necessarily implied in the other is an ‘atf al-malzim, binding conjunction. Allah
says: “. . . Obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and those of you who are in
authority .. .” (4:59), for if they obey the Prophet, they have obeyed Allah. Allah
also says: “He who obeys the Messenger has indeed obeyed Allah...” (4:80), and
if whoever has received Muhammad’s message has obeyed Allah, then he must
necessarily have obeyed the Messenger. For there is no obedience to Allah apart
from obedience to His Messenger. As for the third level of distinction, it is the
conjunction of two terms in which one of the two forms part of the other. Allah
says: “Guard your prayers, especially the middle prayer . . .” (2:238); and “And
when We took from the Prophets their Covenant, and from you [Oh, Muhammad]
and from Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, son of Mary . . .” (33:7); and “Whoever
is an enemy to Allah, His Angels, His Messengers, Gabriel and Michael . . .”
(2:98); and “And He caused you to inherit their lands, and their houses and their
properties, and a land which you had not trodden [before] . . .” (33:27). And lastly
we have the fourth level of distinction, which involves the conjunction of different
terms in order to bring out a distinction among two or more qualities in a single
entity. Allah says: “Glorify the name of your Lord, the Most High; Who has
created, then proportioned it; And Who has measured, then guided; And Who
brings out the [green and luscious] pasture” (87: |—4) and “Those who believe in
the unseen and offer their prayers, and spend out of what We have provided for
them; And those who believe in that which has been revealed to you [Oh,
Muhammad] and in that which has been revealed before you [i.e., the Torah and
the Gospel] and they believe in the Hereafter” (2:34). There are examples in
poetry of conjunctions between terms that are said by some to be for the purpose
188 CHAPTER THIRTEEN

of highlighting a distinction in pronunciation only [as opposed to a distinction in
meaning]. For example, we have a verse of poetry that reads: wa alfa qawlaha
kadhiban wa mina, And he found what she said to be a falsehood and a lie.

There are some who claim that this sort of thing is also found in the Book of
Allah. For example, Allah says: “. . . [We have prescribed] a law and a clear way
...” (5:48). However, they are mistaken, for this type of conjunction never occurs
in the Quran, nor, for that matter, in any type of eloquent speech. Rather, the
purpose behind instances of this type of conjunction is to bring out a distinction
in meaning between the conjoined terms. As an example of a conjunction for the
purpose of highlighting a mere distinction in pronunciation, some have cited the
following verse of poetry:

la habbadha hindun wa ?ardun biha hindu

wa hindun °ata min duniha al-na’yu wal-bu‘du

Ah, how lovely is Hind, and how beautiful is any land in which she is to be found,
yet remoteness and distance have come without her.

They have claimed that the two words al-na’yu and al-bu‘du, translated as
remoteness, and distance, have the same meaning. And in support of their view
they have cited the Qur’anic phrase quoted above, namely, shir‘atan wa minhajan,
saying that these two words, which convey the senses of “law” and “way,” “road,”
“method,” or “program,” respectively, mean basically the same thing. However,
those who disagree with this view have objected, saying that al-na’ yu, remoteness,
has a broader, more inclusive meaning than al-bu‘du, distance. The first term
encompasses the notions of contrast, dissimilarity, parting, leave taking, and
departure, and may or may not involve geographical distance; the latter term, on
the other hand, is used only to speak of those entities separated by a great
geographical distance. Allah says: “And they prevent others from him [from
following Muhammad] and they themselves keep away from him . . .” (6:26);
those people referred to are considered blameworthy for avoiding and distancing
themselves from Him whether they happen to be near or far away. And in fact, not
all of them were far away from him, especially one who says: “I stayed with Abu
Talib.” As the poet al-Nabighah said: “The trench around the al-nu’I, tent, is like
a basin.” The word nu’wiyun, used to refer to the trench one digs around a tent so
as to catch water that otherwise would have gone inside the tent, is derived from
the same root as the verb na’a4, meaning to be or become remote. Moreover, this
trench is said to be like a basin that flanks the tent yet without being far away from
it.
Chapter Fourteen

Connotations of Absolute Iman

What has been stated previously indicates that the word Iman, if applied in an
absolute sense in the Qur’an and the Sunnah, implies birt, piety, taqwa,
righteousness, and din, religion. For example, the Prophet (pbuh) stated that:
“Iman has over seventy branches, the most excellent of which is the declaration
that there is no god but Allah, and the humblest of which is the removal of what
is injurious from the road.” Hence, Iman implies all of what Allah loves. So too
do the words “righteousness” and “religion,” if applied in an absolute sense. It has
been reported that some people asked about Iman, and Allah reveals the following
verse: “It is not of piety that you turn your faces towards east or west; but it is
piety to believe in Allah and the Last Day, and the Angels, and the Book, and the
Prophets . . .” (2:177). Thus piety was interpreted through Iman, as was
righteousness also. The Prophet (pbuh) interpreted “piety” both as Iman and as the
work that takes one nearer to Allah; and these interpretations are true.

Muhammad Ibn Nasr [al-Marwazi] said that it was related to us by Ishaq Ibn
Ibrahim,’ ‘Abd Allah Ibn Yazid al Mugqri?,’ and al-Mulla’i’ that al-Mas‘tdi*

Ishaq Ibn Ibrahim Ibn Rahawtyah (?-853 A.D.) was a compiler of hadith and a mathematician.

Both al-Bukhari and Muslim studied hadith with him. [Al-Fihrist, vol. 2, ‏.م‎ 1082 and al-Zirkili,

vol. 1, p. 284.]

* Al-Mugri’, ‘Abd Allah Ibn Yazid (2-213 A.H.), was a scholar of hadith and a teacher of Qur’an.
[Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 170.]

> Al-Mulla’i, ‘Abd al-Salam Ibn Harb (2-187 A.H.), was a scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-Jman MZ,
p. 170.]

* Al-Mas‘tdi, ‘Abd al-Rahman (?-160 A.H.), was a compiler of hadith. [Kitab al-Jman MZ, ‏.م‎
‎170.]
190 CHAPTER FOURTEEN

related on the authority of al-Qasim,’ who said: “One day a man came to Abu
Dharr and asked him about [the meaning of] Iman, belief. In response he recited
the following verse : “It is not of piety that you turn your faces . . .” (2:177), to the
end of the verse. The man replied: “I did not ask you about birr, piety.” Abu Dharr
said that once a man came to the Prophet (pbuh) and asked him about the same
matter that you have just asked me about. In response, the Prophet recited to him
the same verse I recited to you, and the man said the same thing to the Prophet that
you have said to me. When the man refused to be satisfied, the Prophet said to
him: “Indeed, the believer is the one who, if he does good, is pleased and hopes
for a reward, and if he does evil, is displeased and fears punishment.”

He [Muhammad Ibn Nasr] also said that it was related to us by Ishaq, ‘Abd al-
Razzaq, and Mu‘ammar,’ on the authority of ‘Abd al-Karim al-Jazari,’ on the
authority of Mujahid, that Abu Dharr once asked the Prophet (pbuh) about belief,
so he recited to him the verse that says: “It is not of piety that you turn your faces
...” (2:177), to the end of the verse. This same tradition has been related on the
authority of ‘Ikrimah, who said that al-Hassan Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib,* after
coming from Syria was asked about the meaning of belief. In response he recited:
“Tt is not of piety that you turn your faces towards the east or the west...” (2:177).
It was related by Ibn Battah,” based on the same chain of authority ending with
Mubarak Ibn Hass&n,'° who said that I once said to Salim al-Aftas'' that there was
once a man who was obedient to Allah, who had never disobeyed Him, and
another who had only disobeyed Allah and never obeyed Him. The obedient man
died, and Allah admitted him into Paradise. The disobedient man also died, and
Allah sent him to Hell. So is the belief of either of these two men better than the

5 Al-Qasim, Ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman Ibn Abdullah ibn Mas ‘iid (?-116 A.H.), was a jurist and a judge
in Kufah. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 171.]

© Al-Azdi, Mu‘ammar Ibn Rashid (?-153 A.H.), was a jurist and a scholar of hadith. [Al-Zirkili,
vol. 8, p. 190 and Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 171.]

7 Al-Jazari, ‘Abd al-Karim Ibn Malik (?-127 A.H.), was a compiler of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ,
p. 171.)

5 Al-Hassan Ibn‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib Abu Muhammad (?-50 A.H.) was the grandson of Prophet
Muhammad (pbuh). [£7 2, vol. 3, ‏.م‎ 240 and al-Zirkili, vol. 2, p. 214.]

‎Tbn Battah, ‘Ubayd Allah Ibn Muhammad Ibn Abdullah al-‘Ukbari (?-387 A.H.), was a well-‏ ؟
‎known Hanbali scholar and jurist consult. He wrote several books, the most well-known among‏
‎them are al-Ibanah and al-Sunan. [EI 2, vol. 3, page 734 and Kitab al-Iman MZ, pp. 171-72.]‏

‎© Mubarak Ibn Hassan al-Sullami (n.d.) was a scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 173.]

‎!١ Al-Aftas, Salim (n.d.) was a scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 172.]
CONNOTATIONS OF ABSOLUTE IMAN 191

others? No, he replied. I mentioned this to ‘Ata’? who said to ask them whether
beliefis tayyib, good, or khabith, wicked. For Allah says: “In order that Allah may
distinguish the wicked from the good and put the wicked one on another, keep
them together and cast them into Hell. Those are the losers” (8:37). So I asked
them, but they gave me no reply, though some of them said that belief is inward,
and has nothing to do with works. So I mentioned this also to ‘Ata’, and he said:
“Praise be to Allah! Have they not read the verse in Strat al-Baqarah that says: ‘It
is not of piety that you turn your faces towards the east or the west; but piety is the
one who believes in Allah and the Last Day, the Angels, the Book and the
Prophets . . .”” (2:177). Then he said that Allah also describes the works that are
required for belief. Allah says: “... And gives his wealth, in spite of love for it, to
the kinsfolk, to the orphans and to the poor who beg and to the wayfarer and to
those who ask, and to set slaves free, and offers the prayers, and gives the zakah,
and who fulfills their covenant when they make it, and who are patient in extreme
poverty and ailment and at the time of fighting. Such are the people of the truth
and they are the righteous ones” (2:177). Then he [‘Ata’] said: “Ask them whether
this type of good work is implied by this name.” Allah says: “And whoever desires
the Hereafter and strives for it, with the necessary effort due for it while he is a
believer...” (17:19), thus linking the name [belief] with work, and work with the
name [belief.]

It follows from what has been said that praise is not merited by Iman without
works but only by Iman accompanied by works. Thus, if it is known that dispraise
and punishment are due to abandoning good works, their [the Murji’ites’]
controversy became nothing but an outward dispute. On the other hand, if they
[the Murji’ites] said that abandoning good works is not harmful, this saying is
outright unbelief. Some people related that the Murji’ites said that Allah makes
some matters obligatory. Nevertheless, He does not ask them to do these things
nor does He say that abandoning these acts will harm them. This token may refer
to extremists who say that none of the people who believe in the oneness of Allah
enters Hell. This is the view of immoral hypocrites who claim that as long as one
believes in the oneness of Allah, no sin can harm him. I [the author] state that I
have never known a specific person who related this statement. However, people
discuss it in books without stating specifically who says it. This would be the
statement of those who have no moral character from among the sinners and the
hypocrites who said that it is not harmful to have sin with Iman or with tawhid,
192 CHAPTER FOURTEEN

oneness of Allah, at the same time. Some of those who advanced the argument
against the Murji’ites ascribed this statement to them. The following verse is a
testimony to this: “. . . Such are the people of truth, and they are the righteous
ones” (2:177). That is, they are the people of truth in their saying that they believe.
Allah also says: “The desert Arabs say, ‘We believe.’ Say: “You have no faith; but
you [only] say.’ ‘We have submitted our wills to Allah for not yet has faith entered
your hearts . . .”” (49:14). He also says: “Only those are believers who have
believed in Allah and His Messenger, and have never since doubted, but have
striven with their belongings and their lives in the Cause of Allah: Such are the ©
sincere ones” (49:15). That is, they are the sincere ones in their saying that they
believe in Allah, in contrast to the liars, of whom Allah says: “When the
hypocrites come to you, they say, ‘We bear witness that you are indeed the
Messenger of Allah.’ Allah knows that you are indeed His Messenger, and Allah
bears witness that the hypocrites are indeed liars.” (63:1). Allah also says: “And
among some people who say: ‘We believe in Allah and the Last Day’ while, in
fact, they believe not. They think they can deceive Allah and those who believe,
while they only deceive themselves, and perceive it not. In their heart is a disease
and Allah has increased their disease. A painful torment is theirs because they
used to tell lies”(2:8-10). There are two well-known versions for the reading of
the words yukadhdhibin, and yukdhibin, both of which mean telling lies. This
means that they lied when they said, “we believe in Allah and the Last Day.” They
also, inwardly, did not believe the Messenger even though outwardly they showed
that they believed him. Allah says: “Alif. Lam. Mim. Do people think that they
will be left alone because they say: ‘we believe’ and will not be tested? And We
indeed tested those who were before them. And Allah will certainly make known
[the truth of] those who are true and will certainly make known [the falsehood of]
those who are liars” (29:1—3). In these verses, Allah indicates that one’s Iman
must be tested and tried. The word yaftun, which is used in the sense fo test, also
is used in the expression fatantu al-dhahab, tested the gold. This expression
describes when the goldsmith wants to test or purify gold that may have been
mixed with foreign substances . Moses said, Allah says: “. . . It is only Your trial
by which You lead Whom you will stray and keep guided, Whom you will lead
into the right path. . .” (7:155). What is meant by this verse is to test the trial and
tribulation of the people with the good and the bad in order to find out those who
are patient and thankful and those who are not. Also the trial and tribulation is
being tested through sending down Messengers and Books in order to distinguish
CONNOTATIONS OF ABSOLUTE IMAN 193

between a believer and an unbeliever, thus causing some people to stray and others
to be nghtly guided.

The Quran is full of examples that describe the believers as the People of Truth
and the hypocrites as liars, despite the fact that both groups profess Iman [with
their lips]. To put it differently, those whose deeds validate what they profess with
their lips are considered sincere believers, while those who profess with their lips
what is not in their hearts are considered as liars. Allah says: “What you suffered
on the day the two armies met, was with the leave of Allah, in order that He might
test the believers. And that He might test the hypocrites also, these were told:
‘Come, fight in the way of Allah, or [at least] drive [the foe from your city].’ They
said: ‘Had we known there would be a fight, we should certainly have followed
you.’ They were that day nearer to unbelief than to belief, saying with their lips
what was not in their hearts. But Allah has full knowledge of all they conceal”
(3:166—67). For when Allah declared in the verse of al-birr, piety: “. .. Those are
the people of the truth and they are the nghteous ones” (2:177), He indicated that
the meaning intended is that they spoke the truth when they said: “We believe,”
since this is the utterance they had been commanded to make and that they in fact
did make. They had not been commanded [merely] to utter with their tongues: “we
are righteous.” Rather, if a man says, “] am righteous,” he is vouching for his own
integrity. For this reason, Zaynab, the daughter of Jahsh, was named Birrah, that
is, Pious One. It has been said that because she bore witness to her own integrity,
the Prophet (pbuh) called her Zaynab. This is in contrast to the establishment of
belief by their saying: “We have believed,” for making this declaration was
imposed upon them. Allah says: “Say [Oh, Muslims]: ‘We believe in Allah and
that which has been sent down to us and that which has been sent down to
Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and to al-Asbat [the twelve sons of Jacob], and
that which has been given to Moses and Jesus, and that which has been given to
the Prophets from their Lord.. .’”(2:136). Also in the chapter entitled Al ‘Umran,
Allah says: “Say [Oh, Muhammad}: ‘We believe in Allah and that which has been
sent down to us, and that which has been sent to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob,
and to al-Asbat [the twelve sons of Jacob], and that which has been given to
Moses and Jesus, and that which has been given to the Prophets from their Lord
.. (3:84). Allah also says: “The Messenger [Muhammad] believes in what has
been sent down to him from his Lord, and so do the believers. Each one of them
believes in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His Messengers. They say: ‘We
194 CHAPTER FOURTEEN

make no distinction between one and the other of His Messengers . . .”” (2:285).
In this verse Allah is saying that we do not make any distinction among them as
a further indication to their saying: “We believe and we do not make any
distinction.” For this reason He [Allah] says: “. . . And they said we heard and
obey . . .” (2:285). Thus, they combined their two statements: “We believed and
we heard and obeyed.” Allah says in the verse of al-birr, piety: “. . . Those are the
righteous ones” (2:177). Thus He [Allah] made al-Abrar, the Pious Ones as the al-
Mutagiin, the Righteous Ones, and when used in an absolute sense and in isolation
from each other, they are considered synonymous. However, when specific and
used in association with each other, their meanings are distinguished, as in the
verse that reads: ““. .. Help one another in piety and righteousness . . .” (5:2). This
last verse indicates that when used in an absolute manner, the words Iman, belief;
birr, piety; and 1209/3, righteousness, all refer to the same reality; hence, the
believers are the righteous ones, who in turn are also the pious ones.

For this reason some of the Prophet’s (pbuh) sayings about intercession state that
Allah takes out of the Fire whoever has an atom’s weight of Iman; others mention
“an atom’s weight of good.” This is compatible with Allah’s saying: “Then shall
anyone who has done an atom’s weight of good, see it! And anyone who has done
an atom’s weight of evil, shall see it” (99:7-8). An atom’s weight of good is also
an atom’s weight of Iman. Those pious, righteous believers enjoyed absolute
happiness. They were also the People of Paradise, who were promised that they
would enter Paradise without punishment. However, one about whom the Prophet
(pbuh) said: “Who cheats us is not one of us and whoever takes up arms against
us is not one of us,” he is not considered among the believers but rather one of the
sinners who are subject to punishment.
Chapter Fifteen

Attributes and Terms With Specific Connotations

This type is after the pattern of the names used to describe the names of Allah, His
Books, His Messengers and His religion. Allah says: “Say [Oh, Muhammad}: Call
upon Allah, or call upon al-Rahman, the Most Beneficent: By whatever name you
call upon Him, [it is the same]: for to Him belongs the Most Beautiful Names”
(17:110). He also says: “And [all] the Most Beautiful Names belong to Allah, so
call Him by them and leave the company of those who deny His names. . .”
(7:180); and “He is Allah, than Whom there is no other god, the Knower of the
unseen and visible. He is the Beneficent, the Merciful. He is Allah, than Whom
there is no other god except Him, the Sovereign, the Holy One, the Source of
Peace and Perfection, the Guardian of Faith, the Preserver of Safety, the Exalted
in Might, the Irresistible, the Supreme: Glory to Allah! [High is He] above the
partners they attribute to Him. He is Allah, the Creator, the Evolver, the Bestower
of Forms [or Colors]. To Him belong the Most Beautiful Names. All that is in the
heavens and the earth glorify Him. And He is the All Almighty, the All Wise”
)59:22-24(. All of Allah’s attributes are consistent with one another in that they
all describe His holy essence. At the same time, each name denotes a particular
divine attribute that is distinct from that which is denoted by any other name.
Hence, the name al-‘Aziz, the Almighty, denotes the divine essence in its capacity
as all-powerful; the name al-Khialig, the Creator, denotes the divine essence as
associated with the act of creating; while the name al-Rahim, the Merciful,
conveys the notion of the divine Self as demonstrating mercy. The divine Self
requires all these attributes, such that each name denotes this Essence, as well as
the attribute to which it specifically refers, through direct correspondence; it
signifies either one or the other of these two by implication, and connotes other
attributes by necessity.
196 CHAPTER FIFTEEN

The same applies to the names used to describe Allah’s Book: al-Qur’an, the
Recitation; al-Furqan, the Criterion; al-Kitab, the Book; al-Huda, the Guidance;
al-Bayan, the Clear Declaration; al-Shifa’, the Healing Balm; al-Niir, the Light;
and so forth. These are the revealed names. The following names are used to
describe Allah’s Messenger: Muhammad; Ahmad; al-Mahi, the Abrogator; al-
Hashir, the Assembler; al-Mugaffi, the Rhymer; and Nabi al-Malhamah, the
Prophet of Mercy, the Prophet of Repentance, and the Epic Prophet. Each name
denotes one of his praiseworthy qualities, each of which is distinct from those
denoted by any of the other names. Such is also the case with stories that occur
more than once in the Qur’an, such as the story of Moses and others. They are not
repeated merely for the purpose of providing material for evening conversation,
but rather to teach moral lessons. Allah says: “Indeed in their stories, there is a
lesson for men of understanding . . .” (12:111). For the events that took place are
the same, yet they may be described in various ways; hence, the same story is
conveyed through a variety of expressions, each of which communicates a
different aspect of the events from which the hearer may draw a lesson. Therefore,
what we have here is in fact not really repetition at all.

The same applies to the names of Allah’s religion. Allah commands His
Messenger that these names be: Iman, Belief; Birr, Piety; Taqwa, Righteousness;
Khayr, Goodness; Din, Religion; ‘Amal Salih, Good Work; Sirat Mustaqim,
Straight Path; and so forth. All these names refer to one and the same thing [i.e.,
religion]. But each indicates a distinct and unique attribute that is not indicated by
the other attributes. This attribute will be the basic name for the attribute and the
rest will be associate terms, but with the basic term and always connected with it.
They come to denote the same thing simply by association. For example, the word
Iman refers to belief that is in the heart, which, by necessity, must have two
aspects: belief in the heart, and its confession and knowledge. This is referred to
as the saying of the heart. Al-Junayd Ibn Muhammad! said: tawhid, Oneness of
Allah, is a saying of the heart; and tawakkul, trust in Allah, is the work of the
heart, which first requires the saying and the work of the heart, then, the saying
and the work of the body. The work of the heart is essential in this regard.
Illustrations include love of Allah and His Messenger, fear of Allah, love for what

١ Al-Junayd, Abu al-Qasim Ibn Muhammad (?-298 A.H.), was a celebrated Sufi theologian, a
jurist, and a native of Baghdad. He studied under Abu Thawr and was associated with Harith al-
Muhasibi. [E/ vol. 2, p. 600 and al-Firhist, vol. 2, ‏.م‎ 1025.]
ATTRIBUTES AND TERMS WITH SPECIFIC CONNOTATIONS 197

Allah and His Messenger love, hatred for what Allah and His Messenger hate,
working with devotion for none but Allah, putting trust in none but Allah, and
other works of the heart that are required by Allah and His Messenger and that
constitute part of Iman.

The heart is the essential part; if it has knowledge and will, all the body will
necessarily be influenced. The body cannot function apart from what the heart
desires. To clarify, the Prophet (pbuh) said: “There is a [mudghah small piece] in
the body. If it is pure, the whole body is as well, and if it is spoiled, the whole
body is also; namely, it is the heart.”

Abu Hurayrah said: “The heart is a king and the other members of the body are its
soldiers. Hence, if the heart is good, so also will its soldiers be; and if the heart is
full of evil and malice, its soldiers will be likewise.” The metaphor provided by
Abu Hurayrah is an approximation; however, the description given by the Prophet
(pbuh) illustrates the same truth more clearly. He said: “If (the heart) is pure, so
will the entire body be; and if [the heart] is corrupt, the entire body will be corrupt
as well.” As for Abu Hurayrah’s metaphor, its weakness lies in the fact that if the
king 15 righteous, then the soldiers still have a choice as to whether they will obey
their king or not. The soldiers might be righteous even though the king is corrupt,
or corrupt while the king is righteous. This situation contrasts with the relationship
between the heart and the body; for the body is completely subject to the heart,
and may never violate its will.

Thus, if the heart is pure, by its knowledge and works of Iman, then the body is
pure by the outward sayings and works of Iman. As the compilers of hadith say
concerning Iman: “Saying and work: saying is both inward and outward, and so
is work. The outward follows from the inward and is a necessary constituent of it.”
Thus, if the inward is pure, the outward is so also; and if the inward is spoiled, so
is the outward. For this reason one of the Companions of the Prophet (pbuh) said
about the man who gestured while praying: “If he had a humble heart, the parts of
his body would be humble too.” The belief of the heart requires one to love Allah
and His Messenger and hold Allah and His Messenger dearer than anything else.
Allah says: “And of some people are those who take others besides Allah as rivals
[to Allah]. But those who believe love Allah more . . .” (2:165). In this statement
He describes those who have believed as having greater love for Allah than do the
polytheists for their andad, partners.
198 CHAPTER FIFTEEN

There are two interpretations of this verse. According to the first, the polytheists
love their idols as believers love Allah, but the love that believers have for Allah
is greater than the love that polytheists have for their idols. According to the
second view, the polytheists love their idols as much as they love Allah, but the
believers love Allah more than the polytheists do. It is the second view that is held
to be the correct one. As for the first interpretation, it is both groundless and
contradictory. For polytheists do not love their idols as believers love Allah. Such
love requires the will, and a perfect will together with the ability to act leads
necessarily to performance of the act itself. Thus it would be impossible for
someone to love Allah and His Messenger, to desire that which Allah and His
messenger desire with a definitive, unwavering will, and to be able to carry this
out, without actually doing so. Hence, if someone does not voice his belief,
although he is able to do so, this indicates that he does not have in his heart that
belief which Allah requires of him.

THE INVALIDITY OF THE IDEA THAT IMAN Is
MERE ASSENT AND KNOWLEDGE OF THE HEART

The author refutes the claim of Jahm Ibn Safwan and his followers, who believed
that Iman is mere tasdiq, assent, in the heart and knowledge in the heart, so they
did not include the works of the heart as part of Iman. Moreover, they believed
that one may have true Iman in his heart even if he puts a curse on Allah and His
Messenger, becomes an enemy of the followers of Allah, and becomes a supporter
and friend to Allah’s enemies; killing the prophets, razing mosques, handling
copies of the Qur’an irreverently, and showing the utmost honor to unbelievers
while treating believers with contempt. Jahm and his followers claimed that all
such behaviors were merely acts of disobedience that did not nullify the belief in
one’s heart. Rather, even though one does all these things, he remains a believer
inwardly in the sight of Allah. However, they acknowledged that in worldly terms
such a person would indeed be judged an unbeliever. This is because although by
his words he may be judged outwardly to be an unbeliever, he may be inwardly
other than what he professes. Furthermore, they believed that if the Book, the
Sunnah, and the Consensus of Opinion say that he is an unbeliever and will be
punished in the Hereafter, then this indicates that he has no knowledge and belief
in his heart. Hence, unbelief, according to them, is one thing: namely, ignorance;
ATTRIBUTES AND TERMS WITH SPECIFIC CONNOTATIONS 199

and Iman is also one thing: namely, knowledge or belief and disbelief of the heart.
For they were in disagreement as to whether the tasdiq, assent, of the heart is the
same as knowledge or something else.

This view [i.e., the view that belief is the same thing as knowledge] has been held
by many scholastic theologians and followers of the Murji’ite sect, though it is the
most corrupt interpretation of belief that has ever been adopted. Some of the pious
ancestors, such as Waki‘ Ibn al-Jarrah, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Abu ‘Ubayd, and
others, declared anyone who held this view to be an unbeliever. In support of their
position, they noted the fact that Iblis, the devil, is clearly an unbeliever according
to what we read in the Qur’an; however, he is not an unbeliever because of having
disbelieved some particular report, but rather because he was so arrogant and
proud that he refused to bow down to Adam. Similarly, Allah says of Pharaoh and
his people: “And they denied them [those verses], though their souls
acknowledged them, for spite and arrogance . . .” (27:14). Speaking to Pharaoh,
Moses said: “Indeed, you know that these signs have been sent down by none but
the Lord of the Heavens and the Earth as clear [proofs] . . .” (17:102). The larger
context of Moses’ statement is as follows: “And indeed We gave to Moses nine
clear signs. Ask then the Children of Israel, when he came to them, then Pharaoh
said to him: ‘Oh, Moses! I think you are indeed bewitched.’ He [Moses] said:
‘Indeed, you know that these signs have been sent down by none but the Lord of
the Heavens and the Earth as clear [proofs]. And I think you are indeed, Oh,
Pharaoh, doomed to destruction’”(17:101—2). Thus spoke Moses, who was both
truthful and trustworthy. Allah says: “He [Moses] said: ‘Indeed, you know that
these signs have been sent down by none but the Lord of the Heavens and the
Earth as clear [proofs] .. .”” (17:102), thus indicating that Pharaoh was aware of
the fact that Allah had sent down these signs. Thus, Pharaoh was among Allah’s
most obstinate, oppressive creatures—not because of lack of knowledge on his
part, but because of the corruption of his will. Allah says: “Indeed, Pharaoh
exalted himself in the land and made its people into sects, weakening a group
among them, killing their sons, and letting their females live. Indeed, he was one
of the corrupt ones” (28:4); and “And they denied them [those verses], though
their souls acknowledged them, for spite and arrogance . . .” (27:14). Similarly,
Allah says of the Jews: “Those to whom We gave the Scripture [Jews and
Christians] recognize him [Muhammad] as they recognize their sons . . .” (2:146);
200 CHAPTER FIFTEEN

and of the polytheists Allah says: “. . . It is not you [Muhammad] that they deny
but it is the verses [of the Qur’an] of Allah that they deny” (6:33).

THE Two BASIC ERRORS OF THE MURUJPITES

The first error of the Murji’ ites: The Murji’ites thought that Iman, belief; was mere
tasdiq, assent, and ‘ilm, knowledge, without work, state, action, will, love and
humility in the heart. This is one of the gravest errors the Murji’ites ever
committed. For the works of the heart, which some Sufis call states and ranks, are
part of the obligations that Allah and His Messenger have laid down; therefore,
they are part of the belief required of us. They also include what Allah makes
desirable but not obligatory, and are therefore the part of Iman that is not required,
but merits reward by Allah. The former is necessary for every believer and
whoever is confined to it is among the righteous, while the latter is necessary for
those who draw especially near to Allah, such as loving Allah and His Messenger,
holding Allah and His Messenger dearer than anything else, cherishing Allah and
His Messenger, struggling in the Cause of Allah more dearly than one’s family and
property, fearing Allah, expecting good from none but Allah, putting trust in none
but Allah, and being completely devoted to Him. Allah says: “[A voice will say]
This is what was promised for you, for everyone who turned [to Allah] in sincere
repentance, who kept [His Law], who feared [Allah] Most Gracious Unseen, and
brought a heart turned in devotion [to Him]” (50:32—33) and such similar things,
like the love of Allah, the hate of Allah, the support of Allah, and the enmity
toward Allah.

The second error of the Murji’ ites was their belief that if al-Shari‘, the Legislator
[the Prophet], judges someone to be an unbeliever who will abide forever in Hell,
then the reason would be the lack of knowledge and tasdiq, assent, in his heart. In
this matter they [the Murji’ites] contradicted common sense, reason, and law and
all that people considered right through their natural disposition. For one may
know [in his heart] but deny that he is wrong and that others are right. In general,
those who denied that Allah sent down the Messengers knew [in their hearts] that
the Messengers were right and persons of the truth, but they disbelieved them
either out of covetousness and a desire for preeminence or out of their love for the
religion they followed and the attainments that their old religion afforded them,
such as wealth, power, alliances with other tribes, and so on. For this reason they
ATTRIBUTES AND TERMS WITH SPECIFIC CONNOTATIONS 201

saw following the Messenger as forcing them to abandon objects of affection and
attachment or even to suffer harm, and it was this that caused them to disbelieve
the prophets and set themselves against them. Hence, Iblis, the devil, and Pharaoh
were considered the most blasphemous of all people who really knew that they
were wrong and that the Messengers were right. For this reason unbelievers never
cited sound arguments to challenge the truthfulness of the Messengers but
depended on their contradictory wills and desires. An example is their saying to
Noah. Allah says: “. . . They said: ‘Shall we believe in you when it is the meanest
[of the people] that follow you?’” (26:111). It is known that the following of the
meanest did not cast doubt on the truthfulness of Noah. Rather, they disliked the
notion of having to associate with such people [i.e., those referred to in the verse
as al-ardhaluna, the meanest of the people]. Similarly, the polytheists asked the
Prophet (pbuh) to cast out the weak, such as Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas, Ibn Mas‘id,
Khubab Ibn al-Irth, ‘Ammar Ibn Yasir, Bilal, and others [from his community].
This occurred in Makkah, before there were ahl sifah, people of distinction, so
Allah reveals the verse that says: “And turn not away (Oh, Muhammad] those who
invoke their Lord, morning and afternoon seeking His Face. You are accountable
to them for nothing, and they are accountable to you for nothing, that you may turn
them away, and thus become one of the unjust ones. Thus, We have tried some of
them with others, that they may say: ‘Is it these [who are believers} that Allah has
favored from among us? Does not Allah know best those who are grateful?’”
(6:52—53).

In a similar vein, Pharaoh said: ‘‘They said: ‘Shall we believe in two men like
ourselves? And their people are subject to us!’” (23:47). And the statement of
Pharaoh: “He [the Pharaoh] said to [Moses]: ‘Did we not bring you up among us
as a child? And you did dwell many years with us. And you did your deed, which
you did, i.e., the crime of killing a man. And are you one of the unbelievers’”
(26:18-19)? While the polytheists among the Arabs said that Allah says: “And
they say: ‘If we follow the guidance with you, we would be snatched away from
our land...” (28:57). Allah also says: “. . . Have we not established for them a
secure Sanctuary [Makkah], to which are brought fruits of all kinds . . .” (28:57);
while the tribe of Shu‘ayb said to him [the Prophet] that Allah says: “They said:
‘Oh, Shu‘ayb! Does your prayer command you that we abandon what our fathers
used to worship, or that we abandon doing what we like with our property?
...7(11:87). And the saying of most of the polytheists, Allah says: “... We found
202 CHAPTER FIFTEEN

our fathers following a certain religion, and we do guide ourselves by their
footsteps” (43:22).

These examples do not refute the veracity of the Messengers, but indicate that the
evidence contradicts their [the Murji’ites’] will, desires, and habits; for this reason
they did not follow the Messengers. Hence they are considered unbelievers.
Indeed, Abu Talib [the Prophet’s uncle] and others who loved the Prophet (pbuh)
loved to see him in a distinguished position, did not have any envy against him,
and knew about his truthfulness. However, they could not bear to leave the
religion of their forefathers or listen to the curses that the Quraysh tribe hurled at
them. Hence, they did not abandon Iman for lack of knowledge but out of their
own desire. Then, how can they say that every unbeliever rejects Iman for lack of
knowledge of Allah! |

The Jahmites considered every unbeliever to be ignorant of the truth, saying that
he did not know it to be true that Allah exists. Disbelief, as they saw it, is not
ignorance of just any truth, but rather ignorance of this particular truth. However,
both we and everyone else know of unbelievers who are inwardly convinced that
the religion of Islam is true, yet they mention other reasons for their not having
belief. These reasons might include such things as the possibility of suffering
hostility from their families; being cut off from wealth that would otherwise
accrue to them from their families; the fear that were they to become believers,
they would not be afforded the same protection by Muslims that they have been
afforded by their former religion; and other such concerns or fears that they
declared to be the reasons for their not becoming believers. Moreover, such factors
determined their choices, even though at the same time they were certain that the
religion of Islam is true while their own is false. Such things occur with respect to
all questions of truth; there will be some who know in their hearts that a given
thing is true, although outwardly they deny this. Such individuals may even
display enmity toward those who profess this truth in the belief that this hostility
on their part will benefit them in some manner and protect them from harm. Allah
says: “Oh, you who believe, take not the Jews and the Christians for your friends
and protectors; they are but friends and protectors to each other. If any among you
takes them [for friends] then surely he is one of them. Indeed Allah guides not
those people who are wrongdoers. Those in whose hearts is a disease, you.see how
eagerly they run about among them, saying: ‘We do fear unless a change of
fortune brings us disaster.’ Ah! Perhaps Allah will give [you] victory, or a decision
ATTRIBUTES AND TERMS WITH SPECIFIC CONNOTATIONS 203

according to His Will. Then will they repent of the thoughts which they secretly
harbored in their hearts. And those who believe will say: ‘Are these the men
[hypocrites] who swore their strongest oaths by Allah, that they were with you
[Muslims]?’ All that they did has been in vain [because of their hypocrisy], and
they have become the losers” (5:51—53).

Interpreters of the Qur’4n unanimously agree on the fact that these verses were
revealed because of the hypocrites who pretended to be with the Muslims, but an
affliction was in their hearts. If they feared in their hearts that Allah would not
grant victory to the people of Islam, they would take unbelievers—whether Jews,
Christians, or others—for friends and protectors. This happened not because they
believed that the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) was a liar and the Jews and
Christians possessed the truth, but simply because they feared that the Muslims
would not be granted victory. Indeed, it was narrated that “Ubadah Ibn al-Samit
said: “Oh, Prophet of Allah, I have taken some Jews for friends and protectors and
I am acquitted to Allah for having Jews for friends and protectors.” Upon this
‘Abd Allah Ibn Ubay remarked: “But I am a man who fears a change of fortune
that may bring me disaster, hence, I am not above seeking the friendship and
protection of Jews.” For this reason, the above-mentioned verses were revealed.

THE MURUPITES’ OPINION OF IMAN

Among the Murji’ ites, who said that Iman is tasdiq, assent, in the heart and an
utterance of the tongue but does not include works, was a group of Kufah jurists.
Their claims were not like those of Jahm, for they recognized that one 15 not a
believer if, although he is able to express his belief verbally, he does not do so.
They also acknowledged that Iblis, Pharaoh, and others were unbelievers despite
the fact that they believed the truth in their hearts. However, if they did not include
the works of the heart in their definition of belief, they would have been obliged
to adopt the view of Jahm. If, on the other hand, they did include such ‘works of
the hearts” in their understanding of belief, then they would have needed to include
the works of the parts of the body as well, since such outward works are
necessarily associated with those of the heart. However, if they [the Murji’ites]
had put forward arguments based on Islamic law, this matter would have been
obscured even further. For they held that Allah makes a distinction in the Qur’an
204 CHAPTER FIFTEEN

between belief and work; for He refers to this in more than one place: Allah says:
“Truly those who believe, and do works of righteousness . . .” (2:277). Moreover,
they held that in various places Allah addresses human beings as believers before
they have performed works [that would display belief]. For example, Allah says:
“Oh, you who believe! When you intend to offer prayers, wash your faces and your
hands [forearms] up to the elbows . . .” (5:6); and “All you who believe [i.e.,
Muslims]! When the call is proclaimed for the prayer on Friday . . .” (62:9). They
also said that if a man became a believer in Allah and His Messenger early in the
day and suddenly dies that day before he is obliged to perform some of the
obligations, he will die as a believer and will enter Paradise. Hence, works are not
part of Iman. Moreover, they said that we profess that Iman increases. That is,
every time Allah sends down a verse, it should be accepted. Thus, this acceptance
will be combined with the acceptance that precedes it. However, after the
completion of the revelation, no one’s Iman will be greater than anyone else’s.
That is, all peoples’ Iman becomes the same no matter what everyone’s belief is,
be it the belief of the earliest believers such as Abu Bakr (al-Siddiq) and ‘Umar
(Ibn al-Khattab), or that of the most immoral of people, such as al-Hajjaj (Ibn
Yusuf), Abu Muslim al-Khurasani, and others.

The Murji’ ites, especially the theologians and jurists from among them, regarded
works as part of Iman in a figurative way, for a work is the fruit and requirement
of Iman. They defended this argument by referring to the Prophet’s saying: “Iman
has sixty or seventy branches, the highest of which is the declaration that there is
no god but Allah, and the lowest of which is the removal of what is injurious from
the path.”

MuruP ITE ERRORS IN UNDERSTANDING IMAN

The Murji’ites were of three views: The first was that Iman is merely what is in
the heart. Most of them believed that works of the heart contribute to Iman, as
indicated in the book of Abu al-Hassan al-Ash‘ari. He also mentioned many other
sects whose listing would be lengthy, although the author states that he has
mentioned most of their statements. This view does not include works as part of
Iman. This was the opinion of Jahm and of those who followed him, such as al-
Salihi, who, along with his followers, were great supporters of him [Jahm]. The
second view states that Iman is a mere utterance of the tongue. This position was
ATTRIBUTES AND TERMS WITH SPECIFIC CONNOTATIONS 205

not known prior to the opinions of the Karramite sect. The third view states that
Iman is tasdiq, assent, of the heart and a saying of the tongue. This was the most
well-known position among them. Indeed, this was the prevailing beliefamong the
jurists and the worshipers of the Murji’ites. All three views are in error in several
aspects:

The first is their [the Murji’ites’] assumption that the Iman that Allah requires of
us is equal for all Allah’s servants, and that the belief incumbent upon one person
is likewise required of another. This assumption is false, for the followers of the
earlier Prophets were required by Allah to have a kind of belief that was not
required of Muhammad’s community, just as the belief required of Muhammad’s
community was not the same as that required of still others. And the type of Iman
that was required prior to the revelation of all of the Qur’4n is different from the
Iman required after the revelation. For the Iman required of someone who knew
what the Messenger was told in detail would not be the same as that required of
someone who knew what the Messenger was told in general. It is incumbent as
part of Iman to believe in the Messenger in all that he brought forward. But in the
case of someone who believes in the Messenger and dies immediately afterward,
only that part of Iman is incumbent upon him. Moreover, if he were alive, he
would not be obliged to know every single matter that the Prophet (pbuh)
commanded, forbade, or told about [that is, it is enough to believe without details].
Indeed, he must know what he was obliged to do and what he was prohibited from
getting involved in. This person will be obligated only to the general Iman that
existed before his death and nothing else and before other details of Iman reached
him.

Moreover, if it is assumed that such a person did live, then not every ordinary
person is required to know everything that the Prophet commanded, everything he
forbade, and everything he reported. Rather, all he is expected to know is what he
himself is required or forbidden to do. For example, someone with no wealth will
not be expected to know the Prophet’s detailed commands relating to the payment
of zakah, nor would someone unable to undertake the pilgrimage be required to
know the Prophet’s commands concerning the pilgrimage rites, just as someone
who is not married is not required to know what his duties would be toward a
wife. Hence, the belief required of some individuals differs from that required of
others, both with respect to what one believes and what one practices.
206 ٠ CHAPTER FIFTEEN

This clarifies the answer to their [ Murj’ites] claim that people were addressed
concerning Iman were made obligatory before works. Against this, the author
remarks: If they say that people were addressed about Iman before works, then
before these works became obligatory, they were not part of Iman. Hence,
believers [at that time] were true believers, for they believed in what was
obligatory for them. However, when it is revealed that works are part of one’s
Iman, then believers must perform them; otherwise, they are no longer [true]
believers. And for this reason Allah says: “. . . And pilgrimage to the House is a
duty that people owe to Allah, those who can afford the expense; and those who
disbelieve, then Allah stands not in need of any of the creatures [mankind and
jinns]” (3:97). Therefore, most traditions in which mention is made of Islam and
belief do not speak of the pilgrimage. One such tradition concerns the delegation
of ‘Abd al-Qays, while another concerns the man from Najd, Damam Ibn
Tha‘labah, and others. The pilgrimage is indeed mentioned in the tradition of Ibn
“Umar and Gabriel, since the pilgrimage was the last of the five pillars of Islam
to be legislated. Prior to its being legislated, it was not considered part of either
belief or Islam. When it was legislated, however, the Prophet (pbuh) introduced
the pilgrimage into [the requirements of] belief alone, and into Islam, whether
spoken of in conjunction with belief or apart from it. Allah willing, we shall have
more to say below concerning when the pilgrimage was established as a religious

duty.

From this it becomes clear also how to respond to their [Murji’ites] claim that
whoever believes and dies before works are made obligatory, dies as a believer.
This is correct, for he had accomplished the obligations required for his Iman
before works were made obligatory for his Iman. It is necessary to know this, since
by knowing it the doubt will be lifted.

If it is said that obligatory works are part of Iman, then it should be clear that the
obligatory Iman is not one thing but many things for different people. Orthodox
Muslims say that all good works [whether obligatory or merely desirable] are part
of Iman. That is, they are part of the perfect, desirable Iman, but not the obligatory
Iman. Thus he differentiated between the obligatory Iman and the perfect,
desirable Iman, as the Muslim scholars say that the ghusl, ablution, is of two
kinds: either being rewarded for doing the obligatory or for performing the perfect
of the desirables. The expression “perfect” may refer to the obligatory as well as
to the desirable Iman.
ATTRIBUTES AND TERMS WITH SPECIFIC CONNOTATIONS 207

However, their claim that Allah has differentiated, in many places, between Iman
and works is correct. And the author has indicated that Iman, when used in an
absolute sense, is included by Allah and His Messenger in the obligatory works.
And Iman may be associated with works, and we have already mentioned many
examples to prove this. For the essence of Iman is what is in the heart, as well as
the outward works that are a necessary part of this. Thus, one cannot imagine the
existence of the required Iman of the heart without it being accompanied with all
the works of parts of the body. Indeed, whenever outward works diminish, it
would be so due to the diminishing of Iman that is in the heart. Since it is
conjoined with works, this means that Iman in the heart is not enough, but must
be accompanied by good works.

People have taken two different positions concerning this notion [i.e., that the root
of belief exists within the heart, but that it must be spoken of in association with
good works, since these are considered to be a necessary outcome or component
of true belief]. There are those who say that the second term [namely, good works]
forms part of the first [namely, belief]; however, such works are specifically
mentioned by name lest it be thought that they are not included in the first term
[belief]. People holding this view note that this occurs whenever a more specific
aspect of something is mentioned in conjunction with a more general, inclusive
term, as when Allah says: “Whoever is an enemy to Allah, His Angels, His
Messengers, Gabriel and Michael . . .” (2:98); and “And when We took from the
Prophets their Covenant, from you [Oh, Muhammad], and from Noah, Abraham,
Moses and Jesus, son of Mary . . .” (33:7); and “But those who believe and do
righteous good works, and believe in that which is sent down to Muhammad, for
itis the Truth from their Lord .. .” (47:2), where belief is defined specifically in
terms of that which was revealed to Muhammad. When Allah mentions “those
who have believed,” He is referring to the Prophet’s Companions and other
believers. Likewise Allah says: “Guard strictly the [five obligatory] prayers and
especially the middle prayer . . .” (2:238); and “And they were commanded not,
but that they should worship Allah, and worship none but Him alone and offer
prayers and give zakah . . .” (98:5). Allah’s primary intent is that he alone be
worshiped; He also intends for prayer to be established and charity to be practiced
in order to indicate that they are obligatory acts of worship. Thus, it is not enough
to worship none but Allah without prayer and charity. Hence, one should not think
that it is enough to have Iman without righteous works. Moreover, belief is
208 CHAPTER FIFTEEN

mentioned first because it is the indispensable root; following this, good works are
mentioned since they are a necessary component of the perfect practice of religion,
lest anyone should suppose that either belief or religion may be considered
complete if one has belief alone without good works. Allah says: “Alif. Lam.
Mim. This the Book [the Qur’an], whereof there is no doubt, 15 a guidance to those
who are the righteous ones. Who believe in the Unseen and offer the prayers and
spend out of what We have provided for them. And those who believe in that
which has been revealed to you [Muhammad] and in that which was revealed
before you [i.e., the Torah and the Gospel] and they believe in the Hereafter. They
are on [true] guidance from their Lord, and also they are the successful ones”
(2:1—5). It has been said that those spoken of in this verse are the People of the
Book, such as Ibn Salam and others, who believed in what had been revealed to
Muhammad and to others before him, but that they belong to a different category
than those mentioned earlier, namely, “those who believe in the Unseen.” Others,
however, have held that all those spoken of here—those who have believed in
what was revealed to Muhammad and to the Prophets who came before him, and
those who believe in the Unseen—belong to a single group, and have been spoken
of separately simply to bring out different ways in which they can be described.
A similar use of conjunctions to describe a single entity may be seen in the verses
where Allah says: “Glory be the Name of your Lord, the Most High, Who has
created [everything], and then proportioned it, and Who measured and then
guided. And Who brings out the pasturage. And then makes it dark stubble”
(87:15). For Allah Almighty is One, but various of His attributes and activities
have been spoken of in conjunction with others. The same applies to the verse
where Allah says: “. . . The middle prayer. . .” (2:238); it is the late afternoon
prayer mentioned in conjunction with prayer in general, of which the afternoon
prayer is one example.

When attributes are used within the definite, they are being employed for
clarification; and they may also imply either praise or blame. You might say, for
example, “this man is the one who did such and such, or such and such and such
and such,” thereby enumerating the praiseworthy things he has done. Therefore,
with subordinate components, they may be associated with something via a
conjunctive particle, or be placed in the accusative or in the nominative cases,
which is correct. For if those who believe in the Unseen do not believe in what has
been revealed to the Prophet Muhammad [with reference to the verses above] and
ATTRIBUTES AND TERMS WITH SPECIFIC CONNOTATIONS 209

to the prophets who came before him, then neither are they rightly guided by their
Lord, nor are they spiritually prosperous or fearers of Allah. Likewise, if those
who believe in what was revealed to the Prophet Muhammad and to the prophets
who came before him are not included among those who believe in the Unseen,
perform the ritual prayers, and spend [wisely] the wealth that Allah gives them,
neither will they be rightly guided by their Lord, nor will they prosper spiritually
or be fearers of Allah. And what this indicates is that all these attributes describe
those who are rightly guided, Allah-fearing people whose guidance has come from
the Book revealed to Muhammad (pbuh); for one attribute has been mentioned in
conjunction with another, even though one of them actually represents part of the
other. The intent [of such passages in the Qur’dn] is to describe their belief,
affirming that they believe in all that Allah has revealed to His Prophets and that
they make no distinction between one prophet and another. Otherwise, if no
mention were made of anything but belief in the Unseen, then someone might say:
“T believe in the Unseen,” when in fact he believes in [only] some of the things in
which he is required to believe but not others.

Since Surat al-Baqarah is the sinam, hump, of the Qur’an and the first siirah
revealed in Madinah, Allah begins with four verses that describe traits of the
believers, two verses about unbelievers, and several about hypocrites. For when
the Prophet (pbuh) emigrated to Madinah, people divided into three groups:
believers, unbelievers who outwardly manifested their rejection of Iman, and
hypocrites. Indeed, this was not the case when they were in Makkah, where there
was not a single hypocrite. This is why Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and others said that
there was not a single hypocrite among those who emigrated. But hypocrisy
prevailed among the tribes of al-Ansar, the Helpers, for Makkah was dominated
by unbelievers. Thus, no one believed or emigrated out of Makkah unless he was
a believer, so there was no need for one to be a hypocrite there. However, in
Madinah the people of influence became believers. Thus, the believers have
protection and dignity through al-Ansar who used to harm whoever was not a
believer. Therefore, the hypocrites found it necessary to pretend that they were
believers although they had no Iman in their hearts. Indeed, in the beginning of
Surat al-Bagqarah, its middle verses, and its end verses, Allah stresses the necessity
of having Iman in all that was sent down by the prophets. In the opening of the
Surah, He utters the verse sited above. In the middle of the Sirah, He says: “Say
you: We believe in Allah, and the revelation given to us, and to Abraham, Ismail,
210 CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and that given to Moses and Jesus, and that given to
[all] Prophets from their Lord: We make no difference between one and another
of them: and we bow to Allah [in Islam]. So if they believe as you believe, they
are indeed on the right path; but if they turn back, it is they who are in schism...”
(2:136—37). In the end of the Sirah, He says: “. .. The Messenger believes in what
has been revealed to him from his Lord, as do the men of belief. Each one [of
them] believes in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His Messengers. “We make
no distinction [they say] between one and another of His Messengers.’ And they
say: ‘We hear, and we obey: [we seek] Your forgiveness, Our Lord, and with you
is our destiny’” (2:285).

It was reported in the two famous sound collections of hadith that the Prophet
(pbuh) said: “Whoever recites the last two verses of Surat al-Baqarah, Chapter of
the Cow, at night will suffice him.” He also said: “That he [the Prophet] used to
recite the middle verse.” The Prophet used to recite these verses during the two
rak‘ahs, prostrations, of the Fajr, dawn, prayer. He also used to recite the
following verse. Allah says: “Say [Oh, Muhammad]: ‘Oh, people of the Scripture
[Jews and Christians] come to a word that is just between us and you. . .”” (3:64).
At other times the Prophet recited the Strat al-Kafiriin, Chapter of Unbelievers,
and the Sirat al-Ikhlas, Chapter of Sincerity, which starts with: “Say [Oh,
Muhammad] Allah is One” (112:1). Thus the Prophet used to recite verses that
have reference to Iman and Islam as well as reference to Oneness of Allah and
Sincerity.

Refuting the claim of the Murji’ites [that works are not implied in Iman as the
above-mentioned verses indicate since these verses conjoin deeds with Iman, and
this conjunction requires that they be distinguished from each other] the author
argues that the righteous works associated with Iman are implied in Iman itself.
They are related to it as the specific is related to the general, either by mentioning
the specific after the general; or by being mentioned in conjunction with it to
indicate that it is not implied in the general. It has been said that works were not
originally part of Iman and that the essence of Iman is what is in the heart, while
works are necessary for Iman. Hence, if anyone does not do righteousness, his
Iman is negated. For the negation of a necessary feature requires the negation of
the entity of which it is a necessary feature. But by virtue of the Legislator’s [the
Prophet’s] customary usage of the term Iman, works came to be implied in its
meaning if the word Iman is applied in an absolute sense. As was mentioned
ATTRIBUTES AND TERMS WITH SPECIFIC CONNOTATIONS 211

earlier by the Prophet: “None among you believes until one loves for his brother
what he loves for himself;” and “None among you believe if his neighbor is
endangered by his injurious conduct.” Hence, if works are conjoined with Iman,
it would be mentioned, so that one should not think that his mere Iman, without
righteous works, which are necessary for Iman, leads to Paradise. To put it
differently, the specific mention of works was to affirm that the reward in the
Hereafter [entering Paradise without punishment] is not for someone who claims
that he is a believer, although he does not work righteousness; but for one who
believes and does righteousness. Allah indicates, in many verses, that when the
righteous say “I believe,” they must perform the obligations. The restriction of
Iman to this group only reveals that those outside this group do not possess Iman.

In this regard, the Jahmites raised a question that is mentioned by Abu al-Hassan
al-Ash‘ari in his book entitled the Concise a/-Miujaz, the question being whether,
according to the Qur’an, belief may only be ascribed to those who, although they
profess to believe, do not perform good works. Allah says: “The believers are
those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their hearts . . .” (8:2).
However, it is not stated here that such works are part of belief. Rather, they said
that whoever does not perform these works in this manner is not a believer,
because the absence of such a response is evidence that knowledge is likewise
absent from such a person’s heart.

A response to this position may be made based on the following observations.
First, those who held this view acknowledged that good works are associated with
belief of the heart by necessity, such that if they are not present, neither may the
required belief be said to reside in the heart. However, if this is the case, then the
question of whether such works are associated with belief by necessity, or an
actual component of belief, becomes a mere dispute over words. Second, there are
passages in hadith literature that state explicitly that such works are actually a part
of belief, as in the tradition that says: “Iman has sixty or seventy-odd branches.”
Third, if it is claimed that whoever does not exhibit such outward behaviors is
devoid of all belief, then one has adopted the same view as the Kharijites.
However, since those who are making this claim also claim to be on the opposite
end of the spectrum from the Kharijites, how can they then be in agreement with
them? For among the works included here are ritual prayers, giving of zakah,
fasting during the month of Ramadan, making the pilgrimage to Makkah, engaging
212 CHAPTER FIFTEEN

in jihad, striving in the Cause of Allah, deferring to the rule of Allah and His
Messenger, and other actions that those who claim to hold this view, would not
view, as sufficient reason to declare someone an unbeliever. And if they did
declare such a person an unbeliever, they would in essence be upholding the views
of the Kharijites. Fourth, the claim that the absence or neglect of some of the
works mentioned above requires that there will not be, in the heart of a person, the
slightest belief in the truth of the Lord’s existence. This statement is so patently
groundless as to need no refutation. Fifth, if this view [i.e., the fourth] were shown
to be true with respect to those duties mentioned above, then it would likewise be
true of all other outward requirements of Islam, as a result of which the semantic
debate would be eliminated.
Chapter Sixteen

The Murji’ites’ Views On
Iman, Works, and Religion

The second aspect of the false argument of the Murji’ites is their belief that Iman
is only in the heart is tasdiq, assent, without any works of the heart, which has
already been pointed out in the previous discussion concerning the opinion of the
Murji?ite sect, who followed Jahm.'

The third false argument is that they [the Murji’ites] thought that Iman that is in
the heart is complete without any works. So they regarded works as the product
and necessary outgrowth of Iman, in the rank of cause and effect, but not as an
essential requirement for Iman. Against this, the author argues that the complete
Iman of the heart must be accompanied by righteous works and that Iman of the
heart is never perfect without them. For this reason, the Murji’ites presumed the
possibility of matters that never occurred due to their failure to affirm the
connection between the body and the heart. For example, they said a man may
have Iman in his heart similar to that of Abu Bakr [al-Siddiq] and ‘Umar [Ibn al-
Khattab], although he neither prostrates nor fasts during Ramadan, fornicates with
his mother and his sister, and drinks wine in the daylight hours of Ramadan. They
[the Murji?ites] say that such a man has complete Iman. On the contrary, all
believers would absolutely deny such a claim.

' The editors of the different editions of Kitab al-Iman seem to differ on the organization and
division of chapters 15 and 16. MI.1, MI.2, and MKH, the editions that have been basically
adapted for this translation, begin chapter 16 with a discussion of the second error of the
Murji’ites, whereas MZ combines the two chapters (see pp. 186-203). The editor of MZ has
some Justification for combining the two chapters, since the discussion deals with the same topic
(i.e., the two errors of the Murji’ites). However, the translators have preferred to adhere to the
organization maintained in the editions mentioned above.
214 CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said that Khalaf Ibn Hayyan related on the authority of Ma‘qal
Ibn “Ubayd Allah al-‘Absi,” who said that Salim al-Aftas came to us believing in
the Murji’ite’s sayings; hence, our companions detested him and completely
rejected his sayings, among them Maymin Ibn Mahran’ and ‘Abd al-Karim Ibn
Malik,* who gave a promise to Allah that he would never be under the same roof
of a house with him except in the mosque. Ma‘qal also said that he made a
pilgrimage [to Makkah] and then he came upon ‘Ata’ Ibn Abi Rabah with a group
of his [Ma‘qal’s] companions while he was reciting the following Qur’anic verse.
Allah says: “Until the Messengers despaired and thought that they were falsified
...” (12:110). Ma‘qal further said: “I have a request and I need to talk to you
alone.” When he did, I told him that some people before had brought forward
innovative ideas and arguments in which they said that prayer and giving zakah
are not part of religion. Upon this he responded: Did not Allah say that, as in the
following verse? Allah says: “And they were commanded not, but that they should
worship Allah, and worship none but Him alone, offering prayers, giving zakah:
and that is the Right Religion” (98:5). Hence, offering prayer and giving zakah are
part of religion. He then said that I said that they said that there is no increase in
Iman. Then he said that Iman does not increase. He responded: Did not Allah say
[as in the following verse]: “. .. That they may increase Belief to their Belief? . . .”
(48:4). I said that they quoted your name as saying that, and I heard that Ibn Dharr°
came to you with his companions and presented this saying of the Murji’ites and
you accepted it. Upon this he [Ma‘qal] said two or three times I swear by Allah,
Who there is no god but Him, that I did not. Then he said that I came to Madinah
and sat with Nafi‘.° I said to him: “Oh, Abu ‘Abd Allah, I have a request of you.”
He replied: “Is it a secret or something that can be declared publicly?” He -
responded: “‘It is a secret.” I answered: “Many a secret has come to no good.” He

2 Ma‘gal Ibn ‘Ubayd Allah al-‘Absi (7-166 A.H.) was a compiler and transmitter of hadith from
Ata’ Ibn Abi Rabah and al-Zuhri. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 189.]

3 Maymin Ibn Mahran Abu Ayyab (?-117 A.H.) was a jurist, a scholar of hadith, and a judge in

al-Jazirah during the reign of the Caliph ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 190.]

‘Abd al-Karim Ibn Malik (?-127 A.H.) was a compiler and a trustworthy scholar of hadith.

[Kitab al-Iman MZ, page 190.]

Ibn Dharr, Abu Dharr ‘Umar al-Hamadani (?- 156 A.H.), was a scholar and narrator of hadith and

a leading figure of the Murji’ite sect. [Al-Zirkill, vol. 5, page 205 and Kitab al-Iman MZ, page

190.]

6“ Nafi‘ Abu ‘Abd Allah (?-117 A.H.) was one of the famous Successors, a trustworthy jurist, and
a scholar of hadith. He was also a client of Ibn ‘Umar. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, 190.]

>

tA
THE MURJPITES’ VIEWS ON IMAN, WORKS AND RELIGION 215

replied: “It shall not be so.” I reassured him. Then we prayed the afternoon prayer,
after which he got up and took hold of my robe. Then he came out of the chamber
and did not wait for [me], the one seeking him. “What is your request?” he asked.
I replied: “Stand aside.” So 1 told him what they had said, and he replied that the
Messenger (pbuh) said: “I have been commanded to strike them with my sword
until they say: ‘There is no god but Allah’. If they do say it, they have protected
their souls and their wealth by truly uttering it, while their final reckoning shall be
with Allah.” Then I told him that they said that we acknowledged that prayer is a
duty incumbent upon us, though we do not pray, that alcoholic beverages are
forbidden to us, though we drink them, and that we are forbidden to marry
mothers, though we do so. Then he withdrew his hand violently from mine and
said that whoever does such things is an unbeliever.

Ma‘qal said that he saw al-Zuhni and told him about their saying. He said: “Glory
to Allah! Do people quarrel about such issues?” [He was astonished to hear such
ideas, which result in many controversies.} The Prophet (pbuh) said: “A fornicator
who fornicates is not considered a believer as long as he continues to do so, and
no one who drinks wine is considered a believer as long as he continues to do so.”
Ma‘qal said: “I met al-Hakam Ibn ‘Utaybah’ and said to him that I was told by
‘Abd al-Karim and Maymin that some of the Murji?ites came to present their
views to you, and that you accepted them.” He [al-Hakam] replied: “Maymiin and
“Abd al-Karim reported that about me? While I was sick I was visited by twelve
men who said to me: ‘Abu Muhammad, have you heard that a man came to the
Prophet (pbuh) with a black maiden or an Abyssinian slave! When he approached
the Prophet, he said Oh, Messenger of Allah, I have to emancipate a believing
slave. Do you see this slave as a believer?’” The Messenger asked the slave: “Do
you testify that there is no god but Allah?” Upon this, the slave replied: “Yes.”
The Prophet added: “Do you testify that Muhammad is a Messenger of Allah?”
She answered: “Yes.” He [the Prophet] then said: “Do you testify that Paradise and
Hell are real?” She answered: “Yes.” He [the Prophet] then asked: “Do you testify
that Allah resurrects you back to life [after death]?” She replied: “Yes.” Upon this,
the Prophet said: “Emancipate her. Indeed, she is a believer.” Then they departed,
thinking about the argument.

” Al-Hakam Ibn ‘Utaybah, Abu Muhammad (?-115 A.H.), was a celebrated jurist and a
trustworthy scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p.191.]
216 CHAPTER SIXTEEN

١ Ma‘qal said that once he sat next to Maymiun Ibn Mahran and asked him to recite
and then explain a Sirah of the Qur’an. Then Maymin recited what Allah says:
“When the sun with its spacious light is folded up” (81:1), up until “With authority
there, and faithful to his trust” (81:21). Then he said that here Gabriel 15 meant.
Failure awaits whoever said that his Iman is like that of Gabriel. Supporting this
is the account of Hanbal,’ on the authority of Ahmad and also narrated by Ibn Abi
Malikah.” He [Hanbal] said: “Ages have passed by and I have never encountered
in a people anyone who said:‘I am a true believer.’” He was not satisfied until he
had said: “My belief is like that of Gabriel and Michael.” And Satan continued to
harass them until one of them said: “I am a believer,” even though he had taken
his sister, his mother, and his daughter as wives. This is what I have come to
understand from the Companions of the Prophet (pbuh), none of whom died
without fearing for himself lest he be found to be a hypocrite. The same meaning
was also reported in Sahih al-Bukhari. He said: “I realized that thirty of the
Companions of the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) feared becoming hypocrites, and
none of them ever said that his Iman was like that of Gabriel.”

Al-Baghawi related on the authority of ‘Abd Allah Ibn Muhammad that Ibn
Mujahid said: “While I was sitting with ‘Ata’ Ibn Abi Rabah, his son Ya‘qub
entered and said: ‘Oh, father, some of my companions claim that their Iman is like
that of Gabriel.’ Upon this, he [‘Ata’] answered: ‘Oh my dear son, the Iman of the
one who obeys Allah is not like that of someone who disobeyed Him.”

THE MURUJPITES’ VIEWS ON WORKS: ARE THEY PART OF IMAN OR RELIGION?

We said that the claim that prayer and giving zakah are not part of religion may
be a position that was held by only some of the Murji’ites. However, all of them
held that these duties are not part of belief. As for their part in religion, some of
them are reported to have said that these duties were not part of religion;
moreover, we make no distinction between belief and religion. However, some of
them said that these two duties are indeed part of religion, and [thus] a distinction
must be made between the terms “belief” and “religion.” These were the claims

® The full name of Hanbal is Hanbal Ibn Hilal al-Shaybani, a cousin of Iman Ahmad Ibn Hanbal.
He worked on history and hadiths.

9 Tbn Abi Malikah, ‘Abd Allah (?-117 A.H.), was the judge of Makkah during the time of Ibn al-
Zubayr and a trusthworty narrator and compiler of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 192.]
THE MURJPITES’ VIEWS ON IMAN, WORKS AND RELIGION 217

that are known to have been made. However, I found that none of them claimed,
in any of their writings, that good works are not part of religion; rather, they held
that they are not part of belief. This is also what Abu ‘Ubayd reported concerning
the views of members of this sect who debated with him. Abu ‘Ubayd and others
argued that good works are indeed part of religion. In support of this Allah says:
‘““.. This day, I have perfected your religion for you . . .” (5:3). This verse was
revealed as part of the farewell sermon that the Prophet preached. According to
Abu ‘Ubayd, the religion [of the Prophet’s believing community] was brought to
completion at the end of [this period of] Islam, with this speech given by the
Prophet (pbuh). However, the Murji’ites claimed that religion had reached
completion twenty years before this, from the time when the revelation first
descended upon the Prophet in Makkah and when the Prophet called upon people
to acknowledge [Islam as the true religion]. He [Abu ‘Ubayd] even said that some
of them were obliged to retreat when the injunctions contained in this sermon were
introduced into it. He also added that belief is not all of religion; rather, religion
consists of three parts: belief, religious duties, and supererogatory acts of devotion.

This claim he made was the doctrine held by the majority of the people. But
according to Abu ‘Ubayd, it was not consistent with what the Book teaches. For
did not Allah say: “Truly, the religion in the sight of Allah is Islam . . .” (3:19); He
also says: “And whoever seeks a religion other than Islam, it will never be
accepted of him . . .” (3:85); and He also says: “. . . And I have chosen for you
Islam as your religion . . .” (5:3). All these verses indicate that Islam is religion in
its entirety, while the Murji’ites claimed that it represents only one-third of
religion.

However, what they have said was not that belief is one-third of religion, but
merely that belief is “‘a third.” Moreover, they made a distinction between the
concepts of “belief” and “religion.” And, if Allah wills, we shall mention in the
following what has been said concerning each of these. For some have been
reported to have said that first of all, prayer and giving zakah are not part of
religion, and second, that no distinction is to be made between the terms “belief”
and “religion.” Others, however, have insisted that both these practices are part of
religion. Al-Shafi‘l (may Allah be pleased with him) used to praise ‘Ata’ Ibn Abt
Rabah and said that none of the followers was better than ‘Ata’ in following
hadith. Likewise, Abu Hanifah said: “I have never seen anybody like ‘Ata’.”
Al-Shafi‘l cited this statement about ‘Ata’ [based on the conversation between
218 CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Ma‘qal and ‘Ata’ about whether prayer is part of religion or not). Ibn Abi Hatim
narrated on the authority of his father, from ‘Abd al-Malik Ibn “Abd al-Hamid al-
Maymini, from Abu ‘Uthman Ibn Muhammad Ibn Muhammad al-Shafi‘l, that one
night he heard his father saying to al-Hamidi that the strongest refutation of the
argument of the Murji’tes was the following saying of Allah: “And they have been
commanded no more than this: to worship Allah, offering Him sincere devotion,
being true [in belief]; to establish regular prayer; and to give zakah; and that is the
Religion Right and Straight ” (98:5).

In his book al-Umm, (The Mother), in the Chapter on Intent, al-Shafil also said
that no prayer is adequate without good intent, as indicated in the saying of ‘Umar
Ibn al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him), from the Prophet (pbuh): “Deeds
are recorded according to the intentions of those who perform them.” He further
said: “The Companions and the followers unanimously agree upon the saying that
Iman is an utterance, a work, and an intent. None of these three matters is regarded
without the other two.”

Hanbal said that al-Hamidi reported that he heard that some people say that
whoever acknowledged the duties of prayer, giving zakah, fasting, and pilgrimage
but did not practice any of them until he died, was a believer, provided he was not
a denier, knowing that his abandonment of these duties was a constituent of Iman
as long as he admitted the obligations and faced the qiblah [when he prayed]. The
author refutes this argument as an explicit rejection of Iman, of the Book, of the
Sunnah, and of the unanimity of the Muslim jurists. Allah says: “And they have
been commanded no more than this: to worship Allah, to offer Him sincere
devotion . . .” (98:5). Furthermore, Hanbal said that I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal say that whoever said so [in agreement with al-Hamidi],
indeed, he has committed blasphemy and denied Allah’s commands and rejected
what the Messenger brought forward from Allah.

The Murji’ite’s citation of the Prophet’s statement: “Emancipate her [the slave
girl]; indeed, she is a believer,” is one of their famous arguments, based on which’
Ibn Kullab said that Iman is both tasdiq, assent, and qawl, saying. Against this, the
author argues that this statement of the Prophet (pbuh) is not applicable here
[cannot be generalized]. For manifest Iman, about which worldly judgments may
be made, does not necessitate the existence of inner Iman, whose adherent will
enjoy happiness in the Hereafter. Allah says hypocrites are those who say: “... We
THE MURJPITES’ VIEWS ON IMAN, WORKS AND RELIGION 219

believe in Allah and the Last Day; but they do not [really] believe” (2:8).
Outwardly they pretend to be believers. For they pray, fast, go on pilgrimage,
invade, inherit from Muslims, and marry Muslims in the same way hypocrites used
to do during the time of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh). The Prophet did not
regard them as unbelievers who manifested their unbelief neither in their marriage
nor inheritance practices nor anything else. Rather, when ‘Abd Allah Ibn Ubay Ibn
Salil, one of the most notorious hypocrites, died, his heir was his son ‘Abd Allah,
who was among the most virtuous believers. Similarly, in the cases of all other
hypocrites who died, their inheritances were passed on to their believing heirs.
And if any heirs to any of them died, they in turn were this person’s heirs along
with the Muslims.

JUDGMENT CONCERNING THE HYPOCRITE WHO CONCEALS His ATHEISM

Indeed, Muslim jurists have debated about whether atheist hypocrites, who hide
their unbelief, should inherit and leave an inheritance or not. However, the author
argues that they inherit and leave an inheritance even if they are known to be
covertly hypocrites, as was the case in the time of the Prophet (pbuh). For
inheritance is based on overt support for the Prophet (pbuh) but not on the hidden
devotion of the heart. Indeed, the Prophet’s saying: “An unbeliever never inherits
from a Muslim and a Muslim never inherits from an unbeliever,” does not include
hypocrites, although in the Hereafter they are in the lowest reaches of Hellfire. But
they used to bequeath and inherit in the same way Muslims do. Likewise, they had
the same rights and were subject to the same limitations as all other Muslims.
Moreover, Allah states that even though they establish prayer and give zakah, they
are not-accepted by Him. He [Allah] says: “The only reasons why their
contributions are not accepted are that they reject Allah and His Messenger; that
they come to prayer without earnestness; and that they offer contributions
unwillingly” (9:54). He also says: “The hypocrites—they think they are
overreaching Allah, but He will overreach them: When they stand up to pray, they
stand without earnestness, to be seen of men, but little do they hold Allah in
remembrance” (4:142). It was recorded in Sahih Muslim that the Prophet said:
“Here is how a hypocrite prays [he said this three times]; he intends to observe the
sun until it sets between the two horns of Satan. Then, he stands up to pray and
quickly performs four rak‘as, but little does he hold Allah in remembrance.”
220 CHAPTER SIXTEEN

Hypocrites also used to accompany the Prophet on his expeditions, as Ibn Ubay
once did on the expedition of Bani al-Mustalaq, where the Prophet said this verse
from the Qur'an: “. . . [The hypocrites] said: “If we return to Madinah, indeed the
more honorable will expel from it the meaner ones . . .”” (63:8).

In the two collections of sound hadiths, it is related on the authority of Zayd Ibn
Arqam, who said: “We went out with the Prophet (pbuh) on an arduous journey
during which people suffered severely.” So ‘Abd Allah Ibn Ubay said to his
followers: “Spend none of your wealth on those who are with the Messenger of
Allah so that those gathered about him will be scattered.” And he also said: “. . .
[The hypocrites] said: ‘If we return to Madinah, indeed the more honorable will
expel from it the meaner ones... .’” So I [Zayd Ibn Arqam] came to the Prophet
and informed him of the matter, and he in turn sent a message to ‘Abd Allah Ibn
Ubay, asking him about what he had done. He [‘Abd Allah Ibn Ubay] replied that
Zayd had lied to the Messenger of Allah. I was quite distraught by what they had
said until Allah revealed that I am telling the truth, saying: “When the hypocrites
come to you [Oh, Muhammad] . . .” (63:1). Then the Prophet (pbuh) summoned
them so that he might pray to Allah to forgive them, and they bowed their heads.
On the occasion of the Tabik expedition the Prophet (pbuh) called them to take
up arms, just as he and the rest did. Some of them accompanied the Prophet
(pbuh), and some did not. On the way, some of those who joined him tried to kill
him by unfastening the cinch of his she-camel so that he would fall into a valley.
However, he received a revelation and then confided their names in secret to
Hudhayfah. (Therefore, he is called ‘the man of the secret’ as cited in al-Sahih.]
In spite of all this, they were overtly treated in the same way as believers.

This section clarifies many doubts. For example, many of the followers classified
those who outwardly professed Islam either as just or wicked. But they avoided
making a decision about hypocrites, who were, are, and will be living among us
until the Judgment Day. Hypocrisy has many branches. And the Companions of
the Prophet (pbuh) feared becoming hypocrites.

For example, it was recorded in both Sahih Muslim and Sahih al-Bukhari that the
Prophet (pbuh) said: “Three are the signs of a hypocrite; when he speaks he tells
a lie, when he makes a promise he breaks it, and when he is trusted, he betrays the
trust.” Muslim recorded this hadith with the following addition: “. . . even if he
observes the fast and prays and asserts that he is a Muslim.”
THE MURJPITES’ VIEWS ON IMAN, WORKS AND RELIGION 221

In the two Sahihs it was recorded, on the authority of ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr, that
the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Four attributes can be seen in someone who is
considered a manifest hypocrite. And he who possesses one of them, indeed,
possesses a characteristic of hypocrisy until he abandons it; when he speaks he
tells a lie, when he is trusted he betrays the trust, when he makes a promise he
breaks it, and when he quarrels he behaves traitorously.”

The Prophet (pbuh) used to pray for them and ask Allah to forgive them until
Allah forbade him to do this. Allah says: “Nor do you ever pray for any of them
that dies, nor stand at his grave . . .” (9:84). And He says: “‘Whether you ask for
their forgiveness, or not [their sin is unforgivable]: If you ask seventy times for
their forgiveness, Allah will not forgive them . . .” (9:80). From that time on, the
Prophet (pbuh) stopped praying for them and asking for their forgiveness. But,
unlike the unbelievers, their blood and property are protected [for they overtly
behave as Muslims]. The Prophet (pbuh) said: “I have been commanded to fight
against people until they admit that there is no god but Allah and that I am the
Messenger of Allah. And when they do it, their blood and property are guaranteed
protection on my behalf except for the right, and their affairs rest with Allah.” And
then he said to Usamah Ibn Zayd: “Have you killed him after he said that there is
no god but Allah?” Upon this, Usamah replied: “He said so to seek protection.”
The Prophet (pbuh) added: “But, have you opened his heart [to justify what you
did]?” He further said: “I have been commanded neither to go in search of
people’s hearts nor to split open their stomachs.” When the Prophet (pbuh) was
asked for his permission to kill a man, he used to ask: “Does he [the man] pray?
Does he not testify that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His
Messenger?” If it was said that he was a hypocrite, he [the Prophet] used to say:
“Do not kill him.” Hence, he used to protect people’s blood and property unless
they overtly rejected Iman [whether he knew that some of them were hypocrites
or not}. Allah says: “Certain of the desert Arabs around you are hypocrites, as well
as the People of Madinah. They are obstinate in hypocrisy. Although you do not
know them; We know them; twice shall We punish them, and in addition shall
they be sent to a grievous Penalty” (9:101). Whenever one of them died, Muslims
used to pray for them, provided that they did not know that they were hypocrites,
but if they knew, they would refrain. ‘Umar [al-Khattab] used to not pray for a
dead man until Hudhayfah prayed for him for Hudhayfah had better knowledge
than others about hypocrites because the Prophet (pbuh) had mentioned their
222 CHAPTER SIXTEEN

names to him in secret. Allah says: “Oh, you who believe! When believing women
come to you as emigrants, examine them, Allah knows best as to their belief, then
if you know them to be true believers, do not send them back to the unbelievers
.. .(60:10). Thus here he was commanded to examine them, and then followed
that by saying: “Allah knows best as to their belief.”

Moreover, when Allah commands Muslims to emancipate a believing slave as an
atonement for sin, He does not stipulate that he had to be a true believer. Neither
were they commanded to go in search of people’s hearts nor to open their
stomachs. But, if they found a man who manifested Iman, they were allowed to
emancipate him. This applies to the owner of the slave girl [mentioned
previously]. When the Prophet (pbuh) asked the owner: “Is she a believer?” the
Prophet (pbuh) meant, “Is she a believer outwardly?” The same is true of someone
who has to emancipate a believing slave in fulfillment of a vow. He is to
emancipate an overtly believing slave. For no creature can judge someone else’s
inner Iman. Indeed, no human being can ever know such a thing [i.e., whether
someone else has belief in his heart] for certain. Even the Messenger of Allah, the
most knowledgeable of all human beings, was told by Allah: "Certain of the desert
Arabs around you are hypocrites, as well as the People of Madinah. They are
obstinate in hypocrisy. Although you [Oh Muhammad] do not know them; We
know them; twice shall We punish them . . .” (9:101). The people mentioned in
this verse were being judged by the Prophet to be believers, and if any of them had
died, he would have prayed over that person’s funeral procession. For he was only
forbidden to pray for someone whom he knew to be a hypocrite; otherwise, he
would have had to have the capacity to plumb the depths of peoples’ souls and
know their innermost secrets, which is something no mere human being is capable
of.

When Allah reveals hypocrites’ secrets in Strat Bara’ah, He says: “And among
them ..., and among them . . .” (IX:49)'° and the hidden hypocrisy of some of
them was unveiled. For Allah attributes some traits to hypocrites that were
unknown [to many people] as traits that inevitably characterize hypocrites,
although some of them thought and others knew what they were. Indeed, their
hypocrisy was unknown to the public until the Qur’an was revealed. When Sirat

'0 The chapter titled Sirat Bara’ah is also commonly known as Sirat al-Tawbah. The reference
above, wa minhum, from among them, occurs at the beginning of verses 49, 58, and 75.
THE MURJPITES’ VIEWS ON IMAN, WORKS AND RELIGION 223

Bara’ah was revealed, they hid their hypocrisy and no longer could reveal it. Allah
says: “If the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, and those who
spread news among the people in Madinah, do not cease, We shall certainly let
you overpower them, then they will not be able to stay in it as your neighbors but
for a little while. They shall have a curse on them: wherever they are found, they
shall be seized and slain [without mercy]. That was the way of Allah in the case
of those who disappeared a long time ago, and you will not find any change in the
way of Allah” (33:60—62). Whenever they were warned that they would be killed
if they revealed this hypocrisy, they hid it.

For this reason, when Muslim jurists debated about the acceptance of a zindiq’s,
atheist ’s, repentance, it was said that his repentance was accepted. This saying was
derived from the cases wherein the Prophet (pbuh) accepted their overt repentance
but relied on Allah for the acceptance of their inner repentance. Against this, the
author argues that this was the case before the revelation of this verse. Allah says:
“They shall have a curse on them: wherever they are found, they shall be seized
and slain [without mercy]” (33:61). Afterward, they knew that if they persisted in
their hypocrisy as they did previously, they would be killed. So they hid it.

As for the person referred to as an 212010, atheist, he is likewise a hypocrite, and
is to be killed by anyone who discovers that he has been concealing his hypocrisy.
It has been said that one cannot be certain whether such a person’s repentance is
sincere, since the most that one may ascertain concerning what is inside him is
what he manifests outwardly, and he may have been displaying belief even though
he is a hypocrite. Moreover, if you were to accept the repentance of such atheists,
there would be no way to carry out the injunction to kill them, which is the
punishment with which they are threatened by the Qur’4n.

In other words, the Prophet (pbuh) judged, on the basis of overt pieces of
evidence, that the slave girl was overtly a believer. Otherwise, it was firmly
mentioned that when Sa‘d testified that the man was a believer, the Prophet (pbuh)
remarked: “or a Muslim,” even though this man manifested more overt belief than
that of the slave girl. Hence, one has to distinguish between judgments of overt
Iman by people in this world and judgments in the Hereafter concerning reward
and punishment. Accordingly, the believer who deserves Paradise must be a
believer in his heart as unanimously agreed upon by all of the people of the Qiblah
[those who turn toward Makkah to pray]. Even the Karramite sect, who called a
224 CHAPTER SIXTEEN

hypocrite a believer, said that Iman is al-kalimah, the word (testimony), and that
is to testify that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His Messenger
and that nothing is beneficial in the Hereafter except inner Iman.

Some have reported that they [the Karramites] considered hypocrites to be among
those who will enter Paradise. However, this is an error on their part. For they
disputed over the name rather than over the verdict to be issued as to a person’s
actual spiritual state due to the specious argument put forward by the Murji’ites
to the effect that belief may not be subdivided or ranked as to superior or inferior.
For this reason, that which Islamic jurists have primarily based their judgments on
with regard to the neck [i.e., the person] who was to be rewarded through penance
was one’s outward works. They also disputed the question as to whether a child
should be rewarded. Two well-known positions have been taken by the pious
ancestors with regard to this question, both of which have been passed down in
accounts on the authority of Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal]. According to one position, his
emancipation may not be rewarded since belief consists of both a saying and a
work, and a child has not believed by himself; rather, judged by worldly standards,
his faith is dependent on that of his parents. Nor has anyone laid down the
condition that it must be known for certain that he is a believer inwardly.
According to the opposing view, the child’s emancipation will be rewarded
because emancipation is determined by external judgments, and is something that
depends on his parents. For just as he inherits from them and is prayed for, and
since only a believer may be prayed for, then he is eligible for emancipation.

Likewise, hypocrites who have not let their hypocrisy become manifest outwardly
have been prayed for when they die and have been buried in the same cemeteries
as Muslims ever since the time of the Prophet (pbuh). The cemetery that was set
aside for Muslims during the Prophet’s lifetime and during the lifetimes of his
Successors and Companions was the place where they buried all those who had
manifested belief outwardly, even if they had been hypocrites. Hence, there was
no cemetery designated for hypocrites, as distinguished from Muslims, in the way
there were cemeteries especially for Jews and Christians. Whoever was buried in
a cemetery for Muslims would be prayed for by Muslims, although the Qur’an
forbids prayer for anyone who was known to be a hypocrite. This, of course, is
based on belief that is displayed outwardly, for only Allah knows the secrets of the
heart. Hence, the Prophet (pbuh) used to pray for all Muslims who died, asking
Allah to forgive their sins, until he was forbidden to do so. And this [prohibition]
THE MURJPITES’ VIEWS ON IMAN, WORKS AND RELIGION 225

was explained as being due to unbelief. [However, the Prophet’s former practice]
was an indication that it was permissible to pray for anyone not known for certain
to be an unbeliever in his heart, even if he was heretical in his doctrines and had
committed sins.

If the Imam, prayer leader, or the people of knowledge and religion abandoned
prayer for those who show heresy or wickedness when they die, in order to show
disapproval of their works, this does not mean that it is prohibited to pray for them
or ask Allah for their forgiveness. On the contrary, the Prophet (pbuh) told the
ones who used to refrain from praying for those who include among others, the
miser, the one who intentionally kills himself, and the one who does not pay his
debts: “Pray for your friends.” Moreover, it is related on the authority of the
Prophet (pbuh) that he used to ask Allah for their forgiveness in his heart, although
he [himself] used to refrain from praying for them publicly, as it was narrated in
the hadith of Mulhim Ibn Juththamah."'

In the Book and the Sunnah, people who manifest Islam are of two kinds, either
believers or hypocrites. The hypocrites are in the lowest part of Hell. And the
believer may have decreased Iman and thus will not be covered by the
generalization of this term, or he may have complete Iman. A discussion of this
will be included below, if Allah wills, in connection with the question of Islam and
belief, along with the names used to describe major sinners who are nevertheless
members of a religious community. One should not be regarded implicitly as an
unbeliever if he has committed a sin or embraced a heresy, even if he called others
to practice that heresy, unless he is a hypocrite. That is, if in his heart he believed
in the Messenger and what has been revealed through him but has erred in his
heresy, then in principle, he is not an unbeliever. For example, the Kharijites went
further than anyone else in manifesting heresy and killing others. In spite of this,
however, none of the Companions of the Prophet, neither ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib nor
others, ever considered them as unbelievers. They used to treat them in the way
wrongdoing Muslims were treated.

Such is the case with the remaining seventy-two branches of Islam. Whoever is a
hypocrite is [covertly] an unbeliever. In contrast, whoever is not a hypocrite but
[covertly] a believer in Allah and His Messenger is not [covertly] an unbeliever,

'' Mulhim Ibn Juththamah (n.d.) lived during the lifetime of the Prophet and most probably died
during the time of Ibn al-Zubayr. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 200.}
226 CHAPTER SIXTEEN

even if he has erred in his interpretation [no matter what the error is]. He may also
have some degree of hypocrisy, but this does not lead him to the lowest reaches
of Hellfire. And whoever attributes unbelief to each of the seventy-two branches,
violates what is in the Book and the Sunnah and what the Companions of the
Prophet and the four religious leaders and other [scholars] have agreed
unanimously upon. For none of them ever accused unbelief to any of the
seventy-two branches of unbelief. This will be explained fully in its proper place.

However, authorities on Islam and its teachings have judged this view to be
blasphemous, since it is a supposition that is intrinsically impossible. For it is
impossible that someone who is a believer in his heart should do none whatsoever
of the things which he has been commanded to do, such as prayer, giving zakah,
fasting, and going on pilgrimage to Makkah, as well as engaging in whatever
forbidden activities he is capable of, such as praying without having done the
required ritual ablutions or without turning toward Makkah, or marrying mothers.
Rather, one would only behave in this manner on account of an absence of belief
from his heart. For this reason, the followers of Abu Hanifah used to declare to be
unbelievers various groups who made claims such as the one described here,
because of the contempt that such suppositions imply [for the meaning of belief
and Islam]. And during the debate over terminology and definitions which took
place between Abu Hanifah’s followers and the majority of Islamic scholars, they
labeled some of their opponents as apostates. This debate revolved around whether
outward works are to be considered a part of belief or not. In this context, some
later theologians posed another theoretical scenario that could not possibly take
place: namely, someone who has acknowledged that prayer is his religious duty,
is called to prayer yet refrains, even though he is called upon three times to repent
under threat of death if he does not comply. Moreover, he continues to obstinately
refuse until at last he is killed. So the question is: Will such an individual die as
an unbeliever or simply as a believer who has committed major sins? On this
question, two positions have been taken.

However, this entire scenario is intrinsically impossible. For if one believes that
Allah imposes upon him the duty to pray and believes, moreover, that Allah will
punish him for neglecting this duty, he would not patiently endure being killed
rather than perform a prostration to Allah in prayer without having the slightest
THE MURJPITES’ VIEWS ON IMAN, WORKS AND RELIGION 227

excuse for such behavior. In fact, such a person would not even endure being
beaten, much less being killed, without surrendering to the pressure and praying.
And the reason for this is that to be killed is a kind of serious harm that no one
would patiently endure except for the sake of some weighty cause, such as a
religion to which he holds and which he believes that if he abandoned it, he would
perish spiritually. This would apply whether the religion in and of itself were true
or false. And if one believes both outwardly and inwardly that some action is his
duty, then performance of such an action could not possibly be more difficult for
him than enduring death at the hands of others.

The counterpart to this would be to say that an Orthodox Muslim was told: “Seek
to please Abu Bakr and “Umar,” yet he refused to do so until he was killed in spite
of his love for both Caliphs, and in spite of the fact that he had no excuse that
would prevent him from seeking to win their approval. No one whatsoever would
conduct himself in this way. An equally impossible scenario would be to assume
that there was someone who bore witness both outwardly and inwardly that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, yet although he was asked to give this
testimony he refused to do so, despite the fact that there was no compulsion or
desire on account of which he should refrain from doing so. It is for this reason
that the verbal utterance of one’s belief was considered by the majority of the
pious ancestors, as well as by later Islamic scholars, to be part of that without
which a servant of Allah may not escape perdition. The only group to disagree
with this position were the Jahmites. So if it is assumed that someone is excused
from voicing his belief because he is mute, or because he is fearful of people who
might do him harm were he to manifest outwardly that he is a Muslim, then it
would be possible for him not to speak of his belief even though he does have
belief in his heart. The latter situation would apply to someone who uttered a
statement of disbelief under duress. Allah says: “. . . Whoever disbelieved in Allah
after his belief, except him who is forced thereto and whose heart is addressed
with belief, but such as open their breasts to disbelief, on them is Wrath from
Allah, and theirs will be a great torment” (16:106). This verse clearly shows the
falsity of Jahm’s view, for according to the Qur’an, everyone who utters words
indicating unbelief is to be considered an unbeliever under threat of divine
retribution, unless he is among those who have been compelled to utter such words
while their hearts are firm in belief.
228 CHAPTER SIXTEEN

If someone says, as Allah says: “But he whose heart is content in unbelief,” the
answer would be: this is in harmony with its beginning. For someone who of his
own accord utters words manifesting unbelief is likewise someone who is content
to be an unbeliever; otherwise, the last part of the verse would contradict the first
part. Moreover, if the unbeliever is the person who is content in his unbelief and
who voices such unbelief without compulsion, then an exception is made not only
for the person who has been compelled to make such an utterance; rather, such an
exception would apply both to the person who is compelled and to the person who
is not compelled, yet feels no inward contentment upon making such an utterance.
If, however, one voluntarily utters a declaration of unbelief, then one has gained
some sense of satisfaction therefrom, and is thus an unbeliever. The proof of this
is in the following saying of Allah: “The hypocrites fear lest a Sirah [from the
Qur’4n] should be revealed about them, showing them what is in their hearts. Say:
‘[Go ahead and] mock! But certainly Allah will bring to light all that you fear.’ If
you ask them [about this], they will declare: ‘We were only talking idly and
joking.’ Say: ‘Was it at Allah, and His Verses and His Messenger, that you were
mocking? Make no excuse; you have disbelieved after you have believed. If We
pardon some of you, We will punish others among you because they were
criminals’” (9:64-66). This statement affirms that after becoming believers, they
[the hypocrites] turned again to unbelief. They acknowledged that they spoke
words of unbelief without actually being convinced of what they were saying.
Rather, they claimed only to have been jesting. However, these verses make clear
that mocking the signs of Allah, which could only come from someone who
gained some degree of satisfaction from doing so, is tantamount to unbelief. For
if someone had true belief in his heart, he would be unable to utter such words.

The Qur’an indicates that Iman of the heart necessitates overt work, according to
Allah’s saying: “They [the hypocrites] say: ‘We believe in Allah and in the
Messenger, and we obey,’ but even after that, some of them turn away, they are
not [really] believers. When they are summoned to Allah and His Messenger to
judge between them, behold, some of them decline [to come]. But if the night is
on their side, they come to Him with all submission. But if the right is with them,
they come to him willingly with submission. Is there a disease in their hearts? Or
do they doubt or fear lest Allah and His Messenger should wrong them in
THE MURJPITES’ VIEWS ON IMAN, WORKS AND RELIGION 229

judgment. No, it is they themselves who are wrongdoers. The answer of the
believers, when summoned to Allah and His Messenger, in order that he may
Judge among them, is no other than this: They say, ‘We hear and we obey’: and
such are the successful ones” (24:47—51).'* Accordingly, Allah refuses to attribute
Iman to those who turn away from the obedience of the Messenger. And He notes
that the believers, when summoned to Allah and His Messenger in order that He
may judge among them, hear and obey, thus indicating that hearing and obeying
are among the requirements of Iman.

" The author cited only verses 47 and 48, indicating the omission of verses 49 and 50 with the
phrase "to His saying." He then cited verse 51. For the reader’s convenience, the translators have
cited and translated the complete verses in sequence.
Chapter Seventeen

iman Either Increases or Diminishes

If it is said: If absolute Iman includes all that Allah and His Messenger
commanded, then, if some of the Iman diminishes, the sinners must be charged
with unbelief, as the Kharijites claimed, or abide forever in Hell and be deprived
of Iman, as the Mu‘tazilites claimed. The claims of the Kharijites and the
Mu‘tazilites were more erroneous than the claims of the Murji’ites. For there is
a group among the Murji’ ites who were considered good and praiseworthy people.
However, the Kharijites and the Mu‘tazilites were condemned by the consensus
of the Orthodox Muslim community.

It is said: It should be known that the views of Mu‘tazilites and Kharijites, with
which none of the Orthodox Muslims agreed, implied that the people who
committed major sins would abide forever in Hell. This claim was one of the
important innovations because the Companions and Successors of the Prophet
(pbuh), their followers, and all religious Muslims agreed that whoever has an
atom’s weight of Iman in his heart will not abide forever in Hell. They also agreed
that our Prophet (pbuh) would be among those who would intercede to seek
. Allah’s permission for His intercession for the major sinners from his community.
Indeed, both Sahih Muslim and Sahih al-Bukhri relate that the Prophet (pbuh)
said: “Every prophet is allowed one answered prayer. As for me, I delayed my
request in order to intercede for my community on Judgment Day.” This hadith
will be mentioned in its proper place. However, some people have falsely related
some sayings on the authority of the Companions of the Prophet (pbuh). For
example, it was falsely related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that there is no
repentance for anyone who intentionally kills, and this is a further false claim
about the Companions. For none of the Companions of the Prophet (pbuh) ever
related that the Prophet (pbuh) either said that he does not intercede for major
IMAN EITHER INCREASES OR DIMINISHES 231

sinners or that he said that they [major sinners] will abide eternally in Hellfire.
However, it was recorded that Ibn ‘Abbas, in one of his two narrations said:
“There is no repentance for anyone who intentionally kills [a Muslim].” A similar
error was related on the authority of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal. However, the debate over
repentance is different from the debate over eternal punishment in Hell. For killing
involves a human right; that is why it was debated.

However, the saying, “If part of it [Iman] is lost, then the whole of it is lost,” is
rejected, and it represents the essence from which many innovations concerning
Iman emerged. Moreover, Mu‘tazilites and Kharijites argued that if part of Iman
is lost, the whole of it is lost as well; and thus, the major sinner will abide forever
in Hell. In contrast, the Murji’ites argued that neither committing a major sin nor
abandoning an obligatory deed results in losing Iman. The sayings of the Prophet
(pbuh) and his Companions indicate that part of it is lost while the other part
remains, as illustrated in the Prophet’s (pbuh) saying: “He [Allah] will remove
from Hell whoever has an atom’s weight of belief.” That is why the Orthodox
Muslims said: “Iman exists in varying degrees among different people. It also may
increase and diminish.” However, some of their followers said: “Iman increases
but does not decrease,” as related on the authority of Malik in one of two accounts.
Some [namely, ‘Abd Allah Ibn al-Mubarak} said: “Iman exists in varying
degrees.” But all the Companions of the Prophet (pbuh) mentioned both the
increase and the decrease of Iman. For example, people related on the authority
of Hammad Ibn Salamah,' on the authority of Abu Ja‘far, on the authority of his
grandfather ‘Umayr Ibn Habib al-Khatmi, one of the Companions of the
Messenger (pbuh), that he {the Prophet] said: “Iman increases and diminishes.” He
was then asked: “How does it increase and diminish?” He replied: “If we hold
Allah in remembrance, praise Him, and glorify Him, our Iman increases. But, if
we hold Allah little in remembrance, our Iman diminishes. Similarly, Isma‘il Ibn
“Ayyash relates on the authority of Jarir Ibn ‘Uthman, on the authority of al-Harith
Ibn Muhammad, on the authority of Abu al-Darda’, who said: “Iman increases and
diminishes.”

According to Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, who said that Yazid related, on the authority of
Jarir Ibn ‘Uthman: “Some or of all our scholars heard Abu al-Darda? saying:

' Hammad Ibn Salamah (?-167 A.H.) wasa trustworthy compiler of hadith and a grammarian. [Al-
Ziriklt, vol. 2, p. 302.]
232 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

‘Indeed, it is a part of a man’s growth in knowledge to improve his Iman, make up
for any decrease, know whether his Iman increases or diminishes, and know when
and where Satan’s temptations may come.”” Also, Isma“il Ibn ‘Ayyash narrated,
on the authority of Safwan Ibn ‘Amr, on the authority of ‘Abd Allah Ibn Rabi‘ah
al-Hadrami, on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah, who said: “Iman increases and
diminishes.” Ahmad Ibn Hanbal related, on the authority of Yazid Ibn Harin, on
the authority of Muhammad Ibn Talhah, on the authority of Zubayd, on the
authority of Dharr,” said: “‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab used to say to his companions:
‘Let us increase our Iman [they hold Allah in remembrance].”” In the book of
Gharib al-Hadith, Abu ‘Ubayd related the hadith of ‘Ali which says: “Iman
resembles a white spot on the heart; whenever Iman increases, the white spot
increases as well.” It was related on the authority of ‘Uthman Ibn ‘Abd Allah and
‘Amr Ibn Hind al-Jumali that al-Asma‘i said: “A lamzah, spot, is like a speck or
something similar.”

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal narrated, on the authority of Waki® on the authority of Sharik,*
on the authority of Hilal and on the authority of ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Akim, who said:
“I heard Ibn Mas‘id saying in his prayer: ‘Oh, Allah, increase our Iman, our
conviction, and our knowledge [about religion].’” Similarly, Sufyan al-Thawri
narrated, on the authority of Jami‘ Ibn Shaddad and al-Aswad Ibn Hilal, who said:
“Mu‘adh Ibn Jabal used to tell a man: ‘Let us sit down to hold Allah in
remembrance [in order to increase our Iman].’” Also, Abu al-Yaman’ narrated, on
the authority of Safwan and Shurayh Ibn “Ubayd,° who said that ‘Abd Allah Ibn
Rawahah used to take the hand of one of his companions and say: “Let us get up
in order to increase our Iman for an hour in a posture that holds Allah in
remembrance.” This increase in Iman was affirmed by the Companions of the
Prophet (pbuh) after his death and after the revelation of the whole Qur’an.

2 Dharr Ibn ‘Abd Allah Abu ‘Umar (?-80) was a transmitter of hadith and a Murji’ite
sympathizer. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 206.]

3 Waki‘ Ibn al-Jarrah Ibn Malth (?-811 A.D.) was an authority on the Qur’an and a jurist. [A/-
Fihrist, vol. 2, ‏.م‎ 1121 and al-Zirikli, vol. 9, page 135.]

4 Sharik Ibn ‘Abd Allah Ibn al-Harith al-Nakh‘t (2-177 A H) was a jurist, a judge, and a scholar
of hadith. [Al-Zirikli, vol. 3, ‏.م‎ 239 and Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 206.]

5 Abu al-Yaman, al-Hakim Ibn Nafi‘ (?-222 A.H.), was a reciter of the Qur’an and a scholar of
hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 207.]

6 Shurayh Ibn ‘Ubayd (2-117 A.H.) was a scholar of Qur’an and hadith in the city of Hims, Syria.
[Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 207.]
IMAN EITHER INCREASES OR DIMINISHES 233

It was affirmed that ‘Ammar Ibn Y4sir said: “Three characteristics lead anyone
who possesses them to have true Iman: to be just to oneself, to spend in spite of
poverty, and to offer greetings to everybody [to those you know and to those you
do not know].” Al-Bukhari recorded this in his Sahih. Also, Jundub Ibn ‘Abd
Allah, Ibn ‘Umar, and others said: “We learned Iman, then we learned the Qur’an,
and in turn increased our Iman. Indeed, there are many other sayings narrated on
the authority of the Companions and their Successors that support the fact that
Iman either increases or diminishes.

[Malik Ibn Dinar said that belief in one’s heart appears as weak and as frail as a
small herb plant.’ If one cares for it, watering it with useful knowledge and good
works, removing the thick underbrush that grows up around it and anything else
that might weaken or thwart its growth, then soon it will thrive and increase. First
it will grow roots, then branches, then fruits, until at last it rivals the mountains in
size, casting shade that extends out to infinity. If, however, one shows no concern
for it and neglects it, goats will come and pull it out by the roots, some little boy
will carry it off, or the thicket will grow up around it, weakening or perhaps
destroying it or depriving it of its moisture. And as this plant is, so also is belief.

Khaythamah Ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman said that belief grows fat in times of fertility,
and wastes away in times of drought. Its times of fertility are provided by good
works, while its times of drought are brought on by sins and acts of disobedience.

One of the pious ancestors was asked: “Is it possible for belief to increase and
decrease?” “Yes,” he replied, “it can grow until it towers like a mountain, or
shrink until it is no larger than a particle of dust.”

Hudhayfah said in one of his sound traditions: “One might say of a certain man:
‘How long-suffering he is!’ ‘How witty he is!’ or, ‘How wise and judicious he is!’
even though he does not have belief in his heart the size of a grain of mustard

* The editor of Kitab of al-Iman, MI.2 (Maktab al-Isiami) included a little more than two pages in
brackets, which is his custom for material that is not part of the text (pp. 213, 214, and part of
215). He writes that the included material was found in an unpublished manuscript of Kitab al-
Iman. This material was also included in MI.1 but not in any of the other coptes: MZ, MKH, or
the rest. The translators have not been able to obtain a copy of the manuscript referred to above
in order to verify this portion of the text. The material on these pages is a further discussion about
the main theme of this chapter. It is observed that the MZ edition, published in 1993, made no
reference to the manuscript under discussion.
234 | CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

seed.” In his other sound traditions we read that “the charms and attractions [of the
world] are presented to people’s hearts as a mat is spread out [over the floor], one
reed at a time. Any heart that partakes of them is stained with a black spot, while
any heart that spurns them will take on a white spot until there comes to be two
types of heart: one as white as a stone, which may never be harmed by temptation
as long as the heavens and earth remain, and the other as black as an overcast sky,
like an overturned earthen vessel that neither recognizes a good deed nor shuns an
evil one except that which follows its own desire.” As for the tradition concerning
the seventy thousand who enter Paradise without being called to account for [the
sufficiency of] their deeds, it provides the most convincing evidence that belief
may indeed increase or diminish, since the seventy thousand are described as
having powerful, growing belief [that may be seen] through those qualities and
attributes that make their belief manifest, and through their dependence on Allah
in all of their affairs.

Abu Na‘im related, based on the account of al-Layth Ibn Sa‘d, on the authority of
Zayd Ibn ‘Ubayd Allah al-Yazni, on the authority of Abu Rafi‘, who said that a
man related to him asked the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) about belief. In response
he said: “Do you want me to tell you what pure, unadulterated belief is?” “Yes,”
the man replied. “To have such belief means that if you offend or wrong anyone,
be it your male or female slave or anyone else, you feel grief and regret; or if you
give charity and do good, you feel joy and satisfaction.” A similar tradition is
related by others on the authority of Yazid, on the authority of those who heard the
Prophet (pbuh), when someone asked him about whether belief in one’s heart may
increase or diminish, in reply to which the Prophet gave the response mentioned
above. In addition, al-Bazzar said that it was related to us by Muhammad Ibn al-
Hassan al-Basri, on the authority of Hani? Ibn al-Mutawakkil, on the authority of
‘Abd Allah Ibn Sulayman, on the authority of Ishaq, on the authority of Anas from
the Prophet, who said: “There are three things that, if found within a person, cause
him to merit reward and bring his belief to perfection: a temperament that enables
him to live [peaceably] among people, piety that shields him from danger of
disobedience to Allah, and a patient, forbearing spirit by which to ward off the
ignorance of the ignorant. And there are four things that cause misery to those in
whom they are found: a rigid outlook, hardness of the heart, excessive ambition,
and greed for the things of this world.” The first group of attributes indicates the
IMAN EITHER INCREASES OR DIMINISHES 235

increase and strength of one’s belief, while those in the second group are evidence
of its weakness and diminution.

Abu Ya‘la al-Mawsill said that it was related to him by ‘Abd Allah al-Qawariri
and Yahya Ibn Sa‘id, on the authority of Yazid Ibn Zuray‘ and Yahya Ibn Sa‘id,
who said that it was related to them by ‘Awf that he heard from ‘Ugbah Ibn ‘Abd
Allah al-Mazni that Yazid said in his hadith at the mosque in Basrah: “I was told
by a man [whose name ‘Awf had forgotten] that he was in Madinah in a mosque
with ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab and ‘Umar said to one of those who were seated with
him: ‘What have you heard the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) say about Islam?’ The
man replied: ‘I heard him say that Islam began as a single tree trunk; then it was
doubled, and then quadrupled. After this it grew to six times and finally
flourished.’ Then ‘Umar said to the man: ‘And what can happen after flourishing
but that it should diminish?’” This is how it was related by Abu Ya‘la in Musnad
‘Umar, although in the Musnad of this obscure Companion of the Prophet its
mention is more appropriate.

Abu Sulayman said that whoever does someone a good turn by night shall be
rewarded by day, and whoever does someone a good turn by day shall be rewarded
by night.

The increase of Iman is explicitly cited in many verses of the Qur’an. For
example, Allah says: “For believers are those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel
a tremor in their hearts, and when they hear His Signs rehearsed, find their belief
strengthened . . .” (8:2). Thus, if one feels a tremor in his heart when he hears the
Signs of Allah rehearsed [not only when the Signs are revealed], his Iman
increases. Indeed, a believer experiences this. When he hears the Signs of Allah
rehearsed, his understanding of the meanings of the Qur’an becomes much clearer,
his tendency to do good and his fear of committing evil is strengthened, and his
knowledge of Allah and his desire to obey Him becomes stronger. Hence, his Iman
increases. Similarly, Allah says: “ Those [believers] to whom the people
[hypocrites] said: ‘A great army is gathering against you: and frightened them: but
it [only] increased their belief:’ They said: ‘For us Allah suffices, and He is the
best Disposer of affairs” (3:173). This increase in belief was due to their saying:
“For us Allah suffices, and He is the best Disposer of affairs,” when they were
frightened by their enemy [not when the verse was revealed]. Allah also says:
236 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

“Whenever there comes down a Sirah [a chapter from the Qur’an], some of them
say: ‘Which of you has had his belief increased by it?’ Yes, those who believe,
their belief is increased, and they do rejoice. But those in whose hearts is a disease,
it will add doubt to their doubt ... .” (9:124—25). This increase is not attributed to
their affirmation that this Sirah was revealed by Allah, but is due to their better
understanding and practice of the meanings of the Qur’an. Thus, if it is a
command to resort to jihad, their desire [to do this] becomes stronger, and if it is
a prohibition from doing an evil, their hatred for doing it becomes stronger. For
this reason, Allah says: “And they do rejoice.” Here, the word “rejoice” is not
mere affirmation. Allah also says: “Those to whom We have given the Book
rejoice at what has been revealed unto you: but there are among the clans those
who reject a part thereof. . .” (13:36). Here, rejoicing is a response to the increase
of Iman. Allah says: “Stay in the Bounty of Allah. And in His Mercy, in that let
them rejoice . . .” (10:58); and “. . . On that Day shall the believers rejoice. With
the help of Allah . . .” (30:4-5). Allah also says: “And We have set none but
angels as guardians of the Fire; and We have fixed their number only as a trial for
unbelievers, in order that the people of the Book may arrive at certainty, and the
believers may increase in belief . . .” (74:31); and “It is He who sent down
tranquility into the hearts of the believers, that they may add belief to their belief
...” (48:4). This verse was revealed when the Prophet (pbuh) came back with his
Companions from the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah. Allah makes tranquility a condition
for the increase of Iman. The word “tranquility” refers to peace of mind but not to
the knowledge and certainty of the heart. Supporting this is His saying on the day
of Hunayn. Allah says: “But Allah did pour His calm on his Messenger and on the
believers, and sent down forces [angels] which you saw not .. .” (9:26); and“. . .
They two were in the Cave, and he said to his companion: ‘Have no fear, for Allah
is with us.” Then Allah sent down His peace upon him, and strengthened him with
forces [angels] which you saw not. . .” (9:40). Indeed, on the day of Hunayn and
on the day of the Cave, none of the verses of the Qur’an were revealed. But, Allah
sends down His tranquility and peace into the hearts of the believers. Therefore,
they came back from Hudaybiyyah in order to increase their Iman. This indicates
that the increased Iman is a state of the heart and an attribute of it, and a work akin
to its tranquility, calmness, and conviction. Conviction may be achieved through
work and tranquility as well as through knowledge. Similarly, doubt may be in the
realm of knowledge as well as in the realm of the heart’s tranquility. That is why
IMAN EITHER INCREASES OR DIMINISHES 237

the traditional prayer says: “Oh, Allah, we kindly ask you to send down of Your
fear [into our hearts] that which prevents us [like a barrier] from disbelieving You
of Your obedience [into our hearts] that which brings us closer and closer to Your
Paradise, and of certainty that which enables us to endure with ease the world’s
calamities.”

And in the hadith of [Abu Bakr] al-Siddiq, narrated by Ahmad, al-Tirmidhi, and
others from the Prophet (pbuh), he said: “Ask Allah for good health and certainty.
Besides certainty one can be given nothing better than good health. Therefore, ask
Allah for them.” Hence, certainty in times of calamity and holding firmly to the
belief that calamities happen with Allah’s knowledge and permission, produces
tranquility and peace in the heart, and reliance on Allah. This is the most perfect
Iman in Allah’s predestination of both good and evil, as illustrated in Allah’s
saying: “No kind of calamity can occur, except with the permission of Allah: and
if anyone believes in Allah, He [Allah] guides his heart the right way .. .” (64:11).
“Ulqamah said: “Ibn Mas‘ud narrated: ‘He is a man who when a calamity befalls
him, knows that it happens with Allah’s knowledge and permission, feels content,
and accepts it.’” Allah’s saying: “Allah guides his heart the right way,” refers to
the increase of his Iman, as illustrated in the following saying of Allah. Allah says:
“But to those who receive Guidance, He increases the [light of] Guidance .. .”
(47:17). Allah also says: “. . . They were youths who believed in their Lord, and
We advanced them in Guidance” (18:13).

The term “belief,” of all the terms mentioned in the Qur’4n, is the one most
frequently used in a muqayyad, conditioned, sense. When used in this manner, it
does not include everything that Allah commands. However, when Iman is used
in an absolute sense it encompasses [all] of those attributes or actions that are
necessarily associated with it and the perfection of all that has been commanded.
Allah says: “Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and spend of that whereof He
has made you trustees. And such of you as believe and spend, theirs will be a great
reward. And what is wrong with you is that you believe not in Allah! While the
Messenger invites you to believe in your Lord has indeed taken your covenant, if
you are real believers. It is He Who sends down His Manifest Verses to His Slave
[Muhammad] that He may bring you out from darkness to light . . .” (57:79).
Toward the end of the same chapter He also says: “Oh, you who believe! Fear
Allah, and believe in His Messenger [Muhammad], He will give you a double
portion of His Mercy, and He will give you Light by which you shall walk
238 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

[straight], and He will forgive you. And Allah is All Forgiving, Most Merciful”
(57:28). Some Qur’anic interpreters explain the first verse as being addressed to
the Quraysh tribe, and the second verse as being addressed to the Jews and
Christians. However, this cannot be the case, for Allah never addresses
unbelievers as: “Oh, you who believe.” After this Allah says: “So that the people
of the Scriptures [Jews and Christians] may know that they have no power
whatsoever over the Grace of Allah . . .” (57:29). It is agreed that this chapter of
the Quran is among those revealed during the time when the Prophet was in
Madinah; hence, it was not used to address the polytheists in Makkah. Allah says,
“And what is the matter with you that you believe not in Allah! While the
Messenger [Muhammad] invites you to believe in your Lord, and He has indeed
taken your covenant, if you are real believers” (57:8). It is clear that this verse 15
not addressed to an unbeliever. Moreover, no covenant had been made with the
unbelievers in Makkah, but rather with the believers who pledged their allegiance
to the Prophet. All the Muslims who emigrated [to Madinah] acknowledged the
Prophet (pbuh) as their leader, as did his Supporters on the night of al-‘Aqabah.
However, the Prophet simply called them to realize and perfect their belief by
performing those actions required of them both outwardly and inwardly, just as we
ask Allah in every prayer we pray to guide us along the Straight Path. And
although Allah guides believers to acknowledge [the truth of] the Prophet's
message as a whole, the detailed guidance in all that they say and do has not yet
been realized. However, all this specific, detailed guidance is now a part of the
belief that believers are commanded to have, and through it Allah brings them out
of darkness into light.
Chapter Eighteen

Aspects of Increasing Iman

Increasing the Iman which Allah commands us to have, and which is a trait of His
believing worshipers, can be achieved through different means. The first aspect
in increasing Iman is through practicing ijmal, ‘otal, observance and tafsil,
detailed, observance of Allah’s commands, for it is the obligation of all mankind
to believe in Allah and His Messenger, and of every community to commit itself
to all that the Messenger (pbuh) has ordered. It is well known that what was
obligatory at first differs from what was required after the revelation of the whole
Qur’an. Hence, unlike one who does not know about Islam, he who knows the
Qur’an, the Sunnah, and their meanings is obliged to have a detailed Iman. That
is, if a man, inwardly as well as outwardly, believed in Allah and the Messenger
(pbuh) and died before he knew the laws of religion, he would die as a believer.
His obligation and what he did are different from the Iman of the one who knew
the Islamic laws and who believed in them and worked to fulfill them. The Iman
of such a person is more complete, in accordance with the obligatory and the
actual deeds. Indeed, of what he performed in accordance with the obligation is
of a more complete Iman and what he did is also considered more complete.

Allah says: “. . . This day I have perfected your religion for you . . .” (5:3). In this
verse, the word “religion” refers to the legislation of commanded and forbidden
actions, but does not mean that everybody is obliged to do what the whole
community is ordered to do. It is recorded both in Sahih Muslim and Sahih
al-Bukhari that the Prophet (pbuh) described women as diminished in intellect
and religion. This diminution in intellect made the witness of two women equal
to that of one man; the diminution in her religion is due to the fact that she does
not pray and fast when she is menstruating. Indeed, this diminution is not a
diminution of what she is commanded to do and so she will not be punished
200 CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

because of it. However, if someone is commanded to pray and fast and does so,
his religion is complete compared to the one of diminished religion.

The second aspect [of increasing one’s Iman] is the total and detailed acts of
people. To illustrate this, let us compare the Iman of the following three men. The

first absolutely believed in what the Messenger (pbuh) came with and asked for,

but was neither concerned about what the Messenger (pbuh) commanded and

prohibited nor sought the required knowledge of religion so as to act accordingly.

The second sought and obtained this knowledge and acted on it. The third man’
acquired knowledge, became well acquainted with it, and believed in it but did not

act accordingly. These three men shared the same obligation, but the one who

looked for detailed knowledge and acted on it had a more complete Iman than the

one who knew and believed but did not practice his knowledge. Likewise, he who

believed in the message, confessed his sins, and feared punishment was a better

believer than the one who did not seek to understand what he was asked to do, and

did not fear punishment; on the contrary, he later was negligent and careless,

although [overtly as well as covertly] he believed in Muhammad (pbuh) as the

Messenger of Allah.

Accordingly, the more the heart knows, believes in, and practices [what Allah and
His Messenger have ordered], the more a person’s Iman increases even if that
person has a general adherence and general verbal confession.

Similarly, if someone knows Allah’s Names as well as their meanings and believes
in them, his Iman is more perfect than that of someone who does not know but
believes in them generally, or someone who knows only some of them. Hence, the
more one knows Allah’s Names, Attributes, and Verses, the more perfect his
Iman. 1

The third aspect is that knowledge and assent are differentiated among people.
That is, some people have stronger, more enduring Iman and assent than others
whose Iman is subject to doubt. Indeed, this is something experienced by each one
of us. For example, people differ in the way they see the new moon, hear the same
sound, smell the same smell, and taste the same food. So it is with the heart’s
knowledge and assent. People differ widely in their belief in the meanings of
Allah’s Names and His Words.
ASPECTS OF INCREASING IMAN 241

The fourth aspect is that the assent which requires the work of the heart is more
complete than that which does not. So, knowledge which 15 accompanied by works
is better than that which is not. Suppose that two men knew that Allah, the
Messenger (pbuh), Paradise, and Hell are true. The knowledge of the first man
obliged him to love and fear Allah, wish for Paradise, and avoid Hell. However,
the knowledge of the second man did not lead him to do so. Thus, we can say that
the knowledge of the first is more complete than that of the second. For the
strength of the result signals the strength of the cause, and all these matters stem
from knowledge. So knowledge of the “beloved” requires one to seek him; and
knowledge of the “frightened” requires one to flee from him. However, absence
of the required results signals the weakness of the cause or prerequisite. That is
why the Prophet (pbuh) said: “One who is informed [indirectly] of something is
not like the one who sees it for himself.” To illustrate this, when Allah told Moses
that his community worshiped the calf, he did not throw the al-Alwah, Tablets; but
when he himself saw them practicing that, he did. This is not because Moses
doubted Allah’s words but because the man who is told something, although he
does not report the news of the teller, does not perceive the situation in the same
way he does if he sees it for himself. Since his mind is occupied with something
else, other than what the informer said, he still believes him. Certainly seeing
something will give one a clearer understanding of the situation and this assent is
better than the other.

The fifth aspect is that works of the heart, such as love for Allah and His
Messenger and fear and expectations from Allah, are part of Iman, as proven by
the Qur’an, the Sunnah, and the consensus of the pious ancestors. And people
differ widely in their performance of these works.

The sixth aspect is that overt works, as well as covert works, are part of Iman; and
people also vary widely with respect to these works.

The seventh aspect is the importance of holding Allah in remembrance and not
being inattentive, since the latter opposes perfection of knowledge and acceptance.
“Umar Ibn Habib, one of the Companions, said: “If we thank and praise Allah, our
Iman increases. However, if we neglect and forget Him, our Iman decreases.” And
Mu‘adh Ibn Jabal used to say to his companions: “‘Let us sit still for an hour so as
to strengthen our belief.” Allah says: “. . . Nor obey any whose heart We have
permitted to neglect the remembrance of Us, one who follows his own desires...”
242 CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

(18:28); and “And remind for indeed, reminding profits the believers” (51:55); and
“The admonition will be received by those who fear [Allah]: But it will be avoided
by those most unfortunate ones” (87:10—11). Hence, it is evident that the more a
man remembers what he already knows, and practices his knowledge, he will
come to understand something he has never known, such as Allah’s Names and
Verses. This is suppotted by the following tradition: “Whoever practices what he
knows, Allah will provide him with understanding of what he did not know.” This
is a matter that every believer will realize by himself.

It was recorded in Sahih [al-Bukhari] that the Prophet (pbuh) said: “The one who
holds Allah in remembrance as compared to one who does not, is like a living man
as compared to one who has died.” Allah says: “. . . And when they hear His
Verses rehearsed, find their belief strengthened . . .” (8:2). That is, hearing of
Allah’s Verses increases their knowledge with what they did not know, it
encourages their practice of the new knowledge, and it reminds them of things
they have forgotten. Allah says: “Soon will We show them Our Signs in the
[furthest] regions [of the earth], and in their own souls, until it becomes manifest
to them that this [the Qur’an] is the Truth . . .” (41:53). That is, the Qur?an is the
truth. Allah also says: “. . . Is it not enough that your Lord does witness all
things?” (41:53). So in the Qur’an Allah is witness to what He reported.
Consequently, believers believed in this and then He showed them His Signs in the
furthest regions of the earth and in themselves, all of which confirms what the
Qur’4n says. Therefore, these Signs indicate that the Qur’an is the Truth.

Allah says: “Do they not look at the sky above them? How We have made it and
adorned it, and there are no flaws in it? And the earth, We have spread it out, and
set thereon mountains standing firm, and produced therein every kind of beautiful
growth [in pairs] to be observed and commemorated by every devotee turning [to
Allah]” (50:6-8). So the created signs should be observed and commemorated in
order to prevent one from blindness and inattention. To illustrate, a man recites a
Sirah (e.g., al-Fatihah) many times; and each time he recites it, he gains new
knowledge, which in turn increases his acceptance and Iman as if the Surah was
revealed at that moment. Thus, he believes in these meanings and his knowledge
and work increases. This is to be realized by everyone who reads the Qur’an
attentively, in contrast with the one who reads it absentmindedly. Thus, whenever
one does what he is commanded to do, he becomes aware of these commands and,
ASPECTS OF INCREASING IMAN 243

as a result, he affirms his belief. Consequently, at that moment his affirmation in
his heart establishes what he was unaware of even when he is truthful.

The eighth aspect is that man may deny or disbelieve things, for he does not know
that the Messenger (pbuh) has spoken and ordered them. And if one knew that, he
would neither deny nor disbelieve. For his heart strongly affirms that he [the
Prophet] told and commanded only the truth. It may happen that when one hears
a verse or a hadith or thinks about it or someone interprets its meaning for him or
it becomes clear to him what is forbidden, then he will enter a state of new
affirmation and new belief. This increases his Iman since before this stage he is
not considered as an unbeliever but simply as ignorant. This happens in the case
of many believers who ignorantly think that an affirmation or a deed is not
required for Iman but when they know the truth, they believe. Many people,
including those who are conscious about religious matters, may have, in their
hearts, many detailed matters that may contradict what the Messenger brought
forward. Yet, they do not know that they are contradictory matters and, when they
become aware of this, they reverse their opinions. Thus, anyone who introduces
an innovation or a saying [to the religion of Islam] or performs a wrong act, and
he is a believer in the Messenger or is aware of what the Messenger said and
believes in them and does not reverse his beliefs, he is considered ignorant but not
an unbeliever. It follows then that every innovator with good intentions of
following what the Messenger brought forward is of this category. Thus, he who
has knowledge of what the Messenger brought forward and acts accordingly, is
better than he who commits an error concerning this, and anyone who becomes
aware of the truth after realizing his own error and acts on it, he will be in a more
preferable position than before.
Chapter Nineteen

Iman and Islam and the
Difference Between Them

The Qur’an affirms that there is a kind of Islam without Iman. Allah says: “The
desert Arabs say: ‘We believe.’ Say: ‘You have no faith, but you [only] say.’ “We
have submitted our wills to Allah, for not yet has faith entered your hearts. But if
you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not decrease anything in reward of
your deeds . ..”” (49:14). Further evidence comes from accounts recorded in Sahih |
Muslim and Sahih al-Bukhari that affirm that Sa‘d ‏ه15‎ Abt Waqaas said: “The
Prophet gave [gifts] to some but not to the whole group present at that time.
Among those who were not given anything was one whom Sa‘d thought was the
best believer. Therefore, he [Sa‘d] asked in astonishment: ‘Oh, Messenger of
Allah, why do you not give something to that man whom I think is a [true]
believer?’ Upon this, the Prophet (pbuh) remarked: “Or a Muslim.’ Sa‘d repeated
his question three times, and every time the Prophet (pbuh) remarked: ‘Or a
' Muslim.’ Then, the Prophet (pbuh) added: ‘I give to a man, although I love others
more than him, fearing that Allah may make him fall on his face in the Hellfire.’
In another version of this hadith the Prophet struck his hand between my [Sa‘d’s]
neck and shoulder and said: ‘Are you asking for a fight, Oh, Sa‘d?’”

The question that may arise is: Is this the Islam [of which Allah states that Iman
cannot enter the hearts of its people], something for which people are rewarded
for, or is it like the Islam of hypocrites? There are two well-known opinions of the
pious ancestors and later Muslims. The first is that this is an Islam for which
people are rewarded, and that makes them exempt from unbelief and hypocrisy.
This was related on the authority of al-Hassan [al-Basri], Ibn Sirin, Ibrahim al-
Nakh‘l, and Abu Ja‘far al-Baqir. Also, this was the saying of Hammad Ibn Zayd,
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 245

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Sahl Ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Tustari, Abu Talib al-Makki,' and
many other scholars of the hadiths, the Sunnah, and history.

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said: “It was related to us by Mu’ammal Ibn [Ishaq] on the
authority of ‘Ammar Ibn Zayd, who said that I heard Hisham’ say that al-Hassan
and Muhammad used to say that someone was a Muslim, yet be afraid to call him
a believer. Ahmad Ibn Hanbal also said that it was related to us by Abu Salamah
al-Khuza‘T,’ who said that Malik said that according to Sharik, Abu Bakr Ibn
“Ayyash,* ‘Abd al-‘Aziz Ibn Abi Salamah, Hammad Ibn Salamah, and Hammad
Ibn Zayd said that Iman is al-ma‘rifah, knowledge, al-igrar, affirmation, and al-
‘amal, work. However, Hammad Ibn Zayd made a distinction between Islam and
belief, considering belief to be more specific and Islam to be more general.°

The second opinion is that this Islam is only a surrender that protects one from the
fear of being captured and killed. Hence, it is like the Islam of the hypocrites. Such
Muslims are considered unbelievers. For Iman did not enter their hearts, and he
in whose heart Iman does not enter is considered an unbeliever. This opinion was
the preference of al-Bukhari and Muhammad Ibn Nasr al-Marwazi. The pious
ancestors had different views concerning this matter.

Muhammad Ibn Nasr said that it was related to us by Ishaq that Jarir® had
informed him on the authority of Mughirah,’ who said that he came to Ibrahim al-
Nakh‘t and told him that a man by the name of Sa ‘id al-‘Anbari had disputed with
him. Ibrahim replied that this man was not an al-‘Anbari, but rather an al-Zabidi.

١ Abu Talib, Muhammad Ibn ‘AIT al-Makki (2-386 A.H.), was a scholar of hadith, a mystic, and
head of Saliymiyyah Madhab in Basrah. His major work is entitled Qar al-Oulab. [E/ 2, vol. 1,
p. 153 and Kitab al-iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 216.]

Hisham Abu ‘Abd Allah Ibn Hassan al-Firdawsi (?-148 A.H.) was a reciter of the Qur’an and

a trustworthy scholar of hadith. [Al-Zirikli, vol. 9, ‏.م‎ 81 and Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 217.]

3 Al-Khuza‘i, Abu Salamah Mansir (2-201 A.H.}, was a famous compiler of hadith. [Kitab al-
Iman MZ, p. 217.]

* Abu Bakr Ibn ‘Ayyash (?-193 A.H.) was acommentator and reciter of the Qur’an and one of the
leading scholars of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 217.]

5 In the MI.2 edition of Kitab al-/man the editor, in a footnote on p. 226, quotes on the margin
from the Indian version that: "He considers Islam to be more specific, and belief to be more
general," which is the reverse of the position stated above.

° Jarir Ibn ‘Abd al-Hamid (?-188 A.H.) was a trustworthy scholar of hadith from Kifah. [AI-
Zinikii, vol. 2, p. 111 and Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 218.]

” Mughirah Abu Hashim Ibn Magsam al-Dabbi (2-133 A.H.) was a distinguished jurist and a
scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 218.]

w
246 CHAPTER NINETEEN

The man who disputed with him claimed that the verse in which Allah says: "The
desert Arabs say: ‘We believe.’ Say: “You have no faith; but you [only] say; We
have submitted our wills to Allah . . .’” (49:14) refers to istislam, surrender. To
this Ibrahim replied no, it refers to Islam.

He [Muhammad Ibn Nasr] also said that it was related to us by Muhammad Ibn
Yahyi,® on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Yisuf, ’ on the authority of Sufyan,
on the authority of Mujahid, that in the verse quoted above, “The desert Arabs say:
‘We believe.’ Say: ‘You believed not but you only say; we have surrendered into
Islam . . .’” (49:14), the desert Arabs had capitulated to the Prophet’s message out
of fear of being taken captive or being killed. However, the chain of transmission
of this hadith is incomplete, since Sufyan did not take his account directly from
Mujahid. Some have claimed that the Islam professed by those mentioned in this
verse is like that professed by hypocrites, and that for this reason they will not be
rewarded for it. This is because Allah denies that they have belief, and whoever
has belief denied to him is an unbeliever. Those who hold this position maintain
that Islam is belief and as such every Muslim is a believer, and every believer is
a Muslim. And whoever who considers major sinners to be Muslims but not
believers must hold that they are not included in the verses that read: “All you who
believe! When you intend to offer prayer . . .” (5:6); and “All you who believe!
When the call is proclaimed for the prayer on the day of Friday . . .” (62:9), and
such verses. For those mentioned here are described as believers but not as
Muslims; hence, whoever is not a believer is not included in such passages.

To refute the second opinion, one may say that the pious ancestors, who said that
hypocrites who go out of Iman into Islam, did not say that they had no belief at all.
Indeed, this is what the Kharijites and the Mu‘tazilites claimed. Orthodox
Muslims said that sinners came out of Hell via intercession because they had some
Iman, which made it possible to exit the Hellfire. However, they are not called
believers. For absolute Iman is that whose possessor deserves reward and enters
Paradise, and those sinners did not. However, they are included among those
addressed with the words “you who believe.” Such a call is addressed to those who

* Muhammad Ibn Yahya Ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Dhuhli (?-258 A.H.) was considered the Imam of
hadith in Khurdsan and he collected the hadiths of al-Zuhri in a book entitled al-Zuriyyat. [Kitab
al-Iman MZ, p. 218 and al-Zirikli, vol. 8, ‏.م‎ 3.]

* Muhammad Ibn Yisuf Ibn ‘Abd Allah (n.d.) was a trustworthy scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman
MZ, p. 218.] ;
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 247

believe, even if their belief is not perfect. Indeed, they are called in order to perfect
their Iman. And if so, then how could they have perfected their Iman before the
call? Indeed, being addressed as “‘you who believe” differs from the statement “the
true believers are... ,” as in Allah’s saying: “Only those are believers who have
believed in Allah and His Messenger, and have never since doubted, but have
striven with their belongings and their lives...” (49:15) and the like. Accordingly,
the call to “you who believe” includes hypocrites who outwardly profess Iman.
And if so, then how could one who is not a hypocrite fail to be included in this
address, even though he is not considered truly from among the believers? Indeed,
Orthodox Muslims agree on the fact that whoever is not a true believer is called
a Muslim. Such a Muslim has Iman that prevents him from abiding in Hell
forever. This is agreed upon by Orthodox Muslims; however, would sucha person
still be called by the name of Iman? This question is what they really disputed.
Some said he is called a Muslim and not a “believer” and some said that he is a
“believer.”

The reality is that such a person is a believer with diminished Iman. He is a
believer because of his Iman, but he is sinful because he committed a grave sin;
thus he will not be granted absolute Iman. However, the Book and the Sunnah
deny that he possesses absolute Iman. Such a person will be included in the Iman
that Allah and His Messenger commanded, and it [Iman] is required of him as it
is with others. The discussion here is focused on the absolute Iman that is
necessary for such a person and others. There are three groups of people who are
addressed as believers: the true believers, the hypocrites who overtly pretend to
be believers (and who will go to Hell in the Hereafter), and those who have
converted to Islam although the essence of Iman has not yet entered their hearts
[either because they are new converts to Islam or because they have not
comprehended the core or the essence of belief in their hearts]. Instead, they have
achieved part of Islam and Iman, for which they will be rewarded. Or, they might
have neglected their obligations, because of which they will be punished even
though they have not committed major sins. Such people are like the desert Arabs
mentioned in the previous verse. They are alike in that they said: “we believe” but
they did not practice any of what they were commanded, either inwardly or
outwardly. Moreover, the essence of Iman had not entered their hearts, nor did
they struggle in the way of Allah. However, they do have some degree of both
belief and Islam, for which they deserved to be rewarded. At the same time, they
248 CHAPTER NINETEEN

may have been remiss in performing some of their religious obligations, and
although they committed no major sins for which they deserved punishment, they
were subject to potential punishment for neglecting to observe religious duties.
Such people resembled the desert Arabs mentioned in the verse above since like
them they stated that they had believed, although they had not done what they
were commanded, either inwardly or outwardly. Thus, neither had the essence of
belief entered their hearts nor had they strived in the way of Allah even though the
Prophet (pbuh) had called upon them to do so. On this account they may be
classed among those who have committed major sins for which they are under
threat of divine retribution; such as those who pray, give zakah, and strive in the
way of Allah, while continuing at the same time to commit major sins. Such
individuals are not thereby excluded from Islam; however, a formal dispute may
arise concerning them as to whether it can be said that they are believers. If Allah
wills, we shall discuss this question in what follows.

As for the Kharijites and the Mu ‘tazilites, neither considered these types Muslims
or believers, since both sects considered Islam and Iman as one thing. Thus if they
ceased to have Iman, they did not have Islam, but the Kharijites said that they are
unbelievers, and the Mu‘tazilites said that they are neither Muslims nor
unbelievers; that they are a state in between. They refer to them as manzilah bayna
al-manzilatayn, they are in an in-between state. The proof that the Islam
mentioned in the verse above is the type of Islam that they will be rewarded for
and that they are not hypocrites, is the saying of Allah: "The desert Arabs say: ‘We
believe.’ Say: ‘You have no faith, but you [only] say.’ ‘We have submitted our
wills to Allah, for not yet has faith entered your hearts. But if you obey Allah and
His Messenger, He will not decrease anything in reward of your deeds . . .””
(49:14). This indicates that if they obey Allah and His Messenger with this kind
of Islam, Allah will reward them for their obedience. However, the work of the
hypocrite in the Hereafter will be futile.

Moreover, they have been described as having attributes that differ from those of
~ the hypocrites. For the hypocrites are described as having unbelief in their hearts,
and as concealing within themselves the opposite of what they manifest outwardly.
Allah says: “And there are some people who say: ‘We believe in Allah and the
Last Day,’ while in fact they believe not. They [think to] deceive Allah and those
who believe, while they only deceive themselves, and perceive [it] not. In their
hearts is a disease [of doubt and hypocrisy] and Allah has increased their disease
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 249

...” (2:8-10); and “When the hypocrites come to you [Oh, Muhammad], they say:
‘We bear witness that you are indeed the Messenger of Allah.’ Allah knows that
you are indeed His Messenger and Allah bears witness that the hypocrites are liars
indeed” (63:1). Hence, the hypocrites are described in the Qur’an as being liars
who utter with their mouths what is not in their hearts, and that in their hearts they
carry unbelief for which they deserve divine retribution. However, these
individuals [i.¢., the desert Arabs mentioned in the verse quoted above] have not
been described in this way whatsoever; but when they claimed to have belief,
Allah said to the Messenger: “. . . Say: ‘You have no belief, but you [only] say.’
‘We have submitted our wills to [Islam], for not yet has Iman entered your hearts.
But if you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not decrease anything in reward
of your deeds. . .’” (49:14).

Denying that someone does not have absolute, complete belief does not require
that he be considered a hypocrite. This may be seen in the following verses. Allah
says: “They ask you [Oh, Muhammad] about the spoils of war. Say: ‘The spoils
are for Allah and the Messenger.’ So fear Allah and adjust all matters of difference
among you, and obey Allah and His Messenger, if you are believers” (8:1); and
“The believers are only those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their
hearts and when His Verses are recited unto them, they increase in their belief; and
they put their trust in their Lord. Those who offer prayers and spend out of what
We have provided for them, it is they who are the believers in truth . . .” (8:24).
But of course, one’s not being a true believer in the sense described here does not
mean that he is a hypocrite who will be regulated to the lowest reaches of Hell.
Rather, it simply means that he has not achieved the required belief such that he
may not be said to be a true believer, just as one might not be able to apply other
names to someone due to his having neglected some duties pertaining to such a
designation. Similarly, the desert Arabs described above were said not to have the
required belief even though they were Muslims; nevertheless, they do possess
enough belief to merit some reward.

This is the case of most of the converts to Islam as well as of those who do not
know the facts of Iman. An example of the latter is a man who has converted to
Islam as a result of fighting or being captured by Muslims. Such a man becomes
Muslim and overtly obeys Allah and His Messenger. However, covertly,
knowledge about the facts of Iman has not entered his heart. Such knowledge can
be achieved through understanding of the Qur’an, through accompanying the
250 CHAPTER NINETEEN

people of Iman and imitating their sayings and works, or through special guidance
from Allah. Sometimes, one may see a part of the merits of Islam and of the
disadvantages of unbelief that may discourage him to become Muslim. And if he
was born into a Muslim community and grew up among Muslims, then he will
love Islam, seeing some of its benefits as well as the vices of unbelievers. Many
such Muslims may become skeptical when they hear ideas that cast doubt on
Islam. Also, they may not strive for the sake of Allah. Hence, they are not included
in the following verse. Allah says: “Only those are believers who have believed
in Allah and His Messenger, and have never since doubted, but have striven with
their belongings and their lives in the Cause of Allah . . .” (49:15). Moreover, they
are not hypocrites who conceal their unbelief inwardly. Rather, they have
imperfect Iman so they are not true believers, nor are they hypocrites. Also, they
are not of those who committed major sins but rather performed obedience
outwardly. Yet they do not perform the essence of Iman that leads to true belief.
Thus, they have some Iman with them but they are not true believers. Accordingly,
they will be rewarded for what they have performed of obedience and for this
reason Allah says: “. . . But you [only] say: “We have submitted our wills to Allah
Jee” (49:14). Allah also says: “They impress on you as a favor that they have
embraced Islam. Say: ‘Count not your Islam as favor upon Me; no, Allah has
conferred a favor upon you that He has guided you to the belief, if you indeed are
true’” (49:17). That is, if you are true and sincere in your saying “we believe,”
Allah has conferred a favor upon you that He has guided you to Iman. This
requires that they may be true and sincere in their saying “we believe.” And their
sincerity either means characterizing them by being, as Allah describes, that they
believed in Allah and His Messenger, and have never since doubted, but have
striven with their wealth and their lives in the Cause of Allah, those are the sincere
ones; or it means that they are not like hypocrites because they have Iman
[although it is not absolute]. The latter interpretation seems closer to the meaning
of the verse than the former. Allah knows best how to interpret its meaning, for He
says concerning the tested women: “. . . Then if you know them for true believers,
send them not back to the disbelievers . ..” (60:10). But one cannot deny that they
might doubt in the future. Allah disbelieves only the hypocrites and no one else.
As for these, He does not consider them to be lying, but rather says: “You have not
believed.” Also the Prophet (pbuh) said: “None of you is a believer until he loves
for his brother that which he loves for himself.” Likewise he says: “The fornicator
who fornicates is not a believer as long as he commits it;” and “No one is a
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 251

believer whose neighbor is not secure from his harmful conduct.” But in none of
these statements are hypocrites being described or referred to.

The context of the verse cited above indicates that Allah finds fault with them. The
reason is that in their ignorance and hardheartedness, they looked upon themselves
as having done Allah a favor by becoming Muslims, thereby showing outwardly
what was in their hearts, of which Allah was already aware. As Allah says to the
Prophet concerning them: “Say: ‘Will you instruct Allah about your religion while
Allah knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth? . . .”” (49:16). If
there had been no religion whatsoever in their hearts, then they would have had
nothing to tell Allah about their religion; for anyone can recognize that kind of
Islam which is manifested outwardly. The preposition bi, about, is used along with
the verb in this verse, since the statement implies the sense of the verbs “inform”
or “speak to,” as if Allah had been asking them: “Do you intend to inform Allah
or speak to Him of your religion, when He is the One who knows everything in
heaven and on earth?” The context of the verse indicates that those things of which
they informed Allah were the same things that had been mentioned by Allah
concerning them, namely, their saying: “we have believed.” Hence, what they
were “informing” Allah about was what was in their hearts.

Qur’anic interpreters reported that when these verses were revealed, the desert
Arabs came to the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) swearing that they were true and
sincere believers, so Allah revealed His saying: “Say: What! Will you instruct
Allah about your religion? . . .” (49:16). This indicates that they were true and
sincere in their conversion to Islam because after the revelation of this verse, they
were not ordered to strive. But it was only something they said; and He Himself
says: ‏.“ا‎ . . For not yet has faith entered your hearts . . .” (49:14). The word lama,
yet, is a negation of an event that is about to happen and that is likely to occur. As
Allah says: “Do you think that you will enter Paradise before Allah tests those of
you who fought [in His Cause]? . . .” (3:142). Al-Suddi stated that this verse was
revealed in connection with the desert Arabs of [the tribes of] Muzaynah,
Juhaynah, Aslam, Ashja‘, and Ghufar. These are the ones whom Allah mentions
in Surat al-Fath, and who used to say “we believe in Allah” in order to protect
themselves; however, when they were called out to fight at the battle of
Hudaybiyyah, they stayed behind. This verse was then revealed to address the
situation.
252 CHAPTER NINETEEN

It has been related on the authority of Muqatil that their houses were between
Makkah and Madinah, and that whenever any of the Prophet’s (pbuh) troops
passed by, they would say “we believe” in order to ensure the safety of their lives
and property. Then when the Prophet (pbuh) marched to Hudaybiyyah and called
upon them to come out and fight, they did not do so.

According to Mujahid, this verse [about the desert Arabs] was revealed concerning
the Bedouin tribe of Bani’ Asad Ibn Khuzaymah. Someone else described their
condition, saying that they came to Madinah in a year of drought. When they
arrived, they showed themselves to be Muslims outwardly although they were not
believers. They polluted the city streets with human excrement, then raised their
prices and began to act as though they had done the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) a
favor by becoming Muslims, saying: “We have brought you heavy loads [of goods]
and slaves.” Subsequently this verse was revealed concerning them. Commenting
on the words of this verse of which Allah says: “They regard as favor upon you
[Oh, Muhammad] that they have embraced Islam. Say: ‘Count not your Islam as
a favor upon me. Nay, but Allah has conferred favor upon you, that He has guided
you to the belief, if you indeed are true” (49:17). Qatadah said that this verse refers
to when they came to the Prophet (pbuh) and said to him: “We became Muslims
without putting up armed resistance. We did not fight against you as did this tribe
or that tribe.” In response to this Allah says to His Prophet: “They regard as favor
upon you [Oh, Muhammad] that they have embraced Islam. Say: “Count not your
Islam as a favor upon me. Nay, but Allah has conferred favor upon you, that He
has guided you to the belief. . .”” (49:17) .

Muaatil Ibn Hayyan agrees that they were members of the Bedouin tribe of Bani
Asad Ibn Khuzaymah, who said: “Oh Messenger of Allah, we have come to you
without putting up any armed resistance, leaving behind both our families and our
wealth whereas all the other Arab tribes fought against you until at last, against
their wills, they entered Islam. All of this ought to give us special prerogatives
over others.” In response to this Allah reveals the verse which reads: “They regard
as favor upon you [Oh, Muhammad] that they have embraced Islam. Say: ‘Count
not your Islam as favor upon me. Nay, but Allah has conferred favor upon you,
that He has guided you to the belief, if you indeed are true ” (49:17); and“... And
render not in vain your deeds” (47:33). And it is said that a major sin that leads.
one ultimately to Hell is any serious offense that a person commits, then dies
without repenting of it.
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 253

All the foregoing makes clear that they were not unbelievers inwardly, nor had
they entered the complete belief required of believers. They are referred to in Strat
al-Hujurat, where these different types of people were mentioned. Allah says:
“Indeed! Those who call you from behind the dwellings, most of them have no
sense” (49:4). They are not described here as being either unbelievers or
hypocrites, although they have reason to fear that they might become so. For this
reason, some of them turned away from Islam because the joy in their hearts was
not tempered by belief. After this Allah says: “Oh you who believe! If a fasiq,
sinner, comes to you with news, verify it . . .”(49:6). This verse was revealed
concerning al-Walid Ibn “Uqbah, who had given a false report.

According to Qur’anic exegetists, this verse was revealed concerning al- Walid [bn
“Ugbah, who was dispatched by the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) to the tribe of
Banu al-Mustalaq to collect the alms they were going to donate. But since pre-
Islamic times there had been enmity between them, so after he had gone part of
the distance, he came to the Prophet (pbuh) and said: “They refused to give any
alms, and even wanted to kill me.” As a result, the Prophet (pbuh) prepared an
expedition to fight them, after which this verse was revealed. This story has come
down in various forms. In the end, however, Allah says: “And know that, among
you is the Messenger of Allah. If he were to obey you in much of the matter, you
would surely be in trouble . . .” (49:7). And Allah also says: “And if two parties
among believers fall into fighting, then make peace between them both, but if one
of them rebels against the other, then fight you [all] against the one that rebels till
it complies with the Command of Allah; then if it complies, then make
reconciliation between them justly, and be equitable. Verily! Allah loves those
who are equitable” (49:9). He also forbids them to mock one another or engage in
slander, backbiting, or name-calling, saying: “. . . How bad is it, to insult one
another after having belief. . .”(49:11). It has been interpreted to mean that no
believer should call another a sinner or unbeliever after he has professed belief;
however, a better attested interpretation is: “What an evil thing it is to deserve the
name fasiq, sinner, once you have believed!” As Allah says concerning the one
who gave a false report: “. . . Ifa fasiq, sinner, comes to you with news, verify it
.. (49:6), thus he was called a sinner.

In the two collections of sound traditions, we read in an account passed down from
the Prophet (pbuh) that he said: “To insult or revile a Muslim is fusiiq, sin, and to
254 CHAPTER NINETEEN

take up arms against him is kufr, unbelief. Hence, if one rails against a Muslim and
mocks him, he deserves to be called a fasiq, sinner. Allah says: “. . . And do not
accept their testimony forever, they indeed are the sinners” (24:4). In other words,
if those who have professed belief commit acts on account of which they deserve
to be called sinners, then they have merited the title after having believed;
otherwise, in their mutual name-calling they would not be saying, fasiq, sinner,
and kafir, unbeliever, and the like. For when the Prophet (pbuh) arrived in
Madinah, some people were calling each other names such as these.

According to one group of Qur’anic exegetists, the intent behind this verse is to
say: “Once someone has become a Muslim, do not label him according to the sins
he committed before becoming a Muslim.” For example, if a Jew were to become
a Muslim, it would not be right to say to him, “Hey, Jew!” This interpretation was
adopted by Ibn ‘Abbas and a group of his followers such as al-Hassan, Sa‘id Ibn
Jubayr, ‘Ata’ al-Khurasani, and Al-Qarzi.’° According to ‘Ikrimah, the verse refers
to someone saying “You unbeliever!” or “You hypocrite!” According to ‘Abd al-
Rahman Ibn Zayd, it refers to naming someone based on his actions, as when one
says, “You adulterer!” “You thief!” or “You sinner!” And according to an
interpretation attributed by al-‘Ufi to Ibn ‘Abbas, this verse expresses
condemnation of the repentant sinner for the evil deeds he committed in the past.
Of course, calling someone an unbeliever, a Jew, an adulterer, a thief, or some
other name connoting the commission of unacceptable acts is not the same as
calling someone a sinner. Hence it is certain that the statement, Allah says: “. . .
How evil is the name sinner? . . .”(49:11), does it not refer to calling someone a
sinner, since calling him an unbeliever is far worse; rather, it means that the one
who calls someone else an insulting name himself becomes a sinner. This is the
meaning conveyed by the hadith: “Cursing a Muslim is a sin, and fighting him is
unbelief.” Allah says: “. . . And those who do not repent are [indeed] wrongdoers”
(49:11). He calls them wrongdoers if they do not desist even if they are included
under the name “believers.” Then, He asks the believers not to speak ill of each
other behind their backs and not to despise each other. Allah-says: “. . . The most
honored of you in the sight of Allah is the most Righteous of you . . .” (49:13).
Afterward, Allah mentions the saying of the desert Arabs, “we believe.”

' Al-Qarzi, Muhammad Ibn Ka‘b Ibn Salim (?-117 A.H.), was a jurist and a scholar of hadith who
transmitted hadith from Ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Ali, and Ibn Mas‘td. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 225.]
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 255

Hence, this Sirah prohibits committing sins and disobeying Allah and His
Messenger. Indeed, the desert Arabs mentioned in this verse are like hypocrites.
However, the people who curse and commit sin, and those who shout out [to the
Prophet] from outside the Inner Chambers are not hypocrites. Concerning them
interpreters remark: “They are the people who were called to arms in the year of
Hudaybiyyah. Although they were major sinners [covertly], they were neither
hypocrites nor unbelievers.”

According to Ibn Ishag, when the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) wanted to make the
minor pilgrimage, the pilgrimage he made to Hudaybiyyah, he issued a summons
to the Bedouin Arabs around Madinah to come out and fight with him for fear that
his own tribe would come out against him or seek to prevent him from entering
Hudaybiyyah. However, many of them were slow to respond to his summons;
hence, they are the ones to whom Allah was referring when He says: “Those of the
Bedouins who lagged behind will say to you: ‘Our possessions and our families
occupied us, so ask forgiveness for us . . .”” (48:11). In other words, they were
saying: “Pray for Allah to forgive us for failing you.” As Allah says in another part
of this verse: “. . . They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts . . .”
(48:11). That is, it matters not to them whether you ask Allah to forgive them or
not. This is the condition in which one finds the sinner who is indifferent to the
wrongs he has committed. As for the hypocrites, Allah says of them: “And when
it is said to them: ‘Come, so that the Messenger of Allah may ask forgiveness from
Allah for you,’ they turn aside their heads, and you would see them turning their
faces in pride. It is equal to them whether you [Muhammad] ask forgiveness or ask
not forgiveness for them. Allah will not forgive them . . .” (63:56). However,
Allah does not say such a thing concerning the desert Arabs mentioned above.
Rather, this verse is evidence that they did not speak the truth when they asked the
Prophet to pray that Allah would forgive them. Allah says: “. . . You shall be
summoned [to fight] against a people given to vehement war; then shall you fight,
or they shall submit. Then, if you show obedience, Allah will grant you a goodly
reward, but if you turn back as you did before, He will punish you with a grievous
penalty’” (48:16). Hence, Allah grants them a fair reward if they obey the one who
calls them to fight for the sake of Allah, and He threatens them with a grievous
penalty if they disobey.

This call is like that directed to those people resembling them who commit major
sins. However, they differ from unbelievers, who do not deserve reward if they
256 CHAPTER NINETEEN

obey unless they first believe in their hearts. And unbelievers are not merely
warned against disobedience, since unbelief is worse than disobedience.

This indicates that those [desert Arabs] who lagged behind are considered among
the sinners of the community due to abandoning an obligation or committing a sin.
Since they abandoned the fighting that Allah commands of them it resulted in their
skepticism, which showed that they were not true and sincere believers, although
in their hearts they truly embraced the religion of Islam.

Qur’anic exegetists have said that they were not believers, since Allah denies their
having belief, just as He does in the case of the adulterer, the thief, the person who
drinks alcoholic beverages, the person whose neighbor does not feel safe from
harm on his account, the person who does not desire for his fellow human being
the good that he desires for himself, the person who does not defer to the
authoritative judgments of Allah and His Messenger, and the like. Evidence in
favor of this view may be found in Allah’s saying: “. .. How bad is it, to insult one
another after having belief . . .”(49:11). This 15 consistent with the hadith: “To
insult a Muslim is a sin, and to fight against him is unbelief.” Hence, Allah
condemns those who come to merit the name “sinner” after having professed
belief; moreover, whoever is called a sinner is not a believer, which in turn
indicates that the desert Arabs mentioned above belong to the category of those
who have committed major sins, but not to that of hypocrites.

As for the claim that they became Muslims out of fear of being killed or being
taken captive, this applies to those who did not emigrate from Makkah to Madinah
and who were not among the Prophet’s supporters in Madinah, yet who became
Muslims out of fear, and hope of gain. The situation of these people was similar
to that of the members of the Quraysh tribe, who remained unbelievers until the
surrender of Makkah when they were defeated by the Prophet (pbuh), as well as
those whose attitudes represented a combination of that of the Qurayshites and the
Islam of the inhabitants of Najd and those whose hearts were to be reconciled.
However, not every one who becomes a Muslim out of some desire or fear is
destined for the lowest reaches of Hell. Rather, such individuals may become
genuine, obedient Muslims in whose hearts there is no disbelief of the Messenger
of Allah or enmity toward him. However, neither have their hearts been fully
illumined with the light or spiritual perception of belief. A member of this group
may progress in Islam until he becomes a true believer, as did most of the
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 257

Qurayshites, who became Muslims only after the Prophet’s conquest of Makkah;
on the other hand, he may remain no more than a habitual sinner, or he might be
revealed to be a skeptic and a hypocrite when he is questioned after death by the
angels Munkar and Nakir.'' When asked: “What do you say about the man who
was sent among you?” He may reply: “Well, I do not know! I just heard people
saying something about him, so I said it also.”

We made mention above of those who said that they had become Muslims without
putting up any armed resistance and who for this reason claimed to have an Islam
superior to other people. However, Allah censures them for claiming to have done
someone a favor by becoming Muslims, and reveals about them the verse that
reads: “... And render not vain your deeds” (47:33), as major sinners have done.

And also Allah says: “... But say, We have submitted our wills to Allah, for faith
has not yet entered your hearts . . .” (49:14). The word lammi, translated as not
yet, 15 a negation of that which is expected and the occurrence of that is
anticipated. The same concept is found in the following verses, as Allah says: “Do
you think that you will enter Paradise before Allah tests those of you who fought
[in His Cause] and [also] tests those who remain patient?” (3:142); and “Or do you
think that you will enter Paradise without such [trials] as came to those who
passed away before you? . . .” (2:214). Moreover, Allah says: “. . . Faith has not
yet entered your hearts . . .” (49:14). This implies that the entrance of faith into
their hearts is expected and anticipated. The one who enters Islam for the first
time, Iman did not yet enter his heart but it is expected that this will take place
later as in the following hadith: “A man embraces Islam for worldly desires at the
beginning of the day, and no sooner than the end of the day approaches Islam
becomes more beloved to him than anything that the sun shines on.” Therefore,
most of those who became Muslims out of some fear or earthly desire had belief
enter their hearts later on. Allah says: “... But, Say: “We have submitted to Islam
. . ” (49:14). He commands them to say this, whereas the hypocrite is not
commanded to say anything. Allah also says: “. . . But if you obey Allah and His
Messenger, He will not decrease anything in reward for your deeds . . .” (49:14).
As for the hypocrite, obeying Allah and His Messenger will do him no good unless
he first becomes a believer.

'' Munkar and Nakir are the names of the two angels who examine the dead in their graves as to
their belief.
258 CHAPTER NINETEEN

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal argued that in talking about Iman, but not Islam, one has to
say: “I am a believer, if Allah wills.” Moreover, Ahmad also argued that people
who commit major sins cease to be believers, although they may be Muslims.
Al-Maymiini”? said: “I asked Ahmad Ibn Hanbal about his opinion of the
statement: ‘I am a believer, if Allah wills.’ He said: ‘I say I ama believer, if Allah
wills.” But I say, I am a Muslim without saying if Allah wills.” Upon this,
al-Maymiini asked: “Do you differentiate between Islam and Iman?” Ahmad
replied: “Oh, yes.” The inquirer then asked: “What is your evidence?” Upon this,
Ahmad recited the following verse. Allah says: “The desert Arabs Say: “We
believe.’ Say: ‘You believe not but you only say, we submitted our wills to Allah
_..”” (49:14). He also mentioned other things. Al-Shalinji’* said: “I asked Ahmad
about the one who said: ‘I am a believer in myself by way of judgments and
inherited [practices and traditions] but I am not sure where I am with Allah.’”
Ahmad responded: “He will not be considered a Murji’ite.”

Abu Ayyiib Sulayman Ibn Da? iid al-Hashimi"* said: “Making the exception [that
is, adding the clause, “if Allah wills”] when speaking of belief is permissible. And
if someone says, ‘I am truly a believer,’ rather than making the exception and
adding, ‘if Allah judges me to be so,” this is permissible as I see it, and I would not
consider such a person to be a Murji’ite.” This view was shared by Abu
Khuthaymah and Ibn Abi Shaybah. Moreover, al-Shalinji mentioned that he once
asked Ahmad Ibn Hanbal about the person who persists in committing grave sins
yet without neglecting prayer, giving zakah, and fasting: “Can such a person
persist [in being a believer] even if this is his condition?” Ahmad Ibn Hanbal
replied that he could. For according to the hadith that “the fornicator who
fornicates is not a believer as long as he commits it,” such a person ceases to be
a believer though he continues to be a Muslim. Likewise it may be said, as in the
hadith, “he who drinks wine, at the time he drinks it, is not a believer,” and “he
who steals, at the time he steals, is not a believer.” Allah says: “. . . And
whosoever does not judge by what Allah has revealed, surely those are grave

2 Al-Maymiini, ‘Abd al-Hassan ‘Abd al-Malik (?-274 A.H.), was a jurist and a reciter of the
Qur?dn who studied with Ahmad Ibn Hanbal for over twenty years. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 228.]

3 Al-Shalinji, Isma‘tl Ibn Sa‘id (2-246 A.H.), was a jurist and a scholar of hadith and wrote a
famous book entitled Fada’il al-Shaykhayn. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 229.]

4 Al-Hashimi, Abu Ayyab Sulayman Ibn Da?iid (?-219 A.H.), was a scholar of hadith and a jurist
who lived in Baghdad. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 229.]
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 259

sinners” (5:47).'° So I said to Ibn ‘Abbas: “What kind of unbelief is this which is
referred to here?” He replied: “It is unbelief that does not cause one to cease to be
a member of the religions community. Rather, just as some people’s belief is
greater than others, so also does unbelief exist in degrees, unless there results from
it something concerning which everyone agrees would exclude him from the
community of belief.” And according to Ibn Abi Shaybah, the hadith that, “the
fornicator who fornicates is not a believer as long as he commits it,” indicates that
the person referred to here does not have complete belief; rather, some degree of
belief is lacking in him.

Al-Shalinji related that he once asked Ahmad Ibn Hanbal about belief and Islam.
He replied that belief is a saying and a work, while Islam is an igrar, verbal
confession. Abu Khuthaymah was in agreement with this view. As for Ibn Abi
Shaybah, he held that there can be no Islam without belief, nor belief without
Islam. The person who says, “I have accepted belief,” has likewise entered Islam;
and if he says, “I have accepted Islam,” he likewise has entered belief. And
according to Muhammad Ibn Nasr al-Mirwazi, others also asked Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal about the saying of the Prophet (pbuh): “A fornicator who fornicates is not
a believer as long as he commits it.” He [Ahmad] replied: “Whoever commits one
of the four major sins [fornication, theft, drinking wine, and plundering]
mentioned in the previous hadith, is called a Muslim but not a believer, and if he
commits a lesser sin rather than a major one, he will be called a believer but of
diminished belief.

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal sometimes spoke of this distinction [between the Muslim and
the believer], while at other times he would merely make mention of the
differences and stop there; this latter position was the view he took later on. Abu
Bakr al-Athram’® said in the Sunnah that he heard Abu ‘Abd Allah asking about
making al-istithna’,the exception, with regard to one’s being a believer. He

' In this Qur’dnic verse from Siirat al-Ma’idah (5:47), the last word should be al-fasiqun, the grave
sinners. However, in MI.1 (p. 212), MI.2 (p. 240), MZ (p. 229), and MKH (p. 215) of Kitab al-
/man (the versions used for this translation), this verse ends with the word al-kafirin, the
unbelievers, instead. However, in DKI, p. 217, it is correct. In GHA, which is an abridged
edition, this whole section is omitted. Not only is the word al-kafirtin, as used in the verse,
wrong, but it renders invalid the argument that follows.

® Al-Athram, Abu Bakr Ahmad Ibn Muhammad (?-261 A.H.), was a jurist and a scholar of hadith
who wrote a book entitled a/-Sunan fial-Figh. [Al-Zirikli, vol. 1, ‏.م‎ 194 and Kitab al-iman MZ,
p. 230.]
260 CHAPTER NINETEEN

[Ahmad Ibn Hanbal] replied: “I do not condemn the practice as this implies that
some people do condemn it. For if we believe that Iman is a saying and work that
will increase and decrease, then we have to say, “if Allah wills” whenever we talk
about one’s Iman [i.e., we do not say that because we doubt his Iman but because
he may be negligent in his deeds].” Abu ‘Abd Allah [Ahmad Ibn Hanbal] said in
support of this that Allah says: “. . . You shall enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allah
wills . . .” (48:27). This is evidence about exception, without a doubt. Another
piece of evidence came from the Prophet (pbuh), who said concerning the people
of the graves: “Indeed, if Allah wills, we will follow you [the dead],” and this
means that there is no doubt concerning this matter. Thus he [the Prophet] used
the exception: “Based on this [the Oneness of Allah] we will be resurrected, if
Allah wills,” this means from the grave. He [Ahmad] mentioned the saying of the
Prophet (pbuh): “ I hope to be the most fearful of Allah among you.” He stated all
of the above in order to strengthen the case of istithna’, exception, with regard to
belief.

I said to Abu ‘Abd Allah: “It is as if you see nothing wrong with someone not
making the exception.” He replied by saying: “If it is someone who believes that
belief is both a saying and work, and that belief may increase or diminish, then it
is easier for me to grant this.” Then he went on to say: “There are people whose
hearts are too weak to make the exception, it is like an amazement to them.” I also
heard someone ask Abu ‘Abd Allah: “What do you say about Shababah?”"’ He
replied: “Shababah used to claim to be a Murji’ite, and people have attributed to
him views even more odious than such rumors as these, the likes of which I have
never heard anyone else espouse. According to Shababah, if someone said
[something], he performed an act with his tongue; therefore, he performed an act
with a member of his body. However, this view is offensive, and I never heard of
anyone supporting it.” Then someone asked Abu ‘Abd Allah whether he had
written anything about Shababah. “Yes,” he replied, “I wrote something about him
some time ago, before we became aware that he held this view.” Then I asked him
whether he had written anything about him after this discovery. “No,” he
answered, “not a word.” Someone then said to Abu ‘Abd Allah: “They claim that
Sufyan used to go so far as to make the exception when he referred to himself as
a believer.” “This was based on Sufyan’s doctrinal belief,” replied Abu ‘Abd

'7 Shababah, Abu ‘Amr al-Fazari (?-256 A.H.), was a scholar of hadith and a sympathizer to the
Murji’ite’s way of thinking. [AI-Zirikli, vol. 3, p. 226 and Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 231.]
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 261

Allah, “and he has been known to support the practice of making the exception.”
“But who has reported this on Sufyan’s authority?” I asked. “Whoever has passed
down any report on Sufyan’s authority in this regard has himself practiced making
the exception.” Waki‘ reports that Sufyan once said: “We figure people to be
believers based on [worldly] judgments and inherited [practices and traditions];
however, we cannot be certain what they are in Allah's judgment.” I then asked
him: “So what do you yourself say?” “We support the practice of making the
exception,” he answered.

“So then,” I asked Abu ‘Abd Allah: “What if someone says he is a Muslim but
does not make the exception?” “That is quite acceptable,” he replied. “If one
simply says he is a Muslim, he need not make the exception.” Then I said to him:
“Let us suppose I say that so-and-so is a Muslim, knowing that the Prophet (pbuh)
said: ‘A Muslim is someone whom other Muslims have no reason to fear lest he
harm them by anything he says or does,’ yet knowing also that people do, in fact,
have reason to fear that he might harm them by what he says or does.” In reply, he
mentioned the tradition passed down by ‘Abd al-Razzaq, on the authority of
Mu‘ammar, on the authority of al-Zuhn, according to which Islam is based on
kalimah, utterance (of two testimonies), whereas belief is based on work
performed. Then someone said to Abu ‘Abd Allah: “Shail we say, then, that belief
may increase or diminish? “The tradition passed down from the Prophet (pbuh)
indicates that this is so,” he replied. It says: “Bring out of Hell whoever has
[belief] in his heart the size of a speck of so-and-so.” Someone then asked him
about what ‘Isa al-Ahmar said about the Murji?ite’s views. He replied, saying:
“Yes, 1 am aware of what they said, and they are offensive, objectionable views.”
It was related to us by Mu’ammal, on the authority of Hammad Ibn Zayd, who
said that he had heard Hisham say that al-Hassan [al-Basri] and Muhammad used
to refer to someone as a Muslim, yet hesitated to refer to anyone as a believer.

I said to Abu ‘Abd Allah: “Was this related by anyone other than Suwayyid?” “If
so, | am not aware of it,” he replied. Then I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah say: “Belief is
words that one utters and works that one performs.” I then asked what he thought
of the Prophetic tradition in which it is said [concerning a certain slave woman]:
“Free her; she is a believer.” He replied: “Not everyone says that she is a believer;
rather, some simply say: ‘Free her.”” For example, Malik heard this view
expressed by the elder Hilal Ibn ‘Ali, whose account does not include the clause,
262 CHAPTER NINETEEN

“she is a believer.”'® However, some have said that the woman mentioned in this
tradition was a believer, since when she herself professed to be one, she is thereby
reckoned to be a believer. I said to him: “Do you make a distinction between belief
and Islam?” “This is a manner over which people have disagreed,” he said. “It is
claimed that Hammad Ibn Zayd drew such a distinction.” He was then asked:
“Who are the Murji?ites?” He answered: “They are those who say that belief is
what one says, but has nothing to do with works.” It was said that Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal never wanted to deprive one from all of Iman to the point that nothing
remains of it with him, as the Kharijites and Mu‘tazilites claimed. Ahmad stated,
in more than one place, that this does not mean that one ceases to be a believer if
he commits a major sin, for in another place he remarks that the people who
commit major sins have Iman that brings them out of Hell. To support his
argument, he quoted the Prophet’s (pbuh) saying: “Remove from Hell whoever has
an atom’s weight of Iman.” Hence Ahmad, as well as the leaders of the Orthodox
Muslims, agreed that al-fusaq, the sinners, who are not hypocrites have some Iman
through which they are rescued from Hell. In this way, one can differentiate
between the sinners, unbelievers, and hypocrites. However, it is worth mentioning
that the sinners, although they have some Iman, are not classified as true, complete
believers worthy of praise and reward. The Legislator [the Prophet] denied the
application of the name “believer” to such as these; as he is quoted as saying in the
well-known traditions: “A fornicator who fornicates is not a believer as long as he
commits it;” and “None of you is a believer until he desires for his fellow human
being the good which he desires for himself”; and “No one is a believer unless his
neighbor feels safe from harm on his account.” The Prophet swore to the truth of
such statements numerous times, when he said: “The believer is someone on
whose account people have no reason to fear for their lives or wealth.”

As for the Mu‘tazilites, they categorically denied that such people [that is, major
sinners who are nevertheless not hypocrites] could be described either as believers

'8 [The editor of MI.2 supplied the following footnote on p.243 of that work.] This tradition has
been related by Yahya Ibn Abi Kathir on the authority of Hilal Ibn ‘Ali, that is, Ibn Abi
Maymiinah, who included the statement, "She is a believer," whereas it is excluded by Muslim,
Ahmad and others. The inclusion however, acceptable and accounts where it has been included
have been passed down through other sources on the authority of a group of the Companions of
the Prophet, whose traditions have been related by al-Dhahabi in the beginning of the book
entitled al-‘Uluw. Hence, the statement is a reliable addition which one need not hesitate to
accept.
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 263

or as Muslims. Rather, they said concerning a person belonging to this group that
they consider him as having a status somewhere in between. On one hand, it is
said that he will remain forever in Hell such that even intercession will not be able
to bring him out. This position has been held against them; however, if they only
denied that such a person may be referred to as a perfect believer without
qualification, yet acknowledged that he had a measure of belief sufficient to bring
him out of Hell, they would not be classed as heretics. All adherents of Orthodox
Islam are in agreement that such a person no longer has the complete belief he is
required to have; he has ceased to have some of the requisite belief he once had.
However [he has not ceased to be a Muslim]; rather, he is among those under
threat of divine retribution. There are those among the Murji’ites and the Jahmites
who disagreed with this, saying: “belief may not be divided; therefore, he is
considered to have complete belief.” As for those who denied that he may be
described as having perfect belief, they said that the word “believer,” used in an
absolute manner, is associated with praise and the meriting of reward. Terms used
to refer to such a person might include: “a righteous person,” “a pious person,”
“on the straight path,” and so on. So if such descriptions may not be applied in an
absolute sense to the sinner, then neither may the absolute term “believer” be
applied to him. As for the possibility of him being addressed as a believer, this is
due to the fact that those addressed as believers include everyone who has even a
limited measure of belief. For belief is something that a Muslim is commanded to
have, and his [occasional] works of disobedience do not exempt him from this
command.

However, what Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] mentioned about Islam followed al-Zuhri’s
saying that they see Islam as kalimah, utterance (of two testimonies), and Iman as
work. In the latter saying, the meaning of Islam bears two interpretations. It may
mean verbal confession and its consequences [overt works]. This is the Islam that
the Prophet (pbuh) indicated when he said: “Islam implies that you testify that
there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His Messenger, and you establish
prayer, give zakah, fast during Ramadan, and go on pilgrimage to the Ka‘bah.” It
may also mean mere kalimah, utterance (i.e., to say the two testimonies without
practicing the obligations); but this is not what the Prophet (pbuh) meant by
Islam. However, it might be said that the Islam of the desert Arabs was of this sort.
In response one might say that these people and others, when they became
Muslims during the time of the Prophet (pbuh) were required to perform outward
264 CHAPTER NINETEEN

deeds: prayers, giving zakah, fasting, going on the pilgrimage to Makkah, and so
forth; none of them was allowed to stop by merely making the two testimony.
Rather, such a person was considered to have committed a punishable act of
disobedience. But if what Ahmad Ibn Hanbal meant in this account was that Islam
is nothing more than saying the two testimonies that: “there is no god but Allah”
and, “Muhammad 15 the Messenger of Allah,” then everyone who uttered them
would be a Muslim. This, in any case, is one of the versions of what he said; the
second version indicates that one is not a Muslim unless he both utters the two
testimonies and prays. If one does not pray, he is an unbeliever. According to the
third version, one is also considered an unbeliever if he neglects giving zakah. As
for the fourth vesion, it indicates that one is considered an unbeliever by virtue of
neglecting giving zakah if he takes up arms against the Imam, ruler, on account
of it, whereas if he simply neglects to give it yet without resisting the Imam, he is
not to be so considered. It has also been related on his [Ahmad Ibn Hanbal’s]
authority that if one were to say, “I give zakah, but not to the Imam,” then the
Imam has no right to kill him. In addition, there are versions attributed to him
according to which one becomes an unbeliever by neglecting to fast or go on
-pilgrimage; that is, if he determines never to make the pilgrimage. And of course,
if it may be said that someone who neglects any of the five pillars of Islam is
thereby rendered an unbeliever, then Islam cannot possibly be anything but words
that one utters. However, what is meant [by these various accounts] is that if one
utters the words of the testimony, he enters Islam; he is then said to be a Muslim,
though not necessarily a believer in the sense of having belief in his heart. To say
that one is a Muslim in this sense does not require that one make the exception,
since to become a Muslim in this way is a universally recognized command.
However, if one says that he is a Muslim in the sense of performing the duties
involved in the five pillars, he may make the exception. Hence, the level of Islam
in regard to which one need not make the exception is that level achieved through
saying of the two Shadahs, two testimonies, alone; making the exception is not
applicable to it since it is not subject to growth or diminution [as is one’s
performance of the fundamental religious duties of Islam].

There are three sayings about the meaning of the word Islam. [The Kharijites and
the Mu’ tazilites] said that it is Iman. Others said it is the kalimah, utterance [i.e.,
shahadah] that is the saying of, “there is no god but Allah” and that “Muhammad
is His Messenger.” These two sayings have some other aspects, which will be
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 265

mentioned later. But the real meaning is what the Prophet (pbuh) clarified when
he was asked about Islam and Iman. He interpreted Islam to mean “outward
deeds,” and Iman as believing the five principles (as affirming belief in Allah, in
His Angels, in His Books, in His Messengers, and in the Divine Predestination of
good and evil). Hence, if the words Islam and Iman are cited together, then we
have to interpret each of them in the same way the Prophet (pbuh) did. Whereas,
if the word Iman is used in isolation [without being joined to Islam] then it implies
Islam. Also, if the word Islam is used alone then it may imply Iman. But the
question that arises is: Does Iman require Islam? People have debated over this.
And it is worth mentioning that Allah promises Paradise to believers, but not to
Muslims. However, He orders people to embrace Islam, which He considers the
only religion He will accept from human beings. And it was with Islam that Allah
sent all the prophets. Allah says: “If anyone seeks a religion other than Islam, it
will never be accepted of him; and in the Hereafter he will be one of the losers”
(3:85). He also says: “Indeed, the religion in the Sight of Allah is Islam...”
(3:19). Noah said to his people, Allah says: “Relate to them the story of Noah.
Behold! He said to his people: ‘Oh, my people, if my stay with you and my
reminding you of the Signs of Allah is hard on you, then I put my trust in Allah.
So devise your plot, you and your partners, and let not your plot be in doubt for
you. Then pass your sentence on me and give me no respite. But if you turn back
[consider]: no reward have I asked of you: my reward is only due from Allah, and
I have been commanded to be one of the Muslims’” (10:71—72). Allah says that
none will escape penalty except the believers. Allah also says: “. . . We said:
Embark therein, two of each kind, male and female, and your family——except
those against whom the Word has already gone forth, and the believers. But only
a few believed with him.” (11:40); and Allah also says: “And it was inspired to
Noah: ‘None of your people will believe except those who have believed already
..2” (11:36). And Noah said, Allah says: “. . . 1 am not going to drive away those
who believed... (11:29).

Allah also says about Abraham that his religion is Islam. Allah says: “And who
turns away from the religion of Abraham except him who fools himself? Him We
chose and rendered pure in this world: and he will be in the Hereafter in the ranks
of the Righteous. Behold! his Lord said to him: ‘Bow [your will to Me].’ He said:
“1 bow [my will] to the Lord and Cherisher of the Universe.’ And this was the
legacy that Abraham left to his sons, and so did Jacob; ‘Oh my sons! Allah has
266 CHAPTER NINETEEN

chosen the [true] religion for you; then die not except as Muslims’” (2:130—32).
Allah also says: “And who can be better in religion than one who submits his face
[himself] to Allah and he is a Muhsin, good doer. And follows the religion of
Abraham. And Allah did take Abraham as an intimate friend” (4:125). Hence,
happiness will be attainable through the combination of these two qualities. Allah
says: “Yes, but whoever submits his face to Allah and is a Muhsin, good doer,
then his reward is with his Lord, on such shall be no fear nor shall they grieve”
(2:112). Likewise, Allah links Islam with Iman and the Day Hereafter and with
good works. Allah says: “Those who believe and those who follow the Jewish
[scriptures], and the Christians and the Sabians, any who believe in Allah and the
Last Day, and work righteousness, shall have their reward with their Lord: on
them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve” (2:62). It follows that Islam, which is
combined with the Ihsan that Allah commands, and Iman, which is associated with
righteous deeds, are inseparable from each other. For the promise attached to both
is the same, namely, reward and exemption from punishment. For negation of fear
is a cause that requires negation of the source of fear. This is why Allah says: “. ..
On them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve” (2:62), but not “they do not fear.”
For there shall be no reason for them to fear, although they fear Allah. Moreover,
He relates that they shall not grieve. For grief is based on what happened in the
past. So they shall not grieve at all, neither in the grave nor in the Courtyards of
Resurrection. On the other hand, they may feel fear for what could occur before
entering Paradise, although they shall not grieve. Allah says: “Behold! Indeed on
the friends of Allah there is no fear, nor shall they grieve. Those who believed and
used to fear Allah” (10:62-63).

However, absolute Islam [i.e., Islam that is not joined to Righteous deeds], in the
Book of Allah, is not associated with entering Paradise, whereas it is associated
with absolute Iman as indicated in the following sayings of Allah. Allah says:
“Raise one with another in hastening towards Forgiveness from your Lord, and
towards Paradise, the width whereof is as the width of heaven and earth, prepared
for those who believe in Allah and His Messengers . . .” (57:21); and Allah says:
“,. And give good news to those who believe, that they shall have with their Lord
the rewards of their good deeds . . .” (10:2). And He describes al-Khalil [1.e.,
Abraham] and those who followed him with Iman. Allah says: “. . . So Lot
believed in him [Abraham] . . .” (29:26). He thus describes him as a believer,
saying: “. . . So which of the two parties has more right to be secure, if you know.
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 267

It is those who believe and confuse not their belief with wrong. Those are the ones
who have security and they are the right-guided ones. And that was Our Proof
which We gave Abraham against his people . . .” (6:81—83). He even describes
him as having attained the highest level of belief, and as being the most righteous
of the righteous after Muhammad (pbuh). Al-Khalil [1.e., Abraham] made special
supplication to Allah to provide sustenance especially for believers, saying. Allah
says: “... And provide its people with fruits, such of them as believe in Allah and
the Last Day . . .” (2:126). He also prayed, saying. Allah also says: “Our Lord!
And make us submissive to You and of our offspring a community of Muslims to
You...” (2:128). As for Moses, he said, Allah says: “Oh my people! If you have
believed in Allah, put your trust in Him if you are Muslims” (10:84). Allah says:
“But none believed in Moses except the offspring of his people, because of the
fear of Pharaoh and his chiefs, lest they should persecute them . . .”(10:83). And
concerning these events Allah says: ““And We inspired Moses and his brother:
‘Take dwellings for your people in Egypt, and make your dwellings as places for
your worship, and offer prayers, and give glad tidings to the believers” (10:87).
We have mentioned the absolute bushra, glad tidings, promised to Muslims, where
Allah says: “... And We have sent down to you the Book as an exposition of
everything, a guidance, a mercy, and glad tidings to the Muslims” (16:89).

Allah describes [Pharaoh’s] sorcerers, after they believed in Allah, as being both
believers and Muslims. Allah says: “They said: ‘We believe in the Lord of the
Worlds, the Lord of Moses and Aaron’” (7:121—22); and He also says: “And you
take vengeance on us only because we believed in the Signs of our Lord when they

reached us! . . .” (7:126); and “They also said: ‘Our only desire is that our Lord
will forgive us our faults, that we may become foremost among the believers!”
(26:51); and “. . . They said: ‘Our Lord! Pour out on us patience and constancy,

and take our souls unto You as Muslims” (7:126). Allah also attributes Islam to
the Prophets of the Children of Israel. He says: “It was We who revealed the Torah
{to Moses]: therein was guidance and light. The Jews have been judged by its
standard, the Prophets who bowed [as in Islam] to Allah’s Will . . .” (5:44).
However, He attributes both Iman and Islam to the Disciples. Allah says: “And
behold! I inspired the Disciples to have belief in Me and My Messenger. They
said: ‘We have belief, and bear witness that we are Muslims’” (5:111). Allah also
268 CHAPTER NINETEEN

says: “... The Disciples said: ‘We are the helpers of Allah; we believe in Allah,
and bear witness that we are Muslims’” (3:52).

The real difference between Islam and Iman, as understood from the Prophet’s
(pbuh) hadith, is that Islam is din, religion. The word din is a noun of the verb
dana, which means to submit and to humble oneself. Accordingly, Islam means
submitting to and worshiping none but Allah. Hence, whoever worships others
beside Allah is not considered a Muslim. Likewise, whoever arrogantly refuses to
worship Allah is not considered a Muslim. Philologists say that the word Islam
means submission to Allah through the deeds of both heart and body. However,
Iman means tasdiq, assent, iqrar, verbal confession, and ma‘rifah, knowledge. |
Hence it refers to the profession of the heart, which in turn implies work of the
heart.

Accordingly, the foundation of Iman is tasdiq, assent, verbal confession, and
knowledge. Thus, it is “utterance of the heart,” which implies work of the heart.
The essence in it is tasdiq, assent, and the work that is joined to it. For this reason,
the Prophet (pbuh) interpreted Iman as consisting of believing in the heart and its
[the heart’s] humility, which implies having belief in Allah, in His Angels, in His
Books, and in His Messengers. Whereas he [the Prophet] interpreted Islam as a
special submission [to Allah], which implies the five pillars. The Prophet (pbuh)
said: “Islam is overt and Iman is in the heart.” Accordingly, Islam implies overt
deeds, whereas Imari implies what is in the heart: tasdiq, assent, knowledge, love,
fear, and hope; and all of this is implied inwardly. However, there are some
restrictions that might apply to these things. Thus, there are certain conditions that
are connected with what the believer may do, on the one hand, and what the
hypocrite may do, on the other. In support of this is the following hadith narrated
by ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr and Abu Hurayrah: “A Muslim is one from whose hand
and tongue the Muslims are safe. A believer is one whom people trust with their
persons and property.” In this hadith the Prophet (pbuh) interpreted Islam on the
basis of an outward phenomena; namely, the safety of others from a Muslim. By
contrast, he interpreted Iman on the basis of something implied; namely, people’s
willingness to trust the believer with their lives and property. The latter [Iman]
ranks higher than the former [Islam]. For if someone is trustworthy, people are
safe from his hand and tongue. However, not every person from whose hand and
tongue others are safe is trustworthy. On the other hand, one may not harm the
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 269

people and still they may not feel safe from him. This is not a result of belief in his
heart but rather of abandoning hurting people out of fear.

In another hadith narrated by ‘Ubayd Ibn ‘Umayr, on the authority of ‘Amr Ibn
“Absah, from the Prophet (pbuh), a man asked the Prophet (pbuh): “What is
Islam?” He replied: “Providing food and offering salutations.” The inquirer then
asked: “What is Iman?” The Prophet replied: “Tolerance and patience.” Indeed,
providing food as well as offering salutations are overt deeds that one does for
different reasons. However, tolerance and patience are traits of the soul. Allah
says: “. . . And enjoin patience, constancy, self-restraint, and enjoin deeds of
kindness and compassion” (90:17). This verse demonstrates that a person who is
in a state of thankfulness and patience endures hardship and is kinder to his fellow
beings. This is in contrast to the one who is impatient and, whenever he encounters
any difficulty, will not show any tolerance.

As a continuation of this hadith, the inquirer then asked: “What of Islam is best?”
The Prophet (pbuh) replied: “The one from whose tongue and hand Muslims are
safe.” He [the inquirer] asked: “Oh, Messenger of Allah, who is the best believer?”
He [the Prophet] replied: “The one with the best morals.” He [the inquirer], asked:
“Which among deaths is the best?” He [the Prophet] answered: “That in which
your blood is spilled and your horse is wounded.” He [the inquirer] asked: “Which
jihad is the best?” He [the Prophet] replied: “To strive in the Cause of Allah with
your belongings and person.” He {the inquirer] asked: “Which among charity is
the best?” He [the Prophet], replied: “That which one gives when he is wealthy
and close-fisted, haunted by the fear of poverty, hoping to become rich, and still
hoping to live [as a rich man].” He [the inquirer] asked: ‘“Which among the prayers
is the best?" He [the Prophet] replied: “The prayer in which one is completely
devoted to Allah.” He [the inquirer] asked: “Which Hijrah is the best?” He [the
Prophet] replied: “Abandoning what Allah has prohibited.” He [the inquirer]
asked: “Which among the hours is the best?” He [the Prophet] replied: “That of
midnight.” A similar hadith was narrated on Jabir’s authority, in which the
following statement was used: “The best Iman is tolerance and patience.”

In all other hadiths the Prophet (pbuh) interpreted Islam as submission in the heart
to Allah as well as overt works. An example is the account narrated by Ahmad
[Ibn Hanbal] by Bahz Ibn Hakim, on the authority of his father, who said that his
270 CHAPTER NINETEEN

grandfather said: “By Allah! Oh, Messenger of Allah! I swore by all the fingers on
my hand that I would not come to you! So, in the name of the One who sent you
in truth, what did He send you with?” The Prophet (pbuh) replied: “Islam.” Then
he asked the Prophet (pbuh): “What is Islam?” The Prophet (pbuh) answered: “To
submit your heart to Allah, to turn your face to Him, to pray the required prayers,
and to give obligatory zakah.” The Prophet (pbuh) then added: “Allah does not
accept the Islam of a slave who became an unbeliever after being a Muslim.” In
another place, the same hadith was narrated as follows: “To say that you have
submitted your face to none but Allah, to establish prayer, to give zakah, and not
to kill a Muslim.” In another place, the same hadith was narrated as follows: “To
say I submitted my soul to none but Allah and I turned my face to Him.” Similarly,
Muhammad Ibn Nasr narrated, on the authority of Khalid Ibn Mu‘dan, on the
authority of Abu Hurayrah, that the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Islam is like the light
and a sign like the light on the road. Therefore you are to worship Allah and not
to associate with any but Him, to establish prayer, to give zakah, to fast during
Ramadan, to command good and to abandon evil, to pay salutation to people you
know and do not know [if they answer your salutation]; if you do, the Angels will
answer both of you. However, if they do not, the Angels will answer you and will
put a curse on them, and to pay salutation to your family when you enter your
home. Whoever does not fulfill any of these requirements, abandons his share in
Islam; and whoever abandons this, abandons Islam itself.”

Allah says: “Oh, you who believe! Enter into Islam wholeheartedly . . .” (2:208).
Mujahid and Qatadah said that this verse was revealed to order Muslims to fully
accept and obey all Islamic legislation. This saying does not seem to contradict
that this verse was revealed concerning the People of the Book [whether they had
converted to Islam or not], since all of them were commanded to do likewise. A
group of people stated that this means obedience and their statement is related to
what Ibn ‘Abbas said that the phrase “enter into Islam” means to obey Allah and
His Messenger, and this is considered part of the works of Iman. However, in this
verse the word kaffah, whole, has different interpretations. Some said it means that
all of you enter Islam. Others said it means enter into Islam as a whole, which is
the right interpretation. For no human being is commanded to do anything other
than “enter into all of Islam,” but is commanded only to do what he is capable of.
In His saying, “enter” is addressed to all of them; however, if what the word
kaffah, all, conveys is the idea that they are all to enter it together, then this would
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 271

require that someone leave Islam in order for others to do so, in which case Islam
could only be commanded of someone on condition that others were in agreement
as a whole, as in performing the Friday prayer. However, this is a position that no
Muslim holds. And if the word “all” means that all of them are to enter Islam, then
all the commands found in the entire Qur’4n are of this sort. Allah says: “Believe
in Allah and His Messenger . . .” (57:7);'° and He also says: “And offer prayers
and give zakah . . .” (2:43). Another verse in which the same word for “all” occurs
is the one in which Allah says: “... And fight against the polytheists collectively
...” (9:36), which means “fight against them all, not leaving a single polytheist
with whom you have not fought,” having been revealed after the breaking of
covenants. It does not mean, “‘let all of you fight against them,” for this would not
be necessary; rather, they are to fight as the welfare [of the Islamic community]
dictates. Moreover, waging jihad is a collective duty; so if individual duties do not
apply to all those commanded to perform them, then how could collective duties
be said to apply to them all? Rather, the intention is to apply the command
generally to all fighters as in Allah’s saying: “. . . As they fight against you
collectively .. .” (9:36).

For Allah commands people to enter into the whole of Islam. That is, if it is an
obligation for each person, one has to do it; if it is an obligation for a group of
people, one has to believe that it is something he must do if he becomes able to,
and if it is desirable, he has to believe in its goodness and be disposed to do it.
Supporting this is a hadith narrated by Jarir in which a man came to the Prophet
(pbuh) and said: “Oh, Messenger of Allah, could you kindly describe Islam for
me?” The Prophet (pbuh) answered: “It is to testify that there is no god but Allah,
to acknowledge what Allah reveals, to establish prayer, to give zakah, to fast
during Ramadan, and go on pilgrimage to the House.” To this the man replied: “I
confess,” in a long story in which it says that a large rat fell in a large hole in the
ground and was killed. It was hungry and two angels put some of the fruits of
heaven in its mouth. So his saying “and you admit of what Allah came with”
means the confession that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah and he is the one
who came with it.

‎In MI.2 (p. 253) and DKI (p.229) this verse is referenced as 4:165. However, the correct‏ فا
‎reference is 4:136, as in MI.1 (p. 225), as it occurs in the middle of the verse. It also occurs as‏
‎above.‏
212 CHAPTER NINETEEN

In a hadith narrated by Abu Sulayman al-Darani,”” a delegation said: “We are
believers.” The Prophet (pbuh) asked: “What is your evidence?” They said:
“Fifteen traits. Five of them the Messenger of Allah commanded us to do, five he
commanded us to believe in, and five are customs we adopted before we converted
to Islam, and we will maintain them unless you disapprove of any of them.” The
Prophet asked: “What are the five you are commanded to do?” They replied: “To
testify that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His Messenger, to
establish prayer, to give zakah, to fast Ramadan, and to go on pilgrimage.” The
٠ Prophet (pbuh) asked: “What are the five that my messengers commanded you to
believe in?” They said: ““We are commanded to believe in Allah, in His Angels,
in His Books, in His Messengers, and in Resurrection after death.” The Prophet
(pbuh) then asked: “What are the five customs you adopted before you converted
to Islam and that you still keep?” They said: “Patience when afflicted, gratitude
in case of abundance, acceptance of ill fate, honesty in fighting, and not gloating
over the affliction of one’s enemy.” To this, the Prophet (pbuh) replied: “You are
knowledgeable and wise men who [because you are true and sincere] are nearly
prophets.” He added: “I will tell you about five more traits to add to your fifteen
so that you will have twenty if you are what you say you are: Do not gather what
you will not eat; do not build what you will not dwell in; do not.compete over
what you will leave behind [when you die]; fear Allah, to Whom you will return
and be presented in front of; and desire what you undertake and will abide in
forever.”

In this hadith the delegation differentiated between the five things that they were
to do, Islam, and the five that they believed in, Iman. Indeed, many hadiths of the
Prophet (pbuh) support this distinction.

And in the hadith narrated by Ahmad, based on that of Ayyub, on the authority 01
Abu Qilabah, on the authority of a man from Syria, on the authority of his father,
the Prophet (pbuh) told him: “Embrace Islam and you will be in peace.” The father
inquired: “What is Islam?” He [the Prophet] said: “To commit your heart to the
Will of Allah and to protect other Muslims from your tongue and hand.” He [the
inquirer] asked: “Which part of Islam is best?” He [the Prophet] replied: “Iman.”
He [the inquirer] asked: “What is Iman?” He [the Prophet] replied: “To affirm
your belief in Allah, in His Angels, in His Books, in His Messengers and in the life

20 Abu Sulayman al-Darani (n.d.) was a scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 240.]
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 273

after death.” He [the inquirer] asked: “Which of Iman is best?” He [the Prophet]
replied: “Hijrah.” He [the inquirer] asked: “What is Hijrah?” He [the Prophet]
replied: “Abandoning evil.” He [the inquirer] asked: “Which part of the Hijrah is
best?” He [the Prophet] remarked: “jihad.” He [the inquirer] asked: “What is
jihad?” He [the Prophet] replied: “‘To fight against unbelievers wherever you find
them, not to be a miser, and not to be a coward.” The Messenger (pbuh) then
added [three times)] ““There are two deeds [or their like] that are considered the
best of all deeds: a righteous pilgrimage and ‘Umrah [going on pilgrimage at a
time other than that usually set aside for pilgrimage].” It is worth mentioning here
that these two deeds are the best two [after jihad]. For the Prophet (pbuh) said:
“Then there are two deeds.” Moreover, this hadith clarifies the fact that Islam is
a more global concept than Iman, which in tum is a more global concept than
hijrah, which in turn is a more global concept than jihad. Islam means that you
worship Allah alone and that you do not associate anyone with Him and sincerely
believe in the religion of Islam. Islam is the only accepted religion and
Muhammad is the last Messenger of Allah. Hence, one is not considered a Muslim
unless he testifies that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His slave
and Messenger. Through these two affirmations of belief, one enters into Islam.
Afterward, other obligations [e.g., establishing prayer and giving zakah] are to be
fulfilled. If anyone abandons an obligation, his Iman decreases accordingly.
However, if he wholeheartedly confesses that there is no god but Allah and that
Muhammad is His Messenger and faithfully performs all the obligations in order
to please Allah, he will be rewarded. A great number of Muslims are born having
Islam [outwardly and inwardly], with its requirement of Iman. However, they have
not attained certainty or reached the rank of jihad. Therefore, they will be
rewarded for their Islam and their general acceptance of what the Prophet (pbuh)
commanded. For it may be that they are ignorant about the details of Islam. For
example, they may not know that the Book was revealed unto him [the Prophet]
or that an Angel [Gabriel] used to teach him about religion. Thus, if the message
does not reach some people, then they are not required to know it in detail.
However, they must confirm that the Prophet is the Messenger of Allah and that
he is telling the truth about everything that he informs about Allah.

Then after Islam comes Iman, which is characterized by tranquility and certainty
and is also distinguished by its quantity and quality. Iman leads one to the truth.
274 CHAPTER NINETEEN

Believers are those who have Iman in Allah, in His Angels, in His Books, in His
Messengers, and in the details of Divine Predestination, which they do not know.

' Hence, believers have [in their hearts] the assurance and the conviction that
Muslims do not have, for a believer must be a Muslim. However, the contrary is
not true. For Islam does not require Iman. In other words, when people convert to
Islam, abide by its laws, and obey Allah and His Messenger, they will be
considered Muslims, having an absolute Iman. And, if Allah wills, the essence of
Iman will gradually enter their hearts. However, a great number of people do not
reach the rank of Iman. Such people are neither called unbelievers nor hypocrites.
But they do not have knowledge of the heart, the conviction, and the love of Allah
and His Messenger, which would enable them to overcome their doubts.

Similarly, if they are commanded to strive, but do not obey, then they will be
threatened with punishment. That is why when the Prophet (pbuh) entered
Madinah, most of its people became Muslims, but when calamities and hardships
befell the Muslims, some people became hypocrites. Had those hypocrites died
before the calamities occurred, they would have died Muslims and entered
Paradise even though they were not true believers. Allah says: “Alif, Lam, Mim.
Do people think that they will be left alone on saying, ‘We believe,’ and that they
will not be tested? We did test those before them, and Allah will certainly know
those who are true from those who are false” (29: 1--3); and “Allah will not leave
the believers in the state in which you are now until He distinguishes what is evil
from what is good . . .” (3:179); and “There are among mankind some who serve
Allah, as it were, at the very edge: if good befalls them, they are therefore, well
content; but if.a trial comes to them, they turn their faces: they lose both this world
and the Hereafter. That is an evident loss!” (22:11). For this reason, Allah
dispraises hypocrites who have rejected belief after they had accepted it by saying:
٠ . . The hypocrites are indeed liars. They have made their oaths a screen [for their
misdeeds]: thus they hinder [people] from the Path of Allah: truly evil are their
deeds. That is because they believed, then they rejected belief: so a seal was set
on their hearts. Therefore they understand not” (63:1—3); and “The hypocrites are
afraid lest a Sirah should be sent down about them, showing them what is in their
hearts. Say: ‘[Go ahead and] mock! But certainly Allah will bring to light all that
you fear.’ If you ask them [about this], they declare: ‘We were only talking idly
and joking.’ Say: ‘Was it at Allah and His Signs, and His Messenger, that you
were mocking? Make you no excuses: You have rejected belief after you had
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 275

accepted it. If We pardon some of you, we will punish others among you, because
they were criminals’” (9:64-66). Thus, He commands the Prophet (pbuh) to tell
them that they had rejected Iman after they had accepted it.

The claim made by some concerning such verses as these is invalid, to the effect
that after having professed belief, they disbelieved with their tongues after having
first disbelieved in their hearts. For professing belief with one’s tongue while
disbelieving in one’s heart goes hand in hand with [utter] disbelief. Hence it may
not be said, “you have become unbelievers after having believed,” for what this
really means is that such people have never ceased to be unbelievers in the first
place. And if what is meant here is, “you displayed unbelief after having displayed
belief,” then the only people they have displayed anything to are their intimate
associates, and with their intimate associates, they have continued to be as they
were in the beginning. Rather, when they behaved as hypocrites and were warned
that a chapter [of the Qur’an] would be revealed to manifest the hypocrisy in their
hearts, and when they spoke derisively [of Allah’s signs] they became unbelievers
after having believed. Moreover, the term “unbelievers” does not imply that they
were still hypocrites. Allah says: “Oh, Prophet! Strive hard against the unbelievers
and the hypocrites and be harsh against them; their abode is Hell, and worst indeed
is that destination. They swear by Allah that they said nothing [bad], but really
they said the word of unbelief and they disbelieved after accepting Islam, and they
resolved that which they were unable to carry out, and they could not find any
cause to do so, except that Allah and His Messenger had enriched them of His
Bounty. If they repent, it will be better for them, but if they turn away, Allah will
punish them with a painful torment in this world and in the Hereafter .. .”
(9:73—74), He says here, “they became unbelievers after having become Muslims;”
the Islam referred to here may be of the same sort as that of the desert Arabs
referred to in verses quoted above, such that His sayings, “after their having
believed,” and “after their having become Muslims,” bear the same meaning. They
may, however, still be hypocrites, since they have not entered a state in which they
possessed any belief whatsoever, the reason being that they have displayed
unbelief and apostasy. And for this reason they are called upon to repent as in the
above verse: if they repent, it will be better for them, but if they turn away from
their previous repentance, they shall be afflicted with a grievous punishment both
in this world and the next. This situation is similar to that of someone who
manifests unbelief with the result that the Messenger wages jihad against him by
26 CHAPTER NINETEEN

establishing limits and penalties for him. Mention of this is made in the command
to “fight against the unbelievers and hypocrites, showing them no mercy;” about
such people it is also said that they are “without protectors nor supporters on
earth.”

However, those who became unbelievers after having become Muslims are to be
distinguished from those who became unbelievers after having professed belief.
For they have sworn by Allah to do what they have said; they have also uttered the
word of unbelief after having become Muslims and sought that which they had not
attained, which indicates that they sought it persistently yet did not reach their
intended destination. For Allah did not say, “they sought after what they had not
done,” but rather “what they had not attained,” since both a saying and a deed
came from them. Allah says: “If you ask them, they will declare: “We were only
talking idly and joking . . .”” (9:65). Hence they confessed to what they had done
and even apologized; thus Allah says: “Make no excuse; you have disbelieved
after you had believed. If We pardon some of you, We will punish others among
you because they were criminals” (9:66), which indicates that as far as they were
concerned, they had not committed unbelief. In fact, they did not consider what
they had said or done to be infidelity whatsoever. However, this verse makes it
clear that mocking Allah, Allah’s Signs, and His Messenger is unbelief that may
be committed after one becomes a believer. And this in turn indicates that those
spoken of here had a weak belief, as a result of which they committed this
forbidden act that they knew to be forbidden, although they did not believe it to
be outright unbelief. Hence, more than one of the pious ancestors stated,
concerning the description of the hypocrites to whom a proverb was applied in
Siirat al-Baqarah, that they saw, then were blinded; they knew, then denied; they
believed, then disbelieved. Likewise Qatadah and Mujahid said: “Allah applies a
proverb to the way in which they approached the believers, heard the message the
Prophet had brought, then lost the light they had attained.” Allah says: “Their
likeness is as the likeness of one who kindled a fire; then, when it lighted all
around him, Allah took away their light and left them in darkness so they could
not see. They are deaf, dumb, and blind, so they return not [to the right path]”
(2:17-18).

There are those who claimed that the term “light” in this verse refers to the
protection which was provided for their lives and wealth as long as they were in
this world, and which they were stripped of when they died, just as the person
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 277

mentioned in the verse is stripped of the light he once enjoyed. However, this is
not the meaning conveyed by the verse. Allah says: “... And left them in darkness
so they could not see. They are deaf, dumb, and blind, so they return not [to the
right path}” (2:17--18). Moreover, on Judgment Day they will be in torment. Allah
says: “On the Day when the hypocrites, men and women, will say to the believers:
‘Wait for us! Let us get something of your Light!’ It will be said: “Go back to your
rear! Then seek a light!’ So a wall will be put up between them, with a gate
therein. Inside it will be Mercy, and outside it will be Torment. [The hypocrites]
will call the believers: ‘Were we not with you?’ The believers will reply: “Yes!
But you lead yourselves into temptation. . .”” (57:13—14). More than one of the
pious ancestors said: “On the Day of Judgment, a hypocrite will be given a light,
then the light will be extinguished.” For Allah says: “... That Day Allah will not
permit the Prophet (pbuh) and those who believe with him to be humiliated. Their
light will run forward before them and their right hands, while they say, ‘Our
Lord! Perfect our light for us and grant us Forgiveness . . .”” (66:8).

Qur’anic interpreters have said that when the believers see the light of the
hypocrites extinguished, they asked Allah to perfect their light for them and grant
them Paradise.

Ibn ‘Abbas said: “On the Day of Judgment, every Muslim will be given light. But
the light of the hypocrite will be extinguished.” So the believer feels frightened
when he sees the light of the hypocrite extinguished. Then he [Ibn ‘Abbas] said:
“Our Lord! Perfect our light for us.” This has been established in the collections
of sound traditions, from the tradition of Abu Hurayrah and Abu Sa‘id, various
forms of which are accepted from the Prophet (pbuh); it was narrated by Muslim
on the basis of the tradition of Jabir. It is also well known from the tradition of Ibn
Mas‘iid, which is the longest version, and from that of Abu Misa in the long
tradition, in which it is mentioned that he called upon the Day of Judgment,
saying: “Let every community follow that which it has followed before, such that
everyone who has worshiped the sun shall worship the sun, all who have
worshiped the moon shall worship the moon, and those who have worshiped
taghit, ido/s, shall worship idols. Moreover, each community shall retain its
hypocrites, who will be approached by Allah in a form they have never known. He
will say: ‘I am your Lord,’ to which they shall reply: ‘May Allah protect us from
you! This is the place where our Lord comes to us, and if He were to come to us
278 CHAPTER NINETEEN

we would recognize Him.’ Allah then comes to them in the form they do know
and says: ‘I am your Lord,’ to which they reply: ‘You are our Lord,’ and they
follow him.” In one account, he “reveals his leg,” while in another he says: “Is
there some sign between you and him by which you might recognize him?” They
reply: “Yes, he will reveal one of his legs.” So there will be no one who used to
bow down to Allah of his own accord but that he will be allowed to bow down
once more, nor is there anyone who used to prostrate himself before Allah in a
hypocritical manner but that Allah turns his back into a single, flat surface such
that whenever he wants to bow down, he falls onto the back of his neck, while his
back remains [crooked] like the horn of a bison. They will raise their heads, only
to find their light before them and in their right hands, while the light of the
hypocrites is extinguished and they say: “Allow us to borrow some of your light.”

Hence, it became apparent that in terms of outward appearances, hypocrites are
gathered in on Judgment Day along with believers, just as they mingled with them
in this world. But then the truth becomes manifest: one group bows down to its
Lord, while another is unable to do so, since during their time on earth they did not
bow down to Him. Rather, their intention was to dissimulate before other people.
And the reward received in the Hereafter corresponds to the actions one has done
on earth; therefore, they were given light that is then extinguished because when
they were still in this world, they entered into belief and then departed from it. For
this reason Allah speaks in parable fashion about those of them who believed and
later fell again into unbelief, and those who are given light in the afterlife that is
then extinguished. He says of them: “. . . Do not return” (2:18). According to
Qatadah and Muaatil, the meaning of this clause is that they never return from the
error into which they have strayed, whereas al-Suddi held that it means they do not
return to Islam, at least not inwardly. A parable 15 told concerning what occurs in
the world, and applies to those of them who believed and later disbelieved. As for
those who continued to be hypocrites, he draws another simile, namely Allah says:
“Or like a rainstorm from the sky wherein is darkness, thunder and lightning . . .”
(2:19). Commentators have differed as to whether these two similes were meant
to describe all of them, or whether each of the two applies only to some of them.
There are two views on this question, the second of which is the correct one. For
Allah says: “Or like a rainstorm . .. ,” which confirms one of the two views, since
this indicates that they may be likened either to this or to that. [All of] them may
be seen to be illustrated in both similes, since some of them may resemble this or
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 279

that aspect more than others, but all of them bear points of resemblance or
comparison to both similes. For this reason they are joined not with the disjunctive
“or” but rather with the conjunctive particle “and.”

For someone to say “or” here by way of allowing a choice, as when one says, “he
sat with al-Hassan or Ibn Sirin,” would make no sense, since the provision of a
choice occurs in a command, when the request is not in the predicate: or the
provision of a choice would be found in a command or a request, but not in a
predicate. The same thing applies to one’s saying that “or” is in the sense of “and,”
or to arouse doubts, suspicions, or confusion in those being addressed. For Allah
desires, through such similes, to render things clearer and more comprehensible,
not to arouse doubts or confusion.

The intent here is to provide the believers with a clear picture of their [the
hypocrites’] state. To fulfill this, Allah cites two similitudes in the beginning of
Surat al-Baqarah. In the first, Allah says: “Deaf, dumb, and blind, they will not
return [to the path] . . .” (2:18). In the second, Allah says: ‘‘. .. They press their
fingers in their ears to keep out the stunning thunder-clap, all the while they are
in terror of death. But Allah is ever around the rejecters of belief. The lightning all
but snatches away their sight; every time the light [helps] them, they walk therein,
and when the darkness covers them, they stand still. And, if Allah wills, He could
take away their faculty of hearing and seeing; for Allah has power over all things”
(2:19-20). The second similitude indicates that they could hear and see and that
if Allah wills, that he could take away their faculty of hearing and seeing. And the
first similitude indicates that at first they could see, but then could become deaf,
dumb, and blind. Moreover, the second similitude indicates that if the light helps
them, they walk therein, and when the darkness covers them, they stand still. Thus,
they had two states: a state of illumination and a state of darkness. The first
similitude indicates that they stayed in darkness. Hence, the first similitude
describes the state of those who were in a state of illumination but ended in a state
of darkness, whereas the second describes those who remain neither in a state of
illumination nor in a state of darkness but rather their states vary according to the
circumstances and the situation.

Allah also employs two metaphors to describe unbelievers using the particle aw,
or. He [Allah] says: “As for those who disbelieve, their deeds are like a mirage in
a desert: the thirsty one thinks it to be water; until he comes up to it, he finds it to
280 CHAPTER NINETEEN

be nothing, but he finds Allah [ever] with him, and Allah will pay him his account:
and Allah is swift in taking account. Or [the unbelievers’ state] is like the depths
of darkness in a vast deep ocean, overwhelmed with a great wave topped by a
great wave, topped by [dark] clouds, depths of darkness, one above another: if a
man stretches out his hand, he can hardly see it! For any to whom Allah gives no
light, there is no light for him” (24:39-40). The first metaphor describes the state
of unbelief wherein the unbeliever thinks he is acting righteously while in fact he
is doing evil and does not know it. Therefore, he is in a state comparable to a
mirage in a desert. The second metaphor describes the state of unbelief wherein
the unbeliever does not believe in anything but due to his ignorance and
waywardness, he is beneath layer upon layer of accumulated darkness.

Sometimes a hypocrite and an unbeliever may be characterized by the trait
mentioned in the preceding section. Hence the two metaphors are divided
according to people’s types and states. Each example is cited for a different
purpose, since they convey different images and meanings. That is why only one
metaphor was cited for Iman; namely, light. Whereas for unbelievers, the
metaphor cited was of light that has no real existence, like a mirage in the desert
or a thick darkness. Similarly, the hypocrite is compared to someone who could
see but then became blind, or to someone who swings in an unstable way between
light and darkness. This indicates that among hypocrites is a group who [covertly]
rejected Iman after they had accepted it. This is explained in detail by the scholars
of hadith and interpretation and by biographers. There are some men who believed
and then turned around and practiced hypocrisy. Hypocrisy is due to many
reasons, one of which was the command [of Allah] to change the Qiblah, direction
of prayer. As a result of this some people rejected Iman and it became a criterion
by which to test people. Allah says: “. .. And We made the Qiblah [prayer
direction, toward Jerusalem] which you used to face, only to test those who
followed the Messenger [Muhammad] from those who would turn on their heels.
Indeed it was great except for those whom Allah guided . . .” (2:143). What is —
meant here is that the Ka‘bah is the real Qiblah and that was the original intention
of making it the Qiblah. For indeed the Ka‘bah, its mosque, and its sanctuary are
far superior to Jerusalem. Above and beyond that, it is al-Bayt al-‘Atigq, the
Ancient House, and it is the Qiblah of Abraham and other Prophets. Allah never
commands any of the Prophets like Moses, Jesus, or any other one who came
before the Prophet Muhammad to direct his prayer toward the Qiblah of
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 281

Jerusalem. Indeed, He did not intend to appoint it as a permanent Qiblah. The
rationale was to test the will of the people concerning the change of direction of
the Qiblah in order to find out who followed the Messenger and who would turn
on their heels [from Iman]. Thus, there is a wisdom in legislating it.

Also, some people rejected Iman after they had accepted it [became hypocrites]:
when Muslims fled on the Day of Uhud and the Prophet (pbuh) was wounded in
his head and face, and one of his teeth, the ruba‘iyyah, was broken. Allah says:
“So do not become weak [against your enemy], nor be sad, and you will be the
superior [in victory] if you are [true believers]. If a wound has touched you, be
sure a similar wound has touched the others. And so are the days [good and not so
good], We give to men by turns, that [Allah] may test those who believe, and that
He may take martyrs from among you. And Allah likes not the wrong-doers. And
that Allah may test the believers and destroy the unbelievers” (3:139-41). Allah
also says: “What you suffered on the day the two armies met [at Uhud] was with
the leave of Allah, in order that He might test the believers. And He might test the
hypocrites also. These were told: ‘Come, fight in the way of Allah, or [at least]
defend yourselves.’ They said: ‘Had we known how to fight, we should certainly
have followed you.’ They were that day nearer to unbelief than to belief, saying
with their lips what was not in their hearts. But Allah has full knowledge of all
they conceal” (3:166—-67). His saying: “And [to test] the hypocrites” also explicitly
refers to those who had recently shown hypocrisy. It also [implicitly] refers to
those who at first did not reject Iman and to those who were hypocrites and then
became hypocrites again. His saying: “They were that day nearer to unbelief than
to belief,” indicates that before that day they were not nearer to unbelief than to
Iman. That is, they were either nearer to Iman [than to unbelief] or had equal
degrees of Iman and unbelief. For example, when Ibn Ubayy seceded from the
Prophet (pbuh) on the Day of Uhud, about three hundred people, representing
one-third of the Muslims who participated on that day, seceded too. But not all
these people were covertly hypocrites. For there was no reason for them to be so.
For example, before that day, Ibn Ubayy used to show his Iman and obedience to
the Prophet (pbuh). Moreover, he used to deliver a sermon every Friday,
commanding people to follow the Prophet (pbuh). What is in his heart is known
to only a few people. Furthermore, he was praised by his community, who had
intended to enthrone him as a king. However, when the message was sent down,
his covetousness led him to hypocrisy. So when he seceded on the Day of Uhud
282 . CHAPTER NINETEEN

and said that he [the Prophet] consulted the youth but not me, many people who
were not hypocrites seceded too. There are many other examples of people who
became hypocrites after they had accepted Iman. If those people had died before
“the occurrence of the tribulation, they would have died as Muslims that would be
rewarded. However, they would neither be regarded as true believers who adhered
to Iman when tested, nor as true hypocrites who turned away from Iman when
tested via tribulations. In the case of many Muslims these days, when they are
tested [via tribulations], their Iman diminishes. Many of them become hypocrites,
some of them turn back [if the enemy defeats Muslims]. However, they remain
Muslims [if Muslims are defeated], although covertly as well as overtly they
believe in the Messenger, but do not adhere to Iman when tested.

For this reason, these people frequently abandon their religious obligations and
commit prohibited acts. These are the people who, when they said: “We believe,”
Allah replies: “. . . Do not say we believe, but say: we profess Islam. For Iman has
not yet entered your hearts . . .” (49:14). That is, they are not true believers. For
true Iman, when referred to in the absolute sense in the Book of Allah or the
Sunnah, is not affected by tribulations. Allah says: “Only those are believers who
have believed in Allah and His Messenger, and have never since doubted, but have
striven with their belongings and their lives in the Cause of Allah: such are the
sincere ones” (49:15). Unlike doubt, which does not occur except with regard to
the knowledge of heart, suspicion applies both to the knowledge as well as the
works of the heart. Therefore, nobody is characterized by [true] conviction except
he whose heart is tranquil both theoretically and practically; that is, with respect
both to what he knows and to what he does. Otherwise, if he knows the truth but
suspicion enters his heart when a calamity happens, then he is not characterized
by [true] conviction. Allah says: “In that situation were the believers tried: they
were shaken as by a tremendous shaking” (33:11).

Often a believer is exposed to a brand of hypocrisy, then repents and Allah accepts
his repentance. Sometimes his heart may be exposed to hypocrisy but Allah
protects him. Anda believer is tested by Satan’s evil suggestions and blasphemous
thoughts that annoy him, as reported in the Companions’ saying: “Oh, Prophet of
Allah, indeed, one of us finds himself in a state where he would rather fall from
the sky to the earth than speak about the evil thoughts in his soul.” To this, the
Prophet (pbuh) replied: “That is evidence of pure Iman.” In another version it was
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 283

said: “It was even oppressive to talk about it.” To which the Prophet replied:
“Praise be to Allah! Who returned his guile of evil thoughts.” In other words, the
occurrence of such evil thoughts along with the hatred and aversion against them
are evidence of the purity of one’s Iman. People who experience this are like the
fighter [for the Sake of Allah] who fights his enemy until he conquers it. This is
the greatest jihad. The pure and sincere [Iman] is like pure milk. The reason is that
it is pure is because it causes one to dislike satanic evil thoughts. Thus Iman
becomes pure.

The general public cannot avoid being exposed to evil suggestions and thoughts.
Some people welcome and encourage these thoughts, and then become either
unbelievers or hypocrites; others whose hearts are full of sins and bestial passions
do not revive such thoughts unless they seek religion, in which case they either
become believers or hypocrites. Accordingly, people are more frequently exposed
to evil thoughts when praying than when they are not. That is, a worshiper who
wishes to draw nearer to Allah is more frequently exposed to Satan. Likewise the
people of knowledge and religion are more frequently exposed to satanic thoughts
than the general public, who have not obeyed Allah’s ordinance or walked in His
path, but instead follow their own whims, which distract them from the
remembrance of their Lord. For they are the enemies of Satan, who tried his best
to hinder them from making advances toward Allah. Allah says: “Indeed Satan is
an enemy to you: so treat him as an enemy . . .” (35:6). The reciter of the Qur’an
is commanded to seek the protection of Allah from Satan in order to have Iman in
his heart and to increase his conviction, tranquility, and spiritual health. Allah
says: “We send down [stage by stage] of the Qur’an that which is a healing and a
mercy to those who believe, and it increases the wrongdoers nothing but loss”
(17:82). Allah also says: “Here is a plain statement to men, a guidance and
instruction to those who fear Allah!” (3:138); and . . . And it is a guidance to the
righteous ones” (2:2); and “. .. You, those who believe, their belief is increased,
and they do rejoice” (9:124).

Indeed, every believer feels that Satan tried his best to suggest evil thoughts to him
in order to prevent him from benefitting from the Qur’an. For this reason he is
commanded by Allah, when he recites the Qur’4n, to seek the protection of Allah
from it [Satan’s incitement]. Allah says: “When you do read the Qur’an, seek
Allah’s protection from Satan, the Rejected One. No authority has he over those
who believe and put their trust in their Lord. His authority is over those only who
284 CHAPTER NINETEEN

take him as patron and who join partners with Allah” (16:98—100). It is clear that
when one seeks the protection of Allah and asks His aid against Satan, Allah
protects and helps him. Allah says: “. . . Repel [evil] with what is better; indeed,
the one between you and him, there was enmity and it [will appear] as though he
was a Close friend. And no one will be granted such goodness except those who
exercise patience and self-restraint—none but persons of the greatest good fortune.
And if [at any time] an incitement to discord is made to you by the Evil One, seek
refuge in Allah. He is the One who hears and knows all things” (41:34—36).

It is recorded in Sahih Muslim and Sahih al-Bukhari that the Prophet (pbuh) said:
“I know a statement that, if one utters it, will cause all bad feelings to disappear;
namely, it is: ‘I seek the protection of Allah against the cursed Satan.” So, Allah
commands us to utter this statement whenever we seek good [in order not to be
hindered by Satan] and whenever we are exposed to evil [in order to be defended].
For this reason, the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Satan still comes to one of you asking
him: who created this, who created that, until he asks: who created Allah?
Whoever [of you] has such an experience, must seek the protection of Allah
against Satan. And he must stop it.” Thus Allah commands us to seek protection
from him when Satan attempts to trap a person or make him commit an evil act or
even prevents him from doing good as an enemy behaves and acts toward his
enemy.

Indeed, the greater a desire one has for knowledge and worship, and the more
capable he is of these things, the more frequently he will be exposed to evil
thoughts. If Allah protects him against Satan, his reward will be greater. On the
other hand, if Satan has the power to mislead him, his error will be greater.
Al-Sha‘bi said: “The scholars of every community are the worst people, except
those of Muslim communities. They are the best people.”

The people of the Sunnah are the distinguished Muslims. So in Islam, Orthodox
Muslims are to Islam as Islam is to other religions. That is, they are superior to
other Islamic sects, just as Islam is superior to other religions. To put it differently,
all communities, except Muslims, are misguided; they are led astray by their
scholars, who are the worst group. In contrast, Muslims are rightly guided by their
scholars, who are the best group among them. Likewise are the Orthodox
Muslims, whose leaders are the best of the community. While the leaders of the
people of heresy are more dangerous than the sinners. For that reason the Prophet
IMAN AND ISLAM AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THEM 285

(pbuh) commanded them to fight the Kharijites and forbid fighting unjust rulers,
unlike those who have a desire for knowledge and worship. Thus it appears to
them that bad thoughts misguide them; however, they think that this will put them
on the right path. And he who is safe from these evil thoughts is considered one
from among the leaders of the pious, who are the leaders of guidance and
fountains of knowledge, as Ibn Mas‘id said to his friends: “Be fountains of
knowledge, lights of wisdom, lights of the night, pure-hearted; stick close to home,
wear worn-out clothes, be known to the people of the heaven, and unknown to the
people of the earth.”
Chapter Twenty

Understanding Iman and Islam:
Interpreted by the Messenger
As the Ultimate Authority

What has to be known is that if the meanings of the words, and what is intended
by them, that exist in the Quran and the Sunnah and were known by the Prophet
(pbuh), then there would be no need to seek additional information from
philologists or any others, Thus, jurists have said that words are of three kinds.
One kind is defined by shar‘, Jaw (e.g., “prayer and “zakah’’), and another is
defined by language (e.g., “sun” and “moon”). The third is defined according to
convention (e.g., qabd, holding, and ma‘ruf, kindness, as indicated in Allah’s
saying: “... And treat them with kindness . ..” (4:19). It is related on the authority
of Ibn ‘Abbas that tafsir, the explanation of the Qur’ an, is of four types. These are
tafsir known to Arabs through their language: tafsir no one is excused for being
ignorant of, tafsir known to scholars, and tafsir known only to Allah such that
whoever claims to have knowledge of it is considered a liar. The Messenger
interpreted the meanings of words such as “prayer,” “zakah,” “fasting,”
“pilgrimage,” and similar words, and what is intended by them which is based on
the words of Allah and His Messenger and also the word “wine” and other such
words. On this basis their meanings are known such that if anyone wanted to
interpret them differently from the Messenger, it would not be accepted from him.
But talking about their derivations and their connotations, that is to be dealt with
in ‘ilm al-bayan, rhetoric, and refinement of judgment adds to knowledge and to
clarifying the wisdom of the words of the Qur’an. However, knowing what is
meant by these words is not dependent on this.

_ There is no need to seek evidence from derivation or illustrations and proofs from
the [speech] of the Arabs concerning the usage of the words Iman, Islam,
UNDERSTANDING IMAN AND ISLAM 287

“hypocrisy,” and “unbelief,” because the Messenger has clarified their definitions
since these words are of great importance. Therefore, in explaining these words,
one should refer to the definitions given by Allah and His Messenger, for they are
both unequivocal and sufficient. Rather, both the specific and general meanings
of these words are known to the scholars and to people. On this basis, if one looks
attentively at the way the Kharijites and the Murji’ites explained the meaning of
Iman, he is bound to see that their explanation contradicts that of the Messenger.
He is also bound to know that obedience to Allah and His Messenger is part of the
perfection of Iman and that he did not consider anyone who commits a sin to be
an unbeliever [as the Khariites say]. Let us suppose that if some people said to the
Prophet (pbuh) that we believe without a doubt, in our hearts, in what you have
brought to us, and we publicly testify that there is no god but Allah and that
Muhammad 15 His Messenger [this is a refutation of the Murji’ites, who do not
regard deeds as part of Iman]. But we do not obey your commands or prohibitions.
That is, we do not pray, fast, make pilgrimage, believe in hadith, keep the trust,
keep a promise, be kind to relatives, and we will not do any of the good things that
you commanded. On the contrary: we drink wine, marry the maharim, /egally
unmarriageable women, such as mothers and sisters, with the outward
manifestation of committing adultery, kill whoever we can of your followers and
your community and take their property, and we even kill you and fight alongside
your enemies. How could any sane person imagine that the Prophet (pbuh) would
say to them: “You are [true] believers and your Iman is complete. I will mediate
for you on Resurrection Day!” And that he [the Prophet] hopes that no one of you
enter Hellfire. But every Muslim knows, by necessity, that he [the Prophet] said
to them: “you are a people who are in the highest state of unbelief of the message
and that I will fight and kill you unless you repent from that.”

Also every Muslim knows that the Prophet (pbuh) did not classify the alcoholic,
adulterer, or thief as qadhif, the slanderer, or as murtaddiin, apostates, who
should be killed; rather the Qur’an and hadith show that such people should be
punished differently than the murtaddiin from Islam. Thus, the punishment, as
mentioned in the Qur’an, of the qadhif, the slanderer, and the adulterer was
flogging; and of the thief, the amputation of the hand; however, if they were
considered apostates, the Prophet (pbuh) would have ordered them killed. Hence,
both views may be seen to be invalid when judged by the religion of the
Messenger (pbuh).
288 CHAPTER TWENTY

The people of innovations were swayed by alien, false notions because they turned
away from the straight path and started building the religion of Islam on premises
they thought were correct, either through semiology of words or rationale of
meaning, and they did not look attentively at the statements of Allah and His
Messenger. Thus, this may have caused misguidance. Therefore, Ahmad [Ibn
Hanbal] spoke in his well-known epistle in refutation of the views of those who
hold to Qur’anic interpretations that seem correct to them without basing such
interpretations on explanatory statements made by the Messenger, his
Companions, and those who followed them. He [Ahmad] also discussed this
matter in his letter to Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Jurjani concerning the refutation of
the views of the Murji’ites. This is the same method that has been followed by all
other authorities on Islam, who, whenever possible, take into consideration those
explanations that were provided by the Messenger himself. Whoever departs from
this approach will fall into heresies consisting of statements about Allah and his
Prophet that, while they may not be outright falsehoods, are nevertheless not
known with certainty to be true. Such a practice has been forbidden by Allah and
His Messenger. As Allah says about Satan: “[Satan] commands you to do only
what is evil and shameful, and that you should speak against Allah what you know
not” (2:169). He also says: “. . . Was not the covenant of the Book taken from
them that they would not say about Allah anything but the truth? . . .” (7:169).
This is the type of subjective interpretation of the Qur’an spoken of by the
tradition that says: “Whoever voices that which is nothing but his own personal
opinion about the Qur’4n, let him take his seat in Hellfire.”

However, it should be clear that any premises that contradict statements of Allah
and His Messenger are a delusion. An example of this delusion is that when the
Murji’ ites abandoned the knowledge of Allah’s and His Messenger’s words, they
started speaking about the words Iman, Islam, and others in ways they invented
themselves. They said, for example that linguistically, Iman means 125010, assent,
and since the Messenger addressed the people in Arabic, then he must have meant
tasdiq by the word Iman. Then the Murji’ites added that tasdiq could be covert [in
the heart] and overt [with the tongue], or just covert. Hence, works are not part of
Iman. They base this view on Allah’s saying: “They [ Josef’s brothers] said: “Oh
our father! We went racing with each other, and left Josef by our belongings and
a wolf devoured him; but you will never believe us even when we speak the truth”
(12:17).
UNDERSTANDING IMAN AND ISLAM 289

In response to this it can be said that the word Iman is repeated more than any
other word in the Qur’an and the hadith. It is the essence of religion through which
people come out of darkness into light, and which differentiates between the happy
and the miserable and between those who are supporters and adversaries. And the
entire religion follows from this Iman, and every Muslim needs to know this. Is it
possible for the Messenger to have disregarded this and based Iman on the false
premises that the Murji’ites claim? Of course, the quotation they have cited as
evidence for the view that belief is tasdiq, assent, is taken from the Qur’an.
Moreover, there are more widely attested sayings passed down on the authority of
the Prophet concerning the meaning of belief than there are similar sayings that
merely contain the word “belief.” For, unlike a simple word out of some chapter
in the Qur’4n, belief is something that needs to be known and passed down by all
members of the community of Islam. Most believers have not memorized a single
Surah (chapter of the Qur’4n], so it is not permissible to base the explanation of
the origin of religion on such presuppositions as these. For this reason there have
been so many disputes among those who have deviated from Allah’s straight path;
they have followed their own various ways, thereby bringing disunity to their
religion and splitting into sects, and they have scattered and fallen into discord
after having received {Allah’s Revelations]. Such an observation is a general,
absolute statement [which does not apply to any one particular group].

Therefore it is said that these two premises are not permissible. To clarify this
issue, the question was raised: Who said the meaning of the words Iman and
tasdiq, assent, are used interchangeably? On this basis, the correct usage does not
mean that words are synonymous. For example, it would be correct if you were to
say: “you are not a Muslim” in place of “you are not a believer.” It would also be
correct if you said: “establish prayers” or “do prayers” in place of “be steadfast in
prayer.” However, the words “establish” and “do” are not synonymous to the
words “be steadfast.” Likewise, the words Iman and tasdiq, assent, are not
synonymous, and this for the following reasons.

First, it is true to say: “he affirmed what the reporter said,” but not “he believed
in him,” or “had belief in him.” Allah says: “But Lot had believed him. . .”
(29:26); and “But none believed in Moses except some children of his people .. .”
(10:83). Allah also says: “[Pharaoh] said you believe in him before I give you
permission? . . .” (26:49); and “They said to [Noah]: ‘Shall we believe in you,
when the meanest [of the people] follow you?’” (26:111). Allah also says: “. ..
290 CHAPTER TWENTY

Say: He listens to what is best for you, he believes in Allah, and has faith in the
believers . . .” (9:61). And as they said to Moses and Aaron: “Shall we believe in
two men like ourselves, and their people are subject to us?” (23:47); and “But if
you believe not in me, then keep away from me and leave me alone” (44:21).

In the question, “Do you not believe us?” the preposition li, for, is added to a
transitive verb, which normally takes no preposition if the action is weakened,
either by its being delayed, by its being expressed in the form of an active
participle or a verbal noun, or a combination of the two. Hence someone might
say, “so-and-so worships, fears and reveres Allah” [in which the verbs are treated
as transitive verbs requiring no preposition]. However, if the active participle is
used, one says, “he is a worshiper of his Lord,” “a reverer of his Lord,” and “a
fearer of his Lord.” If, on the other hand, you were to mention the verb, yet delay
the action, you might strengthen it with the preposition li, as when Allah says: “. ..
And in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their Lord”
(7:154); and “. . . Then fear Me alone” (16:51). In this last verse the verb is used
transitively without a preposition; instead, the unattached direct object pronoun
iyyaya, me, is more complete than the use of the preposition would have been;
whereas in the verse quoted before this, the use of the preposition in the phrase
lirabbihim, for their Lord, is more complete than it would be had the preposition
been omitted and the direct object pronoun in the accusative case, rabbuhim, their
Lord, had been used. This is because the unattached pronoun in the accusative
case, iyyaya, is considered more complete than the attached pronoun in the
genitive case. Likewise, the strengthening of the noun, which appears in the
sentence by the use of the preposition li, is more fitting than leaving it as it is. This
may be seen in the verse that reads: “. . . Explain to me my dream, if it be that you
can interpret dreams” (12:43). One might also say: ‘abartu ru’yahu, / interpreted
his vision. We also have the verse that reads: “And indeed, they have done what
really enraged us” (26:55); whereas one might also say ghiztuhu, / enraged him,
without the use of the preposition li before the object pronoun, rather than ghiztuh
lahu, J enraged for him, which, with the addition of the preposition, is incorrect.
And there are many more examples of the same thing. In the statement, ma anta
bimusaddigin lana, you do not believe us, the preposition has been introduced
because the musaddiq, active participle, is being used; otherwise one would
simply say, “I believed him,” with use of an intervening preposition rather than
saddaqtu lahu, with the preposition before the object pronoun. And had the verb
UNDERSTANDING IMAN AND ISLAM 291

been used rather than the active participle, they would have said, ma saddaqtana,
you have not believed us. This is in contrast to the word Iman (i.e., the verb from
Iman), with which the preposition is always used before its object pronoun [when
this pronoun refers to a rational being]. Hence when one says, “I believed him,”
one does not express it as Amantuhu, without the preposition; rather, one says,
amantu lahu, with the preposition before the pronoun. Likewise one says, aqrartu
lahu, / acknowledged what he said, whose meaning is closer to that of the phrase
amantu lahu than is the concept of belief or tasdiq, assent; there is, however, also
some difference between them [i.e., between iqrar and Iman].

Second, the word Iman is not synonymous with the word tasdiq, assent, in
meaning. To the reporter of an action, whether he witnessed it or not, it is said
either: sadaqta, you told the truth, or kadhabta, you lied. Thus, if one says “the sky
is above us,” the answer could be either, “you told the truth,” or “you told a lie.”
Whereas the word Iman is only used in reference to a report about something that
was not witnessed directly. When one reports something he witnessed, like saying,
“the sun rose or set,” it is said, “he told the truth,” or “he told a lie.” On this basis,
it is said about witnesses and others: saddaqnahum, we affirm their report, and not
*Amanahum, we have beliefin them. Indeed, the Arabic word Iman is derived from
the verb amana, fo be secure, which is used in reporting unseen matters that are
entrusted to the reporter. Because of this, the phrase amanna lahu, we have
believed for him, is not used in the Quran or anywhere else in the same sense as
saddaqnahum, we affirmed their report. And if two partners share the knowledge
of a matter, it is said that one of them affirms what his partner says but not that he
has belief in him, because the matter entrusted to that partner was not unseen.
Allah says: “Lot believed in him . . .” (29:26); and “ . . They said ‘Shall we

believe in two men like ourselves? . . .”” (23:47); and“. . . [Pharaoh] said: ‘Believe
you in him..’” (20:71); and “. . . He believes in Allah, and has belief in the
believers...” (9:61). Thus He affirms their statements of what was absent in their

reports. Hence the word Iman, as indicated by its usage and derivation, implies the
meanings of assent and trust as well as acceptance. That is why they said [Josef’s
brothers to their father]: “... And you will never believe us . . .” (12:17). That is,
you do not accept, trust, or have confidence in our report. Even if they were
truthful, their father would not trust them. That is because [according to him] they
were not trustworthy.
292 —C: CHAPTER TWENTY

Third, unlike the meaning of the word tasdiq, assent, linguistically the meaning
of the word Iman is not opposed to takdhib, denial. [This is a sign of their
difference, proving that Iman and tasdiq are not synonymous]. Linguistically, it is
known that it is said to every reporter that he told the truth or that he lied. Or that
it is said that we affirm or do not accept what he says. But it is not said that we
have belief in his report or that we refute him [as the opposite of the first
statement], as it is not said that you are a believer in him or a disbeliever in him.
But what is known is that the word kuff, unbelief, is the term used in contrast to
the word Iman. For example, it is said that he is a believer or an unbeliever and
kufr, unbelief, is not restricted to takdhib, denial. One’s unbelief would be greater
if he said to a believer: “I know that you are truthful but I will consider you an
enemy and will not follow you.” So unbelief, which contrasts with belief, is not
mere disbelieving, which proves that Iman is not mere assent. Of course, belief is
not merely tasdiq, assent. Rather, the state of kufr, unbelief, is not only disbelief,
but also opposition, enmity and rejection despite the fact that one believes, then
belief must likewise be belief along with agreement, support and willing
cooperation. But assent alone is not sufficient, for Islam is part of the reality
referred to by the word Iman, belief, just as refusal to surrender and cooperate
even though one affirms that this is part of the reality referred to by the word kufr,
unbelief. Hence, every believer must be a Muslim, surrendered to Allah’s
Command, and this is what is meant by the work required by belief.

If it were said that the Messenger (pbuh) interpreted belief to mean that in which

_one believes, one might reply by saying that when the Messenger spoke of that in
which one is to believe, he used the preposition bi, in, and not li, for. As for his
own person, he is someone in whose message we are ’an nu’mina bihi, to believe
(in him) and whom we are an nu’mina lahu, to have trust {in him). For Iman bihi,
belief in him, with respect to the permanence and certainty [of his message] is a
reality we are unable to see but about which he has spoken to us. However, not
every unseen reality in which we believe is something we are required to obey. As
for the trust we are to have in him, it is belief of the sort that requires us to obey
him. It thus needs to be recognized that the Prophet is someone in whom we are
to have both kinds of belief described above. Moreover, obedience to the Prophet
is obedience to Allah, and obedience to Allah is part of the perfection of belief in
him.
UNDERSTANDING IMAN AND ISLAM 293

Fourth, some people say that the Arabic word Iman is derived from the Arabic
word ’amn, security, which is the opposite of the word khawf, fear. The Arabic
verb amana, he has belief, means that he has become secure. And they recited [for
illustration]. . .'.

According to the second premise, if it is supposed that Iman and tasdiq assent, are
synonymous, then their [the Murji’ites’} claim that tasdiq can only be in the heart
or lip profession, may be answered in two ways. The first of these is man‘,
prohibition. Works are considered tasdiq, as it was recorded in the Sahih that the
Prophet (pbuh) said: “The eye commits adultery and its adultery is sight; the ear
commits adultery and its adultery is hearing; the hand commits adultery and its
adultery is assault; the leg commits adultery and its adultery is walking; and the
heart hopes for all these and has passion for them, and the woman’s farj, private
part, shows this to be true or makes its false.”

Likewise philologists and some sects among the pious ancestors and one of the
later Muslims, al-Jawhart, said: “The righteous, upright man, like the utterly
iniquitous, believes constantly, being one who demonstrates the truth of what he
says by what he does.” Al-Hassan al-Basri said: “Belief does not consist in
[outward] adornment, nor in wishing or desiring. Rather, it is something that is
established in the heart and confirmed by one’s actions.” This is a well-known
statement of his that has been passed down in various versions. Likewise it was
related by ‘Abbas al-Dur, who said: “It was related to us by Hajjaj,” on the
authority of Abu “Ubaydah al-Naji, on the authority of al-Hassan [al-Basri], who
said: “The Arabic word siddiq means righteous [one], whose truthfulness is
reflected by his works.” Al-Hassan al-Basri said: “Iman is not achieved by
wishing, but it is that which is firmly fixed in the heart and is proved through
works. Allah would not reward the one who speaks well and acts badly, but will
exalt the one who speaks and does righteousness.” Allah says: “... To him mount
up all words of purity. It is He who exalts each deed of righteousness. . .” (35:10).
It has been passed down by Ibn Battah in both versions. In al-Hassan’s statement

١ The copies of Kitab al-iman consulted ( MI.1, p. 248; MI.2, p. 278; MZ, p. 258; and DKI, p.
251) all included a brief footnote which states that what was to be recited here was left blank.

* Al-Hajjaj, Ibn Minhal Abu Muhammad (?~217 A H), was a compiler of hadith, and al-Bukhari
transmitted some of his hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 258.]
294 CHAPTER TWENTY

quoted above, “wishing” or “desiring” refers to what one says, whereas by
“foutward] adornment” he refers to belief’s becoming an external “decoration,”
such that one displays outwardly without the reality of it existing in his heart.
However, belief is that which remains in the heart and the reality of which is
confirmed by one’s outward behavior. For outward works confirm that there is
belief in one’s heart, and without such actions one gives the lie to his claim to
have such belief, for that which is in the heart requires outward works, and the
absence of the essential quality indicates the absence of the entity in which that
quality inheres.

Muhammad Ibn Nasr al-Marwazi relates that ‘Abd al-Malik Ibn Marwan wrote to
Sad Ibn Jubayr asking him about the following matters, upon which Sa‘id
remarked: that you asked me about Iman. It is assent. That is, it means to believe
in Allah, His Angels, His Books, His Messengers, and in Resurrection Day. You
also asked about assent. It is to act in accordance with what you accept from the
Qur’4n, to ask Allah’s forgiveness, to repent of any sin you committed, and not to
persist in it. You asked about religion. It is worship; and you will not find a man
belonging to one religion who abandons the worship of his religion and does not
follow any other. If he did this, he would be a man of no religion at all. You asked
about worship. It is obedience. If anyone obeys what Allah orders or prohibits, he
has shown his preference for the worship of Allah. And he who obeys Satan in his
religion and works, has worshiped him. Do you not see what Allah says to those
who neglect their religion? He says: “Did I not enjoin on you, Oh you children of
Adam, that you shall not worship Satan . . .” (36:60), and that their worship of
Satan indicates that they have obeyed him in their religion. Asad Ibn Miisa’ said
that al-Walid Ibn Muslim said, on the authority of al-Awza‘l, that Hassan Ibn
‘Atiyyah said: “Iman is in the Book of Allah until it becomes work.” Allah says:
“The believers are only those who, when Allah is mentioned feel a tremor in their
hearts . . .” (8:2), until this led them to work where Allah says: “. . . And those
who offer prayers and spend out of what We have provided for them” (2:3). He
said that I heard al-Awza‘l say that Allah the Exalted says: “If they repent, offer
prayers and give zakah, then they are your brothers in religion . . .” (9:11). This
concludes that Iman in Allah is by the tongue, and assent of it is through works.

3 Asad Ibn Misa, Abu Sa‘id (?-212 A H), was a trustworthy scholar of hadith [Kitab al-Iman MZ,
p. 260.]
UNDERSTANDING [MAN AND ISLAM 295

Mu‘ammar'" relates, on the authority of al-Zuhri, that Islam is based on igrar,
verbal confession, whereas belief is based on works. Belief is both words and
works in concert, neither of which avails without the other. Nor is there anyone
whose words and works do not form a sort of equilibrium. For ‏ابيا لا‎ works weigh
more than his words, he ascends to be with Allah, whereas if tus words oulwengh

who said: “Iman is incomplete without words: and Iman asd words are

incomplete without works, while Iman, words, and works are toeorapicic without
having intentions in agreement with the Sunnah.”

Those whe preceded us did not differentiate between Iman avd work Co chem,

works are part of Iman and Iman is part of works. Indeed, Iman is
that is confirmed through works. Thus, whoever protesses helict «iin fis ianean
and has understanding in his heart but is not trithtud in his works vou Sea hose
on Resurrection Day. This :s something that is known on the auinerty of more

than one of the pious ancestors and their successors, that is, that they consider

one’s works to be a verification of what one says. This view was passe
the authority of the Prophet (pbuh). Similarly, Mu‘adh Ibn Asac ‏عمط‎ sant”
related to us by al-Fudayl Ibn “Ayyad, on the authority of Layih [by Soi Sulawm
on the authority of Mujahid, that Abu Dharr once asked the Prophets neuh) abo
belief. He replied: “Belief is iqrar, verbal confession, tasdiq, assen:, and anial,
work.” Then he recited the verse that says: “It is not al-birr, prery, thar you turn
your faces toward the East or the West [in prayers] but al-birr is {the quality of] the
one who believes in Allah, the Last Day, the Angels, the Book, the Prophets and
gives his wealth, in spite of his love for it, to the kinsfolk, to the orphans, aad ‏نذا‎
‎the poor who beg, and to the wayfarer, and to those who ask, and to set the slaves

4 Mu‘ammar Ibn Rashid, Abu ‘Amr (?-153 A.H.), was a jurist, reciter of the Qur'an. and

trustworthy scholar of hadith. He was born and raised in Basrah, [Kitab a!-[man MZ, ‏.م‎ 260 and
al-Zinkh, vol. 8, p. 190.]

5 Abu ‘Umar al-Talmanki Ibn Ahmad Ibn Muhammad (?-429 A.H.) was a great authority on
hadith and reciter of the Qur’4n and wrote several books on the Sunnah. He iived in Cordoba.
Spain. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 260.]

° Mu‘awiyah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn al-Muhallab al-Azdi (7-214 A.H.) was a scholar of hadith, whom
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said was a trustworthy transmitter of hadith. [Kitab ai-Jman MZ, p. 260.]

7 Mu‘adh Ibn Asad (?-221 A.H.) was a scholar of hadith; several later comptiers of hadith.
including al-Bukhari, used some of his Sunans. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 261.]
206 CHAPTER TWENTY

free and offers the prayers, and gives the zakah, and who fulfill their covenant
when they make it, and who are patient in extreme poverty and ailment and at the
time of panic. Such are the people of the truth and they are the pious ones”
(2:177). |

This tradition concerning Abu Dharr has been passed down in more than one
account. If it is indeed what the Prophet himself said, then there is no basis on
which to dispute it, whereas if they have passed it down in some other form that
bears the same meaning, then this indicates that it is a recognized usage in their
[the Arabs’] language for one to say: “He verified the truth of his words by what

he did.” It has also been said by the Islamic authority al-Harawi: “Belief, all of it
is tasdiq.”

Similarly the second reply holds that if the root of belief is tasdiq, then it is assent
in something specific, just as ritual prayer is a particular kind of supplication, the
pilgrimage involves heading toward a particular destination, and fasting involves
abstaining from something in particular. Moreover, this type of tasdiq has certain
essential attributes that are always associated with it and that have come to be
included within the definition of the term when it is used in an absolute sense. For
the absence of an essential property necessitates the absence of the entity in which
this essential property inheres. Hence the dispute over terminology continues, the
question being: Does belief convey the notion of work by implication, or by
[logical] necessity?

It is worthy of note here that the greatest dispute among Orthodox Muslims is a
dispute over words. After all, those who say that Iman is words are in agreement
with all Orthodox Muslim jurists, such as Hammad Ibn Abi Sulayman, and he is
the first to say, along with those who follow him from the people of the [city] of
Kifah, that they are in agreement with all orthodox scholars over the fact that all
sinners will be under threat and censure. If they say that their belief is as perfect
and complete as that of Gabriel, then they are saying that in accordance with the
view of the Islamic community, someone who has belief yet does not perform his
required duties and commits forbidden acts deserves to be rebuked and punished.
They are also saying that, in accordance with the community’s consensus, there
are among those who have committed grave sins, individuals who will enter
Hellfire. Those Orthodox Muslims who decline to call any major sinner a believer
are in agreement that such a person shall not-abide eternally in Hell. For there is
UNDERSTANDING IMAN AND ISLAM 297

no disagreement among Islamic jurists concerning those who have committed sins
as long as they have confessed both inwardly and outwardly the truth of the
message brought by the Prophet. And according to reports passed down on his
authority by numerous independent sources, such individuals are under threat of
punishment, and among them there are those whom Allah and the Messenger have
stated shall enter Hell. However, none of them remain there eternally, nor are they
considered to be apostates upon whom one may legitimately wage war.
Nevertheless, there are some, such as the Kharijites and the Mu‘tazilites, who hold
the heretical view that they do remain eternally in Hell, as well as the extremist
Murji’ites, who maintain that we cannot be certain that any of them shall enter
Hell and that, instead, we must withhold judgment on all such matters.

A view that has been attributed to the extremist Murji’ites holds unequivocally
that belief cannot be ascribed to anyone with certainty. As for the Kharijites, one
might reply to them by saying that if someone denies that the thief, the adulterer,
the drinker of alcohol, or anyone else may be said to have belief, he does not
thereby consider them to be apostates from Islam; rather, he may punish this one
with flogging and that one by cutting off his hand. However, he would have none
of them put to death except for the adulterer. And even if he did have him put to
death, he would not have him put to death as an apostate, for the apostate is to be
put to death by the sword after being called upon to repent, whereas this person is
stoned without being called upon to repent. This indicates that even if he says that
such individuals have no belief, he nevertheless does not consider them to be
apostates from Islam, despite the manifest nature of their sins. Nor are they like
the hypocrites who used to act outwardly as though they were Muslims while
inwardly they were unbelievers. And as for hypocrites such as these, he would
only have them punished for outwardly visible sins.

Based on the discussion of Iman, people disagree on whether the language
contains legal terms that the Prophet (pbuh) shifted away from their original
referents in the language, or whether these terms remain the same in the law as
they were in the language, the Prophet (pbuh) not having added to their meanings.
Do the words “prayer,” “zakah,” “fasting,” and “pilgrimage” retain the same
meaning in legislation as in they do in the language, with only one addition,
namely, legislative rules? Their intention is that Iman is mere tasdiq that takes
place in the heart and by the tongue. The third group stated that the Legislator [the
Prophet] changed these terms, as normal speakers do. Thus, they are linguistically
298 CHAPTER TWENTY

considered a figurative form of speech whereas, according to the norms of the
Legislator, they are real. It is evident that the Legislator neither transferred nor
changed these words but used them in a conditioned, not an absolute sense, as he
uses their counterparts. Allah says: “. . . Pilgrimage to the House is a duty that
people owe to Allah . . .” (3:97). Here He makes mention of a specific pilgrimage,
namely, pilgrimage to the Ka‘bah in Makkah. Likewise He also says: “. . . [So it
is not a sin] for those who perform pilgrimage or minor pilgrimage [‘umrah] . . .”
(2:158). The word “pilgrimage” does not include just any destination; rather, it
refers to a particular destination that is denoted by the word itself without any
change in the language. And if the poet should say:

And I witness many disbandments on the part of the [Bani] ‘Awf,
who seek out [literally, make pilgrimage to] the saffron-dyed turban of al-Zibirgan.

He would be speaking in accordance with linguistic usage, having qualified his
expression with “making pilgrimage to the saffron-dyed turban of Zibirqan.” And
of course, this particular pilgrimage is indicated by the use of the possessive
construction [which would, translated literally, read, “the pilgrimage of the
saffron-dyed turban . . .”]; likewise, the particular pilgrimage that Allah has
commanded is also indicated with a possessive construction or by the use of the
definite article. Hence if someone says, “the pilgrimage is a duty incumbent upon
you,” the definite article makes it clear that what is referred to here is the
pilgrimage to the House of Allah (that is, the Ka“bah in Makkah); likewise, zakah
is a name for something through which the soul is purified. For zakah of the soul
is an increase in its goodness and its purification from evil; moreover, doing good
for others is one of the greatest ways in which the soul may grow more righteous
and pure. Allah says: “Take alms from their wealth in order to purify them and
sanctify them with it...” (9:103). Abandoning evil deeds is another way in which
one’s soul may be purified. Allah says: “. . . And had it not been for the grace of
Allah and His mercy on you, not one of you would ever have been pure [from sins]
...” (24:21). The root of the soul’s purity is to be found in belief in the one and
only Allah, and in being sincere toward Allah in one’s religion; hence Allah says:
« . . And woe to the polytheists. Those who do not give zakah . . .” (41:6-7),° a

5 The reference to these verses in MI.1 (p. 253) and MI.2 (p. 284) gives the wrong word, Sirah
instead of Sirah, for Siirat al-Sajdah The Prostration, XXXII. MZ (p. 264) gives the correct
reference, as above, but quotes verses 7 and 8, instead of 6 and 7. In DKI (p. 256) the correct
reference is given for both the Surah and the verses.
UNDERSTANDING IMAN AND ISLAM 299

verse in which commentators have interpreted the word zakah to be the equivalent
of belief in the one and only Allah.

The Prophet (pbuh) stated the amount due in zakah and called it “the legally
required zakah.” So whenever one uses “the” with the word zakah it means the
amount due, and the time of it is decided. However, it is known that the noun
zakah means purity of the same kind that increases the good in the soul and
removes its wickedness. Likewise, the word tayammum, performing ablution
without water,’ is used according to its well-known linguistic meaning in the verse
where Allah says: “. . . Then take for yourselves clean sand or earth and rub
therewith your faces and hands. . .” (5:6). Thus the word tayammum is used in its
normal conventional linguistic manner, as Allah ordered people to touch the sand
or earth and then to rub them off the face and hands. Thus the word tayammum,
as used by the jurists, implies the act of rubbing. However, the Prophet (pbuh)
differentiated between the initial rubbing of the sand or soil and the wiping of the
face and hands that comes afterward. When Iman was ordered, its meaning was
used in a conditioned sense to the belief in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His
Messengers. Likewise, the word Islam is conditioned to submission to Allah, the
Cherisher and Sustainer of the words. Such is also the case with the word kufr,
unbelief, when used in a conditioned sense. As for the word for “hypocrisy,” it has
been said that the Arabs had not been accustomed to using this word. However,
it is taken from their speech; for the verb nafaqa resembles the verb kharaja,
meaning to emerge, go out, or depart. From it we have expressions such as nafaqat
al-dabbah, the beast of burden died, nafiqa’ al-yarbii‘, the jerboa’s burrow, and
nafaq fil-ard, a tunnel in the earth. Allah says: “. . . Then if you were able to seek
a tunnel in the ground... .” (6:35). As for the hypocrite, he is the one who has
departed from the belief inwardly after having entered it outwardly. Hence, the
word for “hypocrisy” is conditioned as being hypocrisy with respect to belief, that
is, a hidden departure from belief. There are those who refer to someone who has
departed from obedience to the king as a hypocrite toward the king; however, the
hypocrisy referred to in the Qur’an is hypocrisy toward the Messenger.

° Tayammum is a form of ablution practiced when water is not available. A Muslim strikes his
hands on clean earth, passes the palm of each on the back of the other, blows off the dust from
them, and then passes them, in a rubbing manner, on the face. After doing this, a person is
permitted to pray
300 CHAPTER TWENTY

So when Allah and His Messenger addressed the people with these words, it was
done in a specified, conditioned manner and not in an absolute manner, which
could bear different interpretations. The Messenger clearly stated these
restrictions, so that it could neither be said that the words had been taken directly
from their linguistic usage nor that legislative rules were added without altering
the words, but that the words were used specifically in the way the Legislator
intended them to be. They were not used absolutely [i.e., with no restrictions]. For
example, the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Establish prayer regularly.” He said so only
after he had made clear the kind of prayer that was ordered. So the definition was
applied to the prayer they knew. That is, the word “prayer” was not revealed to
them before they knew what was meant by this word. Therefore, if anyone who
says concerning the word “prayer” that it is used in a general sense based on
linguistic usage, or that it has an inclusive meaning since it is used sometimes in
a general sense and sometimes in a legal sense based on Islamic law, then such
claims are weak. For this word is only used either in a command or a report. An
example of a report would be Allah’s saying: “Have you [Oh, Muhammad] seen
him who prevents a slave when he prays?” (96:9-10), as well as the chapter of the
Qur’an entitled Siirat Iqra’, Recite, which is one of the first chapters of the Qur’an
to be revealed. Some of the unbelievers of the Prophet’s (pbuh) day, either Abu
Jahl or some other than him, forbade him from praying, saying: “If I see him
praying, cut off his head.” However, when he found him prostrated [before Allah],
he saw something so terrifying that he turned on his heels and fled. For Allah says:
“Have you [Oh, Muhammad] seen him who prevents a slave when he prays?”
(96:9-10); here what is intended is a particular sort of prayer, not one that is
detailed and comprehensive.

Also on the morning following al-Mi‘raj, Ascension Night, during which the five
daily prayers were ordered, the Prophet (pbuh) established the prayers at their
prescribed times to the people. The Prophet (pbuh) was led by Gabriel in prayer,
and he in turn led the Muslims. So after that, when it was said: “establish the
prayer,” they knew that this was the prayer intended. It has been said that prior to
this he had two prayers, one at the beginning of the day and the other at the end.
For he did not address any of these words because their meanings are known to
them, for such words would not be used in a comprehensive, restrictive sense so
as to include every sort of pilgrimage, supplication, or fasting. This would only
UNDERSTANDING IMAN AND ISLAM 301

apply if the words were used in an absolute, unrestricted sense, which is not the
case.

So also with the words Iman and Islam, the meanings were clearer to the Muslims
than that of any other matter. And when Gabriel asked the Prophet (pbuh) about
Iman and Islam, while the people were listening, the Prophet (pbuh) remarked:
“This is Gabriel. He has come to you in order to teach you in matters of your
religion.” That is, Gabriel came to show them the real and complete meanings of
these words, so they would not just be satisfied with the lowliest realities to which
these words referred. This we read in a sound hadith. The Prophet (pbuh) said:
“The poor is not that feeble person who is satisfied with one or two mouthfuls or
with one or two dates, but rather the one who does not possess enough to prevent
him from needing the help of others; people do not remember him or give him
alms; and he does not beg importunately.” Indeed, people used to know the poor
person as someone who is needy. To them the poor was one who showed his need
by begging. But the Prophet (pbuh) pointed out that if someone shows his need by
begging and is given things by people, then his poverty diminishes [by their giving
to him], and begging for him thus becomes a sort of occupation. Hence, if he is a
poor person who deserves to be given zakah if his needs are not met from any
other source, and if he finds someone who gives him all he needs, then he is no
longer labeled as poor. But the poor is the needy person who does not beg, and is
not recognized nor given alms. This is the one who should be given priority to
receive alms because he is truly destitute. Such a person is different from the one
whose poverty stops by his receiving from those he begged from. The same applies
to the Prophet’s (pbuh) saying: “Islam is built on five [pillars].” Here he means
that all these five are duties of any Muslim, for it is not enough for one to utter the
two testimonies of belief, that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad 15 His
Messenger. Also one should not be satisfied with general Iman but only with a
detailed Iman. For this reason Islam was described in this manner.

Muslims are in full agreement about the fact that whoever does not utter the two
testimonies of belief is an unbeliever. However, they differ over whether to
consider someone who abandons any of the four deeds [1.e., prayer, zakah, fasting,
and pilgrimage] as an unbeliever. If we say that Orthodox Muslims are in
agreement that whoever commits a sin is not considered an unbeliever, we are
referring to sins such as drinking alcohol or committing adultery. But there is a
famous dispute over whether to consider those who abandon the pillars of Islam
302 CHAPTER TWENTY

as unbelievers. It was reported that Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] said concerning this
dispute that he considered anyone who abandons one of the pillars to be an
unbeliever. This position is adopted by Abu Bakr and a group of the followers of
Malik, such as Ibn Habib.’° Another version is that only the one who abandons
prayer and zakah is considered an unbeliever. A third version is that the one who
abandons prayer and who refuses to give zakah and fights the ruler for it is
considered an unbeliever. The fourth is that only the one who abandons prayer is
considered an unbeliever. The fifth position is that one will not be considered a
believer even if he abandons any of these requirements. These are well-known
statements of the pious ancestors. Al-Hakam Ibn ‘Utaybah said: “Whoever
deliberately neglects prayer, giving zakah, making the pilgrimage [to Makkah], or
fasting during Ramadan has become an unbeliever.” And according to Sa‘id Ibn
Jubayr: “Whoever deliberately neglects to pray, give zakah, or fast during
Ramadan has committed unbelief against Allah.” As for al-Dahhak, he says that
one is only exempted from prayer by giving zakah, whereas ‘Abd Allah Ibn
Mas‘iid has said: “Jf anyone establishes prayer but does not give zakah, it is as if
he had not prayed.” All these views were passed down by Asad Ibn Musa.

‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr has said: “Whoever drinks wine in the evening shall greet
the following morning as a polytheist, and whoever drinks in the morning shall
enter upon the evening as a polytheist.” Ibrahim al-Nakh‘I was once asked: “How
can this be?” He replied: “This is because [on account of drinking wine], he
abandons prayer.” Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Akhnas has said in his book: “Whoever
drinks an intoxicating beverage is liable to neglect prayer, and whoever neglects
prayer has departed from belief.” And among the things that clarify this is that
when Gabriel asked the Prophet (pbuh) about Islam, Iman, and Ihsan, it was at the
end [of the period of the establishment of Islam], after the legislation of the
pilgrimage; and the pilgrimage was not established until the year 9 or 10 A.H.

It is generally agreed that the pilgrimage was not established before the year 6
A.H. Moreover, it is known that the Messenger (pbuh) did not command people
to have belief or clearly explicate its meaning to them at that time. Rather, they
already knew the origin of its meaning. A full discussion of these matters may be
found elsewhere.

'° Ton Habib, ‘Abd al-Malik (?-238 A.H.), was a jurist in Spain. He wrote several books, including
Tafsir al-Muwatta’. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 266.]
UNDERSTANDING IMAN AND ISLAM 303

What is meant here is that those whom the Messenger refuses to describe as
believers or Muslims must have abandoned some of the obligations of Iman or of
islam, even if they continue to practice other obligations. And so, on this basis, the
pious ancestors and the Companions of the Prophet (pbuh) used to say: “A person
may have both Iman and hypocrisy.”

Abu Dawud al-Sijistani said: “It was related to us by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and
Waki“ on the authority of al-A‘mash, on the authority of 5582010, on the authority
of Abu al-Miqdam, on the authority of Abu Yahya, who said: “Hudhayfah was
asked who the hypocrite is, to which he replied: ‘He is the one who knows Islam
but does not practice it.”” Abu Dawid also said that it was related to us by
“Uthman Ibn Abi Shaybah and Jarir, on the authority of al-A‘mash, on the
authority of ‘Amr Ibn Murrah," on the authority of Abu al-Bukhturi, on the
authority of Hudhayfah, who said that there are four types of hearts: the qalb
aghlaf, uncircumcised heart, which is the heart of the unbeliever; the heart of
eloquent speech, which is the heart of the hypocrite; the desolate heart, in which
there is a shining light, which is the heart of the believer; and a heart in which
there is both belief and hypocrisy. The belief therein is like a tree whose roots tap
into fresh water, while the hypocrisy is like a festering, bleeding sore; and
whichever of the two overcomes the person is the victor. This statement has been
related from the Prophet in the Musnad.

This statement by Hudhayfah is supported by Allah’s saying that: “... They were
that day, nearer to disbelief than belief...” (3:167). For prior to this time there
was hypocrisy in their hearts that had not yet gotten the better of them. Then on
the day of the Battle of Uhud, their hypocrisy won out and they grew closer to
being hypocrites than to being believers. ‘Abd Allah Ibn al-Mubarak related, on
the authority of “Awf Ibn Abi Jamilah, on the authority of “Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr
Ibn Hind, on the authority of Alt Ibn Abi Talib, who said: “Iman resembles a small
bright white spot in the heart [ whiteness and brightness refer to purity of the soul],
so that whenever one’s Iman increases, his heart's brightness increases, and when
his Iman is complete, his heart will be compietely white [i.e., wholly pure]. On the
other hand, hypocrisy resembles a black spot in the heart [blackness refers to
impurity of the soul]. So as one’s hypocrisy increases, his heart increases in
blackness, and whenever his hypocrisy reaches its highest level, his heart becomes

"© Amr Ibn Murrah )2-[ 16 A.H.} was a trustworthy scholar of hadith. [Kizab ai-Iman MZ, p. 208.)
304 CHAPTER TWENTY:

completely black. So according to Allah, if you looked into the heart of a believer,
you would find it bright [with whiteness]; and if you looked into the hearts of
hypocrites and unbelievers, you would find them black.” According to Ibn
Mas‘ud: “Wealth causes hypocrisy to spring up in the heart just as water causes
green herbs to sprout.” This statement was related by Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] and
others. Such statements are found frequently in the writings of the pious ancestors,
which made it clear that both belief and hypocrisy may be found in the same
person’s heart; this view finds support in both the Book and the Sunnah. For the
Prophet (pbuh) made mention of the branches of belief, and also of the branches
of hypocrisy, saying: “This branch [of hypocrisy] may be found along with many
branches of belief.” Therefore he once said: “Whoever has belief in his heart the
weight of a speck of dust shall be brought out of Hellfire.” Hence, whoever has
even the least amount of belief shall not abide forever in Hellfire, even if he also
has a great deal of hypocrisy in his heart. He will be tormented in Hellfire in
proportion to the amount of hypocrisy in his heart, then be brought out of Hell.
Hence we have the statement made to the desert Arabs. Allah says: “The desert
Arabs say: ‘We believe.’ Say: ‘You have no faith; but you [only] say, ‘We have
submitted our wills to Allah, for faith has not yet entered your hearts... .”” (49:14).
He denies that they have Iman in their hearts. However, this does not prevent them
from having a degree of Iman. Likewise, He acknowledges the existence of belief
in the heart of the thief, the adulterer, the one who does not desire for his brother
[in Islam] what he desires for himself, and the one whose neighbor is not safe from
his injurious conduct, as was mentioned earlier. Indeed, the Qur’an and hadith are
full of such examples.

Therefore, while some among the pious ancestors hold that the statement, “we
have become Muslims,” means, “we have submitted out of fear of the sword,” and
others hold that they truly became Muslims, we hold that both views are correct.
For this statement only means that they have entered into Islam, while outward
Islam is something into which hypocrites also enter. Hence, those who enter into
Islam include those in whose hearts there is both belief and hypocrisy. It is known
that he whose heart contains as little as an atom’s weight of Iman comes out of
Hell, unlike the sheer hypocrite, whose heart is wholly black and who will be in
the lowest stratum of Hell. Because of this, the Companions were afraid of
becoming hypocrites but not afraid of disbelieving Allah and His Messenger. This
is because a believer is certain that he does not disbelieve Allah and His
UNDERSTANDING iIMAN AND ISLAM 305

Messenger and, therefore, he can say, “I am a true believer.” Such a man knows
this is based on his decisive belief. But Iman is not merely belief or assent. For
there should be overt works that reflect this assent [as was discussed earlier]. For
example, the love of Allah and His Messenger is part of Iman, so are loving what
Allah commands and hating what He has forbidden. Because of this, the Prophet
(pbuh) says in several places: “Whoever is happy for doing a good deed and
unhappy for doing a bad deed is a believer.” For he loves good deeds and rejoices
in them and hates the bad deeds and is offended by them. This love and hatred are
among the characteristics of Iman.

It is known that when the adulterer commits adultery, he does so because he likes
committing that deed. But if he had within himself the fear of Allah, which
vanquishes lust and is conquered by the love of Allah, then he would not have
committed adultery. Allah says about Yusuf (peace be upon him): “. . . [Did we
order] that we might turn away from him [all] evil and shameful deeds for he was
one of our servants, sincere and purified?” (12:24). So whoever is truly sincere to
Allah would not commit adultery, but he does so because he lacks the devotion to
Allah, and this is the Iman that is taken away from him at the time he commits
adultery. But his acceptance [of the existence of Allah, His Angels, His Books,
and His Messengers] is not taken away from him; and it is said that he is a Muslim
but not a believer. The Muslim who deserves Allah’s reward must accept certain
truths. Otherwise, he would be considered a hypocrite. However, the mere fact that
someone accepts the teachings of Islam does not mean that he has in his heart the
required conditions of belief, such as the true love of Allah and His Messenger, the
fear of Allah, sincerity to Him in all one’s deeds, and putting trust in Him. But it
may happen that even though he accepts the Messenger’s message, his deeds are
not in accordance with his beliefs. To him, his family and his wealth are dearer to
him than Allah, His Messenger, and striving in Allah’s Cause. This concern was
addressed to the believers in Strat al-Tawbah [Bara’ah], in which Allah says:
“Say: If it be that your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your mates and your
kindred and the wealth that you have gained; the commerce in which you fear a
decline: or the dwellings in which you delight are dearer to you than Allah, or his
Messenger or striving in His Cause, then wait until Allah brings about his
decision, and Allah guides not the sinners” (9:24). It is a known fact that many
Muslims possess these qualities.
306 CHAPTER TWENTY

It is affirmed that a man is not considered a believer until Allah and His
Messenger are dearer to him than all of mankind. Also, a believer is he who does
not doubt and strives [in the Cause of Allah] with his soul and property. Hence,
Iman cannot be attributed to one who does not have in his heart the requirements
of Iman, even if he has the assent. This is because he must have some love and
fear of Allah besides assent. Otherwise, it would not be Iman at all. Rather, it is
like the belief of Pharaoh, the Jews, and Iblis. This is what the pious ancestors
criticized the Jahmites for. Al-Humaydi once said that he had heard Waki‘ say:
“Orthodox Muslims say that Iman is both words and works, while the Murji’ites
say that Iman is a saying, and the Jahmites say that Iman is knowledge.” In another
version of this statement he adds: “this is unbelief.” Muhammad Ibn ‘Umar al-
Kullabi reports having heard Waki‘ say: “The Jahmites are more odious than those
of the Qadarite’s school.” Waki‘ also said: “The Murji’ites are those who say that
verbal confession is separable from outward works; but whoever says such a thing
shall perish. And whoever says, as Jahm did, that one’s intention may be separated
from outward work, is an unbeliever.” This view was shared by Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal.

For this reason Orthodox Muslims have held the view that belief is both sayings
and works; this view has also been part of Orthodox Muslim rites, while more than
one person has reported their unanimous agreement on it. We have already
mentioned, on the authority of al-Shafi‘i (may Allah be pleased with him), the
unanimous agreement on this view reported in his book a/l-Umm, where he states
that: “The Companions of the Prophet, those who came after them, and our own
contemporaries as well, have held unanimously that belief is a saying, a work, and
an intention, and none of these three may be separated from any of the others.”
Moreover, Ibn Abi Hatim mentions in his Mandaqib that he once heard Harmalah””
say: “Hafs al-Fard and Mislaq al-Abadi once met together with 21-5581161 in al-
Jarawi’s house, where they debated with him on the subject of belief. Mislaq
argued that belief may increase or decrease, while Hafs al-Fard argued that belief
is simply a saying. Hafs al-Fard won out over Mislaq in the debate, while Mislaq
began to weaken, whereupon al-Shafi‘i heatedly entered the argument and settled
the issue by saying that belief is both saying and work, and that it may either
increase or diminish, thereby silencing Hafs al-Fard.

!2 Harmalah Ibn Yahya Ibn ‘Imran (?-243 A.H.) was a jurist and scholar of hadith who transmitted
hadith from al-Shafi‘l. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 271.]
UNDERSTANDING IMAN AND ISLAM 307

Abu ‘Amr al-Talamanki has related, based on his well-known chain of
transmission, on the authority of Misa Ibn Haran al-Hammal,” who said: “Ishaq
Ibn Rahwiyah dictated to us that belief is a saying and a work, and that it may
increase or diminish. There is no doubt that this is as we have described, but rather
we came to understand this through sound accounts and accurate, generally
recognized traditions relating to the deeds and sayings of Muhammad and his
Companions, as well as accounts, each of which was passed down on the authority
of just one of the Companions of the Prophet (pbuh) or their Successors. Scholars
who came after the Successors of the Companions were likewise in agreement on
this single view. The same was true during the era of al-Awza‘l in Syria, Sufyan
al-Thawni in Iraq, Malik Ibn Anas in the Hijaz, and Mu‘ammar in Yemen, all of
whom held the view we have explicated here, according to which belief is a saying
and a work, which may either increase or diminish.

Ishaq said: “Whoever deliberately neglects prayer until its time is past, from noon
to sunset and from sunset to midnight, has committed unbelief against the Great
Allah. He shall be called upon to repent for three days, and if he refuses and says
that neglecting prayer is not unbelief, he shall be beheaded. However, if he does
pray and makes such a statement, then this raises a theological and legal question
requiring the formulation of an independent judgement [based on the Qur’an, the
Sunnah, the Prophetic traditions and the consensus of the Islamic community].”
Ishaq also said: “And scholars who came after them from this era of ours [and
onward] adopted the view that we have described. That is, all of them did so
except those who differed with the [Islamic] community and followed various and
sundry whims. As for these latter, they are people whose opinions carry no weight
in Allah’s scheme of things because of their having departed from the consensus
of the community.”

Abu ‘Ubayd al-Qasim Ibn Sallam al-Imam, who wrote a book on the subject of
belief, says: “These are the names" of those who say that belief is saying and
work, something which may increase or diminish.”

Among the scholars of Makkah we have: ‘Ubayd Ibn ‘Umayr al-Laythi, ‘Ata’ Ibn
Abi Rabbah, Mujahid Ibn Jabr, Ibn Abt Mulaykah, ‘Amr Ibn Dinar, Ibn Abi

١3 Masa Tbn Haran al-Hammil (?-294 A.H.) was a scholar of hadith and a follower of Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 271.]
'* The majority of the names listed below have been previously identified.
308 CHAPTER TWENTY

Nujayh, ‘Ubayd Allah Ibn ‘Amr, ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn ‘Uthman, ‘Abd al-
Malik Ibn Jurayj, Nafi‘ Ibn Jubayr, Da‘tid Ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman al-‘Attar, and
“Abd Allah Ibn Raja’. Among the scholars of Madinah we have: Muhammad Ibn
Shihab al-Zuhri, Rabi‘ah Ibn Abi ‘Abd al-Rahman, Abu Hazim al-A ‘raj, Sa‘d Ibn
Ibrahim Ibn ‘Abd al-Rahmaan Ibn ‘Awf, Yahya Ibn Sa‘id al-Ansari, Hisham Ibn
“Urwah Ibn al-Zubayr, ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr al-‘Umr, Malik Ibn Anas,
Muhammad Ibn Abi Dhi’b, Sulayman Ibn Bilal, ‘Abd al-Aziz Ibn ‘Abd Allah
(that is, al-Majishun), and ‘Abd al-‘Aziz Ibn Abi Hazim. Among those of Yemen
we have: Tawiis al-Yamani, Wahb Ibn Munabbih, Mu‘ammar Ibn Rashid, and
‘Abd al-Razzagq Ibn Humam. And from Egypt and Syria we have: Makhul, al-
Awza‘l, Sa‘id Ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, al-Walid Ibn Muslim, Yinis Ibn Yazid al-
Ayyiali, Yazid Ibn Abi Habib, Yazid Ibn Shurayh, Sa‘id Ibn Abi Ayyub, al-Layth
Ibn Sa‘d, ‘Abd Allah Ibn Abi Ja‘far, Mu‘awiyah Ibn Abi Salih, Haywah Ibn
Shurayh, and ‘Abd Allah Ibn Wahb.

And among those who lived in the capitals and other cities of the [Arabian]
peninsula we have: Maymin Ibn Muhran, Yahya Ibn ‘Abd al-Karim, Ma‘qil Ibn
“Ubayd Allah, ‘Ubayd Allah Ibn ‘Amr al-Ruqqi, ‘Abd al-Malik Ibn Malik, al-
Mu‘afa Ibn ‘Imran, Muhammad Ibn Salamah al-Harrani, Abu Ishaq al-Fazari,
Mukhlid Ibn al-Husayn, ‘Ali Ibn Bakkar, Yusuf Ibn Asbat, ‘Ata’ Ibn Muslim,
Muhammad Ibn Kathir, and al-Haytham Ibn Jamil. As for the scholars of Kufah,
they include: ‘Ilqamah, al-Aswad Ibn Yazid, Abu Wa’il, Sa‘id Ibn Jubayr, al-
Rabi‘ Ibn Khaytham, ‘Amir al-Sha‘bi, Ibrahim al-Nakh‘, al-Hakam Ibn ‘Utaybah,
Talhah Ibn Masrif, Mansar Ibn al-Mu‘tamar, Salamah Ibn Kuhayl, Mughirah al-
Dabbi, ‘Ata’ Ibn al-Sa’ib, Isma‘1l Ibn Abi Khalid, Abu Hayyan, Yahya Ibn Sa‘“id,
Sulayman Ibn Muhran al-A‘mash, Yazid Ibn Abi Ziyad, Sufyan Ibn 5210 ‏حلت‎
‎Thawn, Sufyan Ibn ‘Uyyaynah, al-Fudayl Ibn ‘Ayyad, Abu al-Miqdam, Thabit Ibn
al-‘Ajlan, Ibn Shabarmah, Ibn Abi Layla, Zuhayr, Sharik Ibn ‘Abd Allah, al-
Hassan Ibn Salih, Hafs Ibn Ghayyath, Abu Bakr Ibn ‘Ayyash, Abu al-Ahwas,
Waki‘ Ibn al-Jarrah, ‘Abd Allah Ibn Numayr, Abu Usamah, ‘Abd Allah Ibn Idris,
Zayd Ibn al-Hubab, al-Husayn Ibn ‘Ali al-Ja‘fi, Muhammad Ibn Bishr al-‘Abdi,
Yahya Ibn Adam, Muhammad, Ya‘la, and ‘Amr Bani ‘Ubayd. Among the
scholars of Basrah we have: al-Hassan Ibn Abi al-Hassan, Muhammad Ibn Sirin,
Qatadah Ibn Da‘amah, Bakr Ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Muzni, Ayyib al-Sikhtiyani, Yiinis
Ibn ‘Ubayd, ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Awn, Sulayman al-Taymi, Hisham Ibn Hassan al-
Dustuwa’1, Shu‘bah Ibn al-Hajjaj, Hammad Ibn Salamah, Hammad [bn Zayd, Abu
UNDERSTANDING IMAN AND ISLAM 309

al-Ashhab, Yazid Ibn Ibrahim, Abu ‘Uwanah, Wahib Ibn Khalid, ‘Abd al-Warith
Ibn Sa‘id, Mu‘tamar Ibn Sulayman al-Taym1, Yahya Ibn Sa‘id al-Qattan, ‘Abd al-
Rahman Ibn Mahdr, Bishr Ibn al-Mufaddal, Yazid Ibn Zuray‘, al-Mu’ammal Ibn
Isma‘il, Khalid Yon al-Harith, Mu‘adh Ibn Mu‘adh, and Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman al-
Mugarrt. And among the scholars of Wasit we have: Hushaym Ibn Bashir, Khalid
Ibn ‘Abd Allah, ‘Ali Ibn ‘Asim, Yazid Ibn Haran, Salih Ibn ‘Umar, and ‘Asim Ibn
“Ali. As for those from the East, we have: al-Dahhak Ibn Muzahim, Abu Jamrah,
Nasr Ibn ‘Imran, ‘Abd Allah Ibn al-Mubarak, al-Nadr Ibn Shumayl, and Jarir Ibn
“Abd al-Hamid al-Dabbt.

According to Abu “Ubayd, all of the above say that belief is a saying and a work,
and something that may either diminish or increase. Moreover, this is the view
held by Orthodox Muslims and that which we ourselves adhere to.

This view has been attributed more to Kufan scholars than it has been to those in
other groups, since in the beginning there were more Kufans who held the
Murji’ite’s views. The first to espouse such a view was Hammad Ibn Abi
Sulayman. This view was repudiated by Islamic scholars of Ktfah along with the
Jahmite’s views, and their denial of the divine attributes when such teachings
began to spread out from Khurasan. Moreover, criticism of the Jahmite’s views by
scholars in Khurasan at that time was seen to a degree not encountered among
those in whose countries this particular heresy had not appeared or even been
heard of. As it is stated in one of the Prophetic traditions: “Within every heresy
that plots against Islam and its adherents, Allah has those who speak in favor of
Islam, so be certain to benefit from gatherings [of such persons], for mercy shall
descend upon those who take part in them.”

And if one of the views held by the pious ancestors was that both belief and
hypocrisy may reside in a single individual, then it may likewise be said that in the
same person one might find both belief and unbelief, though not the kind of
unbelief that excludes one from the religious community. As Ibn ‘Abbas and his
disciples have said concerning Allah’s saying: “... And whosoever does not judge
by what Allah has revealed, such are the unbelievers” (5:44). This refers to a kind
of unbelief that does not exclude one from the [Islamic] community. This
interpretation was shared by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and other leading Orthodox
Muslim scholars.
310 CHAPTER TWENTY

In his book al-Salah, Prayer, Muhammad Tbn Nasr al-Marwazi said that people
have differed over how to interpret Gabriel’s saying. A group of our followers said
that the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Iman is to have belief in Allah.” This hadith has a
precise and deep meaning that the Murji’ites misunderstood. Their faulty
explanation and interpretation of it was based on their lack of understanding of the
Arabic language and the depth of the meaning of the words of the Prophet (pbuh),
who was given a gift of knowing the deep sense of speech and its essence.
However, the Prophet’s (pbuh) saying, “Iman is to have belief in Allah,” means
that one must believe that there is only one Allah and believe in Him overtly and
covertly, submit to Him and to His orders, and be determined to do what He
commands. One must also avoid disdain, arrogance, and obstinacy; and if a person
abides by what is. mentioned above, he will win Allah’s love and avoid his
indignation. As for the phrase “and His Angels,” this means that one ought to have
Iman in those Angels that Allah named in His Book, as well as having belief that
Allah has other Angels whose names and numbers are only known to Him Who
created them. The phrase, “and His Books,” means that one ought to have belief
in the Books Allah mentions in His Book, which include the Old and New
Testaments of the Bible, the Gospel, and especially the Book of Psalms; and that
one must believe that Allah has other Books that He reveals to his Prophets, whose
names and numbers are only known to the One who reveals them [i.e., to Allah].
One must have belief in the Furgan [one of the names of the Qur’an], and one’s
Iman in it should differ from that of the other Books. For Iman in the other Books
is limited to an acknowledgment of them with the heart and the tongue. But having
Iman in the Furgan should not only be mere affirmation; in addition, it should
include following the instructions mentioned therein.

His saying, “and His Messengers,” means that one should have Iman in the
Messengers whom He named in His Book and must have belief that Allah has
other Prophets and Messengers whose names are unknown except to Him Who
sent them. One must also have belief in Muhammad (pbuh), which is different
from belief in all other Messengers. Iman is to testify that Allah has sent all of
them. But one’s belief in Muhammad must involve, in addition to this test, an
assent and perseverance in obeying his message. This is done by performing all the
obligations, abandoning all that is prohibited, doing what is lawful, pausing before
taking any dubious action, and hastening to do good deeds. The Prophet’s (pbuh)
saying, “Resurrection Day,” means that one should have Iman in resurrection after
UNDERSTANDING IMAN AND ISLAM 311

death, in the accounting [by weighing one’s deeds on the scales of reward and
punishment], in Paradise and Hell, and in all of Allah’s descriptions of
Resurrection Day. Finally, the Prophet’s (pbuh) saying, “One should have Iman
in the predestination of both good and evil,’ means that one should trust that
anything that happens to him could not have missed him, and anything that failed
to happen to him could not have happened to him. Also one should not say: “If
such and such had happened, such and such would have been the result.” He
[al-Marwazi] closes by saying: “This is the meaning of having Iman in Allah, in
His Angels, in His Books, in His Messengers, and in Resurrection Day.”
Chapter Twenty-One

The Difference Between the Five Pillars
of Islam and Other Duties

What is in question here is whether the overt deeds that Allah has ordered include
deeds in addition to the five pillars of Islam. Some said that these were the greatest
and most prominent of the religious ordinances of Islam. They added that one’s
submission to Allah is completed by performing these religious duties; whereas
if he abandons them, he feels that the bonds of his submission are being undone.

It has been verified that the Prophet (pbuh) regarded religion as a person’s
absolute submission to His Lord, which in turn became the duty of every person.
Hence, every able individual must worship Allah purely by practicing the five
pillars of Islam. Whatever is commanded apart from these five pillars is based on
personal interests and is not considered a general duty. However, a sufficient
number of people have been commanded to undertake actions such as striving for
the Cause of Allah, commanding good deeds, and forbidding evil deeds, as well
as other matters like ruling, leadership, and giving one’s legal opinion ona certain
matter, and so on. Or an action may be required of someone who is held
responsible for fulfilling certain human rights. This obligation comes to an end
when it is fulfilled [that is, when the aim is fulfilled, or if the person is proven
innocent of committing a crime, or compensates for a crime committed by
returning what was borrowed or taken by force or received in trust]. It may also
involve restoring justice to people who have been unjustly deprived of life,
property, or honor, All of these are human rights, and once they are restored, the
obligations pertaining to them are brought to an end. In certain situations, these
rights are the responsibility of some people but not others. It follows that not every
able individual is ordered to perform all these duties as pure worship. Because of
this, these duties are shared in common among Muslims, Christians, and Jews,
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE FIVE PILLARS 313

unlike the five pillars of Islam, which are particular to Muslims. This applies to
doing good for one’s kinsfolk and respecting the rights of wives, children,
neighbors, partners, and the poor. It is also applicable to giving one’s legal opinion
on a certain matter, issuing legal judgments, being a leader, commanding good
deeds and forbidding evil, and striving in the Cause of Allah. Such deeds are
required of some people but not others in order to bring benefit and to keep away
harm. Hence, these common deeds are considered an obligation for a sufficient
number of people. On the other hand, those that are specific to the individual are
considered an obligation for certain individuals. For example, Zayd’s wife and his
kinsfolk are not “Amr’s wife and his kinsfolk. So the duty of Zayd differs from that
of “Amr. It follows that not all able people are obliged to undertake any given
action except for the five pillars of Islam. Unlike fasting the month of Ramadan,
going on pilgrimage, praying the five prayers, and giving zakah, what is one
person’s obligation is not necessarily the obligation of someone else. And even
though zakah is a monetary right (due certain people), giving it fulfills an
obligation toward Allah, toward eight groups and its beneficiaries.’ On this basis,
one must have the intention to give zakah, and he cannot do it for someone else
without first receiving his permission. Moreover, unbelievers are not asked to give
it. However, the intention is not a condition for fulfilling human rights. That is,
one can fulfill human rights on behalf of another without having his permission.
Also, unbelievers are required to fulfill these rights. The rights due Allah, like acts
of atonement, are required because of what humans have done; and by fulfilling
them, punishment (for committing a sin) diminishes in the Hereafter. There are
three types of obligations toward Allah: specific worship, such as prayers; specific
punishment, such as limitations; and that which is similar to acts of atonement.

Likewise in the case of acts of penance related to the pilgrimage and vows made,
such things are duties required of someone because of something he himself has
done. As for zakah, it is an obligation that one owes to Allah on his property.
Therefore it is said: there is no right to wealth except for zakah; that is, there is no
obligation which is due on account of wealth other than zakah. However, there are

' The eight categories who are beneficiaries are listed in the following Qur’anic verse. Allah says:
"Alms are for the poor and the needy; and those employed to administer the [funds]; for those
whose hearts have been [recently] reconciled [to truth]; for those in bondage and in debt; in the
Cause of Allah; and for the wayfarer; a duty ordained by Allah. And Allah is All Knowing and
All Wise" (9:60).
314 CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

other obligations that result from causes other than money, such as expenses that
must be paid on behalf of relatives, one’s wife, one’s slave, or one’s livestock; the
blood with which a clan is obliged to pay for its members; repayment of debts; the
obligation to give of one’s wealth to those struck by misfortune, to feed the
hungry, and to clothe the naked, all of which are collective duties; and other
monetary obligations that arise from a temporary cause or circumstance.
Obligations such as these become incumbent upon an individual only if he
possesses the requisite wealth, just as the pilgrimage is incumbent only upon
someone with the capacity to undertake the journey; hence, having a body is the
cause of the obligation, while the capacity to undertake the action is another
condition. In the case of zakah, wealth is both the cause of the obligation and the
obligation itself, so that if there is no one in his country who deserves or needs it,
he [the giver] takes it to another country where such a person does exist. For this
is an obligation that is due to Allah Almighty. For this reason some Islamic jurists
have said that one condition related to zakah is taklif, legal capacity, since it 15 not
incumbent upon either the child or the insane adult. However, the majority of the
Companions of the Prophet, as well as others such as Malik [Ibn Anas], al-Shafi‘,
and Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal], required that zakah be paid out of the wealth of children
and the insane as well, since they considered the wealth of a child or an insane
adult to belong to the same class as the wealth of all other people, besides the fact
that their guardian could undertake the payment in their stead. For although they
may be sound in body, they are not mentally competent to undertake this
obligation, and it is on their behalf that such a guardian acts. The same applies to
the tithe due on any land they own, even though it is only due to the eight
[beneficiaries of the zakah]; and the obligation to distribute kaffarah, atonement
(i.e., expiatory gifts), out of their wealth. As for the obligations to pray and fast,
these are nullified if one is mentally incapable of performing such duties,
particularly if one also considers a child’s bodily weakness. Such a consideration
does not apply to wealth, however, since a guardian may act as proxy for either a
child or a mentally incompetent adult in fulfilling all their monetary obligations.
But where their bodies are concerned, nothing whatsoever is required of them
[with respect to monetary obligations].
Chapter Twenty-Two

The Concept of Iman and Related Issues

THE ASSOCIATION OF BELIEF WITH WORK

Muhammad Ibn Nasr [al-Marwazi] said: “They [the Murji’ites] deduced the
meaning of Iman from what is mentioned in the Qur’anic verses that regard prayer
and other acts of obedience based on Iman, Islam, and religion.” They also
deduced what Allah says about Iblis when he disobeyed Allah by refusing to make
a single prostration to Adam. If this is true, then the question is, Why did Iblis
deny his Lord, even though he [Iblis] said: “. . . Oh, my Lord! Because You have
mislead me...” (15:39). And Iblis also said to his Lord: “. . . Oh, my Lord! Give
me then respite until the Day the [dead] are raised” (15:36). For these words
indicate that he believed in the Resurrection Day and in his power to put all people
[except the sincere and purified servants of Allah] in the wrong. Did Iblis deny the
power of Allah although he swore by His Glory [‘‘by Your Glory I will put them
all in the wrong’’]? Did Iblis become an unbeliever due to his refusal to make one
prostration to Adam when he was ordered to do so by Allah? His unbelief was
because he neglected an act, namely, to make one prostration, thus indicating that
deeds are a condition of Iman. He [Muhammad Ibn Nasr] said that they also
deduced the meaning of Iman from the story of Adam’s two sons, in which Allah
says: “And recite [Oh, Muhammad] to them [the Jews] the story of the two sons
of Adam [Habil and Qabil] in truth, when each offered a sacrifice [to Allah]. It
was accepted from one but not from the other. The latter said to the former: ‘I will
surely kill you.’ The former said: ‘Indeed, Allah accepts only from the righteous
ones.’ ‘If you do stretch your hand against me to kill me, I shall never stretch my
hand against you to kill you, for I fear Allah, the Lord of the Worlds. Indeed, I
intend to let you draw my sin on yourself as well as yours, then you will be one of
the dwellers of the Fire, and that is the recompense of the wrong-doers.’ So the
316 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

nafs, self, of the other encouraged him and made it appealing to him to murder his
brother, he murdered him and became one of the losers” (5:27-30).' Muhammad
asked: “Did Adam’s son [whose sacrifice was not accepted] deny His Lord? If so,
١ then how could he have presented a sacrifice to Him? ” Allah says: “Only those
believe in Our Signs who, when they are recited to them, fall down in adoration
and celebrate the praises of their Lord, nor are they [ever] puffed up with pride”
(32:15). But He does not say: ‘When they are recited to them they only confess it.’
Hence he refutes the claim that Iman is mere lip confession. Allah also says:
“Those to whom We have sent the Book recite it as it should be recited: they are
the ones that believe therein . . .” (2:121). That is, they faithfully follow the Book.

Someone may ask: Is there evidence from the Sunnah that supports the idea that
work is a condition for Iman in Allah, in His Angels, in His Books, and in His —
Messengers? The answer would be: Indeed, there is. Many of the Sunnan and
traditions indicate this. One of the hadiths concerns the delegation of ‘Abd al-
Qays. There is also the hadith of Shu‘bah and Qurrah Ibn Khalid,” on the authority
of Abu Jamrah,’ on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, which was mentioned earlier, and
whose words are: “I command you to have Iman in Allah alone.” Then he [the
Prophet] asked: “Do you know what belief in Allah alone is?” They replied: “Only
Allah and His Messenger know.” Then he said: “It is testifying to the fact that
there is no god but Allah, that Muhammad is His Messenger, establishment of
prayer, giving zakah, fasting during Ramadan, and payment of one-fifth of the
spoils that falls to your lot.”

And he [Muhammad Ibn Nasr] mentioned many hadiths that require the inclusion
of works in the definition of belief. For example, we have the hadith of Abu Dharr,
in which the Prophet (pbuh), when asked about belief, recited the verse that says:
“It is not al-birr, piety, that you turn your faces to the East and the West .. .”
(2:177).

Then Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad Ibn Nasr said: “Our friends differed over the
interpretation of the Prophet’s (pbuh) hadith, which reads: “The fornicator who

' The author of Kitab al-Jman cites the beginning portion verse 27 and then he cites the end of
verse 30.Here we chose to provide the full text of the verse. .

2 Qurrah Ibn Khalid (?-154 A.H.) was a compiler of hadith and transmitted hadith from both al-
Hassan al-Basri and Ibn Sirin. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 280.)

3 Abu Jamrah, Nasr Ibn ‘Imran (7-128 A.H.), was a compiler of hadith and died in Sarkhas. [Kitab
al-Iman MZ, p. 280.]
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 317

fornicates is not a believer so long as he commits it [fornication.]” Some say that
by this hadith the Prophet (pbuh) meant that the Iman [but not the Islam] of such
a person is negated. That is, he is no longer a believer, though he is a Muslim.
Thus they differentiated between Iman and Islam. Moreover, they have stated that
if someone commits fornication, he is not a believer even though he is a Muslim,
using this as an argument in favor of their distinction between Iman and Islam. To
support their interpretation, they used the following verse, which starts: “The
desert Arabs say: ‘We believe. . .”” (49:14), which differentiates between Iman
and Islam. It has been said that Islam is a general concept referring to belief in the
Oneness of Allah and secession from unbelievers’ sects, while Iman is a specific
concept referring to works, and to belief in the Oneness of Allah. Proponents of
this view support it by citing the story of Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas, in which the
Prophet (pbuh) gave [gifts] to some but not to all of a particular group of men.
Among those who were not given [gifts] was a man whom Sa‘d thought was the
best believer of all of them. When Sa‘d asked the Prophet (pbuh) why he did not
give that man anything although he was a believer, the Prophet (pbuh) replied
[three times]: “. . . or a Muslim.” Then he added: “Indeed, I give to some people
but not to others [although they are dearer to me than those to whom I gave]
fearing that they will be in Hellfire with their faces down.” Al-Zuhri said: “Hence
we conclude that Islam is kalimah (Shahadah), verbal profession [that there is no
god but Allah and that Muhammad is His Messenger], and Iman is works.”

Muhammad Ibn Nasr said: “It has been argued that someone who disobeys ceases
to be a believer, and becomes only a Muslim.” To support his argument he cited
“Abd Allah Ibn Mas‘iid’s disapproval of someone who testified to his Iman by
saying: “I am a believer,” without adding the term, istithan’, exception (if Allah
wills). And so was the opinion of his followers and most of the scholars of Kifah.
Hence, Iman is dependent on future works. That is, one may do them or he may
not. Therefore, he has to say: “if Allah wills,” thereby indicating that works are a
condition of Iman. Further support for their argument comes from a hadith
narrated by Abu Hurayrah, which says: “If the disobedient person turns away from
his disobedience, Iman returns to his heart.” They also cited accounts on the
authority of al-Hassan and Muhammad Ibn Sirin, who used to say: “this is a
Muslim” but would hesitate to say: “this is a believer.” They so argued their
position using the statement of Abu Ja‘far, which was related to us by Ishaq Ibn
Ibrahim that we were informed by Wahb Ibn Jarir Ibn Hazim who said that my
318 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

father related to me, on the authority of Fudayl Ibn Yassar, on the authority of Abu
Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali, that he was asked about the saying of the Prophet
(pbuh): “A fornicator who fornicates is not a believer so long as he commits
fornication.” Abu Ja‘far replied: “This is Islam,” and he made a large circle with
his hands and then said: “This is Iman,” and made a smaller circle within the
larger circle. Thus, if someone fornicates or steals, he will exit from the circle of
Iman to the outer circle of Islam. However, this will not make him exit from the
circle of Islam unless he commits unbelief in Allah. Other people use the argument
based on what was narrated from the Prophet (pbuh), who said: “[Other] people
became Muslims, but ‘Amr Ibn al-‘As became a believer.” It was related to us by
Yahya Ibn Yahya‘ and Ibn Luhay‘ah,” on the authority of Mashrah Ibn Ha‘an, on
the authority of ‘Uqbah Ibn ‘Amir al-Juhani, that the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
said: “[Other] people became Muslims, whereas ‘Amr Ibn al-‘As became a
believer.”

Muhammad Ibn Nasr mentioned that Hammad Ibn Zayd used to distinguish
between Islam and Iman. He perceived Islam as general and Iman as specific. He
also said that the examples of these people are the best ones to follow. For Allah
made the name “believer” a name of mercy and praise that deserves Paradise, as
is evident from the following verses. Allah says: “. . . And He is ever Merciful to
the believers. Their salutation on the day they meet Him will be: Peace. And He
has prepared for them a generous reward ” (33:43—-44). Allah also says: "Then give
the glad tidings to the believers, that they shall have from Allah a very great
bounty" (33:47); and “. . . Then give the glad tidings to the believers, that they
shall have with their Lord the reward of their good deeds . . .” (10:2); and “One
day you shall see the believing men and the believing women—-how their light
runs forward before them and by their right hands . . .” (57:12); and “Allah is the
protector of those who have belief: from the depths of darkness, He will lead them
forth into light . . .” (2:257); and “But give glad tidings to believers, men and
women, that their portion is Gardens under which rivers flow . . .” (2:25).

He (Hammad Ibn Zayd] mentioned that Allah prepared Hell for major sinners,
thus indicating that the name “believer” does not apply to them. On the other hand,

4 Yahya Ibn Yahya, Abu Zakariyyah, was a famous religious scholar of hadith in Khurasan. [Kitab
al-Iman MZ, p. 282.]

5 Tbn Luhay‘ah, ‘Abd Allah (2-174 A.H.), was a judge and a very well-known religious scholar
in Egypt. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 282.)
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 319

Allah did not prepare Paradise for Muslims, hence indicating that the name
Muslim still applies to major sinners (a major sinner is one who no longer has
Iman but has Islam). This is one aspect of the difference between Islam and Iman.

One might have said to al-Marwazi’s companions [mentioned previously] that in
their claim that Iman, but not Islam, is negated of a major sinner so long as he
commits a sin, Iman is not the opposite of unbelief. In response, they would say
that unbelief opposes the essence of Iman, which has both a root and branches.
Hence, unbelief cannot take root until Iman is uprooted. One might ask them:
those of you whose Iman you claim the Prophet (pbuh) negated, do they still have
any Iman? In reply they would say that yes, the essence of their Iman remains;
otherwise they would be unbelievers. Did you not hear Ibn Mas‘id reproaching
the one who said: “I am a believer,” [simply] because he believed in Allah, in His
Angels, in His Books, and in His Messengers? Indeed, Ibn Mas‘id remarked that
one does not deserve the name “believer,” for a believer is someone who fulfills
his religious obligations and refrains from committing sins that lead to Hell.

Some have said that Allah declares that the name “believer” applies to one who
deserves compassion, mercy, and Paradise from Allah; moreover, when we know
that we believe and trust in Allah, we know that we believe. And when we know
that we have disobeyed Allah, we know that we deserve a penalty; and this is the
opposite of reward with which Allah judges the believers with the name Iman.
Then we realized that we believed and we held onto the name Iman, whose
judgment Allah affirms in Paradise, and this Iman that purifies and praises is from
Allah. Allah also forbids us to purify ourselves. He alone commands us to fear
ourselves and He stipulates punishment when we rebel. Hence Allah makes it
incumbent for those who commit grave sins to go to the Hellfire, and for those
who follow His commands and seek His praise, blessings, and mercy to be
rewarded by Paradise. Consequently, these are two opposing ordinances.

Someone may ask: Why did you not deserve the name “believers,” although you
claim that the essence of Iman remains in your hearts, which is the assent that
Allah is just and what He says is true? In response they said that Allah, His
Messenger, and Muslims [in general] name things by their associations. They call
the fornicator a sinner, the slanderer a sinner, and the drinker of alcohol a sinner,
but they do not call any of them believers or faithful, although they possess the
essence of Iman. For they fear Allah, do not associate any others with Him, pray,
320 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

do not have sexual desires toward their mothers, and so on. It follows that they
have the essence of Iman, which may be strengthened by increasing the number
of the branches of Iman. However, they are called sinners rather than believers
because they have committed sins.

Therefore they [the group of al-Marwazi’s companions] do not call a fornicator
a believer, but rather a sinner, although he has the essence of Iman in his heart. For
Iman is a name that Allah attributes to believers and purifies them with it for
which they are promised Paradise. Then we say Muslim and not “believer.” They
said: “If it were one of the Muslims whose heart contained neither Iman nor Islam,
he would be one of the people who would enter Hellfire.” However, when we
found that the Prophet (pbuh) said that Allah says: “Take out of the Fire whoever
has [in his heart] an atom’s weight of Iman,” we became certain that even the
worst Muslim has some Iman [in his heart]. And when we found that the Islamic
community judges him as a Muslim rather than as an unbeliever, who does not
deserve Paradise, we ascertained that he was indeed a Muslim. So they have the
consensus of opinion to apply the Islamic ordinances on them and they do not
deserve to be called believers, since Islam is a proof that makes a person [who is
a Muslim] different from all other communities. Consequently, he will not be
designated to be part of any community other than the community of Islam. Thus,
he will adhere to Islamic ordinances, and none of the ordinances of other
communities will apply to him.

Someone might ask them [the group of al-Marwazi’s companions]: “Why do you
not say: ‘I am an unbeliever, if Allah wills,’ referring to whether you have
achieved perfect unbelief, just as you say: ‘J am a believer, Allah willing,’
referring to whether you have achieved perfect belief?” In response they might say
that this is because the unbeliever is a denier of the truth, whereas the root of a
believer’s belief is tasdiq, assent [of the truth]. Denial has no beginning or end,
since based on it, more facts are always anticipated. Belief, on the other hand, has
its origin in tasdiq, assent, while confession brings an anticipation of facts related
to action on the basis of that which has been confessed and believed. This may be
likened to two men who both owe a debt to a third man. The creditor asks one of
the other two men to pay him what he owes him, and the man replies: “I owe you
nothing,” thereby denying his debt and acting in ingratitude. As a result, [the
creditor] is no longer in a position to bring about the fulfillment of what [the other
man] said, since he has denied his obligation and acted ungratefully. Then he asks
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 321

the other man to pay what he owes, and he says: “Yes, I owe you such and such.”
However, this acknowledgment is not something by which he will obtain what the
other man owes until he has actually paid the debt. Hence, the creditor waits for
him to fulfill what he has said through action, and to demonstrate the truthfulness
of his acknowledgment by carrying out his promise. And if he were to make this
acknowledgment, yet still not pay him what he owed, he would be, in effect, like
someone who had acted in ingratitude toward him, neglecting to carry out his
obligation. And in this way the two debtors would be alike. For the fulfillment of
what he has said is for him to pay him what he owes him. If he pays part of it, he
will have fulfilled part of what he promised, and will have made good on part of
the debt that he acknowledged he owed. And whenever he pays any part of it, he
will have fulfilled that much more of what he has pledged. It is the believer’s duty
to always carry out whatever obligations he acknowledges he has until the day he
dies. And it is for this reason that we say: “I ama believer, Allah willing,” whereas
we do not say: “I am an unbeliever, if Allah wills.”

UNBELIEF IN ALLAH’S GRACE AND THE UNBELIEF OF POLYTHEISM

Muhammad Ibn Nasr said: “Another group of al-Marwazi’s companions held a
view something similar to that of the first group [mentioned previously]. However,
they called him [the one who disobeyed Allah] a Muslim because of his having
seceded from unbelievers’ sects, his testifying that there is no god but Allah, and
his belief in what Allah reveals. However, they did not call him a believer.
Moreover, they claimed that even if they called him a Muslim, he was still an
unbeliever: not one who disbelieves in Allah, but one who had become an
unbeliever as a result of a lack of work. Furthermore, they said that the latter type
of unbelief did not exclude him from the Islamic community.” For it would be
impossible for the Prophet (pbuh) to say: “A fornicator who fornicates is not a
believer so long as he commits fornication,” if unbelief were the opposite of Iman.
That is, we should not call a disobedient person an unbeliever. When the Prophet
(pbuh) negated such a person’s belief by saying: “A fornicator who fornicates is
not a believer so long as he commits fornication,” while at the same time unbelief
opposes Iman, and this is a contradiction. The only way to solve it is to say that
unbelief is of two kinds: unbelief that removes someone from the Muslim
community, and unbelief that results from neglecting good deeds. For unbelief
322 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

opposes Iman. But unbelief is of two different kinds: unbelief in Allah and what
He says [which opposes confession and believing in Allah and His words], and
unbelief that is attributed to committing a bad deed [which opposes the kind of
Iman that is based on performing righteous works]. Do you not know what the
Prophet (pbuh) stated? He said: “He is not a believer whose neighbor is not safe
from his mischievous deeds.” Some have said that if one does not believe then he
is in a state of unbelief. That could only happen by way of work, since he does not
believe in this aspect of work. Thus, he loses sight of what is an obligation upon
him and commits a grave sin simply because of his diminishing fear of Allah,
which is a result of his losing sight of the Glorification of Allah and His torment.
Thus, removing Allah’s Glorification from Iman also results in removing the
source of fear and humility. The Prophet (pbuh) also swore: “He is not a believer
whose neighbor is not safe from his mischievous deeds.”

Moreover, some have reported from the Prophet (pbuh) that he said: “Cursing a
Muslim is sin, and fighting against him.is unbelief;” and “If someone should say
to his fellow Muslim, ‘You unbeliever!’ when in fact he is not, then the speaker
himself shall be rendered an unbeliever.” Hence, by virtue of such a person’s
having fought against his brother, the Prophet (pbuh) called him an unbeliever,
and because of his having called a fellow Muslim an unbeliever, he was himself
declared an unbeliever. To say such a thing is more serious than fornication,
stealing, or drinking alcoholic beverages. Someone might argue with us, claiming
that if we called someone an unbeliever, then he must be judged to be the same as
all those who blaspheme against Allah, such that we call upon him to repent and
-nullify all restrictions that would apply to him as a believer. For if he had
blasphemed, then those regulations and restrictions pertaining to believers would
no longer apply to him. This also means that the restrictions and regulations
pertaining to believers are dropped from consideration when it comes to someone
who has committed a major sin. But we have not gone as far [on this question] as
some others have. Rather we say: “Belief has both a root and a branch, while
against belief there stands kufr, unbelief; in every sense of the word.” The root of
belief is verbal testimony and tasdiq, assent, while its branch is the perfection of
good works, both those of the heart and those of the body. Against iqrar, verbal
testimony, and tasdiq of the sort that is the root of belief stands unbelief in Allah
and what He says and abandoning tasdiq in Him and for Him. As for belief of the
sort that is action rather than mere verbal testimony, against it also stands unbelief,
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 323

though not the sort of unbelief that excludes one from the community of belief, but
rather the kind of unbelief that consists ofa failure to act. For action may also be
considered a kind of belief, in addition to belief in the sense of a verbal testimony
of Allah’s existence and truth. Whoever abandons the belief that is
acknowledgment of Allah’s [truth and existence] is an unbeliever who is to be
called upon to repent, while everyone who has abandoned belief in the sense of
works [such as giving zakah, going on the pilgrimage, fasting during Ramadan, or
’ failing to abstain from drinking alcohol, and committing sexual sin] has also lost
a measure of belief; nevertheless, he is not to be called upon to repent, either in
our view or in that of the Orthodox Muslims and heretics who, except for the
Kharijites, have disagreed with us, saying that belief is both tasdiq and works.
Likewise, if we say that someone is an unbeliever in the sense of having failed to
perform certain works, we are not required to call upon him to repent, nor do the
restrictions pertaining to believers cease to apply to him, since he has not lost the
root of belief, nor is he an unbeliever in the sense of someone who has repudiated
Allah or His Revelation.

It is clear that knowledge of Allah is Iman and ignorance of Him is unbelief.
Similarly, fulfilling one’s religious obligations is Iman; however, ignorance of
them before their being revealed is not unbelief. To clarify this, the Companions
of the Prophet (pbuh) testified that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is
His Messenger, but they were ignorant of the obligations that were revealed to
them later. Hence, their ignorance was not regarded as unbelief. When Allah
revealed the obligations incumbent upon Muslims, they started practicing them.
And whoever denies these obligations now is considered an unbeliever because
he disbelieves what Allah says. But a Muslim who does not have knowledge of an
obligation is not regarded as an unbeliever and ignorance in Allah, in any case, is
considered unbelief both before and after they have been informed.

Some have also said that abandoning tasdiq in Allah’s truthfulness is considered
unbelief. So is neglect of one’s religious obligations, as well as tasdiq in Allah,
which made them obligatory. The latter is considered unbelief in terms of works.
In support of this are accounts on the authority of the Companions of the Prophet
(pbuh), who spoke of “branches” of unbelief, besides the “root.” These branches
do not cause one to secede from the Islamic community. They also speak of
324 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

branches of Iman that correspond to works, the abandonment of which does not
cause one to cease being a member of the Muslim community, An example is the
comment of Ibn ‘Abbas on this verse. Allah says: “. . . If any do fail to judge by
what Allah has revealed, indeed those are the unbelievers” (5:44). Muhammad Ibn
Nasr said that it was related by [Muhammad] Ibn Yahya, on the authority of
Sufyan Ibn ‘Uyyaynah, on the authority of Hisham Ibn Jubayr, on the authority of
Tawis, on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, who was once asked about the verse in
which Allah says: “. . . If any do fail to judge by what Allah has revealed, indeed
those are the unbelievers’” (5:44). He [Ibn ‘AbbAs] said: “This refers to a degree
of unbelief.”

Muhammad Ibn Yahya related on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Rafi‘, on the
authority of ‘Abd al-Razzaq, that Mu‘ammar informed us, on the authority of Ibn
Tawis, on the authority of his father, that Ibn ‘Abbas was asked about the verse
mentioned above. He replied: “People such as those [mentioned in the verse
quoted above] have a degree of unbelief, but not like that of people who have
blasphemed Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His Messengers.”

Ishaq related to us that we were informed by Waki‘, on the authority of Sufyan,
on the authority of Mu‘ammar, on the authority of Ibn Tawis, on the authority of
his father, on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, who said: “People such as those
[mentioned in the verse quoted above] have a degree of unbelief, but not like that
of people who have blasphemed Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His
Messengers.” |

It was also related to us by Waki‘, on the authority of Sufyan, on the authority of
Mu‘ammar, on the authority of Ibn Tawis, on the authority of his father, who said:
“I asked Ibn ‘Abbas: 15 the one who does not make judgments based on what
Allah has reveals considered an unbeliever?” He replied: “He has a degree of
unbelief in his heart, but not like that of someone who has blasphemed Allah,
denying the Day of Judgment, Allah’s Angels, His Books, and His Messengers.”

It was related by Muhammad Ibn Yahya and ‘Abd al-Razzaq, on the authority of
Sufyan, on the authority of [an unnamed] man, on the authority of Tawus, on the.
authority of Ibn ‘Abbas, who said: “This refers to a kind of unbelief that does not
exclude one from the [Muslim] community.”
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 325

It was related to us by Ishaq, who said: “We were informed by Waki‘, on the
authority Sufyan, on the authority of Sa‘id al-Makki, on the authority of Tawias,
who said: ‘It is not an unbelief that excludes one from the [Muslim] community.’”

Ishaq also related to us, saying: “Waki‘ informed us, on the authority of Ibn Juray),
on the authority of ‘Ata’, who said: ‘Some types of unbelief are less weighty than
others, just as some types of injustice are less serious than others, and some types
of sin are less grave than others.’”

THE TWO KINDS OF WRONG

Muhammad Ibn Nasr reported that they [al-Marwazi’s companions] said that “Ata”
was correct in saying that an unbeliever may be called a wrongdoer, but so may
a disobedient Muslim. Hence there are two kinds of wrongdoing, one of which
excludes the one who commits it from the Islamic community, and the other of
which does not. Allah says: “Those who believe and confuse not their beliefs with
wrong . . .” (6:82). He also says: “. . . For polytheism is indeed the highest
wrongdoing” (31:13). Further support comes from the saying of Ibn Mas‘ud when
the verse, “It is those who believe and confuse not their beliefs with wrong,” was
revealed. He said: “When this verse was revealed, the Companions of the Prophet
(pbuh) found it difficult to abide by it, and asked in astonishment: ‘Oh, Messenger
of Allah, who of us has not wronged himself?’” To this the Prophet (pbuh) replied:
“It is not that. But have you not heard the saying of the nghteous slave [Luqman]:
‘... For polytheism is indeed the highest wrongdoing’” (31:13). This indicates that
wrongdoing here means shirk, polytheism.

Muhammad Ibn Yahya narrated, on the authority of al-Hajjaj Ibn al-Minhal, on the
authority of Hammad Ibn Salamah, on the authority of ‘Ali Ibn Zayd,° on the
authority of Yisuf Ibn Muhran and Ibn ‘Abbas, that ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab used
to recite from the Qur’an whenever he entered his home. One day when he was
reciting the Qur’an he came to the verse where Allah says: “Those who believe
and confuse not their beliefs with wrong . . .” (6:82) [until the end of the verse].
Suddenly he put his shoes on and rushed to Ubayy Ibn Ka‘b’s house. He said: “Oh,
Abu al-Munghir, have you read the verse where Allah says? ‘It is those who

® Ali Ibn Zayd, Ibn Jad‘ana al-Tamimi (?-13 1 A.H.) was a well-known scholar of hadith . [ Kitab
al-Iman M.Z. pp. 291-92.]
326 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

believe and confuse not their beliefs with wrong . . .* (6:82). Do not we do
wrong?” To this Ubayy replied: “Oh, Commander of the Faithful, it is not as you
suppose. Allah says: ‘. . . For polytheism is indeed the highest wrongdoing”
(31:13). Hence the word “wrongdoing” refers to shirk, polytheism.

Two KINDS OF SIN

Furthermore, Muhammad Ibn Nasr said: “There are two kinds of sin. One that
excludes one from the Islamic community, such that he is called an unbeliever,
and one that does not.” To clarify this, Allah mentions Iblis by saying: “. . . He
[Iblis] fasaqa, disobeyed, the command of His Lord . . .” (18:50). This
disobedience or fisq, sin, is regarded as unbelief. Of unbelievers Allah also says:
“As to those who sin, their abode will be the Fire . . .” (32:20). What is intended
here is the unbelievers, as indicated in the same verse. Allah says: “... Every time
they wish to get away therefrom, they will be forced thereto, and it will be said to
them: ‘Taste you the Penalty of the Fire, which you used to deny’” (32:20).
~ However, Allah calls al-qadhif, the slanderer, from among the Muslims by the
name of fasiq, sinner, without excluding him from Islam. Allah says: “And those
who launch a charge against chaste women and produce not four witnesses [to
support their allegations], flog them with eighty stripes; and reject their evidence
ever after: for such men are sinners” (24:4). He also says: “. . . If anyone
undertakes that duty [goes on a pilgrimage], let there be no obscenity, nor
committing sin, nor dispute unjustly at the pilgrimage . . .” (2:197). Muslim jurists
have interpreted the word fusiiq, sin, cited in the last-mentioned verse to mean al-
ma “Asi; acts of disobedience to Allah.

They [al-Marwazi’s companions] also said that since there are two kinds of wrong
and two kinds of sin, so also are there two kinds of unbelief: one that does not
exclude a person from Islam, and one that does. The same applies to shirk,
polytheism. One type is shirk in the tawhid, unity of Allah, which excludes one
from the community [of Muslims]; the other type is shirk in ‘amal, work, and does
not exclude one from the community [of Muslims], and this is riya’, hypocrisy. An
example of the latter kind of shirk, polytheism, is given in the verse where Allah
says: ‘“... Whoever expects to meet his Lord, let him work righteousness, and in
the worship of his Lord, admit no one as a partner” (18:110). What is intended
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 327

here is to pretend to do righteous works. The Prophet (pbuh) says: “al-tirah,
gambling, is shirk, polytheism.”

Muhammad Ibn Nasr said that these are two doctrines that are reported to have
been taught by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, as well as other transmitters of prophetic
traditions who were in agreement with his views. Al-Shalinjt Isma‘il Ibn Sa‘id
related that he asked Ahmad Ibn Hanbal about the person who by his own volition
and effort persists in committing grievous sins, yet at the same time does not
neglect to pray, give zakah or fast during Ramadan. The question is: Does
someone in such a condition persist [in being a Muslim]? He replied that such a
person does continue [to be a Muslim]. As the prophetic hadith says: “The
fornicator is not a believer as long as he commits fornication,” which implies that
he ceases to be a believer, but not to be a Muslim. We also have the related saying:
“He who drinks wine is not a believer as long as he drinks it, and he who steals is
not a believer as long as he steals,” as well as the statement made by Ibn “Abbas
concerning the following verse. Allah says: “. . . And whosoever does not judge
by what Allah has revealed, those are the unbelievers” (5:44). I asked him [Ibn
“Abbas]: “What kind of unbelief is referred to here?” To which he replied: “It is
the sort that does not exclude one from the [Muslim] community, as some people’s
belief is weaker than or inferior to others. Likewise there are degrees of unbelief,
until it reaches a degree about which there is no room for disagreement.” And
concerning the saying, “The fornicator is not a believer as long as he commits
fornication,” [bn Abi Shaybah said: “Such a person does not have complete belief,
but rather has a belief that is lacking.” And he said: “I asked Ahmad Ibn Hanbal
about Islam and belief, to which he replied: ‘Belief is both a saying and a work,
while Islam is verbal testimony.’” And this is the view of Abu Khaythamah. Ibn
Abi Shaybah said: “There is no Islam without belief, nor any belief without
Islam.”

We have already discussed the fact that these two entities are inseparable, even
though neither is interchangeable with the other. Moreover, we have accounts by
more than one person concerning the unanimous agreement among Orthodox
Muslims and hadith scholars on the teaching that belief is both words and works.

In his book entitled a/-Tamhid, Abu ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abd al-Birr said: “Orthodox
Muslims and jurists unanimously agree upon the fact that Iman is both words and
328 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

works, and that no work [is accepted] without a [good] intent.” According to them,
Iman increases and decreases. It increases through acts of obedience and decreases
through acts of disobedience. Moreover, they [Orthodox Muslims] regard all kinds
of obedience as Iman, except Abu Hanifah and his companions, who argued that
acts of obedience are not called Iman, for Iman is assent and verbal testimony.
Some of his companions also add knowledge to the constituents of Iman.

He [Abu ‘Umar] added that all of the jurists [except Abu Hanifah and his
companions] of Hijaz, Iraq, Syria, and Egypt, such as Malik Ibn Anas, al-Layth
Ibn Sa‘d, Sufyan al-Thawri, al-Awza‘t, al-Shafi‘l, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Ishaq Ibn
Rahwiyah, Abu ‘Ubayd al-Qasim Ibn Sallam, Da’ iid Ibn ‘Ali, and al-Tabari, and
whoever followed in their footsteps, said that Iman is words and works. It is a
saying by the tongue, which is a verbal testimony, and belief in the heart and work
with the bodily parts with good intent. They added that whichever of the religious
obligations or desirable acts serve to help one obey Allah are considered part of
Iman, which increases via obedience and diminishes via disobedience.
Accordingly, sinners are regarded as imperfect believers. They have imperfect
Iman because they committed grave sins. Support for this is found in the saying
of the Prophet (pbuh): “A fornicator who fornicates is not a believer so long as he
commits fornication.” This hadith regards a fornicator as an imperfect believer,
but does' not [totally] negate his Iman. This is because it is unanimously agreed
that a fornicator, a thief, and a drinker of alcohol are permitted to inherit if they
pray toward the Qiblah and accept the call of Islam. And also [they may inherit]
due to their nearness to the believers who are not in the same condition as they are.
Therefore, he [Abu ‘Umar] remarked that the majority of Malik’s companions
regarded Iman and Islam as one thing.

He [Abu ‘Umar] said that the Mu‘tazilites regard Iman as the sum total of all acts
of obedience. Moreover, whoever fails to perform any act of obedience is
considered a fasiq, sinner, but not a believer or an unbeliever. This is the opinion
of the Mu‘tazilites, who believed in the manzilah bayna al-manzilatayn, state in
between. He also said that Iman increases and decreases. It increases with
obedience and decreases with disobedience. This is also the opinion of the people
of traditions and of jurists in the provinces. Ibn al-Qasim related, on the authority
of Malik [Ibn Anas], that belief may increase, though he stops short of saying that
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 329

it may also decrease. However, ‘Abd al-Razzaq, Ma‘an Ibn “Isa, and Ibn Nafi<’
related on his authority that according to him, belief may either increase or
decrease. This is in agreement with the views of hadith scholars within the
Orthodox Islamic community. Praise be to Allah.

Then he [Abu ‘Umar] cited the arguments of the Murji?ites and the Orthodox
Muslims, after which he refuted the claim made by the Kharijites that those who
disobey Allah [e.g., through fornication or theft] are unbelievers, either based on
the criteria mentioned or based on inheritance, and he also cited the hadith of
“Ubadah: “He who gets something of that [inheritance] and then will be punished
for it in this world; it is in the realm of penance.” He [Abu ‘Umar] said that there
are many degrees of Iman. Hence, an imperfect believer is not like a perfect
believer. Allah says: “For believers are those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel
a tremor in their hearts . . .” (8:2). For that reason Allah also says: “These are the
true believers . . .” (8:4). Further support comes from the Prophet’s (pbuh) hadith
that reads: “A believer is he whom Muslims trust [with their persons and
property]; whereas a Muslim is he from whose hand and tongue other Muslims are
safe.” And also he [the Prophet] said: “And the most perfect of believers in Iman
are the best of them in morals.” Naturally, in order for one to have perfect Iman,
others must have a lesser degree of Iman.

The Prophet (pbuh) said: “‘The closest bonds of Iman are love and hate for the sake
of Allah;” and “No Iman [is accepted] from he who is untrustworthy.” This
indicates that there are types of Iman that are more perfect and trustworthy than
others. In this regard, the following hadith, which was narrated by al-Tirmidhi and
others, is mentioned: “‘Whoever loves, hates, gives, and prohibits for the sake of
Allah perfects his Iman.” Furthermore, Abu ‘Umar al-Talamanki mentioned the
consensus of the Orthodox Muslims, which states that Iman is words, works, good
intent, and good undestanding of the Sunnah.

THE OPINION OF ABU TAB AL-MAKKi ON ISLAM AND IMAN

Abu Talib al-Makki said that Islam has five pillars: to testify that there is no god
but Allah, to pray, to fast during Ramadan, to give zakah, and to go on pilgrimage;

” Ibn Nafi‘, Abu ‘Abd Allah (2-186 A.H.), was a famous jurist of Madinah and a disciple of Imam
Malik. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 293.]
330 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

whereas Iman has seven pillars: the five pillars mentioned in Gabriel’s saying plus
having belief in divine predestination and in Paradise and Hell. Both of these are
mentioned in Gabriel’s hadith, which will be cited later, in sha’a Allah.

Likewise, he said that belief is to believe in Allah’s Name and His Attributes, to
believe in Allah’s Books and His Prophets, and to believe in the Angels and the
devils. He means here, and Allah knows best, to distinguish between them [Angels
and devils]. For indeed some people place them in one category. But they are
distinguished according to their deeds, as human beings are distinguished as those
who are righteous and those who are not. Also Iman is to believe in Paradise and
Hellfire and that both of them were created before Adam and to believe in
Resurrection after death and to believe in all categories of predestination; the good
and the evil and the sweet and the bitter. These all emanate from Allah’s
Predestination, Will, and Wisdom. That is just from Him and Great Wisdom. He
is the only One who knows the Unseen and the meaning of their realities.

Abu Talib as well as others said that Iman is Islam, thereby denying the existence
of differing degrees, and this is closer to the doctrine of the Murji’ites. Others said
that Islam is not Iman and those are the ones who introduce the concept of the
opposite and the difference between the two, and this is close to the saying of the
al-Ibadiyyah sect. This is a problematic question that requires a lengthy
explanation. Indeed, the relationship of Islam to that of Iman resembles the
relationship of the two parts of the testimonies, both in meaning and in principle.
For indeed the testimony of the Prophet is different from the testimony of the
Unity of Allah. Both of them are considered of equal prominence and they are
both related to each other in principle and wisdom, and they bond together as one
and so Iman and Islam are bonded together as if they form one unit. Thus there is
no Iman for one who has no Islam, nor is there any Islam for one who has no
Iman. For one must have some Iman in order to be a Muslim, just as a believer
must have some Islam in order to fulfill his Iman. Thus a believer will not be
derived of Islam and this indeed will affirm his Iman. For Allah commands good
deeds as a condition for Iman. In the realization of this Allah says: “Whoever does
good deeds, while he is a believer, his efforts will not be rejected . . .” (21:94). He
also commands Iman as a condition for good deeds. Allah says: “But whoever
comes to Him [Allah] as a believer, and has done good deeds, they have the
highest ranks [in the Hereafter]” (20:75). Hence, whoever outwardly manifests
Islam’s deeds and does not believe in the inner essence of belief of the Unseen is
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 331

called a hypocrite, and his hypocrisy is the type that excludes him from the
[Muslim] community. And whoever believes in the Unseen but does not act
according to Iman and Islamic laws is called an unbeliever. His unbelief
contradicts the Oneness of Allah. Finally, whoever believes in the unseen and does
what the Messengers of Allah reported is called a believing Muslim. Otherwise,
it would be possible for a believer not to be called a Muslim or for a Muslim not
to be called a believer in Allah.

The people of the Qiblah agreed that every believer is a Muslim and every Muslim
is a believer in Allah, in His Angels, and in His Books. Iman is to deeds as the
heart is to the body: they are inseparable from each other. He [Abu Talib] said that
the likeness of Iman to works resembles the likeness of the heart to the body: they
are inseparable from each other. No living body can exist without a heart and no
heart can exist without a body. They are two separate entities and they are, in
meaning and principle, considered two separate things. The likeness of them is
similar to a seed, which has both an inside and an outside and yet is one. That is,
we do not call it two seeds due to the variation in the characteristics of the outside
and the inside. So are the deeds of Islam. Islam is the overt expression of Iman and
Iman is the covert expression of Islam. And it is action of the parts of the body,
and Iman is the inward aspect of Islam and it is part of the works of the heart.

It was also narrated from the Prophet (pbuh) that he said: “Islam is overt whereas
Iman is in the heart.” In another version: “Iman is a sirr, secret thought, in the
heart.’ Hence, Islam is the works of Iman; and Iman is the beads of Islam. Hence
there is no Iman without deeds and there are no deeds without binding. Similar to
this are overt and covert knowledge, which are connected with the person who
possesses them through acts of the heart and the acts of the parts of the body. This
can be seen in the saying of the Prophet (pbuh): “Indeed, works are achieved only
through good intentions.” Hence, no works, whether of the body or the heart, are
accepted without good intentions. Namely, there is no deed fulfilled except with
resolve and intention because the particle innama, indeed, used in the above cited
hadith, is used to affirm the realization of one thing and negate everything else.
Thus he affirmed that the work of the parts of the body is considered behavior and
the work of the heart is considered intention. For action is to belief what the lips
are to the tongue. For speech cannot occur without both of them, since the lips
bring the words together while the tongue produces outward speech, such that if
either of these entities were taken away, no speech would be possible. Similarly,
332 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

if action were removed, there would be no belief. Therefore, when Allah
enumerates the blessings that He bestows upon man through speech, He makes
mention of the lips along with the tongue, as in the following verses. Allah says:
“Have We not made for him a pair of eyes? And a tongue and a pair of lips?”
(90:8-9). In other words, He is asking: “Did We not create human beings to be
able to see and to speak?” He thus depicts the notion of speech by referring to the
tongue and the lips, since the lips are the tongue’s resting place, as it were.
Moreover, he makes mention of the lips because the speech through which Allah’s
blessings were revealed could not have come about without them.

The relationship between belief and Islam may also be likened to a large tent or
pavilion with an upper canopy that rises above ground level, tent pegs that hold
it in place, and an upright post in the center. The tent is like Islam in that, just as
Islam has foundations or “pillars” consisting of outward deeds performed by the
body, the tent has pegs that hold the outer edges of the canopy in place, and a pole
that stands upright in the center. This center pole may be likened to belief, for just
as the tent cannot stand without the center pole, neither can Islam remain standing
without belief. For the tent is in need of these pegs and poles, being unable to
stand firm and upright without them, just as Islam, with its outward actions, may
not remain standing without belief. And conversely, belief involves acts of the
heart from which no benefit may come except through Islam with its
accompanying works of righteousness.

Allah makes one thing the opposite of both Iman and Islam [if Iman and Islam did
not have the same meaning, their opposites would not be one thing]. Allah says:
“How shall Allah guide those who reject belief after they accepted it? . . .” (3:86);
and “. . . Would He order you to unbelief after you have bowed your will [to Allah
in Islam]?” (3:80). Hence He has made unbelief the opposite of both Iman and
Islam. He [Abu Talib al-Makki] said that the Prophet (pbuh) pointed out that Iman
and Islam are of the same kind. For example, in the hadith narrated by Ibn ‘Umar,
the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Islam is built on five [pillars].” He [al-Makki] also said,
with reference to the hadith of Ibn ‘Abbas, on the authority of the delegation of
“Abd al-Qays, that they asked him [the Prophet] about Iman and he indicated the
five pillars, thus pointing out that there is no covert Iman without overt Islam. Nor
is there any overt Islam without covert Iman, for Iman and works are mutually
connected. The possessor of just one of them [Iman or Islam] will not be of benefit
to the possessor.
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 333

He [Abu Talib al-Makki] also said that in Gabriel’s saying the Prophet (pbuh)
differentiated between Iman and Islam regarding the details of the acts of the heart
in accordance with the meanings that we have described. They are details of the
acts of the body, which reflect the outward deeds and are not connected with
differentiating, in meaning, between Islam and Iman. Hence, the hadith provides
no evidence for the difference between the two concepts with regard to judgment.
Abu Talib added: “A worshiper of Allah can be a believing Muslim.” Thus, what
he mentioned concerning the secret of the heart is the description of the heart, and
what he described overtly is the description of the body.

He [Abu Talib] also said that the Islamic community agreed that if a worshiper of
Aliah believes in ail that is mentioned in the sayings of Gabriel [about Iman], but
does not act according to what is mentioned in it about Islam, he would not be
called a believer. Neither would he be called a Muslim if he does all that is
mentioned in the saying of Gabriel about Islam yet does not believe in what
Gabriel said about Iman. And as is well known, the Prophet (pbuh) said: “The
[Muslim] community does not unanimously agree on what is false or misleading.”

THE RESPONSE TO ABU TALIB AL-MAKKI FOR NOT
MAKING A CLEAR DISTINCTION BETWEEN IMAN AND ISLAM

By his last statement, Abu Talib meant the consensus of the Companions and their
followers. Legally speaking, such a person is not regarded as a believer. Nor is he
called a Muslim if he denies some of the pillars, if he knows what the Prophet
(pbuh) said but does not believe it, or if he does not have any considerable
agreement with those who simply follow their own whims. Abu Talib used to be
well versed on their views. Therefore, 1 believe that this is what Abu Talib meant
in chapter 33 of his book, which deals with the details of Islam and Iman and
explains the intentions of the heart from the point of view of the Orthodox Muslim
community. The author opposes the views of Abu Talib on two points. One is that
the Muslims who deserve a reward must have the required and detailed Iman
described in Gabriel’s saying. The other point is that the Prophet (pbuh) used the
name “believer” in some places and the word Muslim in others [e.g., the hadith
narrated by Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas in which Sa‘d said that the man 1s a believer;
whereas the Prophet (pbuh) said: “. . . or a Muslim’’]. For the traits of a Muslim
334 -CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

are different from those of a believer. Indeed, Muslim jurists have debated over the
interpretation of the hadith narrated by Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas. They argued that,
in this hadith, the Prophet (pbuh) did not say: “or a Muslim” in order to indicate
that the man did not have the traits of a believer. If he had, he would have negated
the possibility of perfect Iman for pious people who follow a middle course and
are therefore rewarded Paradise without punishment. However, this is not the case.
For both Orthodox Muslims and heretics unanimously agree that such a man is a
believer. For if it were possible to negate one’s Iman because of the presence of
a better believer [than he], then the Iman of many believers and Prophets would
be negated, which would make no sense at all.

Indeed, it has been mentioned that such a thing is not included in the sayings of
Allah and His Messenger. However, this hadith refers only to someone who is a
Muslim, but not a believer. Such a man ranks lower than the pious people of
Paradise who follow a middle course, since their Iman is imperfect. They are so
because they neglected an obligation for which they deserve Paradise if they are
able to do it. And if they are not able to do so, they are still considered as
imperfect believers. That is, even if such people enter Paradise, they are not like
those who had total Iman and died before either knowing or performing detailed
Iman. Such people, although they enter Paradise, are not treated like those who
know and fulfill the obligations. However, it may be said that the righteous ones,
the “people of the right hand,” also have different ranks, as illustrated in the
following hadith: “The strong believer is better and more beloved to Allah than the
weak one, but both of them are good,” and in the following verse. Allah says: “Not
equal are those believers who sit [at home] and receive no hurt, and those who
strive and fight in the Cause of Allah with their wealth and their lives . . .” (4:95).
In other words, although both weak and strong believers do what they are
commanded to do, in Paradise the strong believer ranks higher than the weak one.
Hence, it may be that by saying, “such a man does not have the traits of a
believer,” Abu Talib meant that such a man’s belief is not like that of a [true]
believer or a righteous person who believes in and performs detailed Iman.

If it is said that one is a Muslim, but not a believer, it does not negate his Iman.
Likewise, if it is said that one is not a jurist, a scientist, or of the people of
reasoning, it would not negate his knowledge. The Prophet (pbuh) said: “If one of
you paid an amount of gold equal in size to that of Mount Uhud, he would neither
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 335

reach the rank nor even half of that of a [true] believer’s Iman.” There are many
other hadiths that indicate that Iman varies among people. Even among those who
will enter Paradise, there are some who do what they are commanded to and some
who do what others, other than themselves, are commanded to do. For this reason,
overt Islam was considered as belonging in the category of works, whereas Iman
involves help and favor from Allah in the form of knowledge. Allah says: “But to
those who receive Guidance, He increases the [light of] Guidance, and bestows on
them their Piety and Restraint [from evil]” (47:17); and “Allah does advance in

guidance those who seek guidance . . .” (19:76); and “It is He Who sent down
Tranquility into the hearts of the believers, that they may add belief to their belief
.. 2” (48:4).

Such tranquility may not be accessible. But Allah, the Most Gracious, sends it
down into a believer’s heart as a reward for his righteous deeds. Allah says: “. . .
But if they had done what they were [actually] told, it would have been best for
them, and would have gone farthest to strengthen their [belief]. And We should
then have given them from Our Presence a great reward. And We should have
shown them the Straight Way” (4:66-68). Allah also says: “... Fear Allah and
believe in His Messenger, and He will bestow on you a double portion of His
Mercy: He will provide for you a light by which you shall walk [straight in your
path] . . .” (57:28); and “. . . For such has written belief in their hearts, and
strengthened them with a spirit from Himself. . .” (58:22). For this reason it is said
that whoever acts in accordance with what he knows, Allah will provide him with
the knowledge of what he does not know. The latter kind of knowledge is not
accessible to Allah’s servants, although they [the servants] are able to perform
overt and covert works due to Allah’s help and favor. Accordingly, works are of
two kinds: one is within their capacity due to Allah’s kindness and help, such as
walking and sitting; the other is not. An example of the second kind of works is
the support of Allah for one who obeys Him so that he becomes able to do what
others cannot do. Indeed, the Qur’an is full of such examples. Allah says:
“Remember your Lord inspired the Angels [with the message]: ‘I am with you:
give firmness to the believers..’” (8:12). He also says: “. .. When you [believers]
meet a force, be firm. . .” (8:45). Accordingly, Allah commands the believers to
be firm. The Angels are inspired with this firmness so as to give it in turn to the
believers.
336 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

RANKING PEOPLE WITH REGARD TO IMAN AND ALL ACTS OF OBEDIENCE

It may be that Iman is what some people are ordered to perform, and are dispraised
if they do not. On the other hand, others who are unable to perform that part of
Iman will not be dispraised for it. However, although the latter group of people
have not neglected an obligation, Allah prefers the former, provided they fulfill
that part of Iman. The same is applicable to overt deeds. In other words, some
people are ordered to perform some overt deeds but others, because of their
inability, are not. However, with regard to overt deeds, the unable, provided they
have a true belief and intent to act, will be rewarded in the same way as the able
will be rewarded if they do so. Support for this is found in the saying of the
Prophet (pbuh): “In Madinah there are men who accompany you wherever you go,
whether you walk in a street or cross an valley.” To this the Companions of the
Prophet (pbuh) replied: “But they [the men] are in Madinah.” The Prophet (pbuh)
added: “Indeed, they are in Madinah because an excuse prevents them from being
actually with you.” Further support comes from the following saying of Allah. He
says: “Not equal are those believers who sit [at home] and receive no hurt, and
those who strive and fight in the Cause of Allah with their wealth and their lives.
Allah has granted a grade higher to those who strive and fight with their goods and
persons than to those who sit [at home] . . .” (4:95). Thus, He exempts from blame
those [believers] who receive hurt.

Moreover, both Sahih Muslim and Sahih al-Bukhari recorded that the Prophet
(pbuh) said: “Whoever calls others to receive sure guidance will be granted the
same reward as that of his followers; and whoever calls others to go astray will
receive the same penalty as that of his followers.”

Abu Kabshah al-Anmari commented on this, saying: “They are alike in reward;
and they are alike in penalty.” Al-Tirmidhi recorded the same hadith as follows:
“The world is for four types of people: a man who is granted knowledge and
wealth because of which he fears Allah, knows that Allah has a right to it, and
gives some of it to his relatives; such a man will be granted the highest rank; as for
the man who is granted knowledge but not wealth, he sincerely said: ‘If I had
money, I would do like the first man,’ hence, he will be rewarded as much as him;
as for the man who 15 granted wealth [but not knowledge] because of which he
neither fears Allah nor gives-some of it to his relatives, such a man will abide in
the lowest rank; finally, the man who is granted neither knowledge nor wealth
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 337

says: ‘If 1 had money, I would do like the third man;’ hence, he will receive as
much punishment as the others.”

The version of this hadith as reported by Ibn Majah is: “This community may be
likened to four different men. To the first of them Allah gave both wealth and
knowledge; as a result, he demonstrated his knowledge by spending his wealth in
the proper way. To the second man Allah gave knowledge, but not wealth. Thus,
he said: ‘If 1 had what this other man has, I would do the same thing with my
wealth.’ Commenting on this, the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Therefore, both men will
receive an equal reward. The third man was given wealth without knowledge, as
a result of which he squandered his money, spending it foolishly. As for the fourth
man, Allah gave him neither wealth nor knowledge; therefore, he said: ‘If I had
that man’s wealth, I would do the same as him.’ Consequently, they will bear the
same punishment.”

If two persons possess similar degrees of Iman in their hearts, they may be
considered alike in their Iman, even if one of them undertakes physical actions that
the other cannot because of his inability to do so, as in the following tradition:
“The believer’s strength is in his heart, while his weakness is in his body, whereas
the hypocrite’s strength is in his body, while his weakness is in his heart.”
Therefore the Prophet (pbuh) said: “A strong man is not he who possesses a strong
body to fight with; rather, he is the one who is able to suppress his passion when
angry.” The Prophet also said: “I dreamt that I went to the qulayb, well, to get
some water and [Abu Bakr] Ibn Abi Quhafah took the pail and lowered it into the
well; when he had filled it once then twice, he felt tired [may Allah forgive him].
When ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab took the pail from him [Abu Bakr], it looked as if it
were a big pail. And 1 did not see such a wonderful man among persons and he
went on serving water to the people until they were fully satisfied and then they
went to their resting place.” In this hadith the Prophet (pbuh) remarked that Abu
Bakr was weaker than ‘Umar and that ‘Umar was [physically] stronger than him
[Abu Bakr]. Ibn Mas‘td also said: “We became stronger the moment ‘Umar
converted to Islam.” However, there is no doubt that Abu Bakr’s Iman was
stronger than that of “Umar, and that the power of Iman is stronger and more
perfect than the power of work. For the one who possesses Iman the reward of the
work of the others will be granted for him. What ‘Umar did during his lifetime is
similarly recorded for Abu Bakr, since he succeeded him in the Caliphate.
338 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

It was recorded that the Iman of the Prophet (pbuh) weighed more than that of the
whole [Muslim] community, as did that of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. And during the
life of the Prophet (pbuh) as well as after his death, ‘Umar used to be granted Iman
and knowledge through Abu Bakr, who would call and help him to do righteous
deeds. Hence, Abu Bakr would get as much reward as ‘Umar. For the Prophet
(pbuh) said: “Whoever outfits a striver for the Cause of Allah is considered as he
who strove; and whoever [sincerely] stays with the family of a striver for the
- Cause of Allah is considered as he who strives; and whoever has guided others to
the good will get as much reward as that of a follower of that guidance.” The
Prophet also said: “Whoever fed a fasting person will get as much reward as he
who fasted.”

Moreover, it was narrated on the authority of al-Tirmidhi that: “Whoever offers
condolences to a hurt man will get as much reward as that of the person who was
hurt.” There are many other sayings that iridicate that if two men seem alike with
regard to their overt deeds, they may differ with regard to the Iman in their hearts.
If this is the case, he who has stronger Iman in his heart will rank higher than he
who has weaker Iman in his heart. For this reason, Allah favored some prophets
over others, even if those favored [i.e., the best] were unable to do [overtly] as
much as the unfavored [i.e., the good]. For example, Allah favors the Prophet
(pbuh), whose Prophethood lasted for more than twenty years, over Noah, whose
Prophethood lasted for one thousand years less fifty. Allah also favors the
community of Muhammad, who worked from the ‘Asr prayer until the Maghrib
prayer, over other communities who worked from the start of the day until the
Zuhr prayer and those who worked from the Zuhr prayer until the “Asr prayer-—by
granting the community of Muhammad double the reward of the other
communities. This is due to the fact that the Iman of [Muhammad’s community]
in their hearts was more perfect and excellent than that of the other communities,
although the latter did more righteous works than the former. So it is with all those
whom Allah favors over others.

Allah graciously grants them the means by which they can come to merit His
favor. Allah may grant some people the ability to know, or to be patient, sincere,
sure, and so on, by virtue of which He favors them over others with regard to their
reward. Allah says: “A group of the People of the Book says: “Believe in the
morning what is revealed to the believers, but reject it at the end of the day;
perchance they may [themselves] turn back.’ ‘And believe no one unless he
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 339

follows your religion.’ Say [Oh, Muhammad]: ‘True guidance is the guidance of
Allah: [fear you] lest a revelation be sent to someone [else] like unto that which
was sent unto you? Or that those [receiving such revelation] should engage you in
argument before your Lord?’ Say [Oh, Muhammad]: ‘All bounties are in the hand
of Allah . . .”” (3:72—73); and Allah also says: “. . . Allah knows best where [and
how] to carry out His Message... .” (6:124); and “Allah chooses Messengers from
Angels and from men . . .” (22:75); and “. . . He forgives whom He pleases, and
He punishes whom He pleases . . .” (3:129).

In some verses of the Qur’an, Allah indicates the reasons behind His forgiveness
as well as those behind His punishment. He also provides sustenance without
limits to whom He pleases. He also indicates that He may grant wealth to whom
He pleases.

If there is Iman that some people are able to attain while others are not, then this
Iman is what Allah favors, and the former group is favored over the latter. And it
is this Iman which is negated of the latter group for Iman is what is in the heart,
and differs widely from one person to the next. This negation is not accompanied
by dispraise. For dispraise occurs as a result of either abandoning an obligation or
committing a sin. However, with regard to what Abu Talib al-Makki mentioned,
it is said that such people are Muslims, but not believers in some respects; and are
believers in others. Accordingly, Iman is negated for the person who fails to
achieve the perfect Iman. Such Iman is negated for him, although it is neither
obligatory nor desirable where he is concerned; it is, however, required from
others. For example, the increase of one’s worship at midnight may be required
of some people but not others. Moreover, it may even be undesirable for someone
who is unable to do that. However, such a matter is not addressed by the
Legislator [the Prophet]. Indeed, what the Prophet (pbuh) declared is that negation
of Iman requires dispraise. For it will not be negated for anyone unless he commits
asin, which indicates that the Prophet’s (pbuh) saying, “. . . ora Muslim,” was due
to this person’s having neglected outward and inward obligations, which is the
view of the general public.

Then there is a group of people who said that one might be a hypocrite without
Iman. They also said that the desert Arabs, mentioned previously, are hypocrites
with no Iman. This opinion was supported by others, such as Muhammad Ibn
Nasr. The majority said that these desert Arabs were not hypocrites whose deeds
340 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

were not accepted. Although they possessed a kind of hypocrisy, they also had
tasdiq, because of which their righteous deeds, deeds that were done for the Cause
of Allah were accepted. Therefore Allah considers them Muslims, saying: “. . .
That He has guided you to the belief, if you be true and sincere” (49:17). The same
thing applies to the thief and the adulterer, who are said to have no Iman, although
they have tasdiq. This is the most correct of the three views.

RESPONSE TO THE VIEW OF ABU TALIB AL-MAKKI

Abu Talib considered the person who is blameworthy for having neglected some
duty to be among those whose hearts have been [recently] reconciled [to truth] and
who have been given nothing. Moreover, he considered such a person to be a
believer whose belief was inferior to that of others. As for the majority, they said
that if someone is confirmed as a Muslim without being confirmed as a believer,
he is blameworthy, but not simply because someone else is superior to him. As the
Prophet (pbuh) said: “The most perfect believers are those with the best
character.” However, he did not deny Iman to those who rank lower than the
perfect believers. Allah says: “. . . Not equal among you are those who spent and
fought, before the conquering [of Makkah]. Such are higher in degree than those
who spent and fought afterwards. But to all, has Allah promised the best [reward] -
...” (57:10). |

Thus, in the verse above, He affirmed the Iman of both the favored and the less
favored and this is agreed upon by Muslims. So our Prophet (pbuh) said: “If the
ruler has judged correctly he receives two rewards, but if he has judged wrongly
he receives one.” He also said to Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘adh, when he made a judgment in
the Bani Qurayzah case: “You have judged as a king rules from above seven
firmaments.” Moreover, he [the Prophet] used to say to military leaders: “If you
laid siege to any fort and they ask you to judge them as Allah wishes, do not do
_ that, but judge them as you and your companions see fit [because people’s
judgment could be right or wrong, but Allah’s judgment can never be anything but
right], so if he [the judge] is correct, he will receive two rewards for being in
agreement with Allah’s judgment. However, ifhe is mistaken, he will only receive
one reward.” These three sayings are reported in Sahih Muslim and Sahih
al-Bukhari. Sulayman (may Allah be pleased with him) said that: “I asked Allah
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 341

to enable me to make judgments that agreed with His judgment [i.e., for the ability
to judge correctly].”

These tests and others prove what the Companions of the Prophet (pbuh) and their
Successors agreed on: that one of two persons may be given ijtihad, reasoning
ability, by Allah. As a result, he receives knowledge that the other does not, as a
result of which he receives two rewards. The mistaken one receives one reward,
but he is not considered a sinner. The knowledge of the first person, and his overt
and covert deeds based on it, bring about an increase in his Iman. Moreover, this
Iman is his duty, since he is able to achieve it. However, the other is not obliged
to have it since he is not able to achieve it. Hence, the first person has been
favored with an obligatory Iman, but it is not a must for the other, who is unable
to attain it,

This is the state of the whole Muslim community with respect to problems of
knowledge. If one person is given knowledge of the truth in a certain matter, while
another person seeks to understand it but is unsuccessful, both are praised,
rewarded, and considered believers. Allah gives the first person some Iman, which
it is his duty to have. But the mistaken individual does not deserve punishment.
However, if he were the first person and did the same thing, he would be punished.
Likewise, Allah especially favors our Prophet’s (pbuh) community with what a
law would be, and if we abandoned anything in it then we would deserve
punishment and dispraise. The Prophets before Muhammad are not to blame for
neglecting this law [since they had not yet received it}. But Allah favors
Muhammad (pbuh) and his community over other prophets and other communities
[without directing blame to any of the other prophets and their followers].

If a human being is only obliged to have that belief of which he is capable, and if
he does what he 1s asked to, he merits Paradise. If this man is called a Muslim, but
not a believer, he must be the one who is promised Paradise as the desert Arabs
were, and like the man whom our Prophet (pbuh) spoke of, saying, “. . . or a
Muslim,” and anyone of whom Iman is negated such as a fornicator, a drunkard,
a thief, or someone whose neighbor is not secure from his injurious conduct, or
who does not desire for his brother [in Islam] what he desires for himself; but this
is not so. Allah promises Paradise only to believers, not Muslims, although He
considers Islam the only religion that is to be accepted from people. Allah says:
“Allah has promised to believers, men and women, Gardens under which rivers
342 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

flow ...” (9:72). So He confines it to either absolute Iman or that which is bound
to righteous deeds. Allah says: “Those who have belief and do righteous deeds,
they are the best of creatures. Their reward is with Allah: Gardens of Eternity,
beneath which rivers flow . . .” (98:78); and “But give glad tidings to those who
believe and work righteousness, that their portion is Gardens, beneath which rivers
flow. Every time they are fed with fruits therefrom, they say: ‘Why, this is what
we were fed with before . . .”” (2:25); and “Those who believe, and do deeds of
righteousness, and establish regular prayers and regular charity, will have their
reward with their Lord: on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve” (2:277);
and “But to those who believe and do righteousness, He will give their [due]
rewards, and more, out of His Bounty . . .” (4:173); and “Then those who believe
in Allah, and hold fast to Him, soon will He admit them to Mercy and Grace from
Himself, and guide them to Himself by a straight Way” (4:175); and “But those
who believe and do deeds of righteousness, we shall soon admit to Gardens, with
Tivers flowing beneath their eternal home: Therein shall they have spouses pure:
We shall admit them to shades, cool and ever deepening [Paradise]” (4:57); and
“... Allah’s promise is the Truth and whose words can be Truer than those of
Allah’s?” (4:122); and “As to those who believe and work righteousness, Allah
will pay them [in full] their reward; but Allah loves not those who do wrong”
(3:57); and “To those who believe and do deeds of righteousness has Allah
promised forgiveness and a great reward” (5:9); and “. .. So those who believe and
do righteous deeds, upon them shall be no fear nor shall they grieve” (6:48); and
“But those who believe and work righteousness, no burden do We place on any
soul, but that which it can bear, they will be Companions of the Garden, therein
to dwell [forever]” (7:42). And there are many other Qur’anic verses that express
the meanings above.

So the promise of entering Paradise and receiving mercy in the Hereafter and
deliverance from punishment is tied to absolute Iman, and Iman is accompanied
by righteous deeds. And as we have mentioned, absolute Iman includes what Allah
and His Messenger commanded, and is not limited to the name Islam. Some claim
that if one has all the Iman he can attain, yet is not able to know its details, he may
be called a Muslim, but not a believer; nevertheless, he will still enter Paradise.
Paradise is merited by anyone who is called a Muslim, even if he is not called a
believer. However, this is not the case; for Paradise is not tied to anything except
Iman. This is consistent with the claim of some that not every Muslim is among
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 343

the believers whom are promised Paradise. If he were, then the promise of
Paradise would be bound to one’s being a Muslim just as it is bound to his being
a believer, and to his being righteous and pious. Allah says: “As to the Righteous,
they will be in the midst of Gardens and Rivers” (54:54); and “As for the
Righteous, they will be in Bliss” (82:13); and “Behold! Indeed on the friends of
Allah there is no fear, nor shall they grieve; Those who believe and [constantly]
guard against evil; For them are Glad Tidings, in the life of the Present and the
Hereafter: no change can there be in the Words of Allah. This is indeed the
supreme Success” (10:62—64). Since the word Islam was not used in this manner,
we know that the reality it refers to is not necessarily tied to Iman as it [Iman] is
tied to the words “righteous” or “pious,” and that the word Muslim includes those
who are threatened with punishment although Allah rewards them for their
obedience, such as having Iman in his heart. They have some hypocrisy by which
they deserve punishment, but they will not be in Hell forever; since if they have
some Iman in their hearts, the like of the weight of an atom or more, Allah takes
them to Paradise after they are punished.

FURTHER DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ISLAM AND IMAN

Thus, major sinners are imperfect believers, and if any one of them has a degree
of hypocrisy in his heart, he will be punished if Allah does not forgive him, but he
will not dwell in Hell forever. So major sinners are Muslims but not [true]
believers. But they [major sinners] show hypocrisy in their deeds rather than in
belief, since hypocrisy in belief would make them unbelievers. So, since they were
closer to being unbelievers than believers, they were called hypocrites. They are
included in the category of Muslims according to worldly judgments just as the
outright hypocrites are, since they have Iman and are included in Allah’s call: “Oh,
you who have believed!” His is a command to do what benefits them and abandon
what hurts them, and they need this. Also, if the Iman which they have includes
them in the group addressed as, “Oh, you who have believed!” then no one
objects; otherwise, they would be in a worse state than the sheer hypocrite. The
hypocrite ts addressed on the basis of his deeds, which benefit him in this life and
cause him to be assembled along with believers on the Day of Resurrection, being
distinguished thereby from people of other religions just as he was in this life.
However, at the Hour of Truth, they will be separated. Allah says: “... So a wall
344 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

will be put up between them, with a gate therein. Within it will be Mercy
throughout, and without it, all alongside, will be [wrath and] punishment! [Those
without] will call out: ‘Were we not with you?’ [The others] will reply: ‘True! But
you led yourselves into temptation; you looked forward [to our ruin]; you doubted
[Allah’s promise]; and [your false] desires deceived you in respect of Allah. This
Day no ransom will be accepted of you, nor of those who rejected Allah. Your
abode is the Fire: that is the proper place to claim you: and an evil refuge it is!””
(57:13-15). Allah also says: “The hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the
Fire: no helper will you find for them; except for those who repent, do righteous
deeds, hold fast to Allah, and purify their religion as in Allah’s sight: if so they
will be [numbered] with the believers. And soon will Allah grant to the believers
a reward of immense value” (4:145—46).

So if the servant of Allah does righteous deeds [for the cause of Allah], this is the
Islam that is Allah’s religion, and such a person has enough Iman to be assembled
with believers on the Day of Resurrection. If he committed sins, he is punished
and taken out of the Fire if he has even a mustard seed’s weight of Iman, or even
if he has hypocrisy with respect to deeds, not belief. Allah says: “. . . They will be
[numbered] with the believers. And soon will Allah grant to the believers a reward
of immense value” (4:146). So He does not say that they are believers only by
virtue of this, since having belief in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His
Messengers is obligatory for having Iman, and they do have this belief. However,
he mentions righteous deeds and loyalty to Allah and says: “They will be
[numbered] with the believers.” Hence, they are treated as believers.

Allah differentiates among believers; so he who achieves the required Iman
deserves reward, but he who has some hypocrisy and has committed major sins is
among those threatened with punishment. His Iman will benefit him and remove
him from the Fire, even if he has a mustard seed’s weight of Iman. However, he
does not deserve the absolute Iman on which depends the promise of entering
Paradise without first being punished. To summarize, there are people who have
a degree of unbelief [or hypocrisy] as well as a degree of Iman. As Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal said, such people are called Muslims. |

Thus, a human being may have some degree of Iman and some degree of
hypocrisy, or he could be a Muslim who is guilty of [minor] unbelief, which does
not exclude him from Islam completely, as Ibn ‘Abbas and others have said. This
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 345

is what Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said concerning the thief, the drunkard, and so on,
whom our Prophet (pbuh) considered to be Muslims but not believers. Reference
is made to the Qur’an and the Sunnah to demonstrate that such a person has Iman
but not Islam. A man could be a Muslim and have unbelief that does not take him
away from the Muslim community since unbelief is of two kinds: that which
excludes one from Islam, and that which results from neglect of deeds, which does
not exclude him from Islam, but causes him to be a mere Muslim rather than a
believer. This is how Ibn ‘Abbas and his companions interpret Allah’s saying: “. ..
If any do fail to judge by what Allah reveals, those are the unbelievers” (5:44).
They say that unbelief that does not exclude one from the Muslim community is
unbelief of a lesser degree than unbelief, sin of a lesser degree than sin, and
wrongdoing of a lesser degree than wrongdoing.

This is also cited by al-Bukhari in the first chapter of his Sahih, entitled The Book
of Belief, in which he indicates that deeds are part of Iman. Here he includes the
ideas of Orthodox Muslims as well as refutations of the Murji?ites as he was a
supporter of the Sunnah and the Orthodox Muslims who in turn sincerely followed
the Companions of the Prophet and their Successors.

FURTHER ASPECTS THAT DIFFERENTIATE BETWEEN ISLAM AND IMAN

Muslim scholars agree that the name Muslim may be overtly applied to hypocrites,
since outwardly they have surrendered, prayed, paid zakah, gone on pilgrimage,
and fought in the same manner that the Prophet applied the tenets of outward
Islam upon them. They also agree that he who does not have any Iman [who is a
hypocrite in his belief] is as Allah says: “The hypocrites will be in the lowest
darak, level, of the Fire . . .” (4:145). There are two different readings of the word
darak (or dark) and they both mean /eve/. Abu al-Husayn Ibn Faris says that Hell
has darakat, /evels, while Paradise has darajat, grades. Al-Dahhak says that the
word darajat means grades on top of each other, while darakat means steps
leading downward. Accordingly, Muslims differ in their grades. For example, the
highest grade in Paradise is occupied by our Prophet (pbuh) who said: “If you hear
a call to prayer [adhan], say what the caller says, then ask Allah to give you al-

* Abu al-Husayn, Ahmad Ibn Faris (7-390), was a well-known grammarian. [Kitab al-Iman MZ,
‏.م‎ 310 and al-Zirikli, vol. 1, p. 184.]
346 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

wasilah, which is the highest grade in Paradise, which should only be for one of
Allah’s slaves, and I hope to be that slave. Whoever asks Allah to give him al-
wasilah, I will intercede for him on the Day of Resurrection.” His [the Prophet]
saying: “I hope to be . . .” is like his saying: “I hope to be the most Allah-fearing
and righteous among you and to be the most knowledgeable with His hudud,
divine ordinances,” and there is no doubt he is the most fearing member of the
Muslim community and the most knowledgeable about Allah’s divine ordinances.

He [the Prophet] also said: “My prayer of intercession for my people will remain
hidden until the Day of Judgment, and it will be for every one who died without
associating anything with Allah.” He also said: “I hope you will constitute half of
the inhabitants of Paradise,” and other such sayings which Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal]
and others have cited in support of the view that whenever one says, “] am a
believer,” he must add, in sha’a Allah, if Allah wills, as the Prophet does in this
hadith.

What is meant here is that our Prophet (pbuh) is the best of believers and occupies
the highest grade in Paradise. Hypocrites, however, are in the lowest level of the
Fire even though they were Muslims in this life and were outwardly judged to be
Muslims based on overt laws and legislations. One who is a hypocrite with respect
to his deeds is called a Muslim, but if his hypocrisy exceeds his Iman, he does not
deserve the name “believer,” rather, he deserves the name “hypocrite.” If one’s
hypocrisy supersedes Iman then he does not deserve to be called a believer but
rather he is more deserving to be called a hypocrite. A person whose complexion
is a mixture of white and black, but his blackness supersedes, will be more
deserving to be called black rather than white. Allah says: “. .. They were that day
nearer to unbelief than to belief . . .” (3:167). But if he has more Iman than
hypocrisy, he is threatened with punishment [i.e., he has committed major sins],
and is not among those believers who are promised Paradise. This is an argument
for what Muhammad Ibn Nasr mentions on the authority of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal;
however, I have not found it in Ahmad’s writings, and neither is it mentioned by
al-Khallal or any of his followers. According to Muhammad Ibn Nasr and others,
Ahmad said: “Whoever commits these four major sins [fornication, theft, drinking
alcohol, and plundering] or something more serious than these four is called a
Muslim, but not a believer.” The one who commits minor sins is called a believer
but not a perfect believer. Ahmad said that when the Prophet (pbuh) negated the
Iman of a major sinner, he also negated it of himself. Moreover, he only negated
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 347

it of major sinners [as in his saying: “The adulterer who commits adultery is not
a believer when he commits adultery”]. Thus, the believer who commits minor
sins, which may be erased by doing righteous deeds, is an imperfect believer. As
for someone who fulfills the required Iman but mixes his righteous deeds with
minor sins, he occupies a lower grade in Paradise than one who does not commit
such sins.

Ahmad’s refusal to attribute Iman to major sinners is based on the Prophet’s
(pbuh) refusal to do so. Although such sinners have the essence of Iman and
tasdiq, they have committed sins that takes their Iman away from them. The
servant of Allah can have both Iman and hypocrisy in his heart, as well as both
Iman and unbelief. But the absolute Iman is that belief whose possessor deserves
the promise of Paradise.

CAN AN INDIVIDUAL HAVE BOTH IMAN AND HYPOCRISY?

The Kharijites, Mu‘tazilites, Jahmites, and Murji?ites, which include the
Karramites and other subsects, say that Iman and hypocrisy cannot be found
together at the same time in the same servant of Allah. Some of them claim
consensus on this, as does Abu al-Hassan. But in so doing they are mistaken and
oppose the Book, the Sunnah, and the traditions of the Companions and their
Successors, as well as sound reasoning. Moreover, the Kharijites and the
Mu“tazilites have generalized this corrupt view by claiming that one person cannot
have both obedience deserving reward and disobedience deserving punishment at
the same time. He cannot be praised for some characteristic and condemned for
another, or loved by one and damned by another. They cannot imagine that the
same person might enter both Hell and Paradise. Rather, he who enters one does
not enter the other, so they deny the possibility of coming out of Hell or receiving
the Prophet’s intercession for those who deserve Hell. (In this they oppose the
Prophet’s previous statement about his intercession.) It is said that the vast
majority of the Murji’ites agreed with them; however, they [the Murji?ites] say
that major sinners do enter Paradise and do not enter the Fire.

The Orthodox Muslim community, the Companions, their Successors, Islamic
sects such as the people of the hadith, Muslim jurists, and theologians from such
348 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

sects as the Murji’ites and Karramites, Kullabites, Ash‘arites, and Shi‘ites [both
Murji’ites and non-Murji’ites] say that someone may be punished in Hell by Allah
and then be allowed to enter Paradise, as the authorized hadiths clearly indicate.
All these groups were in agreement concerning the destination of the person who
committed evil deeds for which he deserved to be punished, and did righteous
deeds for which he merits Paradise. However, these groups disputed over what he
should have been called. For example, the Murji’ites [whether Jahmites or non-
Jahmites] said that he was a perfect believer since they defined Iman as mere
acceptance or belief, without deeds. However, the Orthodox Muslim community
said that he was not a perfect believer; otherwise he would have been punished.
He also lacked birr, piety, and taqwa, righteousness, so how could he be called a
believer? Here we have two different points of view. The correct one is: If the
question has to do with freeing a slave to atone for sin, he is a believer. The
answer is the same if one asks if he is included in the address to believers.

However, if one asks how he will be judged in the Hereafter, it is said that such
a person is not among the believers who are promised Paradise. Nevertheless, he
also has Iman, which prevents him from remaining forever in Hell, and by virtue
of this Iman he can enter Paradise later; if Allah has not forgiven him, he is
punished in the Fire. Therefore, some have said that he is a believer based on his
Iman and a sinner based on his major sins; or he may be considered an imperfect
believer. Those Orthodox Muslims and Mu‘tazilites who do not call hima believer
(although they oppose the Mu‘tazilites’ view that he has the essence of Iman,
through which he will enter Paradise] say that calling someone a sinner precludes
calling him a believer. Allah says: “. . . Ill-seeming is a name connoting sin [to be
used of one] after he has believed . . .” (49:11); and He also says: “Is it then he
who is a believer like the one who is a sinner? Not equal are they” (32:18); and the
Prophet’s (pbuh) saying: “Cursing a Muslim is a sin and fighting against him is
unbelief.”

On this basis some people have a degree of unbelief and some a degree of Iman
as well. Hence, our Prophet (pbuh) named many sins as unbelief even though the
sinner has more than an atom’s weight of Iman, because of which he does not
abide eternally in the Fire. As the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Cursing a Muslim is a sin
and fighting him is unbelief;” he also said: “Do not become unbelievers after me,
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 349

fighting each other.” This, of course, is found in many of the Prophet’s (pbuh)
sayings. For example, on his Hujjat al-Wada‘, farewell pilgrimage, he called
Muslims who fight each other without good cause unbelievers and he also called
this type of action unbelief. Allah says: “If two parties among the believers fall
into fighting, then you make peace between them; but if one of them transgresses
beyond bounds against the other, then you fall] fight against the one that
transgresses until it complies with the command of Allah; but if it complies, then
make peace between them with justice, and be fair; for Allah loves those who are
equitable. The believers are but a single Brotherhood so make reconciliation
between your brothers, and fear Allah, that you may receive Mercy” (49:9-10). He
thus makes clear that they had not completely ceased to be believers. But they did
have unbelief of the type that the Companions called minor unbelief. The Prophet
(pbuh) said: “Whoever calls his brother an unbeliever, one of the two becomes
one.” If one of them became completely non-Muslim, he would no longer be his
brother. However, in the situation described here, his unbeliefis the kind that does
not exclude Islam.

Similarly we have the reliable hadith that states: “There is no man who has
claimed to anyone other than his father while he is teaching him but that he has
unbelief.” In another hadith we read: “Whoever repudiates his family origins, even
if he is a man of no importance, is an unbeliever.” And among the words in the
Qur’an that were later abrogated we read: “Do not spurn your forefathers, for it is
ingratitude on your part to do so; for the rights of parents [over their children] go
hand in hand with the rights of Allah [over his servants].” Thus Allah says: “. . .
Give thanks to Me and to your parents, to Me is the final destination” (31:14); and
He also says: “And your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him and that
you be dutiful to your parents . . .” (17:23). The father is the source for the creation
of his son, while the son is the one who has acquired the benefit. Allah also says:
“His wealth and his children will not benefit him” (91:2). Ingratitude toward one’s
parents is a type of unbelief against Allah, since it is ingratitude toward being, out
of which his Lord created him, which means that he is ungrateful to Allah for
having created him. And in the language of those who came before, the Lord was
described as a father. Thus, in this respect such a person has shown ingratitude
toward Allah; however, he is not like one who utterly repudiates Allah. In what
follows we shall speak, Allah willing, of other related hadiths.
350 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

THE NECESSITY OF GOING BACK TO THE BOOK AND THE SUNNAH
TO CLARIFY THE MEANINGS OF IMAN AND ISLAM

Our intention here is to lay a comprehensive foundation on which knowledge of
sayings may be based, and to seek solutions to people’s disputes in the Qur’an and
the Sunnah. Muslims have different views about the words Iman and Islam
because these concepts are mentioned many times, and they have been frequently
discussed among Muslims. Any word that is sometimes applied in an individual
sense and other times in a restricted sense will lead to controversy. For someone
in search of understanding, the more he hears such words, the more obscure their
meanings become to him. But he who searches for knowledge, until he knows how
such words are used, knows that the best and perfect speech is that of Allah, and
that what Muslims have agreed on is much more than what they disputed over.

All Muslims, Orthodox and non-Orthodox, agree that it is required to believe in
Allah, His Angels, His Books, His Messengers, and the Hereafter. Moreover, they
agree that it is also required to pray, give zakah, fast, and go on pilgrimage.
Furthermore, they agree that whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger enters
Paradise without being punished; but whoever does not believe that Muhammad
is the Messenger of Allah is an unbeliever. Such bases and rules [of Iman}, which
constitute the foundation of religion, are agreed on by all Muslims and believers.
Their disputes over some matters or the meanings of certain terms are insignificant
compared to what they agreed on. Those who oppose the truth of the Qur’an and
the Sunnah are well known to the majority as heretics, for such people—like the
Kharijites, the Qadrites, and the Rafidites—are neither trusted nor accepted by
Muslims in general. Muslim scholars within the Orthodox Muslim community
disputed over subtle matters that most ordinary people know nothing about, but
these matters should have been referred to Allah and His Messenger. The question
of the names Iman and Islam—which both refer to a duty and obligation, since
none deserves Paradise unless he is a believing Muslim—must also be referred to
Allah and His Messenger. Hence the truth of the matter was made clear by our
Prophet (pbuh) in Gabriel’s hadith, where he divided religion and its people into
three categories, the lowest of these being Islam, the middle being Iman, and the
highest being Ihsan. Therefore, whoever reached the highest category must have
passed through the other two. To clarify, muhsin, man of Ihsan, is a believer, and
the believer is a Muslim, but the Muslim may not be a believer or a man of Ihsan.
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 351

The Qur’an classified the Islamic community into three categories, as Allah says:
“Then We have given the Book for inheritance to such of Our servants as We have
chosen: but there are among them some who wrong their own souls; some who
follow a middle course; and some who are, by Allah’s leave, foremost in good
deeds; that is the highest Grace” (35:32). So the Muslim who does not fulfill the
required Iman is the one who wrongs himself, the one who follows a middle
course is the perfect believer who has performed the required Iman and abandoned
that which is prohibited, while the one foremost in good deeds is the charitable
person who worships Allah as if he saw Him directly. In the Surahs entitled
Wagi‘ah [The Inevitable Event] and al-Mutafafin [Dealing in Fraud], Allah
mentions that in the Hereafter, people will be divided into these three categories.

Abu Sulayman al-Khattabi said that people are often mistaken concerning this
matter. For example, al-Zuhni said that Islam is a dual profession of belief, while
Iman is works. Others have said that Islam and Iman are one thing, referring to
Allah’s verses. Allah says: ““Then We evacuated those of the believers who were
there, but We found no [Muslim] persons except in one house” (51:35-36).
Al-Khattabi said that two scholars of knowledge discussed this matter and one of
them [the author] has written a book refuting the second opinion that says that
there is no difference between Islam and Iman, whereas al-Khattabi supports the
former opinion. For a Muslim could be a believer in some cases but not in others.
The believer, however, is always a Muslim, so every believer is a Muslim but not
vice-versa.

Of the two scholars referred to by al-Khattabi, I think the first one was
Muhammad Ibn Nasr; he was the first one to whom I explained that Islam and
belief are one and the same according to Orthodox scholars of Islam and the
hadith. There was no one else before him that I explained this to. As for the second
scholar to whom he responded, I think he was. . ..? Al-Khattabi favors the opinion
of those who differentiate between Islam and Iman—such as Abu Ja‘far, Hammad
Ibn Zayd, ‘Abd al-Rahman Ibn Mahdi, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, and others. I know of
no earlier scholars who disagreed with them. Accordingly, al-Khattabt favors this
opinion, which is also the opinion of the Orthodox Muslims in general.

‎In the three copies consulted, besides the one the translation is based on, the name of this person‏ ؟
‎was left blank (as indicated by footnotes to the texts).‏
352 . _ CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

Abu al-Qasim al-Taymi al-Asbahani'° and his son Muhammad, who interpreted
the book of Muslim, and others mentioned that Orthodox Muslims favor the view
that, in accordance with the Prophet’s statement, does not call the’ thief and the
fornicator a believer, as indicated by the [Qur’anic] text. Al-Khattabi, in his
interpretation of al-Bukharl, mentioned that the terms Iman and Islam are
intrinsically inseparable. In his interpretation of the Sunnah, al-Baghawi,
mentioned that our Prophet (pbuh) considered the word Islam as referring to overt
deeds and Iman as a name for covert belief. This is not because deeds are not part
of Iman, or because the tasdiq in the heart is not part of Islam. Rather, it is a
detailed analysis of things that one realizes as a comprehensive reality in religion
[that is, religion includes Iman and Islam, as the above verses illustrate]. Thus our
Prophet (pbuh) said: “Here comes Gabriel. He has come to teach you about your
religion.” Both tasdiq and works are included in the terms Islam and Iman, as
indicated in the following. Allah says: “Truly the religion in the sight of Allah is
Islam . . .” (3:19); and He says: “. . . And I have chosen for you Islam as your
religion . . .” (5:3); and He also says: “And whoever seeks a religion other than
Islam, never will it be accepted of him . . .” (3:85). He thus makes clear that the
religion he has chosen and accepted from his servants is Islam, and that religion
will not be accepted unless tasdiq is joined to work (i-e., tasdiq for Iman and work
for Islam). In the hadith about Gabriel, the Prophet (pbuh) distinguishes between
Islam, Iman, and Ihsan. He ranks Ihsan as the highest, since Ihsan includes Iman,
while Iman includes Islam. However, the reverse is not true. There is a great deal
of evidence to show that the meanings of these three nouns differ according to the
ways in which they are used. For example, if Islam and Iman are mentioned
together we differentiate between them. But if only one of them is mentioned, it
includes the meaning of the other [as mentioned previously]. An understanding of
this fact resolves many questions. What was mentioned above, that religion is not
acceptable unless tasdiq is joined to work, means that Iman requires righteous
work. This reveals the absolute necessity of Iman. However, it does not mean that
the righteous work, which is religion, is not called Islam, and even if work is a
condition of Iman’s acceptability, it does not necessarily mean that it is
inseparable from Iman. And even when it was inseparable from it, it is not
necessary that it will be part of it.

'° Abu al-Qasim al-Taymi al-Asbahani (?-535 A.H.) was a commentator on the Qur’an and a
scholar of hadith and of the Arabic language. He wrote several books on tafsir, the most famous
of which is entitled a/-Jami‘ fial-Tafsir. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 317 and al-Zirikii, vol. 1, p. 322.)
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 353

THE OPINION OF IBN SALAH CONCERNING IMAN AND ISLAM

Abu ‘Amr Ibn Salah said that our Prophet’s (pbuh) said: “Islam is to testify that
there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His Messenger.” He [the Prophet]
also said: “Iman is to affirm your belief in Allah, in His Angels, in His Books and
in His Messengers.” This is the explanation of both the essence of Iman, which is
inward 125010, and the essence of Islam, which is overt submission and obedience.
The Prophet’s (pbuh) statement also indicates that whoever overtly testifies that
there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His Messenger is judged to be a
Muslim. But the Prophet (pbuh) also added the other four pillars [since they are
the most prominent religious duties] to indicate that whoever fulfills them has
completely submitted [to Allah], but whoever abandons them loosens the bond of
obedience.

The term Iman includes the term Islam, as it is interpreted in the Prophet’s (pbuh)
hadith, in addition to other acts of obedience, since they are the results as well as
the foundation of the inward tasdiq, which is the essence of Iman and supports,
compliments, and preserves it. Thus, our Prophet (pbuh) interpreted Iman, in his
statement to the delegation of the people of ‘Abd al-Qays, as the two testimonies
of belief, establishment of prayer, giving zakah, and payment of one-fifth of the
spoils that falls to one’s lot. So the name “perfect believer” does not refer to
someone who has committed a major sin or abandoned an obligation, since the
description of something as perfect is applicable only to that which is complete,
and inapplicable to the [overtly] imperfect, unless some restriction is attached.
Therefore, it is permissible to negate the Iman of someone based on the Prophet’s
(pbuh) saying: “A fornicator who fornicates is not a believer so long as he
commits fornication.”

The term Islam, if used alone, also includes the essence of Iman, and it is tasdiq
and the essence ofacts of obedience, and all this is submission [to Allah]. He [Abu
‘Amr Ibn al-Salah] said that from his investigations he discovered that Islam and
Iman can be found together as well as separately, and that every believer is a
Muslim but not the reverse. This finding is in total agreement with the Qur’dn, the
Sunnah, and the sayings of the vast majority of Muslim scholars of hadith and
others. Often those who indulge in discussing these matters err.
354 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

THE OPINION OF THE AUTHOR CONCERNING THE STATEMENT OF IBN SALAH

This he [Ibn Salah, may the Mercy of Allah be upon him] mentioned that there is
harmony in the statements of Muslim scholars, and that what is in the Book and
the Sunnah is the statement of the majority of the scholars, that “every believer is
a Muslim and not every Muslim is a believer.” And he further related that in the
hadith in which he mentioned the roots of belief and Islam, one might note that the
Prophet (pbuh) replied to questions about belief and Islam with answers that are
limited to the defined. Hence, what he mentioned corresponds to both [belief and
Islam], not simply to their origins. For belief is belief in what he has mentioned
both inwardly and outwardly; at the same time, however, the belief of which he
speaks encompasses Islam, just as Ihsan encompasses belief.

The finding of Ibn al-Salah is also in agreement with the statement that the essence
of submission is overt Islam, since Islam is to submit to Allah both outwardly and
inwardly. This is the religion that Allah has accepted from people, as indicated in
the Qur’an and the Sunnah, and whoever overtly, but not covertly, submits to
Allah is a hypocrite whose outward submission is accepted of him, since none is _

commanded to investigate what is in people’s hearts. If Islam includes inward...
tasdiq, which is the essence of Iman, then it is necessary that every Muslim bea
believer. However, this contradicts what the majority of Muslim scholars have >:

said. Similarly, in Islam there must be an acceptance in which the essence of Iman ١
is rooted. When the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Here comes Gabriel. He has come to _
teach you about your religion,” and “Islam is the five pillars,” he did not mean that
one who fulfills these pillars without sincerity to Allah or with hypocrisy isa.
Muslim. However, he did mean that he who fulfills them overtly and covertly, as -
he is commanded, is a Muslim. Hence, Islam is the five pillars, which every able
servant of Allah should fulfill for the sake of Allah. But the remaining kinds of
worship are either duties [which, if some people fulfill them, are not required of
others; such as praying for the dead] or rights of some people over others. Such
kinds of worship follow from the five pillars, which constitute the foundation of
Islam. As the Prophet (pbuh) said: “A Muslim is one from whose hand and tongue
other Muslims are safe,” and “Islam is providing food and offering salutations to
people whom you know and whom you do not know.” So these five are the pillars
of Islam, as well as of Iman. Concerning the statement that acts of obedience are
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 355

the fruits of inward tasdiq, two things are meant. First, it means that acts of
obedience are a necessary outgrowth of belief, such that whenever inward belief
is present, outward acts of obedience will also be in evidence. This is the view
adopted by the pious ancestors and other Orthodox Muslims. Second, it means that
inward belief may be a cause in the sense that it exists in completeness even
before such acts of obedience have come into being. This is the view of the
Murj1 ites, the Jahmites, and others. And as we mentioned above, they are in error
in three different respects. First, they err in thinking that the belief in one’s heart
may be complete without the works of the heart, such as loving and revering
Allah, fearing Allah and relying on Him, and longing to meet Him. Second, they
are in error by thinking that the belief that is in one’s heart may be complete
without outward actions. This is the view adopted by all the Murji’ites. Their third
error is their claim that whoever is declared to be an unbeliever by the Lawgiver
[i.e., the Prophet] is declared to be so because of the absence of inward tasdiq in
the blessed, almighty Lord. Many later thinkers, who tacitly agree with the
Murjiites’ and Jahmites’ views on belief, confuse the doctrines of the pious
ancestors with the claims of the Murji’ites and Jahmites, and therefore make no
distinction between them. Such people hold the pious ancestors and hadith
scholars in great awe, and think that they are reconciling the views of the pious
ancestors with the views of others.

AL-MARWAZI DOES NOT DIFFERENTIATE BETWEEN ISLAM AND IMAN

Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad [bn Nasr al-Marwazi said: “A third group, which
represents the great majority of Orthodox Muslims and hadith scholars, said that
the Iman that Allah has called for and commands us to follow is Islam, which He
declares to be the religion He would accept from His servants. Islam is the

opposite of unbelief, which Allah abhors”. He [Allah] says: “. . . He likes not
disbelief for His slaves . . .” (39:7); and “. . . [have chosen for you Islam as your
religion . . .” (5:3); and “Those whom Allah wills to guide, He opened his breast

to Islam...” (6125); and “Is one whose heart Allah has opened to Islam, so that
he has received the light from his Lord. . .” (39:22). It follows that Allah praises
fsiam in the same way He praises Iman. He also makes [slam a name of praise and
thanks, and dectares that he who submits to Islam will receive enlightenment and
guidance from Allah. Moreover, He indicates that Islam is the religion which He
356 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

chooses, praises and makes obligatory. Do you not see that His Prophets and
Messengers desired it [Islam] and asked Allah to have it? For example, Ibrahim
and Isma‘il said that Allah says: “Our Lord! Make of us Muslims, bowing to Thy
[Will], and of our progeny a Muslim people, bowing to Thy [Will] . . .” (2:128).
Yisuf said that Allah says: “Cause me to die as a Muslim, and join me with the
righteous ones . . .” (12:101). Allah also says: “And this was enjoined by Ibrahim
upon his sons, and so did Jacob [saying]: ‘Oh, my sons! Allah has chosen for you
the true religion, then die not except as Muslims’” (2:132). Allah also says: “. . .
And say to the People of the Book and to those who are unlearned: Do you [also]
submit yourselves? If they do, they are in right guidance . . .” (3:20). In another
place Allah says: “Say you: ‘We believe in Allah, and the revelation given to us,
and to Ibrahim, Isma‘il, and Ishaq . . .”” (2:136); and “So if they believe as you
believe, they are indeed on the right path . . .” (2:137). Accordingly, Allah’s

“judgment is that whoever submits to Allah is rightly guided, and whoever believes
is also rightly guided. Hence He equates the two.

Muhammad Ibn Nasr al-Marwazi says that we have mentioned the entire argument
in support of the claim that Islam is Iman, that they are neither separate nor
different from each other, an argument we prefer not to repeat so as not to be

verbose or bore the reader. However, we will cite the evidence that was not ~~

mentioned previously, so as to show how it has been misinterpreted. We will also »
mention the pieces of evidence they cite from the Qur’an and other sources in ~
order to clarify the difference between Islam and Iman.

EXPLAINING THE VIEW OF AL-MARWAZI AND RESPONDING TO IT

Al-Marwazi means to say that the praiseworthy Muslim is the praiseworthy © _
believer, and that the blameworthy Muslim lacks both Islam and Iman. Moreover, -

every believer is a Muslim and every Muslim must have Iman: this is right and
agreed upon. He also means to say that whoever is called a Muslim is likewise
called a believer. However, a dispute over terminology arises here. Al-Marwazi’s
claim is that the connotation of one is the same as that of the other, but this
similarity was never reported by our ancestors, although it is said that they [Islam
and Iman] are inseparable from each other. But in this case, the referent of the first
word must not be the same as the referent of the other. Indeed, he does not cite any
of the Prophet’s Companions, their Successors, or Muslim jurists, who said that
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 357

the term Islam is the same as the term Iman. But what is well known about the
pious ancestors and their successors is that the believer who deserves the promise
of Allah is the Muslim. Hence every Muslim is a believer and every believer is a
Muslim. This fact is agreed upon by the pious ancestors and their successors, as
well as all Islamic sects, who said: “A believer who is promised Paradise must be
a Muslim; and a Muslim who is promised Paradise must be a believer; and
whoever enters Paradise without punishment is a believing Muslim.”

Orthodox Muslims say that whoever comes out of Hell and enters Paradise has
some Iman, but the dispute is over that term—that is, whether to call them
believers or not. The ancestors narrated that Iman is words and works, but they did
not state such a thing concerning Islam. However, since the great majority of
Muslim jurists say that Islam is the whole religion, not merely the utterance of the
two testimonies of belief (which is in conflict with al-Zuhni’s view), and that
prayer, giving zakah, fasting, pilgrimage, and other similar obligations are part of
Islam as well as of Iman, al-Marwazi took them to be one thing. However, this is
not so. For Iman requires Islam; this is unanimously agreed upon, but it does not
mean that they are one thing. There is no single piece of evidence that indicates
that Islam requires Iman (contrary to al-Marwazi’s argument that there is no
difference between Islam and Iman]. But does Islam require the obligatory or
perfect Iman? Indeed, this is a controversial question. Al-Marwazi does not cite
any evidence in support of the claim that Islam requires Iman. However, the
prophets whom Allah described as Muslims were [true] believers, and Allah
described them as such. Yet even if He did not mention this, we would know for
certain that all prophets are believers.

The foremost Muslims were also believers. And if it happens that Islam
necessitates Iman, then we can say that they are inseparable, or that every Muslim
is a believer and every believer is a Muslim. This is true if it means that a Muslim
who enters Paradise has the required Iman or that a Muslim who is rewarded for
his worship must have the essence of Iman. Hence, every Muslim is a believer,
although it might not be the Iman that our Prophet (pbuh) negated of the one who
does not desire for his brother [in Islam] what he desires for himself, or one who
commits major sins, or the desert Arabs and others. If it is said that Islam and
perfect Iman are inseparable, this does not imply that one is the other. In this
regard they are like the soul and the body, since there is no soul without a body,
and there is no living body without a soul; but one is not the other. Iman is like the
358 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

"soul that exists in a body, and Islam is like the body, which cannot live without a
soul. For they are inseparable, but the referents of the two terms are not the same
thing. On the other hand, the Islam of hypocrites is like the dead body: a corpse
without a soul. For there is no living body without a soul. But souls vary widely,
as illustrated in the Prophet’s (pbuh) hadith: “Souls of the same type flock
together.” It is not that every one who prays [using his body] has a heart
enlightened by fear and remembrance of Allah and understanding of the Qur’an,
even if he is rewarded for his prayer. So overt Islam is like overt prayer; and Iman
is like the knowledge of Allah, reverence, and the understanding of the Qur’an that
are found in the heart at the time of prayer. So whoever has a humble heart has a
humble body, but not the reverse. That is why it is said: “Avoid the humility of
hypocrites.” That is, do not show reverence with your body if it is not in your heart
as well. But if the heart is pure, the whole body is also pure.

PEOPLE’S LEVELS WITH RESPECT TO IMAN AND ISLAM

With respect to belief and Islam, people are to be found on three different levels:
one who wrongs himself, one who adopts a middle course, and one who outdoes
others in bringing blessing. The person who is a Muslim, both outwardly and
inwardly, yet who is wronging himself must have some measure of belief;
nevertheless, he has not performed his [religious] obligations. Neither, however,
has he turned back [from belief]. The same is true of the other levels. A discussion
of this will. follow, if Allah wills.

Indeed, the verses that Muhammad Ibn Nasr cites indicate the obligation to
embrace Islam, which is the religion chosen by Allah. This is entirely correct.
However, it does not indicate that Islam is Iman itself, nor does it indicate that a
man enters Paradise by merely being a Muslim [as Muhammad Ibn Nasr claims
in his first argument]. Allah promises the believers Paradise in many verses, but
He does not use the term Muslims therein. But Allah’s praise and love [for Islam]
indicate that it is part of Iman. This is agreed on among Orthodox Muslims, who
say that every believer is a Muslim and that whoever fulfills the required Iman has
also fulfilled the required Islam. But the controversy is over the opposite situation
[that is, whether every Muslim is a believer]. In other words, although Allah
desires and commands Muslims to pray, this does not indicate that prayer is Iman
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 359

itself; rather, it is implied in Iman. Hence, every believer is someone who prays,
but it does not necessarily follow that every one who prays is a believer.

Indeed, all the evidence al-Marwazi cites from our Prophet’s (pbuh) sayings
differentiates between Iman and Islam, as for example in the hadith concerning
Gabriel, which indicates that if the term Iman is used alone, Islam will be implied
in it.

ABU ‘ABD ALLAH IBN HAMID EXPLAINS THE VIEWS
OF MUSLIM SCHOLARS CONCERNING IMAN AND ISLAM

In his book entitled a/-Munsiffi Usul al-Din (On the Foundations of Religion] Abu
“Abd Allah Ibn Hamid said: “We have mentioned that Iman is words and works.
But Islam [in Ahmad’s opinion] bears two meanings: (1) Islam is as Iman; (2)
Islam is words without works.” The same opinion is stated by Isma‘il Ibn Sa‘id
[al-Shalinji], who said that the correct narration ts that it is words and works. As
for Ahmad Ibn Hanbal’s statement that Islam is words only, what he meant is that
embracing Islam does not require what belief does by way of works, which are a
condition of its reality. Prayer, for example, is not a necessary condition for one
to be a Muslim, since according to the statement attributed to [Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal], one does not become an unbeliever by neglecting prayer.

Ibn Hamid continues that we have judged that Islam and Iman are two terms with
two different meanings, and we have mentioned the jurists’ dispute over this.
Malik, Shurayk, and Hammad Ibn Zayd likewise differentiate between Islam and
Iman. However, the followers of al-Shafi‘i and Abu Hanifah have argued that they
are two names with one meaning. He [Ibn Hamid] adds that at the time of
committing a major sin, Iman ceases to be found in one’s heart, so one ceases to
be a believer and becomes only a Muslim. But if he repents, he becomes a believer
even if he may commit minor sins. Then he (Ibn Hamid] cites some evidence for
this, but what he quotes refutes the view that Islam is merely the utterance of the
two testimonies of belief. For there are many pieces of evidence that indicate that
works are part of Islam. For example, we have the hadiths that state: “A Muslim
is he from whose hand and tongue other Muslims are safe;” and “Islam is to testify
that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad (pbuh) is His Messenger, to pray,
to give zakah, to fast during the month of Ramadan, and to perform the
360 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

١ pilgrimage, if you can bear the expense of the journey.” Accordingly, whoever
says that overt deeds that Allah commands are not part of Islam is wrong. By
contrast, there is no authorized evidence to indicate that the heart’s acceptance is
part of Islam. The Prophet (pbuh) interpreted Islam to mean turning one’s face and
surrendering one’s heart to Allah. Thus, sincerity to Allah is Islam, but not the
acceptance that refers merely to the heart’s knowledge.

Although Ahmad Ibn Hanbal states in one place that Islam is the two testimonies
of belief, he states elsewhere that works are part of Islam, and in this he agrees
with al-Zuhri. If by saying that Islam is the two testimonies of belief one means
that by uttering these two testimonies of belief one enters into Islam without
fulfilling perfect Islam, then he is correct. However, if he means that by uttering
the two testimonies one fulfills perfect Islam, then he is absolutely wrong. Indeed,
Ahmad denied such an interpretation. It follows then that one should be called a
Muslim even if he does not perform the works, This is in accordance with the
hadith of the Angel Gabriel. Thus, the statement of Ahmad should have been
mentioned in its totality.

Isma‘il Ibn Sa‘id [al-Shalinji] said that when he asked Ahmad about Islam and
Iman, he said that Iman is words and works, while Islam is verbal testimony. He
[Isma‘il] also said that when he asked Ahmad about him who said “If I do what
Gabriel told the Prophet (pbuh) when he [the latter] asked him about Islam, am I
Muslim?” he [Ahmad] said, yes. To this the man replied that if one does not do
what Gabriel told the Prophet (pbuh), is he also a Muslim? No, he [Ahmad]
replied, for this contradicts what is in Gabriel’s hadith.

Accordingly, Ahmad considers the one who does not fulfill the five pillars of
Islam to be a non-Muslim, although he also says that Islam is verbal testimony. In
other words, verbal profession is made at the time of conversion into Islam, though
the required Islam is incomplete unless one fulfills the five pillars. However,
Ahmad criticizes the one who does not follow what is in Gabriel’s hadith.
Moreover, in many of his answers he charges him who does not pray with
unbelief, and Muslims unanimously agree that an unbeliever is not a Muslim.
Hence it is clear that Ahmad Ibn Hanbal did not mean that Islam is merely the two
testimonies of faith without works. And if one thinks that by Islam Ahmad meant
the two testimonies alone, this means that even if one abandons the four other
pillars [of Islam], he will not be charged with unbelief. However, most statements
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 361

attributed to him are against this. And even those (namely, al-Shafi‘i Malik, and
Abu Hanifah) who do not accuse the person who abandons these pillars of being
an unbeliever, consider deeds to be a part of Islam. This being the case, how is it
that Ahmad does not consider them as part of Islam, although his opinion on this
is stronger than that of others? It has been related of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal that he
considered Sa‘d’s hadith to be in conflict with that of ‘Umar, and that he preferred
the former to the latter.'!

Al-Hassan Ibn “Ali once said that he once asked Ahmad Ibn Hanbal about belief
or Islam. He [the latter] said that ‘Umar’s hadith relates to this; however, I prefer
the one related by Sa‘d, as if he understood that the one related by ‘Umar
indicated that works are what is referred by the term Islam, which is preferable,
whereas the account related by Sa‘d indicates that the entity referred to by the
term “belief” is preferable. However, ‘Umar’s hadith mentions nothing about
Islam except for outward works. And these are not considered to constitute belief
unless they are joined to inward belief in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His
Messengers, in which case it would be partial belief. Hence, the entity referred to
by the term “belief” is preferable, as indicated by Sa‘d’s hadith, and there is no
real inconsistency between the two hadiths.

As for the distinction made by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal between Islam and belief, he
would sometimes make the distinction, and at other times mention some
difference between them, without making any definitive statement about them.
Moreover, when he would draw a comparison between them, he would say: “Islam
is merely the words [of the testimony] one utters,” whereas at other times he
would not say this. Likewise, with respect to declaring someone an unbeliever for
having neglected some of the basic religious obligations of Islam, he would
sometimes declare people to be unbelievers on this basis, to the point of becoming

١ [The following footnote is taken from the MI.2 edition, pp. 354-55.] As for “Umar’s hadith, it
concems the coming of the Angel Gabriel (upon him be peace) in the form of a desert Arab. The
final part of the hadith (which has been mentioned earlier) reads as follows: "Here is Gabriel,
who has come to teach you your religion.” As for the hadith related by Sa‘d, it tells us that the
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) gave gifts to a group of people while Sa‘d was seated (nearby).
However, the Prophet (pbuh) ignored one of the men, who of all of them was the most admirable,
in Sa‘d’s view. So he said to him: "Oh Messenger of Allah, what do you have against this man?
For indeed, I perceive him to be a believer." To which the Prophet replied: ". . . or a Muslim.”
(This hadith was recorded by al-Bukhari.)
362 . CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

enraged, while at other times he would not declare them to be unbelievers at all.
Maymiini tells us that he once said: “Oh, Abu ‘Abd Allah [Ahmad Ibn Hanbal],
do you distinguish between Islam and belief?” “Yes,” he replied. “On what basis?”
Maymiini asked. He answered: “The majority of hadiths point to such a
distinction.” As it is said: “The fornicator is not a believer as long as he commits
fornication, nor is the thief a believer as long as he steals.” While Allah says “The
desert Arabs say: ‘We believe.’ Say: ‘You have no faith; but you [only] say we
have submitted our wills to Allah. . .’” (49:14). Besides, Hammad Ibn Zayd also
makes a distinction between Islam and Iman. And it was related to us by Abu
Salamah al-Khuza‘i that Malik and Sharik, along with Hammad Ibn Zayd, all drew
a distinction between Islam and belief.

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said that a man once told him that if we never learned any
more about belief than this, it would be good. So he said to Abu ‘Abd Allah: “Do
you base your views on the apparent meaning of what is in the Qur’an along with
al-Sunan?” “Yes,” he replied. So he asked: “What about the Murji’ites’ claim that
Islam is based on mere words?” He answered: “They do not distinguish between
Islam and belief, and they consider the Muslim and the believer to be one and the
same; moreover, they hold that both have belief as complete and perfect as that of
Gabriel.” Then he [Ahmad] said: “Is this the basis of our argument against them?”
“Yes,” he replied. Hence, he made an absolute distinction between them, basing
his argument on the [religious] texts [of Islam].

Salih Ibn Ahmad”said that his father was once asked about Islam and belief, and
he replied by saying that, according to Ibn Abi Dhi’b, '3 Islam is based on what one
says, while belief is based on what one does. Then he [the father] was asked: and
what do you say about it? To which he replied that Islam and belief are not
synonymous with each other, citing the hadith mentioned above from Sa‘d. In this
hadith the Prophet (pbuh) did not show preference for the view that Islam is based
solely on an utterance; rather, he simply replied that Islam is to be distinguished
from belief, as evidenced by what we read in both the Qur’an and in this reliable
hadith.

2 Salih Ibn Ahmad, Abu al-Fadl (7-265 A.H.), was a jurist and the son of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal. [Al-
Zirikii, vol. 3, ‏.م‎ 273.]

3 Thyn Abi Dhi?b, Muhammad Ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman (?-158 A.H.), was a jurist of Madinah. [Kitab
al-Iman MZ, p. 328.]
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 363

Hanbal (Ibn Hilal al-Shaybani)"* said that Abu ‘Abd Allah [Ahmad Ibn Hanbal]
has related Buraydah’s hadith to us, which says: “The Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
used to teach Muslims, tf they passed by a graveyard, to say, ‘Peace be upon you
[deceased] believers and Muslims. We will follow you, if Allah wills.’” Hanbal
said: “I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah say that in this hadith there is evidence against the
person who said: ‘Iman is mere words. Thus, I am a [true] believer,” for the
Prophet’s (pbuh) reference to “believers and Muslims” differentiates between a
Muslim and a believer and belies the claim of one who says: “I am a true
believer.” His saying: “We will follow you, Allah willing,” although he knows he
will die, shows the importance of adding the phrase, “if Allah wills,” to the
statement, “1 am a believer.”

Abu al-Harith [Ahmad Ibn Muhammad al-Sa’igh] said that he asked Abu ‘Abd
Allah about the hadith, “The fornicator who fornicates is not a believer as long as
he commits fornication, and no drunkard who drinks wine is a believer as long as
he drinks it.”” He answered that people have varied widely in their interpretations.
For example, ‘Ata’ said that Iman turns aside from a sinner. Tawis said that if one
commits a sin, he is no longer a believer. Al-Hassan said that if one repents, Iman
will be restored to him. Some have said that [the sinner] ceases to be a believer
and becomes only a Muslim, but he does not cease to be a Muslim. This issue is
also mentioned by Salih {the son of Imam Ahmad], who narrated the issues of Abu
Harith and who once asked his father about it. The father replied that it was
narrated that Abu Ja‘far said: “The fornicator who fornicates is not a believer as
long as he commits fornication.” When he heard this hadith, he remarked that a
sinner ceases to be a believer and becomes only a Musiim. Therefore, anyone who
commits an act of fornication will exit from the status of a believer to that of a
Muslim. Hence, Islam is a prerequisite of Iman. Al-Zuhnri said that when Sa‘d’s
hadith was narrated he found that Islam is the two testimonies of belief, while
Iman is works. To this Ahmad replied that this hadith has different interpretations
and that Allah alone knows best.

Hence, he [Ahmad] makes mention of the views held by those who were followers
of the Companions of the Prophet, yet without stating a preference for any of them
over any others. This may be because all their views were valid, and because he

١ Hanbal, Ibn Hilal (?-273 A.H.), a cousin of Imam Ahmad Jbn Hanbal, died in Wasit, Iraq. He
devoted his time to working on the science of hadith and history. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 328.]
364 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

was in agreement with all of them, just as he has stated elsewhere that the person

- _ who commits fornication ceases to be a believer and becomes [only] a Muslim.

Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] and others of the pious ancestors do not use the term ta’ wil,
interpretation, to refer to the practice of denying the apparent meanings of
expressions [in the Qur’an]; rather, they employ the term ta’wil to refer to
interpretation and to the explication of what a given expression means. Thus we
have the words of ‘A?ishah (may Allah be pleased with her), who said: “The
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) often used to say as he knelt and prostrated himself
before Allah: ‘Praise be to you, Oh, Allah, forgive me,”” as he interpreted the
Qur’an. However, what has been said by the Successors of the Prophet’s
Companions does not conflict with the apparent meaning of the hadith; on the
contrary, it supports it. It is also in agreement with Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal’s]
interpretation of it, even if [such an interpretation] is consistent with its apparent
meaning. Otherwise, the innovator or heretic might suppose its meaning to be that
he became an unbeliever with no belief whatsoever, as the Kharijites’ claim. For
the hadith provides no evidence for this view; and whoever denies that such people
have belief considers them to be Muslims but not believers.

Al-Marwazi relates that Abu ‘Abd Allah [Ahmad Ibn Hanbal] was once asked:
“Are we believers?” “We say we are Muslims,” he replied. Then I said to him:
“Shall we say that we are believers?” He said: “No, rather, we are Muslims;” this
is because part of the essence of Islam is to make the exception with regard to
belief. For one does not know whether someone has performed everything Allah
commands him, even if he says: “I am righteous,” “I am Allah-fearing,” or “I am
one of Allah’s saints.” But this does not prevent one from omitting the exception
if what one means to say is simply, “I believe”; in this case all a person is doing
is affirming the belief that exists in his heart, rather than stating with absolute
certainty that he has carried out all of Allah’s commands. Similarly, one might
state with certainty that he loves Allah and His Messenger, that he detests unbelief
against Allah, or other things he may know for certain to be true about the present
state of his heart. The same would apply if what he meant to say was that he was
a believer outwardly, in which case there is nothing to prevent him from affirming
unequivocally that which is known about him. Rather, like all members of
extremist sects, he detests the claims of the Murji’ites, who say that belief is
identical in all those who possess it. They claim that everyone who has belief has
it in the very same degree, the way every human being has a head, so that someone
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 365

might say: “I am truly a believer,” or “I am a believer in the eyes of Allah,” just
as someone might say: “I truly have a head,” or “I truly have a head in the eyes of
Allah.” For whoever makes such an unequivocal statement has excluded all works,
both inward and outward, from the definition of belief. However, this is a
reprehensible thing to say, as well as being a falsehood in the view of the
Prophet’s Companions, their Successors, and all other Muslims. As for the
question of when and whether one is required to make the exception, people have
voiced various opinions, which shall be discussed later.

THE REPLY TO THOSE WHO 00 NOT DIFFERENTIATE BETWEEN IMAN AND ISLAM

On this subject there are two extreme views. The first says that Islam is solely
uttering the words [the testimony] and that overt works are not part of it. The
second view states that the meanings of Islam and Iman are the same. However,
both views are weak and contradict the hadiths of Gabriel and the Prophet
Muhammad (pbuh). So although Muhammad Ibn Nasr al-Marwazi agreed with the
second view, he did not have evidence to support it. However, he did cite evidence
that refutes the first view. This evidence is found in the story of the desert Arabs,
where Allah says: “... Say, do not count your Islam as a favor upon me: No, Allah
has conferred a favor upon you that He has guided you to the belief, if you are true
and sincere” (49:17). He [al-Marwazi] said that this verse indicates that Islam is
the same as Iman. However, some hold that this verse indicates exactly the reverse
of what al-Marwazi claims. For the desert Arabs did not say: “We have submitted
our wills to Allah.” Rather they said: “We believe,” whereupon Allah ordered
them to say: “We have submitted our willis to Allah.” Then He called them
Muslims, saying: “... Say, do not count your Islam as a favor upon me: No, Allah
has conferred a favor upon you that He has guided you to the belief, if you be true
and sincere” (49:17). This was in response to their saying: “We believe.” If Islam
were Iman itself, He need not have said: “If you be true and sincere,” for surely
they were true and sincere in saying: “we submitted our wills to Allah,” although
they did not actually state this. But Allah says: “They impress on you as a favor
that they have embraced Islam. Say, * Do not count your Islam as a favor upon
me: No, Allah has conferred a favor upon you.. .”” (49:17). That is, they consider
that they have done Allah a favor by submitting their wills to Him. Allah calls
their deeds Islam, though there is no evidence in this verse that indicates that they
366 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

called it Islam. Rather they said “We believe.” Then Allah says that He has
conferred a favor upon them by His guiding them to Iman. As for Islam that does
not have Iman with it, if they only submit their wills to Allah out of fear of the
sword, yet without believing, they confer a favor upon no one. And if Allah had
not guided them to Iman, then their Islam would be like that of hypocrites, which
Allah does not accept. However, if they were true and sincere in saying “We
believe,” Allah is the One Who has conferred a favor upon them in that He guides
them to Iman and to the Islam that is included in Iman. In this verse Allah denies
their Iman and makes His favor dependent on their being true and sincere,
indicating that it was possible for them to be thus. It is said that they became true
and sincere after this. It is also said that something tied to a condition does not
entail the presence of the condition itself. It is likewise said that they had a degree
of Iman, but what kind of Iman is it that he described the second time? Is it that
they have a branch of Iman?

Muhammad Ibn Nasr pointed out that Allah says: “And they have been
commanded no more than this: to worship Allah, offering Him sincere devotion
.. .” (98:5); and “The religion in the Sight of Allah is Islam . . .” (3:19).
Accordingly, Allah refers to the establishment of prayer and the giving of zakah
as Islam. He also refers to din, religion, as Islam. Hence, whoever does not give
zakah has abandoned a part of religion, which is Islam. Muhammad Ibn Nasr then
cites [as support for his opinion] the argument of the group that differentiates
between Islam and Iman by saying that Iman is words and works; and that prayer
and zakah, which Allah calls religion, are part of Iman; moreover, the religion
accepted by Allah is Islam. Accordingly, Allah refers to Islam and Iman as the
same thing. Similar opinions are attributed to the Prophet (pbuh). But whoever
claims that Islam is mere verbal testimony and that works are not part of Islam has
violated the Book and the Sunnah. Indeed, such a person is no different from the
Murji’ites, who claim that Iman 15 verbal testimony without works.

He [al-Marwazi] said that Allah makes prayer and zakah part of religion, which
is Islam, and it is a commendable view, which agrees with the saying of Gabriel.
So is his refutation of the claim that works are not part of Islam. However, he also
said that Allah refers to Islam and Iman as one and the same, which 15 untrue. For
Allah says: “The religion in the Sight of Allah is Islam. . .” (3:19). However, He
did not say, “the religion in the Sight of Allah is Iman,” but rather, “this religion
is of Iman.” For the essence of Iman is knowledge of the heart and affirming it.
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 367

Al-Marwazi claims that works follow from such knowledge, and that assent is
inseparable from this knowledge. Moreover, a servant of Allah cannot be a
believer without both of them [works and assent]. However, Islam is mere work
with words, and knowledge and assent are not part of it, although Islam
necessarily entails this very assent. For there is no work without knowledge. But
Islam does not require the detailed Iman that Allah declares in His sayings: “Only
those are believers who have believed in Allah and His Messenger, and have never
since doubted, but have striven with their belongings and their persons in the
Cause of Allah: Such are the sincere ones” (49:15); and “For believers are those
who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor in their hearts, and when they hear
His signs rehearsed, find their belief strengthened, and put [all] their trust in their
Lord” (8:2).

All the [religious] texts [of Islam] negate the Iman of those who do not possess the
qualities of a believer. And indeed, many individuals are Muslims both outwardly
and inwardly with total assent, yet they are not characterized by Iman. Allah says:
“If anyone desires a religion other than Islam, never will it be accepted of him...”
(3:85); and “. . . And I have chosen for you Islam as your religion . . .” (5:3).
However, He does not say that if anyone desires knowledge, assent, and Iman
other than Islam, never will it be accepted of him. Nor does he say that He has
chosen for you Islam as your assent and knowledge. For Islam is implied in
religion, works, obedience, and submission. So, whoever desires a religion other
than Islam, his religion will not be accepted. Iman, by contrast, is tranquility and
assurance, the origin of which are knowledge, assent, and understanding. And
from Iman, religion follows. Accordingly, it is said: “I believed in Allah,” and “I
submitted to the will of Allah.” Allah says: “Moses said: ‘Oh, my people! If you
do [really] believe in Allah, then in Him put your trust if you are really Muslims’”
(10:84). If this is what is meant by both of them [Iman and Islam, then it will be
repetitious. Allah also says: “For Muslim men and women—for believing men and
women .. .” (33:35). He also says in this same verse: “True men and women, for
men and women who are patient and constant, for men and women who humble
themselves.” Hence, a believer possesses all these qualities; but these qualities do
not correspond to the general or the specific requirements of Iman. Whenever the
Prophet worshiped Allah in the middle of the night he would say: “Oh, Allah, I
have submitted my will to You, believed in You, put my trust in You, turned to
You in repentance, fought for Your Sake, and relied on You for settling all my
368 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

affairs.” It is also recorded in the two Sahihs that whenever the Prophet (pbuh)
prostrated himself at night in prayer to Allah he would say: “Oh, Allah, I have
bowed down to You, believed in You, and submitted my will to You.” And when
he bowed down, he used to say: “Oh, Allah, I have bowed down to You, submitted
my will to You, and believed in You.” When the Prophet (pbuh) clarified the
qualities of both a Muslim and a believer, he said: ““A Muslim is he from whose
hand and tongue other Muslims are safe, whereas a believer is he whom people
trust with their persons and property.” And it is well known that safety from being
wronged by someone differs from trusting him with one’s person and property.
Indeed, the latter ranks higher than the former, for whenever people trust someone
with their persons and property, they feel safe from the danger of his tongue and
hand; otherwise, they would not do so. But the reverse is not necessarily true. And
based on this one may see the distinction between Islam and Iman.

Muhammad Ibn Nasr said that whoever claims that Islam is verbal testimony and
that works are not part of it has violated the Qur’an and the Sunnah. For all
Qur’anic texts indicate that works are part of Islam. He said: “There is no
distinction between this view and that of the Murji’ites, who claim that belief is
merely verbal testimony apart from works.”

Hence someone might say that there is a distinction between them, since Orthodox
Muslims, such as al-Zuhri and others, who held similar views have said that works
enter into the definition of belief, whereas Islam to them is also a part of belief.
Hence, they see belief as being more complete than Islam and this is in total
agreement with the Book and the Sunnah. They also hold the view that people
possess varying degrees of belief. Both of these views are consistent with the
Qur’an and the Sunnah. As for the Murji’ites, they say that belief represents part
of Islam, Islam being the more perfect and superior of the two entities. They also
hold that everyone who possesses belief possesses it to the same degree; hence, the
belief of one of the Companions of the Prophet and that of the most iniquitous,
sinful individual would be equal. A corresponding view of theirs is that no one can
have partial belief, which is in conflict with both the Qur’an and the Sunnah.

Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] responded to this question in one of the two versions of his
teachings, saying that Islam is the words [testimony] one utters. Al-Zuhri says that
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 369

sometimes he [Ahmad] agreed with those who hold this view, while at other times
he did not. Rather, he mentions the fact that both the Book and the Sunnah support
the notion that Islam 1s to be distinguished from belief. Hence, when he responded
by referring to al-Zuhri’s statement, al-Maymuni replied to him, saying: “Oh, Abu
“Abd Allah! Do you distinguish between Islam and belief?” “Yes,” he replied. “On
what basis can we argue for this view?” he asked. “Most of the hadiths provide
evidence in support of this,” he replied. Then he [al-Maymini] said: “The
fornicator is not a believer so long as he commits fornication, and the thief is not
a believer so long as he steals.” Allah says: “The desert Arabs: Say: ‘We believe.’
Say: ‘You have no faith; but you [only] say: We have submitted our wills to Allah
...”” (49:14). I then asked him: “So do you base your views on the straightforward
meaning of the Book and the Sunan?” “Yes,” he replied. “So what about the
Murjiites’ view that Islam is an utterance?” He replied: “They consider the
Muslim and the believer to be one and the same. Moreover, they view them both
as having belief as perfect and complete as that of Gabriel.” I then asked: “Is this
the basis of our argument against them?” “Yes,” he said, “since Ahmad has replied
that they consider the flagrant sinner to be a believer with belief as complete and
perfect as that of the angel Gabriel.”

As for his statement that the Murji’ites considered the Muslim and the believer to
be one and the same, it is the view of those who hold that religion and belief are
the same thing. For Islam is religion, and they make no distinction between Islam
and belief. This is the view of the Murji’ites according to many of the authoritative
scholars of Islam, such as al-Shafi‘i, Abu ‘Ubayd, and others who have debated
with those who take this position. For it is known from the writings of the
Murji’ites that they make a distinction between the terms “religion” and “belief,”
and between Islam and “belief,” saying that part of Islam is belief, and part of it
is works. Some of these works are religious obligations, while others are
supererogatory acts of devotion. However, the words of the pious ancestors were
based on what appeared to them to be the teachings of heretical sects such as the
Jahmites, to whom they used to attribute the view that Allah is everywhere. This
was the teaching of a sect known as the Najjarites; but as for the majority of their
opponents among the Jahmites, the Mu‘tazilites, the Dararites, and others, they
taught that Allah is neither within the world, outside the world, nor above it.
370 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

DISCUSSION OF PREDESTINATION

Similarly we have what they wrote about the Qadarite sect, to whom they
attributed the view that neither [divine] knowledge nor the Qur’an is [uncreated].
Concerning the Qadarites, Ibn ‘Umar once said: “If you should encounter the
followers of that sect, inform them that I have nothing to do with them, and that
they in turn should have nothing more to do with me.” This is the sect that says
that Allah gives commands and prohibitions to His servants without having any
prior knowledge of who will obey or disobey him, or who will enter Heaven or
Hell, until these things had actually occurred. Therefore they said that the
command was ’unuf, new—that is, it was newly begun or musta’naf, commenced.
For example, one might refer to a “new garden,” meaning one that is growing
profusely yet has never been tended before. With reference to Allah, it means that
He comes to know for the first time who is blessed and who is damned; this
awareness begins without Allah’s having had prior knowledge of such things and
without there being a preexisting book [in which future events are recorded].
Hence, what one does is not based on a sort of emulation of a preordained divine
decree; rather, it comes about as an entirely new event. If someone wants to do
something, he predetermines within himself what he desires to do, then proceeds
to do it, revealing outwardly what he has determined in his heart. This sort of
predetermination within one’s self is called khalq, creation. As the poet said:

Ah, you are sharpening what you have created,
while some people create, yet do not sharpen.

In other words, unlike other people, you are a person who, if he sets his mind to
something, carries it out and brings it to pass. As Allah says: “Indeed, We have
created every thing by measure” (54:49). Before creating anything, Allah knows
everything that will be. Moreover, He creates according to His will, since He
knows and desires whatever He makes. His knowledge and His will are self-
existent, and based on this self-existent will and knowledge Allah speaks, as when
He says: “That I will fill Hell with you [Iblis] and those of them [mankind] that
follow you, together” (38:85); and “And had it not been for a Word that went forth
before from your Lord, and a term already determined, the judgment would have
been inevitable [in this world]” (20:129); and “And, indeed, Our Word has gone
forth of old for Our slaves—-the Messengers. That they indeed would be made
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 371

triumphant. And that Our forces, they indeed would be the victors” (37:171—73);
and “Indeed, We gave the Book to Moses, but differences arose therein, and had
it not been for a Word that had gone forth before from your Lord, the case would
have been judged between them .. .” (11:110). Among the things Allah records
in the Book are those things that He predetermines. He says: “Know you not that
Allah knows all that is in heaven and on earth? Indeed, it is all in the Book.
Indeed! That is easy for Allah” (22:70). According to Ibn ‘Abbas, Allah creates
humanity knowing what they would do beforehand; then He speaks of His
knowledge, saying: “Be a Book,” and so it was a Book. Then He reveals evidence
of this. Allah says: “Know you not that Allah knows all that is in heaven and on
earth? Indeed, it is all in the Book. Indeed! That is easy for Allah” (22:70). He also
says: “No calamity falls on the earth or in yourselves but it is inscribed in the Book
of decrees, before We bring it into existence. Indeed, that is easy for Allah”
(57:22); and “And indeed We have written in the Zabur [Book of Psalms] after the
Reminder [the Message given to Moses], My righteous slaves will inherit the
earth” (21:105); and “Allah effaces what He will and confirms [what He will].
And with Him is the Mother of the Book” (13:39); and “And when you said to the
angels: ‘Indeed, I am about to place a viceroy on earth.’ They said: ‘Will you place
therein those who will make mischief therein and shed blood while we glorify You
with praises and thanks and sanctify You?’ He says: ‘I know that which you do not
know’” (2:30). So if even the Angels had prior knowledge of the destruction and
bloodshed that human beings would bring about on earth, how much more
knowledge would Allah have of such things? This is trae whether, as most
Quranic exegetists hold, the Angels came to know such things by a revelation
from Allah [in which case He is more knowledgeable than they were concerning
that which He had revealed to them] or whether, as some believe, the Angels made
such a statement based on what they had seen before. Allah knows best what shall
become of His creatures, who themselves have no knowledge that He himself has
not taught them, or that He has not revealed to His Prophets or others. For none
of us comprehends anything of Allah’s knowledge unless He wills it.

Allah speaks to the Angels, saying: “. . . Indeed, I am about to place a viceroy on
earth . . .” (2:30), before commanding them to prostrate themselves to Adam,
before Iblis had refused to bow down, before He had forbidden Adam to eat from
the tree, and before Adam had eaten from it, thereby bringing about his fall to
earth.
372 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

Hence, Allah already knows that He will appoint Adam as a vicegerent on earth
even as He gave both Adam and Iblis commands that He knew they would
disobey, whereupon He commands them both to descend to earth and to be His
vicegerents there. This makes it clear that Allah knows ahead of time that they will
disobey His commands. Iblis refused to bow down to Adam, hating him, becoming
his enemy, and tempting him to eat from the tree and thereby become a sinner like
himself. Iblis had sworn that he would lure all human beings into sin, requesting
that he be granted jurisdiction over the earth until the day when all would be
resurrected, since he was set on luring Adam and his progeny into temptation with
all the power at his disposal. However, Adam received words from Allah that led
him to repent; he was then rightly guided by his Lord and chosen as a prophet. In
this way, human beings obtained a way to find happiness and to be delivered from
the snares into which Satan might cause them to fall through his deceitful allure.
This way was the way of repentance. Allah says: “So that Allah will punish the
hypocrites, men and women, and the men and women who associate partners in
worship with Him. And Allah will pardon the believers, men and women .. .”
(33:73). For Allah’s foreordained decree encompassed all these things before they
came to pass. As for Iblis, he persisted in his sinful ways, excusing himself by
objecting that this was Allah’s foreordained decree and asking for the right to
oversee earth’s affairs in hopes of luring others into destruction. However, Adam
and his wife turned to Allah in repentance. Allah says: “They said: ‘Our Lord! We
have wronged ourselves. If you forgive us not, and bestow not upon us Your
Mercy, we shall certainly be the losers’” (7:23). As a result, Allah restored Adam
to His grace, chose him and gave him right guidance, then set him on earth to
work there in obedience to Him, so that consequently Allah might elevate him in
such a way that after this his entrance into Paradise might be more perfect than it
would have been otherwise. For whoever of Adam’s descendants sins, then
follows Adam’s example by repenting, shall be blessed. And if he repents,
believes and does good works, Allah will transform his evil deeds into good ones.
In fact, like all Allah-fearing saints, he will be more righteous after his repentance
than he was before having sinned. As for those who follow Iblis’ example by
persisting in their sin, using Allah’s foreknowledge as an excuse for their actions
and attempting to lure others into temptation, they will be among those of whom
Allah says: “That J will fill Hell with you [Iblis] and those of them [mankind] that
follow you, together” (38:85).
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 373

The point behind the present discussion has been to raise the issue of Allah’s
divine decree. It has been established in Sahih Muslim on the authority of ‘Abd
Allah Ibn ‘Amr that the Prophet (pbuh) said: “With His throne over the waters,
Allah foreordained the fates of His creatures fifty thousand years before He
created the heavens and the earth.” And we read in Sahih al-Bukhari, on the
authority of “Imran Ibn Husayn, that the Prophet (pbuh) said: “He [Allah] Is, and
nothing existed before Him. His throne is upon the waters, and He records
everything in the Reminder [Qur’4n]. Then He created the heavens and the earth.”
And we have several accounts in the two books of hadith [Sahihan] on the
authority of the Prophet (pbuh) according to which Allah knew from the beginning
who would enter Paradise and who would enter Hell, and what human beings
would do before they had done it.

We also read in Sahthan on the authority of ‘Abd Allah Ibn Mas‘iid that after
Allah creates someone’s body and before breathing life into it, He sends forth an
Angel who records the time when the person is destined to die, the type of
livelihood he will enjoy, and the actions he will perform, as well as whether he
will be blessed or damned. Other hadiths such as these will be discussed in the
proper place, if Allah wills. This notion of predestination has been decried by the
Qadarite sect, which arose during the latter days of the Companions of the
Prophet. It has been related that the first person to innovate this sect’s teachings
in Iraq was a man from Basrah by the name of Sibawayh, [originally] a
Zoroastrian. His teachings were then passed on to a man named Ma‘bad al-Juhani.
It is also said that one of the first events [to inspire this teaching] took place in the
Hijaz, namely, the burning of the Ka‘bah. After it occurred one man said that it
was burned down by Allah’s decree, to which someone else replied that no, Allah
decreed no such thing! However, during the days of the rightly guided Caliphs, no
one ever dared question the notion of divine predestination. So when those of the
Qadarite sect first began denying this notion, they were condemned for it by the
surviving Companions of the Prophet, among them ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Umar, ‘Abd
Allah Ibn “Abbas, and Wathilah Ibn al-Asqa‘. Most supporters of the new
teachings were to be found in Basrah and Syria, while a few of them resided in the
Hijaz. The pious ancestors had a great deal to say in criticism of the Qadarite sect;
according to Waki‘ Ibn al-Jarrah, for example, followers of the Qadarite sect hold
that the results of Allah’s commands will only become manifest in the future, and
that Allah did not foreordain what people had written or what they had done. The
374 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

Murji’ ites, however, hold that one’s words may be separated from what one does,
whereas according to the Jahmites, knowledge may be separated from both one’s
words and one’s actions. Concerning all such views, Waki‘ said: “This, all of this,
is unbelief.” It was narrated by Ibn. . . .°

However, when writings on divine predestination spread and became more well
known with the participation of numerous speculative thinkers and others, the
majority of those who had embraced the Qadarites’ teachings began to accept the
notion of divine foreknowledge, although they still denied the absolute Will and
Creation. We have two different accounts, on the authority of ‘Amr Ibn ‘Ubayd,
concerning the denial of the existence of a preexisting Book [i.e., Qur’an]. This
view was denounced by Malik [Ibn Anas], al-Shafil, Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal], and
others, who declared them [the Qadarites] to be unbelievers on account of it. There
are many scholars and others who have written in favor of the notion of divine
foreknowledge and whose views have been passed down by al-Bukhari and
Muslim. However, they do not set forth the views of those who advocated this
notion. This was the doctrine taught by hadith scholars who were also Islamic
jurists, such as Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] and others, namely, that whoever was
advocating a heretical teaching deserves to be punished in order that other people
may be protected from any harm which he might bring upon them. [This applies
even if inwardly, such a person is convinced of the validity of his interpretation
and has based it on the four foundations of the Qur?an, the hadith, the consensus
of the 1jma‘, community, and qiyas, analogy.] The lightest punishment he might
receive would be ostracism, so that he would no longer enjoy any status within
Islam, his testimony would no longer be accepted, nor would he be consulted or
allowed to teach or to be appointed as a judge. The teaching of Malik [Ibn Anas]
is similar to this; hence, compilers of prophetic traditions did not record the views
of individuals who were propagating any sort of heretical doctrine. However, they
and other scholars did record the views of many who secretly agreed with the
teaching of the Qadarites, the Murji’ites, the Kharijites, the Shi‘ites, and others.

Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] once said that if we failed to relate the teachings of the
Qadarites, we would be leaving out the views of most of the inhabitants of Basrah.
This was because the question of whether the actions of human beings are

‎All the editions consulted indicate that there is a blank here.‏ ذا
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 375

“created,” and concerning the wills of “creatures,” is a problematic one. And just
as those Mu‘tazilites who held Qadarite views erred in their thinking, so also did
many of those who sought to refute their teachings. For in their attempts to refute
their views, they followed in the footsteps of Jahm Ibn Safwan and his followers,
denying the wisdom of Allah in His acts of creating and commanding, in His
Mercy toward His servants, as well as the causes for Creation and Commands. In
fact, they so thoroughly repudiated existing realtties evident in Allah’s creatures
and laws that they alienated most prudent thinkers who had understood their
claims concerning what they believed to be Orthodox Islam. That is, they were
making the claim that the views of Orthodox Muslims on predestination were the
same as those introduced by Jahm. This subject is discussed more fully elsewhere.

The point being made here is that in the pious ancestors’ efforts to respond to the
Murji’ites, the Jahmites, the Qadarites, and others, they would reject views based
on reports that had reached them through individuals who did not always represent
the thinking of all members of a given sect, or views based on inaccurate
representations of their views. Therefore, they would respond to the Murji’ites’
claim that religion and belief are one and the same based on the assumption that
this represented the thinking of all members of the Murjiite sect, whereas at a
later time, some Murji’ites arrived at the view that belief is an utterance without
tasdiq and without the inward knowledge of the heart; this view was first
introduced by Ibn Karram, and was held by him alone. As for his other teachings,
they had all been introduced by people before him; hence, this was the only view
attributed to him alone by those who, like al-Ash‘ari and others, related what
people had said on his authority.

As for the other teachings espoused by Ibn Karram, they have also been attributed
to people who came before him, without his name being associated with them.
Moreover, Ibn Karram was not a contemporary of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and other
authorities on Islam. Therefore, Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Abu
Thawr,'° and others related that scholars were in unanimous agreement with the
views that conflicted with those of Ibn Karram. The position of the Murji’ites,
who preceded him was that belief is an utterance with one’s tongue and tasdiq in
one’s heart; as for Jahm’s position, it was that tasdiq is nothing but tasdiq in the

‎Abu Thawr, Ibrahim al-Kalbi (?-240 A.H.), was a jurist and a close associate of Imam al-Shafit*.‏ ذا
‎[Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 340.]‏
376 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

heart. Hence, when Ibn Karram claimed that belief was nothing but an utterance
of the tongue, the Murji’ ites took three differing positions on the matter. However,
Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] was more knowledgeable than others concerning the views
held by various people; therefore, he was familiar with the Jahmite’s views on
belief. As for Abu Thawr, he was not familiar with it; in fact, he was well versed
only in the teachings of Islamic jurists who held the Murji’ites’ views; for this
reason, he related that there was a unanimous rejection of the teachings of both the
Jahmites’ and the Karramites’ sects.

THE OPINION OF ABU THAWR ON IMAN

In his refutation of the Murji’ites, Abu Thawr says [in an account narrated by Abu
al-Qasim al-Tabari al-Lalaka’i'’ and others, on the authority of Idris Ibn ‘Abd al-
Karim]'* that a man from Khurasan asked him whether Iman increases and
diminishes, and whether it is “words and works” or whether it is “assent and
works.” To this Abu Thawr replied: “You asked, may Allah have mercy upon you
and may He forgive you and forgive us, about what is Iman? Does it increase or
diminish? Is it “words and works’ or is it ‘assent and works’? I will tell you about
the interpretations of the different sects.”

You should know, may Allah have mercy upon us and you, that Iman is tasdiq in
the heart and utterance with the tongue, and works of the body. So there is no
disagreement among scholars about a man who said that he testifies that there is
no god but Allah, that what the Messengers brought is the truth, and who affirms
all of Allah’s laws. But [covertly] he said that he neither believes in nor accepts
what he says, that he is not a Muslim. And if he says that Jesus is Allah, denies
Islam, and says that he [covertly] does not believe in what he says, he is an
unbeliever, not a believer. Mere verbal testimony, without inward assent, is not
Iman; likewise, mere assent, without verbal testimony, is not Iman, for Iman is
both assent of the heart and verbal testimony. Accordingly, some sects regard
Iman as assent of the heart and verbal testimony with the tongue; whereas other

'7 Abu al-Qasim al-Tabari al-Lalaka’i (?-418 A.H.) was a jurist and a scholar of hadith. His famous
book is entitled Madhib ahl al-Sunnah. [Al-Zirikli, vol. 9, p. 57.]

'* Idris Ibn ‘Abd al-Karim, Abu al-Hassan (?-292 A.H.), was a famous reciter of the Qur’an and
narrated hadith from Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 340.]
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 377

sects regard it as assent of the heart, verbal testimony, and bodily works. Hence,
all the above sects regard Iman as being composed of two or three elements, not
one. And all of them agreed that whoever fulfills these three conditions, namely
assent of the heart, verbal testimony, and bodily works, is a believer.

Abu Thawr questioned the group of people who argued that works are not part of
Iman. He asked, “What does Allah want from His servants when He commands
them to establish prayer and give zakah? Does He mean verbal testimony alone,
or verbal testimony with works?” If the group said that Allah wanted mere verbal
testimony without works, then scholars would charge them with unbelief. Some
scholars said that if Allah did not want the people to perform prayer and to give
zakah, and if they say that He wanted from them verbal testimony as well as
works, it can be said to them, “Why then did you claim that one can be a believer
if he only affirms this, although Allah wanted both of these things to be done? Do
they regard one as a believer if he does all he was commanded to, without verbal
testimony?” If they say no, they may be asked: “Do you regard someone as a
believer ifhe affirms all that he is commanded, but does not do any of it?” If they
say yes, one might ask: “What is the difference?” You claimed that Allah wants
both verbal testimony and works, and if it is possible for one to be a believer if he
abandons one of the two, then it is possible for him to be a believer if he is
righteous, without verbal testimony. If they [the same group] object, asking that
if a man embraces Islam and affirms the message that the Prophet (pbuh) came
with, would he be regarded as a believer with this verbal testimony before the time
for work arrives? The answer to him is that he may be called a believer due to his
acknowledgment that he must do what he has been commanded when the time
comes. However, if he affirms his belief but does not do righteous deed, he will
not be called a believer.

RESPONSE TO THE VIEWS OF ABU THAWR CONCERNING IMAN

Abu Thawr said that one cannot be a believer unless he consistently does work
along with verbal testimony. Otherwise, if he affirms his belief but does not
perform works, he will not be a believer. Hence Abu Thawr’s claim revealed the
necessity of both conditions, verbal testimony and works, for Iman. It also
indicates that both conditions are part of religion. Hence one cannot be obedient
to Allah, deserving of His reward, or praised by Him and His Messenger unless he
378 ‏ش‎ CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

fulfills both conditions. Moreover, his statement refutes the argument that works
are excluded from religion as well as from Iman. However, if someone says that
works are part of religion and that a sinner is a believer who has taken part of the
religion [i.¢e., Iman] and neglected the rest, his view will be reported differently.
But Abu Thawr and other Sunnah jurists offer the same argument. However,
Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] was more knowledgeable than Abu Thawr. Therefore,
Orthodox Muslims unanimously refute the views of the Karramites. But Ahmad
Ibn Hanbal did not regard it as certain that the Karramites were wrong. Therefore,
in his letter to Abu ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Juzjani,"” he said he did not think that
anyone would say this [the Karramites’ view]. Ahmad’s statement is reported in
al-Sunnah, The Book of the. Sunnah, by al-Khallal, which is the most
comprehensive book of the sayings of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal on religious issues, even
though he discussed other matters in it. Likewise, another of his [al-Khallal’s]
books is the most comprehensive book on knowledge; it contains many of Ahmad
Ibn Hanbal’s statements on the subject of jurisprudence.

THE LETTER OF IMAM AHMAD IBN HANBAL
TO AL-JUZJANI ON THE QUESTION OF IMAN

Al-Marwazi said that he once saw Abu ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Juzjani with Abu ‘Abd
Allah [Ahmad Ibn Hanbal]. Abu ‘Abd Allah had mentioned him prior to this,
saying that his father had been a Murji’ite, or he said that he was a man whose
opinion enjoyed respect. As for Abu ‘Abd al-Rahim, he spoke highly of him. He
had written earlier to Abu ‘Abd Allah from Khurasan, asking him about belief. He
mentioned this letter was based on two sources who had spoken of it on Abu ‘Abd
al-Rahim’s authority and Ahmad’s answer. [The text of Ahmad’s letter follows. ]

In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful, may Allah bless both of us
and deliver us from all evil, by His Mercy. I received your letter in which you
mentioned the arguments of the Murji’ites. And you should know (may Allah
bless you) that it is not the custom of the Orthodox Muslims to indulge in disputes
over religious matters; rather they find themselves obliged to refute others’
arguments, You should also know that in interpreting the Qur’an one should refer

!" Abu ‘Abd al-Rahim al-Juzjani (7-245 A.H.) was a jurist and a scholar of hadith and
corresponded with Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal on religious matters. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p.
341-42.]
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 379

to the Sunnah and the sayings of the Companions of the Prophet (pbuh) in order
to get a clear picture of exactly what Allah means. However, heretical thinkers
interpret it without referring to the Sunnah or the sayings of the Companions of the
Prophet. For a verse may be specific but have a more general application, or it may
sound general, whereas it aims at a specific matter. The Prophet (pbuh) is the best
interpreter of the Qur’an, followed by his Companions who witnessed the
revelation of the Book. Hence, one has to refer to them for its interpretation. In
other words, a verse may be specific [have a specific referent] although it also has
a more general sense. An example is the following verse, in which Allah says:
“Allah [thus] directs you as regards to your children’s [inheritance]: to the male
a portion equal to that of two females . . .” (4:11), which is a specific verse,
although it is general enough to include every son or daughter. However, the
Prophet’s (pbuh) Sunnah came to specify that an unbeliever should never inherit
from a Muslim.

Likewise it is related that the Companions of the Prophet (pbuh) used not to give
an inheritance to someone who had deliberately killed a Muslim. Therefore the
Prophet (pbuh) came to clarify that this verse applies only to Muslims, not to
unbelievers. On the other hand, whoever interprets it in a general sense has to give
an inheritance to every son, even if he is an unbeliever or a killer; and in this case
he contradicts what the Prophet (pbuh) said. To conclude, Orthodox Muslims refer
to the Sunnah and the sayings of the Companions of the Prophet (pbuh) to refute
the false interpretations of the Qur’4n espoused by heretics, the Kharijites, and the
like.

Words such as mujmal, comprehensive, mutlaq, absolute, and ‘amm, general,
were all included in the terminology used by authorities on Islam, such as al-
Shafi‘l, Ahmad, Abu ‘Ubayd, Ishaq and others. When using the term mujmal,
comprehensive, they do not mean that which cannot be understood from it, which
was the incorrect interpretation given by some later thinkers. Rather, the term
refers to that which alone is not sufficient for its practical application, even if its
apparent sense has been correctly understood. This may be seen in the verse where
Allah says: “Take sadaqah, a/ms, from their wealth in order to purify them and
sanctify them with it . . .” (9:103). The surface meaning of this is clear and
comprehensible; it is not an obscure verse. However, the meaning it conveys is not
sufficient in and of itself for the verse to be carried out in practice. For the action
it commands is a gift of charity that will have a purifying effect on them; this,
380 | CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

however, is something we only come to know through the explanation provided
by the Messenger (pbuh). For this reason, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal cautions the
scholastic theologians dealing in Islamic jurisprudence to apply the following two
principles: mujmal, comprehensive, and qiyas, analogy. According to Ahmad, the
most common errors theologians commit have to do with ta’wil, allegorical
interpretation, and qiyas, analogy. By this he means that [in interpreting the
Qur’an or other authoritative religious texts], one must not make a judgment based
on the most general or absolute sense before considering those factors that restrict
and qualify the meaning. Nor should one interpret something on the basis of an
analogy or point of comparison with something else before making certain that the
meanings conveyed by the texts in question justify such comparisons, For the most
widespread errors are due to people’s clinging to what they believe to be the
meaning of a given term or an analogy between it and something else. For matters
open to speculation cannot be translated into action until one has investigated
possible conflicting meanings or interpretations with sufficient thoroughness to
feel reasonably confident that his conclusions are sound. Whoever has not done
so is in error. This, said Ahmad, is the truth concerning those who cling to
superficial interpretations and hasty comparisons. For this reason he considered
it a heretical practice to argue on the basis of the apparent meaning of a text while
ignoring those interpretations offered by the Prophet (pbuh) and his Companions.
Moreover, he has devoted an entire book to this subject.

The same thing is true of the practice of holding tightly to the use of certain
analogies and parallels while simultaneously failing to make mention of other
relevant texts [from the Qur’an] and the traditions. Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] declared
such a practice to be a mark of heresy, and for this reason, all the conclusions at
which some people arrived were fallacious. The only sound conclusions they
reached were those that were in agreement with the teachings of the pious
ancestors and their followers. Allah says: “Allah [thus] directs you as regards to
your children’s [inheritance] ...” (4:11), and he [Ahmad] classified it as a general
statement, whereas it is completely unrestricted in personal affairs. He generalized
it by way of substitution in the following verse, in which Allah says: “. . . The
freeing of [the neck] of a believing slave . . .” (4:92) to apply to all necks. He does
not, however, generalize it in the same way that he generalizes the term “boy” in
the preceding verse to apply to all boys. And whoever adopts this interpretation
could not simultaneously interpret the text of the Qur’an merely on the basis of its
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 381

superficial meaning. Rather, he would interpret it on the basis of the meanings he
deduced, not only from what the Qur’an does say, but also from what it does not
say. Hence, the meaning would become apparent [in part] from the Qur’an’s
silence on a given matter, not because of the Qur’an’s indication that it is the
surface meaning. Hence, they did not hold to the straightforward meanings of the
words themselves, but rather to the meanings to which these words point. The
foundation on which they based all this is ignorance of the texts that provide
evidence of restrictions that may apply to the Qur’anic passage at hand. However,
everything the Qur’4n reveals and manifests is truth, as opposed to some other
meaning that may appear correct to someone although it does not reflect what is
in the Qur’an itself. This includes inferences drawn by heretical sects, such as the
Murji’ites, the Jahmites, the Kharijites, and the Shi‘ites.

THE VIEWS OF THE MURJPITES, THE KULLABITES
AND THE KARRAMITES ON IMAN AND THE RESPONSE TO THEM

Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] said that whoever claims that Iman is a verbal testimony of
belief may be asked what he says about knowledge. Does one need knowledge
with verbal testimony in order to be a believer? And does one need to believe in
{affirm] what he knows in order to be a believer? If he claims that one need
knowledge in addition to verbal testimony in order to be a believer, this means that
he claims that Iman consists of two components. And if he holds that one needs.
verbal testimony, acceptance, and knowledge in order to be a believer, he is
claiming that Iman consists of three components. However, if he claims that one
needs neither knowledge nor tasdiq in order to be a believer, he is absolutely
wrong. For the absence of knowledge, tasdiq, and works—all these
combined—-signals sin and unbelief.

The author says that Ahmad, Abu Thawr, and other Muslim leaders knew the
origin of the Murji’ites’ claim that Iman is a single entity, such that it is untrue to
say that part of it may leave while the other part stays in one’s heart. For Iman can
only be one thing [that is, it cannot consist of two or three parts]. Therefore, in
order to avoid the partition of Iman, the Jahmites said that Iman is a single thing
in the heart, while the Karramites said that Iman is a single thing on the tongue.
382 — CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

However, Muslim jurists have provided evidence that refutes the Murji’ites’
claim. For example, Abu Thawr refuted the claim of Murji’ite jurists by taking as
evidence the unanimous agreement that Iman is tasdiq and works, despite the fact
that he did not receive the statements of their representatives or the opinion of the
Jahmites. Their opinion had not yet reached the level of their disagreement. And
Ahmad mentioned that knowledge and tasdiq must accompany verbal testimony.
Moreover, he [Ahmad] said that whoever denies the necessity of knowledge and
tasdiq has uttered an unacceptable view, the falsity of which may clearly be seen
when examined against the teachings of Islam. For this reason no one held this
view before the establishment of the Karramite sect, even though this sect does not
deny the necessity of knowledge and tasdiq. Rather, they simply hold that such
things do not enter into the definition of belief, lest belief be fragmented or
multiplied. For they do not believe it is possible for someone to lose part of his
belief while retaining part of it, for this requires that the same person have both
belief and unbelief in his heart. Hence, they unanimously hold this view, which
has been mentioned by al-Ash‘ari and others. ١

This is a fallacious argument, to which many have fallen prey, despite their being
sincere Muslims who were individuals of understanding, devotion, reverence, and
belief. On account of this, a number of jurists, who were known by the Islamic
community to be prudent, pious individuals adopted the Murji’ites’ views. For this
reason, none of the pious aficestors declared any of these people to be unbelievers;
instead, they considered their views to be an innovation involving certain
terminology and behaviors, but not a heresy revolving around essential doctrines.
For a large part of the dispute over such questions is merely semantic, revolving
around the proper term by which to refer to a given entity. But whatever term is
consistent with the Qur’an and the Sunnah is the most appropriate and correct one.
For no one has the right to espouse a view that is in conflict with what Allah and
His Messenger said, especially when such views were used as pretexts to support
the heretical doctrines of scholastic theologians who held the Murji’ites’ beliefs,
or to justify immoral behavior. In this way, a minor error in terminology has
become a cause for a much greater error in both doctrine and practice. For this
reason, so much criticism has been leveled against the Murji’ites that Ibrahim al-
Nakh‘ once said that the dissension and strife introduced by the Murji’ite sect
posed a greater threat to the Islamic community than that aroused by the
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 383

Azariqites.”? And according to al-Zuhri, there has never arisen a heresy more
harmful to Islam and its adherents than that of the Murji’ites. As for al-Awza‘1, he
stated that Yahya Ibn Abi Kathir’' and Qatadah used to say that they could think
of no caprice or fancy that would be a greater cause to fear for the Islamic
community than the Murji’ites’ teachings. Speaking also of the Murji’ite sect,
Sharik al-Qadi said that they are the most odious of all people. As if the Rafidites”
were not hateful enough, the Murji?ites, who told lies against Allah, were worse.
And Sufyan al-Thawri said that the Murji’ites have left Islam more flimsy than
Sabri’s robe. As for Qatadah, he notes that the Murji’ite sect arose after the
insurrection incited by Ibn al-Ash‘ath’s band of followers.

Once Maymin Ibn Muhran was asked about the views held by the Murji’ites, to
which he replied that he would not even deign to speak of them. Once 5210 Ibn
Jubayr said to Dharr al-Hamadhani, “Are you not ashamed [to embrace] an
opinion that is beneath you?” And Ayytb al-Sikhtiyani once stated that the
religion of the Murji’ites was beneath his dignity. The first person ever to voice
the Murji’ites’ views was a man of Madinah, from the tribe of Banu Hashim, by
the name of al-Hassan. According to Zadhan,” he came to see al-Hassan Ibn
Muhammad” and said: “What is this book that you have written?” [Since he was
the one who had recorded the Murji’ites’ teachings.] He replied: “Oh, Abu ‘Umar,
I wish I had died before writing this book and letting it see the light of day! For an
error concerning the term ‘belief’ is not like an error concerning some other word,
such as the name of a transmitter of prophetic traditions. After all, the meaning of
the terms ‘belief,’ Islam, ‘unbelief,’ and ‘hypocrisy’ have a bearing on judgments
pertaining both to this life and the life to come.”

20 The Azariqites were a subgroup of the Kharijite sect, named after their founder, Nafi* Ibn al-
Azraq. This sect held the view that the one who commits a grave sin is eternally in Hellfire and
that every grave sin is unbelief.

1 Yahya Ibn Abi Kathir (2-129 A.H.) was a leading authority on hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p.
345 and M. M. Azmi, p.176.]

22 The Rafidite sect is an extremist Shi‘ite subsect.

3 Zadhan, Abu ‘Amr al-Kindi (?-82 A. H.), was a trustworthy scholar of hadith but transmitted
very few hadiths. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 346.]

24 Aj-Hassan Ibn Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyyah (7-101 A.H.) wasa pious man who did not take
a position concerning the affairs of Caliph ‘Uthman, Caliph ‘Ali, Talhah, and al-Zubayr;
however, the matter should be left in a state of irja’ adjournment, for Allah to decide on. {Kitab
al-Iman MZ, p. 346.]
384 - CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal made a distinction between the knowledge that resides in the
heart and the tasdiq that resides in the heart. For the verbal testimony uttered by
the tongue is tasdiq. He thus mentioned three things [i.e., inward knowledge,
inward belief, and outward testimony], whereas this includes only two. That is,
one may distinguish between tasdiq in one’s heart and knowledge in one’s heart,
which is consistent with the views of Ibn Kullab, al-Qilanisi, al-Ash‘ari, and his
followers, since they distinguished between knowledge of the heart and tasdiq of
the heart. Tasdiq is the heart’s utterance. And utterance of the heart, according to
them, is not knowledge but rather another type [of entity]. Therefore Ahmad {Ibn
_Hanbal] asked: “Does [belief] require both knowledge and verbal testimony? Does
it require that one believe that which he has come to know? For if one claims that
it requires both knowledge and verbal testimony, then he is claiming that belief
consists of two things. And if one says that it requires that one both confess and
believe in what he has come to know, then belief consists of three things. But if
one denies [that it requires any of these things], saying: ‘It requires neither
knowledge nor tasdiq,’ then he has committed a grave error. For I can hardly
imagine anyone who would deny the necessity of both knowledge and tasdiq.”

There are those who say that belief is verbal testimony, while testimony with the
tongue implies that the tongue is likewise affirming the truth of what it confesses.
The Murjiites were in agreement that verbal testimony with the tongue implied
such assent, knowing that what it meant is that tasdiq and knowledge in one’s
heart go along with an outward acknowledgment with the tongue. However, one
might say that what is meant is assent of the heart, both in one’s heart and with
one’s tongue, along with knowledge and verbal testimony. As for the term
“testimony,” it refers to commitment, not mere assent of the truth of something.
Allah says: “And [remember] when Allah took the Covenant of the Prophets,
“Take what ever I gave you from the Book and Wisdom, and afterwards there will
come to you a Messenger [Muhammad] confirming what is with you; you must
believe in him and help him.’ Allah says: ‘Do you agree [to it] and will you take
up my Covenant?’ They said: ‘We agree.’ He says: ‘Then bear witness; and I am
with you among the witnesses’” (3:81). For the covenant was made with them
based on the assumption that they believed in it and supported it, for this is what
they were commanded to do. But this verbal testimony is not the same as tasdiq,
for Allah has made no declaration of truth to them for them to believe or affirm.
Rather, He charges them with the obligation to believe in and support His
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 385

Messenger if he should come to them. Hence, they affirm the truth of this verbal
testimony and commit themselves to it. This, then, is their verbal testimony. And
someone might acknowledge the Prophet in the sense that he commits himself to
obeying whatever commands he received from the Prophet without actually having
inward knowledge or tasdiq that he is the Messenger of Allah. However, none of
the Murji’ites ever said that this sort of verbal testimony is belief. Rather, there
has to be a verbal testimony of the validity of a specific declaration of truth; that
is, one must acknowledge that he is the Messenger of Allah. Hence, the term iqrar,
confession, implies both commitment and tasdiq, both of which are necessary. On
the other hand, by “verbal testimony” one might mean mere tasdiq without a
commitment to obey. The Murji’ites sometimes considered this to be belief [that
is, verbal testimony in the sense of belief without a pledge to obey], while at other
times they defined belief as both tasdiq and commitment together. This latter type
of verbal testimony was the type spoken of by the Murji’ite scholars, who defined
it as they did belief. Otherwise, if one were to say: “I obey him, though | do not
believe that he is the Messenger of Allah,” or, “1 believe that he is the Messenger
of Allah, but | make no commitment to obey him,” he would neither be a Muslim
nor a believer in their view.

Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] added that this verbal testimony must be accompanied by
assent, knowledge, and acceptance of what one knows [the last portion was
recorded in another place as “acceptance of what he affirms”]. This entails inward
acceptance, which may imply both verbal testimony and works. In this case his
heart’s acceptance implies that, besides his heart’s knowledge of the Prophet
(pbuh) as a Messenger of Allah, he submitted to him and followed his teachings;
hence he has shown acceptance and veneration of the Prophet’s (pbuh) teachings
in his heart. Otherwise, mere inner knowledge that he is a Messenger of Allah is
not considered Iman. Accordingly, Iman entails the knowledge of the heart as well
as its works. So, by acceptance Ahmad meant that in addition to knowledge of the
Prophet (pbuh), the heart accepts and desires to follow his teachings. And,
according to Ahmad, he who denies the fact that deeds are part of Iman is exactly
like him who denies the fact that knowledge is part of it. However, the Book, the
Sunnah, and the consensus of the Islamic community affirm that Iman entails
knowledge of the heart as well as its works. Whoever among the Jahmite sect
argued that the heart’s obedience is part of belief is like some member of the
386 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

Karramite sect who argued that knowledge in one’s heart is part of belief. Hence,
referring to Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal’s] statement this makes the most sense in light of
what he said in this context.

Moreover, the difference between the heart’s knowledge and mere tasdiq in the
heart, which is not accompanied by submission, is so subtle that most people of
knowledge cannot perceive it. Most wise people deny this, which indicates that
there is a difference between knowledge and acceptance. They said that the claims
made by Ibn Kullab and al-Ash‘ari concerning this distinction were groundless,
And in fact, many of al-Ash‘ari's followers acknowledged the absence of any real
distinction. To support their view, they cited the example of a report given by
someone who is lying. Such a person, they said, has knowledge in his heart that
conflicts with this report. This they took as evidence for the existence of a
distinction [between knowledge in one’s heart, and the heart’s belief]. Others
objected to their view, saying that it was based on the assumption that there is a
Khabar, report [in one’s mind], which is not true, as well as knowledge, which is
not true knowledge. And since they demonstrated this on the basis of a statement
of the heart that conflicts with both one’s knowledge and one’s will, then this
simply indicates different types of knowledge and will, not some other entity that
stands in conflict with them.

Therefore it has been said that someone may not have a report in his mind that
conflicts with what he knows, even though he may convey such a report with his
tongue. However, it is not possible for one to have a report in his mind without his
having knowledge of it, or one that conflicts with what he knows. And this is one
of the pieces of evidence upon which people have based their belief in the
inconceivability that falsehood or lies could inhere in Allah’s essence, for He is
knowledgeable of all things, and it is impossible that some meaning should exist
in contradiction to knowledge that exists in the mind of the knower. For a false
report existing within the mind is the opposite of knowledge.

Now it may be said that if a report existing within the mind were in conflict with
knowledge, then this would mean that it was possible for knowledge to exist
together with its opposite, as has been stated by others in numerous places. It was
the most powerful of the arguments put forth by al-Qadi Abu Bakr on the question
of al-‘aql, reason, and other issues. Others who held a similar view included al-
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 387

Qadi Abu Ya‘la, Abu Muhammad Ibn al-Labban,”* Abu ‘Ali Ibn Shadhan,”° Abu
al-Tayyib,”’ Abu al-Walid al-Baji,”* Abu al-Khattab,”* Ibn ‘Aqil, and others. They
stated that reason is a type of knowledge, since it is not in conflict with it. For if
it were not a type of knowledge, then it would necessarily be in contradiction to
it, and if it were in contradiction to it, then it would be possible for it to exist
alongside the opposite of reason. Although this argument is weak [having been
weakened by the masses as well as by Abu al-Ma ‘ali al-Juwayni and others], it is
true that if something is necessarily accompanied by some other entity, then it
cannot be its opposite. Neither can it be the very same type of entity, but rather
must contrast with it. This is based on a terminological system according to which
they classify every pair of entities according to whether they are mathalayn,
identical, khilafayn, in contrast to one another, or diddayn, opposites. For the
relationship between one entity and another entity, which is necessarily associated
with it, is like the relationship between the will and knowledge, or between
knowledge and life. In other words, these are pairs of entities that are neither
identical to each other, nor are they opposites; rather, they contrast with one
another. Nevertheless, an entity in which something else inheres by necessity
cannot exist along with something that is the opposite of one of its essential
properties, since this “something” would preclude the first entity’s existence.
Moreover, when one entity is necessarily associated with another, the former
cannot exist without the latter; for example, the will cannot exist without
knowledge, nor can knowledge exist without life. Such pairs represent contrasting
but inseparable entities such that neither of the two members of the pair could
exist together with the other member’s opposite.

Similarly, knowledge is necessarily associated with reason, or the ‘aql, mind. For
every being capable of knowing is a being endowed with a mind, that is, with

Abu Muhamunad, Ibn al-Labban (?-446 A.H.), was a jurist and a scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-
Iman MZ, p. 349 and al-Zirikli, vol. 4, p. 226.]

26 Abu ‘AN, Ibn Shadhan (7-426 A. H.), was a Hanafite jurist and a scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-
Iman MZ, p. 349.]

27 Abu al-Tayyib, Tahir Ibn “Abd Allah (-?-450 A. H.), was a leading SAafi‘l jurist of his time and
wrote several important books on the Shafi school of law, such as Tabagat al-Shafi‘iyyah.
[Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 349 and al-Zinikli, vol. 3, p. 321.]

*8 Al-Baji, Abu al-Walid Sulayman (2-474 A. H.), was a famous Maliki jurist and a scholar of
hadith. [Al-Zirikli, vol. 3, p. 186.]

2 Abu al-Khattéb, Mahfuz Ibn Ahmad (?-510 A. H.), was a leading Hanbali jurist. [Kitab al-Iman
MZ, p. 349.]
388 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

reason. Moreover, the mind is a condition of knowledge, being neither identical
with it, nor its opposite, nor one type of knowledge. Neither can knowledge exist
together with any entity that contradicts reason. But this argument is used with
respect to knowledge that exists alongside the inward speech, which is a report
[existing within the mind]. For it [ knowledge] is neither the opposite [of the
report] nor identical to it; rather, it simply contrasts with it. Therefore, knowledge
may in fact exist alongside that which is the opposite of a report, be it true or false.
Hence, one may see the falsehood of the argument, that it is impossible for a lie
to exist within the mind of a person with knowledge.

What is meant here is that one finds it difficult to differentiate between his
knowledge that the Prophet (pbuh) was truthful, and his mere acceptance in his
heart, without works, that this is true. Ahmad provided many pieces of evidence
to prove that works are part of Iman. He said that a delegation of the people of
‘Abd al-Qays asked the Prophet (pbuh) about Iman. The Prophet (pbuh) answered:
“Iman is testifying to the fact that there is no god but Allah, that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah, the establishment of prayer, giving of zakah, fasting during
Ramadan, and paying one-fifth of the spoils that falls to your lot.” Hence he [the
Prophet, pbuh] considered all these to be parts of Iman. The Prophet (pbuh) also
said: “Modesty is an aspect of Iman;” and “The best believer is the one with the
best morals;” and “Indeed, cleanliness is part of Iman;” and “Iman has over
seventy branches, the most excellent of which is the declaration that there is no
god but Allah, and the humblest of which is the removal of what is injurious from
the path;” and “Bring out of the Fire whoever has [in his heart] an atom’s weight
of Iman.” It was also reported that the Prophet (pbuh) said, concerning the
attributes of the hypocrite: “There are three traits that, if one possesses them, make
him a sheer hypocrite.” Furthermore, in many verses of the Qur’an, Allah says that
Iman may increase. Allah says: “It is He Who sent down tranquility into the hearts
of the believers, that they may add belief to their belief. . .” (98:4); and “. . . In
order that the People of the Book may arrive at certainty, and the believers may
increase in belief . . .” (74:31); and He also says: “. . . And when they hear His
Signs rehearsed, find their belief strengthened . . .” (8:2); and “Whenever there
comes down a Surah [Chapter] some of them say: ‘Which of you has had his belief
increased by it?’ Yes, those who believe, their belief is increased, and they do
rejoice” (9:124); and “Only those are believers who have believed in Allah and
His Messenger, and have never since doubted, but have striven with their
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 389

belongings and their persons in the Cause of God: such are the sincere ones”
(49:15); and “. . . But if they repent and establish regular prayers and practice
regular charity, then open the way for them . . .” (9:5); and “But [even] if they
repent, establish regular prayers, and practice regular charity, they are your
brethren in belief...” (9:11); and He also says: “And they have been commanded
no more than this: to worship Allah, offering Him sincere devotion, being true [in
belief]; to establish regular prayer; and to practice regular charity; and that is the
Religion Right and Straight” (98:5).

Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] said that one ought to say that he is a believer by his own
confession even if he acknowledges the right to giving zakah in its totality yet will
not find in every two dirhams, five, he is considered a believer. It follows that
works are part of Iman and that Iman is not mere tasdiq. For one may claim that
he is a believer but at the same time pray to the cross, go to churches, and commit
other sins. To this the author replies that the many pieces of evidence Ahmad cited
in order to refute the claim of the Jahmites did not charge one with [covert]
unbelief ifhe committed overt sins. Rather, they said that such works signal one’s
unbelief by worldly standards. However, if one cited authorized pieces of evidence
that affirm that, in the Hereafter, such a man is also regarded as an unbeliever,
they [the Jahmites] would argue that such pieces of evidence indicate that such a
man has no knowledge about Allah. Hence they explicitly contradicted both sound
reason and Islamic legislation.

Despite the indefensibility of this claim, either on the basis of reason or Islamic
law, and despite the fact that, upon close examination, it fails to establish [an
understanding of] belief, those who espouse it have made belief out to be a
unified, indivisible entity devoid of any real existence. It is reminiscent of the
claim made by members of the Jahmite sect and others with similar views
concerning the unity of Allah, Whom they: said is an Essence without attributes.
They also held that the Qur’dn was created, that Allah may not be seen in the
afterlife, and that speech and other [divine] attributes are all unified and
inseparable.

Their claims with regard to Allah, the divine attributes, divine speech, and belief
in Allah may all be traced back to a doctrine of utter divestiture, stripping the
Godhead of all attributes whatsoever. Moreover, this is an error into which many
sects fell, including later ones that traced their origins back to Orthodox Islam,
390 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

Islamic jurisprudence, and the study of the prophetic traditions in accordance with
the views of the founders of the four schools of Orthodox Islam [i.e., Abu Hanifah,
al-Shafi‘i, Malik Ibn Anas, and Ahmad Ibn Hanbal]. Nevertheless, some of these
sects held extremist Murji’ite, Jahmite, and Mu‘tazilite views; and in their
ignorance of the facts out of which such heresies arose, they continued seeking to
combine teachings that are irreconcilable opposites. However, it is a sign of
Allah’s mercy that Islamic leaders such as Malik, al-Shafi‘l, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal,
Abu Hanifah, al-Thawni, al-Awza‘, al-Layth Ibn Sa‘d, Ishaq, Abu Ubayd, Abu
Yisuf, and Muhammad used to refute the claims of the Jahmites about the Qur’an,
Iman, and the divine attributes of the Lord. And they were in agreement, like the
pious ancestors, that Allah will be seen in the Hereafter; that the Qur’an is the
Word of Allah, it has not been created; and Iman must have 125010 of the heart and
the tongue. Hence, if one cursed Allah and His Messenger, everyone agrees that
he was an unbeliever, both inwardly and outwardly. As for those who agreed with
Jahm’s views on belief, having acceded to the arguments put forth by Abu al-
Hassan concerning belief, they sometimes adopted the views of the pious
ancestors and other authoritative figures of Orthodox Islam, while at other times
they adopted the views of the scholastic theologians who held the same position
as Jahm. On the question concerning the person who curses Allah and the Prophet,
there is a subsect of the Hanbalites, Shafi‘ites, and Malikites who held that such
behavior was utter unbelief, both outwardly and inwardly.

On the other hand, the same individuals might voice the views of those who
agreed with Jahm, saying that such behavior appeared on the surface to be
unbelief, though inwardly this person might be a believer with perfect belief. For
belief in Jahm’s view cannot be partitioned [that is, one either has perfect belief,
or no belief at all]. For this reason, when al-Qadi ‘Ayyad learned that some of his
disciples took this position, he denounced it and brilliantly expounded arguments
in support of the views of Malik and the Orthodox Muslims.

I have presented points relevant to this topic in my book entitled a/-Sarim al-
Maslal ‘ala al-Shatim al-Rasiul. You will also find them making reference to the
views of Islam’s authoritative scholars and the pious ancestors on questions
relating to belief, and setting forth the discussion presented by the Jahmites and
their followers, since they took this discussion from the writings of scholastic
theologians who supported Jahm’s views on issues pertaining to belief.
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 391

In his book entitled Managib al-Shafi‘t [The Virtues of al-Shaf ‘1] al-Razi
mentioned [al-Shafi‘i’s] position on belief, which is the same as that of the
Companions of the Prophet and their Successors. According to al-Shafi‘, the view
he espoused was held unanimously by the Prophet’s Companions and their
Successors. However, those who have encountered al-Shafi‘l’s view have found
it to be quite dubious. The reason for this is that al-Shafi‘i was influenced by the
fallacious argument put forward by the Kharijites, the Mu‘tazilites, the Jahmites,
the Karramites, and the Murji’ites concerning belief; namely that if any part of a
compound entity is removed, then the entire entity must cease to exist. However,
he only made mention of the superficial elements of this argument. Moreover, one
need find no difficulty in refuting their views. For it is taken for granted that when
it comes to something like a social body, for example, such an entity may not
retain all the parts of which it was once comprised. However, the loss of some of
its components does not necessitate the loss of the entity as a whole.

Al-Shafi‘i, the Companions of the Prophet (pbuh), the Successors, and the rest of
the pious ancestors said that a sin harms the perfection of Iman. Therefore, the
Prophet (pbuh) negated the Iman of sinners so long as they committed sins.
According to them, negation of Iman meant that some of it leaves [the heart] and
some of it remains [in the heart].

However, the Murji’ites had an aversion to the term “decrease,” if attributed to
Iman. For the Murji’ites [who said that Iman is one thing], and the Kharijites and
Mu<‘tazilites [who said that Iman has two constituents], said that Iman being
decreased means its removal from the heart. Indeed, they applied the same
principle to the Oneness of Allah, and the Oneness of His Attributes.

It is interesting to note that the root of the Jahmites and Murji’ites mistakes was
their belief that Iman and unbelief cannot coexist in a single person’s heart. Abu
al-Hassan al-Ash‘ari stated that Muslims unanimously agreed on this belief.
However, on account of this false belief they erred. Indeed, more than one Muslim
leader mentioned that the pious ancestors unanimously agreed upon charging with
unbelief those who said, like the Jahmites, that Iman is mere acceptance.

There are many counterparts to this; for someone may make a statement that is
actually inconsistent with both the text [of the Qur’an and other sacred writings],
and the consensus of the Islamic community, believing all the while that he is
392 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

being faithful to both. He does this based on the degree of knowledge and
expertise in interpretation he possesses. Hence, he will be forgiven for his failure
to know the correct interpretation underlying the text. So when some mistakenly
believed that the belief required of all people is of a single type, some of them
came to assume that this type of belief in and of itself cannot vary in degree or
quality from one individual to the next. Hence, someone once said to me that
belief as such can neither increase nor decrease. I replied that I noted that he used
the term “as such,” as when one says: “a human being as such is a human being,”
_“an animal as such is an animal,” “existence as such is existence,” “blackness as
such is blackness,” and such other things as this. In cases like these, we are
speaking of concepts that do not, in fact, increase or decrease or vary in degree.
For this person was stating that the entities to which he was referring had a sort of
absolute, unqualified existence abstracted from all restrictions or specific
characteristics. However, entities such as these have no objective existence; rather,
they are entities that one envisions or conceptualizes in his mind. For example,
one might conceptualize something that has neither existed from all eternity nor
come into existence at some point in time; likewise, he might imagine something
that is neither self-existent nor dependent for its existence on something outside
itself. He might envision a human being who is neither existent nor nonexistent,
saying that the essence [of something] as such is characterized neither by existence
nor by nonexistence. Something’s essence in and of itself is something conceived
by the mind; therefore, it exists‘within the mind, but not outside it. As for the
conceptualization of something that exists neither in the mind nor outside it, this
is an impossibility. This type of conceptualization occurs only in the mind, as does
that of any other impossibility, such as the world’s having been created by more
than one being. Conceptualizations such as these exist nowhere but in the mind.

Similar to this would be to imagine a kind of belief that is abstracted from any
particular believer, a belief stripped of all qualifications or restrictions; or to
conceptualize a person who neither exists nor does not exist. For the fact is that
there has never been any belief that existed in isolation from some particular
believer or group of believers. Nor has there ever existed a kind of “humanness”
apart from some human being to embody it. For every human being has a
humanness that specifically pertains to him, and every believer has a belief that
belongs specifically to him as well. Zayd’s humanness resembled that of “Amr, yet
is not identical to it. And if the two of them participated in the category of
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 393

“human,” then this means that they resembled one another in certain outwardly
discernible characteristics, while at the same time they both participated in an
abstract universal (that is, “humanness”’] that exists only in the mind.

Likewise one might say that Zayd’s belief was similar to that of ‘Amr’s, while at
the same time each one’s belief belongs to him alone. Hence, if we supposed that
everyone’s belief were alike, then every believer would still have a belief specific
to him alone. It would not be “belief as such,” but rather a particular belief that
may increase [or diminish]. As for those who deny that there can be any gradation
in belief, they are imagining a kind of absolute, abstract belief, the way one might
imagine an “absolute, abstract man” or an “absolute existence” stripped of all
specific characteristics. From here they go on to make the assumption that this sort
of belief, which admits of no variation, gradation, or complexity, is the sort that
exists in people. However, the reality is that this sort of belief is a mere
conceptualization that exists solely in the mind. For this reason, many of the
people who view belief in this manner believe that entities that have facets in
common with one another are identical in every person and essence. This view
finally led a group of erudite and pious scholars to conclude that the same applies
to existence as well. They thus imagined that all existing entities share in common
in the reality referred to as existence. And, picturing this in their imaginations,
they supposed that this ‘‘existence” they had conceptualized was to be found
outside themselves as much as within their own minds. Then they came to believe
that this existence was Allah [Himself], and came to think of Allah as this
existence, which is not objective, but is only to be found within the mind of the
one who conceives of it. Similarly, many philosophers have conceptualized
abstract numbers and realities, which they call the platonic forms, as well as an
abstract time stripped of all motion or movers, and dimensions in isolation from
bodies and their characteristics. From here they went on to imagine that such
entities possessed a kind of objective existence, thereby confusing what has
independent existence with that which exists in the mind alone. Such people might
consider “one” to be “two,” and “two” to be “one.” For example, sometimes when
dealing with objective entities characterized by variety and gradation, they would
depict them as being uniform or homogeneous, while at other times they would
take something with objective existence such as an animal, a place, or a point in
time and treat a single entity as if it were two. For example, philosophers and
followers of the Jahmite sect erred by taking [pairs of] divine attributes such as the
394 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

Lord’s knowledge and power and treating each one of the two as if it were
identical with the other, as well as identifying the attribute with the entity in which
the attribute inheres.

The same is applicable to the one who said that Iman is one thing that is invariable
among people. That is, he erred in saying that it is one thing. Also, he erred in
saying that it is the same from one person to the next. They also made similar
errors when discussing the Oneness of Allah, His Attributes, and the Quran. Thus
the error of Jahm and his followers, concerning Iman, is similar to their error
concerning the attributes of the Lord, of Whom the believers believe in His Words
and His Attributes. We seek refuge with the Almighty of what the wrongdoers are
saying.

Just as blackness and whiteness vary in degree, so also do other attributes.
Moreover, the mind accepts and perceives such variations. Hence, the heart’s
knowledge also varies among people. Around all these questions disputes have
arisen. Hence, one group that traced its origins back to Orthodox Islam denied that
such things are subject to gradation or variation. Al-Qadi Abu Bakr, Ibn “Aqil and
others also held this view.

Two views have been attributed to Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] on the question of :
whether inward knowledge is subject to variation. One of the teachings of the
Murji?ites was the repudiation of the notion that such attributes were subject to
gradation or change; however, this view was also held by those who disagreed
with the Murji?ites’ teachings. Such people claim that variation or gradation is
only to be found in people’s outward actions, whereas the belief found in one’s
heart may not vary or change. However, this is not the case; the fact is that both
inward belief and outward actions may vary and exist in differing degrees. They
[the Murji?ites] said that unlike the heart’s knowledge, the heart’s deeds vary
among people. However, this is untrue. For the Iman of the heart varies as a result
of differences in the heart’s knowledge as well as its deeds. Although all Muslims
were required to have Iman, once the Islamic law was established, the necessity
of Iman in a certain matter came to depend upon: hearing about the matter if it is
a report, doing it if it is a command, and knowing it if it is knowledge. It is not
obligatory for every Muslim to hear, know, and interpret every matter reported in
the Qur’an and the Sunnah. For indeed, nobody is able attain this. Hence, people
differ in the Iman required of them, as well as in ability and knowledge. That is,
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 395

some people know about detailed Iman and some know about overall, general
Iman. Some possess strong ability, some possess weak ability. Some have a high
degree of resolve, some have a low degree. Accordingly, those who know about
detailed Iman and those who know about general Iman are unequal. Likewise,
people differ in deeds of the heart such as love for Allah and His Messenger, the
fear of Allah, the trust they put in Allah, the praise they bestow on Allah, and the
sincerity of their deeds. And whoever denies such differences is either ignorant or
stubborn.

According to Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal], if they [the Murji’ites] claimed that they did
not accept the idea that Iman could increase due to a lack of knowledge about this
increase in Iman [since it is indeterminate], then what did they say about the
Prophets of Allah, His Books, and His Messenger? Did they believe in them and
claim that this belief is part of Iman? If they said yes, then they might have been
asked: “Can you find them and know their number? Did you not affirm your belief
in the Messengers without knowing their exact number?” The same is true of the
increase in Iman. To put it differently, Ahmad indicated that their lack of
knowledge about the maximum increase in Iman need not have prevented them
from affirming in general that it can occur. This is identical to their belief in the
Messengers and the Books, although they lacked knowledge about the number of
the Messengers and the Books. Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] and Muhammad Ibn Nasr as
well as others said that they did not know the number of the Messengers and the
Books, and that the hadith of Abu Dharr, concerning this matter, did not confirm
it to them.

If anyone equates Islam and Iman by saying that Allah employs the terms Iman
and Islam to refer to the same reality, he is indeed wrong in this saying. For Allah
and His Messenger interpreted Iman as having belief in Allah, His Angels, His
Books, His Messengers, and the Hereafter. Allah and His Messenger also
indicated that performing what Allah commands is considered part of Iman.
However, Allah does not refer to having belief in His Angels, His Books, His
Messengers, and in the Resurrection after death by the term Islam. Rather, He calls
Islam submission to Allah in one’s heart and an intent, besides being loyal to
religion and doing what one is commanded to do, such as establishing regular
prayers and giving zakah, for the sake of Allah alone. Indeed, the latter is what He
calls Islam, which He considers the only acceptable religion. Allah says: “If any
one desires a religion other than Islam, never will it be accepted of him. . .”
306 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

(3:85). Islam, as stated in this verse, does not include the constituents of Iman,
such as having belief in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His Messengers. Nor
does it include the deeds of the heart, such as the love of Allah and His
‘Messengers. Rather, these are considered parts of Iman, and they characterize the
believing Muslim. However, even if they do characterize him, this does not
necessarily mean that they are components of Islam. Rather, they are components —
of Iman. Although Iman as well as Islam are obligations, Islam is included in
Iman. Hence, whoever fulfills the obligatory Iman would necessarily fulfill all
obligatory deeds for Islam. Also, if someone fulfills the requirements of Islam, this
does not necessarily mean that he has fulfilled the requirements of Iman, unless
there is other evidence of this [that is, evidence other than the fact that he is called
Muslim]. It has been indicated that those whom Allah praises as Muslims, such as
the Prophets and their Successors up to the disciples of Christ, were all believers
and Muslims. Allah says: “, . . We believe in Allah, and do you bear witness that
we are Muslims?” (3:52). Allah also says: “And behold! I inspired the disciples
to have belief in Me and My Messenger. They said: ‘We have belief and do you
bear witness that we bow to Allah as Muslims?’” (5:111). That is why Allah
orders us to be both Muslims and believers. He says “Say you: We believe in
Allah, and the revelation given to us, and to Abraham, Isma‘1l, Isaac, Jacob and
the Tribes, and that given to Moses and Jesus, and that given to [all] Prophets from
their Lord: We make no difference between one and another of them. And we bow
to Allah [in Islam]. So if they believe as you believe, they are indeed on the right
path; but if they turn back, it is they who are in schism, but Allah will suffice you
against them, and He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing” (2:136—37). In another
verse, Allah says: “If anyone desires a religion other than Islam, never will it be
accepted of him; and in the Hereafter he will be one of the losers” (3:85).

The above-mentioned verses indicate that if anyone desires a religion other than
Islam, his deed will not be accepted [by Allah], and he will be a loser in the
Hereafter. Accordingly, one must desire the religion of Islam only, and none other.
This does not imply that what we call religion is, exactly, what we call Iman. For
Allah commands us to say: “We believe in Allah,” and He also commands us to
say: “We are Muslims.” That is, He commands us to abide by these two
commands. So, how can we consider them [Islam and Iman] to be one thing?

Those who consider Islam and Iman to be one thing either say that the two words
are synonymous, which means that there is a repetition, while in fact the two
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 397

words have different meanings; or they may say: “Indeed, one of the two words
designates a characteristic that could not be designated by the other word, as in the
case of the names of Allah and the names of His Book.” However, even this
interpretation does not require that we be commanded to fulfill both of them.
Rather, it requires that it be described sometimes with one word and sometimes
with the other. One should not say, for example, that Allah commands you to
establish five prayers and the obligatory prayer. Moreover, conjunction by
adjectives takes place if we intend to highlight characteristics that are
praiseworthy or blameworthy, as in Allah’s saying: “Glorify the Name of the
Guardian Lord, most High, Who has created and further given order and
proportion, Who has ordained laws and granted guidance” (87: 1—3). So, it cannot
be said that you pray to your Lord, most High, as well as to your Lord who has
created and given order and proportion [as if these were two different activities].

Muhammad Ibn Nasr al-Marwazi (may Allah have mercy upon him) said that
Allah declared in His Book and the Sayings of His Messenger that Islam and Iman
are not distinct entities. Hence, whoever has submitted himself to Allah believes
in Him, and whoever believes in Allah submits himself to Allah and embraces
Islam. And whoever fasts, prays, and fulfills the religious obligations that Allah
commands, and forbids what Allah prohibits, fulfills the required Islam and Iman.
And if anyone fails to perform some of the obligatory acts or commits what is
prohibited, he will not cease to be called a believer or a Muslim. However, he will
have less Iman or Islam than someone else. For his Islam and Iman have
decreased, but his acknowledgment that “Allah is Truth and says nothing but the
truth” has not decreased. However, his Iman, which is the glorification of Allah,
submission to His Majesty, Bounty, and Honor, and obedience to the One in
Whom he believes [Allah], has decreased.

What al-Marwazi mentioned above indicates that whoever fulfilled the required
Iman has fulfilled the required Islam. However, this does not mean that whoever
has fulfilled the required Islam has fulfilled the required Iman. His [al-Marwazi’s]
claim that whoever believes in Allah and has submitted to Him is true, but this
does not indicate that whoever submits to Allah has Iman in Allah, in His Angels,
in His Books, in His Messengers, and in the Resurrection after death. Moreover,
al-Marwazi’s claim that Allah and His Messenger declared that Islam and Iman
are inseparable is true, if he meant that Allah commands both of them and forbids
398 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

us to separate them. However, his saying is untrue, ifhe meant that Allah made the
terms Iman and Islam refer to the same reality. For the Book and the sayings of the
Prophet (pbuh) oppose this meaning. Besides, there is no evidence that indicates
that the referent of the term Iman and the referent of the term Islam are the same.

Moreover, al-Marwazi’s claim that “whoever performs what he is commanded to
do and refrains from doing what he is forbidden to do has fulfilled Iman and
Islam” is correct, if he performs what he is commanded to do both outwardly and
inwardly. In this case it is true to say that he fulfilled the required Islam and Iman.
However, his Iman and Islam are not necessarily equal to that of people with
determination, such as al-Khalil Ibrahim, the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh), the
Seal of the Prophets, and others of Allah’s Messengers.

Furthermore, al-Marwazi claims that if anyone fails to fulfill all of the required
Iman and Islam, the terms Muslim and “believer” will not be taken away from
him. To this the author replies that if he [al-Marwazi] meant that such a man
would still have some Islam and Iman, then his claim is correct, for the texts
support his claim and oppose the opinions of the Kharijites and Mu‘tazilites.
However, if al-Marwazi meant that such a man would be called a Muslim and a
believer without restrictions in a context of praise or promise of entering Heaven,
then his claim is incorrect, for it opposes what is in the Book and the Sunnah. For
if this is the case, then such a person would be included in Allah’s saying: “Allah
has promised to believers, men and women, Gardens under which rivers flow, to
dwell therein . . .” (9:72), and with similar righteous people who were promised
to enter Paradise without punishment.

In addition he [al-Marwazi] said that the Prophet denied, in numerous places, that
such a name may be applied to them. In fact, he said [in one prophetic tradition]:
“To fight against a believer is unbelief,” and “Do not revert to being unbelievers
after [having believed in me], seeking one another’s death.” And if one were to
object on the basis of the verse where Allah says: “And if two parties among the
believers fall to fighting, then make peace between them both, but if one of them
rebels against the other, then fight you [all] against the one that which rebels until
it complies with the command of Allah; then if it complies, then make
reconciliation between them justly, and be equitable. Indeed! Allah loves those
who are equitable” (49:9). One might reply that all these individuals were
described with the use of a qualification indicating that they had done these things,
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 399

as a reminder of what they themselves have been commanded to do, and what
others have been commanded to do.

Someone might say that there could be no decrease with respect to their testimony
that Allah exists and that what He says is truth. But rather one might reply that the
decrease may exist in their inward belief as it pertains to their knowledge and
understanding. Hence, their knowledge and their belief in Allah, the Divine
Names, the Divine Attributes, and the things that Allah says by way of commands
and prohibitions, promises and threats, would not be [exactly] like the knowledge
and belief of others. It would not fully resemble it in its overall form and minute
details, nor with respect to strength and weakness, or mindfulness and neglect. But
all such things do enter into the definition of belief in Allah and the message He
sent with His Messenger. This being the case, how could everyone’s inward belief
in Allah, the Divine Names, or the Divine Attributes be identical? And how could
one possibly claim that belief in Allah’s omniscience, omnipotence, forgiveness
and mercy, almighty power and wisdom, and stern recompense of evil is not a part
of belief in Him? For no Muslim may say that belief in such things forms no part
of belief in Allah, nor would he claim that everyone’s belief in these matters 5
exactly the same.

Also, al-Marwazi’s statement that “Islam decreases just as Iman does” is correct,
for it is supported by the sayings of the Prophet (pbuh). Hence, if someone’s
prayer, zakah, fasting, or pilgrimage is not fulfilled completely, his Islam is
likewise not complete. And whoever says, “Islam is mere verbal testimony, and
does not increase or decrease,” is mistaken. Also, those who say that Islam and
Iman are the same are mistaken. Indeed, their claim about Islam is similar to that
of the Murji’ites about Iman.

Due to the above-mentioned dispute and discussion, the sect was divided into
three distinct groups with regard to Iman and Islam. The first group, the Murji’ites,
said that Islam is better [than Iman], for it implies Iman. The second group said
that Iman and Islam are the same. This group included the Mu‘tazilites, the
Kharijites, and a group of Orthodox Muslims and scholars of the hadith. It should
be mentioned that Muhammad Ibn Nasr al-Marwazi attributed this claim to all the
people of the hadith, which is incorrect. The third group said that Iman is better
and more complete {than Islam]. This view, indeed, is supported by the Book and
the Sunnah, as well as the sayings of the Companions and their Successors.
000 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

There are also some people who say that Islam is mere qawl, utterance [saying
that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His Messenger], and that
works are not part of Islam. However, what is true is that Islam is all outward
works. Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] denied that istithna’, exception, is based on the
statement by al-Zuhri, who said that it [Iman] is the kalimah, testimony that there
is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His Messenger, which in turn was the
opinion of al-Athram, al-Maymini, and others. However, he [Ahmad] did not
choose the opinion of those who said that Islam is an utterance. This means that
it is possible to apply “exception” to Islam in the same way it is applied to Iman.
Thus, a person cannot decide whether he is able to do everything that he is
commanded to do concerning Islam. If the Prophet (pbuh) said that a Muslim is
someone from whose hand and tongue other Muslims are protected, and that Islam
is built on five pillars, this indicates that Islam means performing the five pillars
diligently. This is indeed supported by Allah’s saying: “Oh, you who believe!
Enter into Islam wholeheartedly . . .” (2:208). That is, abide by all the laws of
Islam.

Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] and others among the pious ancestors have interpreted the
‘statement that the term Iman is included in the term Islam. They said that if what
is meant by Islam is mere kalimah, testimony that there is no god but Allah and
that Muhammad is His Messenger, then there is no need to add the words “if Allah
wills” when one says that he is a Muslim, as stated by Ahmad and others. This will
be discussed fully in the next chapter. However, if Islam means performing all the
outward obligations, then one must add the words “if Allah wills” when stating
that one is a Muslim, just as he must when he states that he is a believer.
Therefore, he who testifies that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is
His Messenger, becomes a Muslim, distinguished from the Jews and the
Christians, and the rules of Islam become applicable to him, as they are to other
Muslims. This is, indeed, the case with no exceptions. That is why al-Zuhri said
that Islam is kalimah, the testimony, with which Ahmad and others agreed.
However, when Ahmad agreed with this, he did not mean that obligatory Islam is
a mere utterance of the creed [namely, without works]. For al-Zuhri was very
knowledgeable concerning Islam, and such a matter would not be unknown to
him. This was clarified in the saying of Ahmad that Islam is not a mere utterance
of belief. It is also illustrated in the question al-Athram asked Ahmad, that if a
man says, “I am a Muslim,” must he add “in sha’a Allah, if Allah wills?” Ahmad
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 401

replied no, it is not necessary for him to say “if Allah wills” if he says he is a
Muslim. Al-Athram asked if it is acceptable to call him a Muslim when one knows
that other Muslims are not protected from his hands and tongue? One should
remember that the Prophet (pbuh) said: “A Muslim is he from whose hand and
tongue other Muslims are protected.” Ahmad replied that he knows that not all
people are safe from him, and then he mentioned the hadith of Mu‘mmar, on the
authority of al-Zuhnri, which declares that Islam is kalimah and Iman is works.

Hence, Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] made clear that if Islam is understood to be a
kalimah, testimony, then there is no need for someone who claims to be a Muslim
to add the phrase, “if Allah wills.” And if the term “belief” is understood in the
same way, as in the phrase where Allah says: “. .. The freeing of a believing slave
...” (4:92), then what is meant by the term “believer” is someone who has shown
himself outwardly to be a Muslim. For the belief upon which worldly judgments
are based is an outward belief that may be identified with Islam. Hence, in terms
of outward judgments on individuals, the words “belief” and Islam, or “believer”
and Muslim, refer to the same thing. For this reason, when al-Athram mentioned
to Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] that the Murji’ites’ argument was based on the words of
the Prophet (pbuh): “Free her, for she is a believer,” Ahmad replied that this
statement is based on the woman’s being reckoned a believer according to
outward, worldly standards; it does not, however, mean that if this woman met
Allah [in the afterlife], with nothing but an outward testimony of belief, she would
be a believer in Allah’s eyes meriting Paradise without having first to enter
Hellfire [to purify her of her sins]. This type of believer is the “absolute” believer
according to the Book of Allah, that is, the one who has perfect belief and is
therefore promised Paradise without ever having to go through the fires of Hell.
Therefore, Ibn Mas‘td and others of the pious ancestors used to require anyone
who claimed to have belief to also claim that he would enter Paradise (i.e., to
claim that he would die a believer). For it was firmly agreed on that Paradise is
only for those who die with their belief intact.

Ifa person said: “I am, absolutely, a believer, and I am a believer in the judgment
of Allah,” he would be asked to ascertain that he would enter Paradise without
punishment if he died in this state; for Allah says that believers would enter
Paradise without punishment. Indeed, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal denied the hadith of Ibn
“Umayrah that stated that ‘Abd Allah Ibn Mas‘tid changed his mind about the
matter of saying “if Allah wills” after stating that one is a believer. This is due to
402 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

the fact that when Ibn Mas‘id was told that a community said: “We are believers,”
he asked: “Did you not ask them if they would be in Paradise?” In another
account, Ibn Mas‘id asked: “Did they not say that they were the people of
Paradise?” In a third account, he was told that a man claimed to be a believer, to
which Ibn Mas‘id replied: “Ask him: Will he be in Paradise or in Hell?” When
they asked the man, his answer was: “Allah knows best.” To this Ibn Mas‘ud
replied: “Why did he not say the same thing [“Allah knows best”] when he was
asked about Iman?” Indeed, it is recorded by Qatadah, Na‘im Ibn Abi Hind,” and
others on the authority of ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab that he [the latter] said: “Whoever
says ‘I am a believer’ is an unbeliever, whoever says ‘I am a scholar’ is ignorant,
and whoever says ‘I will be in Paradise’ will be in Hell.”

The Murji?ites posed this question to Ibn Mas‘tid, saying that Yazid Ibn ‘Umayrah
had posed it to Ibn Mas‘td also, until he changed his mind about the question of
whether to say “if Allah wills” after claiming to be a believer. But if one knows
that he is a believer today, he does not know that he will remain so when he dies.
That is why some people started saying that a believer is he whom Allah knew in
advance would have his belief sealed for him; the unbeliever is the one whom
Allah knew in advance would be an unbeliever. Moreover, no consideration is
given to what the person was before this time. It is on this basis that they insisted
on the necessity of saying “if Allah wills” after claiming to be a believer. Indeed,
this is what some of the companions of Ahmad and others said, and it was also the
view of Abu al-Hassan [al-Ashart] and his companions.

However, Ahmad {Ibn Hanbal] and others among the pious ancestors did not mean
this. Rather, they meant that absolute Iman includes the performance of what is
commanded. Accordingly, saying, “I am a believer” is like his saying, “I am
Allah’s friend: I am a believer who fears Allah and believes in Him; I am one of
the pious ones” and so on. And as it is a well-known fact that Ibn Mas‘iid knew
well that Paradise is only for the person who dies as a believer and that a man does
not know in which state [whether belief or disbelief] he will die. However, his
saying, “Ask him, will he be in Paradise if he dies in his state fof belief]?’ 15
similar to saying, “Ask him, will he be one of the people of Paradise in this state?”
But when the man replied: “Allah and His Messenger know best,” Ibn Mas‘ud

20 Nam Ibn Abi Hind (?-110 A.H.) was a trustworthy scholar of hadith. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p.
362]
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 403

remarked: “He should have said the same thing when he was asked about his
Iman.” This means that one should not testify of himself that he performs the
obligations and that he abandons what is prohibited. For if he does so, then he
testifies of himself that he will be one of the people of Paradise if he dies in this
state. That is why those who do not believe in saying, “if Allah wills” concerning
one’s present state, but only concerning one’s state when he dies, do not judge for
certain that Allah does not accept the repentance of a repentant for he may go back
on his repentance before death. They also did not judge for certain that Allah
punishes a sinner. For if they claimed to know for certain that his repentance was
accepted, this would require that they guarantee his entry into Paradise. However,
they do not state absolutely whether any Muslim will go to Paradise or Hell unless
this is stated clearly of him in the texts [of Qur’dn and the Sunnah].

If it is said that Paradise is for whoever faithfully repents ofall bad deeds, and they
said that even if he died in this state of repentance, we cannot judge for certain that
he would enter Paradise. They did not make exceptions in certain cases. Rather,
they judged that a believer is he who has complete Iman. Accordingly, they
guaranteed Paradise for the person whom they judged to have died as a believer,
with no sins. That is why they did not judge the acceptability of his repentance, in
order not to be forced to judge him worthy to enter Paradise. The leaders of the
pious ancestors did not make any unequivocal judgments about who enters
Paradise, for they could not judge for certain that a man performed what he was
commanded to do and abandoned what was prohibited. Nor did they judge for
certain that he was true and faithful in his repentance.

The leading pious ancestors unanimously agreed on the fact that a single name is
negated or affirmed according to judgments that are related to it. Hence, ifa name
is affirmed or negated in one judgment, it does not mean it would be so in all the
rest. This is true of the speech of the Arabs as well as of other communities. An
illustrative example is the hypocrites who were included among the believers in
one place, while they were excluded from them in another. Allah says: “Indeed
Allah knows those among you who keep back [men] and those who say to their
brother: come along to us, but come not to the fight except for just a little while.
[They are] covetous over you. Then when fear comes, you will see them looking
to you, their eyes revolving, like [those of] one over whom hovers death; but when
the fear is past, they will smite you with sharp tongues in their greed for wealth
[from the spoils]. Such men have no belief, and so Allah makes their deeds of no
404 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

effect: and that is easy for Allah” (33:18-19). In this verse, hypocrites are
described as those who fear the enemy, are reluctant to undertake jihad, forbid
others from jihad, and dispraise believers. In another verse, Allah says: “They
swear by Allah that they are indeed of you; but they are not of you: yet they are
afraid [to appear in their true colors]. If they could find a place to flee to, or caves,
or a place of concealment, they would turn away threats with an obstinate rush”
(9:56-57). The sins of these hypocrites are less serious than those of the hypocrites
mentioned in the previous verses. For they did not harm the believers, either by
forbidding them from jihad or by smiting them with sharp tongues. However, they
swore by Allah that they were believers in their hearts, although they were not.
That is why Allah says, in the last verse, that “they are not of you.” He also says,
in the previous verse, that “indeed Allah knows those among you who keep back
[men].” This statement refers to whoever is outwardly a believing Muslim, saying
that some of them have these characteristics. However, such people are not
believers, for Allah make their deeds worthless. Hence, such people were “of
you” outwardly, but not inwardly.

Indeed, when the Prophet (pbuh) was questioned about fighting against hypocrites,
he said: “He did not want people to say that Muhammad fights against his
friends.” Accordingly these hypocrites were, outwardly speaking, considered
friends of the Prophet. Indeed, this is what was believed by those who did not
know the truth about them. However, the true friends of the Prophet (pbuh) did not
have the least hypocrisy. For they [the true friends] were the ones who taught
others about the sayings of the Prophet, who fought against the apostates, who
became unbelievers after the death of the Prophet, and the ones who pledged
allegiance to the Prophet (pbuh) under the tree, including the people of Badr and
others. However, these people, who were hypocrites, were mostly people who
were not versed in worldly affairs.

Similarly, we have lines of descent, as when a man is someone’s father or brother,
in which some rules apply to him while others do not. For we read in al-Sahihayn
that Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqis and ‘Abd Ibn Zam‘ah Ibn al-Aswad brought a dispute
before the Prophet (pbuh) concerning the son of Walidah Zam‘ah. For ‘Utbah Ibn
Abi 11320035 had sexual relations with her out of wedlock before the time of the
Prophet, after which she gave birth to a son. ‘Utbah then said to his brother Sa‘d:
“When you come to Makkah, look at Walidah Zam‘ah’s son, and you will see that
Iam his father.” It was after this that he and ‘Abd Ibn Zam‘ah [i.e., Zam‘ah’s son]
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 405

brought their dispute over him to the Prophet (pbuh). Sa‘d said: “Oh, Messenger
of Allah! My brother ‘Utbah charged me, when I came to Makkah, to look at
Walidah Zam‘ah’s son, claiming that he was the boy’s father. So, Oh, Messenger
of Allah, do you not see his resemblance to ‘Utbah?” Then ‘Abd Ibn Zam‘ah said:
“Oh, Messenger of Allah, [he is] my brother and Walidah’s son [who] was born
on my father’s bed.” And seeing the clear resemblance between the boy and
“Utbah, the Prophet (pbuh) said: “He is your [relative], Oh, ‘Abd Ibn Zam‘ah. The
boy was indeed born on this man’s bed, and let the whore be stoned.” [Then,
speaking to Sawdah, ‘Abd Ibn Zam‘ah’s sister, he said]: “And veil yourself so as
not to be seen by him, Sawdah!” He said this because of the boy’s clear
resemblance to ‘Utbah [Sawdah’s father]. For the Prophet (pbuh) judged him to
be Zam<ah’s son since he was born on his bed. And he declared him to be a
brother to Zam‘ah’s son, saying: “He is your [relative], “Abd Ibn Zam‘ah.”
Sawdah thus became his sister and a joint heir with him, since he was the son of
her father Zam‘ah, born on his bed. Then the Prophet (pbuh) commanded her to
veil herself in his presence due to the clear resemblance he bore to ‘Utbah.*! For
there were two different sorts of evidence relating to him: the bed on which he was
born, and the resemblance between him and ‘Utbah. The first of these was the
most compelling. However, their resemblance was a public matter, whereas sexual
sin is a secret, illicit matter of which no one was to know, and which must be
hidden rather than revealed. As he [the Prophet] said: “Let the whore be stoned.”
Similarly one might say: “‘in your mouth is dust,” and “in your mouth is gravel”;
that is, “you must not speak openly of sexual immorality, for it is something that
Allah abhors.” And since it was possible for her to veil herself in his presence
without any harm being done, he commanded her to do so due to the evidence that
in his heart, he was not her true brother.

It thus becomes apparent that the same classification may be affirmed in one
judgment and negated in another. For he is considered a true brother to her with
respect to inheritance, but is nevertheless not considered to be a close enough
relation that he would be precluded from marrying her. On the other hand, an
illegitimate son, in the view of some scholars of Islam, and likewise Ibn

* Tt appears that the Prophet wanted to conceal the scandal of their being born of the same father
by having the girl Sawdah veil herself in the boy’s presence as if he were not her brother. For,
under normal circumstances, there is no need for a girl to veil herself in the presence of male
relatives for whom she would not be a potential wife.
406 ١ CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

mala‘inah, a son of perdition, in the view of all except for those who depart from
the consensus, is not classified as a true son when it comes to inheritance;
however, he is considered to be a true son with respect to being forbidden to marry
certain females in the family.

The term nikah, marriage, comprises marriage in the complete sense, including
a contractual agreement and consummation, as when Allah says: “. . . Then marry
women of your choice . . .” (4:3); and “So if a husband divorces his wife, he
cannot, after that, remarry her until after she has married another husband and he
has divorced her. In that case there is no blame on either of them if they reunite,
provided they feel that they can keep the limits ordained by Allah . . .” (2:230). In
prohibitions, on the other hand, we find marriage referred to in both the complete
and the partial senses, such that in some cases only the contractual agreement is
forbidden without the inclusion of sexual relations, as when Allah says: “And
marry not women whom your fathers married . . .” (4:22). This is because the
intention of the one giving the command is to achieve some benefit which would
only come about through consummation of a marriage. It is as 11 one were to say,
“buy me some food,” where the intention can only be carried out by making the
purchase and collecting the goods. As for the person forbidding some action, he
intends to prevent some sort of damage or corruption; for this reason he includes
every aspect of what is being forbidden, since its very existence is a cause of
corruption. The same applies to matters pertaining to lineage and inheritance,
which require marriage in the full sense. However, marriage to a male relative
may be precluded based on even the most minor cause, including having nursed
from the same woman. |

Similarly, anything that has an early stage and a stage of perfection is sometimes
negated when its perfection is negated; whereas it is sometimes affirmed when its
early stage is affirmed. For example, the term “men” includes all males, even if
they are young. Allah says: “. . . If they are brothers and sisters, the male having
twice the share of the female . . .” (4:176). However, the term “men” does not
include male children in the following saying of Allah: “. . . And of those who,
being weak, are ill-treated [and oppressed] men and women, and male children
whose cry is: ‘Our Lord! rescue us from this town, whose people are oppressors
...”” (4:75). This is due to the fact that hijrah, immigration in the cause of Allah,
and jihad are deeds that only the capable can perform. Hence, if the verse were
restricted only to men who were weak and ill-treated, then male children would
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 407

be excluded, although they also are weak and ill-treated. Therefore, mentioning
male children [by name] was intended to make clear that they were excused for
not being able to immigrate and to fight for the sake of Allah. Iman has an early
stage and a stage of perfection. It also has an outward aspect and an inward aspect.
Accordingly, worldly judgments concerning rights and limitations—such as saving
lives, property, and inheritance, as well as worldly punishments—must be based
solely on the outward aspect of Iman, not the inward aspect. For it is very difficult,
if not impossible, to base them on inward Iman, due to the fact that inward Iman
is unknown and uncertain to us. Hence, one cannot punish a hypocrite, even if he
thinks that he has no inward Iman.

Indeed, the Prophet (pbuh) used to refrain from punishing hypocrites, for there
were some people who did not know that they were hypocrites, as Allah states.
And even if he [the Prophet] knew who the hypocrites were, he would not punish
them; for his people would have become angry and say, “Muhammad kills his
Companions,” which may have alienated some from Islam. This was the case
unless hypocrites committed outward, publicly recognized sins. And when the
Prophet (pbuh) tried to punish those who did not go to the mosque for
congregational prayer, he could not. He was prevented from doing so by the
presence of women and children at home, since he had intended to punish each
and every person who did not attend the prayers. Commands and prohibitions are
related to the early stage of Iman. Therefore, when Allah says: “Oh, you who
believe! When you prepare for prayer . . .” (5:6) and similar sayings, He refers to
an outward act for all people who are, outwardly, Muslims. It is also an inward
address for all people who know about themselves that they believe in the
Messenger and put their trust in him, even if they are disobedient and fail to
perform the outward and inward obligations. For if the phrase “those who believe”
is applicable to them, then there is no dispute; and if it is not, then it is because of
their sins. However, their sins would not prevent them from doing good deeds,
which, if they actually do them, will be the cause of Allah’s mercy on them.
However, if they do not perform good deeds, their punishment is due to their
having abandoned Iman. Even the disbeliever is required to obey what is
commanded. However, if he does so, these good deeds will not be accepted of
him, for Iman is a condition for the acceptance of good deeds. Likewise in the case
of the sheer hypocrite, his good deeds will not be acceptable unless he has inner
Iman.
408 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

If someone has the root of Iman, which is the inner acceptance of Islam [that is,
he is in the early stage of Iman], his deeds will be accepted, for he inwardly
accepted the necessity of what the Messenger ordered and abandoned what the
Messenger prohibited. Related to the perfection of Iman is the promise of
Paradise, victory, and safety from Hell. Indeed, this promise concerns him who has
performed what he was commanded to do and abandoned what was prohibited.
However, he who performs some and neglects some [of the obligatory acts] will
be rewarded for what he has done and will be punished for what he has neglected.
Such a man will not be classified as “‘a believer who deserves praise without
punishment.” It follows that whenever the Messenger negates someone’s Iman, the
negation is made by way of a warning or threat that requires a negation of that
which merits reward or wards off punishment. Accordingly, the negation of Iman
of the people who commit sins, as reported in the Book and the Sunnah, is related
to threat and dispraise, but it is related neither to commands and prohibitions nor
to worldly judgments.

The names Islam, Iman, and Ihsan are all praiseworthy and desirable names for
people who are characterized by them will be safe in the Hereafter. The Prophet
(pbuh) made clear that he who has been characterized by Islam, Iman, and Ihsan
in the manner that he [the Prophet] indicated will receive an excellent reward.
Accordingly, whenever the Prophet (pbuh) negated someone’s Iman or both his _
Iman and his Islam but did not consider him an unbeliever, he negated these only
with respect to reward in the Hereafter, but not with regard to worldly judgments.
However, the Mu‘tazilites believed that if the name Iman or Islam is negated of
someone, then its parts would be negated accordingly. Hence, the Mu‘tazilites
thought that whenever the Prophet (pbuh) negated anyone’s Iman, or both Iman
and Islam [as stated earlier], then he has neither Iman nor Islam and such a man
should abide in Hell. However, this interpretation contradicts what is in the Book
and the Sunnah as well as the consensus of the pious ancestors. For if someone has
neither Iman or Islam, then none of the believers’ and Muslims’ rules could be
applicable to him; rather, ‏عط‎ is considered to be a hypocrite. The Book, the
Sunnah, and the consensus [of the Muslim jurists] all agreed on the distinction
between someone who does not inwardly believe in what the Prophet (pbuh) said,
and the believer who commits a sin. Indeed, the Mu‘tazilites did not distinguish
between sinners and hypocrites in terms of the judgments of this world or the
Hereafter. This equity is demonstrated in the negation of a man’s Islam and Iman.
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 409

It may be affirmed of the hypocrite that outwardly, he is both a Muslim and a
believer while, on the other hand, they may deny that the sinner is a Muslim or a
believer, whether outwardly or inwardly.

Someone might ask, if each and every believer is a Muslim, yet not every Muslim
is a believer [with perfect Iman}—as indicated in the hadith of Gabriel, other
hadiths, and the Qur’an, and the sayings of the pious ancestors [for Islam is
outward obedience as well as submission, while Iman also connotes the meaning
of acceptance and tranquility, which is more than mere submission}then what
do you say about the person who performs what Allah orders, and forbids what
Allah prohibits, and is loyal and faithful to Allah in his outward deeds and inner
intent? Is not such a man considered a Muslim, outwardly as well as inwardly, and
will he not enter Paradise? If so, and if only believers enter Paradise, then he is a
believer.

We say that elsewhere in this book we have mentioned that such a man must have
the required Iman; for if he did not perform the requirements, he would be
exposed to the threat of punishment. However, there may be Iman that is not
required of him; either he has not been presented with it or he is incapable of
performing it. For the Iman and Islam described in the hadith of Gabriel were not
considered requirements in the early stages of Islam. Nor were they considered
requirements of previous communities who followed the Prophets [the people of
Paradise], although they were believing Muslims, and although Islam is the
religion of Allah and the only religion that is accepted. Islam is also the religion
of Allah, both in the present life and in the Hereafter. For Islam is the worship of
Allah only, with no partners, and obedience to Him. Allah’s commands may vary
in a single Shari‘ah, /s/amic law, not to mention in more than one such law.
Accordingly, Islam may include some requirements of Iman that may be excluded
in another time. An illustrative example is the prayer toward the Rock [namely,
when Muslims used to pray toward Jerusalem in the early period of Islam, before
the Qiblah was transferred to Makkah]. This kind of prayer was part of Islam,
when Allah orders it to be so, but was no longer part of Islam after He prohibits
it,

It is a well-known fact that the five pillars of Islam, which are mentioned in the
hadith of Gabriel, were not made obligatory in the early stages of Islam. Instead
fasting, pilgrimage, and giving zakah were made obligations in Madinah. Also, the
410 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

five prayers were made obligatory on the night of [the Prophet’s] ascension.
Moreover, many of the sayings of the Prophet (pbuh) make no mention of
pilgrimage. For pilgrimage was only made obligatory later, in the year 9 or 10
A.H. When Allah reveals His mission to Muhammad (pbuh), whoever followed
him [the Prophet] and believed what was revealed in his message was considered
a believer and a Muslim. And if such a person died, he would be among those
meriting Paradise. After this stage, Allah adds to and completes Iman and Islam.
Allah says: “. . . This day I perfected your religion for you . . .” (5:3). The same is
applicable to Iman. For indeed, the detailed Iman mentioned in the hadith of
Gabriel was not made obligatory in the early stages of Islam, when Allah revealed
the Sirahs entitled al-‘Alaq, The Clot of Congealed Blood, and Muddaththir, One
Who Is Wrapped Up. Rather, it was made obligatory in the Madinan Surahs, such
as Sirah Baqarah, The Cow, and Sirah al-Nisa”» The Women. Hence, detailed
Iman was not made obligatory for people who died before that time. Moreover, a
man could be a Muslim who worships Allah only, and does not associate partners
with Him, who had the obligatory Iman [Iman that was made obligatory for him]
and who would be of the people of Paradise, yet without having detailed Iman,
which was mentioned in the hadith of Gabriel. Such a man [who was a Muslim at
the early stage of Islam] is said to have the Iman and Islam that was made
obligatory for him. Hence, he could be a Muslim who worships Allah [as
commanded] and who does not worship anyone other than Allah, Whom he fears
and from whom he seeks forgiveness; but he may not love Allah and His
Messenger more than all other things and people, nor love Allah, His Messenger,
and jihad more than his family and his money. Also, he may not desire for his
brother what he desires for himself, nor fear and take refuge in Allah alone. But
it is these things that, altogether, constitute obligatory Iman. For Islam is the
submission that implies obedience to none but Allah, and following and adoring
none but Allah. Submission and adoration may include fear [of Allah] and hope
in Him. However, tranquility of the heart due to loving none but Allah, love of
Allah and His Messenger that is greater than one’s love of anything else, trust in
Allah, and desiring for a brother in Islam what one desires for oneself: all these are
realities that correspond to Iman, and whoever does not demonstrate them in his
life is not considered to be a true believer, even if he is a Muslim. The same is
applicable to other phenomenon, such as having a tremor in one’s heart when
Allah’s name is mentioned and increasing one’s Iman when Allah’s verses are
recited.
THE CONCEPT OF IMAN AND RELATED ISSUES 411

Someone might ask: Is the absence of this Iman considered a sin or not? The
answer would be: If a man has not been presented with it, then its absence is not
to be considered a sin, even if he is able to attain it. Many people, or even the
majority of people [which is true of the masses at all times and places], do not
have knowledge about the details included in Iman, although they perform the
required obedience of Islam. When they commit a sin, they repent and ask for
Allah’s forgiveness, but they do not know either about the requirements of Iman
or about the fact that they are parts of Iman. Indeed, many of the people who know
about these requirements, if they even believe in their existence, think that they are
supererogatory acts of piety, which are desirable but not required.

Islam includes whoever declares his Islam yet does not have any Iman. Such a
man is a sheer hypocrite [namely, a hypocrite with regard to belief, who pretends
that he is a Muslim, although he is an unbeliever in his heart]. Islam also includes
whoever declares his Islam and has inner belief in Islam as a whole, but does not
perform all the requirements or obligations. Such a man is considered a sinner who
has a “branch” of hypocrisy. Islam also includes whoever performs the required
Islam and the Iman that it requires, but fails to attain perfect Iman. Such a man is
not considered a sinner who has neglected an obligation or committed a forbidden
act; rather, he is dispraised for neglecting some aspects of Iman that are required
to be known and fulfilled outwardly and inwardly [in the heart]. Indeed, this is the
kind of hypocrisy the pious ancestors used to fear; for whoever has it, has some
degree of hypocrisy in his heart. Beyond this there are aspects of belief by which
Allah grants those who draw near to Him distinction over other righteous
believers. This may include desirable acts, as well as a degree of Iman or Islam
that is required of some but not others. That is why the Prophet said: “Whoever of
you sees a wrong deed should change it by his hand; if he is unable to do so, then
he should change it with his tongue, and if he is unable to do this, then he should
change it with his heart, which is considered the weakest form of Iman.” In
another hadith the Prophet (pbuh) said: “Beyond this [the mere ability to change
a wrong deed with one’s heart] there is no Iman, even the weight of a mustard
seed.” By the latter hadith, the Prophet (pbuh) meant that disapproving of
something in one’s heart is the best possible expression of Iman. Hence, the saying
does not mean that whoever does not disapprove it [in his heart] does not have
even a mustard seed of Iman. Thus, the Prophet (pbuh) divided believers into three
412 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

ranks, each of which fulfills the required Iman. Believers in the highest rank [who
change the wrong deed with their hands], since they are most able, are required to
have a more perfect Iman than those in the second rank, who in turn are asked to
have a more perfect Iman than those in the lowest rank. Accordingly, it is clear
that people differ in the Iman required of them according to their abilities,
provided that all of them have been presented with Iman and its necessity.
Chapter Twenty-Three

Exception In Iman

oot

The question of whether to say, “I am a believer, if Allah wills,”' is indeed a
controversial issue, and [Muslim] people have three opinions regarding this: some
people consider it obligatory; some consider it forbidden; and some accept the two
previously stated opinions under different circumstances, and this is the most
correct opinion. Those who use the conditional clause, in sha’a Allah, and forbid
making the exception are the Murji’ites, Jahmites, and others who considered
Iman as a single entity that one recognizes by himself, such as tasdiq, assent, in
the Lord and similar matters in one’s heart. Therefore, if I say that I know that I
am a believer in the same way I know that I bear witness that there is no god but
Allah and that Muhammad is His Messenger, and in the same way I know that I
have read the Fatihah [the first chapter of the Qur’an] and just as I know that I
love the Messenger of Allah and hate the Jews and the Christians, then my saying
that I am a believer is like my saying that I am a Muslim, that I have uttered the
Shahadah, testimony, or read the Fatihah, or that I hate the Jews and the
Christians, and other such matters that J know for certain. And although it is
unacceptable to say: “I read the Fatihah, if Allah wills,” likewise I cannot say: “I
am a believer, if Allah wills.”” Nevertheless, if one has some doubts about whether
he is a believer, then he should add the phrase, “if Allah wills,” to his statement.
Therefore, whoever makes the exception regarding his Iman is one who has doubts
about his Iman, and people of this type are called al-Shakkakah, the Doubters.

Those who make the exception a necessity base their claim on two principles. The
first is that one’s Iman concerns only the state of his Iman when he dies. For a man

’ The clause and mu’min, in sha’a Allah, / am a believer, if Allah wills, is a theological issue and
came to be known as istithna’, exception in Iman. Some religious scholars add the conditional
clause in sha’a Allah to the affirmative statement "I am a believer,” and some do not.
414 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

is considered a believer or an unbeliever according to his state of faith or unbelief
upon dying, whereas his state before that is of no importance. They say that if
Iman is followed by unbelief, then the person who dies in a state of unbelief is
considered an unbeliever. This is like someone who spoils his prayer before he
finishes it or breaks his fast before sunset. Such a man is indeed considered an
unbeliever because of Allah’s knowledge of the state in which he will die. This
was the argument employed by many later thinkers of the Kullabite sect, as well
as others who supported the view that came to be widely ascribed to Orthodox
Muslims and people of the hadith. According to this view, one must add the
clause, “if Allah wills,” whenever stating that one is a believer. At the same time,
there is no variation or gradation in belief from one person to the next, and this
clause is used not because one doubts his present faith, but rather because he is not
certain whether he will continue to believe in the future. A further claim was
added to these views, namely that the love of Allah, His approval, disapproval, and
His wrath exists throughout all eternity. But here the question arises as to whether
such things are to be identified with the [divine] will, or with other [divine]
attributes? Two positions have been taken on this question. Most earlier thinkers
held that divine approval, disapproval, wrath, and so on are attributes not to be
identified with divine will. Similarly, hearing and sight are not to be identified
with knowledge, nor are friendship and enmity, all of which are eternally
preexisting attributes in the view of Abu Muhammad ‘Abd Allah Ibn Sa‘id Ibn
Kullab and those scholastic theologians who followed in his footsteps, as well as
followers of the views of the Hanbalites, Shafi‘ites, Malikites, and others.

Such people hold that throughout all eternity Allah loves someone who is an
unbeliever, if it becomes known that this person will eventually die a believer.
Allah loves the Companions of the Prophet, for example, even though they
worshiped idols for a period of time; conversely, Allah abhors Iblis throughout all
eternity, even from the time before he became an unbeliever. This position arises
out of one of the two views taken on the question above. For Allah’s pleasure and
displeasure can be traced back to His will, which in turn corresponds to divine
knowledge. What this means is that Allah continues to desire to reward such
people after they have embraced belief, and to punish Iblis after. his having
become an unbeliever. And this is correct. For Allah wills to create everything that
He already knows He will create. And based on the views of those who affirm this,
there are other attributes. It has also been said that His love pursues the one whom
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 415

He wills to reward, for everyone whom He wills to establish, He loves, and
everyone whom He wills to punish, He abhors. And this follows upon knowledge.
According to those who hold this view, once someone has been the object of
Allah’s wrath, he will never enjoy His favor; nor does Allah begin to rejoice ina
servant's repentance after He restores him to grace, since He rejoices in it
throughout all eternity. His [Allah’s] rejoicing arises either out of [His] will or out
of [His] approval. And what this means is that Allah always wills to establish such
a person [in belief]. Similarly, Allah’s wrath against someone does not begin on
the Day of Resurrection without any continuity with what went before. Rather, His
wrath exists for all eternity, either in the sense of willing it, or in some other sense.

Hence, they claim that if Allah knows that a particular person will die an
unbeliever, then He wills this person’s punishment for all eternity. Hence,
whatever faith this person had is devoid of all benefit; in fact, it may as well not
exist. For such a person was not [truly] a believer to begin with. Conversely, if it
becomes known that someone will die a believer, then He [Allah] wills to
establish this person [in belief] for all eternity, and whatever unbelief he has been
guilty of may as well not exist, since according to this view, such a person was
never [truly] an unbeliever to begin with. Thus, such people include the phrase, “if
Allah wills,” whenever stating that anyone is a believer. In fact some of them, for
example, Abu Mansur al-Maturidi, add this clause even when stating that someone
is an unbeliever. Hence, they apply the same practice in either case. However, the
majority of the leading authorities on Islam do not add the exception when stating
that someone is an unbeliever. In fact, this practice is a heretical one that has never
been reported by any of the pious ancestors. Nevertheless, it is considered to be
a necessity [by those who practice it].

There are also some within this group who make a distinction between the two
situations, saying that we make the exception with respect to belief out of our
desire that Allah may establish us in belief until the day we die, whereas unbelief
is something no one would desire. However, if one’s stating that he is a believer
is tantamount to his saying that he will enter Paradise, then one might say of the
unbeliever that he is an unbeliever but not that he will enter Hellfire, unless one
meant to say that such a person was going to die an unbeliever. Hence, one might
state unequivocally that someone was in a condition of unbelief, albeit with the
acknowledgment that he might become a believer. Likewise in the case of the
believer, whether he is speaking of himself or of someone else, if he were to say
416 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

of a Jew or a Christian, “he is an unbeliever,” then he would need to add, “if Allah
wills,” as long he did not know whether this person would die an unbeliever. And
in the view under discussion, no one knows whether anyone else is a believer
unless he also knows that he will die in a state of unbelief. This view has been
espoused by many scholastic theologians who were disciples of Ibn Kullab;
moreover, it has also found support among a good number of the followers of the
founders of the four Orthodox schools of Islam [Abu Hanifah, al-Shafi‘i, Malik
Ibn Anas, and Ahmad Ibn Hanbal]. Nevertheless, it is not a position that was ever
adopted by any of the pious ancestors, the four authorities mentioned above, or
anyone else. Nor did any of the pious ancestors who made the exception [with
regard to belief] argue for it, including Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and his predecessors.

EXCESSIVE USE OF EXCEPTION

The principle upon which this practice was based was repudiated by a group of
leading Muslim thinkers who had been accustomed to making the exception with
respect to belief in imitation of the pious ancestors. Thinkers from Syria were
particularly hard on the Murji’ites. This happened during the time when [the city
of] “Asqalan was [still] inhabited, being one of the choicest of all Muslim seaports.
Muhammad Ibn Yisuf al-Faryani,’ a disciple of al-Thawri, was stationed there.
And for this reason it had a frontier fortress built for the sake of Allah. At that
time, people used to make the exception when speaking of someone as a believer,
thereby following the example of the pious ancestors. They also made the
exception whenever someone spoke of righteous works [he intended to perform].
This may be seen in the example of someone who says, “I have prayed, if Allah
wills,” meaning that if Allah wills, his prayer will be accepted. In this practice
situation one may also see the influence of the pious ancestors. After that some
took the practice a step further, and began making the exception with respect to
everything. One might say, for example, that this is my robe, if Allah wills, or that
this is a rope, if Allah wills. And if someone objected, saying that these are matters
about which there 1s not any doubt, he would reply that it is true, there is no doubt
about it. However, if Allah wishes to change these things, He could do so. Hence,
by using the clause, “if Allah wills,” they are expressing the possibility that

> Al-Faryani, Muhammad Ibn Yisuf (?-212 A.H.), was a close associate of al-Thawri and was
against the Murji’ites. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 372.]
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 417

something might change in the future, even if at the present time it is in a
condition concerning which there was no doubt. Thus, the only facts one would
not be required to add the clause, “if Allah wills,” are those not subject to change.
This is similar to the view of those who make the exception with respect to belief,
namely, that [true] belief is that which Allah knows will not change, being the
same condition in which its possessor will ultimately die.

This position has been taken by learned, pious thinkers with discernment and
competence in the formulation of independent judgments on theological questions.
And those who make the exception with regard to virtually everything have
adopted this practice from some of their mentor’s followers. As for their mentor,
a man by the name of Abu ‘Amr “Uthman Ibn Marziiq,” he himself did not support
this practice; rather, he followed the tradition of the pious ancestors [i.e., he only
practiced making the exception following statements affirming that someone was
a believer]. It [the exception] was initiated by some of his later disciples. Abu
“Amr based his teachings on those of Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal], and was also a
follower of “Abd al-Wahhab Ibn al-Shaykh Abu al-Faraj al-Maqdisi,* who was
himself 2 follower 0121-0301 Abu Ya‘la. And although all of those mentioned here
traced their views back to those of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, they were nevertheless all
in agreement with the basic teachings of Ibn Kullab, whose supporters were
condemned by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal. On account of this, he ordered that al-Harith
al-Muhaibi* be ostracized. Nevertheless, Ibn Kullab’s views also found support
among some of the followers of Malik Ibn Anas, al-Shafi‘l, and Abu
Hanifah—such as Abu al-Ma‘alt al-Juwayni, Abu al-Walid al-Baji, Abu Mansir
al-Maturidi, and others. And the views of such individuals on making the
exception derived from the positions they took on various issues related to the
divine attributes; for example, the question of whether the Qur’an was something
that Allah uttered by His will and power, or something that is inseparably
associated with His essence.

3

Abu ‘Amr ‘Uthman Ibn Marzigq (?-564 A.H.) was a Hanbali jurist and a mystic who used the

exception extensively. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, ‏.م‎ 373 and al-Zirikli, vol. 1, p. 378.]

* “Abd al-Wahhab Ibn al-Shaykh Abu al-Faraj al-Maqdisi (?-536 A.H.) was a chief Hanbali jurist
of his time, a scholar of hadith, and a commentator of the Qur’an. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 373.]

* Al-Muhasibi, al-Harith‘Abd Allah (7-243 A.H.), wasa mystic, a theologian, and a follower of
the Kullabite sect. Ahmad Ibn Hanbal opposed his position. [E/, vol. 7, pp. 466-67 and Kitab
al-Iman MZ, pp. 373-74.]
418 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

This also formed the basis for the views adopted by al-Ash‘ari and his followers;
for they were all supporters of Ibn Kullab’s views, according to which Allah does
not speak as an act of will and power. They also hold that Allah does not [begin
to] show favor toward someone after he becomes a believer or [begin to] show His
wrath toward someone after he has become an unbeliever; nor does He rejoice in
the repentance of the repenter after he has repented. Therefore they agreed with
the teaching of the pious ancestors, that the Qur’an is Allah’s uncreated speech.
They also held that this speech existed throughout all eternity, from which it
followed that Allah had not uttered it by an act of will and power. However, there
were disagreements among them as to the meaning of the term qadim,
sempiternal, that is, eternally preexistent. They debated over whether this term
bears only one meaning, or whether it refers to eternally preexisting words and
letters, which then appeared in succession. Their views and those of others on this
matter have been presented more fully elsewhere.

Another teaching espoused by this later group of thinkers was that one must never
say qat‘an, absolutely or certainly, with regard to anything whatsoever. This was
related to their extreme view on the necessity of making the exception with regard
to virtually everything. This word became so odious to them, in fact, that even
though they made unequivocal statements such as, “Muhammad is the Messenger
of Allah,” or that Allah is their Lord, they would nevertheless never add a term
such as “absolutely” or “certainly” to such affirmations. I once met with a group
of them and criticized them for this; in fact, I refused to comply with the request
they made of me until they said, “certainly.” They brought me a book that
contained traditions on the authority of the Prophet (pbuh), according to which he
had forbidden anyone to say, “absolutely.” However, these are unauthentic
traditions that were fabricated by later thinkers [desiring to use them in support of
their own teachings].

The point being made here is that making the exception with regard to Iman that
someone is a believer (for whatever explanation they may render for justifying that
cause,) some people reject this argument with regard to things about which it is
not possible to make the exception by unanimous agreement of all Muslims. This
view was based on the notion that if Allah knows that the condition will change
presently existing things, then the exception is made with respect to characteristics
__ they possess at the present time. Someone might say “this is small, if Allah wills,”
since Allah might cause it to become large; or one might say “that person is
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 419

insane, if Allah wills,” since Allah might restore the person’s sanity. Likewise
someone might say of the apostate “‘He is an unbeliever, if Allah wills,” due to the
possibility that he might repent. Those who have made it a practice to make the
exception in statements pertaining to someone’s being a believer on the basis of
this notion believed that this was the same practice adopted by the pious ancestors.
Such people, as well as scholastic theologians holding similar views, supported
[those truths that have] come to light through Islam. Support for the same view
was found among the Mu‘tazilites, the Jahmites, and other Muslim theologians;
hence, they affirmed belief in the Creator, Prophethood, and the Hereafter. And,
along with the followers of Ibn Kullab, Ibn Karram, al-Ash‘an, and others, they
supported the doctrines developed by the various theological schools of Orthodox
Islam and the Muslim community. Hence, they affirmed their belief that the
Qur’an 1s the uncreated speech of Allah, that Allah may be seen in the Hereafter,
and that the people of the Qiblah do not become unbelievers merely by
committing sins, nor do they abide eternally in Hellfire. Moreover, they believed
that the Prophet (pbuh) was given the right to intercede on behalf of those who
committed major sins, that the trial of the grave is a just reality, as retribution
after death is just and the hawd,° pool, of our Prophet is just in the Afterlife. There
are also other similar teachings that were widely believed to be among the
fundamental beliefs of Orthodox Muslims and the community of Muslim scholars.
They also believed in the legitimacy of the first four Caliphs, the superior virtue
of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar (Ibn al-Khattab) and so on.

Indeed, many of the scholastic theologians did not know the facts of Islam, what
is in the Sunnah, or the opinions of the pious ancestors regarding many of the
views they supported. Therefore, they blindly supported the surface meaning of
the opinions of the pious ancestors without being aware of the essence of these
opinions. Or they may have supported the opinions of the heretics. Hence, they fell
into error, confusion, and disagreement because the pious ancestors condemned
such views and those who held them. For such opinions opposed what is in the
Qur’an and the Sunnah. And whatever opposes the Qur’dn and the Sunnah is
falsehood and lies, standing in contradiction to Islamic law. Allah says: “The
Word of Allah is completed in Truth and Justice . . .” (6:115). So when it became
widely known among these thinkers that Orthodox Muslims made the exception

6 The word hawd refers to a special pool called hawd al-Rasiil, the Messenger’s pool.
Muhammad’s followers will be allowed to drink from it on the day of Resurrection.
000 1 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

with affirmations pertaining to someone’s being a believer, and when they arrived
at the belief that this practice must be based on the fact that belief is only that state
in which someone dies (that is, the state in which someone meets his Lord),
consequently they concluded that this must be how the pious ancestors themselves
defined belief, and thus they attributed this view to the pious ancestors. However,
the fact is that none of the pious ancestors taught this. Nevertheless, this was the
view that was attributed to them due to their supposition that the pious ancestors’
practice with regard to making the exception necessitated such a view. They
claimed that the Jahmite’s view of belief, which they espoused, was the same view
that had been espoused by investigators and theoreticians among hadith scholars.
Such a phenomenon was frequently found among them with respect to the
teachings of the pious ancestors, which were opposed by some thinkers, who
offered arguments in support of their views without an understanding of what the
pious ancestors truly taught. Hence, if someone became acquainted with such
people’s arguments apart from what the pious ancestors taught, and if it is
someone who held them in high esteem due to their distinguished position, with
respect to them he might have said that this was the view of the inquirers. As for
the inquirers, they held that this was a groundless position that stands in
contradiction to both reason and Islamic law. However, this appears frequently
among the writings of some heretics and atheists. And one whom Allah has
granted knowledge and Iman knows that the truth attained by later Muslims is
never as complete as that which was attained by the pious ancestors, whether in
regard to knowledge or works. One who has experience with theories and mental
reasoning and processes knows that the doctrine of the Companions was always
more sound than that of their followers. One also knows that anyone who comes
up with his own view on Islam is always making an error, and that the right view
is always to be found in the sayings of those who came before him.

THE ASH‘ARITES’ OPINION ON THE STATE OF BELIEF
AT THE TIME OF ONE’S DEATH AND THE RESPONSE TO IT

Abu al-Qasim al-Ansari related, on the authority of Abu Ishaq al-Isfarayini,
regarding the view of Abu al-Hassan [al-Ash‘art] and his companions on Iman,
which was corrected to be tasdiq, assent, in the heart, that he [the latter] said that
some of his friends said, concerning, al-muwafat, the state of belief at the time of
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 421

one’s death, that a condition of genuine Iman is to end one’s life ina state of belief
and to meet one’s Lord in this state. Others, however, do not regard this as such
a condition.

Al-Ansari said that when most of the leaders of the pious ancestors used to say that
Iman is knowledge in the heart, verbal testimony of the tongue, and works of the
parts of the body, the majority of them stressed the importance of the state of
belief at the time of one’s death [i-e., a person must end his life as a believer by
performing what is commanded and avoiding what is prohibited]. These leaders
stressed the importance of belief at the time of one’s death, for those persons
whom Allah does not mention that they will enter Paradise. But if this is
mentioned of someone, then he is certainly a believer, just as the Prophet’s ten
Companions [who were promised Paradise] are [true believers]. He [al-Ansari]
said that those with a proper understanding of the truth said that Iman is tasdiq in
the heart. He also mentioned their dispute over the state of one’s belief at the time
of death, whether this state is a condition for judging the soundness and
genuineness of Iman, and whether this is crucial in determining Allah’s judgment.
It follows that those who said that this is a condition for judging Iman made the
exception [1.e., they said, “if Allah wills”]. This does not mean that they doubted
the genuineness of one’s belief in the oneness of Allah or one’s knowledge of
Him; rather they said that they did not know which Iman we have in the present:
15 it recognized by Allah? That is, will we benefit from it in the Hereafter and reap
its blessings?

If they are asked: “Are you true believers?” or “Do you say, ‘if Allah wills,’ or
“We hope. .. .””? in reply they would say: “We are believers, if Allah wills.” By
making this exception, they meant that this matter was left to Allah’s judgment.
For Iman is taken into account in Allah’s judgment if it is a sign of deliverance
and the knowledge of salvation. However, if the possessor of Iman was (Allah
forbid) judged by Allah to be among the unfortunate, then his Iman was
considered devoid of value. According to them, there was no difference between
saying, “I am definitely a believer who will enter Paradise,” and saying, “I ama
true believer.”

However, this only follows from the view of one who defines belief so as to
include the performance of religious obligations and the abandonment of those
things that are forbidden. Someone who dies in this state will enter Paradise. As
422 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

for those who supported the views of the Jahmites and the Murji’ites, they
believed that such a person will undoubtedly die a believer with perfect belief.
However, he may also be a major sinner bound to enter Hellfire. Hence it follows
that simply because he dies a believer, this does not mean that he will enter
Paradise. And it is this logical reasoning of their view that indicates its falsity, for
Allah promises believers that they will enter Paradise. Allah says: “Allah has
promised the believers, men and women, Gardens. . .” (9:72). Hence, those who
affirmed so unequivocally that such a person will die a believer considered his
steadfastness in belief to be a result of this assent, as well as the belief that we
have described to punishment and fulfillment of it in the Afterlife as a condition
of belief on the basis of law, not on the basis of language or reason. It has been
said that this was the teaching of the earliest hadith scholars. It was also the view
chosen by Abu Bakr Ibn Furak. As for Muhammad Ibn Ishaq Ibn Khuzaymah, he
took it to extremes, claiming that anyone who says he is a true believer is a heretic.

Regarding the doctrine of the pious ancestors and experts on hadith—such as Ibn
Mas‘td and his followers, al-Thawri, Ibn ‘Uyyaynah, and the majority of the
scholars of Kifah—Y ahya Ibn Sa‘id al-Qattan, on the authority of the scholars of
Basrah, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, and other leading Orthodox Muslims all of them used
to make the exception with regard to Iman. This has been reported about them by
numerous widespread sources. However, none of them said that he made the
exception due to uncertainty about the state of his belief at the time of his death.
Nor did they say that Iman is merely the state of one’s belief at the time of death.
Rather, their leaders declared that the exception was made because Iman includes
the performance of one’s religious obligations. For this is something about which
they could not bear witness for themselves, just as they could not testify for
themselves that they were pious and righteous. These are things they simply did
not know about themselves [as will be indicated later].

As for the importance al-muwafat, the state of belief at the time of one’s death, |
know of none of the pious ancestors who justified the practice of making the
exception on this basis. However, many later thinkers, including hadith scholars
and followers of Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal], Malik, al-Shafi‘'l, as well as speculative
thinkers such as Abu al-Hassan al-Ash‘ari and most of his disciples, used it as a
justification. However, this is not the position taken by the earliest hadith scholars.
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 423

Someone might ask: “if you say that the belief we are commanded to have in
Islamic law is what you have described with certain conditions attached, though
it 15 not a sense that has been passed down through linguistic usage, then how can
you legitimately say that the term ‘belief’ is consistent with such usage?” In
response we would say that belief is the same as assent; both are based on
linguistic usage and Islamic law. However, Islamic law added to this assent certain
conditions and specifications, the sum total of which becomes acceptable and a
basis for reward, as we have likewise mentioned with regard to prayer, fasting,
making the pilgrimage, and so on. The same is true for the linguistic meaning of
“prayer, it is supplication,” except that the Islamic law added certain conditions
to It.

It might then be said that this contradicts what some have said the term “belief”
refers to; for when they claim that, linguistically speaking, this term means the
same as tasdiq, assent, and that Islamic law introduced no changes into it, they
have answered themselves.

Someone might ask: Do not the terms “prayer,” “pilgrimage,” and zakah have
meanings different from those they originally conveyed in the language? And are
they not used in a manner that differs from the way speakers of the language used
them before? To this we would reply that scholars have differed on this question.
But the fact is that their meanings have been determined by the manner in which
speakers of the language have used them before. Moreover, they have retained
their required components, and have not been shifted away from their original
sense, though some elements have been added to them. And if we granted, for the
sake of argument, that they had indeed been shifted away from their original
meanings, or that they had clearly been used in a metaphorical manner, then on
this basis one might adduce evidence that something similar had occurred with
regard to the term “belief.” For it is not necessary that all phenomena in the
Qur’an be removed simply because one of its phenomena has been removed.

The author of this book refutes his [Abu al-Qasim al-Ansari’s] view by saying that
he claimed that the addition of the exception is based on Islamic law. He thus
considered the exception to be like prayer and zakah, although there is no evidence
[in Islamic law] to support the notion that Iman is judged solely according to one’s
belief at the time of death. Also, it is known that the evidence for the inclusion of
424 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

works in Iman is much more simple and more widely recognized. So, why are
works not included in Iman, according to Islamic law? Moreover, he [al-Ansari]
claimed that the statement, “there must be definitive evidence [that someone will
enter Paradise],” can be refuted in two ways. One way is to refute the notion that
one’s Iman is judged according to the state of his belief at the time of his death.
The second is to affirm that we have greater certainty that one’s love for Allah and
His Messenger and other such attitudes are included in the word Iman [as it is used
in the words of Allah and His Messenger] than we have concerning some acts of
prayer, fasting, and pilgrimage over which people dispute. Moreover, Abu al-
Hassan, Ibn Furak, and others who stressed the importance of one’s state of belief
at the time of death do not make the exception. Rather, they believed that if
Islamic law negates someone’s Iman, he will lose the tasdiq in his heart. He [al-
Ansari] said that among his friends are those who did not make one’s state of
belief at the time of death a condition for genuine Iman at the present time,
although they did consider this a condition for being rewarded for one’s Iman.
Indeed, this was the doctrine of the Mu‘tazilite’s and the Karramites. It was also
the opinion of Abu Ishaq al-Isfarayini, which was supported by statements made
by al-Qadi. He [al-Ansari] said that it is also the opinion of our teacher Abu al-
Ma‘Aali, who said that Iman in al-hal, the present, is definitely established and not
subject to doubt. However, the Iman that is the knowledge of being rewarded [in
Paradise] and the sign of deliverance [from Hell] is the Iman that one has at the
time of death. The latter type of Iman was the concern of the pious ancestors, who
associated it with the use of the clause, “if Allah wills.” Yet they did so without
doubting the possibility of having a complete, perfect Iman. He [Abu al-Ma‘ali]
added that Iman is a kind of description or adjective from which the word
“believer” is derived and which refers to knowledge and tasdiq. Similarly, the
word “alim, scientist, is derived from the word ‘ilm, science. And if I recognize
Iman in myself, I can be certain of it, just as I can be certain that I am a scientist,
or that I know or believe something. If something occurs in the future to remove
it [Iman], then one no longer deserves to be described as a believer. In such a case,
we are not to say that it is now clear to us that this person did not truly have the
Iman that Allah commands. Rather, it was an Iman worthy of reward that has now
undergone changes and, hence, is nullified. However, saying that I will enter
Paradise is different. For this matter is unknown to me and can only be hoped for.
He [Abu al-Ansari] said that he who advocates the first saying clings to certain
notions, for example, that Iman is lifelong worship. It is like a single act of
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 425

obedience in which the soundness of its early stages depends on the success of its
final outcome. This is also the case with regard to prayer, fasting, and pilgrimage.
It has also been said that there is no doubt that such a man is not to be called a
friend of Allah, blessed, or acceptable to Allah at the present time. Similarly, the
unbeliever is not to be called Allah’s enemy or a villain at the present time, except
in the sense that he may be judged as an enemy in order to show him that he
himself is an enemy. [Their argument is that he may convert from unbelief to Iman
before his death, but what is correct is that Allah’s favor and wrath are based on
one’s deeds, as will become clear below].

What has been mentioned no doubt reflects the views of Ibn Kullab, al-Ash‘ari
and his followers, and supporters of his view from among the followers of Ahmad
[Ibn Hanbal], Malik, al-Shafi‘l, and others. However, most people say that if a
man is an unbeliever, then he is an enemy of Allah, but if he believes in Allah and
becomes righteous, then he will be a friend of Allah. Allah says: “Oh, you who
believe! Take not My enemies and yours as friends [or protectors] offering them
your love, while they have disbelieved and what has come to you of the Truth and
have driven out the Messenger and yourselves because you believe in Allah, your
Lord! Ifyou have come forth to strive in My Cause and to seek My Good Pleasure.
You show friendship to them in secret, while I am All-Aware of what you conceal
and what you reveal. And whosoever of you [Muslims] does that, then indeed he
has gone astray, from the Straight Path. Should they gain the upper hand over you,
they would behave to you as enemies and stretch forth their hands and their
tongues against you with evil, and they desire that you should disbelieve. Neither
your relatives nor your children will benefit you on the Day of Resurrection. He
will judge between you. And Allah is the All-Seer of what you do. Indeed there
has been an excellent example for you in Abraham and those with him, when they
said to their people: ‘Indeed, we are free from you and whatever you worship
besides Allah, we have rejected you, and there has started between us and you,
hostility and hatred forever, until you believe in Allah alone,’ except the saying of
Abraham to his father: ‘Indeed, I will ask for forgiveness [from Allah] for you, but
I have no power to do anything for you before Allah.’ ‘Our Lord! in You [Alone]
we put our trust and to You [Alone] we turn in repentance, and to You [Alone] is
[our] final Return. Our Lord! Make us not a trial for the disbelievers, and forgive
us, Our Lord! Indeed, You, only You, are the All Almighty, the All Wise.’
Certainly, there have been in them an excellent example for you to follow, for
426 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

those who look forward to [the meeting with] Allah [for the reward from Him],
and the Last Day. And whosoever turns away, then indeed, Allah is Rich, Worthy

of All Praise. Perhaps Allah will grant love [and friendship] between you and
those whom you [now] hold as enemies. For Allah has power [over all things]; and
Allah is Often Forgiving, Most Merciful” (60:1—7). Indeed, this is what happened
with the people of Makkah. Before Makkah was conquered, they were the enemies
of Allah and His Messenger. But subsequently, the majority of them became
believers and friends of Allah and His Messenger. In fact, Ibn Kullab and his
followers based their argument on the notion that wilayah, friendship, is an eternal
characteristic of Allah’s essence, which includes will, love, goodwill, favor, and
the like. Hence, it means a constant, unchanging will after death. This is a
consequence of Allah’s knowledge. For if Allah knows that someone will die as
a believer and continue to be a friend of Allah, He wants him to enter Paradise. A |
similar principle is applicable to the enemy of Allah [i.e., if Allah knows that he
will be an unbeliever at the time of death, he will remain an enemy of Allah; for
Allah continues to want him to enter Hell].

The public, however, said that although friendship implies love for Allah and
pleasing Him, while enmity implies hatred for Allah and incitement of His wrath,
Allah is nevertheless pleased with someone and loves him after he becomes a
believer and does righteous deeds. However, He is angered and displeased if a
man reverts to unbelief. Allah says: “This is because they followed that which
called forth the wrath of Allah, and they hated Allah’s good pleasure . . .” (47:28).
In this verse, Allah mentions that one’s deeds call forth His wrath. He also says:
“When at length they provoked Us, We exacted retribution from them .. .”
(43:55). Qur’anic exegetes have interpreted the clause, “when at length they
provoked Us,” to mean, “when they enraged Us [or made Us angry].” Allah also
says: “... If you are grateful, He is pleased with you...” (39:7).

In the authorized hadith in Sahih al-Bukhari, recorded on the authority of Abu
Hurayrah, from the Prophet (pbuh), who said: “Allah Almighty says: Whoever
takes a friend of mine as an enemy, has challenged Me to wage war on him. And
the best way in which a man can draw nearer to Me is to perform the obligations
that I have laid upon him. My servant continues to draw nearer to Me through
supererogatory acts of piety in order that I may love him. And if I love him, I will
be the hearing by which he hears, the eyes by which he sees, the hand with which
he fights, and the legs on which he walks. Through me he hears, he sees, he fights,
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 427

and he walks. If he asks anything of Me, I will give it to him, if he takes refuge in
Me, I will protect him, and there is nothing from which I recoil more from than
taking the soul ofa believer; he hates death, while I hate to cause him offense. Yet
death is his inevitable end.”

Allah says that a man seeks to draw near to Him through supererogatory acts of
obedience so that He will love him. Then He says, “If I love him I will be such and
such.” Thus, it is clear that Allah’s love comes after the person’s performance of
deeds that call forth His love. And the Qur’an supports this. Allah says: “Say [Oh
Muhammad]: If you do love Allah, follow me: Allah will love you and forgive you
all your sins, . .” (3:31). His saying, “Allah will love you” is the result clause
following the conditional, “if you do love Allah, follow me.” This is, indeed, their
reward for the act of following the Messenger. Allah rewards them by loving them.
And as is known, the reward for a deed and the effect of a cause do not occur until
after the deed is done and the cause takes effect. This is, indeed, similar to His
saying: “Call on Me; I will answer your prayer . . .” (40:60). It is also similar to
His saying: “Oh, our people, hearken to the one who invites you to Allah, and
believe in Him: He will forgive you your faults and deliver you from a Grievous
Penalty” (46:31); and “Oh, you who believe! Fear Allah, and always say a word
directed to the Right. That He may make your conduct whole and sound and
forgive you your sins...” (33:70-71); and“... So fulfill your engagements with
them to the end of their term: For Allah loves the righteous” (9:4); and “. .. Why
say you that which you do not do? Grievously hateful is it in the sight of Allah that
you say that which you do not do. Truly Allah loves those who fight in His Cause
in battle array, as if they were a solid cemented structure” (61:24), Allah speaks
these words after the people told the Prophet (pbuh) that if they knew the deed that
Allah loves most, they would perform it. Allah also says: “The unbelievers will be
addressed: Greater was the aversion of Allah to you than [is] your aversion to
yourselves, seeing that you were called to the belief and you no longer refuse”
(40:10), which indicates that His love and His aversion are due to their deeds, and
that He loves them if they fear Allah and fight for His Sake. That is why He
encourages them to perform such deeds, exactly in the same way He encourages
them to do what He will reward them for. And the reward of a deed must follow
the deed. His saying: “. . . Seeing that you were called to the Belief and you no
longer refuse” (40:10) also indicates that Allah abhors them for rejecting the call
to belief. Similar to this is His saying: ““Allah’s Good Pleasure is on the believers
428 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

when they swore allegiance to you under the tree: He knows what is in their
hearts, and He sends down tranquility to them; and He rewards them with a speedy
victory” (48:18). His saying, “Allah’s pleasure is on the believers when they swore
allegiance to you under the tree,” indicates that Allah’s Good Pleasure is on the
believers after they swore allegiance. For an effect cannot occur before its cause
and hence, if Allah’s Good Pleasure is on the believers, then this did not occur
until after they had sworn allegiance.

This is supported in the Sahih, in which we read that the Prophet (pbuh) said:
“Allah asks the people of Paradise: ‘Oh, people of Paradise, are you pleased?’
They answer: ‘Oh, our Lord, how could we not be pleased when you have granted
us what you did not grant to any of Your other creatures?’ Allah replies: ‘Do you
want Me to grant you better than that?’ They answer: ‘Oh, our Lord, what else is
better than that?’ He says: ‘I will grant you My good pleasure so that I will never
be displeased with you again.’” This indicates that at that time, Allah granted them
His Good Pleasure, which would never again be followed by His wrath. It also
indicates that other forms of His approval might be followed by His displeasure
or anger.

It is related in both Sahih Muslim and Sahih al-Bukhary, in the intercession hadith,
that all the Messengers [except the Prophet Muhammad, pbuh] said: “My Lord has
been more angered than He ever has before, and more than He ever will again.”
Also, in the two Sahths the Prophet (pbuh) expresses in more than one way that:
“Allah’s response to the repentance of His servant may be compared 10:2 man
traveling through a desert full of dangers and perils who loses his horse, which has
been carrying his food and water. He looks for it [the horse] but he does not find
it. He lies down to await death, and when he wakes up, what should he see but his
horse before him with his food and water; Allah’s joy over the repentance of one
of His servants is like the joy of this man.” In another version the Prophet (pbuh)
said: “How would you describe His [Allah’s] happiness?” They replied: “It will
be very great, Oh, Messenger of Allah.” He [the Prophet] answered: “Allah will
be more pleased with the repentance of His servant than that man who found his
horse.” Similar to this is Allah’s derisive laughter at two men, one of whom kills
the other, yet both of them enter Paradise; or His laughter at the last person to
enter Paradise, who said: “What! Are you mocking me though you are the Lord
of the worlds?” Allah replies: “No, but I am capable of doing whatever I choose.”
[These comments are all found in the two Sahihs].
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 429

In what is called du‘a’ al-qunit, the prayer of reverence, the worshiper said to
Allah: ‘Please take me as your friend among those whom You have taken as your
friends.” Allah says: “My friend is Allah, Who revealed the Book and He also
takes the Righteous for friends” (7:196); and “. . . And Allah takes for friends
those who fear Him” (45:19). This friendship is due to their fear of Allah and their
righteousness, and hence, could not have preceded their fear and righteousness,
even though they have become righteous and godfearing due to Allah’s Will,
Power, Gracious Bounty, and Beneficence. Accordingly, Allah’s taking them for
friends is a consequence of their being righteous and fearing Him. Similar to this
is Allah’s mercy, of which the Prophet (pbuh) said: “The Merciful Allah will show
His Mercy to the merciful for He is the Merciful. He is merciful toward people of
the earth, in order that He who is in heaven [Allah] may show His Mercy to you.”
[Al-Tirmidhi said that this is a sound hadith]. Allah says: “. . . If you are grateful,
He is pleased with you. . . .” (39:7). In this verse, Allah associates His Pleasure
with their gratitude in the same way that reward is associated with an act, or as an
effect is associated with its cause. It is well known that a reward always follows
the act for which it is a reward. Allah also says: “. . . You shall enter the Sacred
Mosque, if Allah wills, with minds secure . . .” (48:27). This verse indicates that
“Allah’s will” will be in the future. He [Allah] also says: “Indeed, when He
intends a thing, His Command is ‘Be’ and it is!” (36:82). This verse also indicates
that if He [in the future] intends something, He will say: ‘Be’ and it will be. Allah
also says: “And say: work [righteousness], and soon Allah will observe your work
...” (9:105). Thus, He will observe their work [in the future] if they work
[righteousness].

THE CONCEPT OF EXCEPTION ACCORDING TO AHMAD IBN HANBAL

The second principle appealed to by those who considered it necessary to make
the exception [the first of which was discussed in the beginning of this chapter] is
that absolute Iman includes the performance of all that Allah commands and the
abandonment of all that He prohibits. Hence if a man says, “I am a believer”
[according to these considerations], then he testifies concerning himself that he is
among the righteous and godfearing who perform all they are commanded to do
and abandon all they are prohibited from doing. Hence, he is one of the friends of
Allah. Indeed, this is a testimony concerning oneself about something he does not
430 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

know. If this testimony were true, then he would have to testify that he will enter
Paradise if he dies in this state of belief. However, no one can testify to his [future]
entrance into Paradise. For his testifying that he is a believer is the same as his
testifying that he will enter Paradise if he dies in this state of belief. And this is,
indeed, the basis on which the majority of the pious ancestors used to make the
exception, although they made it permissible.to omit the exception when Iman is
spoken of in another sense. This will be discussed below, if Allah wills.

Al-Khallal, in the Book of the Sunnah, related that Sulayman Ibn al-Ash‘ath [Abu
Da?ud al-Sijistani] said that he heard from Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad Ibn Hanbal
that a man came to him and said: “I was asked, ‘Are you a believer?’ I said: ‘Yes,
is there something wrong with that. Are not all people either believers or
unbelievers?’” Whereupon Ahmad became angry and said: “This is the argument
of those who suspend all judgment concerning their spiritual status, leaving it in
the hands of Allah.” [That is, it is the attitude taken by the Murji’ites.] Allah says:
“There are [yet] others, held in suspense for the command of Allah . . .” (9:106).
Then Ahmad added: “Is not Iman both words and works?” The man answered:
“Yes.” Ahmad replied: “Have you spoken the words?” “Yes,” the man replied.
Ahmad said: “Have you done the works?” The man replied: “No.” Ahmad then
said: “Then how can you object to saying, “if Allah wills” [making the exception]
when you claim to be a believer?”

Abu Da? id said that Ahmad Ibn Abu Surayj told him that Ahmad Ibn Hanbal
wrote to him regarding this issue, saying that Iman is words and works; we have
spoken the words but we have not done the works. Therefore, we make the
exception regarding the works. Al-Khallal mentioned this reply on the authority
of al-Fadl Ibn Ziyad, who said that he heard Abu ‘Abd Allah saying that Sulayman
Ibn Harb’ used to say that we perform the works but we do not know if Allah will
accept them or not.

I said that Allah’s acceptance depends on the performance of the work in the way
Allah commands. Hence, if someone fears Allah as he performs a work, and if he
does it in the way Allah commands, then Allah will accept his work. But he cannot

” Sulayman Ibn Harb, Abu Ayyub al-Washihi (?-244 A.H.), was a leading jurist, scholar of hadith,
and a judge in Makkah. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 385.]
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 431

be absolutely certain that Allah will accept it because he is not certain whether he
has perfected his work. Allah says: “Those who dispense their charity with their
hearts full of fear...” (23:60). [That is, they are afraid that their charity will not
be accepted by Allah.] ‘A’ ishah once said: “Oh, Messenger of Allah, does the man
who commits adultery, steals, and drinks wine fear Allah?” To this he [the
Prophet] replied: “No, daughter of ‏عله‎ Siddiq [the first Caliph, Abu Bakr], he is the
man who prays, fasts, and gives charity and who fears that these deeds will not be
accepted from him [by Allah].”

Al-Khallal also related that Abu Talib al-Makki said that he heard Abu ‘Abd Allah
saying that we have no choice but to make the exception. For if someone said, “he
is a believer,” then this means that he has uttered the necessary words but has not
performed the works. Hence, the exception is to be made for the works.

Also, Ishaq Ibn Ibrahim said that he heard Abu ‘Abd Allah saying: “Refer to the
saying of Ibn Mas‘id concerning the exception with regard to Iman, that Iman is
words and works, and works mean action. We have spoken the words but we fear
that we have not fulfilled the works. Therefore, I prefer that one make the
exception with regard to Iman by saying, ‘I am a believer, if Allah wills.’” He [al-
Khallal] also said that he also heard Abu ‘Abd Allah being questioned about the
saying of the Prophet (pbuh): “We will follow you, if Allah wills.” When asked
to which part of the statement the exception applies, he answered that it applies
to the location in which the Prophet would be buried. For he did not know whether
he would be buried in that place or somewhere else.

It is also related that al-Maymini asked Abu ‘Abd Allah [i-e., Ahmad Ibn Hanbal]
about his view on the statement: “Oh, say, | am a believer, if Allah wills, hoping
that you are a believer,” since he did not know if his works would be perfected and
accepted or not. Such statements are found in abundance in the sayings of Ahmad
and others with similar views. This is also consistent with what has already been
mentioned to the effect that the absolute believer is one who performs his
obligations, and thus deserves Paradise if he dies in this state of belief. Similarly,
he who does not perform his obligations and commits what is prohibited will not
be called a believer. For the absolute believer is one who is righteous, godfearing,
and a friend of Allah. Hence, if one says, “I am a believer,” then it is exactly as if
432 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

he were to say, “without a doubt, I am righteous, godfearing, and a friend of
Allah.”

Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] and others of the pious ancestors used to hate to hear one
man ask another: “Are you a believer?” They also used to hate the answer. For this
is a heresy introduced by the Murji’ites to defend their view that a man knows of
himself that he is not an unbeliever. Rather, he finds that his heart believes in what
the Prophet’s message revealed. Therefore, by saying, “I am a believer,” he proves
that Iman is mere tasdiq. For you are definite about your being a believer, but you
cannot be certain about performing all you have been commanded to do. When the
pious ancestors realized the Murji’ites’ intent, they would either avoid answering
this question entirely, or elaborate on their answer. This is because the term Iman
may be used either in an absolute or a conditioned sense. Thus, they used to
answer by referring to Iman in the conditioned sense, which does not require that
one testify that his Iman is perfect. Therefore, the correct view [of the three
mentioned in this chapter] is that it is ‘permissible to say, “I am a believer,”
without making the exception if he so chooses. However, this refers to the
conditioned, not to the absolute, Iman. That is why Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] used to
hate to answer with regard to the perfected Iman without making the exception.

Al-Marwazi said that Abu ‘Abd Allah [Ahmad Ibn Hanbal] was once asked:
“Should we say, ‘we are believers’? He replied: “Rather, we say ‘we are
Muslims.”” Al-Marwazi asked Abu ‘Abd Allah again: “Should we say ‘we are
believers’”? He replied that rather, “we say ‘we are Muslims,’” although he did
not criticize the person who omits the exception, as long as he does not mean to
say, as the Murji’ites did, that Iman is mere verbal testimony of belief. Rather, he
omitted it because the exception may imply doubt, and he has no doubt about the
presence of Iman in his heart, even if he is not absolutely sure about the perfection
of his Iman.

Al-Khallal said that Ahmad Ibn Asram al-Muzani told him that if Abu ‘Abd Allah
was asked whether he was a believer, he would say, “your questioning is a
heresy,” since there was no doubt about his Iman. Or he would say, “we do not
doubt our Iman.” Al-Muzani also said that he recalled that ‘Abu ‘Abd Allah said,
“I say, as Tawis did, ‘I believe in Allah, His Angels, His Books, and His
Messengers.’”
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 433

Al-Khallal also said that Harb Ibn Isma‘il’ and Abu Da?iid told him that Abu
Da?ud said he heard Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] saying that he [Ahmad] heard Sufyan
Ibn ‘Uyaynah say that if one is asked, “are you a believer?” he should not answer,
but say, “your question is heresy and I have no doubt about my Iman.” He also
said that if the person questioned says, “I am a believer, if Allah wills,” then this
exception 15 not to be considered as doubt. For he does not doubt the fact that what
was revealed to the Messenger is the truth; in fact, he is quite certain of it. Rather,
he doubts or is uncertain about whether he will keep performing the obligations
for the rest of his life. Indeed, it has been revealed that Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] said
that we do not have any doubts about our Iman, nor did the inquirer have doubts
about the Iman of the person he questioned. Moreover, he was certain of his belief
in what the Messenger came with [commands and prohibitions], but he was
uncertain about his performance of his obligations.

It follows that Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] and others of the pious ancestors used to speak
definitively and unequivocally about the presence of Iman in the heart. However,
they made the exception when referring to absolute Iman, which involves
performing what is commanded. They also made it permissible to make the
exception when referring to the practical aspect of Iman that one is not confident
of fulfilling completely. This is, indeed, another consideration, although we have
no doubts about the Iman in our hearts. For making the exception regarding things
that we know to exist is supported by the Sunnah, due to the wisdom and prudence
of such a practice.

Muhammad Ibn al-Hassan Ibn Harun reported that he asked Abu ‘Abd Allah
[Ahmad Ibn Hanbal] about making the exception with respect to Iman. The latter
replied that yes, one must make the exception if he has doubts about his future
works. Ibn Mas‘ud and others also used to make the exception, which was
consistent with the views of al-Thawri. Allah says: “... You shall enter the Sacred
Mosque, if Allah wills” (48:27). The Prophet (pbuh) also said to his Companions:
“1 hope I am the most godfearing of all of you.” He also said about someone who
had died: “He will be resurrected as a Muslim, if Allah wills.” Accordingly,
Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] emphasized that he made the exception as a precaution lest

8 Harb Ibn Isma“il, Abu Muhammad al-Karmani (?-280 A.H.), was a jurist and a disciple of
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 387.]
434 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

he not complete certain works. For he feared that he could not fully perform what
he had been commanded to do; hence, he made the exception despite the fact that
he had no doubts about the belief in his heart. That is, he doubted the completion
of the works, but not the essence of belief in his heart.

Al-Khallal said that Muhammad Ibn Harin’ told him that when Hubaysh Ibn Sindi
discussed this issue, he mentioned that Abu ‘Abd Allah [Ahmad Ibn Hanbal] had
cited the words of the Prophet (pbuh) as he stood beside the graves. The Prophet
said: “If Allah wills, we will follow you.” Thus, he knew that he was going to die.
In the story of the person lying in the grave he said: “You lived as a Muslim, died
as a Muslim, and will be resurrected as a Muslim, if Allah wills.” The Prophet
(pbuh) also said: “I have concealed my prayer, which will, if Allah wills, benefit
whoever who does not associate partners with Allah.” Someone once asked the
Prophet (pbuh): “If one of us wakes up in the morning in a state of major ritual
impurity, may he fast?” The Prophet (pbuh) said: “I do so and still fast.” The
inquirer then said: “But you are not like us. For Allah has forgiven all of your past
and future sins.” To this the Prophet (pbuh) replied: “I swear by Allah that I hope
I will be the most godfearing of all of you.” Indeed, there are many other hadiths
that include the exception, which indicates that the exception is made not due to
doubts; for he [the Prophet] made the exception although he was absolutely certain
of the occurrence of the events of which he spoke. .

He [Ahmad Ibn Hanbal] also said that an old man once came before him and
asked him about Iman. He replied that Iman is words and works, which may
increase or decrease. The inquirer asked: “Could I say that so-and-so is a believer,
if Allah wills?” He [Ahmad] said: “Yes.” The inquirer added: “They tell me that
I am in doubt about it.” Ahmad replied: “What an evil thing they have said!”
When the man started to leave, Ahmad asked him to come back. He then asked
him: “Do they not say that Iman is words and works, which increase and
decrease?” The man said: “Yes.” Ahmad then said: “Then you should make the
exception.” The man said: “How so, Oh, Abu ‘Abd Allah?” Ahmad replied: “Tell
them that they claim that Iman is words and works; they have spoken the words
but they have not performed the works. Hence, they ought to make the exception

* Muhammad Ibn al-Hassan Ibn Hariin (7-308 A.H.) was a jurist, scholar of hadith, and a follower
of Ahmad Tbn Hanbal. [Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 387.]
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 435

for the works.” He was asked: “Should we make the exception for Iman?” “Yes,”
he said. “I say: ‘I am a believer, if Allah wills.’ But I make the exception with
certainty, not based on what is doubtful.” Then he noted that Allah says: “... You
shall enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allah wills. . .” (48:27). In this verse Allah tells
them that they would enter the Sacred Mosque, “if Allah wills,” although He is
sure that they would enter.

THE DESIRABLE ASPECTS OF EXCEPTION AND
THE RESPONSE TO THOSE WHO DISAGREE

In his statement, Ahmad [Ibn Hanbal] declared that he made the exception despite
the fact that he was completely sure about his present state. He said it with his
tongue, while his heart had no doubt about it. He made the exception because
works are part of Iman and he was not entirely sure that he would complete his
works; rather, he had some doubts regarding this matter. Hence, he negated his
doubt and affirmed his certainty concerning what he was completely sure about.
He also affirmed his doubt about the thing whose existence he had no certain
knowledge of. He declared that it is desirable to make the exception in the latter
case, which he did not know whether or not he had fulfilled. It is also permissible
in matters one is completely sure about. That is, if one makes the exception about
the Iman he has in his heart, it would be permissible, such as in the saying of the
Prophet (pbuh): “I swear by Allah that I hope I will be the most godfearing among
you.” This matter was already the case in the present, not the future; and since he
was the most godfearing, he did not hope to become so in the future. Rather, his
hope had to do with a present matter [i.e., at the time he uttered the saying].
Similarly, a believer hopes that if he performs a work, Allah will accept it from
him, and he fears that He will not accept it. Allah says: ““And those who dispense
their charity with their hearts full of fear do so because they will return to their
Lord” (23:60). The Prophet (pbuh) said: “It is he who prays, fasts, and gives
charity and still fears that Allah would not accept these from him.” The acceptance
is either a present or a past matter. And he [the one who hopes] hopes in Allah and
fears Him. Fora matter that has future consequences would be either praiseworthy
or blameworthy; and a person makes either its good or its bad consequence more
probable. It is said that a person places his hope in Allah and fears Him. Thus, the
hope and the fear are associated with the present and the past. For the good and
436 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

bad consequences of an act are to happen in the future. Therefore, he hopes that
Allah will accept his work, with the result that He will reward him and have mercy
on him in the future. He also fears that Allah will not accept his work and hence,
will not reward him. He likewise fears that Allah will put His curse on him for
disobedience which would result in his being punished.

And if someone strives after what he seeks, like a merchant or a messenger whom
_he has sent on an errand that he is to accomplish in a certain period of time, then
when this period of time comes to an end, he says, “I hope that so-and-so has
completed the errand.” The accomplishment of the task is past; however, the
resulting joy or pleasure or other desired outcomes are in the future. And one says
concerning the time when it is customary for pilgrims to enter Makkah, “I hope
they have entered.” And he might say of a body of troops that was sent out against
unbelievers, “I hope Allah has given victory to the believers and granted them
plentiful booty.” And at the time of year when the Nile rises one might say, “T
hope the Nile has risen.” Likewise, someone who came to Egypt at this time might
have said, “I hope the level of the Nile is high this year.” To someone who owns
land and would like it to rain, one might have said, “after it had rained in some
parts, I hope the rain is widespread and I hope that such and such a piece of land
has received rain.” After all, what one hopes for is something whose presence will
cause him to rejoice, while that which he dreads is something whose presence
would cause him pain.

This is in turn related to knowledge; the knowledge of such things pertains to the
future. For if the person referred to above knew that the Muslims had been
victorious, that the pilgrims had entered Makkah, or that the rain had fallen, he
would rejoice in such knowledge. Besides this, other desired outcomes would also
occur. Otherwise, what he desires and seeks would not occur, in which case he
would say, “I hope and I fear,” since that which he desires or dreads is related to
knowledge of it, which is itself a matter that is related to the knowledge of such
events when they are still in the future. Similarly, those things that are sought
through belief, such as happiness and salvation, are future matters, such that when
one speaks of them, he should make the exception. This is because what is sought
after by means of it is still in the future. Moreover, every future event that is
desired or sought after is dependent on the will of Allah, even if one is certain of
its occurrence; for apart from Allah’s will, there would be no future whatsoever.
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 437

It follows that our saying, “this will happen, if Allah wills,” is valid. For it will not
happen unless Allah wills it. Both doubt and the utterance must be made
depending on Allah’s will. However, it is unnecessary that a suspended matter be
doubtful. Rather, this doubt depends on the knowledge of the speaker. For,
sometimes he is doubtful and other times he is not. And since doubts occur to him
quite often due to his lack of knowledge about the consequences, one may think
that doubt is included in its meaning. However, this is not true. For Allah’s saying:
“.. . You shall enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allah wills . . .” (48:27) connotes no
doubt on the part of Allah, nor on the part of His Messenger or the believers. That
is why Tha‘lab’” said that this is an exception made by Allah, even though He has
the knowledge [that they shall enter the Sacred Mosque]. Other people, however,
make the exception for what they do not know. Abu ‘Ubaydah and Ibn Qutaybah
said that the Arabic particle “in,” if employed here means when or because
(expressed with the particle idh). That is, what is meant here is, “when or because
Allah wills.” What they intended by this was to affirm the action with the particle
“in,” ‏,ا‎ just as it would be affirmed with idh. The particle idh is an adverb of time
whereas “in,” if, is a particle that joins a dependent clause to an independent
clause.

Someone might note that the Arabs say, “idha, when, the unripe dates turn red,
come to me,” whereas they do not say, “in, if the unripe dates turn red.” In
response, one could say that the intent here is to time the act of coming based on
the time of the dates’ ripening, in which case the coming would take place at a
certain time that has actually been fulfilled. However, the particle “in,” if, has
nothing to with timing; rather, it is merely a conditional particle, which requires
that the second action be bound to the first. Hence, a statement that would
correspond to the situation at hand would be: “the green dates will become red and
sweet, if Allah wills.” And this is true.

Someone might say that there is a group of people who have rejected this sense of
the word, and have adopted the practice of making the exception for matters that
are subject to doubt. For example, the Qur’anic verse that reads, “.. You shall enter
the Sacred Mosque, if Allah wills . . .”” (48:27) was taken by al-Zajjaj to mean that

‎Tha‘lab, Ahmad Ibn Yahya al-Shaybani Abu al-‘Abbas (7-291 A.H.), was a famous authority‏ ”ا
‎on Arabic grammar and hadith. He wrote the well-known Ma ‘ani al-Qur’ an. [Al-Fihrist, vol. 2,‏
‎p. 1110 and Kitab al-Iman MZ, p. 390.}‏
438 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

Allah commands them to enter the Sacred Mosque. It has also been said that the
use of the exception is due to fear and a concern for safety; in other words, the
meaning of the saying is, “may you enter safely.” As to whether they will enter,
however, this is an event that is not subject to doubt. According to another
interpretation of the saying, it means, “may either all or some of you enter,” since
Allah knew that some of them would die; hence, the exception was used because
not all of them would enter. It has been noted that due to their futile distortion of
the actual intent of the words of the Qur’an, proponents of all of these
interpretations have succumbed to the very notion they had rejected. Consider, for
example, those who interpret the verse to mean that Allah commands them to
enter the Sacred Mosque. They hold that Allah already knew whether He would
command them to do so or not; for His knowledge that He would command them
to enter is like His knowledge that they would enter. In this way they have made
the exception dependent on a meaning that is not conveyed by the words
themselves. Moreover, Allah’s knowledge is related both to that which is manifest
and that which is concealed. Similarly, with respect to their fear and concern for
safety, Allah knows whether they will enter safely or fearfully, and in fact He
declares that they will enter safely, knowing that they would do so. Hence, neither
of these occurrences were subject to doubt according to Allah nor, for that matter,
in the mind of His Messenger. As for those who understand the verse to mean that
either some or all of them would enter, they hold that that which depends on the
divine will is the entrance of those referred to in this saying. That is, if reference
was made to all of them, then all of them would undoubtedly go in; and if
reference was being made to the majority, then the entrance of these was what
hung on the divine will. As for that which is not referred to, it may not be made
conditional with the use of the particle “in,” if; rather, the particle employed would
be inna, that, which would indicate an unequivocal promise.

“Umar [Ibn al-Khattab] said to the Prophet (pbuh) on the day of the Battle of
Hudaybiyyah: “Did you not used to tell us that we would come to the Ka‘bah and
do a circle around it?” The Prophet replied: “Yes, I did. But did I tell you that you
would come to it this year?” “No,” ‘Umar replied: “So then,” said the Prophet,
“you will certainly come to the Ka‘bah and make the circle around it.”

Someone might ask why he [the Prophet] did not make any of the other promises
mentioned in the Qur’an dependent on Allah’s will. The reason for this is that this
verse was revealed after the Prophet (pbuh) came back from Hudaybiyyah. They
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 439

had made the minor pilgrimage that year and had striven to enter the Sacred
Mosque, but the polytheists prevented them from doing so. So they returned with
hearts full of grief, the depth of which no one but Allah knows. They were waiting
for the fulfillment of this promise that year. For the Prophet (pbuh) had promised
them unconditionally that this would take place. And it is said that in his sleep he
saw someone who said: “You shall enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allah wills.” In the
morning he told people about his vision and ordered them to go on a minor
pilgrimage. However, they could not make the minor pilgrimage that year, and this
verse was revealed. In this verse, Allah promises them the same thing the
Messenger promised them. The clause, “if Allah wills” was intended to certify
that they would indeed enter the Sacred Mosque and that Allah would fulfill His
promise. Similarly, if a man is absolutely determined to do something, he would
say, “I swear by Allah that I will do so and so, if Allah wills.” Indeed, he says, “if
Allah wills,” not because he is in doubt about his ability or desire to do so, but to
certify and assure that he will do it. For he fears that, if he does not say, “if Allah
wills,” his determination might be thwarted and he will not achieve what he
desires. Sahih Muslim and Sahth al-Bukhari relate that Sulayman (may Allah be
pleased with him) said: “I swear by Allah that I will make the rounds among a
hundred women tonight; each one will give birth to a child who will become a
horseman who fights in the Cause of Allah.” When his friend told him to say, “if
Allah wills,” Sulayman did not say it. And none of them gave birth except one
who bore a dwarf, a male child split in two. The Prophet (pbuh) said: “I swear by
Him Whose hand is my soul, if he had said, “if Allah wills,” the women would
have given birth to children all of whom would have become horsemen and fought
for the Cause of Allah. Accordingly, if he had said, “if Allah wills,” this would not
have meant that he doubted what he sought and desired. Rather, it would have
been to certify that Allah would help him to fulfill it. For nothing happens unless
Allah wills it. So if a man swears that he will do something but does not say, “if
Allah wills,” then his desire will not be fulfilled. For if anyone swears by Allah
without saying, “if Allah wills,” Allah will prove him wrong.

Some have been asked: “By what have you come to know your Lord?” They said:
“By the way in which He nullifies people’s resolutions and thwarts their
ambitions.” Allah says: “Nor say of anything, ‘I shall be sure to do so and so
tomorrow’ without adding, ‘if Allah wills. . .”” (18:23—24). For his saying, “T will
do,” implies both seeking and informing. What he seeks is certain; however,
440 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

whether it takes place or not depends on whether he wills it, and his seeking of the
action must come from Allah by His might and power. So, in his request, he must
request what he seeks from Allah; and when informing, he must only report what
Allah has shown him. Accordingly, if he decides something without making the
matter conditional on Allah’s will, then he will be like the person who swears by
Allah without saying, “if Allah wills.” Then Allah will prove him to be a liar,
determined to do something he desires, without hesitation. Therefore he must say,
“if Allah wills,” in order to achieve his desire, which he swore to fulfill. For his
desire will not be fulfilled unless Allah wills it, but not due to hesitation in his
will. Indeed, Allah wants to fulfill what He promises them, and His Will is firm
and without hesitation. Moreover, whatever Allah wills, He does. For whatever He
wants to be done will be done, unlike the human being, who wants what he will
achieve and sees happening to him what he does not want.

His saying, “if Allah wills,” certifies that what He promises will most definitely
be fulfilled by His desire and will. For what He wants and desires will be
achieved, and what He does not want will never happen. Hence, the exception is
made here for the purpose of reassurance, since what they had been promised that
year had not taken place. However, this was not the case for all other promises
they had been given.

Accordingly, there has been a dispute and controversy among Muslim jurists about
the person who makes the exception in an oath, although he is not hesitant and has
a firm desire to achieve his goal. Is such a man excused for having made the
exception, or must he do penance if he breaks his word? As for the person who is
hesitant and who must make the exception, he does so without a doubt. Indeed, the
correct view is that in all cases one ought to make the exception because Allah’s
will encompasses everything, and because no matter how firm one’s own will is,
it still depends on the will of Allah. So he may be definite about his will to achieve
his goal, but he is uncertain that his desire will be fulfilled, nor does he want it to
be fulfilled if Allah has predestined it not to take place. For he has made the
commitment to fulfill it only if Allah wills it; and if Allah does not want it to be
achieved, this person would not make the commitment and he would not swear by
Allah to achieve it even if he had a firm desire. For not everything that one desires
does he swear by Allah to achieve, and in such a case, no penance or atonement
is required if one fails to achieve it.
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 441

What has been mentioned above makes clear that one should say, “if Allah wills,”
to gain one’s full desire and will to achieve his goal, not because he has doubts
about his will. This is applicable to what a man desires and swears to achieve.
Allah says: “. . . You shall enter the Sacred Mosque . . .” (18:27). This is a report
of what He wants to be done and that which He knows will happen. Allah makes
their entrance into Makkah dependent on His will by saying, “if Allah wills.” This
is also the case regarding something that one wants to report regarding a future
action he is completely sure of his intent to achieve. Hence, he says, “if Allah
wills,” to achieve his goal, but does not say it due to doubts about his will or about
its occurrence.

Accordingly, the exception is to be made when there is a full desire and strong will
to achieve a goal. However, one may still fear that his goal will not be achieved;
thus, he says, “if Allah wills,” to achieve his hope, even though he knows that it
will happen. He also asks and prays to Allah to help him achieve the aim he knows
will be fulfilled, as in the case of the Prophet (pbuh) on the day of the Battle at
Badr. The Prophet (pbuh) told his people that they would defeat the polytheists,
although he entered the tent to ask for divine aid, saying: “Oh Allah, please fulfill
what you have promised me.” For the knowledge of what Allah has decreed does
not prevent His Decree from taking place as a result of causes, one of the greatest
of which is supplication. Likewise, hope in His Mercy and fear of His Punishment
could be among the most important causes of someone’s deliverance from His
Punishment and achieving His Mercy.

The exception is made for a simple declaration of fact, as well as for a statement
of fact accompanied by a request. The first refers to when one swears to the truth
of a declarative statement the intent behind which is neither to incite someone else
to action or to forbid him to act. Rather, one would respond to such a statement by
either believing or disbelieving it. For example, one might say, “I swear, the
matter 15 thus and so, if Allah wills,” or, “. .. it is not thus and so. ...” The
person making the exception may know for certain that what he says is true, as in
the statement, “you shall enter,” for this is a clause that has not been omitted. The
second situation—that is, a statement of fact that conveys the sense of a
request—is illustrated in the statement, “I swear that I will do thus and so,” or, “I
swear that I will not do thus and so.” The wording is that of a declarative
statement that is guaranteed by a request. The person did not say, “I swear, I desire
this, but am not determined to do it.” Rather he said, “I swear it will be thus and
442 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

so.” For if it were not “thus and so,” then he would have broken his word due to
the event that occurred in a manner inconsistent with what he had sworn to. But
if he were to say, “if Allah wills,” then he would be swearing with the provision,
“provided that Allah wills it,” rather than doing so in an unqualified manner.

For this reason, many Muslim jurists held that if something to which one swears
does not come to pass, or if it does come to pass but the person does not do what
he swore to do, he has broken his oath, whether out of forgetfulness, error, or
ignorance. For they noted that an oath bears the sense of a report, such that if what
occurs conflicts with the report a person has given, then he has broken his word. _
However, others have held that such a statement ainis to incite others to action or »
forbid them from some action; and if someone forbids a certain action, then does
it out of forgetfulness or error, he has not broken his word.

Early [scholars] held that such an utterance might bear the sense of affirming or
denying some fact, as when someone says, “I swear by Allah, it is going to rain [or
not going to].” This is a sheer declaration of fact that implies no command or
prohibition. But if one swore to what he believed [to be the case], and if the matter
turned out to be in conflict with what he had sworn to, then he would have broken
his word. In this way one may see the distinction between swearing to something
that 15 past, and swearing to something in the future. For an oath pertaining to the
past is not such that if one makes a mistake with regard to it, he is not required to
do penance or make atonement in any way, as one would had he committed
deliberate perjury. This is not so, however, with regard to the future, for one is not
required to make the exception concerning the future if he has done it. Allah says:
“The unbelievers think that they will not be raised up [for Judgment]; say “Yes, by
my Lord, you shall surely be raised up: Then shall you be told [the truth] ofall that
you did. And that is easy for Allah’” (64:7). In this verse, Allah calls the Prophet _
to swear concerning a future matter. Similar is His saying, “The unbelievers say,
‘never to us will come the Hour.’ Say, No! But most surely, by my Lord, it will
come upon you...” (34:3). Allah also calls him to witness concerning a present
matter when He says: “They seek to be informed by you: Is that true? Say, Yes!
By my Lord! It is the very truth . . .” (10:53). The Prophet (pbuh) said: “I swear
by Him in whose Hand is my soul, that the son of Mariam will be sent down as a
just arbiter and fair-minded leader.” He [the Prophet] also said: “I swear by Him
in whose Hand is my soul; life will not come to an end before a time comes
wherein the murderer does not know why he has murdered, and the slain does not
EXCEPTION IN IMAN 443

know why he was killed.” The Prophet (pbuh) also said: “Kisra [a title of Persian
kings], shall perish until there are no more after him, and if Caesar dies, there will
be no Caesar after him. I swear by Him in whose Hands is my soul, the wealth of
Kisra and Caesar will be spent for the sake of Allah.” [Both of these hadiths are
found in the Sahih.] Thus, the Prophet (pbuh) was called to witness with a vow
concerning future matters in different hadiths without making the exception; and,
indeed, Allah knows best. Praise be to Allah, the Cherisher and Sustainer of the
Worlds, and peace be upon our Prophet Muhammad and his family and his
Companions.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abbott, Nabia. Studies in Arabic Literary Papyri. Vol. 2, Qur’anic Commentary and
Tradition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967.

Abu ‘Ubaydah. Majaz al-Qur’an. Ed. Fu’ad Sezgin. 2 vols. Cairo, 1962.

Abu Zahrah, Muhammad, ed. /bn Taymiyyah: Hayatuh wa ‘Usuruhu wa Ara’uhu wa
Fighuhu. Cairo: Dar al-Fikr al-‘Arabi, n.d.

. Tarikh al-madhahib al-Islamiyyah. Cairo: Dar al-Fikr al-‘Arabt, n.d.

. Usbi al-Figh al-Islami wa Mahrahan al-Imam Ibn Taymiyyah fi Dimashq. Cairo:
Al-Majlis al-A‘la li Ri‘ayat al-Funin wa al-Adab wa al-‘Ulim al-Ijtima‘iyyah, 1963.

Al-Asha‘ri, Abu al-Hassan. A/l-/banah ‘an usul al-diyanah. Cairo: Matba‘at al-Munriyyah,

1929.

. Magqalat al-Islamiyyin. 2 vols. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1963.

Ali Muhammad, Kurd. Tarjamat Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah. 2d ed. Damascus: Al-
Maktab al-Islami, 1969.

‘Azami, M. M. Studies in Early Hadith Literature. 2d ed. Indianapolis: American Trust
Publications, 1978.

Al-Baytar, Muhammad Bahjat. Hayat Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah, Muhadarat wa Magalat
wa Dirasat. Damascus: Al-Maktab al-Islami, 1961. |

Al-Bazzar, ‘Umar Ibn ‘AI. Al-A ‘lam al-‘Aliyyah fi 1 1 Shayk al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah.
Ed. Salah al-Din al-Munajjid. Beirut, 1976.

Brockelmann, B. C. Geschichte der Arabischen Literatur. 6 vols. Translated as Ta*ri kh al-
Adab al-‘Arabiby ‘Abd al-Halin al-Najjar. Cairo: Dar al-Ma‘arif. [Vols. 1—3, tr. al-Najjar;
vols. 4-6 tr. Ya‘qiib Bakr and Ramadan ‘Abd al-Tawwab.] .

Al-Bukhari. Translation of the Meanings of Sahih al-Bukhari. 9 vols. Al-Madinah al-
Munawwarah: Dar al-Fikr, n.d.

Encyclopedia of Islam Rev. ed. Leiden: E. J Brill. [A number of entries were used in this study
including: “Ibn Taymiyya,” “Iman,” “Murdjr’a,” “Mut‘tazila,” “Madjaz” “Ist‘ara,”
“Ash‘ariyya,” and “Djahmiyya.”]

Goldziher, Ignaz. /Jntroduction to Islamic Theology and Law. Tr. Andras and Ruth Hamori.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1981.

Heinrichs, Wolfhart. “On the Genesis of the hagiga-majaz Dichotomy.” Studia Islamica 59
(1984): 111-40.

Hilmi, Mustafa. Qawa‘id al-Manhaj al-Salafi. Cairo: Dar al-Ansar, 1976.

Ibn ‘Abd al-Hadi, Muhammad Ibn Ahmad al-Hanbali. Al-‘Ugid al-Durriyyah ft Manaqib
Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah. Cairo: Matba‘at al-Madani, 1983.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 445

Ibn Badran, “Abd al-Qadir. Al-Madkhal ila Madhab al-Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal. Ed. ‘Abd
Allah Ibn ‘Abd al-Muhsin al-Turki. 2d ed. Beirut: Mu’assasah al-Risalah, 1981.

Ibn Kathir, ‘Imad al-Din Ibn ‘Umar. Al-Bidayah wal-Nihayah fi al-Tari kh, Vols. 13-14. 3d
ed. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘IImiyyah, 1987.

Ibn Manzur. Lisan al-‘Arab. 14 vols. Beirut: Dar Sadir, 1968.

Ibn al-Nadim, Muhammad Ibn Ishaq. A/-Fihrist. 2 vols. Tr. and ed. Bayard Dodge. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1970.

Ibn Qasim, “Abd al-Rahman Ibn Muhammad [with the help of his son, Muhammad].
Majmu‘ Fatawa Shaykh al-Islam Ahmad Ibn Taymiyyah. Rabat: Maktabat al-Ma‘4rif, n.d.

Ibn Taymiyyah, Taqiyy al-Din Ahmad. Kitab al-Iman. 2d ed, Beirut: Al-Maktab al-Islami. 455
pp., 1392 A.H. [For other editions of Kitab al-/man see the introduction to this translation. }

Izutsu, Toshihiko. The Concept of Beliefin Islamic Theology. Yokohama: Yurindo Publishing
Co., 1965.

Jackson, Sherman A. “Ibn Taymiyyah on Trial in Damascus.” Journal of Semitic Studies, 39.1
(1994): 41-85.

Al-Jawziyyah, Ibn al-Qayyim. Asma’ Mw’ allafat Ibn Taymiyyah. Ed. Salah al-Din al-Munajjid.
Damascus, 1953.

Khan, Qamar-ud-Din. The Political Thought of Ibn Taymiyah. Islamabad: Islamic Research
Institute, 1973.

Lane, Edward. An Arabic-English Lexicon. 8 vols. Beirut: Librairie du Liban, 1980.

Laoust, Henri. Essaisur les Doctrines Sociales et Politiques de Taki-d-Din b. Taimiya. Cairo:
Institut Francais d’Archaeologie Orientale, 1939.

. La Profession de Foi a Ibn Taymiyya la Wasitiyya. Paris: Librairie Orientaliste Paul
Geuthner, 1986.

Little, Donald P. “The Historical and Historiographical Significance of the Detention of Ibn
Taymiyya.” International Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 4 (1973): 311-27.

Al-Mangor, Ella. “The Early Meaning of Majaz and the Nature of Abii ‘Ubayda’s Exegesis.”
Studia [slamica (1979): 307-26.

Michel, Thomas F., 8.J., ed. and tr. A Muslim Theologian’s Response to Christianity: Ibn
Taymiyya’s al-Jawab al-Sahih. Delmar, N.Y.: Caravan Books, 1984.

Misa, Muhammad Yiisuf. bn Taymiyyah. Cairo: Al-Mu’assasah al-Misriyyah al-‘Ammah lil-
Ta’ lif wal-Tiba‘ah wal-Nashr, 1962.

Muslim. Sahih Muslim. 4 vols. Tr. “Abdul Hamid Siddiqi. New Delhi: Kitab Bhavan, 1977.
Pessagno, Jerome Meric. The Kitab al-Iman of Abii ‘Ubayd al-Qasim B. Sallam: A Study of
The Muslim Struggle. Ann Arbor, Mich.: University Microfilms International, 1973.

Qur’an [The Holy Qur’an]. Translation and commentary by Yusuf Ali. Al-Madinah al-
Munawwarah, 1410 A.H.

The Glorious Qur’an. Text and explanatory translation by Muhammad Marmaduke Pickthall.
New York: Muslim World League, 1977.

The Noble Qur’an. Text by Muhammad al-Hilali and Muhammad Khan. Rev. ed. Lahore: Kazi
Publications, 1993.

446 SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Sezgin, Fuad. Ta’ri kh al-Turath al-‘Arabi. 5 vols. Tr. from the German by Mahmiid Fahmi
Hijazi. Riyadh: 1983.

Swartz, Merlin. “A Seventh-century (A.H.) Sunni Creed: The ‘Aqida WAsitiya Ibn Taymiya.”
Humaniora Islamica 1 (1973): 91-131.

‘Uaways, Manstir Muhammad. Jbn Taymiyyah laysa Salafiyyan. Cairo: Dar al-Nahdah al-
‘Arabiyyah, 1970.

Wansbrough, John. “Mayjaz al-Qur’an: Periphrastic Exegesis.” Bulletin of the School of
Oriental and African Studies 33 (London, 1970): 247-66,

. Our’ dnic Studies: Sources and Methods of Scriptural Interpretation. London: Oxford

University Press, 1977.

Watt, Montgomery. /slamic Philosophy and Theology. 2d ed. Edinburgh: University Press,
1985.

Weiss, Bernard G. “Medieval Discussion of the Origin of Language.” ZDMG (1974): 33-74.

Wensinck, A. J. The Muslim Creed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1932.

Al-Zirikli, Khayr al-Din. A/-A ‘lam. 10 vols. 2d ed. Cairo, 1954-59.

/

INDEX OF 010581010605

(2:88), 40
(2:98), 182, 187, 207
(2:104), 152

(2:112), 266

(2:121), 177, 178, 316
(2:126), 58, 267
(2:128), 267, 356
(2:132), 356

(2:136), 174, 193, 356
(2:137), 356

(2:143), 71, 280
(2:158), 298

(2:165), 85, 197
(2:166), 85

(2:168), 60

(2:169), 288

(2:171), 41

(2:172), 57, 60

(2:177), 35, 175, 189-194, 296, 316

(2:187), 121
(2:189), 175

(2:197), 326

(2:205), 95

(2:208), 270, 400
(2:214), 257

(2:221), 68

(2:230), 406

(2:231), 52

(2:238), 187, 207, 208
(2:254), 86

(2:255), 88

(2:257), 318

(2:259), 124

(2:271), 177

Al-Fatihah (The Opening Chapter)

(1:1-2), 74
(1:5), 173
(1:6), 176
(1:7), 177

Al-Baqarah (The Cow)
(2:12), 35

(2:1-5), 208

(2:2), 39, 176, 283
(2:3), 139, 294
(2:3-4), 7

(2:4), 174

(2:5), 35

(2:8), 94, 152, 153, 219
(2:8-10), 192, 249
(2:11), 95
(2:11—12), 94
(2:12), 95
(2:17-18), 276, 277
(2:18), 41, 278, 279
(2:19), 278
(2:19-20), 279
(2:21), 173

(2:25), 318, 342
(2:30), 371

(2:31), 105

(2:42), 182, 183, 186
(2:43), 271

(2:54), 75

(2:61), 74

(2:62), 28, 266
(2:67), 116

(2:74), 43
448 INDEX OF QUR’ANIC CITATIONS

(4:16), 97
(4:17), 36
(4:19), 286
(4:22), 406
(4:36), 173.
(4:57), 342
(4:59), 185, 187
(4:60-61), 52
(4:66-68), 335
(4:65), 52, 139, 161
(4:69), 70, 71
(4:75), 406
(4:80), 187
(4:85), 77
(4:90), 165
(4:92), 118, 152, 380, 401
(4:93), 73, 84
(4:95), 334, 336
(4:110), 75
(4:113), 52
(4:114), 172
(4:115), 53, 182, 183
(4:122), 342
(4:123), 91
(4:125), 266
(4:131), 175
(4:136), 65, 182
(4:140), 66
(4:142), 44, 219
(4:145), 345
(4:146), 344
(4:155), 40
(4:162), 28
(4:173), 342
(4:175), 342
(4:176), 406

AI-M@idah (The Table)
(5:1), 58
(5:2), 175, 194

(2:277), 27, 96, 204, 342
(2:285), 174, 194, 210

Al-‘Imran (The Family of ‘Imran)

(3:19), 217, 265, 352, 366
(3:20), 67, 356
(3:31), 427
(3:41), 148
(3:52), 268, 396
(3:57), 342
(3:64), 113, 210
(3:72-73), 339
(3:80), 332
(3:81), 384
(3:84), 193
(3:85), 217, 265, 352, 367, 396
(3:86), 332
(3:97), 206, 298
(3:102), 174
(3:103), 54
(3:106), 121
(3:110), 172
(3:129), 339
(3:135), 75, 90
(3:138), 283
(3:140), 71
(3:142), 187, 251, 257
(3:147), 176
(3:152), 73
(3:160), 30
(3:167), 303, 346
(3:173), 235
(3:179), 274
(3:180), 78
(3:199), 83

Al-Nisa’ (The Women)
(4:1), 174

(4:3), 406

(4:11), 379, 380
INDEX OF QUR’ANIC CITATIONS 449

(5:3), 217, 239, 352, 355, 367, 410 (7:2), 43
(5:4), 59 (7:3), 179, 183
(5:5), 59, 65, 67 (7:23), 75, 90, 186, 372
(5:6), 109, 204, 246, 299, 407 (7:26), 121
(5:9), 342 (7:38-39), 81
(5:14), 183 (7:42), 342
(5:32), 96 (7:43), 176
(5:33), 96 (7:54), 186
(5:39), 97 (7:97), 124
(5:44), 267, 309, 324, 327, 345 (7:126), 267
(5:47), 259 (7:142), 94
(5:48), 188 (7:154), 34, 290
(5:51), 32 (7:155), 192
(5:51—53), 203 (7:157), 74, 172
(5:80-81), 31 (7:158), 175
(5:81), 31, 141, 161, 171 (7:159), 83
(5:83), 83 (7:169), 288
(5:89), 177 (7:170), 179
(5:111), 267, 396 (7:179), 40
(7:180), 195
Al-An‘am (The Cattle) (7:196), 95, 429
(6:19), 88 (7:201), 45
(6:26), 188 (7:202), 45
(6:30), 162 (7:205), 146, 147
(6:33), 200
(6:35), 299 Al-Anfal (The Spoils of War)
(6:48), 96, 342 (8:1), 249
(6:51), 88 (8:2), 31, 139-141, 154, 170, 211, 235,
(6:52—53), 201 242, 294, 329, 367, 388
(6:81-83), 267 (8:24), 30, 156, 249
(6:82), 91, 92, 325, 326 (8:4), 33, 329
(6:87), 176 (8:12), 335
(6:106), 179 (8:23, 40
(6:115), 419 (8:23), 40
(6:125), 355 (8:24), 74
(6:145), 59 (8:37), 191
(6:153), 179 (8:45), 335
(6:155), 179

Al-Tawbah (The Repentence)
Al-A‘raf (The Heights) (9:4), 427
(7:4-5), 124 (9:11), 294, 389
INDEX OF QUR’ANIC CITATIONS

(10:87), 267
(10:88), 163
(10:89), 163
(10:90), 163
(10:91), 163
(10:109), 179

Hid (The Prophet Hid)
(11:29), 265
(11:36), 265
(11:40), 265
(11:47), 186
(11:59), 72
(11:87), 201
(11:91), 40
(11:100-101), 75
(11:101), 88
(11:110), 371
(11:123), 30, 173

Yiisuf (Joseph)
(12:5), 122
(12:6), 7

(12:17), 133, 138, 288, 291

(12:24), 305
(12:43), 290
(12:76), 122
(12:82), 123, 125
(12:90), 174
(12:101), 70, 95, 147, 356
(12:110), 214
(12:111), 196

Al-Ra‘d (Zhe Thunder)
(13:36), 236
(13:39), 371

Ibrahim (Abraham)
(14:4), 134
(14:13-14), 36

450

(9:24), 305
(9:31), 79, 80
(9:34-35), 78
(9:36), 271

(9:40), 113, 236
(9:44), 171
(9:43-45), 170
(9:49), 222

(9:54), 219
(9:56-57), 404
(9:60), 177, 313
(9:61), 290, 291
(9:64-66), 228, 275
(9:65), 276

(9:66), 276

(9:71), 172

(9:72), 342, 398, 422
(9:73), 66
(9:73-74), 275
(9:79), 122

(9:80), 221

(9:84), 221

(9:101), 221, 222
(9:103), 115, 298, 379
(9:105), 429
(9:106), 430
(9:119), 174
(9:124), 283, 388

Yunus (Jonah)
(10:2), 266, 318
(10:18), 88

(10:53), 442

(10:58), 236
(10:62-63), 266 ©
(10:62-64), 343
(10:71-72), 265
(10:81), 95

(10:83), 139, 267, 289
(10:84), 30, 267, 367
INDEX OF QUR’ANIC CITATIONS 451

(19:41), 71
(19:56), 71
(19:60), 96
(19:76), 335

Ta-Ha (the letters Ta-Ha)
(20:7), 148

(20:14), 179

(20:48), 154

(20:71), 291

(20:75), 330

(20:82), 96

(20:121), 73

(20:123), 35, 176, 179
(20:129), 370

Al-Anbiya’ (The Prophets)
(21:105), 371

(21:27), 184

(21:28), 89

(21:94), 330

(21:98), 80

Al-Hajj (The Pilgrimage)
(22:11), 274

(22:17), 67

(22:46), 41

(22:70), 371

(22:75), 339

Al-Mw’minin (The Believers)
(23:2), 42

(23:47), 201, 290, 291

(23:51), 58

(23:60), 33, 431, 435
(23:117), 74

AbNur (The Light)
(24:4), 254, 326
(24:13), 71

Al-Hijr (The Rocky Track)
(15:36), 315

(15:39), 315

(15:39-40), 177

ALNahl (The Bee)
(16:51), 290

(16:89), 267

(16:90), 173
(16:98-100), 284
(16:106), 227

(16:112), 120, 124, 125
(16:121), 176

(16:122), 70

AF-Isra? (The Night Journey)
(17:19), 191

(17:23), 349

(17:82), 283

(17:102), 163, 199

(17:110), 195

Al-Kahf (The Cave)
(18:13), 237
(18:23-24), 14, 439
(18:27), 441
(18:28), 242
(18:50), 326
(18:59), 124
(18:69), 186
(18:69—-70), 185
(18:71), 185
(18:74), 185
(18:76), 186
(18:77), 119, 185
(18:110), 326

Maryam (Mary)
(19:10), 148
(19:11), 148
452 INDEX OF QUR’ANIC CITATIONS

Al-‘Ankabut (Zhe Spider)
(29:26), 266, 289, 291
(29:27), 70

(29:45), 172, 179
(29:61—63), 87

(29:68), 65

Al-Ruim (The Romans)
(30:56), 27

Luqmian (Lugm4n)
(31:13), 91, 325, 326
(31:14), 349

Al-Sajdah (The Prostration)
(32:4), 88
(32:15), 170, 316
(32:18), 348
(32:20), 326
(32:21), 120

Al-Ahzab (The Confederates)
(33:7), 187, 207
(33:11), 282
(33:18-19), 404
(33:27), 187
(33:35), 27, 367
(33:36), 186
(33:43—44), 318
(33:47), 318
(33:60-62), 223
(33:61), 223
(33:67-68), 176
(33:70), 174
(33:70-71), 427
(33:73), 372

Saba? (Sheba)
(34:3), 442
(34:10), 103

(24:21), 298
(24:33), 74

(24:39-40), 280

(24:45), 106

(24:47), 154

(24:62), 32, 33, 154, 170
(24:63), 186

Al-Furgan (The Criterion)
(25:27-29), 85

(25:44), 40

(25:59), 182

(25:68-71), 84

(25:70), 97

Al-Shu‘ara’ (The Poets)
(26:7), 76

(26:18-19), 201

(26:49), 289

(26:51), 267

(26:55), 290

(26:83), 70

(26:94-102), 86
(26:111), 201, 289

Al-Naml (The Anis)
(27:14), 163, 199
(27:16), 103
(27:18), 103
(27:19), 70

(27:44), 75
(27:50—-51), 122
(27:59-61), 88

Al-Qasas (The Narration)
(28:4), 96, 199

(28:16), 75, 90

(28:19), 94

(28:57), 201

(28:83), 95
INDEX OF QUR’ ANIC CITATIONS 453

(39:69), 71
(39:71), 162
(39:71-72), 65

Ghafir or Al-Mu’min (The Forgiver or
the Believer)

(40:10), 427

(40:13), 38

(40:18-19), 86

(41:34-36), 284

(40:47-48), 81, 162

(40:60), 427

Fussilat (Explained in Detail)
(41:17), 39

(41:21), 104

(41:53), 242

Al-Shura (The Consultation)
(42:13), 176

(42:34-35), 7

(42:51), 148

Al-Zukhruf (The Gold Adornments)
(43:3), 134

(43:9-14), 87

(43:22), 202

(43:28), 113

(43:36), 183

(43:55), 426

(43:67), 85

(43:87), 163

Al-Dukhan (The Smoke)
(44:21), 290

(44:49), 120

(44:56), 121, 122

Al-Jathiyah (The Kneeling)
(45:19), 429

(34:22-23), 88
(34:3 1-33), 82

Fatir (The Originator of Creation)

(35:6), 283
(35:10), 145, 293
(35:28), 35
(35:32), 24, 90, 351
(35:32-33), 91

Ya-Sin (the letters of Ya-Sin)

(36:10), 39
(36:11), 39
(36:22~23), 8
(36:60), 294
(36:82), 429

Al-Saffat (The Ranks)
(37:22-23), 80
(37:24-25), 81
(37:26-36), 81
(37:35), 82
(37:69-70), 176
(37:77), 104

Sad (the letter Sad)
(38:5), 88

(38:32), 115
(38:73-74), 163
(38:85), 370, 372

Al-Zumar (The Groups)
(39:2), 173

(39:7), 355, 426, 429
(39:9), 35

(39:14), 173

(39:22), 355

(39:23), 32, 43

(39:53), 175

(39:64), 173
454 INDEX OF QUR’ANIC CITATIONS

(50:18), 62
(50:19), 162

(50:20-22), 162
(50:32-33), 200

Al-Dhariyat (The Winds that Scatter)

(51:23), 146

(51:35-36), 27, 351
(51:49), 76
(51:55), 242
(51:57), 173

Al-Najm (The Star)
(53:2), 176, 177
(53:26), 89

Al-Qamar (The Moon)
(54:39), 121

(54:47), 177

(54:54), 343
(54:54—S5), 173

Al-Rahman (The Most Beneficent)
(55:46), 34-36

Al-Hadid (The Iron)
(57:7), 174, 175, 271
(57:7-9), 237

(57:8), 238

(57:10), 340

(57:12), 318
(57:13-14), 277
(57:13-15), 66, 344
(57:16), 42, 43
(57:21), 266

(57:22), 371

(57:28), 175, 238, 335
(57:29), 238

Al-Mujadilah (The Women Who Pleads)

(58:8), 146, 147

Al-Ahgaf (The Curved Sand Hills)

(46:20), 57
(46:31), 427

Muhammad (The Prophet Muhammad)

(47:13), 124
(47:16), 40
(47:17), 237, 335
(47:2), 207
(47:28), 426
(47:33), 252, 257

Al-Fath (The Victory)

(48:4), 214, 236, 335

(48:11), 152, 255

(48:16), 73, 154, 255

(48:18), 428

(48:26), 113

(48:27), 260, 429, 433, 435, 437
(48:28), 176

Al-Hujurat (The Dwellings)
(49:4), 253

(49:6), 253

(49:7), 56, 73, 74, 253
(49:9), 253, 398

(49:9-10), 349

(49:11), 253, 254, 256, 348
(49:13), 254

(49:14), 10, 27, 154, 165, 167, 192, 244,
246, 248-251, 257, 258, 282, 304, 317,

362, 369

(49:15), 30, 33, 139, 140, 154, 170, 192,

247, 250, 282, 367, 389
(49:16), 251
(49:17), 250, 252, 340, 365

Qaf (the letter Oaf)
(50:6-8), 242
(50:8), 38
INDEX OF QUR’ANIC CITATIONS 455

Al-Mulk (The Dominion)
(67:89), 65, 162

(67:9), 72

(67:10), 38

(67:13), 148

Nuh (Noah)
(71:3), 173

Al-Jinn (The Jinn)
(72:23), 72

Al-Muzzammil (The One Wrapped in
Garments)

(73:15—16), 73

(73:16), 73, 163

Al-Muddaththir (The One Enveloped)

(74:31), 236, 388

Al-Qiyamah (The Resurrection)
(75:31-32), 72, 154

Al-Naba? (The Great News)
(78:10), 121

(78:24), 122

(78:24-25), 121

Al-Nazi‘at (Those Who Tear Out)
(79:21), 72
(79:40-41), 34

Al-Takwir (The Folding Up)
(81:1), 216

(81:7), 76

(81:21), 216

Al-Infitar (Bursting Apart)
(82:13), 343
(82:13-14), 175, 179

(58:11), 28
(58:22), 31, 141, 159, 171, 335

Al-Hashr (The Gatering)
(59:6), 61

(59:11), 66

(59:14), 38

(59:22—24), 195

Al-Mumtahinah (The Women to be
Examined)

(60:1-7), 6

(60:10), 69, 222, 250

(60:12), 74

Al-Saff (The Row)
(61:2-4), 427
(61:5), 40

Al-Jumu‘ah (Friday)
(62:9), 204, 246

Al-Munafiqin (The Hypocrites)
(63:1), 192, 220, 249

(63:1—3), 274

(63:5-6), 255

(63:8), 220

Al-Taghabun (Mutual Disillusion)
(64:7), 442

(64:11), 237

(64:13), 30

Al-Talagq (The Divorce)
(65:2—3), 174
(65:9), 121

Al-Tahrim (The Banning)
(66:6), 184, 185
(66:8), 277
456 | INDEX OF QUR’ANIC CITATIONS

Al-Mutaffifin (Those Who Deal in Al-Ikhas (Sincerity)
Fraud) (112:1), 210
(83:34—-36), 123

AL-Tariq (The Bright Star)
(86:15-16), 2

Al-A‘la (The Most High)
(87: 1-2), 74

(87:1-3), 397

(87: 1-4), 187

(87:1-5), 208
)87:2-3(,104
(87:9-12), 38
(87:10—11), 242

Al-Balad (The City)
(90:8-9), 332
(90:17), 269

Al-Shams (The Sun)
(91:2), 178, 349

Al-Layl (The Night)
(92:15-16), 65, 72, 154

Al-‘Alag (The Clot)
(96:9-10), 300

Al-Bayyinah (The Clear Evidence)
(98:1), 67, 115

(98:5), 207, 214, 218, 366, 389
(98:6), 66, 67

(98:7), 28

(98:7-8), 342

Al-Zilzal (The Earthquake)
(99:7-8), 91, 194

Al-Takathur (The Piling Up)
(102:8), 57
INDEX OF PERSONAL NAMES

“Abd al-Rahman Ibn Muhammad Ibn
Qasim, 13, 17

“Abd al-Rahman Ibn Zayd, 105, 254

“Abd al-Rahman Ibn Zayd Ibn Aslam, 105

“Abd al-Razzaq, 190, 261, 308, 324, 329

“Abd al-Wahab Ibn Najdah, 47

“Abd al-Wahhab Ibn al-Shaykh Abu al-
Faraj al-Maqdisi, 417

Abi Salamah, 245

Abraham, 71, 174, 187, 193, 207, 209,
265-267, 396, 425

al-Abrar, 179, 194

Abu al-‘Abbas al-Qalanisi, 156

Abu ‘Abd Allah, 20, 21, 50, 68, 99, 100,
131, 152, 156, 214, 218, 245, 259-261,
302, 316, 329, 355, 359, 362-364, 369,
375, 378, 430-434

Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, 218,
375, 430 ,

Abu “Abd Allah Ibn Hamid, 100, 359

Abu ‘Abd Allah Ibn Mujahid, 131, 156

Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad Ibn Nasr,
316, 355

Abu “Abd al-Rahim al-Juzjani, 378

Abu al-Ahwas, 308

Abu ‘AIi Ibn Shadhan, 387

Abu ‘Ali al-Thagafi, 131, 6

Abu al-‘Aliyah, 36, 80, 95, 105

Abu ‘Amr, 46, 99, 135, 260, 295, 307,
353, 383, 417

Abu ‘Amr Ibn al-‘Ala’, 9

Abu “Amr ‘Uthman Ibn Marziiq, 417

Abu al-Ashhab, 309

Abu Bakr, 20, 24, 29, 33, 49, 54, 91, 100,

Aaron, 94, 290

“Aat’, 36, 42, 68, 191,214, 216-218, 254,
307, 308, 325, 363

“Aat’ Ibn Abi Rabah, 36, 214, 216, 217

“Abd Allah, 20-22, 24, 26, 27, 34, 37, 47,
48, 50, 56, 60, 68, 84, 99, 100, 131,
146, 150, 152, 156, 178, 181, 189, 203,
214, 216, 218-221, 231-235, 245, 246,
259-261, 268, 302, 303, 308, 309,
316-318, 329, 355, 359, 362-364, 369,
373, 375, 378, 387, 401, 414, 430-434

“Abd Allah Ibn “Akim, 232

“Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr, 21, 221, 268, 302,
303, 308, 373

“Abd Allah Ibn Mas‘td, 26, 84, 178, 302,
373, 401

“Abd Allah Ibn Muhammad, 24, 216

“Abd Allah al-Qawariri, 235

“Abd Allah Ibn Rabi‘ah al-Hadrami, 47

“Abd Allah Ibn Rawahah, 232

“Abd Allah Ibn Sa‘id Ibn Kullab, 146,
414

“Abd Allah Ibn Sulayman, 234

“Abd Allah Ibn Ubay, 203, 219, 220

“Abd al-‘Aziz, 49, 214, 245, 308

“Abd al-Halim, 1, 2

“Abd al-Haqq, 49

“Abd al-Karim Ibn Malik, 190, 214

“Abd al-Qays, 23, 25, 206, 316, 332, 353,
388

“Abd al-Rahman, 2, 3, 13, 17, 26, 36, 46,
56, 105, 178, 189, 190, 233, 254, 288,
308, 309, 351, 362

“Abd al-Rahman Ibn Mahdi, 46, 309, 351
458 INDEX OF PERSONAL NAMES

Abu Mansur al-Maturidi, 415, 417

Abu al-Miqdam, 303, 308

Abu Muhammad, 24, 34, 36, 48, 150,
190, 215, 293, 387, 414, 433

Abu Muhammad Ibn al-Khashshab, 150

Abu Muhammad Ibn al-Labban, 387

Abu Muhammad “Abd Allah, 414

Abu Musa, 37, 57, 277

Abu Muslim al-Khurasani, 204

Abu Na‘im, 234

Abu al-Qasim al-Ansari, 420

Abu Qatadah, 125

Abu Qilabah, 20, 272

Abu Rafi‘, 60, 234

Abu Sa‘id, 26, 277, 294

Abu Sulayman, 74, 77, 235, 272, 351

Abu Sulayman al-Darani, 272

Abu Talib, 188, 202, 245, 329, 330, 333,
334, 339, 340, 431

Abu Talib al-Makki, 245, 329, 333, 340,
431

Abu al-Tayyib, 387

Abu Thawr, 196, 375-378, 381, 382

Abu Tha‘labah, 59, 60

Abu ‘Ubayd, 390

Abu ‘Ubayd, 149, 199, 217, 232, 307,
309, 328, 369, 379

Abu ‘Ubayd al-Qasim Ibn Sallam, 307

Abu ‘Ubaydah, 13, 99, 293, 437

Abu ‘Umar al-Talamanki, 329

Abu ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abd al-Birr, 327

Abu Usamah, 74, 308

Abu W27’il, 308

Abu al-Walid al-Baji, 387, 417

Abu Yahya, 303

Abu Ya‘ld, 49, 50, 100, 140, 235, 387,
417

Abu al-Yaman, 232

Abu Yisuf, 390

Abu Zahrah, 2-4, 7, 11

114, 125, 130, 131, 133, 157, 158, 160,
165, 204, 213, 227, 245, 259, 302, 308,
337, 338, 386, 394, 419, 422

Abu Bakr (al-Siddiq), 204; Abu Bakr al-
510010, 33, 125

Abu Bakr al-Athram, 259

Abu Bakr al-Baqillani, 130

Abu al-Bukhtari, 79

Abu Dawid, 303

Abu Dawiid al-Sijistant, 303

Abu Dharr, 78, 190, 214, 295, 296, 316,
395

Abu al-Faraj al-Maqdisi, 417

Abu Hanifah, 68, 99, 100, 131, 217, 226,
328, 359, 361, 390

Abu Hashim, 13, 102, 245

Abu al-Hassan, 13, 49, 81, 100, 102, 131,
132, 155, 158, 160, 180, 211, 376, 390,
402, 420, 422, 424

Abu al-Hassan al-Ash‘ari, 102, 131, 132,
211, 2

Abu Hayyan, 35, 308

Abu Hurayrah, 20, 27, 47, 50, 60, 89, 197,
268, 270, 277, 317, 426

Abu al-Husayn al-Basri, 99

Abu Ishaq, 36, 46, 57, 101, 156, 308, 420,
424

Abu Ishaq al-Fazari, 46, 308

Abu Ishaq al-Isfarayini, 156, 420, 424

Abu Jahl, 300

Abu Jamrah, 309, 316

Abu Ja‘far, 231, 244, 317, 318, 351, 363

Abu Ja‘far al-Baqir., 244

Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘AI, 318

Abu al-Khattab, 100, 387

Abu Khaythamah., 327

Abu Khuthaymah, 258, 259

Abu al-Ma‘ali, 157, 164, 387, 417, 424

Abu al-Ma‘all al-Juwayni, 387, 417

Abu al-Mahasin, 2
INDEX OF PERSONAL NAMES 459

Angel Gabriel, 19, 20, 70, 128, 360, 361,
369

al-Ansari, 21, 156, 158, 308, 420, 421

Asad Ibn Misa, 294, 302

al-Asbat, 193

al-Ash‘arni, 13, 37, 102, 131-133, 160,
211, 375, 382, 384, 386, 418, 419, 422,
425

Ash‘ath, 46, 430

Ashja‘, 251

Aslam, 74, 105, 251

al-Asma‘T, 135

“Assaf al-Nasrani, 5

al-Aswad, 308, 404

al-Athram, 259, 400, 401

“Awf, 46, 235, 298, 303, 308

al-Awza ‘I, 46, 99, 294, 295, 307, 308, 383

Ayyub, 20, 214, 258, 272, 308, 383

Ayyub al-Sikhtiryant, 308, 383

al-Baji, 387, 417

Al-Baqillani, 130, 131, 133

al-Basri, 20, 23, 99, 123, 234, 293, 316

Bahz, 269

Bakr, 20, 24, 29, 33, 49, 54, 91, 100, 114,
125, 130, 131, 133, 157, 158, 160, 165,
204, 213, 227, 245, 259, 302, 308, 337,
338, 386, 394, 419, 422

Balqis, 75

Banii Asad Ibn Khuzaymah, 252

Bant Hashim, 383

Bani al-Mustalaq, 253

Banu Qurayzah, 340

Bagqiyyah Ibn al- Walid, 47

Bilal, 201, 308

Bishr, 99, 308, 309

Bukhan, 2, 20, 21, 27, 38, 57, 82,91, 216,
220, 230, 233, 239, 244, 293, 295, 336,
340, 345, 352, 361, 373, 374, 426, 428,
439: al-Bukhanri, 2, 20, 82, 91, 233, 293,

Abu Zayd, 149

‘Ad, 72

Adam, 13, 14, 62, 73, 75, 90, 104-106,
186, 199, 294, 315, 330, 371, 372

Ahmad, 1-3, 15, 21, 29, 46, 48, 50, 61, 68,
79, 92, 97, 100, 101, 104, 113, 120,
130, 131, 133, 135, 146, 150, 152, 179,
183, 196, 199, 209, 214, 216, 218, 224,
231, 232, 237, 245, 258, 259, 262-264,
269, 272, 288, 295, 302-304, 306, 307,
309, 314, 327, 328, 344-346, 351,
359-364, 368, 369, 374-376, 378-382,
384-390, 394, 395, 400-402, 416, 417,
422, 425, 429-435, 437

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, 2, 3, 15, 21, 46, 48,
100, 101, 133, 146, 179, 183, 199, 209,
214, 216, 218, 231, 232, 245, 258, 259,
262, 264, 295, 303, 306, 307, 309, 327,
328, 344-346, 351, 360-363, 375, 376,
378, 380, 384, 390, 401, 416, 417, 422,
429, 430, 433, 434

Ahmad Ibn Harb, 152

‘A?ishah, 22, 33, 127, 364, 431

al-Akhtal, 150, 151

“All, 2, 3, 13, 34, 42, 49, 50, 68, 85, 100,
102, 131, 152, 156, 178, 190, 225, 232,
245, 254, 261, 262, 308, 309, 318, 325,
328, 361, 383, 387

‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, 42, 68, 190, 225, 303

“Ali Ibn Hajar, 152

“Ali Ibn Zayd, 325

‘Amr, 20-22, 42, 46, 47, 99, 135, 185,
221, 232, 260, 268, 269, 295, 302, 303,
307, 308, 313, 318, 353, 373, 374, 383,
392, 417

“Amr Ibn SAbsah, 22, 269

“Ammar, 44, 201, 233, 245

“Ammar Ibn YAsir, 201, 233

Anas, 23, 29, 41, 68, 80, 131, 156, 234,
307, 308, 328, 390, 416, 417
460 . INDEX OF PERSONAL NAMES

262, 308, 318, 351, 359, 362

Hanbal, 2, 3, 5, 15, 21, 46, 48, 100, 101,
113, 133, 146, 179, 183, 199, 209, 214,
216, 218, 231, 232, 245, 258, 259, 262,
264, 295, 303, 306, 307, 309, 327, 328,
344-346, 351, 360-363, 375, 376, 378,
380, 384, 390, 401, 416, 417, 422, 429,
430, 433, 434

Hanbal (Ibn Hilal al-Shaybant), 363

Hani’ Ibn al-Mutawakkil, 234

al-Harawi, 296

Harb Ibn Isma ‘il, 433

. Harith, 56, 196, 231, 232, 309, 363, 417

al-Harith, 232, 309, 417

Harmalah, 306

al-Hassan, 13, 23, 46, 47, 49, 76, 81, 100,
102, 131-133, 155, 158, 160, 178, 180,
190, 211, 234, 244, 245, 254, 258, 261,
279, 293, 308, 316, 361, 376, 383, 390,
402, 420, 422, 424, 433, 434

al-Hassan al-Basri, 23, 234, 293, 316;
Hassan al-Basri, 23, 123, 234, 293, 316

al-Hassan Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, 190

Hassan Ibn ‘Atiyyah, 54, 294

al-Hassan Ibn Muhammad, 383

al-Haytham, 308

Haywah, 308

Hilal, 216, 232, 261, 262, 363

Hind, 188, 232, 303, 402

Hisham, 245, 261, 308, 324

Hisham Ibn Jubayr, 324

Hubaysh Ibn Sindi, 434

Hubayyigh Ibn ‘Asal, 97

Hid, 72

Hudaybiyyah, 69, 438

Hudhayfah, 220, 221, 233, 303

al-Humaydi, 306

al-Husayn, 19, 48, 49, 99, 131, 308

al-Husayn Ibn 21-1201 al-Bajli, 1

Hushaym, 309

295, 352, 361, 373, 374, 426, 428, 439

Caesar, 443

Caliph Abu Bakr, 114
Caliph al-Ma’min, 146
Christ, 79, 85, 151, 396

al-Dahhak, 41, 76, 81, 302, 309

al-Dabbi, 309

al-Daraqtuni, 49

al-Dhahabi, 262

Dawid, 303

Dharr, 78, 190, 214, 232, 295, 296, 316,
383, 395

Dharr al-Hamadhant, 383

al-Fadl Ibn Ziyad, 430
al-Fudayl, 85, 295, 308
Fudalah Ibn “Ubayd, 21
Fudayl Ibn Yassar, 318
Furqan, 196, 310

Gabriel, 19, 20, 24, 70, 128, 182, 187,
206, 207, 216, 296, 300-302, 333, 352,
354, 359-362, 365, 366, 369, 409, 410

Ghufar., 251

Hafs al-Fard, 306

Hafsah, 49

Hajjaj, 21, 34, 204, 293, 308, 325

al-Hajjaj (Ibn Yusuf), 204

al-Hakam, 215, 302, 308

Hakim, 269

Ham, 104

al-Hamid, 218, 245, 309

Hammad, 20, 131, 231, 244, 245, 261,
262, 308, 309, 318, 325, 351, 359, 362

Hammad Ibn Abt Sulayman, 131, 296

Hammad Ibn Salamah, 231, 245, 308, 325

Hammad Ibn Zayd, 20, 244, 245, 261,
INDEX OF PERSONAL NAMES 461

Tbn Hassan al-Dustuwa’i, 308

Ibn Hind, 232, 303

Ibn al-Hubab, 308

Ibn Idris, 50, 308

Ibn ‘Isa, 329

Ibn Ishaq, 255, 422

Ibn Jabr, 34, 307

Ibn Jamil., 308

Ibn al-Jarrah, 199, 232, 308, 373

Ibn Jarir, 77, 317

Ibn Jurayj, 308, 325

Ibn Karram, 152, 375, 376, 419

Ibn Kathir, 4, 5, 7, 308

Ibn Kaysan, 81

Ibn Khalid, 309, 316

Ibn Khaytham, 308

Ibn Khuzaymah, 61, 252, 422

Ibn Kuhayl, 308

Ibn Kullab, 131, 146, 180, 218, 384, 386,
414, 416, 417, 419, 425, 426

Ibn Mahdi, 46, 309, 351

Ibn Majah, 58, 337

Ibn Makhlif, 6

Ibn Malik, 23, 26, 131, 190, 214, 308

Ibn Mansur, 123

Ibn Masrif, 308

Ibn Mas‘iid, 15, 26, 33, 37, 44, 84, 85, 91,
177, 178, 190, 201, 232, 254, 277, 285,
302, 304, 319, 325, 337, 373, 401, 402,
422, 431, 433

Ibn al-Mubarak, 303, 309

Ibn al-Mufadal, 309

Ibn Muhran, 308, 325, 383

Ibn Mujahid, 131, 156, 216

Ibn Muslim, 46, 294, 308

Ibn Muzahim, 41, 309

Ibn al-Najjar, 2

Ibn Nasr, 21, 56, 63, 178, 189, 245, 259,
270, 294, 310, 315-318, 321, 324-327,
339, 346, 351, 355, 356, 358, 365, 366,

Iblis, 38, 86, 105, 137, 161, 163, 199, 201,
203, 306, 315, 326, 371, 372, 414

Ibn ‘Abbas, 22, 27, 34, 41, 42, 44-46, 60,
74, 76, 79, 80, 94, 95, 105, 122, 177,
178, 230, 231, 254, 259, 270, 277, 286,
309, 316, 324, 325, 327, 332, 344, 345,
371, 373

Ibn Abi Ayyib, 308

Ibn Abi Dhi’b, 308, 362

Ibn Abi al-Dunya, 24, 34, 123

Ibn Abi Hatim, 218, 306

Ibn Abi Hazim., 308

Ibn Abi Layla, 308

Ibn Abi Maymunah, 262

Ibn Abt Mulaykah, 307

Ibn Abi Nujayh, 308

Ibn Abi Quhafah, 7

Tbn Abi Salih, 308

Ibn Abi Shaybah, 258, 259, 303, 327

Ibn Abi Tabib, 308

Ibn Abi Talib, 42, 68, 190, 225, 303

Ibn Abi Ziyad, 308

Ibn Anas, 41, 68, 80, 156, 307, 308, 328,
390, 416, 417

Ibn Asad, 295

Ibn Asbat, 308

Ibn Battah, 190, 293

Ibn Bashir, 309

Ibn Bilal, 308

Ibn Bishr, 308

Ibn Dharr, 214

Ibn Furak, 160, 422

Ibn Ghayyath, 308

Ibn Habban, 152

Ibn Habib, 173, 231, 241, 302

Ibn al-Hajjaj, 21, 34, 308

Ibn Hamid, 100, 359

Tbn al-Harith, 232, 309

Ibn Hartin, 232, 307, 309, 433, 434

Ibn Hassan, 190, 245, 308
462 INDEX OF PERSONAL NAMES

Ishaq, 36, 46, 57, 101, 156, 189, 190, 234,
245, 255, 295, 307, 308, 317, 324, 325,
328, 356, 379, 420, 422, 424, 431

Ishaq Ibn Ibrahim, 189, 317, 431

Ishaq Ibn Rahwiyah, 328

Ishmael, 193

Isma‘il, 4, 13, 20, 36, 131, 231, 232, 258,
308, 309, 356, 359, 360, 396, 433

Isma‘il Ibn ‘Ayyash, 231, 232

Jabir., 277

Jacob, 147, 193, 210, 265, 356, 396

Jahm, 11, 130, 132, 153, 157, 158, 160,
198, 203, 204, 213, 306, 375, 390, 394

Jahm Ibn Safwan, 11, 132, 198, 375

Jami‘ Ibn Shaddad, 232

Jahmites, 8, 11, 14, 37, 98, 100, 153-155,
157, 165, 169, 202, 211, 227, 263, 306,
347, 348, 355, 369, 374, 375, 381, 382,
389-391, 413, 419, 422

Japheth, 104

Jarir, 77, 231, 245, 271, 303, 309, 317

Jarir Ibn ‘Uthman, 231

Jash, 193

al-Jawhart, 293

al-Jazari, 190

Jesus, 80, 151, 187, 193, 207, 210, 280,
376, 396

Joseph, 122, 147

Juhaynah, 251

Jundub Ibn ‘Abd Allah, 233

al-Kalbi, 76, 375

Khalaf Ibn Hayyan, 214

Khalid, 270, 308, 309, 316

Khalid Ibn Mu‘dan, 270

al-Khalil, 70, 99, 120, 135, 266, 267, 398
al-Khallal, 346, 430-434

al-Khatabi, 351, 352

Khaythamah Ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman, 233

368, 395, 397, 399

Ibn Numayr, 308 -

Ibn al-Qasim, 328

Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, 4

Ibn Qutaybah, 44, 106, 437

Ibn Salam, 208

Ibn Salamah, 231, 245, 308, 325

Ibn Sa‘d, 234, 308, 328, 390

Ibn al-Sa’ib, 106, 308

Ibn Sa‘id, 99, 100, 146, 235, 258, 308,
309, 327, 359, 414

Ton Salih, 308

Ibn Shabarmah, 308

Ibn Shumayl, 309

Ibn Shurayh, 308

Ibn Sina, 118

Ibn Sirin, 42, 244, 279, 308, 316, 317

Ibn Sulayman al-Taymi, 309

Ibn Tawis, 324

Ibn Taymiyyah, 1-18, 24, 117

Ibn Ubay, 203, 219, 220

Ibn ‘Umar, 4, 20, 26, 49, 61, 68, 206, 214,
233, 306, 309, 332, 370, 373

Ibn ‘Umayrah, 401, 402

Ibn ‘Uyyaynah, 308, 324, 422

Ibn Wahb, 308

Ibn Yazid, 34, 189, 308

Ibn al-Zaki al-Shafi‘4, 3

“Ibn Zayd, 20, 77, 105, 221, 244, 245, 254,
261, 262, 308, 318, 325, 351, 359, 362

Ibn al-Zubayr, 216, 225, 308 .

Ibrahim, 34, 36, 46, 81, 101, 152, 189,
244-246, 302, 308, 309, 317, 356, 375,
382, 398, 431

Ibrahim Ibn Muhajir, 46

Ibrahim al-Nakh‘i, 244, 245, 302, 308,
382

Idris Ibn ‘Abd al-Karim, 376

“‘Ikrimah, 62, 106, 190, 254

Isaac, 193, 210, 396
INDEX OF PERSONAL NAMES 463

al-Mu’ammal, 309

Mu‘awiyyah, 21, 46

Mubarak Ibn Hassan, 190

Mughirah, 245, 308

Muhammad, 1-3, 5, 7-9, 13, 16-21, 24,
25, 29, 33, 34, 36, 42, 46, 48-50, 56, 63,
67,81, 89, 100-102, 107, 121, 122, 130,
131, 143, 150, 152, 158-160, 164, 174,
178, 181, 189, 190, 196, 203, 207-209,
215, 216, 218, 221, 224, 227, 231, 232,
234, 240, 245, 246, 254, 259, 261, 263,
267, 270-273, 280, 287, 293-295, 301,
306-308, 310, 315-318, 321, 323-327,
338, 339, 341, 346, 350-353, 355, 356,
358, 359, 362, 363, 365, 366, 368, 383,
387, 388, 390, 395, 398-400, 404, 410,
413, 414, 416, 422, 428, 433, 434, 443

Muhammad Abu Zahrah, 2

Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn ‘Abd al-Hadi
al-Hanbalt, |

Muhammad Ibn al-Hassan, 100, 160, 234,
433, 434

Muhammad Ibn al-Hassan Ton Harun,
433, 434

Muhammad Ibn Nasr, 21, 56, 63, 178,
189, 245, 259, 270, 294, 310, 315-318,
321, 324-327, 339, 346, 351, 355, 356,
358, 365, 366, 368, 395, 399

Muhammad Ibn Nasr al-Marwazi, 21,
245, 399

Muhammad Ibn Rafi‘, 324

Muhammad Ibn Salamah al-Harrani, 308

Muhammad Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri, 308

Muhammad Ibn Sirin, 42, 308, 317

Muhammad Ibn Tahlah, 232

Muhammad Ibn Yahya, 246, 324, 325

Muhammad Ibn Yusuf, 246, 416

Muhammad al-Zabidi, 7

al-Muhasibi, 196, 417

Mujahid, 21, 22, 34, 36, 42, 45, 46, 62,

al-Khidr, 185, 186
Khubab Ibn al-Irth, 201

Labid, 113, 145

Layth, 45, 85, 234, 295, 308, 328, 390; al-
Layth, 234, 308

Layth Ibn Abi Sulaym, 45, 295

al-Layth Ibn Sa‘d, 234, 308

Lot, 77, 266, 289, 316, 353, 388

al-Majishiin, 308

Malik, 23, 26, 68, 99, 100, 113, 131, 135,
156, 190, 214, 231, 245, 261, 302, 307,
308, 314, 328, 359, 361, 362, 374, 390,
416, 417, 422, 425

Malik Ibn Anas, 68, 156, 307, 308, 328,
390, 416, 417

al-Ma’min, 146

Mansur, 34, 123, 245, 308, 415, 417

Ma‘qal, 214-216, 218

Ma‘qal Ibn ‘Ubayd, 214

Ma‘qal Ibn ‘Ubayd Allah al-‘Abs1, 214

Mariam, 442

Al-Marwazi, 21, 245, 364, 378, 397-399,
432

Mary, 79, 187, 207

Maymiin, 214-216, 308, 383

Maymin Ibn Mahran, 214, 216

al-Maymint, 218, 258, 369, 400, 431;
Maymiini, 218, 258, 362, 369, 400, 431

Michael, 182, 187, 207, 216

Mislaq, 306

Moses, 34, 40, 75, 83, 90, 94, 95, 107,
137, 139, 154, 163, 185-187, 192, 193,
196, 199, 207, 210, 241, 267, 280, 289,
290, 371, 396

Mu‘adh, 57, 145, 241, 295, 309, 340

Mu ‘adh Ibn Asad, 295

Mu‘adh Ibn Jabal, 57, 241

Mu’ammal, 245, 261, 309
404 INDEX OF PERSONAL NAMES

270, 276, 278, 308, 383, 402
al-Qattan, 309, 422
Quraysh, 136, 202, 238, 256
Qurrah Ibn Khalid, 316
al-Qilanisi, 384

al-Rabi‘ Ibn Anas, 41, 80
al-Rabi‘ Ibn Khaytham, 308
Rahman, 195

Rahman Ibn Zayd, 105, 254
al-Razi, 118, 391

Sa‘d, 26, 57, 92, 201, 223, 234, 244, 308,

317, 328, 333, 334, 340, 361, 362, 390,

404, 405

Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqas, 57, 92, 201, 244,
317, 333, 334, 404

Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘adh, 340

Safwan, 11, 47, 132, 198, 232, 375

Safwan Ibn ‘Amr, 47, 232

Sahl Ibn ‘Abd Allah, 34, 181, 245

Salamah, 231, 245, 308, 325, 362

al-Salihi, 157, 158, 204

Salim al-Aftas, 190

Salman, 59, 94, 158

Salman al-Farisi, 94

Sam, 104, 146

Sawdah, 405

Sa ‘id, 26, 45, 79, 99, 100, 146, 235, 245,
254, 258, 277, 294, 302, 308, 309, 325,
327, 359, 383, 414

Sa‘td Ibn Jubayr, 45, 254, 294, 302, 308,
383

Shababah, 260

al-Sha‘bi, 308

al-Shafi, 3, 50, 68, 100, 113, 133, 306,
314, 369, 374, 379, 390, 391, 416, 417,
422, 425

al-Shalinji, 258, 259, 327

Shams al-Din ‘Abd al-Rahman al-

77, 85, 94, 131, 156, 177, 178, 190,
216, 246, 252, 270, 276, 295, 307

Mukhlid Ibn al-Husayn, 308

al-Muilla’i, 189

Mudatil, 42, 76, 95, 106, 123, 252, 278

Misa Ibn Harun al-Hammial, 307

Muslim, 1, 2, 5, 8-10, 15, 19-24, 27, 30,
36, 38, 46, 51, 54, 57, 58, 61, 64, 66,
70, 82-84, 91, 95, 97, 100, 102, 118,
129, 130, 133, 144-146, 153, 157, 158,
164, 166-169, 180, 189, 204, 206,
218-220, 223, 227, 230, 239, 244-247,
249, 250, 253, 254, 256, 258, 259,
261-264, 268, 270, 271, 273, 274, 277,
284, 287, 289, 292, 294, 296, 299, 301,
305, 306, 308, 309, 317, 319-327,
329-331, 333, 334, 336, 339-354,
356-364, 367-369, 373, 374, 376, 379,
381, 382, 385, 391, 394, 396-401, 403,
404, 408-411, 413, 416, 419, 428, 433,
434, 439, 440, 442

Mutalagq, 220, 253

Muzaynah, 251

Al-Muzni, 308

Al-Nabighah, 188

al-Nasr, 309; Nasr, 21, 56, 63, 178, 189,
245, 259, 270, 294, 309, 310, 315-318,
321, 324-327, 339, 346, 351, 355, 356,
358, 365, 366, 368, 395, 397, 399

Nasir al-Din al-Albani, 16

Na‘im Ibn Abi Hind, 402 _

Noah, 77, 104, 187, 201, 207, 265, 338

Pharaoh, 38, 72, 73, 95, 137, 163, 199,
201, 203, 267, 306

al-Qasim, 158, 190, 196, 307, 328, 420,
423
Qatadah, 36, 42, 76, 77, 125, 178, 252,
INDEX OF PERSONAL NAMES 465

221, 227, 232, 233, 235, 241, 295, 306,
309, 325, 327, 329, 332, 337, 338, 361,
370, 373, 383, 402, 419, 438

“Umar Ibn Habib, 241

“Umar Ibn al-Khattab, 19, 26, 49, 76, 235,
402

“Ugbah Ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Mazni, 235

Usamah, 74, 221, 308

Usamah Ibn Zayd, 221

“Uthman [bn Abt Shaybah, 303

“Uthman Ibn ‘Abd Allah, 2

al-“Uzayr, 80; ‘Uzayr, 80, 85

Wahb Ibn Jarir Ibn Hazim, 317

Wahb Ibn Munabbih, 308

Wahib, 309

Waki‘, 133, 199, 232, 261, 303, 306, 308,
324, 325, 373, 374

al-Walid, 47, 253, 294, 308, 387, 417

Yahya, 46, 235, 246, 262, 303, 306, 308,
309, 318, 324, 325, 383, 437

Yahya Ibn Abi Kathir, 262, 383

Yahya Ibn 53610, 235, 308, 309

Yahya Ibn Yahya, 318

Ya‘qub, 216

Yazid, 34, 76, 189, 231, 232, 234, 235,
308, 309, 402

Yazid Ibn Haran, 232, 9

Yazid Ibn Ibrahim, 309

Yazid Ibn ‘Umayrah, 402

Yazid Ibn Zuray‘, 235, 309

Yunis, 34, 308

Yusuf, 17, 70, 95, 204, 246, 305, 308,
325, 356, 390, 416

Yusuf Ibn Muhran, 325

Zabidi, 17, 245
al-Zajjaj, 36, 37, 43, 437
Zayd, 20, 74, 77, 105, 149, 220, 221, 234,

51200151, 2

Shaqiq, 303

Shamik, 127, 232, 245, 308, 362, 383

Shaykh Taj al-Din al-Fazari, 3

Shaykh Husayn Yusuf al-Ghazal, 17

al-Siddiq, 33, 70, 114, 125, 204, 237

Shihab al-Din, 2

Shu‘ayb, 40, 201

Shu ‘bah, 34, 308, 316

Shurayh Ibn “Ubayd, 232

Shurayk, 359

Sibawayh, 99, 373

Sitt al-Mun ‘im, 3

Subayyigh Ibn “Asal, 97

al-Suddi, 36, 251, 278

Sufyan, 24, 46, 99, 232, 246, 260, 261,
307, 308, 324, 325, 328, 383, 433

Sufyan Ibn ‘Uyayynah, 24, 433

Sufyan Ibn “‘Uyyaynah, 308, 324

Sulayman, 42, 46, 70, 74, 77, 131, 234,
235, 258, 272, 296, 308, 309, 340, 351,
387, 430, 439

Sulayman al-Taymi, 308, 309

Sulayman Ibn Harb, 430

Suwayyid, 261

Talaq Ibn Habib, 173

Tawius, 308, 324, 325, 363, 432

al-Thawn, 99, 307, 308, 383, 416, 422,
433

Thabit, 68, 308

Tha ‘lab, 437

Thamid, 39

al-Tirmidhi, 105, 329

“Ubadah, 203, 329

“Uday Ibn Hatim, 79

“Ubayd Ibn “Umayr, 22, 269, 307

“Umar, 2-4, 19, 20, 26, 29, 47-49, 61, 68,
76, 97, 149, 204, 206, 213, 214, 218,
466 INDEX OF PERSONAL NAMES

244, 245, 254, 261, 262, 308, 313, 318,
325, 351, 359, 362

Zayd Ibn Arqam, 220

Zayd Ibn Aslam, 74, 105

Zayd Ibn ‘Ubayd Allah al-Yazni, 234

Zayn al-Din, 7

Zaynab, 193

al-Zibirqan., 298

Zubayd, 232

Zuhayr, 16, 308

Zuhayr al-Shawish, 16

al-Zuhri, 46, 214, 246, 261, 295, 308, 368,
383, 400,401 —
INDEX OF ARABIC TERMS

bid‘ah, 97, 146

al-Bidayah wal-Nihayah, 3, 4

birr (piety), 35, 175, 177, 189, 190, 193,
194, 196, 295, 316, 327, 348; al-birr,
35, 175, 193, 194, 295, 316, 327

Caliph, 4, 26, 33, 42, 96, 114, 146, 214,
383, 431

dalal, 176, 177

darajat, 20, 345

dhikr, remembrance, 183

dhunub, sins, 175

din (religion), 1-4, 6, 7, 16, 48, 54, 168,
189, 196, 268, 359, 366; al-din, 1-4, 7,
16, 48, 168, 359

al-fahsha’ (abomination), 177

fajir (man of bad conduct), 36

fajr (dawn), 210

fasad (corruption), 94; al-fasad, , 94

fasiq, 63, 162, 253, 254, 326, 328; al-
fasiq, 63

al-fasiqun (the grave sinners), 259

fasl (chapter), 16, 18

fatwas (formal legal opinions), 7

fay’ (booty), 61

fi‘l (action), 112

al-Furqan, 196

al-fussaq, 262, 166

fustiq (sin), 56, 72, 253, 326; al-fusiiq, 72

al-ghadab (wrath), 176

al-ghayy (transgression), 176

ghibah (backbiting), 25

ghulul (dishonest person), 48

al-Abrar, 179, 194

ahadith sahtah (sound sayings), 23

ahl al-Bid‘ah, 146

ahl sifah, 201

Alexandria, 6

Allah, 2, 5,9, 10, 12-15, 18-100, 102-107,
109, 112-117, 120-127, 131-134,
137-168, 170-212, 214-242, 244-261,
263-284, 286-295, 297-373, 375-380,
382-385, 387-391, 393-407, 409-411,
413-422, 424-443

al-Alwah (Tablets), 241

‘amal (work), 10, 11, 149, 177, 245, 326;
al-‘amal, 177, 245

al-a‘mal al-zahirah, explicit deeds, 23

-amr, 109, 113, 144

al-Ansar (the Helpers), 55, 209

al-‘Aqabah, 238

al-‘aql, 38, 386

Al-A‘rab, 10

asad, 101, 125, 252, 294, 295, 302

‘Asqalan, 416

awliya’, protectors, 183

Ayyubids, 5

Azarigites, 383

Badr, 404, 441

Baghdad, 4, 48

al-baght (injustice), 177

Basrah, 20, 23, 99, 235, 245, 295, 308,
373, 374, 422

al-batin, 24, 110

al-Bayan, 138, 196, 286

al-Bayt al-‘Atiq (The Ancient House), 280
468 INDEX OF ARABIC TERMS

al-ihalah, 123

Ihsan, 128, 266, 302, 350, 352, 354, 408

ijma‘ (consensus of opinion), 53, 54

al-ijtiba’ (choosing or election), 176

ijtihad (reasoning ability), 341

Ilham, inspiration, 107

“ilm, 11, 200, 286, 424

Imam (ruler), 264

Iman, 1, 3, 7-29, 31, 32, 34, 36, 41, 45-49,
51, 54-56, 59, 60, 63, 64, 72, 76, 79, 81,
85, 96, 98, 100, 101, 121, 123, 128,
131-136, 138-144, 150, 152-161, 163,
165-172, 174, 177-181, 189-194,
196-200, 202-207, 209-211, 213-216,
218, 221-225, 228-233, 235-237,
239-250, 254, 257-260, 262-270,
272-275, 280-283, 286-289, 291-297,
299, 301-307, 310, 311, 315-325,
327-348, 350-360, 362, 363, 365-368,
375-378, 381-383, 385, 387-391,
394-403, 407-414, 416-418, 420-425,
429-435, 437

in sha’a Allah, 20, 24, 25, 28, 43, 47, 55,
132, 138, 330, 346, 413

igrar (verbal confession), 134, 135, 157,
245, 259, 268, 291, 295, 322, 385; al-
igrar, 245

iradah, 119

Islam, 1-4, 7-10, 18-25, 27-29, 51, 53, 54,
57, 58, 62, 83, 96, 99, 118, 121, 122,
128, 132, 135, 150, 153, 155, 165-169,
172, 176, 179, 202, 203, 206, 210, 212,
217, 220, 225, 226, 235, 239, 244-253,
256-259, 261-275, 278, 282, 284,
286-289, 292, 295, 297, 299, 301-305,
309, 312, 313, 315, 317-320, 326-333,
335, 337, 341-345, 349-369, 374-377,
379, 382, 383, 389, 390, 394-401, 405,
407-411, 415, 416, 419, 420

Islamic, 1, 2, 4-6, 8-14, 27, 50, 67, 74,

ghusl, ablution, 206

habbash, 127

habbat khardal, 27 —

habl, 54

hadagah, 22, 115, 9

hadith, 1, 2, 10, 13, 19-27, 29, 34, 36, 37,
41-50, 54, 57, 59-62, 64, 68, 74, 78, 79,
81, 84, 85, 94, 99, 100, 105, 117,
126-132, 145, 147, 150, 152, 178, 189,
190, 197, 210, 211, 214-217, 220, 225,
230-232, 235, 237, 243-246, 254,
256-260, 268-273, 287, 289, 293-295,
301, 303, 304, 306, 307, 316-318, 325,
327-334, 336, 337, 346, 347, 349-355,
358-364, 373, 374, 376, 378, 383, 387,
395, 399, 401, 402, 409-411, 414, 417,
420, 422, 426, 428, 430, 434, 437

hajj (pilgrimage), 21

Hamat, 5

hamawiyyah, 5, 6

hanbalite, 5; hanbalites, 100, 390, 414

haqiqah, 12, 13, 98, 100

haqq, 25, 49, 54

Harran, 1, 2, 9, 28

haya’ (modesty), 26

Hijaz, 5, 307, 373

hijrah, 12, 21, 22, 269, 273, 406

hikmah, 52, 60

al-huda, 53, 176, 196
al-Hudaybiyyah, 69; Hudaybiyyah, 69,

١ 2 236,251,252, 255, 438

hudid (divine ordinances), 346

Hujjat al-Wada‘ (farewell pilgrimage),
349

al-‘ibadah, worship, 173

Ibadiyyah, 330; al-Ibadiyyah, 330

Iblis, 38, 86, 105, 137, 161, 163, 199, 201,
203, 306, 315, 326, 371, 372, 414

idafah, 106, 111, 123
INDEX OF ARABIC TERMS 469

khalq (creation), 370

khamr (wine), 127

Kharijites, 8, 10, 18, 157, 166, 169, 211,
212, 225, 230, 231, 246, 248, 262, 264,
285, 287, 297, 323, 329, 347, 350, 374,
379, 381, 391, 398, 399

khawf (fear), 33, 293

khayr (Goodness), 196

Khazar, 67

Khurasan, 246, 309, 318, 376, 378

khushi‘, humility, 42, 43

Kitab, 1-3, 7-9, 12, 13, 15-18, 21, 28, 34,
46, 48, 49, 52, 68, 99, 123, 138, 152,
156, 178, 190, 196, 213, 214, 232, 233,
245, 259, 260, 293, 316, 325, 417, 437;
al-kitab, 2, 16, 17, 52, 99, 196

Kifah, 190, 203, 245, 296, 308, 309, 317

Kian, 186, 309

kufr (unbelief), 15, 56, 65, 72, 254, 292,
299, 322; al-kufr, 72

Kullabite, 15, 414, 417; Kullabites, 348,
381

law, 2, 3, 20-22, 42, 46, 49, 50, 68, 107,
115, 116, 133, 153, 155, 157, 160, 161,
169, 186, 188, 200, 203, 286, 297, 300,
341, 387, 389, 394, 409, 419, 420,
422-424

libas (garment), 120, 121

lughawiyyah (linguistic), 107

mabda?’ al-lughat, 13, 102

mabda’ al-lughat (origin of languages),
13

madhab, 2, 3, 48-50, 245; madhabs, 4, 6,
50

Madinah, 23, 68, 209, 214, 220-223, 235,
238, 252, 254-256, 274, 308, 329, 336,
362, 383, 409

Magians, 67, 161

100, 114-116, 123, 133, 136, 142, 153,
155-158, 160, 161, 169, 180, 183, 184,
186, 203, 224, 226, 227, 239, 253, 270,
271, 284, 296, 297, 300, 307, 309, 314,
320, 321, 323, 325, 326, 329, 331, 333,
347, 351, 357, 374, 376, 380, 382, 383,
385, 389-391, 394, 409, 419, 420, 423,
424

Islamic law, 115, 116, 133, 153, 155, 157,
160, 161, 169, 186, 203, 300, 389, 394,
409, 419, 420, 423, 424

isnad (chain of transmission), 47, 49

istilahiyyah, 102

istithan’ (exception), 132, 317

istithna’ (making the exception), 169

al-istithna’, 259

al-istihza’, 122

ithm (sin), 175

jahl, 37, 300

Jahmite, 10, 155, 385, 389, 390, 393;
Jahmites, 8, 11, 14, 37, 98, 100,
153-155, 157, 165, 169, 202, 211, 227,
263, 306, 347, 348, 355, 369, 374, 375,
381, 382, 389-391, 413, 419, 422

jihad, 21, 22, 30, 126, 212, 236, 269, 271,
273, 275, 283, 404, 406, 410

al-Jum‘ah (Friday prayer), 152

Ka‘bah, 161, 263, 280, 298, 373, 438

kabirah (grave sin), 45

kaffarah, 314

kalam (speech), 144, 145, 149, 150, 180

kalimah (testimony), 112, 224, 261, 263,
264, 317, 400, 401; al-kalimah, 224

Karramite, 143, 144, 152, 205, 223, 382,
386; Karramites, 11,98, 152, 153, 157,
166, 169, 347, 348, 378, 381, 391, 424

khabar (report), 144, 386

khabith, 191
470 INDEX OF ARABIC TERMS

432

al-mushrikun, 66, 68

Musnad, 2, 23, 235, 303

al-mutaqun, 194

Mu‘tazilite, 102, 390; Mu‘tazilites, 8, 10,
12, 13, 99, 102, 130, 133, 157, 166,
167, 169, 180, 230,231, 246, 248, 262,
297, 328, 347, 348, 369, 375, 391, 398,
399, 408, 419

mutlaq (absolute), 14, 18, 177, 379

muwafat (the state of belief at the time of
one’s death), 15, 421, 422; al-muwafat,
15, 420, 422

Nabatean, 117

nabith (wine), 127

nafs (se/f), 316; al-nafs, 145,147
al-na‘im (the pleasure), 57

Najd, 206, 256

Najjarites, 369

nifaq (hypocrisy), 65

nikah (marriage), 406

al-nuhbah, 27

qadar, 19

Qadarite, 370, 373, 375; Qadarites, 370,
374, 375

qadhf (false accusation), 97

al-qadhif (the slanderer), 326

garinah, 107, 115; al-qarinah, 107

garinah lafizyyah, 115

al-qaryah, 123, 124

al-qiyas (analogy), 126

qawl (saying, speech, or utterence), 10,
11, 103, 131, 144, 145, 147-149, 152,
157, 180, 181, 218, 400 al-qawl, 147,
157

Qiblah, 132, 166, 169, 218, 223, 280, 281,
328, 331, 409, 419

qiyas (analogy), 126, 374, 380

majaz, (literal and figurative), 12, 13, 98-
101

al-makr, 122

Maliki, 6, 48, 68, 100, 387

Malikites, 390, 414

man‘ (prohibition), 293

manzilah bayna al-manzilatayn, 12, 248,
328

ma‘rifah (knowledge), 245, 268; al-
ma‘rifah, 245

ma ‘rif (good), 14

ma‘ruf (kindness), 6

al-ma‘siyyah (disobedience), 72

matniq, 103

al-maytah, 58

mihan (trials), 3, 4

mihnah (ordeal), 146

minor shirk (association), 84

Mi‘raj, 300

muhajir, 21, 22, 46

muhsin, 10, 20, 24, 48, 166, 266, 350; al-
muhsin, 48

al-muhsinin, 24

mujmal, 163, 379, 380

mukabarah (haughtiness), 143

mu’min, 10, 14, 20, 24, 132, 152, 413

al-mu’minin, 25, 28

munafiq (hypocrite), 142

munkar, 14, 173, 177, 257; al-munkar,
177

mugayyad, conditioned, 14, 18, 90, 237

Murji’ite, 10, 133, 199, 204, 213, 214,
232, 258, 260, 375, 378, 382, 383, 385,
390; Murji’ites, 8, 10, 11, 14, 63, 98,
127, 130, 133, 143, 153, 156, 165, 191,
192, 200, 203-205, 210, 213-217, 224,
230, 231, 262, 263, 287-289, 297, 306,
310, 329, 330, 345, 347, 348, 355, 364,
366, 368, 369, 374-376, 378, 381-385,
391, 394, 399, 402, 413, 416, 422, 430,
INDEX OF ARABIC TERMS 471

Shahadatan, 165

Shahadat&an (two confessions), 166, 165

al-shahid, 70, 71

al-shakkakah (the doubters), 15, 413

shakk (doubt), 15

shar‘ UIslamic law), 160, 161, 286

al-shari‘ (the Legislator), 145, 161, 200

Shari‘ah (/slamic law) 4, 161, 409

sharik, 127, 232, 245, 308, 362, 383

shar‘tyyah, 7, 107

shirk, 84, 325-327

Shiites, 8, 10, 348, 374, 381

al-sidq (truthfulness), 177

sirat Mustaqim (Straight Path), 196

sufi, 8, 34, 138

al-sukhriyyah (scorn), 122

al-Sunan, 46, 49, 145, 190, 259, 362;
sunan, 21, 46, 49, 145, 190, 259, 362,
369

Sunnah, 4, 6, 8, 9, 11, 49, 54, 117, 118,
128, 130, 132-134, 140-142, 146, 154,
162, 165, 167-169, 179-181, 183, 189,
198, 218, 225, 226, 239, 241, 245, 247,
259, 282, 284, 286, 295, 304, 307, 316,
329, 345, 347, 350, 352-354, 366, 368,
369, 376, 378, 379, 382, 385, 394, 398,
399, 408, 419, 430, 433

Tabuk, 220

tafsir, 2, 22, 34, 51, 130, 150, 160, 286,
302, 352

taghit, idols, 277

taharah (purification), 152

takdhib, 144, 292

talaqatul-wajh (cheerfulness), 23

al-Tamhid, 133, 327

taqwa (piety or righteousness) 173, 175,
177, 189, 194, 196, 348; al-taqwa, 173,
175

tasdiq, 8, 11, 15, 24, 45, 118, 128,

Qur’an, 1, 2, 4, 6-9, 13, 14, 18, 20, 24,
26-29, 32-34, 36-38, 41-43, 45, 46, 49,
51, 54, 57, 60, 62, 65-68, 70, 71, 73, 74,
81, 83, 84, 86, 88-90, 92, 94, 96,
99-101, 104, 105, 109, 112, 117, 118,
122, 123, 125-131, 133-137, 139-141,
143-146, 148, 152-154, 158, 159, 163,
165, 167, 169, 170, 178, 181, 182, 188,
189, 193, 196, 198, 199, 203, 205, 209,
211, 216, 220, 222-224, 227, 228, 232,
233, 235-239, 241, 242, 244, 245, 249,
258, 271, 283, 286-289, 291, 294, 295,
299, 300, 304, 307, 325, 335, 339, 345,
349-354, 356, 358, 362, 364, 368, 370,
374, 376, 378-382, 388-391, 394, 403,
409, 417-419, 423, 427, 437, 438; al-
Qur’an, 13, 81, 99, 196, 437

Quraysh, 136, 202, 238, 256

Qurayshites, 256, 257

Rafidites, 130, 383

Ramadan, 19, 20, 25, 29, 211, 213, 263,
270-272, 302, 313, 316, 323, 327, 329,
359, 388

riya’ (Aypocrisy), 326

al-rubibiyyah, 79, 80

al-sa‘at, 22

Sabians, 28, 67, 266

sadaqah (alms), 22, 115, 379

sahih al-Bukhan, 91, 373, 426, 428, 439

sahth Muslim, 19, 38, 57, 58, 64, 70, 84,
91, 219, 220, 230, 239, 244, 284, 336,
340, 373, 428, 439

sariq (thief), 127

Shafi, 3, 4, 48, 50, 68, 100, 113, 131,
133, 217, 218, 306, 314, 328, 369, 374,
379, 387, 390, 391, 416, 417, 422, 425

Shafi‘ites, 390, 414

shahadah, 14, 317, 413
472 INDEX OF ARABIC TERMS

133-139, 141, 143, 144, 146, 156-165,
168, 198-200, 203, 205, 213, 218, 268,
288, 289, 291-293, 295-297, 320, 322,
323, 340, 347, 352-355, 375, 376, 381,
382, 384-386, 389, 390, 413, 420, 421,
423, 424, 432

tashbih (anthropomorphism), 5

tawakkul, 196

tawali (turning away), 73, 154

tawhid, 191, 196, 326

ta’wil, 51, 364, 0

tayyib, 191, 387

Thamid, 9

tilawah (recitation), 177

Torah, 74, 178, 182, 187, 208, 267

tuhir (purification), 48

Uhud, 281, 303, 334

al-‘ulim al-‘aqliyyah (rational thinking),
8

umm al-Qur’an (the opening chapter), 29

Ummah, 5, 26

‘Umrah, 21, 273

“urfiyyah (conventional), 107

wiladyah (friendship), 426

Zabur, 371

al-zahir (outward), 110

Zaydites, 133

zindiq, 223

ziyarat al-qubir (visits to tombs), 7
Zoroastrian, 373
INDEX OF ENGLISH TERMS

apostate, 297, 419

apostates, 96, 226, 287, 297, 404

Arab, 12, 20, 30, 32, 86, 117, 133, 135,
142, 150, 252, 361; Arabs, 10, 13, 27,
67, 104, 106, 109, 112, 117, 123,
134-138, 140, 144-146, 154, 165, 167,
192, 201, 221, 222, 244, 246-249, 251,
254-256, 258, 263, 275, 286, 299, 304,
317, 339, 341, 357, 362, 365, 369, 403,
437

Arabic, 2, 3, 15, 18, 19, 31, 98, 100, 102,
104, 106-108, 112, 117, 120, 123, 127,
128, 133-139, 142-145, 150, 153, 169,
288, 291, 293, 310, 352, 437; Arabic
language, 2, 100, 108, 117, 120, 127,
128, 133-135, 138, 145, 153, 169, 310,
352

Ascension Night, 300

assent, 8, 11, 15, 24, 45, 118, 128, 131,
133-140, 143, 144, 152, 153, 156, 157,
165, 198-200, 203, 205, 213, 218, 240,
241, 268, 288, 289, 291-296, 305, 306,
310, 319, 320, 322, 328, 367, 376, 377,
384, 385, 413, 420, 422, 423

astray, 18, 35, 40, 52, 81, 85, 118, 176, ©
177, 179, 183, 284, 336, 425

atheists, 130, 223, 420

atonement, 118, 222, 313, 314, 440, 442

Attributes, 5, 17, 53, 54, 73, 74, 102, 156,
160, 161, 164-166, 195, 196, 208, 209,
221, 222, 226, 234, 237, 240, 248, 267,
296, 309, 320, 330, 388-291, 393, 394,
399, 414, 417

ablution, 30, 48, 206, 299

abomination, 177, 179

abrogation, 60, 67

Abrogator, 196

absolute, 14, 15, 18, 55, 58, 60, 64, 71-73,
75, 84-86, 89, 92, 94, 98, 99, 108, 109,
111-114, 116-118, 120, 128, 129, 134,
139-141, 144, 147, 149, 151, 167, 170,
172-177, 179, 180, 184, 185, 189, 194,
207, 210, 230, 237, 246, 247, 249, 263,
266, 267, 274, 282, 289, 296, 298, 300,
301, 312, 342, 344, 347, 352, 362, 364,
374, 379, 380, 392, 393, 402, 429,
431-433

adultery, 45, 76, 84, 287, 293, 301, 305,
347, 431

adversary, 63

aggression, 175

Almighty, 39, 44, 113, 145, 160, 195,
208, 314, 355, 394, 399, 425, 426

alms, 19, 22, 115, 167, 253, 298, 301, 379

analogy, 25, 97, 126, 127, 130, 374, 380

Ancient House, 280

Angel, 10, 19, 20, 70, 106, 128, 273, 360,
361, 369, 373; Angels, 14, 19, 21, 29,
65, 88, 89, 98, 104-106, 123, 158, 163,
174, 175, 182, 184, 187, 189, 191, 193,
207, 210, 236, 257, 265, 268, 270-272,
274, 294, 295, 299, 305, 310, 311, 316,
319, 324, 330, 331, 335, 339, 344, 350,
353, 361, 371, 395-397, 432

Angel Gabriel, 19, 20, 70, 128, 360, 361,
369
474 INDEX OF ENGLISH TERMS

303, 305, 318-320, 322, 323, 328, 329,
334-336, 338-341, 343-346, 348-351,
357, 358, 363, 364, 367, 372, 388, 392,
394, 396, 398, 401-404, 409, 411, 412,
421, 422, 426-428, 430, 436, 437

blameworthy, 116, 145, 185, 188, 340,
356, 397, 435

blaspheme, 322

blasphemous, 11, 151, 201, 226, 282

blasphemy, 79, 218

Book of Allah, 44, 80, 91, 188, 266, 282,
294, 401

booty, 61, 436

Brotherhood, 349

Caliph, 4, 26, 33, 42, 96, 114, 146, 214,
383, 431

chain of transmission, 21, 47, 49, 246,
295, 307

charity, 19, 29, 48, 57, 61, 77, 122, 172,
175, 207, 234, 269, 342, 379, 389, 431,
435

Christian, 5, 28, 68, 76, 79, 151, 416;
Christians, 28, 32, 67, 76, 83, 85, 151,
161, 168, 183, 202, 203, 224, 238, 266,
312, 400, 413

Citadel, 6, 7

Clear Declaration, 196

command, 23, 25, 26, 29, 30, 62, 66,
72-75, 85, 113, 116, 134, 144, 163, 165,
173, 175, 182, 184-186, 201, 236, 253,
263, 264, 270, 271, 276, 279, 280, 292,
300, 302, 316, 326, 343, 349, 370, 394,
398, 406, 429, 430, 438, 442

Companions, 8, 9, 12, 21-23, 26, 36, 38,
42, 50, 51, 60, 61, 68, 77, 79, 91, 99,
116, 117, 126, 129, 130, 136, 137, 146,
149, 177, 178, 197, 207, 214, 216, 218,
220, 224-226, 230-233, 236, 241, 262,
288, 303, 304, 306, 307, 314, 319, 321,

backbiting, 25, 253

belief, 10, 11, 15, 18, 19, 21, 24-27,
29-31, 33, 40, 41, 43, 44, 51-53, 55, 56,
58, 63-66, 81, 82, 85, 91, 92, 98, 118,
121, 122, 128-130, 132-134, 137-144,
146, 149, 152-169, 174-178, 180, 181,
183, 190, 191, 193, 194, 196-200,
202-214, 216, 217, 222-228, 231,
233-238, 240-243, 245-250, 252-254,
256-265, 267-269, 272-276, 278, 279,
281, 283, 289, 291-299, 301-307, 309,
310, 315-318, 320-323, 327-332,
334-336, 340-348, 351-355, 357-365,
367-369, 375-378, 381, 382, 384-386,
388-396, 399-403, 411, 414-417,
419-424, 427, 430-434, 436

believer, 9-11, 14, 15, 18, 20-23, 26, 27,
30-33, 37, 38, 41, 45, 46, 55, 56, 61-64,
73, 84, 91, 92, 129, 132, 137, 139-143,
149, 152-154, 156, 159, 161-164,
166-169, 171, 186, 190, 191, 193, 198,
200, 203, 204, 206, 209, 211, 215, 216,
218, 222-226, 235, 239, 240, 242-247,
249-251, 253, 256-264, 266, 268, 269,
274, 276, 277, 282, 283, 289, 292, 296,
302-306, 317-322, 327-331, 333, 334,
340-343, 345-348, 350-354, 356-359,
361-365, 367-369, 376-378, 381, 385,
388-390, 392, 393, 397, 398, 400-403,
408-410, 413-416, 418-422, 424, 426,
427, 430-435

believers, 12, 22, 23, 25, 27, 28, 30-33,
35, 38, 41-43, 53-58, 60-63, 66, 77, 81,
95, 116, 122, 128, 139-141, 143,
152-154, 156, 163, 166, 170-172, 174,
183, 184, 192-194, 198, 202, 204, 206,
207, 209, 211, 213, 219, 220, 222, 225,
228, 229, 235-238, 242, 243, 246-254,
256, 258, 261-263, 265, 267, 272, 274,
276-279, 281-283, 287, 289-291, 294,
INDEX OF ENGLISH TERMS 475

210, 234, 239, 244, 248, 249, 254, 257,
264-266, 268, 269, 273, 274, 279, 287,
298, 301, 305, 307, 310-313, 315, 318,
321, 322, 330-333, 335, 336, 338-348,
351, 352, 360, 361, 365, 372, 385,
394-396, 403, 404, 406-409, 425-427,
431

definitive, 53, 198, 361, 424

derision, 122, 123

desert Arabs, 10, 27, 154, 165, 167, 192,
221, 222, 244, 246-249, 251, 254-256,
258, 263, 275, 304, 317, 339, 341, 357,
362, 365, 369

devil, 38, 85, 137, 161, 199, 201; devils,
330

disbelief, 144, 146, 154, 157, 199, 202,
227, 256, 275, 292, 303, 355

disciples, 26, 80, 267, 268, 309, 390, 396,
416, 417, 422

dishonest, 48

disobedience, 56, 63, 72-74, 80, 147, 173,
177, 198, 233, 234, 256, 263, 264, 317,
326, 328, 347, 436

Divine, 102, 160, 195, 227, 248, 249, 263,
265, 274, 309, 330, 346, 370, 373, 374,
389, 390, 393, 399, 414, 417, 438, 441

divine ordinances, 346

doctrine, 7, 8, 132, 146, 158, 159, 217,
330, 374, 382, 389, 420, 422, 424

doing good, 63, 96, 128, 284, 298, 313,
407

doubters, 15, 413

drunkard, 27, 341, 345, 363

elements, 106, 118, 377, 391, 423

enlightenment, 355

error, 11, 17, 45, 86, 117, 123, 126, 127,
153, 167, 173, 176, 177, 200, 205, 213,
224, 226, 231, 243, 278, 284, 355, 380,
382-384, 389, 394, 419, 420, 442

323, 325, 328, 333, 336, 340-342, 345,
347, 349, 356, 363-365, 368, 373, 379,
380, 391, 399, 402, 407, 414, 420, 421,
433, 443

condition, 6, 31, 58, 60, 90, 97, 114, 119,
124, 128, 139, 161, 224, 236, 252, 255,
258, 271, 313-317, 327, 328, 330, 352,
359, 366, 388, 407, 415, 417, 418, 421,
422, 424; conditions, 58, 114, 141, 157,
160-162, 268, 305, 377, 378, 423

conditional, 14, 31, 91, 132, 172,
184-186, 413, 427, 437, 438, 440

Conditioned, 14, 18, 73, 90, 92, 98, 99,
109, 112, 114, 116, 118, 119, 121, 125,
126, 128, 129, 134, 139, 172, 179, 237,
298-300, 432

conduct, 1, 26, 36, 97, 120, 141, 178, 211,
227, 251, 304, 341, 427

confession, 134, 135, 156, 157, 196, 240,
259, 263, 268, 271, 295, 306, 316, 320,
322, 385, 389; confessions, 166, 168

corruption, 94-96, 146, 199, 406

Creator, 163, 195, 419

creed, 6, 166-168, 400

Criterion, 107, 182, 196, 280

damnation, 102

Day of Judgement, 19, 65, 67, 77, 78

Day of Resurrection, 104, 113, 123, 343,
344, 346, 415, 425

dead meat, 58

deception, 37, 122, 123

declaration, 115, 134, 150, 189, 193, 196,
204, 228, 384, 385, 388, 441, 442

deed, 10, 29, 44, 56, 57, 96, 149, 172,
201, 231, 234, 243, 276, 293, 305, 322,
331, 377, 396, 411, 412, 427; deeds, 1,
8, 10, 18, 21, 23, 24, 33, 43-45, 56-58,
60, 63, 80, 84, 90, 91, 96, 97, 134, 149,
150, 154, 161, 172-174, 179, 180, 193,
476 INDEX OF ENGLISH TERMS

436, 438, 441

fear of Allah, 34, 36-38, 41, 160, 173,
196, 305, 306, 322, 395, 429

fearing Allah, 174, 175, 200, 355

Fire, 38, 58, 66, 73, 75, 77, 78, 80, 81,
123, 162, 184, 194, 236, 276, 315, 320,
326, 344-348, 388

forbidden, 7, 33, 34, 58, 83, 129, 142,
147, 149, 173, 175, 184-187, 205, 215,
222, 224, 226, 239, 243, 276, 288, 296,
305, 371, 398, 406, 411, 413, 418, 421

forgiveness, 18, 75, 90, 121, 210, 221,
225, 255, 266, 277, 294, 339, 342, 399,
410, 411, 425

fornication, 46, 84, 96, 127, 317, 318,
321, 322, 327-329, 353, 362-364, 369

fornicator, 27, 45-47, 141, 171, 215, 250,
258, 259, 262, 316, 318-321, 327, 328,
341, 352, 353, 362, 363, 369

forsaker, 22

forsaking, 21

Friday prayer, 50, 152, 271

Garden, 34, 342, 370
garment, 47, 120, 121

‘God, 15, 18-20, 23, 25, 26, 29, 30, 74,

79-82, 84, 87-89, 98, 145, 151, 163,
176, 179, 189, 195, 204, 214, 215, 221,
224, 263, 264, 271-273, 287, 301, 316,
317, 321, 323, 329, 353, 359, 376, 388,
389, 400, 413

Godhead, 389

Good work, 191, 196

Goodness, 62, 196, 271, 284, 298

Gospel, 74, 182, 310

grave sin, 45, 247, 322, 383

grave sinners, 259

Guidance, 34, 35, 39, 52, 53, 58, 67, 72,
82, 87, 91-93, 176, 179, 180, 182, 183,
196, 201, 208, 209, 237, 238, 250, 267,

eternity, 11, 91, 157, 342, 392, 414, 415,
418

evidence, 8, 53, 84, 105, 106, 113, 130,
133, 137, 138, 142, 143, 152, 153, 159,
162, 163, 167, 168, 171, 202, 211, 223,
234, 235, 244, 255, 256, 258, 260, 272,
282, 283, 286, 289, 316, 326, 333, 352,
355-357, 359, 360, 363-365, 369, 371,
381, 382, 386, 388, 389, 396, 398, 405,

"423, 424

evil, 14, 19, 21, 31, 36-38, 44, 45, 52, 56,
58, 61-66, 74, 75, 77, 84, 86, 91, 92, 94,
124, 172, 173, 190, 194, 197, 234-237,
253, 254, 265, 270, 273, 274, 280,
282-285, 288, 298, 305, 311-313, 330,
343, 344, 348, 372, 378, 399, 425, 434

evil deeds, 21, 91, 173, 254, 298, 312,
348, 372

evil one, 52, 234, 284

exception, 14, 15, 25, 132, 138, 148, 155,
169, 185, 228, 258-261, 264, 317, 364,
365, 400, 413, 415-424, 429-438,
440-443

faith, 1, 11, 15, 17, 18, 76, 92, 154, 165,
168, 192, 195, 224, 244, 246, 248, 251,
257, 290, 304, 360, 362, 369, 414, 415

Faithful, 29, 216, 319, 326, 392, 403, 409

farewell pilgrimage, 349

fasting, 20, 25, 29, 51, 80, 128, 211, 218,
226, 258, 264, 296, 300-302, 313, 316,
323, 338, 357, 388, 399, 409, 423-425

fear, 28, 32-38, 41-43, 45, 55, 59, 84, 88,
92, 96, 120, 121, 137, 142, 143, 146,
147, 160, 173-175, 179, 196, 202, 228,
235-237, 240-242, 245, 246, 249, 253,
255-257, 261, 262, 266-269, 272, 274,
283, 290, 293, 304-306, 315, 319, 322,
335, 342, 343, 349, 358, 366, 383, 395,
403, 404, 410, 411, 427, 429, 431, 435,
INDEX OF ENGLISH TERMS 477

humility, 41-45, 123, 200, 268, 322, 358

hypocrisy, 30, 43, 55, 65, 66, 84, 95, 181,
209, 220-224, 226, 244, 275, 280-282,
299, 303, 304, 309, 326, 331, 340, 343,
344, 346, 347, 354, 404, 411

hypocrite, 38, 44, 66, 91, 142, 152-154,
209, 216, 219-225, 247-249, 254, 257,
268, 277, 280, 299, 303-305, 331, 339,
343, 345, 346, 354, 388, 407-409, 411;
hypocrites, 38, 41, 44, 52, 66, 86, 94,
141, 151, 153, 191-193, 203, 209, 216,
218-225, 228, 244-251, 253, 255, 256,
262, 274-278, 280-283, 297, 303, 304,
339, 343-346, 358, 366, 372, 403, 404,
407, 408

idols, 156, 161, 198, 277, 414

ignorance, 36, 37, 83, 138, 160, 176, 198,
202, 234, 251, 280, 323, 381, 390, 442

injustice, 122, 177, 325

innovation, 97, 125, 181, 243, 382

inspiration, 107, 148, 179

intercession, 86, 88-90, 132, 133, 137,
194, 230, 246, 263, 346, 347, 428

interpretation, I, 2, 5, 8, 13, 25, 34, 36,
41, 51, 95, 100, 105, 124, 125, 127,
128, 130, 136, 146, 147, 155, 157-159,
161, 172, 178, 180, 181, 184, 186, 198,
199, 226, 250, 253, 254, 270, 280, 288,
309, 310, 316, 317, 334, 352, 360, 364,
374, 379, 380, 392, 397, 408, 438

inward, 24, 39, 71, 110, 139, 144, 148,
151, 154, 155, 158, 163, 164, 191, 197,
228, 331, 339, 353-355, 361, 365, 375,
376, 384, 385, 388, 394, 399, 407

inward belief, 24, 144, 158, 164, 355,
361, 384, 394, 399

Islamic law, 115, 116, 133, 153, 155, 157,
160, 161, 169, 186, 203, 300, 389, 394,
409, 419, 420, 423, 424

283, 285, 290, 335, 336, 338, 339, 355,
356, 372

habitual sihner, 162, 257

Hajj, 149

Healing Balm, 196

heated stone, 79

Heaven, 70, 146, 251, 266, 271, 285, 370,
371, 398, 429; heavens, 86-89, 106,
163, 182, 195, 199, 234, 251, 373

Hebrew, 107

Hebrews, 106

Hell, 11, 12, 40, 62, 65, 73, 77-80, 84, 86,
122, 123, 130, 132, 137, 145, 152, 153,
162, 169, 190, 191, 200, 215, 225, 230,
231, 241, 246, 247, 249, 252, 256,
261-263, 275, 296, 297, 304, 311, 318,
319, 330, 343, 345, 347, 348, 357, 370,
372, 373, 401-403, 408

HellFire, 66, 67, 72, 79, 83, 141, 177,
219, 226, 231, 244, 246, 287, 288, 296,
304, 317, 319, 320, 330, 383, 401, 415,
419, 422

Helpers, 55, 77, 209, 268

Hereafter, 19, 24, 34-37, 65, 66, 70, 90,
95, 162, 163, 191, 198, 208, 211, 218,
219, 223, 224, 247, 248, 265, 266, 274,
275, 278, 313, 342, 343, 348, 350, 351,
389, 390, 395, 396, 408, 409, 419, 421

heresy, 15, 183, 225, 284, 309, 380, 382,
383, 432, 433

heretical sects, 127, 130, 146, 183, 369,
381

heretics, 137, 263, 323, 334, 350, 379,
419, 420

High, 19, 74, 123, 187, 208, 395, 397,
420, 436

Hour, 87, 232, 241, 343, 442

Hour of Truth, 343

Humble, 42, 43, 197, 268, 358, 367
478 INDEX OF ENGLISH TERMS

Light, 45, 46, 66, 76, 83, 86, 113, 123,
126, 145, 170, 173, 196, 216, 228, 237,
238, 256, 267, 270, 274, 276-280, 289,
303, 318, 335, 355, 383, 386, 419

Literal, 12, 56, 98-102, 107-111. 113-116,
118-120, 125-128, 135, 181

Lord, 28, 30, 32, 34-36, 43, 51, 65, 66, 70,
72-75, 81, 83, 86-90, 105, 121-123,
139, 146, 147, 155, 156, 161-163, 170,
173, 174, 176, 179, 183, 186, 187, 193,
199, 201, 207-210, 237, 238, 242, 249,
265-267, 277, 278, 283, 290, 312, 315,
316, 318, 326, 335, 339, 342, 349, 355,
356, 370-372, 390, 394, 396, 397, 406,
413, 418, 420, 421, 425, 428, 439, 442;
lords, 79, 82

Magians, 67, 161

major sin, 157, 231, 252, 262, 322, 353,

359

major sinners, 166, 167, 169, 225, 230,
231, 246, 255, 257, 262, 318, 319, 343,
347

martyrs, 35, 92, 281

Merciful, 18, 84, 113, 145, 195, 318, 378,
429

mercy, 34, 35, 44, 59, 66, 70, 75, 90, 123,
157, 173, 175, 186, 195, 196, 236, 237,
267, 276, 277, 283, 290, 298, 309, 318,
319, 335, 342, 344, 354, 372, 375, 376,
378, 390, 397, 399, 407, 429, 436, 441

Message, 25, 32, 39, 43, 65, 67, 72, 85,
106, 133, 143, 162, 183, 187, 220, 238,
240, 246, 273, 276, 281, 287, 292, 297,
305, 310, 339, 371, 377, 399, 410, 432

Messenger, 9, 18-21, 25, 29-33, 38, 40,
48, 49, 51-55, 60, 61, 67, 70-74, 77,
82-85, 91, 92, 95, 96, 114-117, 121,
125-127, 133, 137, 139, 140, 142, 143,
145, 147, 148, 153, 154, 156, 158-160,

Jerusalem, 152, 280, 281, 409

Jew, 76, 254, 416; Jews, 28, 32, 38, 67,
76, 85, 137, 143, 153, 158, 161, 168,
183, 199, 202, 203, 224, 238, 267, 306,
312, 400, 413

Jewish, 28, 67, 178, 266

judgement, 19, 37, 65, 67, 77, 78, 121,
161, 179, 307

jurisprudents, 131

jurist, 20, 21, 24, 48-50, 68, 100, 131,
160, 190, 196, 214, 215, 232, 245, 254,
258, 259, 295, 302, 306, 329, 334, 362,
375, 376, 378, 387, 417, 430, 433, 434;
jurists, 5, 180, 186, 203-205, 218, 219,
223, 224, 286, 296, 297, 299, 314,
326-328, 334, 347, 356, 357, 374, 376,
378, 382, 440, 442

knowledge, 11, 27, 28, 35, 37-40, 43, 44,
58, 62, 83, 87, 99, 112, 117, 118, 127,
130, 133, 136, 137, 143-145, 148, 151,
153-161, 163, 176, 178, 186, 193,
196-200, 202, 211, 221, 225, 232, 233,
235-237, 240-243, 245, 249, 268, 274,
281-286, 288, 291, 306, 323, 328, 331,
334-338, 341, 350, 351, 358, 360, 366,
367, 370, 371, 374, 375, 378, 381, 382,
384-389, 392, 394, 395, 399, 411, 414,
415, 420, 421, 424, 426, 435-438, 441

Last Day, 28, 31, 55, 58, 62, 94, 140, 152,
153, 158, 170, 171, 175, 189, 191, 192,
219, 248, 266, 267, 295, 426

law, 2, 3, 20-22, 42, 46, 49, 50, 68, 107,
115, 116, 133, 153, 155, 157, 160, 161,
169, 186, 188, 200, 203, 286, 297, 300,
341, 387, 389, 394, 409, 419, 420,
422-424

legislator, 138-140, 145, 161, 200, 262,
297, 298, 300, 339
INDEX OF ENGLISH TERMS 479

obedience, 39, 44, 52-54, 56, 61, 63,
71-73, 82, 134, 154, 155, 165-168, 173,
174, 179, 187, 229, 237, 248, 250, 255,
270, 281, 287, 292, 294, 299, 315, 328,
336, 343, 347, 353-355, 367, 372, 385,
397, 409-411, 425, 427

Oneness, 89, 90, 92, 137, 191, 192, 196,
210, 260, 317, 331, 391, 394, 421

oneness of Allah, 89, 90, 92, 191, 192,
196, 210, 317, 331, 391, 394, 421

opinion, 12, 13, 50, 53, 54, 68, 83, 95,
116, 130, 133, 135, 136, 157, 165, 198,
203, 204, 213, 245, 246, 258, 288, 312,
313, 317, 320, 328, 329, 339, 351, 353,
354, 359, 361, 376, 378, 382, 383, 400,
413, 420, 424

ordeal, 146

Orthodox Caliphs, 2

Orthodox Muslim, 15, 133, 146,227, 230,
296, 306, 309, 333, 347, 348, 350

Paradise, 24, 27, 35, 43, 52, 55, 56, 78,
79, 89, 91, 92, 96, 122, 123, 137, 141,
142, 152, 153, 159, 176, 190, 194, 204,
211, 215, 223, 224, 234, 237, 241, 246,
251, 257, 265, 266, 274, 277, 311,
318-320, 330, 334, 335, 341-348, 350,
357, 358, 372, 373, 398, 401-403,
408-410, 415, 421, 422, 424, 426, 428,
430, 431

partner, 23, 77, 84, 127, 291; partners, 77,
79, 80, 179, 195, 197, 265, 284, 291,
313, 372, 409, 410, 434

penance, 224, 313, 329, 440, 442

People of the Book, 59, 66-69, 83, 143,
183, 208, 236, 270, 338, 356, 388

perfection, 8, 10, 19, 29, 42, 49, 92, 128,
134, 166, 173, 195, 234, 237, 241, 287,
292, 322, 391, 406-408, 432

piety, 3, 113, 168, 173, 177, 189-191,

162-164, 166, 170, 171, 173-176, 180,
182, 185-187, 192, 193, 196-198, 200,
201, 204, 205, 207, 210, 212, 215,
218-222, 224, 225, 227-231, 234-241,
243, 244, 247-253, 255-257, 263, 264,
267, 269-276, 280-282, 286-289, 292,
297, 299-306, 316, 318, 319, 323, 325,
334, 335, 342, 350, 353, 359, 361, 363,
364, 367, 377, 380, 382, 384, 385, 388,
390, 395-397, 399, 400, 402, 405, 407,
408, 410, 413, 418, 424-428, 431, 433,
436-439; Messengers, 19, 21, 25, 29,
58, 65, 72, 74, 144, 162, 174, 182, 187,
192-195, 200-202, 207, 210, 214, 265,
266, 268, 272, 274, 294, 299, 310, 311,
316, 319, 324, 331, 339, 344, 350, 353,
356, 361, 370, 376, 395-398, 428, 432

middle course, 24, 43, 90, 91, 179, 334,
351, 358

minor pilgrimage, 21, 255, 298, 439

modesty, 26

Mongols, 2, 4, 9

morsel, 57

Muslim, 1, 2, 5, 8-10, 15, 19-24, 27, 30,
36, 38, 46, 51, 54, 57, 58, 61, 64, 66,
70, 82-84, 91, 95, 97, 100, 102, 118,
129, 130, 133, 144-146, 153, 157, 158,
164, 166-169, 180, 189, 204, 206,
218-220, 223, 227, 230, 239, 244-247,
249, 250, 253, 254, 256, 258, 259,
261-264, 268, 270, 271, 273, 274, 277,
284, 287, 289, 292, 294, 296, 299, 301,
305, 306, 208, 309, 317, 319-327,
329-331, 333, 334, 336, 339-354,
356-364, 367-369, 373, 374, 376, 379,
381, 382, 385, 391, 394, 396-401, 403,
404, 408-411, 413, 416, 419, 428, 433,
434, 439, 440, 442

mustard seed, 64, 234, 411
480 INDEX OF ENGLISH TERMS

156, 166, 170, 179, 187, 191, 204,
207-209, 211, 214, 249, 264, 267,
269-271, 294, 296, 300, 313, 342, 389,
395, 397, 407, 410

predestination, 19, 102, 237, 265, 274,
311, 330, 370, 373-375

Prophet, 1, 5, 8, 9, 12, 18-27, 29-31, 33,
35, 37, 42-44, 46-50, 54-64, 66, 67, 70,
72-74, 76-80, 82, 85, 89-96, 98, 99,
104, 105, 113, 114, 117, 121, 122,
126-130, 133-138, 140-147, 149, 150,
158, 160, 161, 164, 165, 171, 175, 177,
178, 187, 189, 190, 193, 194, 196, 197,
201-203, 205, 206, 208-211, 215-226,
230-232, 234-239, 241, 242, 244, 248,
250-256, 259-263, 265, 268-277,
280-284, 286-289, 292, 293, 295-297,
299-307, 310, 312, 314, 316-323, 325,
327-334, 336-341, 345, 346, 348-350,
352-354, 357, 360-363, 365-368, 372,
373, 377, 379, 380, 385, 388, 390, 391,
398-401, 404, 405, 407, 408, 410, 411,
414, 418, 419, 426-429, 431, 433-435,
438, 439, 441-443; Prophets, 25, 35, 70,
71, 80, 92, 105, 106, 130, 145, 155,
158, 175, 187, 189, 191, 193, 198, 201,
205, 207-210, 265, 267, 272, 280, 295,
310, 330, 334, 338, 341, 356, 357, 371,
384, 395, 396, 398, 409

Prophethood, 25, 143, 338, 419

prostration, 166, 170, 226, 298, 315

protectors, 31, 32, 161, 171, 179, 183,
202, 203, 276

punishment, 24, 33, 35, 52, 55, 56, 62, 65,
78, 79, 81, 83, 84, 87, 92, 120-124, 141,
162, 190, 191, 194, 223, 231, 240, 248,
266, 274, 275, 287, 297, 313, 319, 334,
337, 339, 341-344, 346, 347, 357, 374,
398, 401, 407-409, 415, 422, 441

purification, 19, 48, 51, 152, 298

193, 194, 196, 234, 295, 316, 335, 348,
411, 426

pilgrimage, 2, 19-21, 25, 29, 51, 58, 116,
128, 129, 149, 161, 205, 206, 211, 214,
218, 219, 226, 255, 263, 264, 271-273,
287, 296, 298, 300, 302, 313, 314, 323,
326, 329, 345, 349, 350, 357, 360, 399,
409, 410, 423-425, 439

pillars of Iman, 157

pious ancestors, 1, 2, 5, 8, 9, 15, 68, 93,
96, 99, 100, 105, 116, 125, 130-132,
140, 142, 149, 153, 155, 156, 159, 169,
180, 181, 199, 224, 227, 233, 241,
244-246, 276, 277, 293, 295, 302-304,
306, 309, 355, 357, 364, 369, 373, 380,
382, 390, 391, 400-403, 408, 409, 411,
415-422, 424, 430, 432, 433

pious ones, 173, 194

polytheism, 65, 79, 80, 82, 84-86, 89-93,
321, 325-327

polytheists, 66-69, 86, 89, 92, 96, 126,
143, 197, 198, 200, 201, 238, 271, 298,
439, 441

poor, 19, 22, 177, 191, 295, 301, 313

pray, 30, 41, 42, 44, 45, 50, 72, 79, 82, 89,
143, 149, 154, 215, 219-222, 224-226,
238-240, 248, 255, 264, 270, 287, 299,
302, 307, 314, 319, 327-329, 350,
358-360, 389, 397, 409

prayer, 22, 29, 30, 33, 41-45, 48-51, 56,
61, 89, 128, 129, 140, 144, 148, 152,
161, 163, 166, 168, 172, 175, 176, 179,
187, 201, 204, 207, 208, 210, 214-219,
224-226, 230, 232, 237, 238, 246, 258,
263, 269-273, 280, 289, 296, 300-302,
307, 310, 315, 316, 338, 345, 346, 353,
357-359, 366, 368, 377, 388, 389, 397,
399, 407, 409, 414, 416, 423-425, 427,
429, 434; prayers, 19, 20, 23, 25, 29,
30, 43, 45, 50, 51, 70, 116, 129, 144,
INDEX OF ENGLISH TERMS 481

266, 335, 338, 340, 342, 344, 347, 348,
426; righteous one, 70; righteous work,
28, 145, 352; righteousness, 8, 29, 35,
45, 56, 94, 96, 121, 154, 156, 172, 175,
177, 189, 194, 196, 204, 210, 211, 266,
293, 326, 332, 342, 348, 429

Sabians, 28, 67, 266

sacred mosque, 260, 429, 433, 435,
437-439, 441

Satan, 44, 45, 58, 63, 162, 177, 183, 216,
219, 283, 284, 288, 294, 372

saying, 10, 11, 15, 21-23, 25-31, 33-35,
37-41, 43-45, 47, 48, 52, 56, 58, 61, 62,
64, 67, 71-74, 76, 79, 82, 90-92, 95, 96,
98, 101, 103, 106, 107, 111, 113, 116,
125, 127, 128, 131, 133, 134, 139-141,
145, 147-149, 151-154, 156, 158, 161,
163, 165, 168, 171, 172, 174, 175, 177,
180, 181, 185, 188, 191-194, 196, 197,
201, 202, 204, 205, 214, 215, 218-220,
222-224, 228, 229, 231, 232, 235-237,
243, 244, 247, 248, 250-264, 266, 267,
270, 271, 274, 276, 277, 279, 281, 282,
286, 288, 291, 292, 296, 297, 300, 301,
303, 304, 306, 307, 309-311, 317, 318,
321, 323, 325-328, 330, 331, 333, 334,
336, 339-341, 345-348, 353, 360, 362,
363, 365, 366, 368, 369, 371, 378, 384,
386, 390, 392, 394, 395, 397, 398,
400-406, 411, 413, 415, 416, 421,
423-425, 427, 428, 430-433, 435,
437-442; sayings, 1, 8,9, 20, 23, 29, 35,
48, 49, 55, 60, 62, 71, 77, 78, 88, 90-92,
130, 171, 172, 177, 180, 194, 197, 214,
230, 231, 233, 250, 264, 266, 275, 289,
306, 307, 333, 334, 338, 340, 346, 349,
350, 353, 359, 367, 378, 379, 397-399,
404, 407, 409, 410, 420, 431

scholastic theologians, 99, 155, 180, 199,

rebellion, 56, 63, 73, 74, 81, 84, 94, 163

Recitation, 49, 170, 177, 178, 196

Religion, 1, 4, 8-10, 18-20, 24, 29, 50-52,
54, 60, 63, 64, 77, 80, 82, 83, 85, 121,
122, 128, 143, 158, 166-168, 176, 189,
195, 196, 200, 202, 208, 213, 214,
216-218, 225, 227, 239, 240, 243, 251,
256, 265, 266, 268, 273, 283, 287-289,
294, 298, 301, 312, 315, 339, 341, 344,
350, 352, 354-358, 361, 366, 367, 369,
375, 377, 378, 383, 389, 395, 396, 409,
410

repentance, 36, 50, 176, 196, 200, 223,
230, 231, 275, 282, 367, 372, 403, 415,
418, 425, 428

Restraint, 269, 335

resurrection, 86, 104, 113, 123, 129, 266,
272, 287, 294, 295, 310, 311, 315, 330,
343, 344, 346, 395, 397, 415, 419, 425

revelation, 12, 43, 59, 60, 68, 83, 96, 107,
133, 135-137, 204, 205, 209, 217, 220,
223, 232, 239, 251, 323, 339, 356, 371,
379, 396; revelations, 52, 54, 57

reward, 24, 28, 35, 36, 50, 61, 70, 73, 83,
123, 154, 174, 190, 200, 211, 223, 234,
237, 244, 246, 248, 249, 255, 257, 262,
263, 265, 266, 278, 284, 293, 305, 311,
318, 319, 333, 335-338, 340-342, 344,
347, 377, 408, 414, 415, 423, 424, 426,
427, 429, 436

rhetoric, 98, 286

righteous, 27-29, 33, 35, 39, 58, 70, 71,
76, 83-85, 91, 92, 94-97, 145, 171, 172,
175, 179, 191-194, 197, 200, 207, 208,
210, 211, 213, 254, 263, 265-267, 273,
283, 293, 298, 315, 322, 325, 327, 330,
334, 335, 338, 340, 342-344, 346-348,
352, 356, 364, 371, 372, 377, 398, 411,
416, 422, 425, 426, 429, 431, 432;
righteous deeds, 58, 84, 96, 97, 172,
402 INDEX OF. ENGLISH TERMS

296, 300, 423, 441

Table, 16, 17, 59, 68

Tablets, 34, 241

testimonies, 166-168, 261, 263, 264, 301,
330, 353, 357, 359, 360, 363

testimony, 14, 97, 168, 192, 224, 227,
254, 264, 322, 323, 327, 328, 330, 360,
366, 368, 374, 376, 377, 381, 382, 384,
385, 399-401, 413, 421, 429, 430, 432

theological, 9, 10, 307, 413, 417, 419

traditions, 50, 54, 123, 130, 145, 152, 206,
233, 234, 253, 262, 277, 307, 309, 316,
327, 328, 347, 374, 380, 383, 390, 418

tranquility, 42, 236, 237, 273, 283, 335,
367, 388, 409, 410, 428

transgression, 129, 176

transmission, 21, 22, 47, 49, 134-136,
246, 295, 307

"trust in Allah, 30, 174, 196, 265, 319, 410

truthfulness, 37, 157, 160, 177, 201, 202,
293, 321, 323

unbelief, 11, 12, 15, 40, 53, 55, 56, 63, 65,
66, 72-76, 79, 82, 84, 86, 90, 94, 95,
143, 158, 161, 181, 191, 193, 198, 219,
225-228, 230, 244, 248-250, 254, 256,
259, 275, 276, 278, 280, 281, 287, 292,
299, 302, 306, 307, 309, 315, 318-327,
331, 332, 344-349, 355, 360, 364, 374,
377, 381-383, 389-391, 398, 414-416,

— 425, 426

unbeliever, 11, 15, 45, 57, 66, 72, 76, 78,
85, 143, 153, 156, 158, 161-163, 193,
198-200, 202, 212, 215, 219, 225-228,
238, 243, 245, 246, 253, 254, 264, 270,
280, 287, 292, 301-303, 306, 315,
320-326, 328, 331, 349, 350, 355,
359-361, 364, 376, 379, 389, 390, 402,
408, 411, 414-416, 418, 419, 425, 426,

380, 382, 390, 414, 416, 419
Seal of the Prophets, 398
signs, 19, 55, 65, 66, 72, 148, 162, 163,
187, 199, 220, 228, 235, 242, 265, 267,
274, 276, 316, 367, 388
sin, 34, 45, 47, 50, 55, 56, 63, 72-74, 79,
83, 84, 93, 147, 157, 175, 191, 221,
222, 225, 231, 247, 252-256, 259, 262,
287, 294, 301, 313, 315, 319, 322, 325,
326, 339, 345, 348, 353, 359, 363, 372,
381, 383, 391, 405, 408, 411; sins, 45,
46, 63, 75, 78, 84, 90, 92, 93, 97, 175,
176, 224-226, 230, 233, 240, 247, 248,
250, 254-256, 258, 259, 262, 283, 296,
297, 301, 319, 320, 327, 328, 344,
346-348, 357, 359, 372, 389, 391, 403,
404, 407, 408, 419, 427, 434
sinner, 63, 74, 141, 162, 164, 231,
253-257, 263, 296, 319, 320, 326, 328,
341, 346, 348, 363, 369, 372, 378, 403,
409, 411, 422; sinners, 81, 82, 90, 92,
141, 159, 166, 167, 169, 191, 194, 225,
230, 231, 246, 254-257, 259, 262, 284,
296, 318-320, 328, 343, 347, 391, 408
slanderer, 287, 319, 326
soul, 24, 27, 34, 43, 67, 63, 90-94, 121,
124, 147-149, 152, 269, 270, 282, 298,
299, 306, 342, 357, 358, 427, 439, 442,
443
straight path, 35, 53, 92, 179, 196, 238,
263, 288, 289, 425
submission, 21, 32, 55, 153, 165, 167,
181, 228, 268, 269, 299, 312, 353, 354,
367, 386, 395, 397, 409, 410
successors, 8, 12, 22, 23, 26, 34, 50, 68,
99, 116, 130, 146, 149, 177, 214, 224,
230, 233, 295, 307, 341, 345, 347, 356,
357, 364, 365, 391, 396, 399
Sultan, 6, 7
supplication, 35, 80, 121, 140, 147, 267,
INDEX OF ENGLISH TERMS 483

266, 269, 270, 282, 288, 293-295, 305,
306, 316, 317, 322-324, 327-329, 331,
332, 335, 338, 351, 352, 355, 357,
359-361, 363, 365-369, 372, 376-378,
382, 385, 388, 389, 400, 401, 416, 420,
421, 424, 430, 431, 433-435

worship, 19, 26, 29, 30, 42, 53, 58, 61, 63,
70, 75, 79, 80, 84-86, 88, 106, 123, 129,
157, 161, 173, 179, 201, 207, 214, 218,
267, 268, 270, 273, 277, 284, 285, 294,
312, 313, 326, 339, 349, 354, 357, 366,
372, 389, 409, 410, 424, 425

wrath, 31, 73, 84, 113, 176,227, 414, 415,
418, 425, 426, 428

wrongdoers, 55, 77, 80, 81, 86, 202, 229,
254, 283, 394; wrong-doers, 36, 281,
315

wrongdoing, 6, 147, 225, 325, 345

Zoroastrian, 373

432; unbelievers, 12,21, 31, 40, 45, 57,
60, 61, 64-67, 73, 74, 77, 82, 86, 87, 95,
123, 132, 133, 143, 153, 159, 162, 163,
171, 180, 198, 201-203, 209, 210, 219,
221, 222, 225, 226, 236, 238, 245, 248,
250, 253, 255, 256, 259, 262, 273-276,
279, 280, 283, 297, 300, 302, 304, 313,
319, 326, 329, 343, 348, 349, 361, 362,
374, 379, 382, 398, 404, 419, 427, 430,
436, 442

Unseen, 110, 111, 139, 187, 195, 200,
208, 209, 291, 292, 330, 331

verbal confession, 134, 135, 157, 240,
259, 263, 268, 295, 306

Wars of Apostasy, 96

wayfarer, 175, 191, 295, 313

whiteness, 394

wicked one, 191

wickedness, 84, 225, 299

wine, 27, 45, 63, 68, 76, 77, 127, 213,
215, 258, 259, 287, 302, 327, 363, 431

witness, 67, 70, 71, 88, 162, 179, 192,
193, 227, 239, 242, 249, 267, 268, 298,
384, 396, 413, 422, 442, 443

work, 3, 4, 10, 11, 15, 17, 28, 30, 46, 48,
50, 65, 68, 95, 96, 135, 145, 149, 154,
159, 172, 177, 180, 181, 189, 191, 196,
197, 200, 204, 211, 218, 224, 228, 236,
241, 242, 245, 248, 259-263, 266, 268,
292, 294-296, 306, 307, 309, 315, 316,
321, 322, 326-328, 331, 337, 342, 352,
367, 372, 377, 429-431, 435, 436;
works, 4, 10, 11, 16, 24, 27-29, 31, 56,
71, 84, 91, 98, 99, 114, 128, 139, 140,
142, 152, 153, 155, 156, 161, 163, 167,
168, 170, 176, 180, 181, 191, 197, 198,
200, 203, 204, 206-208, 210-213, 216,
217, 224-226, 233, 241, 250, 261-263,
ac ‏ا‎

0 own deep conviction an 02

_ the Prophet "Muhammad, and the conduct of the pious"
ancestors of the first three Islamic centuries. =e Cay

Ibn Taymiyyah was born i in Syria on 22 January (661/1263).
Throughout history, he is considered one of the very few
distinguished scholars of Islam. From an early age, Ibn
Taymiyyah was firmly grounded in Islamic traditional
education, with emphasis on the Qur’an, Hadith and the a
Arabic language. His prolific works have served to reaffirm
traditional Islamic understanding. Ibn Taymiyyah’s scholarly
contribution resulted in numerous books and treatises.

Salman Hassan Al-Ani is Professor of Near Eastern
Languages and Cultures specializing in Linguistics at
Indiana University in Bloomington, Indiana. He is the
Editor of the International Journal of Islamic and Arabic Studies.

Shadia Ahmad Tel is Professor of Education specializing in
Educational Psychology and Bilingual Language Education.
She is currently the Dean of the College of Education at
Yarmouk University in Irbid, Jordan.

iil u

96750622

