CONCISE COMMENTARY ON a BOOK OF

Dr. Salih Al-Fawzan
Professor of Islamic Jurisprudence,

‘Member of the Board of Senior Ulema & Member
of the Permanent Committee for Fatwa and Research

CONCISE COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF

Tawhid

الملخص ل شرح كتاب التوحيد

Dr. Salih Al-Fawzan

Profescor of Islamic Jurlsprudience,
Member of the Board of Senior Ulema & Member
| of the Permanent Committee for Fatwa and Research

ALMaiman Publlshing House
| Saudi Arabia, P.0.Box 90020, Riyadh 11613

Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhld
by Professor Salih Al-Fawzan

‘Copyright © 2005, Al-Maimian Publishing House, All rights reserved.

Translated by Al-Arabia for Information Technology, Cairo,
49th Noobar St, Bab Al-Log, 2nd Floor, City Mall Building,
Tel: 4202 7949370
Fax: +202 7962730
Published by Al-Maiman Publishing House, Saudi Arabia; Riyadh,
‘PO,B: 90020 Riyadh 11613
Riyadh; Tel; + 966 1 4627336 - 4645594 - 4645581 - 4026194
Fax: + 966 1 4612163 - 2800587

To arrange bulk purchase discounts or book distributors outside Saudi Arabia, please
contact Al-Maiman Publishing House al the above address, For information on translated

books, please contact Al-Arabia at the above address or info@arabia-it.com.

Copyright © 2005 by Al-Maiman Publishing House. All nights reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any
‘means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permiss

of the publisher.
‘This book was composed with Adobe InDesign CS
Page

67
B
85

91

105

In the Name of Allah, the Entirely Merciful, the Especially Merciful

CONTENTS

Merit of Monotheism.

Perfect Monotheism Guarantees Paradise..un

Fear of Polytheism.,,

Calling to Testification of Faith,

Meaning of Monotheism and Faith Testfication,..

‘Acts of Polytheism: Wearing Rings and Strings
for Removing or Averting an Affliction ‏سس سس‎

incantations and Amulet

Seeking Blessings of 'Irees, Stones.

Offering Sacrificial Animals for Deit
than Allah. i

Slaughtering Sacrificial Animals at Places and
Altars Dedicated to False Deities.

English Islamic Library
Editorial Staff
Acknowledgement
Translator’s Preface
‘Book Preface

About The Author

THE BOOK OF TAWHID
Chapter t

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapters

Chapter 6

‘Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9

Chapter 10

‘Chapter 11

Conise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

111

115
125

135
141
14
155

165

175

18
187
197
203
au
219
223
235
244
249
259
269
275
279
287

‘Acts of Polytheism: Seeking Refuge with
Beings other than Allah ....

‘Acts of Poytheisme Seeking Refuge with Anyone
besides Allah and Invoking Anyone besides
Him...

Helpless Partners Ascribed to Allah,
‘The Angels Duly Fear and Obey Allah.

Intercession.
‘Allah Guides Whom He Wills

Excessive Reverence of the Righteous

Worshipping Allah al the Memorial ofa Righ-
{eous Person,

Excessive Reverence for the Graves of the
Righteous is Tantamount-to Molatry.

‘The Prophet and Blocking All Averiues Im-
pairing Monotheism..

Some Muslims Worshipping Idols

Forms of Sorcery

Rulings of Soothsayers

An-Noshrah.

Seeking Rainfall by Virtue of the Stars
Love for Allah..
Fear of Allah.,

Reliance on Allah.

Feeling Secure from the Plan of Allah.,

Faith and Patience with the Decree of Allah ..
Showing off.

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Chapter 19

Chapter 20
Chapter 21

Chapter 22
Chapter 23
Chapter 24
Chapter 25
Chapter 26
Chapter 27
Chapter 28
Chapter 29
Chapter 30
Chapter 31
Chapter 32
Chapter 33
Chapter 34
Chapter 35

293

297
303
315
323
329

337
34

347

351

355
359
365

371
375

37

389

393
395

Acts of Polytheismn: Righteous Deeds Intended
for Worldly Gai

Taking Scholars or Rulers as Partners besides
Allah...

Seeking Judgment from Taghot.
Repudiation of Allabs Names and Attributes...
Denying the Favor of Allah
Attributing Equals to Allah

Dissatisfaction with Oaths Taken in the Name
of Allah een

Saying ‘By the Will of Allah and Yours...

Inyeighing against the Vicissitudes of Time

Wrongs Allah,

‘Names such as the Judge of Judges and the
Like.

Reverence to Allahis Beautiful Names and
(Changing One's Name Accordingly.ceniun:

‘Mocking Allalis Revelations or Messengers.
Rendering Thanks to Allah...

‘The Probibition of Giving a Name Signifying
that One is a Servant of Others Besides Allah...

Invoking Allah by His Beautiful Names
‘The Prohibition of Saying, “Peace be on Alla...

The Prohibition of saying, "0 Allah! Forgive
Me If You Wish, 5

‘The Prohibition of Saying, “My Slave, or My
Slave Girl

‘Asking in the Name of Aliah Is not to Be Re-
pulsed.

Nothing is to Be Asked for. by the Face of
Allah, but Paradise.

Dissatisfaction with the Divine Decree.

CONTENTS

Chapter 36

Chapter 37

Chapter 38
Chapter 39
Chapter 40
‘Chapter 41
Chapter 42

Chapter 43
Chapter 44

Chapter 45,

Chapter 46

Chapter 47
Chapter 48
Chapter 49

Chapter 50
Chapter 51
Chapter 52

Chapter 53
Chapter 54

‘Chapter 55

Chapter 56

Canise Commentary ‏مه‎ the Book of Tawhid

403
407

415
423
431
439
445

449

453

459

467
475
481
485
495

The Prohibition of Inveighing against the
Wind.

Hypocrites Mistrust Allah.,

Deniers of the Divine Decree and Predesti-
nation.

Pictures and Statues,

Oft-repeated Swe

Covenants of Allah and His Prophet...
Adjuring Allah,

Seeking Allahs Intercession with One of His
Creatures.

‘The Prophet and Blocking All Avenues Lead-
ing to 8017018161. ‏سسسب سس‎

Polytheists have not Appraised Allah with
True Appraisal.

Chapter 57
Chapter 58
Chapter 59
Chapter 60
Chapter 61
Chapter 62
Chapter 63
Chapter 64

Chapter 65
Chapter 66

APPENDICES
Glossary

‘Name Index

Quranic Verse Index
Hadith Index
‘Transliteration System

ENGLISH ISLAMIC LIBRARY

Ee Islamic Library: A series in English covering central
and various issues in Creed, Jurisprudence and Islamic Sciences by
authors who have expert knowledge in their fields. It targets both the Muslims
and the non-Muslims in the west as well as those who study Islamic Sciences
in English in Arab countries. It also targets those who are engaged in propa-
gating Islam in the West.

IN THIS SERIES;

1, Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid: Sheikh professor
‘Salih Al-Fawzin

2. A Summary of Islamic Jurisprudence (Volume one): Sheikh
professor Salih Al-Fawzin

3. 4 Summary of Islamic Jurisprudence (Volume two): Sheikh
professor Salih Al-Fawzan

4. Guide to Sound Creed: Sheikh professor Salih Al-Fawzin_

5. A Brief Account of the Prophet Biography: Sheikh Muhammad
Tbn ‘Abdul-Wahhab

6. Allalis Insightful Signs: Dr-Tawfiq ‘Ulwan

7. The Way of the Travelers: An Explanatory Book on Islamic
Jurisprudence: Sheikh 'Abdur-Rahméan As-Sa'di

8, Exonerating the Great Imdms from Blame: Imam Ibn Taymiyah
9, Universality of Istam: Imam Ibn Taymiyah
10. Lbn Taymiyatis Collection of Fatwas (Volumes 21 & 22 & 23)
EDITORIAL STAFF

» Umm Abdullah

CONTRIBUTING TRANSLATORS
6 Muhammad Abdul-Moneim Ali

» Khidr Mustafa Muhammad

SHAR‘LAND ARABIC CONSULTANTS,
= Sheikh Hatem Antio Ali
+ Hamada Ebeid Ahmed.

* Muhammad Nusair Mogahed

‘MAIN EDITORS
* Dr. Attia Fs-Sayyed Attia

+ Sameh Mustafa Asal

= Muhanad Said Metwally.

> Dr. Fabad M. ALMalik, KESC, Saudi Arabia

REVISERS:
Hani Mahmoud Abdal-Fattah

DESIGN AND TECHNOLOGY
* Graphic Designer: Muhammad Salth

* Layow

lakhtar “Thwany

About the Author

Sheikh Salih Al-Fawzin (born in 1935) has obtained a PhD in Islamic
Jurisprudence and hasa long history in teaching jurisprudence.

He is a member of many academic institutions including the Board of
Senior Ulema, the Permanent Committee for Fatwa and Research, the Islamic
‘Academy of Muslim World League, the Committee of Supervising Du’ ah, and

many other scholastic bodies.

He has written more than sixty published works covering Muslim Greed,
Islamic Jurisprudence and Muslim's Conduct.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Our truly and profound thanks and gratefulness are due to Allah the
Almighty Who has endowed us with all the means to make this worka reality,
Thanks go to Him for all His endless blessings and favors. In the course of
translating this invaluable book, innumerable people have helped directly and
indirectly, without their help, this book would have never come to the light. At
the outset, we deeply appreciate and thank sheikh professor Salih al-Fawzin
for giving us exclusive permission to translate and publish his books as well as
his follow-up with the different stages of publishing the books. May Allah give
him success in this Worldly Life and Hereafter,

First of all, our eternal gratitude and sincerest appreciation are due to
Dr. Muhammad Mahmid Ghali, professor of Linguistics and the ex-dean of
Faculty of Languages and ‘Translation, Al-Azhar University, for his valuable
suggestions and penetrating advice he rendered us when we started the process
of translation.

‘We would like also to express our heartfelt thanks to Dr, Muhammad
Muhammad Abd Layla, professor of Islamic Studies in English and Head of
English Department, Faculty of Languages and Translation, for his endless
continuous help, suggestions and moral support. We are enormously indebted
also to Dr. Ahmad Zaki Hammad, professor of Islamic Studies in English,
Faculty of Languages and Translation for providing us with invaluable
suggestions and important insights on translation.

Again, thanks are due to Dr, ‘Attia Es-Sayyed ‘Attia, lecturer in ELT and
Applied Linguistics, Faculty of Education, Al-Azhar University for having
professionally edited this work and others, His pertinent comments and
valuable touches at the final stage of writing the book added much to the final
version of the book. Finally yet importantly, we thank Umm Abdullah, the
native editor, who exerted great efforts in editing the book, and with whose final
touches she made it meaningful and more appealing to the target audience.

Publisher
Sataiman A, Almaiman
Translator’s Preface

This book is an English translation of sheikh professor Salih Al-Fawzan's
‏ا ملخص يِذ شرح كتاب التوحيد‎ Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid: Dar
AL Asimah, 2001 B.C. (ISBN: 2002/22). Our main aim in providing the English
translation is propagating the true Da'wah that derives from Allah's Book and
His Messenger’s Sunnah. This is a duty that every Muslim should cherish. Allah
says: “And let there be [arising] from you a nation inviting to [all that is] good,
enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong, and those will be the
successful.” (A) "Imran; 104), With this in mind, this translated work is, then, a
humble response to our realization of a great responsibility to give the English
speaking reader access to rich Islamic Creed Literature that presents Islam pure
and simple, as close as possible to the way understood and practiced by the
Early Righteous Salaf: In doing so, we have left no stone unturned to make sure
that the final copy of a translated book meets a specific high quality standard
that would convey the same meaning intended by the author and expressed in
the original source text, In effect, we have tried to set a balance between the
originality of thought and the nature of the style of language.

‘To attain this aim, our work (in this book and others) exhibits certain
distinctive features, namely, the process of translation, the style, the attention
paid to the sociolinguistic aspects (i.e. transliteration, glossary and endnotes).
We touch upon these features in the following section.

1.PROCESS.

Before reaching the publisher, our work goes through a developmental
process to guarantee that the final version of the translated book is as perfect
as can be.

In effect, this process commences with the first-hand translation, which
is done by some very carefully chosen translators who are native-speakers
of Arabic and have a native-like command of the target language, The main
principle that governs the translation process is that the translator is after
integrity. With integrity as the main target, the translators would not be
tempted to impose their own ideas on the text nor would they gloss over the
difficult paragraphs instead of taking the trouble to find out what is really
meant. Translators would do their best to convey both the content and spirit
of the original,
5 Concis Commentary of the Book of Tait

‘The next step of the process is undertaken by a reviser who has a high
profile in translating religious texts and is aware of the traps that one might
fall into, In addition, he has a thorough religious background knowledge that
enables him to detect any unintended error in conveying the meaning.

‘The revised version is then submitted to a picky editor who is well-versed
in the target language and has substantial knawledge of Islamic Sciences.

Finally, the edited version is handed over to a native-speaker of English
who is knowledgeable in islamic Sciences to make sure that the translation is
readable and meaningful to the target audience.

2.STYLE

A natural outgrowth of the processes adopted in translation is the style
the final version has come out in. The intended meaning of the author has
been conveyed in a style that is authentic and as close to the original as
possible. It really sounds authentic: So natural that the work does not read
like a translation, but an indigenous piece of writing. The translation version
is marked by remarkable variety and richness as well as tremendous skill at
writing within formal religious genre. Moreover, attempts have been made to
have it simple, clear and appealing to the target audience.

3.ATTENTION TO SOCIOLINGUISTIC ASPECTS

‘As a way to fill up the gap caused by sociolinguistic differences between
the two languages (source language and target language), our work includes
some additional features (i.e. transliteration, glossary and endnotes) that
would guarantee better understanding of the concepts and ideas that might
confuse the English speaking reader due to the lack of schemata in this field.

A- TRANSLITERATION SYSTEM
In the process of translation, we made a serious attempt to limit the use of
transliterated Arabic terms (see table in p. X) to the following two situations:
1) There is no English expression that can reflect the same meaning
as the original term.

ii) The Arabic term is of such importance that it is essential ta
familiarize the reader with it,

B-GLOSSARY

Atthe end of the book, we have included a glossary defining common Arabic
terms that fulfill the above criteria, Included in the glossary also are terms that
need further explanation.

Translacor’s Preface 5

C-ENDNOTES

In the endnotes, we have given clear and concise explanations of the terms,
thatarenotclear or understandable to the target reader due to the sociolinguistic
differences in addition to the commentaries written by the author himself.
Furthermore, each hadith mentioned in the text of the book is ascribed in the
endnotes to the book it is quoted from.

D-INDICES

To facilitate the process of going through the book and save the reader’s
time, we have included a name index. So, if the reader is looking for a given
name, s/he would go directly to the index to find the page number.

4. QURAN TRANSLATION

The Qur'an is Allah exact words. These words can never ever be exactly
translated into other languages because of, among other things, possible
misinterpretations and limited human understanding. What is followed in
the book is to translate the meanings as understood by Muslim scholars. We
solely depended on the “Translation of the Meaning of the Qurin translated
by Saheeh International - Riyadh and published by Abulqasim Publishing,
House. When a verse is cited, the English interpretation is given between
quotation marks “...” in indented, bold, and italicized format. ‘The location
of the Qur‘anic verse, the name of the sura is given below to the verse as it is
illustrated in the example below:

“And We sent not before you any messenger except that We
reveated to him that there is no deity except Me, so worship Me.”

(AL-Anbya: 25)

5. HADITH TRANSLATION

Similarly, when we cite a Aadith, we mention the book of Aadith it is
quoted from in addition to its number in the book. Further, the translation of
Prophetic Aadith is represented in an indented format, italicized and between
quotation marks “.,.” as it is illustrated in the example below:

“Do not drink in gold or silver vessels nor eat in similar bowls (i.e:
bowls made of gold or silver), for they belong ta them (the disbelievers)
in this world and to us in the Hereafter”

In the Name of Allah, the Entirely Merciful, the Especially Merciful

BOOK PREFACE

All praise is due to Allah, and may the peace and blessings of Allah be
upon the Seal of the Prophets, Muhammad. The present study is a brief
commentary on the “Book of Tawhid (ie, Monotheism)" of Shaykhul-
Islam Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdul-Wahhab (may Allah have mercy on him).
In arranging this brief commentary, I presented it in the style of the
modern school curricula so that it may be easily intelligible to beginners.
Task Allah to make it beneficial to the Muslims and to be of significant
contribution in disseminating religious knowledge and properly correcting
people's understanding of the Muslim Creed. Finally, I ask Allah to confer
His peace and blessings upon His Messenger Muhammad (PBUH), his
household, and his Companions.

Salih Ton Fayzén thn ‘Abdullah AL-Fawzin
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

His full name is Mohammad Ibn ' Abdul-Wahhab Tbn Sulayman Ibn ' Ali,
He belonged to the family of Musharraf, an offshoot of the well-known tribe of
Band ‘Tamim, He was the propagator of the Salafi (the early Muslim scholars)
Da‘ wah in Najd and in other neighboring regions.

His Early Life, Education and Professional Record

Shaykh Muhammad {bn ‘Abdul-Wahhab was born in AL’ Uyaynah near
Riyadh in 1115 ‏,عق‎ He memorized the Noble Qur'én at an early age. He,
then, studied Islamic sciences under his father, who used to be the judge
of Al-'Uyaynah. He also studied under many other renowned scholars in
Najd, Medina, Al-Ahsd and Basra. Hence, he became a scholar of prolific
knowledge, well equipped to shoulder his blessed call at a time when bid ‘ahs
(matters innovated in religion) and superstitions such as hallowing shrines,
sanctifying trees and stones, dispersed. He, consequently, called for correcting
the understanding of Muslim Creed and devoting worship to Allah Alone. He
compiled a great number of books such as his best renowned one, Kitdbut-
Tawhfd (The Book of Monotheism). This book was met by great acceptance
among scholars and learners, who concerned themselves with studying and
explaining it. This is because it is an original compilation, which has greatly
benefited a great number of people,

Shaykh Muhammad spent all his life as an instructor calling people for
the way of Almighty Allah, enjoining the right and forbidding the wrong. He
graduated a great number of scholars and prominent callers for Islam, He died
in Ad-Dar'iyyah near Riyadh in 1206 A. H. We ask Allah to reward him and
make Paradise his eternal abode.

1 Concise Commentary oi the Book oF ‏لالس‎

THE BOOK OF
TAWHID

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And 1 did not create the jinn and mankind except to worship Me.”
(Quran: Adh-Dhariyat: 56)

‘The book of Tawhid elaborates on the concept of Islamic monotheism as.
being enjoined by Allah on His servants, whom He has created for fulfilling
this ultimate objective. Meanwhile, the book clarifies the concept of major
polytheism, which categorically contradicts monotheism. It further clarifies
the concepts of minor polytheism and bid'aks, which impair perfect or
desirable belief,

Keywords and Phrases

+ Tawhtid: The devotion of one's acts of worship to Allah Alone.

+ ‘Ibddah (Worship): Literally, it signifies surrender or submission,
‘Technically, it isan umbrella term, which refers to all acts of devotion
including sayings, apparent and hidden deeds, which bring about
Allah's Pleasure,

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

According to this Quranic verse, Allah created the jinn and men to
worship Him. The Quranic verse, thus, specifies the wisdom behind creating
them. Unlike worldly masters, Almighty Allah does not sustain His servants
in return for benefits, for He intends all good for them.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

The Qur’anic verse illuminates the obligation of tawhid ie. devoting all
acts of worship solely to Allal since He has created the jinn and mankind for
falfilling this objective.

‘THE BOOK OF ‏تنلات‎

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

4 The jinn and mankind are obliged to devote all acts of worship solely
to Allah,

+ The Qur'snic verse expounds the wisdom behind the creation of the
jinn and mankind.

+ This only Allah, the Creator, Who deserves worship rather than other
false deities incompetent to create. This point is a refutation of the
idolaters' arguments,

+ Almighty Allah is the Self-Sufficient and thus He is in no need of His
creatures, whereas they are in dire need of Him. This is, definitely,
‘because Allah is the Creator and they are His creatures.

The Quranic verse, further, proves that Allah is All-Wise in His actions.

ee

3 Concise Commentary on the Bool of Taohid

Allah, Exalted and Glorified be He, says:

“And We certainly sent into every nation a Messenger, [saying].
“Worship Allah and avoid taghit...’” (Qur'an: An-Nahl: 36)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Messenger: The prophet to whom a Divine Law has been revealed and
whom Allah commanded to impart it to people.

+ Worship Allah: To devote all acts of worship solely to Him.

+ Tighit (False Deities): This term refers to false objects of worship,
including any person accepting to be adored besides Allah.

General Meaning of the Quranic Verse

According to this Qur‘anic verse; Almighty Allah sent Messengers for
every nation and generation inviting them to solely worship Him and
avoid deifying false deities. For this very ultimate goal did Allah dispatch
‘Messengers, since palytheism first originated at the time of Nah (Noah,
peace be upon him) until the finality of Prophethood through the advent
of Muhammad (PBUH).

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

The verse expounds that the mission of all prophets and their followers is
to call people to believe in one God and prohibit them from committing any
act of polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

4 The divine wisdom behind dispatching Messengers is to invite people
to monotheism and prohibit them from the perpetration of acts
entailing polytheism.

© Though they are of various legislations, all Messengers call for one
common religion, which is consisted in devoting all acts of worship
solely to Allah and associating no partner with Him.

THE ROOK OF TAWHID 4

+ Divine Message has pervaded in all nations and Allah's proof
was established on all so that no one may be excused on the Day
of Resurrection.

‎The significance of monotheism, which is held incumbent upon‏ جد
‎all nations,‏

‎4 The Quranic verse implied the same meaning expressed in the Two
Testifications of Faith (Testifying that there is no deity but Allah, and
that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah). In addition to negating the
validity of worshipping any false deity, it proved Allah as the sole God.
‘Therefore, perfect monotheism should combine both disapproval of
all false deities and absolute approval of Allah’s Divinity,

‎$66

3 0 on the Book of Tiwhid

Almighty Allah says:
“And your Lord has decreed that you not worship except Him,
and to parents, good treatment..." (Quran: Al-Isra’: 23)
Keywords and Phrases

+ Your Lord: It refers to Allah, Who is of sovereign dominion over all worlds.

+ And to parents, good treatment: As Almighty Allah decreed to be
solely worshipped without associating any partner with Him, He also
commanded man to be kind and dutiful to his parents.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

According to the Quranic verse, Almighty Allah commands people, by
‘means of His Messengers, to devoteallacts of worship solely to Him, In addition,
He further enjoins children to be kind and dutiful to their parents by word and
deed and moreover, warns them against mistreating them, since parents have
compassionately reared and cared for them until reaching maturity.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

Monotheism is the most assured right of Allah and the most binding duty
on man, as Allah prefaced the verse with it, and priority is given to what is of
more importance.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

4 Monothefsm is the first decree enjoined by Allah on man. tis, thus,
the foremost binding right of Allah incumbent upon His servants.

4 The verse conveys the same meaning expressed in the Testification
of Faith, ie. declaring that all false deities are not worthy of being
worshipped while Allah is

4 The Quranic verse affirms the significant merit of fulfilling parents’
due rights of respect and kind treatment since these rights are directly
preceded by the enjoinment of monotheism,

THE BOOK OF TAWHID 6

% The obligation of showing all kinds of benevolence, righteousness and
tenderness when dealing with parents. The Quranic verse does not,
however, specify'a limit or designate a way of such a good treatment.

© The prohibition of being undutiful or ungrateful (0 one’s parents.

eos

Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhid

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Worship Allah and associate nothing with Hien..."
(Qur'an: An-Nis4: 36)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Associate nothing: Beware of polytheism, which means associating
partners with Allah by means of ascribing to them what exclusively
pettains to Allah,

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this Quranic verse Almighty Allah commands His servants to devote
all acts of worship solely to Him. Allah does not specifically enjoin a certain
act of worship such as supplication or prayer; this is to generally include all
devotional acts, Likewise, Almighty Allah generally warns us against all forms
and acts of polytheism. Therefore, He does not specifically prohibit certain
acts or deeds of polytheism.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

The verse is prefaced by a divine decree, which enjoins monotheism and
forbids any form or act of polytheism, Thus; the verse defines monotheism as
devoting all acts of worship solely to Allah and associating nothing with Him.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

% The obligation of devoting all acts of worship exclusively to Allah
Alone, since such a command is given top priority according ta the
Quranic verse. Therefore, worshipping one God (i.e., Allah) is the
most assured obligatory ordinance.

+ The prohibition of ascribing partners to Allah, as it is the gravest and
most abominable sin.

# Avoidance of all forms and acts of polytheism is a pretequisite for the
validity of man's devotion to Allah. So, Allah espoused enjoinment of,
devotion and the prohibition of polytheism,

THE BOOK OF JAWHID 8
© Alliypes of polytheism, according to the Arabic context of the Qur'anic
verse, are categorically prohibited whether minor or major.

4% The impermissibility of associating any partner with Allah, whether
an angel, a prophet, a righteous person or an idol.

oe

9 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhidl

Almighty Allah says

“Say, ‘Come, I will recite what your Lord has prohibited
to you. (He commands) that you not associate anything
with Him, and to parents, good treatment, and do not
kill your children out of poverty; We will provide for you
and them. And do not approach immoralities- what is
apparent of them and what is concealed. And do not kill
the soul, which Allah has forbidden (to be killed) except
by (legal) right. This has He instructed you that you may
use reason. And do not approach the orphan’s property
except in a way that is best (i.e., intending improvement)
until he reaches maturity. And give full measure and
weight in justice. We do not charge any soul except (with
that within) its capacity. And when you speak (i.e.,
testify), be just, even if (it concerns) a near relative. And
the covenant of Allah fulfill. This has He instructed you
that you may remember. And (moreover), this is my path,
which is straight, so follow it; and do not follow (other)
ways, for you will be separated from His way. This has He
instructed you that you may become righteous.

(Qur'an: Al-An'Am: 151: 153)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Prohibited: A forbidden act is any act whose perpetration entails
punishment and whose avoidance entails reward.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verses

Since the polytheists followed their whims and satanic insinuations, they
devoted their worship to deities other than Allah, prohibited what Allah
provided for them as lawful, and killed their children so as to draw nearer
to their false deities. Almighty Allah commanded His Messenger to inform
them of what their Creator and Owner made absolutely prohibited according
to His revelation, not out of their speculation. These prohibited items are listed
under the ten commandments stated in the Qur'anic verses as follows:

THE BOOK OF TAWHID 10

1, Allah commands His servants not to associate any object or false deity
with Him. The prohibition here is so exclusive and general that it
includes the forbiddance of worshipping any false deity or object and
the avoidance of any ritual offered to them as well.

2. He comimands sons and daughters to do well and be dutifil to parents,
to be modest with them, and to protect and obey them unless they
enjoin a violation ora sin.

3, He commands Muslims not to bury daughters alive, or kill children
for fear of poverty since man does not provide sustenance for them or
even for himself,

4, He commands Muslims not to approach immoralities - what is
apparent of them and what is concealed as well,

5. He commands His servants not to kill any of the believers or dhimmis
except with a legal right, such as killing someone for retaliation, stoning
to death both married and previously married persons in case they
comuit adultery, or killing an apastate,

6. Allah, Exalted be He, commands Muslims not to approach the orpharis
property unless with the intention to protect and invest it. The orphan's
property should be paid back when he/she reaches maturity.

7, Almighty Allah further commands us to ‘.. give full measure and
weight in justice. We do not charge any soul except (with that within)
its capacity... (Qur'an; Al-An’am: 152) Therefore, weare enjoined to
establish justice as much as we can in case of taking or giving

‘uAnd when you speak (i.e., testify), be just, even if (it concerns) a
near relative...”(Qur'an: Al-An’ am: 152) Almighty Allahimmediately
preceded the command to establish justice in testimony with the
command of doing justice in transactions,

9, Allah ordains the fulfillment of covenants as He says, ‘..And the
covenant of Allah fulfill .. ' (Qur'an: Al-An"am: 152) The covenant
of Allah is to obey Him by acting upon His commands and avoiding
His prohibitions and, moreover, behaving in accordance with the

Quran and the Sumah of the Prophet (PBUH).

10. ‘..And, (moreover), this is My path, which is straight, so follow it;
and do not follow (other) ways, for you will be separated from His
way..” (Qur'’én; Al-An‘am: 153) Allah, Exalted and Glorified
be He, stresses that following the straight path is to adhere to all

Concise Commentary ont the Book of Tawwhid

commandments lucidlated in the aforementioned two Qur'anic
‘verses. Such commandments, which comprise both the abandonment
of prohibited acts, particularly polytheism, and the fulfillment of what
Allah has enjoined, particularly monotheism, constitute the straight
path. The believers are commanded to ‘..follow it (the straight path);
and do not follow (other) ways...’ (Qur'an: Al-An’ am: 153) which
invoke bid'‘ahs (matters innovated in religion) and doubtful matters
so that ‏..؟‎ you will be separated from His way... (Qur'an: Al-An‘am: 153),
i.e. deviating from the straight and righteous path.

u

Relevance of the Verses to the Chapter

In the aforementioned Qur'anic verses, Almighty Allah states a collection

of prohibited acts, starting with the prohibition of polytheism. The prohibition
of polytheism necessarily requires the enjoinment of acting upon monotheism.
‘Therefore, monotheism is the greatest obligation whereas polytheism is the
gravest sin,

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verses

+ Whilepolytheism isthe gravest sin, monotheism is the most significant
obligatory act.

The gravity of parents’ rights.

+ The prohibition of committing homicide without a legal and justified
reasan, Murder of one's relatives is, however, a graver sin.

+ The prohibition of devouring the orphan's property. However, it is
permissible to invest the orphan's property (i.e., by means of trade),

+ One is enjoined to preserve justice in word and deed even ifthe person
involved isa relative,

The incumbency of fulfilling covenants,
% The obligation of embracing Islam and deserting any other religion.
+ It is exclusively Allah's right to prohibit or make something lawful.

$36

THE BOOK OF ZAwHID 12

bn Mas' ad (may Allah be pleased with him) says:

“Whoever wants to know the will of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH)
sealed with his seal, let him recite these Qurianic verses, '..Say,
‘Come, I will recite what your Lord kas prohibited to yor
ending with ‘And, (moreover), this is My path, which is straight,
so follow it...“ * (Qur'an: Al-An’ 4m: 151-153)

Tbn Mas'‘iid

‘The full name of Ibn Mas’ id is“ Abdullah Ibn Mas’ dd Tbn Ghafil Ibn Habib
Al-Hudhali. He was a venerable Companion of the earliest to accept Islam, and
one of the prominent scholars. He accampanied the Prophet (PBUH) and died
in3lAH.

General Meaning of Ibn Mas’ iid’s Tradition

Ibn Mas'iid (may Allah be pleased with him) states that had the Prophet
(PBUH) made his will, he would have instructed the aforementioned Quranic
verses. This is inferred from the concluding phrase of each Quranic verse
which reads; ‘..this has He instructed you... (Qur'an: Al-An'am: 151)

‘bn Mas' dd said that this tradition being motivated by Ibn ‘Abbas (may
Allah be pleased with them) who was reported to have said:

“The real calamity is that the Prophet (PBUH) passed away without
leaving his will?”

Therefore, Ibn Mas'dd (may Allsh be pleased with him) reminded the
Prophet's Companions of the adequate commandments included in the Noble
Qur'in. Had the Prophet bequeathed a commandment, he would have derived
it from the Qur'anic commandments.

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

This tradition illustrates that (he commandments mentioned in these
verses represent the will of the Prophet (PBUH), for the Prophet (PEUH)
enunciates what is instructed in the Noble Qur'an,

13 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tauhid

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

4 The tradition affirms the importance of the ten. commandments
elucidated in the aforementioned Quranic verses,

% The commandments of the Prophet (PBUH) are exactly those of
Almighty Allah for he instructs what Almighty Allah commands.

The Companions were possessed of deep knowledge and piercing
understanding of the Qur'an.

i)

‘THE BOOK OF 19115 14

Mu 'ddh Tbn Jabal (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

"1 wasa companion rider of the Prophet on a donkey. The Prophet
asked, ‘O Mu ‘adh! Do you know Allahé right on His servants
and the right of His servants on Him: I replied, Allah and His
Messenger know best’ He said, ‘Allah’s right on His servants is
that they must worship Him (only) and must not worship any
besides Him. And the servant’ right on Allah is that He must
‘not punish whoever worships none besides Him’ Isaid, ‘O Allah's
Messenger! Should 1 not inform the people of this good news?"
He said, ‘Do not inform them of it, lest they should depend on it
(absolutely): "

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)"

Mu’ adh Ibn Jabal (the Narrator)

‘The full name of Mu adh is Mu'adh Tbn Jabal Ibn * Amr Ibn Aws Ibn Ka*b
Ton ‘Amr Al-Khazraji Al-Anséri, He was one of the venerable renowned figures
ofthe honorable Companions. He was well-versed in Islamic sciences, law and
interpretation of the Noble Qur'an. Mu‘adh (may Allah be pleased with him)
witnessed the Battle of Badr and the rest of the Prophets battles. On the Day
of the Conquest of Mecca, the Prophet (PBUH) appointed him as his viceroy
in Mecca to teach people the basics of religious ordinances. Afterwards, the
Prophet (PBUH) dispatched him to Yemen as a judge and instructor, He died
in 18 A. H. at the age of thirty-eight.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Allalis right on His servants; What Allah deserves from His servants
and makes incumbent upon them.

« The right of servants on Allah: It refers to Allabis promise to reward
His obedient servants out of His bounty and benevolence.

« Absolute Dependence: Excessive trust in Allah's mercy, which may
Jead people to abandon competing in doing good and righteaus
deeds,

15 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tibi

General Meaning of the Hadith

gto the hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) emphasizes the incumbency
of monotheism and, moreover, clarifies its virtues by raising a question, so
that he may grasp the attention of his audience. After the Prophet (PBUH)
had informed him of the virtue of monotheism, Mu’ adh asked the Prophet's
permission to inform people of that glad tiding. However, the Prophet (PBUH)
forbade him to convey such news to people lest they should slacken in offering
good deeds,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘The aforementioned hadith defines monotheism as the devotion of all acts
of worship to Allah Alone, without associating any partner with Him,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Unlike the behavior of arrogant people, the Prophet (PBUH) showed
modesty when mounting the donkey and accompanying Mu’adh
behind him.

4 The permissibility of accompanying another person on a beast imless
it is overburdened.

® Raising questions to invoke answers is an effective method of teaching.

+ Whoever is questioned about what he does not know should say, ‘Allah
knows best!

4 Stressing the right of Allah on His servants; namely, to worship Him
Alone and associate nothing with Him.

+ If the Muslim commits any act of polytheism, his worship is held
invalid, even though he apparently performs all acts of worship.

+ The virtue of monotheism and those who adhere to it,

+ Monotheism is defined as worshipping Allah Alone and avoiding all
acts and forms of polytheism,

% The desirability of conveying glad tidings to a Muslim.

+ Thepermissibility of keeping knowledge secret for the sake of securing
‏د‎ greater interest.

‘+ The exhortation of showing reverence for tutors.

THE BOOK OF TAWHID 16

Endnotes

| Abd Bakrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet (PBUH)
said thrice:
“Should I inform you about the most grievous of the great sins?” They said,
“Yes, Messenger of Allah.’ He said, ‘To join others in worship with Allah, to
be undutifil to one’s parents... The Prophet then sat up after he had been
reclining and said, ‘And I warn you against giving a false witness, and he
kept on saying that warning until we wished he would stop saying it (they
wished so out of their great love for the Prophet)!"

(Related by Al-Bukhari (2654) and Muslim (87).
2 Ubidal fbnus-Samit narrated that the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said:

“Who pledges to comply with the commandments included in these Quranic
verses,” Then he (PBUH) recited the following Quranic verses, ‘Say, ‘Come,
I will recite what your Lord has prohibited to you ...? " (Qur'an: 6: 150) Till
the ‏فاع‎ of the third verse, (then the Prophet (PBUH) added,) ‘Sa whoever
fulfils such conrmandments will be graciously rewarded by Allah, However,
whoever fails to fulfill any of such commandments and receives the legal
pitnishment in this life, then he is deemed free from that sin, But if his
punishment is reprieved till the Hereafter, then it is up to Allah if He wishes
He will punish him or if He wishes, He will forgive him?

‘This hadih is related by Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak (The Reviewed Collection of Hadiths)
(2/318). Commentingon this hadih, Al-Hakim said, ‘Its chain of transmitters is good
and yet neither Al-Bukhari nor Muslim related it’ Al-Bukhari and Muslim related
‘hadihs conveying the meaning of this hadth without having the three Qur'anic-verses.
‘included, Itis related by Al-Bukhari under No. (8), and Muslim under No, (1709),

3 Dhimmis: Non-Muslims living in and under the protection of an Islamic state,

4 See At-Tirmidhi (3080), At-Tabarani in Al-Mu ‘jamul-Awsat (The Middle Lexicon)
(1208), and Aba “Isa said, Tt is hasan (good) gharib (unfamiliar) hadith.

5 ‘Abdallah Ibn Mas’ ad has narrated:

“The Prophet (PBUH) drew a line, then he drew lines to its right and to its left. and
‘said, “This is the path of Allah, and these are the paths on each of them there is a devil

inviting people to it, (Allah, Exalted be He, says,) ‘And, [moreover], this is My
path, which is straight, so follow it; and do not follow other} ways, for you
will be separated from His way ... (Quriin: 6: 153)”

‘Almad in Al-Musnad (The Ascribed Collection of Hadiths) (1/453 and 465), Ibn Hibban
in his Sahih (Authentic Book of Hadith) (1/105) Nos. (6 and 7), and Al-Hiakim (2/318)
and said, "The chain of transmission of this hadith is authentic, but neither Al-
Bukhari nor Muslim related it’ Al-Haythami said in his book Maja’ Az-Zawéd
(The Collection of Additional Hadiths) (7/22), ‘This hadith is related by Ahmad

wy Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid
and Al-Bazzdr, and among its chain of transmitters is ‘Asim Ibn Bahdalah,

‘who is a reliable narrator though somewhat weak,
6 Al-Bukhari (2856) and Muslim (30) Another narration of this hadith states;
Then Mu'ddh narrated the above-mentioned Hadith just before his
death, being afraid of conimitting sin (by not telling the knowledge).”
Tis related by Al-Bukhari (128) and Muslim (32). It is stated in Fathul Majid (Bestowal
of the Glorious) (pp. 28) that Al-Wazir Abul-Muzaffar said, ‘Mu ‘adh abstained
_from speaking out this hadith lest a benighted one would, out of his ignorance,

abandon offering acts of obedience’

Merit of Monotheism

Almighty Allah says:
“They who believe and do not mix their belief with injustice-
those will have security, and they are the [rightly] guided”
(Quran: Al-An‘ am: 82)'

Relevance of Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

This chapter aims at emphasizing the merit of monotheism and its good
impact and blessings which include the expiation of sins, and exhorting people
to adopt monotheism and act according to its principles.

20 Concise Commentary on the Book of ‏انلع ة1‎

Keywords and Phrases

+ Those who believe: The believers are those who retain a firm belief,
pronounce the declaration of faith and maintain apparent righteous
deeds. All these convictions and acts are crowned by true and sound
belief in One God,

٠ Injustice: According to the aforementioned Quranic verse, the term is
defined as polytheism, Injustice originally means a violation of rights
or of what is right, Polytheism is, thus, a form of injustice because itis
a violation of Allah's absolate right of being worshipped solely.

+ The Rightly-guided: Those who are steadfastly guided to adhere to
the straight path,

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Relief of fears and hardships on the Day of Resurrection is secured
for those who are sincerely devoted to Allah Alone without desecrating
monotheism by any act of polytheism; Such people are those who are
guided to steadfastly adhere to the straight path in this life.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‘The aforementioned Quranic verse emphasizes the merit of monotheism
and refers to its expiation of sins,
Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

‘> The merit of monotheism and its fruits in both this world and the
Hereafter

4 Major polytheism is a form of injustice, which nullifies sound belief,
while minor polytheism only degrades true belief

% Associating partners with Allah (polytheism) is an unforgivable sin,
© Polytheism causes fear in both this world and the Hereafter,

ee

‘Chapter 1: Merit of Monotheism: 21

“Ubadah Ibnus-Samit (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the
Prophet (PBUH) said;
“Whoever testifies that none has the right to be worshipped but
Allah Alone Who has no partners, and that Muhammad is His
Servant and His Messenger, and that Jesus is Allah’s Servant and
His Messenger, His Word which He bestowed on Mary and a spirit
{created at a command) from Him, and that Paradise is true, and
Hell is true, Allah will admit him into Paradise with the deeds
which ke had done (even if those deeds are few).””

‘Ubadah Ibnus-Samit (the Narrator)

The full name of ‘ Ubadah is ‘Ubadah Tbnus-Samit Ibn Qays Al-Ansart
Al-Khazraji. He was one of the prominent chieftains who witnessed Al-
Aqabah Pledge. He is reckoned among the people of Badr and died in 34
A.H, at the age of 72.

Keywords and Phrases

+ To testify that none has the right to be worshipped but
Allah: This is the Testification of Faith, which a Muslim must
verbally proclaim, fully comprehend and further act according
to its requirements.

+ Messenger: One that carries a Divine Message.

+ Allah's Servant and Messenger: It is unlike the Christians’ beltef,
which proclaims that Jesus is God or the Son of God or one of the
three hypostases.

+ His Word: Jesus (PBUH) was created by a divine decree expressed in
a divine word.

+ That He bestowed on Mary; Allah sent Gabriel with His Word to
breathe his Spirit into Mary. Jesus was, therefore, created by ‏طقال‎
‎divine will.

+ Spirit: Jesus is called the Spirit of Allah (PBUH) as he is one of the souls
created by Allah,

2 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhid

+ From Him: it means that Jesus (PBUH) was created by Allah. His
creation is like the creation of the heavens and the earth as expressed
in Allah’ saying, “And He has subjected to you whatever is in the
heavens and whatever is on earth - all fro Him.”

(Qur’an:Al-fathyiah:13)

+ Paradise is true, and Hell is true: ‘The Testification of Faith should
include the Muslims’ unrelenting belief that Paradise and the Hellfire
exist according to the instructions of the Ever-Glorious Qur'an.

+ Allah will admit him into Paradise with the deeds which he
had done (even if those deeds were few): This phrase may be
differently interpreted:

1. Allah will admit each monotheist into Paradise regardless of the
sins he commits, for monotheists will inevitably enter Paradise.

2. Allah will admit him into a grade of Paradise proportionate to the
good and righteous deeds he offered.

+ Related by Al-Bukhariand Muslim: Itmeansthattheaforementioned
hadith was compiled by Al-Bukhari and Muslim in their books, which
are regarded as the most authentic compilations of Hadith.

General Meaning of the Hadith

While expounding the virtue of monotheism and its importance, the
Prophet (PBUH) shed light on the prerequisites a Muslim should fulfill in
order to be admitted into Paradise. A Muslim must, therefore, proclaim
the Testification of Faith, comprehend its meaning and act according to
its apparent and inward requirements, He must, further, avoid excessive
or inadequate belief in the nature of the two venerable prophets, Jesus and
‘Muhammad (Blessings and Peace of Allah be upon them both). They must,
thus, be assumed as Messengers and human servants of Allah. Similarly,
a Muslim must believe that Paradise and the Hellfire undoubtedly exist.
The one who fulfills all such requirements, according to the hadith, will be
admitted to Paradise whatever sins he might have committed.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith illustrates the merit of monotheism that ultimately leads the
believer to enter Paradise and expiates his sins.

Chaprer 1; Merit of Monoxheisit 23

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

“ The merit of monotheism, which is a cause of expiating one's sins
% It proves the infinite Grace and Beneficence of Allah, Exalted be He.

A Muslim must not excessively or inadequately venerate Allah's
prophets and righteous people. A Muslim must not be ungrateful
to them. Similarly, he must riot be excessively devoted to them by
associating them with Allah as some ignorant and deviant people do.

% Islamic monotheism is contrary to all polytheistic doctrines of the
Jews, Christians, idolaters and atheists.

+ Wrongdoers among the monotheists will not abide in the Hellfire

for eternity.
eee

‎Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwi‏ د

‎*Itban Ibn Malik (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUR) said:

‎"... Allah has forbidden the Hellfire (to touch) those who say "There
is no deity but Allah,' only for the sake of Allah.”

‎(A part of a hadith related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

‎“Itbdn (the Narrator)

‎‘The full name of the narrator is ‘Itban Ibn Mélik Ibn ‘Amr Tbnul-' Ajlan
AL-Ansari. He was from the tribe of Band Salim ibn “Awf, and a well known
Companion. He died during the caliphate of Mu’ awiyah (may Allah be pleased
with him).

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎« Allah has forbidden the Hellfire: Forbiddance means that Allah
will safeguard the believers against the torture of the Hellfire.

‎+ Only for the sake of Allah; It means that the Testification of Faith
must be proclaimed with sincerity, or otherwise, it may be regarded as

‎hypocrisy,
‎General Meaning of the Hadith

‎‘The Prophet (PBUH) affirms that whoever utters the 'Testification of Faith
will be Kept away from Hellfire if he is sincere in his belief, devotes all acts of
worship to Allah Alone, avoids polytheism, and fulfills all the apparent and
inward requirements of faith,

‎Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‎This hadith is a clear indication of the merit of monotheism, which
guarantees admission to Paradise and expiation of sins anly for those who
retain true belief.

Chapter 1; Meric of Monotheism 25

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

+ The merit of monotheism, which secures its holders from the Hellfire
and expiates their sins

% It is not sufficient to utter the Testification of Faith without retaining firm
belief of the heart, as the case of the hypocrites when they proclaim [slam
but inwardly do not have a firm belief.

+ Similarly, itis not sufficient to retain firm belief of the heart without
verbally pronouncing the Testification of Faith, such as the case of
the infidels.

© ‘The Hellfire is prohibited to approach those of perfect belief in Allah.

4 Good deeds will be accepted only if they are sincerely devoted ta Allah
‘Alone and offered in conformity with the Sunnah of the Prophet (PBUH).

‘ The mere utterance of the Testification of Faith by those who adore
other false deities or objects besides Allah such as devotees of shrines
is of no avail. Though they verbally proclaim the Testification of Faith,
they invoke the dead and draw nearer to them.

© This hadith proves that Almighty Allah has a Face that suits His
Majesty and the Grandeur of His Might,

oe

26 ‏عمدت‎ Commentary on the Book of Tawi

Abia Sa'id Al-KChudri (may Allsh be pleased with him) narrated that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Moses said, ‘O My Lord! Teach me an invocation with which
I should remember and invoke You’ Almighty Allah said, ‘Say
"There is no deity but Allah.’ Moses said, ‘O My Lord! All Your
servants say this invocation.” Almighty Allah replied, ‘O Moses!
If the seven heavens, their inhabitants, other than Me, and the
seven earths were to be in a scale, and the statement ‘There is
no deity but Allah’ were to be in the other scale, the latter would
definitely outweigh ther. "“

(Related by Tbn Hibban and Al-Hakim, who graded it a sahih
(authentic) hadith)

Abi Said Al-Khudri (the Narrator)

‘The full name of the narrator is Abd Sa'id Tbn Sa'd Tbn Malik Ibn Sinan
Al-Khazraji Al-Ansiri Al-Khudri, from Band Khudrah. He was a venerable
Companion and a son ofa Companion, He narrated many hadiths and died in
74 AH; may Allah be pleased with him,

Keywords and Phrases

+ Moses: He is Masi fbn ‘Imran, the Messenger of Allah dispatched to
the Children of Israel, and the one who directly spoke to Allah,

« To remember Allah; To remember Allah means to glorify Him
repeatedly and render words of homage to Him.

General Meaning of the Hadith

Prophet Moses (PBUH) asked Almighty Allah to teach him a formula of
invocation with which he would praise and invoke Him, Thus, he was recommended
to repeat the statement “There is no deity but Allah? Moses (PBUH) realized that
this statement is often reiterated by most people. Therefore, he asked for a
peculiar invocation so that he might be distinguished. Allah explained to
him the virtues of this statement, which is unmatched by other statements.

‘Chapter ٠: Metit of Monotheism 2

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 This hadith points out the great virtues of proclaiming that there is no
deity but Allah, This formula implies both monotheism and sincerity
of belief

# The merit of Moses (PBUH) afd his keenness to draw nearer to Allah

Acts of worship are restricted to what Allah ordains, and no one is
permitted to introduce something innovative in religious ordinances, for
‘Moses (PBUH) asked Allah to teach him how to glorify and praise Him.

‘What is more direly needed should be more available to and bearable
by most people. As the statement "There is no deity but Allah’ is
indispensable for the whole world, itis the most available and easiest
to remember.

* Almighty Allah is above heavens, as He says, ..and their inhabitants,
other than Me.

The statement ‘There is no deity but Allah’ is indivisible, so, it must be
pronounced in full.

‘ This hadith proves the reality of the Balance of Weighing Deeds, which
will be set (in the Hereafter).

4 The prophets need to be directed to the merits of the Testification
of Faith,

% There are seven earths exactly as there are seyen heavens.

obs

28 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhiel

Anas [bn Malik (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“heard the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) saying that Almighty Allah
said, ‘O son of Adam! If you meet Me in the state that your sins fill
the earth, but not associating anything with Me, | will meet you
with the same (vastness) of forgiveness (on My behalf)! **

(Related by At-Tirmidhi who graded it a hasan hadith)

Anas Ibn Malik (the Narrator)

The full name of the narrator is Anas Ibn Malik Ibn An-Nadr Al-Ansari
‘Al-Khazraji. He was the Prophet's servant for ten years. The Prophet (PBUH)
invoked Allah for Anas saying, “O Allah, grant him plenty of money and
children and admit him into Paradise." He died in 92 or 93.A.H. and at the age
of more than a hundred years; may Allah be pleased with him.

Keywords and Phrases

+ But not associating anything with Me: It implies that a believer's
sins may be forgiven on the Day of Resurrection provided that he dies
‘without perpetrating any act of polytheism,

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘The Prophet (PBUH) says that Almighty Allah informs His servants
about His infinite Grace and Mercy, and assures them that He forgives
all sins, no matter how plenty they are, as long as no act of polytheism
is committed. Moreover, this hadith is similar to the Qur’anic verse,
which reads:

“Indeed, Allah does not forgive association with Hint, but He
forgives what is less than that for whom He w

(Qura

An-Nisa’: 48)

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith provides a proof of the great reward of monotheism, which
expiates mans sins, however countless they may be,

sf Monotheism ‏و2‎

Chapter t: Meti

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% The merits of monotheism and the great reward it entails.

4 The hadith provides that Allah’s Grace, Bounty, Mercy and Forgiveness
are infinite.

4 This hadith is a counter argument against the Kharijites" (Seceders')
allegation, which involves that once a Muslim commits any major sin,
he becomes a disbeliever.

4 It also provides a proof that speech is one of Allah's Attributes, and
that His Speech befits His Majesty and Might.

“The Testification of Faith is not a mere utterance. It rather necessitates
the avoidance of both minor and major polytheism.

‎The Hadith also proves the occurrence of resurrection, reckoning and‏ ني
‎reward in the Hereafter.‏

‎Endnotes

‎| “Abdullh Tb Mas'td (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

‎“When the Verse: “They wha believe and do not mix their belief with injustice” (Quritn
ALAn am: 83) was revealed, we said, ‘O Allalis Messenger! Who is there amongst us
‘who has not done wrong to himself? He replied, ‘It is not as you say, for ‘injustice’ in
the Verse ".. and do not mix their belief, with injustice" means ‘Shirk’ (ie. joining
athers in worship with Allah), Have you not heard Luqiian’ saying to his son, *‘O my
‘son, do not associate [anything] with Altah. Indeed, association [with him] is great
injustice! * **

‎[Related by Al-Buldhari (3360) Muslim )124([-

‎2 Al-Bukhari (3435), Muslim (28), At-Tirmidhi (2640) and Ahmad in his book Al-
‘Musnad (5/314),

‎3 AL-Bokkhari (425), Mustim (33),and Ahmad in his compilation A-Musnad (5/449).

‎4 ‏د15‎ Hibban (2324), Al-Hikim (1/528) in Al-Mustadrak (The Reviewed Collection of
‘Hadiths) which Al-Hikim regards as meeting the conditions that either Al-Bukh&st ot
‘Muslim set to add hadiths to their compilations of authentic hadiths, and yet are not
mentioned in either of them. An-Nasi'l in “Amal Al-Yaws Wal-Laylah (Supplicattons
of the Day and Night) (834 and L141), and both Tbn Hibban and Al-Hakim graded
it as authentic, and Adh-Dhahabi was of the same opinion as that of Al-Hakim.
‘Al-Haythami said in his book Majma' Az-Zawdid (The Collection of Additional
Hadiths) (10/82), “This hadith is narrated by Abit Ya‘Id and its transmitters
are deenied reliable though somewhat weak.”

30 Concive Commentary on the Book aff Tawhid

5 At-Tirmidht (3534), Ad-Darami (2791), and Akimad (5/172), and At-Tirmidhi graded
ita hasan hadith.

6 The Khavijites (A-Khawirij, ie. the Seceders): An Islamic radical sect who broke away
from the reign of “AltTbn Aba Talib, the Muslim Caliph then, and murdered him, Their
followers believe that the Muslim who commits a major sin is a disbeliever. They also
‘curse and revile the Prophets Companions and deem the blood of Muslims violable.

Perfect Monotheism
Guarantees Paradise

Almighty Allah says:
“Indeed, Abraham was a (comprehensive) leader, devoutly obe-
dient to Allah, inclining toward truth, and he was not of those
who associate others with Allah.” (Quran; An-Nabl: 120)
He, Exalted be He, also says:
“And they who do not associate anything with their Lord”
(Quran: Al-Mu’minan: 59)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In the previous chapter, the author (may Allah have mercy on him) men-
tioned the virtues of monotheism. Now, he is going to elucidate how to attain
the degree of perfect monotheism.

32 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhid

Keywords and Phrases

« Attainment of perfect monotheism: Perfect monotheism may be
realized if it becomes free from any act or form of polytheism, bid ‘ahs
(matters innovated in religion) or wrongdoings.

+ A comprehensive leader: Ibrahim (Abraham) used to be a normative
model, since he instructed all that is good.

+ Inclining toward truth: He is ardently inclined to obey Allah and
always disinclined to worship any false deity.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verses

Almighty Allah characterizes Ibrahim (Abraham), His intimate friend, by
four qualities:

1, He was a good example of al righteous traits'as he reached the highest
degree in showing patience and certainty; the two attributes are held
necessary for attaining comprehensive leadership.

2. He was devout, obedient and persistent in worshipping Allah,
Exalted be He.

3. In addition to turning away from polytheism, Ibrahim inclined
toward Allah.

4. He kept away from the polytheists.

Relevance of the Two Qur’anic Verses to the Chapter

in the first Qur’anic verse, Almighty Allah mentions the characteristics of
Ibrahim (PBUH), who represents the highest degree of perfect monotheism.
He, moreover, enjoins us to follow his example. Therefore, He said:

“There has already been for you an excellent pattern in Abraham
and those with him..." (Qur'an: Al-Mumtahinah: 4)

in the second Qur’ani¢ verse Almighty Allah depicts our righteous
ancestors’ traits; the greatest of which is their abandonment of all acts and
forms of polytheism whether apparent or covert. Hence, whoever succeeds
in fulfilling these prerequisites will reach the highest degree of perfect and
pure monotheism, and consequently be admitted into Paradise without
being called to account for his deeds.

(Chapter 2: Perfect Monothelsm Guarantees Paradise 35

Lessons Drawn from the Two Qur’anic Verses

The two Qur'anic verses affirm the virtues of our forefather
Ibrahim (PBUH).

4 One is enjoined to follow the footsteps of Ibrahim (PBUH) and adopt
his great attributes.

4 The two Quranic verses expound the prerequisites of perfect and pare
monotheism

% One is enjoined to avoid polytheism, and disown polytheists by
denouncing their beliefs and practices.

© According to the aforementioned Quranic verses, true believers are
portrayed as accomplishing the requirements of pure monotheism.

aad

3A Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawihid

Husayn Ibn "“Abdur-Rahman reported:

“Twas sitting with Sa ‘id Ibn Jubayr when he said, ‘Who among
you saw the shooting star that fell last night?’ I said, ‏ل‎ (saw
it)’ and I added, ‘(At that titne,) I was not performing prayer
but I was stung. He asked me, ‘What did you do then?’ I said,
‘L recited an incantation’ He asked, ‘Why did you do so?’ I
said, I did so because I heard a hadith, which Ash-Sha‘bt
related to us. He asked, ‘What did he relate to you?’ I said, ‘He
related on the authority of Buraydah Ibnul-Husayb who said,
‘No incantation (is permissible) except that made because of
an evil eye or a sting’ So, Said Ibn Jubayr said, 12 is good
that one acts according to what one learns. Then he added
that Ibn ‘Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated
that the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘Nations were
displayed before me; a prophet would pass by accompanied
by a few followers; a prophet would pass by accompanied
by one or two followers, and a prophet would pass by with
nobody, Then a big crowd of people passed in front of me and
1 asked, ‘Who are they? Are they my followers?” It was said,
‘No. It is Moses and his followers: Then I saw a big crowd of
people who passed in front of me and it was said to me, “This
is your nation out of whom seventy thousands shall enter
Paradise without reckoning or chastisement' Then Prophet
Muhammad (PBUH) entered his house without ielling
his Companions who they (the seventy thousand persons)
were. So the people started talking about the issue and some
said, ‘Those may be the Companions who have believed in
Allah and accompanied His Messenger another group said,
‘Those are our children who are born in the fold of Islam
and associate no partner with Allah’; and others expressed
different opinions, When the Prophet (PBUH) came out,
they informed him of their argument, and he said, ‘Those
people do not ask others to treat them with incantation, nor
do they get themselves cauterized (for treatment), nor do they
believe in bad omen, and upon their Lord they rely’ On that,
“Ukkdshah Ibn Mihsan said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Invoke

(Chapter 2: Perfect Monotheisim Guarantees Paradise 35

Allah to make me one of them? The Prophet (PBUH) said,
"You are one of them’ So, another person got up and said, 0
Messenger of Allah! Invoke Allah to make me one of thera?”
The Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘“Ukkashah has preceded you! "

+ Husayn Ibn *Abdur-Rahman: The full name of Hugayn is Hugayn Ibn
“Abdur-Rahman As-Sulam{ Al-Harithi. He was one of the 18010
and died in 136A. H., at the age of 93; may Allah be pleased with him

+ Sa‘id Ibn Jubayr: He is an eminent imam and fagih from among
the most venerable disciples of Ibn’ Abbas. He was murdered by the
‘command of Al-Hajj in 95.A.H., before reaching the fiftieth of his age:

+ Ash-Sha" bi: His full name is Ash-Sha’bi Ibn Shurahbil Al-Hamadani,
He was born during the Caliphate of ‘Umar Ibnul-KhattAb, and was
‘one of the trustworthy Tabi'fin, He died in 103 A.H.; may Allah be
pleased with him:

+ Buraydah: His full name is Buraydah Ibnul-Husayo Ibnul-Harith
Al-Aslami. He was a well-known Companion, and died in 63 AH;
may Allah be pleased with him.

« Ibn ‘Abbas: * Abdullah Ibn ‘Abbas Ibn ‘Abdul-Muttalib was the
paternal cousin of the Prophet (PBUH), and one of the venerable
Companions for whom the Prophet (PBUH) invoked Allah saying "0
Allah, grant kim (Ibn ‘Abbas) deep understanding of the matters of
religion and teach him the essence of interpreting (the Noble Qurlin)”
Allah responded to this invocation. Ibn ‘Abbas died in 68 A.H.; may
Allah be pleased with him.

+ “Ukkashah: His full name is ’Ukkashah Ibn Mihsan Ibn Hurthin
Al-Asadt. He was one of the earliest Companions to accept Islam. He
immigrated to Medina and witnessed the Battle of Badr. He fought
the apostates under the leadership of Khalid Ibnul-Walfd and was
killed therein in 12 A-H.; may Allah be pleased with him.

Keywords and Phrases

« Incantation: Specific Qur'anic verses and prayers recited for an injured
or sick person,

36 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhld

« Evil eye: Envious eye,

+ One acts according to what one learns: According to this phrase, a
‘Muslim should notbe ignorant ofritual ordinances and of how ta perform
them. Similarly, a Muslim has to act according to what he learns.

+ Nations were displayed before me: Some scholars maintained that
such nations were displayed before the Prophet (PBUH) at the Night
of Ascension. when he was shown what would happen to them on the
Day of Resurrection,

+ Are they my followers?; The Prophet's question indicated that he
(PBUH) thought they were his followers because they were great
in number, and that he was so far that he (PBUH) could not clearly
recognize them.

+ Without reckoning or chastisement: They would not be called to
account for their deeds or even receive chastisement. That is because
they fulfilled the prerequisites of perfect and pure monotheism.

+ So the people started talking about the issue: All the attendants
debated and produced different conjectures about the good deed,
which qualified such people to deserve such an elevated grade,

+ ‘Ukkishah has preceded you: ‘Ukkishah preceded in fulfilling
these characteristics or in raising the question,

General Meaning of the Hadith

Husayn Ibn ‘Abdur-Rahman (may Allah be pleased with him) gave an
account of a talk that took place at Sa'id Ibn Jubayr’s session when he discussed
the issue of the shooting star that fell down the previous night, Husayn said that
he witnessed its falling, as he was not sleeping then, Lest the attendants would
think that he spent the whole night praying, Husayn explained why he was awake.
‘This was the common practice of our righteous Muslim Salaf who were so keen
to observe sincerity in all their dealings. Hence, he revealed that being stung was
the real reason for being awake during the whole night. Thereupon, the stream of
their talk turned to discuss what Husayn did with his injury. He informed them
that he treated himself by reciting legal incantation, When Husayn was asked
about the legal proof of his action, he mentioned the hadith, which provided the
permissibility of reciting legal incantation in his case. Thereupon, Sa’id praised
him for applying the hadith, and further guided him how to attain the highest
grades of perfect monotheism by abandoning detestable matters, when needed,

Chapter 2: Perfece Monotheism Guarantees Paradise 37

and exclusively relying on and trusting in Allah (instead of being over confident
in ways of treatment offered by others). Itis, moreover, the quality of the seventy
thousand persons who would be admitted into Paradise without being called to
account for their deeds or even chastised. The Prophet (PBUH) depicted them
as exclusively relying on and trusting in Allah instead of holding fast to legal
incantations, cauterization or other types of treatment sought from others.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith elucidates the way of attaining perféct monotheism and the
rewards it entails in the Hereafter.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Knowing the merit of our righteous Muslim Salaf who always contem-
plate the heavenly signs of Allah,

Our righteous Muslim Salaf were keen to observe sincerity in all their
affairs. They, moreover, detested showing off their righteous deeds.

+ Before proceeding into any act une should investigate the proof of its
permissibility. Such was the case of our righteous Muslim Salaf.

+ tis desirable to séek the proof of permissibility before carrying out any
action, and itis highly commendable to put what is learnt into practice.

* Knowledge should be conveyed with courteousness and tenderness.
% The permissibility of treatment by reciting legal incantation.

Upon witnessing a Muslim adhering to a permissible act, itis desirable
to guide him ‏ها‎ offer what is preferable and more desirable in the Sight
of Allah.

Knowing the merit of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) before whom all
nations were displayed.

The numbers of the prophets’ followers differ from one to another.

‎This hadith provides a refutation of those who allege that the truth lies‏ جه
‎in the practices of the dominant majority of people.‏

‎One is enjoined to follow the truth, no matter how few its followers
may be,
The hadith affirms the virtues of Moses (PBUH) and his followers.

‎+ The hadith affirms the virtue of the Prophet Muhammad's nation as it
represents the major multitude among the other prophets’ followers.

38 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

+ Knowing the merit of attaining perfect monotheism, which will be
greatly rewarded on the Day of Resurrection.

% Itisallowableto hold discussions on religious issues to derive beneficial
points and make the truth evident,

© The Salaf used to keep a deep understanding of religion, They, thus,
realized that the seventy thousand persons attained such a highly
elevated rank through earnest work.

% The Salaf were seriously keen to do righteous acts and compete in
offering good deeds.

Attaining full trust in Allah by abandoning incantation and cauteriza~
tion is an indication of pure and perfect belief in Allah.

*% Itis permissible for the Muslim to ask pious people to invoke Allah
for him.

+ Knowing the virtue of *Ukkashah Ibn Mihsan (may Allah be pleased

The Prophet (PBUH) prophesied that ‘Ukkashah was one of the
seventy thousand people who would enter Paradise without reckoning
or chastisement. Afterwards, “Ukkishah was martyred during the
military campaignslaunched against the apostates. May Allah bepleased
with him! This incident provides one of the signs of Muhammad's
Prophethood.

4 ‘The Prophet's use of euphemism shows his noble character. He did
not offensively tell the man that he would not be included among
those seventy thousands.

4 It is desirable for a scholar to terminate the discussion on specific
topics, so that unqualified persons may not delve into sophisticated
legal issues.

Endnotes

[ Al-Bukharf (3410), Muslim (220), At-Tirmidht (2448), Ad-Darimt (2810), and
‘Abmad (1/271).

2 The Tabi'tin (Successors of the Companions): Plural of Tabi’ a person who witnessed
a Companion of the Prophet (PBUH), ic. one of those who belonged to the first
‘Muslim generation after the Prophet (PBUH).

Fear of Polytheism

Almighty Allah says:
“Indeed, Allah does not forgive association with Him, but He
forgives what is less than that for whom He wills...”
(Quran: An-Nis&: 48-116)
Moreover, Allah, Exalted be He, relates, in the Noble Qur'an, that Ibrahim,
His intimate friend (may Allah be pleased with him), invoked Him saying:

“My Lord, make this city [i.e., Mecca] secure and keep me and
my sons away from worshipping idols” (Qur'an: Ibrahim: 35)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Having clarified how to meet the prerequisites of monotheism and pointed
out its merits, the author, in this chapter, elaborates on the misgivings about
polytheism, so that a true believer may be warned against them.

4 Concise Commentary ont the Book of Tanuhidd

Keywords and Phrases

+ Allah does not forgive association with Him: Allah never grants
forgiveness to the one who dies while dedicating acts of devotion to
any false deity besides Him. Nonetheless, Allah forgives all other sins
with the exception of polytheism.

+ For whom He wills: Allah grants pardon ‏فا‎ whom He wills out of His
bounty and wisdom.

General Meaning of the First Verse

With the aim of warning His bondmen against approaching any act of
polytheism, Allah, to Whom belong all perfection and majesty, stresses that
He will never grant pardon to those who assign partners to Him and remain
so till death. On the contrary, out of His endless bounty and grace He forgives
the sins of those whom He wills with the exception of polytheism,

General Meaning of the Second Qur’anic Verse

Ibrahim (PBUH) invoked Allah to keep him and his sons away from
idolatry, which is deemed as a grave source of mischief.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verses to the Chapter

‘The first verse signifies that assigning partners to Allah is deemed as the
gravest sin in the Sight of Allah, Moreover, the one who commits that grave
sin will never be forgiven if he fails to offer repentance before death. Thus, one
must be warned against approaching such a heinous sin. The second Qur'anic
verse signifies that Ibrahim (PBUH) was afraid of being deluded by acts of
polytheism so he invoked Allah to safeguard him against all acts and forms of
polytheism. We are thus supposed to express out fear of polytheism. Thus, the
‘two Quranic verses emphasize the significance of expressing fear of perpetrating
any act or form of polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verses

+ Polytheism is the gravest sin, as it will never be forgiven unless one
turns to Allah in repentance;

% If anyone commits any sin other than polytheism and dies before
repentance, his affair will be absolutely referred to Allah, Who may
grant him forgiveness or chastise him in the Hereafter.

‘Chapter 3: Fear of Polytheism 4

+ The Muslim must express his fear of polytheism, for Ibrahim (PBUH),
‘who was distinguished by demolishing idols at his time, was afraid of
falling into such a grave sin,

* The permissibility of invoking Allsh for removing tribulations. He is
the One to be besought for help and support.

% It is permissible to invoke Allah for oneself and on behalf of one's
offspring as well.

4 ‘The verses refute the allegation of some ignorant people that the Muslim
nation is not susceptible to fall into acts ar forms of polytheism, Those
people felt safe from it and thus ignorantly fell into its darkness,

oot

42 Concise Commseneary on the Book of Tawhid

‘The Prophet (PBUH) has said:

“The most dreadful sin | am afraid you may commit is minor
polytheism. He was, then, questioned about it. Thereupon, he said,

‘It is (offering your good deeds) in ostentation.
(Related by Ahmad)

General Meaning of the Hadith

Out of his pity and mercy for his nation, the Prophet (PBUH) was so keen
to guide people to the path of righteousness and warn them against all that
is evil. He (PBUH) warned Muslims not to perform devotional acts in order
to show off or to get people’s admiration. He deemed showing off as an act of
minor polytheism, which would render all acts of worship, performed in such
a way, null and void. Since people intuitively long for acquiring prominence
and being praised by others, ostentation may easily permeate righteous
‘Muslims, Therefore, the Prophet (PBUH) expressed his anxiety about the
righteous Muslims who offer good deeds and warned against pretentious
display, While minor polytheism may easily permeate the hearts of the
righteous, acts of major polytheism are hardly perpetrated by them,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

“This hadith warns the believers against the perpetration of minor polytheism;
‘whereas the former two Qur'anic verses warn them against approaching acts
of major polytheism. Thus, the present chapter elaborates on the two main
categories of polytheism,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 A true believer should be anxious about falling into minor polytheism,
since the Prophet (PBUH) expressed his anxiety in the aforementioned
hadith and, moreover, warned righteous Muslims against it.

4 The Prophet (PBUH) was compassionate and keen to guide his nation
to the straight and righteous path.

 Polytheism is categorized into: major and minor polytheism. The
former is defined as setting rivals to Almighty Allah whereas the latter
is confined to acts designated as polytheistic according to the Qur'an
or the Sunmah without reaching the degree of major polytheism. They
‘may, further, be compared as follows:

Chapter 3: Fear of Polytheism 43

2 The former renders man’s entire deeds void, whereas the latter only
tenders acts contaminated with impure intentions null and void,

4 While retainers of major polytheism will abide in the Hellfire for eternity,
perpetrators of minor polytheism will not.

+ A perpetrator of major polytheism is regarded as a repudiator of Tslam
while the holder of any act or form of minor polytheism is regarded

asa Muslim.
oo

‎Concise Commentary on the Book of Tatwhial‏ د
‎Mas’ dd (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Messenger‏ مطل
‎of Allah (PBUH) said:‏

‎“Whoever dies while still invoking anything other than Allah as an
equal will enter the Hellfire?”

‎(Related by Al-Bukhari)

‎General Meaning of the Hadith

‎‘The Prophet (PBUH) states that if the person sets a prophet or any false
deity or object as a rival ta Allah either by invoking or imploring such a false
deity for assistance, and remains so until he dies, he will be doomed to the
Hellfire. Setting a rival to Allah has two forms:

‎a) To associate a partner with Allah with regard to the devotional acts. This
is regarded as an act of major polytheism, which entails eternal chastisement
in the Hellfire.

‎b) Any act of minor polytheism such as making Allah equal to human
beings in words like, "When Allah wills and you will” or “It is only made
for Allah’s sake and yours." Offering good deeds for the sake of pretentious
display is also regarded as an act of minor polytheism, which does not
necessarily lead its perpetrator to abide eternally in the Hellfire.

‎Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‎Muslims, according to this hadith are warned against any act or form of
major or minor polytheism by means of expounding its grave consequences.

‎Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

‎4 This hadith warns Muslims against all acts and forms of polytheism
and advises them to turn to Allah in repentance.

‎4 Invoking prophet ora friend of Allah whether alive or dead, and seeking
the blessings ofa stone or a tree are regarded as acts of polytheism.

‎© Polytheism is only expiated by repentance.

‎Bes

‘Chapter 3: Fear of Polytheism 4

Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:
“He who meets Allah without associating anything with Him will
enter Paradise, and he who meets Him associating (anything) with
Him will enter the Hellfire.”

(Related by Muslim and Ahmad)

Jabir Ibn * Abdullah (the Narrator)

His full name is abir Ibn * Abdullah Tbn ‘Amr Ibn Hirdm Al-Ansiri As-Sulami.
He is one of the venerable Companions of the Prophet. His father was also a
‘Companion, He narrated many hiadiths from the Prophet (PBUH). He died
after 70 AH. at the age of 94; may Allah be pleased with him.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Meet Allah: It means to pass away,

+ Anything: It isa general word to include the prohibition of actsentailing
both minor and major polytheism.

General Meaning of the Hadith

The Prophet (PBUH) declares that whoever dies while adopting monotheism
will definitely be admitted into Paradise. Ifhe persistently commits a major sin
and dies without offering repentance, he will be referred to Allah’s Divine Will.
He may be forgiven and thus permitted to enter Paradise or be admitted into
the Hellfire for a limited period of time before entering Paradise.

Ifa man, on the other hand, dies while retaining any act or conviction of
major polytheism, he will never beadmitted into Paradise. Allah will, moreover,
have no mercy on him and he will be cast into the Hellfire and abide therein
for eternity: But if he dies while perpetrating an act of minor polytheism, he
will enter the Hellfire for a limited period of time.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘The hadith warns Muslims against all kinds of polytheism, and urges them
to keep away from such grave sins.

46 Goncise Commentary on the Book oF Tiwhid

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 One must be overly afraid of committing any act of polytheism: since
salvation from the Hellfire is contingent on the abandonment of such
a grave sin.

# One's good deeds are not accepted except when being free of any form
or act of polytheism,

4+ Clarifying the concept of the Testification of Faith, which implies utter
renunciation of polytheism and pure worship of One God.

© Both Paradise and Hellfire are so close to man, so every human being
will fully realize his destination upon the end of his life.

4 The hadith affirms the virtues of those who are safeguarded against
polytheism.

Endnotes

1 Abmad in Al-Musnad (5/428 and 429), and At-Tabarani in Al-Mu ‘jam Al-Kabir (The
Greal Lexicon) (4/253 No, 4301)

2 Al-Bukharf (4497). “Abdullah Ibn Mas‘td, the narrator of the Hadith, adds, "And I
said, ‘Whoever dies without invoking anything as a rival to Allah will enter
Paradise.” The hadith is also related by Muslim (92) with a wording that reads, “He
who dies associating anything with Allah would enter the Fire (of Hell)”

‘Abdullah Ibn Mas"td said, “Tsay that he who dies without associating anything

with Allah would enter Paradise.”
3 Muslim (95) and Ahmad in Al-Musnadl (3/345).

Calling to Testification
of Faith

Almighty Allah says:

“Say, ‘This is my way; I invite to Allah with insight, I and
those who follow me. And Exalted is Allah; and I am not of
those who associate others with him.” (Qur'an: Yésuf: 108)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In this chapter, we are going to elaborate on the necessity of inviting others
to the straight path of Almighty Allah with insight, wisdom and beautiful
preaching as the Messengers of Allah and their followers did.

48 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhtel

Keywords and Phrases

+ Inviting people to Accept the Testification of Faith: The Call to
Allah is designated as inviting people to worship One God, believe
in Him and His Messenger. This is the essence of the Testification
of Faith.

+ Say: The person addressed with the command is the Prophet (PBUH).

٠ Insight: It includes all means of knowledge, which may be employed to
distinguish good from evil and truth from falsehood.

+ Exalted is Allah: This phrase has been mentioned as a command to
give praise to Allah and disprove any deficiency or inadequacy as-
cribed to Him.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Almighty Allah commands His Messenger to inform people that he,
as well as his followers, invites people to Allah with knowledge, certainty
and clear evidence. The essence of such a call is that Allah is far above
having a rival or a partner in His absolute dominion aver the heavens and
the earth, He is also too exalted to have an associate worshipped or adored
besides Him.

Relevance of the Quranic Verse to the Chapter

According to the aforementioned Qur'anic verse, Allah expounded the
exemplary method of the Messenger (PBUH) and his followers in inviting
people toadmit, with insight, wisdom and beautiful preaching, the Testification
of Faith, Therefore, the Quranic verse emphasizes the obligation of inviting
others to accept Islam, which is the subject matter of the present chapter.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

% Inviting people to bear witness that there is no deity but Allah, is the
exemplary practice of the Prophet (PBUH) and his followers.

© A propagator of Islam should be well versed and possessed of compre-
hensive knowledge about what he enjoins or forbids.

2 A caller to Allah should sincerely offer his call without any personal
yearning or desire. He should never be partial to a party, a sect or
a doctrine.

Chapter 4: Calling to Testification of Faith 49

Having insight is a religious obligation, for following the Prophet
(PBUH) is obligatory and is achieved only through insight represented
in knowledge and firm belief.

Knowing the virtue of monotheism, which is based on the conviction
that Allah is far above any imperfection.

+ Abomination of polytheism since it isa means of abominable profanation.

4 Notonly should a Muslim be free from any act of polytheism, but he
must also disown the polytheists and their practices.

See

Concise Conymenrary an the Book of ‘Tawhid

Ibn ‘Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

‘When the Prophet (PBUH) sent Mu ‘adh to Yemen, he said to him,
“You will ‏مع‎ to the People of the Scripture. So, when you reach there,
invite them to testify that there is no deity but Allah; (in another
narration, it is narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) said, '..to confess
the Oneness of Allah...) and that Mulammad is the Messenger of
Allah. If they obey you in that, tell them that Allah has enjoined on
them five prayers each day and night. If they obey you in that, tell
them that Allah has enjoined on them to pay the Zakah', which will
be taken from the rich among them and given to the poor among
them. If they obey you in that, then avoid taking the best of their
possessions, and be afraid of the invocation of an oppressed person
because there is no screen between it and Allah."

(Related by AL-Bukhdari and Muslim)

30

Keywords and Phrases

+The Prophet sent Mu ‘adh to Yemen: The Prophet (PBUH) sent Mu' adh
to Yemen as a propagator of Islam, a ruler and a judge in 10 AH,

+ The People of the Scripture: The Jews and the Christians who were
the dominant majority of the population of Yemen at that time.

« If they obey you in that: If they proclaim the Testification of Faith,
comply with what you call to and denounce all the false deities
worshipped besides Allah, then proceed in instructing them to accept
further teachings of Islam,

+ Be afraid of the invocation of an oppressed person: The Prophet
(PBUH) warns Mu' adh against oppression and commands him to
enjoin justice

« There is ‏مم‎ screen between itand Allah: it means thatthe invocation
of an oppressed person will be answered sooner or later.

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘When the Prophet (PBUH) intended to dispatch Mu" adh to Yemen as

acaller and an instructor for teaching its people the principles of Islam, he,
further, drew for him the major outlines of inviting the Yemeni people to

Chapter 4: Calling to Testification of Faich 31

the religion of Islam. ‘The Prophet (PBUH), thus, informed Mu‘adh that
he would encounter the Jews and the Christians who were well versed in
igion and fond of engagement in debates. The Prophet (PBUH) urged
‘Mu ‘dh to be well prepared to argue with them and remove their suspicions.
According to the Prophet's pieces of advice, Mu'adh was admonished
to start his mission with important issues. He was first commanded to
correct their understanding of the principles of belief, Once they adopted
correct belief; he would command them to establish prayer, which took
precedence right after adopting monotheism. if they should abide by
performing the five regular prayers, he would command the rich among
them to pay the Zakah as an act of consolation to the poor and gratefulness
to Allah, Exalted be He. Then Mu"adh was warned of taking the best of
their possessions. They were, instead, enjoined to pay Zakah from among
their average possessions. Finally, he was urged to treat them justly and
to avoid oppression so as to stay clear of the invocation of any oppressed
person, which will certainly be answered.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith stresses that the caller to Allah should first invite people to
testify that there isno deity but Allah. Italso urges Muslims to send propagators
to achieve such a purpose.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

+ The permissibility of sending preachers who are capable of inviting
people to Islam.

+ Inviting people to bear witness that there is no deity but Allah and that
‘Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah takes precedence over all ather
religious di

4 The Testification of Faith is defined as dedicating all devotions to
Allah and deifying nothing besides Him.

* A man becomes a Muslim after verbally proclaiming the Testification
of Faith,

© Aman may bewelllearned but remains unaware of the correct meaning
and consequences of the Testification of Faith, However, some people
are aware of its meaning, but do not put it into practice. Such is the
case of the People of the Scripture.

0

4 There are various levels of discourse, which must be taken into
account when inviting different people to Islam. This is inferred
from the Prophet's words, which read, ".,. You will go to the People of
the Scripture.

According to the hadith, a propagator of Islam should be well
versed in the principles of the Muslim faith so that he may refute all
misconceptions. This may be achieved by seeking knowledge.

4 Prayer comes second only to the Testification of Faith.
4 Paying obligatory Zakah follows establishing prayers in importance.

4 According to the hadith, the poor are entitled to receive Zakth, Itmay
also be paid to them only.

4 Itis impermissible to take Zakih from the best of people’ possessions,
unless they do it willingly.

4 Warning against oppression, as the invocations of the appressed
person will certainly be answered, even if he might be a wrongdoer.

oes

Chapter 4: Calling ro Testfication of Faith 53

Sahl Ibn Sa'd (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“On the day of the Battle of Khaybar the Prophet (PBUH) said
“Tomorrow, 1 will give the flag to a person who loves Allah and
His Messenger and is loved by Allah and His Messenger, and ai
whose hands Allah will grant victory: So, people (the Companions)
wondered all that night, wishing eagerly to see to whom the flag
will be given. In the morning, every one of the Companions wished
to be given the flag. However, the Prophet (PBUH) asked, ‘Where
is ‘Alf Ibn Abi Talib?’ It was said that ‘Ali was suffering from eye-
trouble. So, he ordered them to bring ‘Alvin front of him. Then the
Prophet (PBUH) spat in his eyes and invoked Allah for him, and
his eyes were cured immediately as if he had never had any eye-
trouble, Then the Prophet (PBUH) gave him the flag and said, ‘Go
to them patiently and calmly until you enter their land and face
them, Then, invite them to Islam and inform them of what Allah
has enjoined upon them, for by Allah, if a single person embraces
Islam at your hands (i.e. through you), that will be better for you
than the red camels (the Arabs' most precious possessions)."”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Sahl Ibn 520 (the Narrator)

Sahl Tbn Sad’s full name is Sah! Ibn Sa’d Ibn Malik Ibn Khalid Al-Ansaci
Al-Khazrajt As-Sa"idi, He is a prominent Companion who died in 88 AH,
‘when he was over hundred years old; may Allah be pleased with him.

‘Ali Ibn Abd Talib

* Ali Ibn ‏نطف‎ Talib was the Prophet's paternal cousin, the husband of his
daughter Fatimah, and the fourth of the Rightly-guided Caliphs. He was one
Of the earliest persons to accept Islam and one of the ten Companions who
were given the glad tidings of being admitted into Paradise. He was murdered
in 40 AH; may Allah be pleased with him,

Keywords and Phrases

+ The Day of Khaybar: It refers to the Battle of Khaybar, which was
launched against the Jews in 7 AH.

54 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhiel

+ Flag: Itis the emblem of the army, which is usually given to the conirmander.

+ Islam: Submitting to Allah by adopting monotheism, showing
absolute obedience to Allah and dissociating oneself from polytheism
and polytheists.

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘The Prophet (PBUH) gave the Companions glad tidings that in the following
day they would be granted victory over the Jews at the hands of a virtuous
man who was loyal to Allah and His Messenger (PBUH). Consequently,
each Companion aspired to be that virtuous man. When they gathered in the
morning, the Prophet (PBUH) asked about ‘Ali (may Allah be pleased with
him) who was suffering an eye-trouble and could not join them. ° Alf came
and the Prophet (PBUH) spat in his eyes, which healed at once. Thereafter, the
Prophet (PBUH) charged him with the commandment of the Muslim troops
and instructed him to move ahead calmly until he drew near to the enemies’
fortress. The Prophet further commanded ‘Ali to inyite the enemies, when
he reached their fortress, to accept Islam. If they would respond to his call, he
should, then, inform them of the duties imposed on every Muslim. Finally, the
Prophet (PBUH) highlighted the virtues of inviting people to Allah affirming
that if caller succeeded in guiding one person to the straight path, it would
be better for him than being possessed of the most precious worldly gains.
‘Therefore, how great his rewards would be if he became the source of guidance
for more than one person!

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith emphasizes the importance of inviting people to accept Islam.
Invitation to Islam implies calling people to proclaim the Testification of Faith
by declaring that there is no deity but Allah and that Muhammad is His
servant and Messenger. The hadith further emphasizes the virtue of propagating
the religion of Islam,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

Knowing the virtues of Ali Tbn Abd Talib; his loyalty to Allah and His
Messenger, and his possession of certain and firm belief. These virtues
were attested by the Prophet (PBUH) himself:

‘% This hadith proves that Almighty Allah loves ina way that is appropriate
for His Majesty,

(Chapter 4: Calling to Testification oF Paich 55

+ The Companions were keen to compete in offering all good deeds.

Muslims are ordained to show good manners even at times of war.
They are also commanded to avoid hasty decisions and undesired
sonds during war,

4 The Imam should command his viceroys to treat their subjects with
tenderniess without showing weakness or lack of vigor.

4% Before engaging in combat with their enemies, the Muslims must
invite them to Islam,

+ War is to be waged against whoever stands against the propagation
of Islam.

4 When inviting non-Muslims to Islam, Muslims should introduce the
teachings of Islam to them by degrees. That is, a disbeliever may be
first invited to proclaim the Testification of Faith and then invited to
perform the other pillars of Islam,

+ The virtue of inviting non-Muslims to accept Islam lies in the generous
reward they will be granted in case they embrace Islam:

% This hadith implies two proofs of the Prophethood of Muhammad.
He gave glad tidings of victory beforehand and cured the sore eyes by
applying his honorable saliva to" Alfs eyes.

It is obligatory for Muslims to believe in the Divine Decree, This is
shown by the fact that though each Companion was keen tobe granted
the flag; it was only given to the one foreordained by Allah.

© Itis not enough for the person to be called a Muslim, He must, further,
be acquainted with the legal duties incumbent upon him and put them
into practice.

Endnotes

| Zakake: A fixed proportion of one’ property paid annually by every Muslim whose
property has reached a specified amount called the nistb (i.e, the minimum amodnton
which Zaksih is due), Paying Zaki is one of the five pillars of Islam, namely the third.
“There are eight recipients of Zakéh according ‏ها‎ the Sharf'ah (Islamic Law) as stated
in the Qur'an (At-Tawbah: 60).

2 Al-Bukhért (2942) and Musi (2406),

Meaning of Monotheism
and Faith Testification

Almighty Allah says:

“Those whom they invoke seek means of access to their Lord,
[striving as to] which of them would be nearest, and they hope
‘for His mercy and fear His punishment. Indeed, the punishment
of your Lord is ever feared.” (Quran: Al-Isri’: 57)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In the present chapter, the author clarifies the concept of monotheism.
‘There is aneed for clarifying the concept of monotheism since some people
wrongly believe that monotheism involves a mere belief in the Oneness of

sa Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhid

Allah. The author asserts that monotheism necessitates devoting all acts
and forms of worship to Allah Alone, and keeping away from any act of
polytheism,

Keywords and Phrases

+ Testification of Faith: It is the declaration that there is no deity but
Allah and that Muhammad is the servant and Messenger of Allah.

Invoke: The contextual meaning of the word ‘invoke’ is to worship. The
disbelievers, however, invoke or adore the angels, the prophets or the
righteous.

+ Seek means of access to their Lord: Despite being invoked and

adored besides Allah, the angels, the prophets and righteous people
offer all good deeds to draw nearer to their Lord.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Almighty Allah affirms that the angels, the prophets and the righteous,
whom the disbelievers invoke besides Allah, ardently seek to draw nearer
to Allah, hoping for His mercy and fearing His punishment. As the angels,
prophets and righteous men offer good deeds seeking the pleasure of Allah,
how can they be adored or worshipped besides Him?!

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

The verse in question signifies that both monotheism and the Testification
of Faith necessitate avoiding all acts and practices of polytheism such as
invoking the righteous or seeking their intercession for removing adversities
or afflictions.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

The verse provides a counter argument against those who falsely
believe that Allah's friends and righteous persons invoked besides
Allah are competent to bring benefit or avert harm.

> Itshows how the Prophets and the righteous fear Allah and seek His mercy.

ooo

CChuaprer 5: Meaning of Monotheism and Faith Testfication 59

Almighty Allah says:
“And (mention, © Muliammad), when Abraham said to his
father and his people, ‘Indeed, 1 am disassociated from that
‘which you worship - except for He Who created me; and indeed,
He will guide me! * (Qur'an: Az-Zukbruf; 26-27)

General Meaning of the Quranic Verse

‘Almighty Allah narrates the story of His servant, Messenger, and intimate
friend Ibrahim who dissociated himself from the false deities, which were
worshipped by his father and his people. He devoted himself to the worship
of Allah,

Relevance of the Verse to the Chapter

This verse signifies that adopting monotheism and testifying that there is
no deity but Allah necessitate dissociating oneself from all acts of polytheism,
and dedicating all one’s devotional acts to Allah Alone,

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

4 The meaning of the Testification of Faith is to believe in the Oneness
of Allah, devote all acts of worship to Him Alone, and dissociate
oneself from all false deities.

A believer should avowedly declare his repudiation of the polytheists.

% A Muslim should dissociate himself from the enemies of Allah even if
they are from among the nearest kin,

She

eo Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“They have taken their scholars and monks as gods besides
Allah, and (also) the Messiah, the son of Mary. And they
were not commanded except to worship one God; there is no
deity except Him. Exalted is He above whatever they associate
with Hits." (Qur'an: At-Tawbah: 31)

Keywords and Phrases

+ They have taken their scholars and monks as gods: The Jews
and the Christians regard their scholars and monks as the legislators
who assign what is lawful and what is prohibited. Allah, Glorified
be He, is the absolute Lawgiver, and therefore, if anyone submits
himself to the legislation of a human, he is regarded as taking a false
deity besides Allah.

+ And (also) the Messiah, the son of Mary: The Christians have taken
Jesus.as.a god besides Allah

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

The Jews and the Christians sought the advice of their scholars and
monks and obeyed them in legalizing what Allah made unlawful and
prohibiting what He made lawful. ‘They, therefore, set their scholars and
monks as gods besides Allah. The Christians, moreover, worshipped Jesus
and alleged that he was the Son of God. Consequently, they disregarded the
Divine Scripture through which they were commanded to submit to Allah
Alone. Thus, Allah disapproves of theit practices and declares Himself far
above them.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

The verse clarifies the meaning of both monotheism and the Testification
of Faith. Monotheism and the Testification of Faith necessitate that Allah is to
be obeyed by following what He has made lawful and avoiding what He has
prohibited, Whoever obeys a person or submits himself to a law, which
violates Allah's prohibitions, is regarded as a polytheist.

Chapter 5: Meaning of Monorheism and Faith Testificarion 0

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

4 Submission to the Will of Allah with regard to His obligations and
prohibitions is one of the implications of monotheism and sincere
‘Testification of Faith.

4 Obeying anyone in making lawful what Allah made prohibited or
prohibiting what Allah made lawful, isa form of polytheism.

The Quranic verse refutes the Christian belief that Jesus is a god, and
affirms that he is the servant of Allah.

4 Allah is far above having an associate or a partner,

She

a Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiled

Allah, the Almighty, says:

“And [yet], among the people are those who take other than Allah
as equals [to Him]. They love them as they (must) love Allah,
But those who believe are stronger in love for Allah. And if only
they, who have wronged, would consider (that) when they see the
punishment, (they will be certain) that all power belongs to Allah
and that Allah is severe in punishment.”

(Quran: Al-Bagarah: 165)

Keywords and Phrases

+ They love them as they (must) love Allah: 1! means that those who
‘worship false deities besides Allah retain love and reverence for such deities.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, depicts the polytheists’ affairs in this
life and the recompense they will receive in the Hereafter. They set rivals to
Allah by rendering Tove and reverence to them. On the contrary, the trie
believers’ love for Allah exceeds the polytheists’ love for their false deities or
the polytheists’ love for Allah. The reason is that the believers’ love is dedicated
to Allah Alone, whereas the polytheist® love is shared by other false deities.
Had the polythetsts been certain of the grave chastisement they would receive
on the Day of Resurrection for the grave sins they perpetrated, they would have
abandoned all their aberrant practices. However, they did neither perceive nor
believe in their inevitable destiny.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

The Quranic verse is one of the texts that clarifies the meanting of mono-
theism and the significance of a Muslim's Testification of Faith. The verse
implies that whoever ascribes rivals to Allah and loves them as he loves Allah,
is deemed a polytheist. Monotheism is, therefore, an act of rendering love and
reverence {to Allah Alone. Such loye and reverence drive man to sincerely
worship, submit and surrender to Allah Alone.

(Chaprer 5: Meaning of Monotheism and Faith Testification 63

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

 Monotheism designates the retainment of love and reverence, which
correlate submission and surrender, to Allah Alone.

4 Though they render great love to Allah, the polytheists are not considered
Muslims, since they associate false deities with Allah,

“ Polytheism isa form of injustice.

© The verse warns the polytheists against the severe punishment
prepared for them on the Day of Resurrection.

eos

@ Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

‘The Prophet (PBUH) is reported to have said:

"He who testifies that there is no deity but Allah and renounces
whatever is worshipped besides Allah, his property and blood
become inviolable, and his account will be with Allah”

(Related by Muslim and Ahmad)

Keywords and Phrases

+ His property and blood become inviolable: It means that
whoever declares his acceptance of Islam, his property and blood
will be secured.

+ And his account will be with Allah: if anyone declares his
acceptance of Islam, his reckoning will be only with Allah, Who will
recompense him according to his intention,

General Meaning of the Hadith

According to the foregoing hadith, the property and blood ofa man will be
secured upon the fulfillment of two major requirements:

L.Pronouncing the TTestification of Faith by declaring that there is no
deity but Allah and that Muhammad is the servant and Messenger
of Allah,

2.Renouncing all other false deities which are worshipped besides Allah.

Once a person fulfills these two requisites, he will be secured with
regard to his life and property. As far as his inner belief is concerned, it
will be absolutely left to Allah Alone. Therefore, if he is proven to be of
firm and sincere belief, Allah will admit him into the gardens of Paradise.
Otherwise, if he is a hypocrite, he will be driven to a severe punishment
in the Hellfire. However, people are judged in this life according to their
apparent deeds.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith proyidesa clear definition of the Testification of Faith,
which necessitates the renunciation of all false deities worshipped
besides Allah.

Chaprer 5: Meaning of Monotheisny nnd Faith Testification 6

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% Declaration of belief in one God implies the renunciation of all other
false deities worshipped besides Allah, such as idols and tombs.

+ Ifanyone merely testifies that there is no deity but Allah, understands
its meaning and acts accordingly, his blood and property will not be
secured unless he declares his renunciation of all false deities
worshipped besides Allah.

4 A mere verbal declaration of belief in one God (i.e. Allah) and showing
apparent adherence to religious ordinances secure man's property and
blood until proven otherwise,

* A Muslim is enjoined to withhold his hands from the disbelievers once
they accept Islam, even if they do so while being in a state of war, until
the contrary is proven.

‘ A man may verbally testify that there is no deity but Allah without
expressing his renunciation of other false deities,

% People are judged according to their apparent deeds, In the Hereafter,
they will be judged according to their hidden plans,

A Muslim's blood and property are inviolable except for a justifiable
reason such as executing a penalty,

Endnotes

1 The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) has interpreted this verse when  Adiyy Ibn Hitim.
(may Allah be pleased with him) visited him and heard him reciting it, Upon hearing
the verse, “Adi said, “O Messenger of Allah! They did mot worship them!" He (the
Prophet) said, ‘Yes, they did; they (rabbis arid monks) forbade them what is lawful and
‘made lawful for thent what is forbidden, and their peoples followed then). This is their
worship of them.” This hadith is related by At-Tirmidhé (3024) who graded it a hiasan
(good) hadith, Itis also related by tn Abd Shaybah in his Musannaf (The Compilation)
17/167 No. 34925).

2 Muslim (23) and Abmad in AlsMusnacd (3/472)

Acts of Polythelers:
Wearing Rings for Removing
Affliction and the Like

Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“Say, ‘Then have you considered what you invoke besides Allah? If
Allah intended me harm, are they removers of His harms; or if He
intended me mercy, are they withholders of His mercy?” Say, Sufficient
‘for me is Allah; upon Him [alone] rely the [wise] reliers?”

(Quran: Az-Zumar: 38)

Relevance of this Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

The present chapter refers to an act, which is regarded as one of the forms
of polytheism. It is trying to remove or avert afflictions and tribulations by

doing acts of polytheism.

68 Concise Commentary on the Book oF ‏لاسن‎

Keywords and Phrases
« What you invoke: It refers to ali false deities which may be invoked
for the sake of deriving benefit or averting harm,

+ Harm: It is a comprehensive word, which includes all types of
afflictions such as diseases, poverty and distress.

+ Mercy: It is also a comprehensive term, which includes good health,
comfortable life, etc.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah commands His Prophet (PBUH) fo ask the polytheists if their idols
can benefit or harm, to force them to acknowledge the disability of their false
deities. By asking them such a question, the Prophet (PBUH) caused their
argument to fall into pieces

Relevance of the Verse to the Chapter

‘The verse is a proof of the invalidity of polytheism and all acts revealing
polytheism such as wearing rings or strings.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse
% The invalidity of polytheism, for whatever is worshipped besides
Allah is absolutely incapable of doing benefit or causing harm.

+ Wearing rings, strings or their like for the sake of deriving benefit or
averting harm, is strongly denounced. Such acts of polytheism are
similar to idolatry.

+ Itispermissibleto encounter the polytheistsin polemical confrontations
for refuting their false doctrines,

+ The obligation of relying entirely upon Allah and trusting Him.

ooo

‘Chapter 6: Acts of Polytheism: Weating Rings for Removing Affliction 69

“Imrén Ibn Husayn (may Alla be pleased with him) narrated:

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) saw a man wearing a bracelet
of brass in his hand. Thereupon, the Prophet (PBUH) said to him,
‘What is this bracelet for?’ The man replied, ‘It is because of
Al-Wahinah (a vein that causes pain in the shoulder anid the hand)?
Thereupon, the Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Take it off, for it will anly
increase your pain, and if you die while wearing it, you will never
succeed",

(Related by Ahmad with an acceptable chain of transmission)

“Imran Ibn Husayn

‘The Full name of the narrator is ‘Imran Ibn Husayn Tbn *Ubayd tbn Khalaf
‘Al-Khuza'i, He and his father were Companions of the Prophet. He embraced.
Islam in the year of the Battle of Khaybar and died in 52 A.H. in Basra; may
Allah be pleased with him.

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘Imran Ibn Husayn (may Allah be pleased with him) narrates one of
the incidents of the Prophet who used to fight against polytheism. ‘Imran
mentioned that the Prophet (PBUH) saw a man wearing a bracelet of brass
in his hand, Thereupon, the Prophet (PBUH) asked why he wore it, The
man replied that he did so to remove the pain in his hands. Thereupon, the
Prophet (PBUH) commanded him to take it off immediately, and he (PBUH)
justified his order by explaining to the man that such a bracelet would not
remove the pain, but it would increase it, The Prophet (PBUH) further added
that in case man died while wearing such a bracelet, he would never prosper
in the Hereafter.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

The hadith proves the prohibition of wearing rings for the sake of removing a
tribulation, Such an act is a form of polytheism, which contradicts true belief.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Wearing bracelets and the like for the sake of being safeguarded against
diseases is regarded as an act of polytheism.

Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhiel

+ It is forbidden to use any prohibited material asa treatment,
© Itis obligatory for the Muslim to deny the evil and teach the ignorant.
% Polytheism has bad consequences both in this life and in the Hereafter,

+ A mufti (Muslim scholar qualified in issuing legal rulings) must
perceive the issue in detail before delivering his verdict, He should
also take major abjectives of the Shariah (Islamic Law) into account
before giving his legal ruling,

+ Minor polytheism is at the top of the major sins,

+ Falling into polytheism out of ignorance is by no means excused.

+ People must strictly oppose the one who commits any act of polytheism
‏مع‎ as to make people abhor such a practice.

See

2

‎Acts of Polytheism: Wearing Rings For Removing AMiction a‏ :6 معطت

‎Ugbah Ibn “Amir (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:
“Ifa person uses an amulet, may Allah not fulfill his purpose, and if
heuses a seashell (as a remedy, or to protect hint from the evil eye),
may Allah not grant him calraness.”

‎According to another version, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎“Whoever uses an amulet commits an act of polytheism.”

‎*Uqbah Ibn * Amir (the Narrator)

‎“Ugbah Ibn ‘Amir Al-Juhani is a well-known Companion. During the
Caliphate of Mu'awiyah, ‘Ugbah was appointed as a governor of Egypt for
three years and died at the age of about 60 years; may Allah be pleased with him,

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎+ Whoever uses an amulet: An amulet may be attached with the belief
that it can guard a person or an animal against harm or evil.

‎« Amulet; Attachment of amulets wasa pre-Islamic custom. The Arabs used
to attach beads to their children for guarding them against evil eyes.

‎+ May Allah not fulfill his purpose! {tis an invocation expressed by
the Prophet (PBUH) against whoever attaches an amulet.

‎General Meaning of the Two Hadiths

‎The Prophet (PBUH) invokes Allah to let those who attach amulets with
the purpose of removing harm or evil not to fulfill their objective. Similarly,
the Prophet (PBUH) asks Allah not to let those who attach seashells live in
peace and tranquility. The Prophet's invocations are taken as indication for
his admonition against such grave practices. In the second hiadith, the Prophet
(PBUH) affirms that such practices are acts of polytheism.

‎Relevance of the Two Hadiths to the Chapter

‎The two hadiths prove the prohibition of attaching amulets and seashells.
‘They prove such practices as forms of polytheism, since those who attach such
objects become absolutely dependent on them.

n Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Lessons Drawn from the Hadiths
4 Attaching amulets js an act of polytheism
#4 Whoever relies on others besides Allah will never attain his aim.
4 One may invoke Allah riot to fulfill the purpose of those attaching

such amulets.

Chapeer 6: Acts of Polyeheisin: Wearing Rings for Removing Adliction 23

Ton Aba Hatim related that Hudhayfah (may Allah be pleased with
him) saw a man wearing a thread around his arm to protect him from fever,
thereupon, Hudhayfah cut it and recited the Qur'anic verse that reads:
“And most of them believe not in Allah except while they associate
others with Him.” (Qur’én: Yosuf: 106)
(Related by Ibn Abi Halim)

Hudhayfah Ibnul-Yamén (the Narrator)

‘The full name of the narrator is Hudhayfah Ibnul-Yaman Al-' Absi, He is
one of the earliest Companions to accept Islam. He died in 36 A.H.; may Allah
be pleased with him.

General Meaning of the Tradition

‘Hudhayfah Ibnul-Yaman (may Allah be pleased with him) saw a man
tying a thread around his arm for the sake of protecting himself from fever.
Thereupon, Hudhayfah cut the thread as an indication of his disapproval.
Hudhayfah recited a verse from the Noble Qur'in to prove the verity of his
action. This verse states that though the polytheists believe in the Oneness of
‘Allah, they associate others with Him.

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

Itaffirms that wearing threads to alleviate illnesses is an act of polytheism,
which must be strictly opposed.

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

+ Wearing threads to remove afflictions or repel them is prohibited, for
it is regarded as an act of polytheism,

+ Itis obligatory to forbid evil and remove it whenever possible.

© Itis possible to use Qur'anie verses and Prophetic traditions pertaining
to major polytheism to prove the prohibition of acts classified as
minor polytheism.

> Though the polytheists confess Tawhidur-Rubibiyyah (belief in
Allah’ Lordship), they are deemed polytheists because they worship
false deities besides Allah,

24 Concise Commentary on the Book oF Tewhid
Endnotes

| Ahmad in Al-Musnad (4/445), Ibn Hibban in Mawarid Ag-Zamiin (Fountains for
the Thirsty) No. (1410 and 1411), Ibn Majah (3531), and AL-Hakim in A-Mustadrak
(4/216) who graded it sahil: hadith and Adh-Dhahabi agreed to that grading.

2 Abmad in Al-Musnad (4/154), Ibn Hibban in Mawdrid Az Zam'én (1413), and
Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak (4/417),

3 Ahmad in Al- Musnad (4/156) and Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak (4/417).

Incantations and Amulets

Aba Bashir Al-Anséri (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“I was in the company of the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) on
one of his journeys, The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) sent a
messenger and ordered him not to let any necklace of string or
any kind of necklaces (the narrator doubted the exact wording
of the Prophet) round the necks of camels except it should be
cut off"

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In this chapter, the author further elaborates on other practices that

impair pure monotheism such as using charms or amulets and other acts.
of polytheism,

6. Concise Commentary on the Book of Tinwhid

Aba Bashir Al-Ansari (the Narrator)

Abii Bashir Al-Ansari was one of the Prophet's Companions. He witnessed
the Battle of Al-Khandaq and died at the age of about 60; may Allah be pleased
with him.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In one of his journeys, the Prophet (PBUH) sent a man announcing that
all necklaces attached to the camels should be removed, People used to
believe that such necklaces could guard the camels against harm or evil eyes.
‘The Prophet commanded them to remove such necklaces, These practices are
deemed as acts of polytheism.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

The hadith asserts the prohibition of adorning camels and other animals
with strings for the sak of guarding them against harms or envious eyes. Such
practices are acts of polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Attaching strings to animals in order to repel harm is as prohibited as
attaching amalets,

+ Itis obligatory to remoye evil whenever possible.

4 People must be warned against all forms of polytheism so that their
true belief may be properly maintained.

aad

Chapter 7: Incantations and Amutlets 7

Ibn ‏قن 'ممايط‎ (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“I heard the Prophet (PBUH) saying, ‘Using (illegal) incantations,
anwulets, or tiwalah (a kind of magic used to make a Wornan loves
her husband), is an act of polytheism?”

(Related by Ahmad, Abi Dawad)

General Meaning of the Hadith

The Prophet (PBUH) affirms that reciting an illegal incantation, attaching
an amulet and referring to sorcery to repel harm or derive a benefit are acts of
polytheism, as none can guard against evil or bring benefit other than Allah,
Glorified be He.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith affirms that using any of the aforementioned means entails
polytheism, and thus impairs one’s pure belief.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith
A Muslim should be alert to all forms and acts of polytheism.
4 Itis impermissible to seek the help of amulets, incantations, or tiwalahs,

© Being confident about the influence of incantations, amulets, or
tiwalahs is an act of polytheism,

Shh

23 Concise Commentary on the Book of Zawhid

‘An amulet is defined as an object worn, especially around the child’s neck,
‘asa charm to protect him from evil and envious eyes. However, some scholars
of our Salaj (early Muslim scholars) permit attaching amulets if they contain
‘Quranic verses, whereas some others including Ibn Mas‘ iid deem it forbidden.

‘The Prophet only mentions legal incantations, which are free of all forms
of polytheism. Such legal incantations, according to the Prophet's commands,
may be recited for the persons who fall prey fo envious eyes or those stung
bya harmful animal. As far as the tiwalah is concerned, itis a form of magic
wrongly believed to make a wife more endeared to her husband or to make a
husband more beloved by his wife,

Keywords and Phrases

+ Legal Incantation: It refers to a ritual recitation of some verses of
the Ever-Glorious Qur'an for those suffering a disease or an affliction: It
may also be breathed into water, which is given to the patient, A legal
incantation may also be written on a dish and then erased by applying
fresh water, which is presented to the sufferer.

Conclusion

% Legal incantation may be held permissible or prohibited. To become
permissible, a legal incantation must be free of any form, act or
conviction entailing polytheism. If it is contaminated by any act of
polytheism, it will be rendered prohibited.

Amulet is absolutely prohibited if it contains any spell or charm
entailing polytheism according to the consensus of Muslim scholars.
Scholars, however, differed on the amulet containing passages of the
Qur'an: While some permitted it, others forbade it. The sound view is
that itis forbidden lest its use should open further avenues of innovative
acts of worship. It is similarly prohibited for the sake of securing the
Quran from all innovative practices.

According to the unanimousagreement of Muslim scholars, Hwalah is
forbidden because it is classified as a form of sorcery,

نمف

Chapter: ‏مممفسمهه!‎ and Amulets p
‘Abdullah Ibn “Ukaym (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated, as a

marfit’ hadith, that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“If anyone wears anything (like an amulet) (believing that it brings
good or repels evil), Allah will leave him to such a thing he
attached himself'to.””

* Abdullah Ibn‘ Ukaym (the Narrator)

“Abdullah Tbn’Ukaym was nicknamed Abd Ma'bad Al-Juhani Al-Kafl.
‘Though he was alive during the lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH), there is no
evidence that he heard any hadith from the Prophet (PBUH).

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this fiadith, the Prophet (PBUH) states that if the person attaches his
heart, or his deeds or both to any false deity or object besides Allah believing
that it can bring benefit or avert harm, he will be left to such a thing and
deprived of Allah’s compassion, However, whoever turns to Allah will have all
his affairs accomplished, and his hardships released,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

According to the hadith itis forbidden and greatly condenmned to attach oneself
to any object believing that it can independently bring benefit or avert harm.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith
+ Itis prohibited to attach oneself to any object besides Allah.
+ A Muslim must exclusively rely on Allah for accomplishing all his deeds.
% Falling into polytheism incurs great harm and bad consequences.
© Rewards are always proportionate to deeds.

ad

80 Goneise Commentary on the Book of Tauihid

‎Abmad related that Rawayfi* (may Allsh be pleased with him) narrated:‏ سكم

‎“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘O Ruwayfi'! You may live

‎fora long time after 1 am gone, so, tell people that if anyone ties his
heard or wears a string round his neck to ward off the evil eye, oF
cleanses himself (after defecation or urination) with animal dung
or bone, then Muhammad has nothing to do with him.”

‎Ruwayfi’ Ibn Thabit (the Narrator)

‎His full name is Ruwayf’ Ibn Thabit Ibnus-Sakan Ibn ' Adi Ibnul-Harith,
He was from the tribe of Band Malik Ibn An-Najjar Al-Ansari, He ruled ‏طامط‎
‎Barca and ‘Tripoli and conquered ‘Tunisia (Ifriqiyyah) in 47 A.H. He died in 56
(A-H.), may Allah be pleased with hin,

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎+ Ties his beard: People used to twist their beards in wars out of arrogance.
They also used to twist their hair for showing effeminate manners, It
may also refer to tying beards at times of offering prayers.

‎+ Wears a string: The Arab pagans used to wear strings as necklaces or
put them around animals’ necks to guard them against envious eyes,

‎General Meaning of the Hadith

‎‘The Prophet (PBUH) assured Ruwayfi (hat he would live fora long time
until he witnessed a group of people who would renounce his guidance
by committing certain forbidden acts. Such people would deviate from the
Prophet's guidance of letting one’s beard grow to twisting their beards into
ringlets or coils in a way that resembles the manners of effeminate men. Those
people would also exercise acts impairing pure belief such as wearing
necklaces or attaching them to animals’ necks mainly for the sake of averting
anticipated harm. Such a group of people would further commit violations
of the Prophet's exemplary practices. They would, therefore, cleanse
themselves by using impure objects such as dung or bone. Therefore, the
Prophet (PBUH) entrusted Ruwayfi’ with the task of informing Muslims that
their Prophet would dissociate himself from those who would dare to commit
such abominable acts,

Chapter 7: ‏عممتتسمهها‎ and ‏سعانسة‎ ai

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith stresses the prohibition of wearing amulets for the sake of
averting harm, as itis an act of polytheism, It is Allah Alone, Who can guard
against any harm.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% This hadith is a proof of Muhammad's prophethood, The Prophet
foretold that Ruwayfi’ would lead a long life. He had a long lifespan
and died in 56 AH.

# People should be fully informed about the legal duties and the
prohibitions with which they must comply.

+ Ibis permissible to honor one's beard and let it grow, whereas shaving,
cutting, twisting or even curling itis prohibited.

© Wearing a necklace to repel harm is prohibited, as it is an act of
polytheism,

+ Cleansing oneself with animal dung or bone is prohibited.

tions are classified as major sins.

Soe

+ The aforementioned prol

a2 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhid

Waki" narrated that 5314 Ibn Jubayr said:

“Whoever removes an amulet worn by a man will be rewarded as if
he has emancipated a slave.”

Wak also reported that Ibrahim said:

“They (the followers of ‘Abdullah Tbn Mas'td) disliked all forms
of amulets; whether they consisted of passages from the Qurlin
or not.”

Waki? Ibnul-Jarrah

‘Wakt’ Ibnul-Jarrah was a trustworthy Imm who compiled a number of
books and died in 197 A.H.; may Allah have mercy on him.

Torahim An-Nakh'i

Ibrahim An-Nakh’{ was a trustworthy Imam and one of the prominent
‘Muslim jurists. He died in 96 A.H.; may Allah have mercy on him,

General Meaning of the Two Traditions

‘These two traditions affirm that whoever removes an amulet attached to
someone's neck will be rewarded as if he has released a person from the bondage
of slavery. A man wearing an amulet is a slave of the Satan. By removing the
amulet he wears, he will become free from the bondage of satanic insinuations.
Moreover, Ibrahim An-Nakh'i reports that prominent scholars among the
Tabi‘ dn maintain that all forms of amulets are forbidden, even those containing,
passages from the Qur'an. This is mainly to block the means leading to the
introduction of further innovative acts of worship.

Relevance of the Two Traditions to the Chapter

The two traditions affirm that those prominent scholars among the Tabi ‘tn
forbade the attachment of amulets,

Lessons Drawn from the Two Traditions

The merit of removing amulets and freeing people from the bondage
of polytheism

Chaprer 7: Incantations and Amulets a3

> Attaching amulets is generally prohibited according to the view of
some prominent scholars among the Tibi‘an. Prohibition also
includes amulets containing passages from the Glorious Qur'an.

> The Salaf (early Muslim scholars) were so keen to keep the Muslim
belief pure and free from superstitions.

Endnotes

| AL Bukhari (3005), Muslim (2115), and Abd Dawad (2552),

2 Ahmad (1/381), Aba Dawad (3883), Ibn Majah (3530), Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak
(4/418) who graded ita sahil hadith, and Adh-Dhahabl agreed ta that grading,

3 Ahmad in Al-Musnad (4/211) and At-Tirmidhi (2073).

4 Alimad (4/108, 109) and Abo Dawdd (36),

Seeking the Blessings of Trees, Stones...

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“So have you considered Al-Lat and Al-'Uzz4? And Mandh, the
third - the other one? Is for you the male and for Him the female?
That, then, is an unjust division. They are not but [mere] names
‘you have named them - you and your forefathers - for which
‘Allah has sent down no authority. They follow not except
assumption and what (their) souls desire, and there has already
come to them from their Lord guidance”

(Qur'an: An-Najm: 19-23)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

The present chapter represents a continuation of the condemned practices
deemed to contradict pure belief.

03 Concise Commentary on the Boole of Tiwhld

Keywords and Phrases

+ Seeking the Blessings of Trees, Stones, etc: Also included among
such condemned practices is the act of seeking blessings of a shrine, a
tomb orarelic.

+ AL-Lat: It is the name of an idol that used to be worshipped in the
Pre-Islamic Period of Ignorance (the Jahiliyyah). It originally refers
to a white variegated rock on which a building was erected in
AL-T#if. It may also refer to the name of a man who used to prepare
food for pilgrims'. Upon his death, people devoted acts of worship at
his tomb.

+ Al-' Uzza: It was the name ofa tree surrounded by a wall and decorated
with curtains. It was located in the road between Mecca and At-Taif.

* Manah: it was an idol, which used to be located at Al-Mushallal
between Mecca and Medina.

+ Is for you the male and for Him the female: The polytheists
alleged that the angles are Allah’ begotten daughters.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verses

Almighty Allah argues that the aforementioned idols, worshipped
besides Allah, are inanimate and ate, thus, of no avail, Moreover, Allah
reprimands the polytheists for their unjust partiality since they dissociate
themselves from the females and ascribe them to Allah, They are asked
to prove the validity of worshipping these idols. He further argues that
assumptions and personal desires can never be taken as decisive criteria
in such an argument. Clear-cut proofs only lie with Allah’s Messengers
who gave irrefutable proofs of the obligation to worship none but Allah
and to renounce idolatry.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verses to the Chapter

‘These verses prove the prohibition of seeking the blessings of trees or
stones, which is categorically regarded as polytheism. The polytheists devoted
acts of worship to these idols for the sake of seeking their claimed blessings.
Seeking the blessings of shrines, trees or stones is tantamount to seeking the
blessings of false deities such as Al-Lat, Al-'Uzza and Manah.

Chapter &: Seeking the Blessings of Trees, Stones. a7

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verses
4 Seeking the blessings of trees and stones is an act of polytheism.
kis permissible to encounter the polytheists in debates for the sake of
removing their doubts,

> Legal rulings are proven only when supported by proofs deduced from
the Divine Revelation. A ruling cannot be based on personal desires

or assumptions,
4 Almighty Allah has clearly established religion through the Messengers
He sent and the Scriptures He revealed.

ooo

538 Concise Commentary on the Boake of Tiwhidl

‘Abd Wagid Al-Laytht (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“We went along with the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) to (the Battle of)
Hunayn. At that time, we were new converts to Islam. The polytheists
had a lot tree for adoration. They used to attach their arms to the
tree seeking its blessings. Afterwards, we passed by (another) lot tree
and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Let this tree be a source of blessings
for our arms as the disbelievers used to do! The Prophet (PBUH)
exclaimed saying, ‘Allah is the Greatest! (You have followed the evil)
traditions (of the previous nations). By the One in Whose Hand my
life is, you have said the same as the Children of Israel said to Moses,
‘make for us a god just as they have gods’ He said, ‘Indeed, you are
‏م‎ people behaving ignotantly... (Qur'an: ‏تفلم‎ raf: 138) You will
follow the (erring) traditions of those (nations) before you.’”™

(Related by At-Tirmidhi who graded it a sahih (authentic) hadith)

Aba Wagid Al-Laythi (the Narrator)

His name is Al-Harith Ibn “Awf. He is a renowned Companion who died
in 68 AH. at the age of 85; may Allah be pleased with him.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Hunayn: It js valley lying ten miles east of Mecca, where the Prophet
(PBUH) combated the tribe of Hawazin.

+ Anwit: Swords which ihe polytheists used to hang on the tree secking
its blessings.

General Meaning of the Hadith

Abi Wagid gives an account of an interesting incident that took place
immediately before the Battle of Hunayn. Some Muslims had just embraced
Islam, and thus they were unaware of specific acts of polytheism, When they
witnessed the polytheists seeking the blessings of a tree, they asked the Prophet
(PBUH) to assigna tree for them to seek blessings thereof, The Prophet (PBUH)
‘was greatly surprised and shocked by their suggestion. He disapproved of their
mistaken proposal and likened it to the affair of the Children of Israel who
asked Moses to assign an idol for them to worship. The Qur'an provides:

“,.Make for us a god just as they have gods,
(Qur'an; ‏عفر هله‎ 138)

Chapter 8: Seeking che Blessings of Trees, Stones... 89

The Prophet (PBUH) informed that the Muslim Nation would follow the
steps of the Jews and Christians. He condemned such an imitation,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

The hadith proves that seeking blessings of trees or any other object is an
act of polytheism,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

Seeking blessings of trees or stones is an act of polytheism.

® If someone has recently abandoned falsehood, he may retain some
erroneous beliefs,

% Idols are usually adored for the sake of seeking their blessings.

+ A man may applaud an erroneous act, which does not draw him nearer
to Allah,

4 When expressing surprise or exclamation, a Muslim may glorify Allah
by saying ‘Allah is Greatest’

The Prophet foretold thatacts of polytheism would disseminate among
the people of this nation.

8 Itis prohibited to imitate the pagans, the Jews or the Christians unless
‘what is approved of in the Muslim religion.

© ‘Though the Companions chose the same designation of the polytheists'
tree in their request, the Prophet (PBUH) did not care for that, but
rather he stressed the intrinsic nature of such a tradition depicting it
ag that sought by the Children of Israel. Thereupon, rulings are ta be
considered according to the connotations rather than designations,

Endnotes

{This piece of information is related by Al-Bukhiei on the authority of ton “Abbas (4859).
2 At-Tirmidhi (2181), Ahmad in AJ-Musnad (5/218), and At-Tirmidhi graded it a hasan
(good) sahth (authentic) hadith,

Offering Sacrificial Animals for
Deities Other than Allah

Almighty Allah says:

“Say, ‘Indeed, my prayer, my rites of sacrifice, my living and my
dying are for Allah, Lord of the worlds - no partner has He. And
this 1 have been commanded and I am the first [among you] of
the Muslims.” (Quran: Al-An‘am: 162: 163)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

‘The present chapter elaborates on an act of polytheism, which contradicts
true and pure monotheism.

2 Concise Cammentary on the Book of Tah

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verses

Allah, Exalted be He, commanded His Prophet (PBUH) to inform the
polytheists who worshipped deities besides Allah that his own prayers, sacrificial
offerings, faith and good deeds must be solely dedicated to Allah.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verses to the Chapter

The Quranic verses affirm that offering sacrifices to any false deity or
object besides Allah is an act of polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verses

4+ Offering a sacrifice for the sake of any deity besides Allah is regarded
‘as an act of major polytheism. Prayer precedes sacrifice in the Quranic
verse; since Prayer must only be offered for Allab’s sake; so must
sacrifices.

4 Prayer and sactitices are of the greatest and most rewarded
devotional acts.

‎The abligation of dedicating ull devotional acts with sincerity for‏ جه
‎Allah's sake‏

‎Allah has ordained all devotional acts, Nobody is authorized to
innovate further practices not enunciated by the Prophet (PBUH).

‎‘The Qur'an provides, “,.. And this I have been commanded ....”

‎She

Chapter 9: Offering Sacrificial Animals for ‏كته‎ other than Alla 93

Almighty Allah also says:
“So pray to your Lord and sacrifice (to Him alone).”
(Quran: Al-Kawthar: 2)

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Unlike the polytheists who worshipped false deities and offered sacrifices
for the sake of their idols, the Prophet (PBUH) was commanded to dedicate
his prayers and sacrifices solely to Allah,

Relevance of the Verse to the Chapter

Sacrificing is an act of worship, which must be dedicated to Allah, Sacrificing,
for the sake of other deities besides Him is an act of major polytheism.
Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

+ Devotional acts turn into acts of major polytheism once dedicated to
false deities. Since offering sacrifices is an act of worship, it turns into
an act of major polytheism once dedicated to anything besides Allah,

‎Prayer and sacrificing are of the greatest devotional acts.‏ ف

‎4 Offering prayers and sacrifices to Allah are of the greatest proofs of
acknowledging Allah's grace and showing gratitude.

‎oot

54 Concise Commentary on the Book af Tawhid

‘Alt Ton Abd ‘Talib (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“The Prophet (PBUH) told me four things: “May the curse of Allah
be upon him who sacrifices for anyone other than Allah; may the
curse of Allah be upon him who curses his parents; may the curse
of Allah be upon him who accommodates an evildoer; and may the
curse of Allah be upon hint who changes the boundary lines of the

land (to steal it)’ "١
(Related by Muslim)

Keywords and Phrases.

+ The curse of Allah: Curse is a ban or deprivation of Allah’s mercy.

+ The one who sacrifices for anyone other than Allah: It includes
those who offer sacrificial animals for the sake of memorials, shrines,
jinn and so forth,

+ Who curses his parents: It also includes cursing fathers,
mothers, and forefathers. The person incurs the same sin when
he directly insults them or when he incurs curses by driving
others to insult them.

+ The one who changes the boundary lines of the land: It means
that those who change the boundary lines of lands or frontiers for the
sake of plundering peoples properties, are also included among those
cursed by Allah.

General Meaning of the Hadith

The Prophet (PBUH) warns his people ugainst committing any of the
following major sins, which incur Allah's curse. These sins are as follows:

1 Sacrificing for the sake of any deity besides Allah,
2.Cursing one’s parents, insulting them or driving others to insult them.

3.Harboring an innovative act of worship and providing a secure shelter
for 2 person who is liable for a legal punishment.

4.Changing the boundary lines that demarcate peoples terrains for the
sake of seizing their property without a just cause,

‘Chapter 9: Offering Sacrificial Animals for Deities other than Allah 95

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith stresses the prohibition of offering sacrifices for the sake of any
deity besides Allah. A perpetrator of such a grave sin is the first to be cursed
according to the hadith,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Slaughteringa sacrificial animal for the sake of any deity besides Allah.
is an abominable and prohibited act. It is an act of polytheism and is
reckoned as a major sin.

4 Offering sacrifices is an act of worship, which must be dedicated to
Allah Alone.

% The prohibition of insulting one’s parents or driving others to
insult them.

4 The prohibition of supporting a criminal or giving him shelter,

© It is similarly prohibited to accept or harbor bid ahs (innovative acts
in religion).

% It is prohibited to change boundaries or frontiers for the sake of
plundering people's possessions.

4 Ibis permissible to curse wrongdoers and sinners in order to restrain
them from committing sins.

ee

03 Concide Commentary on the Book of Yawhidd

Tariq Ibn Shihab narrated:

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘A man entered Paradise
because of flies and a man entered the Hellfire because of flies? They
(the Companions) said, ‘How would it happen, O Messenger of
Allah?’ He said, "Two men passed by a group of people who used to
worship an idol. They did not allow anyone to pass without offering
a sacrifice to the idol. They, thus, asked the first to offer a sacrifice. He
said, ‘Thave nothing to offer’ They said, ‘Offer (something) even (it
may be as little as) flies’ He offered flies so that they would let him
pass. Thereupon, he was cast into the Hellfire. When they asked
the latter to offer something as a sacrifice for the sake of the idol,
he said, ‘Lam not to offer any sacrifice for any deity besides Allah,
Exalted be He! Thereupon, they beheaded him, and he was admitted
into Paradise’

(Related by Ahmad)

‘Tariq Ibn Shihab (the Narrator)

His fall name is Tariq Ibn Shihab Al-Bajalt Al-Ahmasi. He was one of the
Prophet's Companions. Though he saw the Prophet, he did not directly receive
his hadiths, The hadith reported by him is thus termed as mursal’ Trig died
in 83 AH. may Allah be pleased with him.

General Meaning of the Hadith

With the aim of demonstrating the gravity af polytheism, the Prophet
(PBUH) increased curiosity by prefacing the story with the phrase, “A man
entered Paradise because of flies and a man entered the Hellfire because
of flies” Upon hearing these words, the Companions asked in exclamation,
‘How can such little flies lead to Hellfire?’ Consequently, the Prophet (PBUH)
illustrated that those two men, who belonged to the Children of Israel,
intended to pass through a road where an idol existed. In order to pass
through such a road, they were asked to offer a sacrifice for the sake of this
idol as a means of glorification and exaltation. Therefore, the worshippers of
such an idol demanded those two men to abide by such a polytheistic ritual.
‘The first man asked to be excused for he was entirely without money. They
approved of the slightest sacrifice he could offer, since their goal consisted in

‘Chapter 9: Offering Sactficial Animals for Deities other than Allah 97

drawing him to polytheism. Upon offering flies for the sake of the idol, he was
permitted to pass. As a result of his action, he was doomed to the Hellfire.
‘The latter steadily refused to commit such a heinous act of polytheism and
was thus murdered. He was consequently admitted into Paradise due to his
firm belief.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith demonstrates that offering sacrifices is an act of worship,
which entails polytheism if being observed for the sake of any false deity
besides Allah.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith
lightness

4 Whoever commits any act of polytheism will inevitably be doomed
to Hellfire, and whoever adopts pure monotheism will be admitted
into Paradise.

+ The gravity of any act of polytheism regardless of i

* Anyone may inadvertently fall into an act of polytheism, which entails
chastisement in the Hellfire,

+ People should be warned against all sins however slight they may be.

© Though the first person did not initially intend to offer sacrifices to
the idol, he acceded to their will. He was thus admitted into the Hellfire.

+ Ifa Muslim commitsan act of polytheism, he becomes a polytheist, and will
inevitably enter Hellfire. Had he not been a Muslim, the Prophet (PBUH)
would have not said, ‏م‎ man entered the Hellfire because of flies”

% People are judged according to their inner beliefs and intentions, however
few their deeds are.

> Sacrificing is an act of worship, However, when an act is offered to
anyone other than Allah, it becomes an act of polytheism.

‘ Belief in one God is a meritorious act, which will be greatly rewarded
in the Hereafter.

+ The persistent adherence to righteous deeds isa greatly meritorious act.

03 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid
Endnotes

1 Muslim (1978),

2 Ahmad in the book of Az-Zuhd (Asceticism) (p. 22), Abd Nua‘im in Al-Hilyah (The
Ornament) (1/203), and ibn Aba Shaybah in Al-Musanaf (The Compilation) (6/477
No, 33028) grading it 2 maugif (discontinued) haditf: ascribed to Salman Al-Fatist
(may Allah be pleased with him).

3 Mursal (incompletely transmitted) hadith is a hadith whose chain of transmission
jacks a Companion transmitter; ie. ‏ه‎ hadith which a rabi't has directly attributed
to the Prophet without mentioning « Companion as a link between him and the
Prophet.

0

Slaughtering Sacrificial Animals
at Places and Altars Dedicated to
False Deities

Allah, Exalted and Glorified be He, says:

“Do not stand [for prayer] within it - ever. A mosque founded on
righteousness from the first day is more worthy for you to stand
in. Within it are men who love to purify themselves; and Allah
loves those who purify themselves” (Qur'an: At-Tawbah:108)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book

The foregoing chapter elaborates on the legal ruling of offering a sacrificial
animal for the sake of false deities or objects. The present chapter discusses
the cause behind such a sin. It further prohibits imitating the polytheists in
offering sacrifices,

100 Concise Commentary on the Books uf Tiwhld

Keywords and Phrases

+ Those who purify themselves: Intended purification includes getting
rid of both physical and moral impurities.

General Meaning of the Quranic Verse

Almighty Allah commanded His Prophet (PBUH) not to establish prayer
in the mosque built by the hypocrites to seed dissension among the Muslim
Community. The hypocrites invited the Prophet (PBUH) to offer prayers in
the new mosque so as to hide their malicious aims. The Prophet (PBUH)
was unaware of their hidden plots, so he promised them to respond to their
request. Thereupon, Allah forbade him to offer prayer at their mosque and
urged him to establish prayers in ‏"قطي‎ Mosque which had been founded on
righteousness and in conformity with the commands of Allah and His Messenger
(PBUH). Thereafter, Almighty Allah depicted the people of Quba’ as always
being careful to purify themselves of all physical and moral impurities, and
indeed Allah loves those endowed with such a meritorious quality.

Relevance of the Verse to the Chapter

By means of analogical deduction, it is prohibited to offer sacrifices at
places dedicated for false deities as it is prohibited to offer prayer at Masjid
‘Ad-Dirar (the Mosque of Discord) which was mainly constructed in defiance
of Allah and His Messenger (PBUH).

Lessons Drawn from the Verse

+ It is prohibited to. offer sacrifices for the sake of Allah at places
dedicated for sacrifices offered for false deities,

+ It is desirable to establish prayers in the company of righteous and
pure groups of people.

It is proven that Allah experiences love in a way appropriate for
His Majesty.

IL is commendable to perfectly offer ablution and be purified of all
physical impurities.

© Legal rulings related to the offer of sacrifices or ritual ordinances at
specific places, are determined by the intention behind the dedication
or construction of such places.

 Itis commendable to block all the means leading to polytheism:

She

ان

Chaprer 10: Slaughtering a Sacrifice at an Altar Dedicated for a False Deity

‘habit Ibn Ad-Dahhak (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“During the lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH), a man vowed
to slaughter a camel at Buwanah. So, he came to the Prophet
(PBUH) and said, ‘I have made a vow to sacrifice a camel at
Buwénah. The Prophet (PBUH) asked, ‘Did the place contain
any idol of Pre-Islamic Period of Ignorance (the Jahiliyyah)?
They (the Companions) said, ‘No. The Prophet (PBUH) asked,
‘Was any pre-Islamic festival observed there?’ They replied,
‘No! The Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Fulfill your vow, for there is no
vow to be fulfilled in defiance of Allah or concerning what man

does not possess:

(Related by Abii Dawid according to the condition stipulated by

Al-Bukhéri and Muslim in their compilations)

Thabit Ibnud-Dahhak

His full name is Thabit Ibnud-Dahhék Ibn Khalifah Tbn Tha'labah Ibn.
“Adi Al-Ashhali Al-Khazraji Al-Ansari. He was a renowned Companion, and

died in 64.A.H. may Allah be pleased with him,

Keywords and Phrases

+ Vow: It is an earnest promise to perform a specified non-obligatory

ritual act.

+ Buwanahz It isa hill close to Yanbu’.

+ Idol: Technically the word includes every idol, tomb or memorial,

which may be hallowed.

+ The condition of Al-Bukhari and Muslim: Al-Bukhari and

Muslim stipulated specific conditions for their acceptance of hadiths.
A hadith, according to these conditions must be of a continuous chain
of transmitters. Those transmitters must also be of upright character
and have a retentive memory. The hadith must, moreover, be free from
any irregularity ‏عه‎ speciousness.
102 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhidl

General Meaning of the Hadith

Thabit (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that a man vowed to
slaughter a camel ata certain place for the sake of Allah as an act of submission to
Him, The man informed the Prophet (PBUH) of his vow. The Prophet (PBUH)
inquired whether there were any idols in the place where the man would offer
his sacrifice, When the Prophet (PBUH) made sure that the place in question
was free from any trace of polytheism, he allowed the man to fulfill his vow.
Moreover, this hadith states that it is impermissible for the Muslim to fulfill
his vow if t leads toa sin, Man is also excused from fulfilling his vow when it
is beyond his capacity.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

The hadith stresses the prohibition of offering sacrifices for the sake of
Allah ata place where an idol exists or ata place where a feast is commemorated
by the polytheists,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith
> A Muslim is duty bound not to fulfill a vow at a place where an idol
once existed, even if that idol had been completely demolished,

% A Muslim is, similarly, legally bound not to fulfill a vow at-a place
where a pre-Islamic feast was celebrated, even if such a feast is no
longer celebrated.

4 The mufti is recommended to thoroughly inquire about the issues on
which he is asked to give legal rulings.

© It is prohibited to offer any act leading to polytheism.

% Even if they do not intend to be like the polytheists, Muslims are not
permitted to imitate the polytheists' rituals and feasts,

4 Slaughtering a sacrificial animal for the sake of Allah at a place where
the polytheists slaughter for their false deities or hold their feasts, is an
act of disobedience to Allah.

Its forbidden to fulfill a vow which leads to the commitment of a sin.

+ It is not obligatory for the Muslim to fulfil his vow if itis beyond his
capacity. Therefore, if a man vows to manumit the slave of another
man, his vow is not binding.

‘Chapter 10; Slaughteting a Sacrifice ‏مسدعه‎ Altar Dedicared for a False Deity 103

Is obligatory for the Muslim to fulfill any vow he takes as long as itis
neither an act of disobedience nor beyond his capacity.

© Taking a vow is an act of worship, and is, thus, prohibited to be
dedicated to any false deity besides Allah.

Endnotes

1 Aba Dawid (3313).

Act of Polytheism:Vows for
Deities Other than Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“They [are those who} fulfill (their) vows...”
(Qur'an: Al-Insan: 7)
Allah, further, says:

“And whatever you spend of expenditures or make of vows-
indeed, Allah knows of it...” (Quran: Al-Bagarah: 270)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

This chapter tackles the issue of dedicating vows to any false deity besides
Allah. It farther warns Muslims against such an act of polytheism.

106 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Keywords and Phrases

act of Polytheism: Taking a vow is an act of worship. If it is
dedicated to any false deity besides Allah, it becomes an act of major
polytheism,

+ They fulfill Vows: It means the commitment of oneself to do
something which is not legally ordained in order to glorify the one to
whom the vow is devoted.

+ And whatever you spend of expenditures: The Qur'anic phrase
includes both admitted and unadmitted acts of charity.

+ Or make of vows; The phrase includes both permissible and impermissible
kinds of vows,

+ Indeed, Allah knows of it: It means that Allah will recompense people
for their good and evil deeds. Since Allah knows the hidden
intentions behind all vows, the Quranic phrase thus represents a
promise of good rewards for the righteous and a threat of chastisement
to the wrongdoer.

General Meaning of the Two Qur’anic Verses

Allah, Exalted be He, praises those who commit themselves to certain
non-obligatory acts of worship for His sake. Moreover, Allah enunciates
that He is cognizant of whatever alms we spend and whatever acts of
worship we commit ourselves to, and will reward everyone according to
their intentions.

Relevance of the Two Qur’anic Verses to the Chapter

These two verses prove that vowing is an act of worship. Therefore,
Allah praises those who fulfill their vows. Allah praises only those who
commit themselves to observing the obligatory acts ar to abandoning
theunlawful. Furthermore, Allah affirms that He is omniscient ofall acts
of charity we offer and of the vows we take. He will, thus, recompense
Us for our good and evil deeds. Therefore, vowing is an act of worship,
which turns to be an act of polytheism if devoted to any false deity
besides Allah.

Chaprer 11: Act of Polytheism: Vows for Deities ‏عغطت‎ than Allah 107

Lessons Drawn from the Two Qur’anic Verses

% Vowing is a devotional act, which becomes an act of major polytheism
if devoted to any false deity besides Allah,

> The two Qur'anic verses affirm that Allah is the Omniscient.
+ Allah will recompense people for good and evil deeds in the Herealter:
“© Muslims should be encouraged to fulfill their vows.

oe

108 Concise Commentary on the Book af Tawbhd

* Kishah (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated
that the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said:

“Whoever vows to obey Allah must obey Him, and whoever vows
fo disobey Allah must not disobey Him."

(Related by Al-Bukhari)

* Rishah (the Narrator)

‘ Kishah, the Mother of the Believers, was one of the Prophet's wives, and
a daughter of Abt Bakr (may Allah be pleased with them). She was the most
versed woman in Islamic jurisprudence and the most belaved to the Prophet
among his wives. There is, however, a disagreement among scholars whether
she or Khadijah was more endeared to the Prophet. She died in 57 A.H.;may
Allah be pleased with her.

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘The Prophet (PBUH) commands Muslims to fulfill the vows devoted to
Allh, such as offering supererogatory prayers or giving charity. He, further,
wams them against fulfilling vows entailing a sin, such as the vow to offer a
sacrifice to anyone besides Allah, to offer prayer at tombs, orto go on pilgrimage
to tombs.

Releyance of the Hadith to the Chapter

According to the hadith, a man may make a Vow to offer a good deed or
to commit a sin. Therefore, making a vow is an act of worship, which may be
regarded as an act of polytheism if dedicated to any deity besides Allah

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% Taking a vow is an act of worship. Therefore; if itis dedicated to anyone
besides Allah, it turns to an act of polytheism.

A Muslim is duty bound to fulfill his vow as long as it is an act of
obedience.

+ Itis prohibited to fulfill any vow entailing an act of disobedience.

‎of Polytheism: Vows fot Deities Other than Allah 109‏ عع

‎Chapter

‎Endnotes

‎1 Al-Bukhari (6696), Abd Dawad, (3289), At-Tirmidhi, (1526) Ibn Majah, (2126), and
Altmad in Al-Musnad (6/ 36, 41).

Act of Polytheism: Seeking Refuge
with Beings other than Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And there were men from mankind who sought refuge in men
‘from the jinn, so they [only] increased them in burden (i.e., sin)?”

(Quran: Al-Jinn: 6)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

This chapter elaborates on one of the forms of polytheism, namely, the act
of seeking refuge in any false deity besides Allah. Such an act certainly contradicts
the true monotheistic belief,

12 Concise Commentary on the Book of Timid

Keywords and Phrases

+ There were men from mankind who sought refuge in men from
the jinn: This phrase refers to a common pre-Islamic practice. The
‘Arab pagans used, when passing by a valley at night, to seek refuge in
the (jinni) master of that valley.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah, Glorified be He, related that some people sought refuge with some
of the jirm. However, instead of providing them with safety, the jinn increased
the humans fears. Undoubtedly, this was a punishment from Allah.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‘Upon accepting Islam, a group of the jinn used to express their renunciation
oF acts perpetrated by the Arab pagans before the advent of Islam. Such acts
entailed polytheism and included practices such as seeking refuge with false
deities besides Allah.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

% Seeking refuge with any deity other than Allah is an actof polytheism.
Consequently, the believers from among the jinn, as quoted by
Allah, said:

“And we will never associate with our Lord anyone.”
(Quran: Al-finn: 2)
Denouncing this act of polytheism, the jinn said:

“And there were meu from mankind who sought refuge in men
from the jinn (Quran: Al-finn: 6)

4% The Prophet (PBUH) hias been sent for the sake of guiding both the
jinn and mankind,

4 Seeking refuge with anyone other than Allah is a major cause of fear
and weakness.

> The verse signifies that seeking refuge with Allah fills man with

strength and safety:
So

Chapter 12: Acts of Polytheism: Seeking Refuge with Beings other than Allah 113

Khawlah Bint Hakim (may Allah be pleased with her) said:

“T heard the Prophet (PBUH) saying, ‘When anyone lands at a
place, and then says, ‘I seek refuge with the Perfect Words of Allah
from the evil of what He has created? nothing would harm him
until he departs from that stopping place.”"

(Related by Muslim)

Khawlah Bint Hakim (the Narrator)

‘The full name of the narrator is Khawlah Bint Hakim Ibn Umayyah As-
Sulami, She was the wife of 'Uthman ‏مآ‎ Maz’ tin (may Allah be pleased with
him), and was a virtuous woman; may Allah be pleased with her.

Keywords and Phrases
+ Perfect Words of Allah: The Noble Quran

General Meaning of the Hadith

“The Prophet (PBUH) guides his nation to seek refuge in the sanative,
sufficient and perfect Words of Allah, in order to feel secure from all fears and
dangers upon landing or staying at any place.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith guides Muslims to the beneficial and legal way of seeking
refuge. It, further, warns them against seeking refuge with false deities, which
is regarded as an act of polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Secking refuge with Allah is an act of worship.

4 Muslims are ordained to seek refuge only with Allah by invoking Him
by His names and His Sublime Attributes,

4 The Words of Allah are not created, for Allah ordains His servants to
seek refuge in His Words. As it has been pointed out earlier, seeking
refuge in any creature is an act of polytheism.

4 Concise Commentary on the Book of Zawbid

% ‘The virtue of invoking Allah by pronouncing the phrases mentioned
in this hadith, though they seem brief

+ Allah dominates the affairs of all creatures.

Endnotes

1 Muslin (2708), At-Tirmnidht (3433), Ibn Majah (3547), and Ahmad in AL Musnad
(6/377, 409),

|CHAPTER |

13

Acts of Polytheism: Seeking Refuge
with anyone besides Allah and
Invoking anyone besides Him

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And do not invoke besides Allah that which neither benefits you
nor harms you, for if you did, then indeed you would be of the
(unjust) wrongdoers.” (Qur'an: Yanus: 106)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

This chapter illustrates that seeking refuge with and invoking anyone
other than Allah are two acts of polytheism that contradict the prerequisites
of monotheism.

‎Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid‏ قلا

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎٠ Seeking Refuge and invoking: The difference between seeking
refuge and invoking is that the former is confined to those who are
always in distress while the latter is so comprehensive that itis usually
practiced by those in distress or not.

‎+ Unjust wrongdoers: Polytheists are regarded the worst unjust
wrongdoers.

‎General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

‎Allah commandsHis Prophet(PBUH) notto invoke anyone ofthe creatures,
who are incapable of either bringing about benefit or repelling harm. Had the
Prophet invoked anyone besides Allah, he would have been regarded as one
of the polytheists. The prohibition enunciated in the Quranic verse is general
and addressed to the whole Muslim nation,

‎Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‎In this verse, Allah prohibits people from invoking anyone besides Him
since such an invocation is considered an act of polytheism that contradicts
pure monotheism.

‎Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

‎4 Invoking deities besides Allah isan act of major polytheism.

‎% Lfthemostrighteous servantof Allah invoked false deitiesbesides Allah,
he would be regarded as a polytheist. So, those of less righteousness
are more entitled to fear this grave sin.

‎% The Qur‘anic verse highlights the disability of the polytheists' false
deities, and thus the invalidity of adoring them.

‎$e6

‎Acts uf paljheim : Seeking Refge tl Anyane Beser Allalr liz‏ :13 ممومداة

‎Allah, Exalted be He, says:

‎“And if Allah should touch you with adversity, thereisno remover
of it except Him; and if He intends for you good, then there is no
repeller of Hlis bounty. He causes it to reach whomever He wills
Of His servants. And He is the Forgiving, the Merciful”

‎(Qur'an: Yanus: 107)

‎General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

‎Allah is the dominating Sovereign who gives, deprives, brings benefit and
inflicts harm. Therefore, none is worthy to be invoked and worshipped but
Allah, for those invoked besides Him are not capable of inflicting harm or
bringing a benefit neither for themselves, nor for others.

‎Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‎The verse shows that invocation must be dedicated to Allah, for He is
the one worthy of worship. Therefore, invoking those who can neither bring
benefit nor repel harm is an act of polytheism.

‎Lessons Drawn from the Qur' anic Verse

‎‘+ Since Allah is the only God, He must be solely worshipped.

‎4 The invalidity of invoking besides Allah others who cannot bring a
benefit or repel harm.

‎The Quranic verse attests to the verity of the Divine Will.

‎% It also proves Allah's forgiveness and mercifulness in a way that is
appropriate for His Majesty.

‎She

118 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

" ‏مك..‎ seek from Allah provision and worship Him and be grateful
to Himn, To Him you will be returned.” (Qur'an: Al-’ Ankabiit: 17)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Worship Him: It is a command to dedicate all acts of worship solely
to Allah,

+ And be grateful to Him: Being grateful to Allah means acknowledging
His favors, doing what pleases Him and giving up all sins.

«To Him you will be returned: On the Day of Resurrection everyone
will return to Allah to be recompensed for his goad and evil deeds.

General Meaning of the Quranic Verse

Allah, Glorified be He, commands His servants to seek provision exclusively
from Him, not from idols, to devote all acts of worship solely to Him and
to acknowledge all His favors by using them for His obedience. In addition,
‘Almighty Allah emphasizes that all creatures will return to Him on the Day
of Resurrection, and He will recompense them for their good and evil deeds.
‘Therefore, everyone must prepare himself for accountability before Allah.

Relevance of the Quranic Verse to the Chapter
‘The Qur'anic verse affirms the obligation of dedicating all acts of worship,
including invocation, solely to Allah, and confutes the fallacies of the polytheists
who worship false deities besides Allah,
Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse
> One is duty bound to solely invoke Allah and ask Him for provision.

© Itis incumbent on every Muslim to dedicate all his devotional acts to
Allah Alone.

4 One must show gratitude fo Allah for the great favors He bestows on man,
9 Resurrection and Reward are proven according to the Qur'anic verse.

There is no contradiction between seeking Allah's provision and
worshipping Him, as Islam guarantees the interests of people in this

life and the life to come.
eis

Chapter 13: Aci of polytheism : Seeking Refige with Anyone Besides Allah ng

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And who is more astray than he who invokes besides Allah thase
who will not respond to him until the Day of Resurrection (i.e,
never), and they, of their invocation, are unaware - And when
the people are gathered (that Day), they (who were invoked) will
be enemies to them, and they will be deniers of their worship.”

(Quran: Al-Ahgaf: 5-6)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Those who will not respond to him: Those invoked besides Allah
are incompetent to fulfill invocations of their followers,

+ (They) are unawate: Those invoked besides Allah are unaware
of the invocations because they may be dead persons, inanimate
objects, or angels preoccupied with that for which they have
been created.

+ They will be enemies to them: Those who are invoked besides Allah
will dissociate themselves from anyone invoking them in this life.

General Meaning of the Two Qur’anic Verses

According to the Qur'ani¢ verses, itis determined that the most deviated
persons in the sight of Allah are those who invoke false deities that are
incapable of responding to people's invocations in the worldly life and are,
moreover, unaware of such invocations: When the Day of Judgment comes.
and people are gathered, the ones besought will dissociate themselves from
whoever invoked thent. Thus, the polytheists are unfortunate in both this
life and the Hereafter. Their invocations will notbe realized in this life and
their worship will be rejected when they are in a dire need for relief in the
Hereafter.

Relevance of the Two Qur’anic Verses ta the Chapter

The two Quranic verses state that whoever invokes anyone other than Allah
is the most astray. Besides, invocation is an act of worship, and it becomes an
act of polytheism when devoted to other than Allah.

120 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tinuhiid

Lessons Drawn from the Two Qur’anic Verses

4 Invocation is an act of worship that turns into an act of major
polytheism in case it is directed to anyone other than Allah.

> Whoever invokes anyone besides Allah remains miserable in both this
life and the Hereafter.

 Polytheism is the gravest manifestation of going astray from the
straight path.

+ The verity of the Resurrection, Assembly and Reward in the Hereafter

4 Unlike what the polytheists perceive, idols neither hear the invocations
nor respond to them.

Bliss in both this life and the Hereafter can be achieved only by
worshipping Allah Alone.

فنا

Chapter 13: Acts of polytheinm = Seeking Refuge with Anyone besides Allah 121

Allah, the Almighty, says:
‏عل"‎ He (not best) who responds to the desperate one when he calls
upon Him and removes evil and makes you inheritors of the
earth? Is there a deity with Allah? Little do you remember.”

(Quran: An-Nam: 62)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Inheritors of the earth: Nations succeeding each other

+ Is there a deity with Allah? It means that there is no deity who
can respond to invocations or bestow the favors mentioned in the
Quranic verse.

+ Little do you remember: Asa result of yourlittle reflection on Allsh’s

grandeur and on the favors He bestowed on you, you associated others
along with Him.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah rebukes the polytheists who invoke others besides Him though
they admit that Allah Alone responds to their invocations and removes their
afflictions at times of adversity. He also makes them the successors of their
predecessors. Therefore, the polytheists are condemned for worshipping false
deities that cannot grant them any of the favors bestowed by Allah, Inasmuch
as their reflection on the favors they bask in is too little to raise the fear of
Allah inside them, they fall into the abyss of polytheism.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‘The verse implies the invalidity of seeking refuge with anyone other than
Allah, for only Allah can respond to the desperate, remove the harm. give life,
and cause death.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

+ The prohibition of invoking others besides Allah for achieving that
which none is capable of but Allah

2 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawubiid

4 Though the polytheists believe in the Oneness of Allah's Lordship,
they are not admitted into Islam.

4 The Oneness of Allah's Lordship is a clear-cut proof of the Oneness of
His Divinity (Le. His being the only one worthy of worship).

+ Thepolytheists' beliefin the Oneness of Allah can be taken as a counter-
argument against their repudiation of the Oneness of His Divinity.

eee

Chapter 13: Act of polyhetim : Seeking Refuge with Anyone Besides Allah 13

“During the lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH), there was a hypocrite
who used to hurt the believers. Some of them said, ‘Let us go to the
Messenger of Allah to seek refuge with him from that hypocrite’
Thereupon, the Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Do not seek my refuge, but

seek ‏كلملل‎ refuge’ ”"

(Related by At-Tabarant)

At-Tabardini (the Compiler)

Sulayman Ibn Ahmad At-Tabardnt was a prolific compiler and Imam who
compiled three large Ma ‘djim (compilations) of Prophetic hadith.

Keywords and Phrases

+ A hypocrite: It refers to ‘Abdullah Ibn Ubayy Ibn Saldl, the head of
the hypocrites.

+ Do not seek my refuge: The Prophet disliked to be sought for help
besides Allah,

General Meaning of the Hadith

When Islam spread widely and Muslims became a strong community, a
group of the unbelievers decided to apparently embrace Islam and coverily
remain unbelievers, so they were called hypocrites. Such hypocrites used to
hurt the believers in word and deed. Such was the case of the man mentioned
in this hadith. Some Companions wanted to seck refuge with the Prophet
(PBUH) to dissuade that hypoctite from his abuses, The Prophet (PBUH) was
able to fulfill their request for help, but, instead, he denounced the wording they
used as it implied lack of respect toward Allah, The Prophet (PBUH) wanted
to teach his Companions, block ‏لله‎ possible avenues leading to polytheism and
keep their sound belief intact.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

In this Hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) condemns the act of seeking refuge
with anyone besides Allah.

1 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tanhid

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% It is forbidden to seek refuge with the Prophet (PBUH) or anyone
other than Allah,

4 Muslims are recommended to avoid profane words sa that their sound
belief can be kept pure.

+ All possible avenues leading to polytheism must be blocked.
4 Muslims should endure adversities for the sake of Allah,
+ Hypocrisy is an abominable sin.

+ The interdiction of offending the believers, as it is an act of hypocrisy.

Endnotes

1 At-Tobardni - Al-Haytham! said in his Majma* Az-Zawéld (10/109): This hadith ts
related by At-Tabarini and its transmitters are among those of the hadiths related

by Al-Bulhari and Muslim, except for Iba Laht'ahi who is graded as an acceptable
transmitter of hadith.

4

Helpless Partners Ascribed
to Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Do they associate with Him those who create nothing and they
are (themselves) created? - And they (i.e., the false deities) are
unable to (give) them help, nor can they help themselves.”

)191-192 قف فلخ ‎(Quran:‏

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In this chapter, the author tackles the legal proofs of the prohibition of
all acts of polytheism and the state of those invoked besides Allah. No doubt,
such clear-cut proofs attest to monotheism.

126 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Keywords and Phrases

+Do they associate with Him those who create nothing and they
are (themselves) created? The question is introduced in the form
of a reprimand, Thus, Allah rebukes those who associate partners
with Him.

+ Those who create nothing: Any creature taken as a deity though it
neither creates nor deserves to be worshipped.

+ And they are (themselves) created: Those deities worshipped
besides Allah are created, and a created being can never be set up as a
rival to the Creator.

Nor can they help themselves: Such false deities are powerless to
guard themselves against any imminent harm, and therefore, they
cannot be helpful to others,

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verses

Allah, Glorified be He, rebukes the polytheists for ascribing to Him partners
that cannot create anything. Neither do these false deities have any attributes
that may render them worthy of worship, nor can they guard those invoking
them against any destined harm. Also they cannot guard themselves against
any harm, Therefore, invoking such false deities is null and void, for a created
being is by no means a rival to the Creator, and a helpless being is by no means
a rival to the Omnipotent (i. Allah) who dominates the whole universe.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verses

+ The Quranic verses invalidate polytheism since they imply attachment
to impotent and incapable creatures.

Only the Creator is worthy of worship,

~ The Oneness of Allah's Lordship is a clear-cut proof of the Oneness of
His Divinity,

+ Itis permissible to argue with the polytheists in order to support truth

and confute falsehood,
‏نعف‎

Chaprer Las: Helpless Partners Ascribed to Allah 12

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“.,.And those whom you invoke other than Him do Hot possess
(as much as) the membrane of a date seed - If you invoke ther,
they do not hear your supplication; and if they heard, they
would not respond to you. And on the Day of Resurrection they
will deny your association. And none can inform you like (one)

Acquainted (with all matters)” (Qur'an: Fatir: 13-14)

Keywords and Phrases

+ And those whom you invoke other than Him: The angels, the
prophets, the idols, etc.

+ They do not hear your supplication: Such adored angles and
prophets are preaccupied with the ultimate goal for which they have
been created.

+ They would not respond to you: It means that false deities are
incapable of meeting the requests of their worshippers.

+ They will deny your association: On the Day of Resurrection, such
false deities will dissociate themselves from their worshippers.

«Andnonecaninform youlike [One] Acquainted (withall matters):
‘None, other than Allah, can inform you about the consequences of any
matter and its end,

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verses

Allah, Exalted be He, states that all the false deities invoked besides Him,
including the angels, the prophets and the idols, are powerless to fulfill their
worshippers’ supplications, In addition, these false deities lack the three
requirements necessary for the one who deserves to be invoked:

a) He must possess the requests which are invoked for.
b) He must be able to hear the invocation.

.0 He must be able to respond to the invocation.

Whoever is bereft of one of the above-mentioned three requir
ments cannot be invoked, and it is crystal clear that all the false deities
lack these conditions.

(28 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verses to the Chapter

‘These verses confute the fallacies of polytheists and provide a clear-cut
proof of the nullity of polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verses

% ‘The invalidity of polytheism is clearly established,

‘ The one who deseryes to be invoked must meet the following three
conditions:

a) He must possess what he is asked to grant.
b) He must be able to hear the invocation.
©) He must be able to respond to the invocation,

# The sound belief should be founded on clear-cut proofs and firm
certitude, not on speculation or blind imitation.

% The Quranic verse proves that Allah possesses a comprehensive
knowledge of the consequences of all affairs,

$oe

Chapter 14: Helpless Partner scribed ‏ف‎ Allah 129

Anas Ibn Malik (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) got a wound on his head and his
{front teeth were damaged on the day of (the Battle of) Uhud. So, he
said, ‘How will these people (the disbelievers), who have wounded
their Prophet, attain salvation?’ Therefore, Allah, Exalted be He,
revealed the Quranic verse, “Not for you, (O Muhammad, but for
Allah), is the decision...” (Qur’in: Alu ‘Imran: 128)"

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Uhud: A famous mountain north of Medina where the well-known
battle took place.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, Anas Ibn Malik gave a brief account of the trials with
which the Prophet (PBUH) was afflicted during the Battle of Ubud, when he
(PBUH) received two wounds. Consequently, the Prophet (PBUH) despaired
of the disbelievers of Quraysh, and thought that they would never believe
Thereupon, Allah revealed, “Not for you, (O Muhansmad, but for Allah), is
the decision...” (Qur'an: Alu “Imran: 128), ‏ما‎ command His Prophet (PBUH)
to go on calling to Islam, and to believe that the consequences of all actions

and the destiny of all people exclusively belong to Allah.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith is a proof of the invalidity of exclusively beseeching the help
of those in authority or of the righteous besides the help of Allah. Therefore,
Prophet (PBUH) could not guard himself against harm, and he had nothing to.
do with the destiny of people.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

It is invalid to set the allies of Allah or the righteous as rivals to Allah,
for even the Prophet (PBUH) had nothing to do with the destiny of
people, and, with greater reason, anyone other than the Prophet has
nothing to do with it,

Concise Cammentary of the Book of Tanhtd

+ The prophets of Allah were susceptible to illnesses and afflictions.

+ The obligation of dedicating one's acts of worship solely to Allah, since
He is the All Dominating.

© Showing forbearance and patience over afilictions for Aliah’s sake is
highly recommended.

% The Muslim is forbidden to express or experience despair of Allah's
mercy; no matter how many'sins he committed, Such a rule does not

apply to polytheism,

130

Chapter 14: Helpless Parmners ‏لمفتصية‎ to Allah 131

Ibn ‘Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that he heard the
Messenger of Allah (PBUH), after rising from the bowing posture of the last
rak' ah of the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer, saying:

“O Allah! Curse so-and-so and so-and-so} after ke had said, ‘Allah
hears him who praises Him, Our Lord, all praise be to you!’ So
Allah, Exalted be He, revealed ‘Not for you, (O Muhammad, bus

for Allah) is the decision .,.’ a (Qur'an: Alu ‘Imran;128)
(Related by Al-Bukhari)
According to a variant version:

*...He used to invoke Allah against Safwan Ibn Umayyah, Suhayl
Ibn ‘Amr and Al-Harith fbn Hishara, so Allah, Exalted be He,
revealed (the verse which means,) ‘Not for you, (O Muhammad,
but for Allah) is the decision...” (Qur'an: Alu ‘Imran: 128)”

(Related by Al-Bukhari)

* Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar Ibnul-Khattab (the Narrator)

The narrator ' Abdullah Ibn “Umar Ibnul-Khattab was a venerable and
pious Companion and a well-known scholar, He died in 73 A.H., may Allah
be pleased with him,

The Occasion of the Hadith

Ibn “Umar heard this invocation just after the Battle of Uhud during which
the Prophet (PBUH) had his head wounded and his front teeth damaged.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Allah! Curseso-and-soand so-and-so; A curseisan appeal or prayer
for a deprivation of Allah's mercy to befall someone or something. The
persons cursed were mentioned in the variant version of the hadith.

+ He used to invoke Allah against Safwan Ibn Umayyah, Suhayl
Ibn "Amr and Al-Harith Ibn Hisham: The Prophet (PBUH)
named those three persons as they were the heads of the polytheists
‘on the day of ‘Ubud. Afterwards, those three persons converted to
Islam and Allah accepted their repentance,

132 Concise Commentary an the Book of Tiwi

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar narrated that he heard the Prophet (PBUH) invoking
in prayer against certain figures among the disbelievers wha wounded him on
the day of the Battle of "Uhud, so Allah admonished him in the Ever-Glorious
‘Que’an saying:

“Not for you, (O Muhammad, but for Allah), is the decision
(Qur'an: Alu ‘Imran:128)

However, those three people converted to Islam afterwards and Allah
accepted their repentance.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith shows that the Prophet (PBUH) could not guard either himself
or his Companions against the evils of the polytheists. He, instead, sought help
from His God; the Omnipotent and the All-Sovereign. The Prophet’ behavior
attests to the falsity of the beliefs of tomb-worshippers, who adore Allah's
friends and righteous persons.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

© It is invalid to invoke the allies of Allah and the righteous to bring
benefit or remove harm.

 Itis permissible to invoke Allah within prayers to let His wrath befall
the polytheists.

‎Naming the person meant in invocation during prayer does not‏ ف
‎blemish one's prayer.‏

‎According to the hadith, imam of prayer is to pronounce both tasrat”
(saying “Allah hears him who praises Him’Yand tamitd (saying “Our
Lord, all the Praises are for you!") immediately after rising from

‎She

‎bowing posture.

Chapter 14: Helples Partners Aseribed tw Alla 134

‘Abd Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“When the verse that reads, “And warn, (0 Muhammad), your
losest kindred.” (Qur'in: Ash-Shu'ard: 214) was revealed, the
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) rose and said, '0 people of Quraysh! Buy
(ie. save) yourselves (from the Hellfire), as [ cannot save you from
the punishment of Allah, © ‘Abbis Ibn “Abdul-Muttalib! I cannot
save you from the punishment of Allah. O Safiyyah, the Aunt of the
Messenger of Allah (PBUH)! I cannot save you from the punishment
of Allah. O Fatimah Bint Muhammad! Ask me anything from my
wealth, but I cannot save you from the punishment of Allah?”

(Related by Al-Bukhari, Muslim and At-Tirmidhi)

Aba Hurayrah (the Narrator)

‘Aba Hurayrah is the nickname of ‘Abdur-Rahman Ibn Sekhr Ad-Dawsi.
He was one of the great scholars and prolific narrators among the venerable
Companions. He narrated more than five thousand hadiths and died in 57,58
oF 59 A.HLs may Allah be pleased with him.

Keywords and Phrases

+ The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) rose: It means that the Prophet
(PBUH) climbed up the hill of As-Saff.

+ Buy yourselves: Buying a soul means saving it from the Hellfire by
believing in Allah and obeying Him. The nobility of ancestry will not
save anyone from the Hellfire.

«I cannot save you from the punishment of Allah: Since his kindred
may have conceived that he would intercede on their behalf if they
should be doomed to the Hellfire; the Prophet (PBUH) intended to
remove that thought from their minds,

General Meaning of the Hadith

Aba Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that Allah
commanded the Prophet (PBUH) in the Noble Quran to warn his closest
kindred. In submission to Allah's command, the Prophet (PBUH) climbed
up the hill of As-Safé and called out the people of Quraysh, including his

14 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawied

uncle, aunt and daughter and gave them all an exclusive warning against the
punishment of Allah. The Prophet (PBUH) thus instructed them to seek their
salvation through believing in the Oneness of Allah and obeying Him by word
and deed. Moreover, he (PBUH) informed them that he would be incapable of
saving them from the Hellfire and their being of his close kinfolk would then
be of no avail unless they should believe in Allah.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith states that it is impermissible to ask the Prophet (PBUH), or
anyone else, except for what he is capable of in this life. Also, itis prohibited
to ask someone to do something exclusively confined to Allah, The hadith
thus confutes the fallacies of the tomb worshippers who invoke the dead piouis,
people to remove their afflictions and fulfill their needs.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

* ‘The hadith provides an argument against those who worship the
prophets or the righteous, and believe that such pious people can
respond to requests exclusively fulfilled by Allah.

‎It is impermissible to ask someone to do something not within his‏ جه
‎capabilities.‏

‎> The Prophet (PBUH) was keen to submit to the commands of Allah
and convey His message.

‎4 Only true faith and good deeds can save people from the Hellfire.
Mere ancestry will be of no avail in the Hereafter.

‎4 The people most worthy of the Prophet's intercession are those who
obey him and adhere to his Sunnah, be they among his kindred or not.

‎4 Being one of the Prophet's relatives will be of no avail in the Hereafter,
unless accompanied by sound faith and good deeds based on the
monotheistic creed.

‎Endnotes

‎1 Al Bukhart (4069).
2 Al-Bulkhart (4070).
3 Al-Bulkhart (2753), Muslim (206), and Al~Tirmidhi (3184),

5

The Angels Duly Fear
and Obey Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“,.(And those wait) until, when terror is removed from their
hearts, they will say (to one another), ‘What has your God said?”
They will say, ‘The truth? And He is the Most High, the Grand.”

(Qur'an: Saba’: 23)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In this chapter the author demonstrates how much the angels fear

Allah though they are the strongest and greatest creatures worshipped
besides Allah.

136 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawbidt

Since these angels are in such a state of terror and fear of Allah, then how
can they, or any other creature with greater reason, be invoked along with
‘Allah? Therefore, this chapter is an argument against all polytheists who
invoke besides Allah some creatures inferior to the angels.

Keywords and Phrases

« When terror is removed from their hearts: It means that when the
angels are released from the feeling of great fear striking them upon
hearing the Words of Allah inspired to Gabriel, they usually ask each
other about what has just been heard.

« And Heis the Most High: Allah is of high dignity, superior domination
and He is the Most Exalted.

٠ The Grand: Allah, Exalted be He, is the Most Great.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah, Exalted be He, states that whenever the angels hear Allah's Words
revealed to Gabriel, they tremble and get terrified till they become in a state
similar to that of human faint. As soon as terror is released from their hearts,
the angels ask each other, ‘What has your Lord said?’ Thereupon, they reply
saying, ‘The truth! ‘And He is the Most High, the Grand.”

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

4 The Quranic verse provides an argument against all polytheists who
associate false deities with Allah. Such false deities are, however,
neither equal to the angels nor comparable to them.

% The Quranic verse proves that speech is one of Allah's attributes. His
speech is appropriate for His Majesty,

% The words of Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, are not created,
because the angels, according to the Qur'niec verse, said, 'What has your
Lord said?! They, however, did not say, "What has your God created?"

© Allah is the Most High above all His creatures,
% Allah is similarly the Most Great.

She

‎"he Angels Duly Fear and Obey Allah 137‏ +13 توصك

‎Abd Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

‎“The Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘When Allah has ordained some
affair in the Heaven, the angels beat with their wings in obedience
to His statement, which sourds like a chain dragged over a
smooth stone and this causes them to be scared, (This comes
in the Quranic verse which means), ‘.. (And those wait) until,
when terror is removed from their hearts, they will say [to one
another];What has your Lord said?" They will say, ‘The truth.
And He is the Most High, the Grand! (Qur'an: Saba’; 23) Then
those who gain a hearing by eavesdropping (i.e., devils) will hear
the statement of Allah’ Sufyan, a sub-narrator, said, ‘Those who
gain a hearing by stand one over the other like this’; (to illustrate,
he spread the fingers of his right hand and placed them one over
the other horizontally). ‘So when one of them (the devils) hears
the Statement of Allah, he throws it to the one below him and so
on until it reaches the sorcerer or the soothsayer. The burning
flame may overtake and burn the eavesdropper before conveying
the news to the soothsayer (or the sorcerer) and he might convey it
before being overtaken by the burning flame. The soothsayer (or
sorcerer) would thus add a hundred lies to it. (His prophecy will
prove true, as far as the heavenly news is concerned). People will
say, ‘Did he not tell us that on such-and-such a day, such-and-
such a thing will happen? Therefore, people believe him because

‎of the true news heard from heaven.”
(Related by Al-Bukhari)

‎Sufyan Ibn ‘Uyaynah (the Sub-narrator)

‎The full name of the sub-natrator is Sufyan Tbn *Uyaynah fbn Mayman
Al-Hilali, He wasa trustworthy hafiz and an authoritative scholar from among,
the grand imams. He died in 198 A-H.; may Allah have mercy on him,

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎+ Those who gain hearing by stealing: The devils used to eavesdrop
on the angels’ talks in the heavens.

138 Concise Commentary on the Book of Zahid

General Meaning of the Hadith

The Prophet (PBUH) expounds the angels’ glorification of the words of
Allah and the state of fear inflicting them upon hearing His decrees. They ask
each other about what their God has said and receive answers from oneanather.
The Prophet, further, highlights that the devils eavesdrop on the conversations
of the angels and then convey them to the sorcerers and soothsayers. Upon
hearing such talks, the devils are pursued by shooting stars. Despite being
pursued by shooting starts, they may manage to convey talks to a sorcerer or
a soothsayer, for a reason Allah knows. Nothing, however, falls outside the
boundaries of His Omniscience The devils, the sorcerers, or the soothsayers
then blend the heavenly words with a myriad of lies; which are accepted by
people due to the few true words included.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith confutes the fallacies of the polytheists. Upon hearing the
Words of Allah, the angels become frightened, in spite of the great strength
they possess. It thus proves the invalidity of dedicating any act of worship to
the angels. Other false deities are inferior to the angels and are thus worthless
of any worship.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith
+ It provides an argument against the polytheists who worship angels,
prophets or the righteous,

4 The hadith exalts the glory of Allah and attests that He is the only One
worthy of worship.

© Tt proves that Allah is the Most High. It also proves that speech is
one of Allah's Attributes. His speech is appropriate for His majesty
and grandeur.

# The falsity of sorcerers and soothsayers, even if they may occasionally
-speak the truth.

+ The majority of sorcerers! divination are false and therefore, they are

regarded as liars.
ee

Chapter 15: The Angels Duly Feat and Obey Allah 139

An-Nawwas Ibn Sim‘ an (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated,
“The Prophet (PBUH) said:

‘When Allah, Exalted be He, wants to send down a revelation,
He says His inspiration, so the heavens strongly quake, out of fear
of Allah, Exalted be He. When the dwellers of the Heavens hear
that, they become unconscious or fall in prostration, (the narrator
doubted the exact wording). The first of them to raise his head is
Gabriel, to whom Allah reveals the inspiration He wills to reveal.
Then Gabriel passes by the angels of the heavens, and in every
heaven, the angels dwelling in it say, 0 Gabriel, What has our God
said?’ Gabriel says, ‘He has said the truth, And He is the Most High,
the Grand! So all of them say the same as he says until he reaches
the place where Allah has ordered him to announce the revelation
(whether in the heavens or on earth): "*

An-Nawwas Ibn Sim’ an (the Narrator)

The full name of the narrator is An-Nawas Ibn Sim‘an Ibn Khalid Al-
Kulébi, He was a venerable Companion; may Allah be pleased with him.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Revelation: The Words of Allah; which He reveals to one of His
Prophets.

٠ Out of fear of Allah: The heavens fear Allah as He endowed them
with sensation and awareness of His Majesty.

General Meaning of the Hadith

Expounding on the Grandeur of His God, Almighty and Ever-Majestic be
He, the Prophet (PBUH) states that whenever Allah pronounces a revelation,
theheavens strongly quake out of their fear of Him since they fully recognize His
Grandeur. Upon hearing the Words of Allah, the angels become unconscious
and prostrate themselves in glorification to Allah and out of fear of Him. The
first of them to raise his head is Gabriel as he is the Messenger of Allah to
His prophets. Thereupon, Allah tells Gabriel what He wills, and when Gabriel
passes by the angels in the heavens, they ask him about what Allah says, He

md Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

thus replies, “He says the truth. And He is the Most High, the Grand.” His
reply is by turn repeated by the angels. Thereafter, Gabriel proceeds to convey
the revelation to whomever is assigned by Allah,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

Tnaddition to the aforementioned Qur'anic verses. and Prophetic traditions,
this hadith demonstrates how the angels and the heavens fear Allah. It is thus
an argument against those who worship false deities besides Allah.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

+ The hadith provides a confutation of polytheists' fallacies and others
who worshipped false deities besides Allah.

4 Almighty Allah is the Most Great and He is the only One worthy of
worship.

4 Allah speaks whenever He wills, to whomever He wills, in any way
Hewills.

The hadith proves that Allah is the Most High.
+ Knowing the virtue of Gabriel (PBUH)

Endnotes

1 AL-Bukhart (4701),

2 168 Khuzaymah in his book entitled At-Twhid (Monotheism) (206), and Tb Aba
“Agim in his book As-Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) (515), and Al-Ajurtt in his book
Ash-Shart ah (staini¢-Lavw)

6

Intercession

Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“And warn by it (i.e, the Qur’én) those who fear that they will
be gathered before their Lord - for them besides Him will be no
protector and no intercessor - that they might become righteous.”

(Qur'an: Al-An‘am: 51)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book Tawhid

Invoking angels, prophets or righteous people is an act of shirk; however,
the polytheists deem it an act of worship. Though the polytheists believe that
those invoked besides Allah are among His creatures, yet, they pretext that their
high rank in the Sight of Allah is the reason behind seeking their intercession
with Him, The present chapter maintains a counter argument against those
who invoke Allahs angels, prophets or righteous people deeming that they
may be taken as interceders on their behalf.

142 Concise Commentary on the Book of ‏لسن‎

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah, Exalted be He, commands His Prophet (PBUH) to use the Noble
Qur'an to warn those who fear Allah and keep in mind the day when they will
stand before their God, lacking the support of any relative or intercessor. They
may, therefore, be alert and do good deeds in this life in the hope that Allah
will save them from the punishment of the Day of Resurrection.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‘The verse refutes the fallacies of the polytheists who seek intercession from
Allah's prophets and righteous men.
Lessons Drawn from the Qur'anic Verse

4 The Qur‘anic verse refutes the fallacies of the polytheists who dedicate
devotional acts to the prophets and the righteous in pursuance of their
intercession.

4% Itis commendable to remind people of the Day of Judgment,

“ True believers act in response to exhortations and reminders.

Be

Chapter 16: Intercession 143

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Say, ‘To Allah belongs (the right to allow] intercession entirely...”
(Qur'an: Az-Zumar: 44)

And He says:
“<..Who is it that can intercede with Him except by His permission?”
(Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 255)

Keywords and Phrases

+ To Allah belongs intercession: Intercession exclusively belongs
to Allah Alone and none of those whom you invoke can intercede
without His leave.

General Meaning of the Two Qur’anic Verses

‘The Prophet is commanded to inform those attached to false deities for the
sake of their intercession that intercession exclusively belongs to Allah Alone
and none can intercede without His leave. Moreover, none can utter any wordl
on the Day of Resurrection except by Allah's permission.

Relevance of the Two Qur’anic Verses to the Chapter

The two verses refute the fallacies of the polytheists who take intercessors
from the angels, the prophets or the idols of righteous persons, and believe
that such pious men have the power to intercede without the permission of
Allah, Exalted be He

Lessons Drawn from the Two Qur’anic Verses

+ The two Quranic verses refute the fallacies of the polytheists who
invoke created beings to intercede on their behalf in front of Allah.

% Intercession exclusively belongs to Allah. Therefore, it must be sought
from Him.

+ Allah is the Most Great and the Most Superior, He is above everything
in creation.

‎‘The second Qui'anic verse proves thal intercession can only be granted‏ جه
‎to whom Allah pleases.‏

‎te

‎Concise Commentary on the Book of Fixed‏ كوا

‎Allah, Exalted be He, also, says:

‎“And how many angels there arein the heavens whose intercession
will not avail at all except (only) after Allah has permitted (it) to
whom He wills and approves?” (Qur'an: An-Najm: 26)

‎General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

‎Despite the elevated rank of the angels in the sight of Allah, their
intercessions can never be of any avail except on behalf of those whom Allah
pleases. Their intercession will only beaccepted on behalf of those admitted by
Allah and whose deeds are free of any act of minor or major polytheism, Such
is the case of other intercessors such as the prophets and righteous persons.

‎Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‎‘The aforementioned Quranic verse is a counter-argument against the
polytheists who seek intercession from the angels and other creatures.

‎Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

‎+ The ‏عتم سرج‎ verse represents a counter argument against those
who attach themselves to Allah's created beings for the sake of
their intercession.

‎% Intercession exclusively belongs to Allah Alone. Therefore, nobody
may be invoked besides Him.

‎+ Intercession can only be accepted if the following two conditions
are fulfilled:

‎+ Allah's permission is granted to the intercessor.

‎+ Allah should be pleased with those seeking intercession, They must
be of sincere intention and pure belief.

‎26s

Chapter 16: Intercession 145

Alllah, Exalted be He, says:

“Say, [0 Muhammad], ‘Invoke those you claim [as deities]
besides Allah: They do not possess an atom’s weight [of ability]
in the heavens or on the earth, and they do not have therein any
Partnership [with Him], nor is there for Him from among them
any assistant. And intercession does not benefit with Him except
for one whom He permits, [And those wait] until, when terror is
removed from their hearts, they will say [to one another], ‘What
has your Lord said?? They will say, ‘The iruth? And He is the
Most High, the Grand.” (Qur'an: Saba’: 22, 23)

Keywords and Phrases

« An atom’s weight (of ability): It means that those invoked besides
Allah are powerless to bring benefit or repel harm even if such harm
or benefit is as light as the atom’s weight.

+ Nor is there for Him from among them any assistant: Allah is not
in need of anyone among the inhabitants of the heavens or the earth to
help Him manage the affatrs of the universe.

+ And intercession does not benefit with Him except for one
whom He permits: This is an argument against the polytheists who
claim that their deities can intercede on their behalf.

General Meaning of the Quranic Verse

In order to prove the disability of the polytheists’ false deities, the
Prophet (PBUH) is commanded to challenge the polytheists by asking
them to invoke their false deities which they claim to bring them benefit
and guard them against harm. These false deities are, undoubtedly,
incompetent to respond to any invocation as they do not possess an atom's
weight of the universe. They, moreover, are not partners with Allah nor do
they assist Him in managing the affairs of the heavens and the earth nor
even have the ability to intercede on behalf of any of His bondmen, except
with His permission, and He does not give permission for intercession to
‏م‎ polytheist, Therefore, the fallacy of worshipping those deities should
fall into pieces.

146 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawiidl

Relevance of the Two Qur’anic Verses to the Chapter

‘The two Quranic verses refute the fallacies of the polytheists who ardently
seek the intercession of Allabis friends and invoke them for deriving a benefit
or averting harm.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verses

% ‘The two Quranic verses refute the fallacies of the polytheists who
invoke false deities besides Allah, and claim that such deities can bring
them benefit and guard them against harm.

+ It is permissible to encounter the polytheists in debates for refuting
their false arguments.

The two Quranic verses absolutely confute the reasons for which
a man may adore a false deity. A man worships a deity to acquire a
benefit. Anyone besought for fulfilling a need should meet one of the
following prerequisites:

+ He must be exclusively possessed of all means which his devotees
yearn for.

+ He must be a partner to Allah.
+ He must be an assistant to Allah.
+ He must be approved of by Allah as an intercessor.

+ It is only Allah who fulfills the aforementioned prerequisites: He is,
therefore, the only God worthy of worship.

+ Intercession is proven provided that it is conferred upon whom
Allah pleases,

> There is no intercession on behalf of the polytheists.

She

Chaprer 16: Intercession 147

Abul-' Abbas said:

“Allah depicts all His creatures as bereft of the attributes to which
the polytheists adhere. They, therefore, cannot possess sovereignty
or even become assistants to Allah in managing the affairs of the
heavens and the earth. As for intercession, it will only be of avail to
those whom Allah pleases. Almighty Allah says, ‘..and they cannot
intercede except on behalf of one whom He approves... (Qur'an: ‏حلط‎
‎ya’: 28) Therefore, the intercession besought by the polytheists
will become a mere illusion on the Day of Resurrection according to
the Qurlan, The Prophet (PBUH), on the Day of Resurrection, will
{first prostrate before His Lord and utter some words of His praise.
‘Then, he will be called to raise his head, utter to be listened to, ask to
be granted what he ask fr, and intercede so that his intercession will
be accepted’, One day, Aba Hurayrah asked the Prophet (PBUH),

“Who will be the luckiest person to gain your intercession (on the
Day of Resurrection)?’ He (the Prophet) said, ‘He will be the one
who sincerely proclaimed from the bottom of his heart “There is 0
deity but Allah?” Thus, by the leave of Allah, intercession will be
granted to people who have sincerity. Anyone perpetrating any act
of polytheism will be deprived of intercession, The true essence of
intercession is that Allah will bestow His pardon upon the sincere
believers by virtue of the invocation of righteous persons whom
Allah grants the right to intercede, Such intercession will be granted
to them to elevate their rank and gain Al-Magam Al-Mahmtd (the
Position of Praiseworthiness). The intercession rejected in the Noble
Quirln is that which involves polytheism, while the legal intercession
is proven in other Qurianie verses, The Prophet (PBUH) affirms that

intercession will be permitted for the sake of the sincere believers”

Abii Al- Abbas
Abul" Abbas Shaykhul-Iskim Ahmad Ibn ’Abdul-Halim Tbn *Abdus-

Salim Tbn Taymiyah, the renowned imam who wrote many useful books. He
died in 728 A.H.: may Allah have mercy on him:

Keywords and Phrases

“ The intercession which the polytheists hope to gain: The
intercession for which the polytheists beseech their false deities.

48 Concise Cam mentary on the Book of Taxobid

+ AL-Maqdm Al-Mahmad (the Position of the Praiseworthiness):
‘The supreme position gained by the Prophet due to his intercession on
behalf of erring believers.

Jon Taymiyah provided a brief explanation of the Qur'anic verses of this
chapter. The following points can be drawn from his explanation:

1, The Quranic verses maintain the major outlines of the intercession
accepted and that rejected by Allah.

2. ‘The Que‘anic verses mention what the Prophet is supposed to do on
the Day of Judgment to acquite Al-Magdm Al-Mabmitid,

3. ‘The happiest and most fortunate people are the believers who deserve
the intercession of the Prophet (PBUH).

‘There are, however, six forms of intercession which the Prophet will offer
‘on the Day of Judgment:

1, The major intercession, which belongs to the Prophet (PBUH) on
behalf of the believers who stand on the Day of Resurrection. The
Prophet will intercede on their behalf so that Allah will relieve them
of the suffering of such a situation,

2, His intercession on behalf of those destined to enter Paradise by
seeking Allah's permission to let them enter therein.

4. His intercession on behalf of sinners, who deserve to enter the Hellfire.
‘Through his intercéssion, they will be saved form entering it.

4. His intercession on behalf of some sinners, who have already entered
the Hellfire, to be rescued from it.

5. His intercession on behalf of some of the Paradise dwellers to be
granted higher grades in Paradise.

6. His intercession on behalf of his paternal uncle, Abd Talib to alleviate
his torment in the Hellfire.

Endnotes

| Al-Bukhari (3340) and Muslim (194),
2 ‏فطلب هام‎ (99).

7

Allah Guides Whom He Wills

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Indeed, (O Muhammad), you do not guide whom you like, but
Allah guides whom He wills. And He is most knowing of the
(rightly) guided? (Qur'an: Al-Qasas: 56)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

This chapter is regarded as a refutation of the fallacies of tomb worshippers
who believe that the prophets and the righteous can bring benefit and cause
harm, The Prophet (PBUH) had strived to guide Abii Talib his paternal uncle
to accept Islam but his attempts came to naught. After his uncle had died, the
Prophet invoked Allah to forgive him till revelation was sent down forbidding
him to do so. Besides, Allah, Glorified be He, enunciates, in the Noble Qur'an,
that the Prophet (PBUH) is not able to guide whom he likes, and this fact

‎Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid‏ وكا

‎implies his inability to cause either benefit or harm. Therefore, invoking the
Prophet (PBUH) or anyone else is null and void.

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎+ You do not guide: The Prophet (PBUH) did not have the power
to convert people to Islam, though he was granted the faculty of
convincing people and expounding for them the principles of Islam.
‘The Quran provides:

‎“And indeed, [O Muhammad}, you guide to a straight path.”
(Qur'an: Ash-Shara: 52)

‎+ But Allah guides whom He wills: Allah guides whom He wills to

‎embrace Islam.

‎+ And He is most knowing of the (rightly) guided: Allah knows
best who deserves to be guided and who deserves to be let astray.

‎General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

‎Allah, Exalted be He, informs His Prophet (PBUH) of his inability to
convert whom he likes to Islam. Allah Alone can inspire people to accept
Islam, He, surely, knows best who deserves to be a Muslim and who does not.

‎Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‎The Quranic verse provides clear-cut proof that the Prophet (PBUH) has no
power to cause harm, bring benefit or bestow favors, All man’ affairs exclusively
belong to Allah. The Qur’anic verse maintains an argument against those who
ask the Prophet (PBUH) to remove their afflictions and fulfill their needs.

‎Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

‎The Quranic verse provides an argument against those who claim
that the righteous dead can bring a benefit, inflict harm or influence
people's affairs.

‎+ The power of converting people to Islam exclusively belongs to
Allah Alone.

‎+ Allah is the Omniscient:
% Allal is the All Wise.
% ‘The invalidity of being attached to any false deity or object besides Allah

‏فنك

‘Chapter 17: Jie (Bighting in she Cause ‏نان‎ Allah) ust

Sa‘id Tbnul-Musayyab reported on the authority of his father-

“When the time of the death of Aba Talib approached, the Messenger
of Allah (PBUH) went to him and found ‘Abdullah Ibn Abd’ Umayyah
anid Aba Jaht by his side. The Prophet (PBUH) said to Abi Talib, ‘O
uncle! Say “There is no deity but Allah’; a sentence with which I shall
bea witness (ie., argue) for you before Allah: Abii Jahl and ‘Abdullah
Ibn Abd Umayyah said, ‘0 Abii Talib! Are you going to abandon
the religion of ‘Abdul-Muttalib (Aba Talib father)?’ The Prophet
(PBUH) kept on inviting Abit Talib to say it (i.e., ‘There is no deity
but Allah’) while they (Abit Jahl and ‘Abdullah) kept on repeating
their statement until Abit Talib said as his last statement that he was
on the religion of “Abdul-Muttalib and refused to say, ‘There is no
deity but Allah’. Thereupon, the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘T
will keep on asking Allah’ forgiveness for you unless 1 am forbidden
(by Allah) to do so’ So, Allah, Exalted be He, revealed the Quranic
verse, ‘It is not for the Prophet and those who have believed to
ask forgiveness for the polytheists, even if they were relatives...’
(Quran: At-Tawbah: 113). To clarify this case of Aba Talib, Allah
revealed the verse that reads, ‘indeed, (O Muhammad), you do not
guide whom you like, but Allah guides whom He wills, And He is
most knowing of the (rightly) guided.” (Qur'an: Al-Qasas: 56)”

(Related by Al-Bukhari)

Sa‘ id Ibnul-Musayyab

Sa'id Ibnul-Musayyab was one of the grand scholars and jurists of the
successors. He died a few years after the age of ninety. His father, Al- Musayyaby
‘was a Companion who died during the Caliphate of ‘ Uthman.

Keywords and Phrases

+ The religion of ‘Abdul-Muttalib: ‏غ1‎ is idolatry. Aba Jahl and
*Abdullsh Tbn ‏عطق‎ Umayyah reminded him of the religion of his
forefathers who were polytheists. The Qur'an, however, mentionstheir
false argument in the verse that reads:

“Indeed, we found our fathers upon a religion...”
(Qur'an: Az-Zukhruf: 22)

isd Caneise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘Abii Talib used to protect the Prophet (PBUH) from being exposed to
any harm of his people. Due to his uncles matchless protection, the Prophet
(PBUH) was so keen to guide him to embrace Islam, When Abi Talib was on
his deathbed, the Prophet (PBUH) visited him and called him to Islam hoping
that he would embrace it before death to attain bliss and happiness in the
Hereafter. The Prophet (PBUH) implored his uncle to utter the Testification of
Faith, the polytheists asked him not to abandon the religion of his forefathers,
for they knew that uttering this Testification would entail renunciation of all
types of polytheism and dedication of all devotional acts to Allah. The Prophet
(PBUH) kept asking his uncle to utter that Testification, while the polytheists
kept on urging him to refuse Islam, till they managed to avert him from the
truth and make him die asa polytheist. Thereupon, the Prophet (PBUH) swore
to keep asking Allah's forgiveness for his uncle unless he should be forbidden
to do so. Then, Allah revealed the prohibition of asking forgiveness for the
polytheists, and illustrated that the power of guiding to Islam belongs only to
‘Allah Who grants it whomever He wills out of His cognizance of those who
deserveit.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith maintains that the Prophet (PBUH) is powerless to bring
benefit even to the nearest of his kin, which proves the invalidity of invoking
him, or anyone else, to bring benefit or guard against harm.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% It is permissible (o visit a sick polytheist in the hope that he may
embrace Islam.

4 Depraved people have a bad influence on their fellows.

+ ‘The meaning of the Testification of Faith is to abandon idolatry and
worshipping righteous people, and to dedicate all devotional acts solely
to Allah, Such a meaning was fully comprehended by the polytheists.

4 Whoever testifies that there is no deity but Allah out of awareness,
certitude and firm belief, is deemed a Muslim.

People are judged, in the Hereafter, according to their last deeds.

‘Chapter 17: Jihid (Fighting in the Cause of Allah) 153
# A Muslim is prohibited to invoke Allah's forgiveness for the polytheists,
or to be loyal to them, or to love them.

% The invalidity of relying on the Prophet (PBUH), or anyone else, for
the sake of bringing benefit or guarding against harm.

% The hadith refutes the claim that Abd Talib converted to Islam imme-
diately before his death

 Itis apparently aborninable to blindly imitate the forefathers and chiefs,

Endnotes

{ Al-Bukhdri (1360), Muslim (24), and Ahmad in his compilation Al-Musnad (5/168, 433).

Excessive Reverence
for the Righteous

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“O People of the Scripture, do not commit excess in your religion..
(Quran: An-Nis@’: 171)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

The present chapter represents a warning against excessive rever-
ence and adoration of the righteous. Such excessive reverence may lead
to polytheism.

156 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawihid

Keywords and Phrases

+ Excessive reverence of the righteous; An excessive reverence may
occur by exceeding the proper limits of praise or veneration either
through deeds or sayings.

+ The righteous: The (erm includes Allah's prophets, friends, etc.
+ People of the Scripture: The Jews and the Christians

+ Do not commit excess in your religion: Do not transgress the limits
set by Allah for you, However, the Christians excessively revered Jesus
while the Jews extremely adored ‘Uzayr.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah forbids the Jews and the Christians to transgress the limits He has set
for them. They have been commanded not to ascribe any of the unique attributes
of Allah to any of His creatutes (i.e, not to averly revere any of His creatures).

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‘The Quranic verse implies a prohibition of showing excessive reverence for
any of Allahé creatures such as righteous persons or Allah's prophets. Though
the Qur'anicdirectiveis addressed to the People of the Scriptures, the warning is
so general that it includes the Muslim nation. Muslims, therefore, are prohibited
to excessively praise Allah's Prophet or the righteous among them.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse
% The prohibition of being excessive in revering persons or in offering
good deeds.

% The Quranic verse condemns the practices of the Jews and the
Christians who exceedingly praised righteous persons and practiced
their religion excessively.

Muslims are urged to take the moderate path in acting upon the
commands of Allah. They should not be excessive or inadequate in
fulfilling their obligations.

4 Muslims are warned against polytheism and all avenues leading to it.

SoG

Chapter 18: Excessive Reverence of the Righteous ist

‘Commenting on the verse that reads:
“,, And said, 'Never leave your gods and never leave Wadd or
Suwa" or Yaghiith and Ya"tig and Nasr” (Qur'an: Noh: 23)

Ton ' Abbas (may Allah be pleased with them) said:

“These are the names of some righteous men of the people of
Noah, When they died, Satan whispered to his people to erect idols
embodying the figures of those righteous persons at the places where
they used t0 sit, and he tempted them to call those idols after the
names of those deceased men. The people did so, but the idols were
not worshipped. Afterwards, when those people (who erected the
idols) died and religious knowledge was forgotten, people began to
worship these idols."

Ibnul-Qayyim said:
"A considerable number of the Salaf (our righteous Muslim ancestors)
said, ‘When they (the righteous) died, their people devoted themselves

to their graves and sculpted their figures. Then, after so long people
began to worship them”

Tonul-Qayyim

The full name of Tbnul-Qayyim is Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr Ibn Ayyab
‘Az-Zar'i Ad-Dimashg, He was a disciple of Shaykhul-Islim Ahmad Ibn
‘Taymiyah. He compiled many useful and famous books, and died in 751 A.H.
‘May Allah have mercy on him.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Never leave your gods; It is a command addressed by the unbelievers
to their mates to keep worshipping such idols.

+ Religious knowledge was forgotten: It means that most people
became ignorant of the religious teachings, and could not differentiate
between monotheism and polytheism.

+ People began to worship them: The ignorant people worshipped
the idols which embodied the figures of the deceased righteous men
when Satan whispered to them that their forefathers used to worship
these idols.

158 Concise Commventary on the Book of ‏تاس‎

General Meaning of the Tradition

Interpreting the aforementioned Qur’anic verse, Ibn “Abbas (may Allah be
pleased with him and his father) maintained the origin of the idols worshipped
at the time of Noah (PBUH). According to Ibn ‘Abbas, they were originally
named after some deceased righteous persons of a preceding generation, Upon
the death of such righteous persons, Satan whispered into the hearts of Noahs
people to glorify them excessively. Thereafter, idols were made for them and
finally they were worshipped besides Allah,

Thnul-Qayyim’s commentary is close to that of Al-Bukhart, yet the former
‘maintains that the people of Noah (PBUH) had devoted themselves to the graves
of the righteous before sculpting idols for them, He, thus, added that worshipping
their graves was a preliminary step to glorifying such righteous persons.

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

The tradition affirms that excessive glorification of righteous people is a
preliminary step to worshipping them.

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition
4% Excessive glorification of righteous people is a preliminary step to
worshipping them and thus repudiating Islam.

4 Muslims are warned of making pictures or statues of human beings, as
well as of hanging pictures, especially those of prominent figures.

4 Muslims are warned of the satanic insinuations, Satan always
embellishes falsehood.

‘ Muslims are warned of innovative heresies even though the intention
behind offering them may apparently seem good.

+ Alll the preliminaries leading to polytheism must be blocked.

% The tradition emphasizes the importance of seeking religious
knowledge and refers to corruption resulting from ignorance.

Lack of religious knowledge results mainly from the death of
competent scholars.

Muslims are warned against blind imitation, which may lead to
repudiation of religion.

$5

Chapter 18: Excessive Reverence of the Righteous 139

” Umar Ibnul-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘Do not exaggerate in
praising me as the Christians praised the son of Mary (Jesus), for
Lam only a servant (of Allah). So, call me the servant of Allah
and His Messenger’ ”

(Related by Al-Bukhariand Muslim)”

“Umar [bnul-Khattab (the Narrator)

“Umar Ibnul-Khattab Ibn Nufayl Al-Qurashi Al-' Adawi, the Commander
of Faithful, is the most virtuous Companion right after Abd Bakr, He was
martyred in Dhul-Hijah in the year 23.A.H.; may Allah be pleased with him.

Keywords and Phrases

« As the Christians praised the son of Mary: The Christians
exaggerated in praising Jesus to the extent that they claimed his
divinity,

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘The Prophet (PBUH) forbade Muslims to exaggeratedly flatter him as the
Christians did with Jesus (PBUH) by claiming his divinity. Since he is just a
servant and Messenger of Allah, the Prophet (PBUH) commands people to
call him by these two attributes, and never raise him higher than his duerank,
which Allah bestowed upon him.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘The Prophet (PBUH) forbade Muslims to praise him exaggeratedly by
ascribing any of the divine attributes to him. Excessive praise of humans is
thus prohibited since t leads to polytheism. Such was the case of the Christians
who exaggerated the praise of Jesus to the extent they regarded him as a god.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

‎According to the hadith, it is prohibited to exceed the proper bounds‏ ب
‎in praising the Prophet (PBUH) by not regarding him a slave of Allah.‏
‎Doing that is an act of polytheism and is thus prohibited.‏

160 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawbid
+ The Prophet Muhammad was keen to warn his nation against all
avenues leading to polytheism,

Excessive praise of the righteous results in the perpetration of
polytheism.
‘ Muslims are warned not to follow the footsteps of the unbelievers,

aoe

CChaprer 18: Excessive ‏كه معرعسها‎ the Righteous 141

Thn ‘Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“Beware of excessiveness, for it was only this which led those
(nations) before you to destruction.”

The Narrator

‘The above-mentioned hadith is quoted by the compiler (Muhammad Ibn
* Abdul-Wahhab) without identifying the narrator, who is Ibn ' Abbas.

General Meaning of the Hadith

The Prophet (PBUH) warns his people against excessiveness in religion.
This warning is so general that it includes all forms of excessiveness in beliefs
and deeds. Therefore, excessive praise of the righteous may lead to worshipping
them and is thus prohibited. To maintain the reason behind such a prohibition,
the Prophet (PBUH) provides that excessiveness was behind the destruction
of previous nations, Therefore, Muslims are incumbent to avoid imitating
previous nations in this regard,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith absolutely prohibits excessiveness, and affirms that it isa cause
of total loss both in this life and the Hereafter. Thereupon, excessive praise of
the righteous is to be prohibited with greater reason, for it results in falling
into polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 The hadith stresses the prohibition of excessiveness and warns against
its bad consequences.

4 A Muslim should carefully think about the previous nations in order
to avoid all the erroneous thoughts they retained.

% The Prophet (PBUH) was keen to safeguard his nation against all acts
of polytheism and the avenues leading to it.

Muslims are commanded to take the moderate path in fulfilling
their obligations. They are warned against all forms of excesstveness
and inadequacy,

162 Concise Commentary an the Book of Trwhtd

© Excessive praise of the righteous results in falling into polytheism.
% The Prophet (PBUH) expressed his fear of polytheism and warned

Muslims against it.
ote

(Chapter 18: Excessive Reverence of the Righteous 163

‎Mas'tid (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:‏ مطل

‎“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘Ruined are those who are
extremist! He repeated this thrice.”*

‎(Related by Muslim)

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎« He repeated this thrice: The Prophet (PBUH) repeated the statement
thrice so as to make sure that it had been thoroughly grasped by his
audience.

‎General Meaning of the Hadith

‎‘The Prophet (PBUH) warns Muslims that extremism and exaggeration
lead to destruction in this life and in the Hereafter. The Prophet's warning
implies a prohibition.

‎Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‎“This hadith affirms that extremism is a form of the prohibited excessive-
ness. It includes excessive gratification of righteous persons, which may entail
polytheism,

‎Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

‎4 The believers are urged to keep away from extremism especially in
offering devotional acts or when praising righteous persons.

‎4 Muslims are urged to take the moderate path in all their affairs.

‎The Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) was keen to safeguard his‏ يي
‎nation against evil. He endeavored to fully and clearly convey‏
‎his message.‏

164 Concise Commencuy ot. the Book of Tawhid

Endnotes

1 AL-Bukhiri (4920),

2 Al-Bukhari (3445), Unlike what the compiler (Muhammad Ibn “Abdul-Wahh4b)
stated, this hadith is not related by Muslim. 1) ‏كا‎ rather related hy Abmad (1/23, 24,
47and 55),

3 Ahmad in Al-Musnad (1/215, 347), bn Majah (3029), Ibn Khuzaymah (2867),
and Al-Hakim (1/466) and graded it sahil: hadith, and Adh-Dhahabi agreed to his
grading.

4 Muslim (2670), Abit Dawid (4608), and Alnmad (1/386),

9

Worshipping Allah at the
Memorial of a Righteous Person

jah (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated:

“Umm Salamah made a mention (before the Prophet) of a church
which she had seen in Abyssinia in which there were pictures. The
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘When a pious person amongst
those people dies, they build a place of worship at his grave, and
then decorate it with such pictures, They are the worst of creatures
in the sight of Alah.””

Commenting on this hadith, Shaykhul-Islim Ibn Taymiyah said:

“Those people committed two grave sins, namely, building places of
worship at memorials and erecting idols?”

166 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book

‘This chapter illustrates that dedicating any devotional act at the memorials
of righteous men leads to polytheism.

Umm Salamah

The full name of Umm Salamah, the Mother of the Believers, is Hind Bint
‘Abd Umayyah Al-Makhziimiyyah Al-Qurashi. She was one of the wives of the
Prophet (PBUH), and died in 62 A.H. may Allah be pleased with her.

The Occasion of the Hadith
This hadith took place shortly before the Prophet's death.

General Meaning of the Hadith

During the last illness of the Prophet (PBUH), Umm Salamah gave him an
account of the human pictures she saw in the church. Thereupon, the Prophet
(PBUH) demonstrated that excessive praise of righteous persons was the reason
of building places of worship at their tombs, and making pictures of these
righteous men to decorate such places. Then, the Prophet (PBUH) referred to
these people as the worst of creatures, for they committed two actions leading to
polytheism, namely, building places of worship at tombs and glorifying idols.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith is a crystal clear proof of the prohibition of worshipping
Allah or building places of worship at the tombs of the righteous, since such
practices are those of the Christians, Therefore, whoever commits these sins is
considered of the worst creatures.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith
% Itis prohibited to offer devotional acts at the tombs of the righteous,
1s itis a Christian practice that ultimately leads to polytheism.

It is permissible to unveil the unbelievers’ practices so that Muslims
can be alert to them.

> Muslims are warned not to draw pictures orerect idols as such practices
lead to polytheism.

4 Whoever builds a place for worship at the tomb of a righteous man, is
deemed one of the worst creatures, even ifhis intention may apparently

seem good,
t+

‘Chapter 19: Worshipping Allah ar the Memorial of a Righteous Person 167

” Ashah (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated:

“As the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) was on his deathbed, he covered
his face with a cloth and when it became difficult for him to breathe,
he uncovered his face and said, ‘May Allah curse the Jews and the
Christians that they took the graves of their Prophets as places of
worship’ He said so 10 warn (his followers) against what they (the
Jows and the Christians) did. If it had not been for this, his grave
‘might have been outside his home, but it was feared that his grave
might be taken as a place of worship”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Keywords and Phrases.

+ Itwas feared: Either the Prophet (PBUH) or his Companions feared to
make his grave (PBUH) outside his home.

General Meaning of the Hadith

The Prophet (PBUH) was so keen to maintain the purity of belief that
he forbade his nation, while being on the verge of death and experiencing its
agonies, to take his tomb a place of worship as the Jews and the Christians did.
We invoke Allah to confer His blessings and peace upon Prophet Muhammad,
for he conveyed his message ina thorough and crystal clear way.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith affirms the prohibition of offering devotional acts at the graves
of prophets or taking such graves as places of worship, for such acts ultimately
lead to polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

* Taking the graves of the prophets and the righteous as places of worship
is prohibited since it ultimately leads to polytheism.

% Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) was so keen to maintain the purity of
belief that he expressed his fear of hallowing his grave,

% It is permissible to curse the Jews and the Christians and whoever
follows them in taking the graves of the righteous as places of worship.

168 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tatehied

‎The Prophet (PBUH) was buried at his home to guard people against‏ جه
‎falling into the abyss of polytheism by glorifying his grave,‏

‎Like all other creatures, the Prophet (PBUH) is predestined to die and
suffer the agonies of death,

‏فنك

‎Worshipping Allah a the Memorial of a Righteons Person 169‏ :19 عمسا

‎Jundub Ibn.‘ Abdullah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

‎“Theard the Prophet (PBUH), five days before his death, say, ‘I stand
acquitted before Allah that I took any one of you as intimate friend,
for Allah has taken me His intimate friend the same way he took
Abraham as His intimate friend, Had I taken any one of my followers
as un intimate friend, I would have taken Aba Bakr as.an intimate
‘friend. Behold! Those who preceded you used to take the graves of
their prophets and righteous men as places of worship, So, you must
not take graves as places of worship; 1 forbid you to do that’ *”

‎(Related by Muslim)

‎Jundub Ibn ‘ Abdullah (the Narrator)

‎‘The full name of the narrator is Jundub Ibn ‘ Abdullah Ibn Sufyan AI-Baj
He was a renowned Companion who died at the age of mare than sixty; may
Allah be pleased with him.

‎Abit Bakr As-Siddiq

‎The full name of AbO Bakr As-Siddig is “Abdullah fbn “Uthmdn Ibn
‘Amir Ibn ' Ame Ibn Kab At-Taymi, He was the first Caliph after the Prophet
(PBUH) and unanimously the most virtuous Companion. He died in 13 AH
at the age of 63; may Allah be pleased with him.

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎+ Five: It may refer to five days or five years.
= Those (nations) who preceded you: The Jews and the Christians

‎+ Take graves as places of worship: Taking graves as places of worship
may be achieved by praying at or toward such graves or building
tabernacles or domes therein,

‎General Meaning of the Hadith

‎immediately before his death, the Prophet (PBUH) informed his nation
about his status in the sight of Allah. He asserted that he reached the highest
degree of love and intimacy, and so did Abraham (PBUH), Since the heart of
the Prophet (PBUH) was filled up with affection and glorification for Allah

170 Concise Commentary on the Book of ‏لشاف‎

ue to his awareness of Allah's Grandeur, he dropped the possibility of taking
an intimate other than Allah, Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) said that if he
had taken an intimate friend, it would have been Abii Bakr. Such a supposition
indicated the virtue of Abi Bakr and served as a Prophetic directive to
appointing Abi Bakr in the position of the Prophet's Caliph. Then, the Prophet
forbade following the footsteps of the Jews anid the Christians who excessively
revered the graves of their prophets to the extent that they devoted acts of
worship to such graves and consequently fell into palytheism.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

The hadih probibits Muslim from taking graves as places of worship, as
did the Jews and the Christians and other people who acted upon innovative
heresies,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 It is prohibited to take graves as places of worship, perform prayers at
oF toward them, or build mosques or domes therein, All such acts lead
to polytheism.

4 All the ways leadisig to polytheism must be blocked.
2 Allah, Exalted be He, loves in a way that is appropriate for His Majesty.

% Knowing the virtue of the two intimate servants of Allah, Muhammad
and Abraham (peace be upon them)

> ‏طفق‎ Bakr is by all means the most virtuous one in the Muslim nation.

© This hadith gives an implication to appoint Abd Bakr asthe first Caliph
of the Prophet (PBUH).

ee

Chapter 19: Worshipping Allah at the Memorial of a Righteous Person 171

Commenting on the above-mentioned hadiths, Shaykhul-Iskim Ahmad
‏مطل‎ Taymiyah said:

“Immediately before his death, (he Prophet (PBUH) forbade Muslims
to take graves as places of worship. and cursed those who committed
this grave sin, Similarly, performing prayer at the graves takes the
same ruling even if no mosque is buill, and this is the meaning of
‘Aishalts statement which provides, 'But it was feared that it may be
iaken as a place of worship’, for the Companions were never to build
a mosque at the grave of the Prophet (PBUH).”

Also, any place in which prayer is established is called a mosque, as stated
in the hadith that rea

and the earth has been made for me (and my followers) as a
place for prayer and an object for purification.”

Keywords and Phrases

+ The Prophet (PBUH) forbade Muslims to take graves as places

of worship: This prohibition is stated in the aforementioned hadith
narrated by Jundub Ibn * Abdullah (may Allah be pleased with him).

+ And cursed those who committed this grave sin: This is according
to the above-mentioned Hadith narrated by ' Kishah (may Allah be
pleased with her),

+ Even if no mosque is built there: The mere performance of prayers
at graves is prohibited even if no mosques are erected,

« But it was feared that it may be taken as a place of worship:
Though no mosque was erected at the Prophet's grave, it was feared
that the grave might be taken as a place for offering prayers, Therefore,
the Prophet (PBUH) was buried inside his home, Such a justification
was provided by ' Aishah (may Allah be pleased with her),

+ For the Companions were never to build a mosque at the grave
of the Prophet (PBUH): It means that the Companions recognized
the Prophet’ prohibition and abomination and were therefore alert
not ‏ما‎ establish a mosque at his grave, The implied meaning of the
phrase is that the Companions realized that building a mosque-at a
‘grave is prohibited.

ww Concise Commentary on the Book ol Tiwbit

+ Any place, in which prayer is established, is called a place of
worship: Any place in which a prayer may be performed is called a
mosque even if such a prayer was offered there accidentally.

+ As stated in the hadith that reads, "...and the earth has been made
for me (and my followers) as a suitable place for prayer and an object
‘for purification.”: Making mention of this hadith, Ibn Taymiyah intends

to substantiate the last point he raised. According to this hadith, the
Prophet (PBUH) refers to the earth as a pure place in which one is
permitted to perform prayer. However, such places which are not pure
‘or where Muslims are not allowed to perform prayer are not subject to
the legal ruling included in the hadith.

See

Chapter 19: Worshipping:Allah ar che Memorial nfa Rightoous Persou 173

Ahmad related, with an acceptable chain of transmission, that Ibn Mas’ tid’
(may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“Among the worst people are those who will be overtaken by the
(Last) Hour while they are still alive, and those who take the
graves as places of worship:

jétim in his authentic compilation of Haditl))

(it isalso related by Aba

Keywords and Phrases

+ Those who will be overtaken by the (Last) Hour: Those who will be alive
at the emergence of the portents of the Hour, such as the emergence
of the Giant Beast that will talk to people and the rise of the sun from
the west,

+ And those who take the graves as places of worship: Those who pray
al or toward the graves.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In the sight of the Prophet (PBUH), the worst creatures are those who will
be alive when the major signs of the Day of Judgment appear, and those who
establish prayers at or toward the graves and erect domes therein. Thus, the
Prophet (PBUH) warns his nation against taking his grave and the graves ‏كه‎
‎the righteous people in general as places of worship, which was the practice of
such evil people.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘The Prophet warns his nation against taking graves as places for offering
prayers or as sources of blessings since such an act ultimately leads to the
perpetration of polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

* Muslims are warned against performing prayers at tombs, for such an
act ultimately leads to polytheism.

5 Whoever takes the grave ofa righteouis person asa place of worship
is deemed of the worst creatures even if he intends to draw nearer
to Allah.

174 Concise Commentary on the Book of Twohid

4% The Day of Judgment will occur when the earth is inhabited by the
worst creatures only;

4 Muslims are warned against any act; form or means leading to
polytheism even if the intention of the perpetrator of such acts or
forms apparently seems sound.

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhari (427), Muslim (528), and Ahmad (6/51)

2.al-Bukdhit (435) and Muslim (531),

3 Muslim (532),

44 Al-Bukta (335) and Muslim (521),

5 Abmad in his book (ALMusiad), and Ibn Hibban in his compilation of authentic:
Iyaiths (340) grading ita sahih (authentic) hadith.

Excessive Reverence for the Graves
of the Righteous is Tantamount
to Idolatry

Imam Malik related in his collection of Hadith entitled Al-Muwatta’ that
the Prophet (PBUH) said:

"0 Allah! Do not let my grave be an idol that is worshipped. Allah’s
wrath is immense upon the people who take the graves of their

prophets as places of worship.”

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In this chapter, the author warns Muslims against showing excessive rever-
ence for the graves of the righteous, for it contradicts true belief and eventually
leads to polytheism, when the dead person is worshipped besides Allah.

176 Concise Commentary on the Book of Ziubld

Imam Malik

‘The full name of Imam Malik is Malik Ibn Anas Ibn Malik Ibn Aba ‘Amir
Al-Agbabi. He was the Imim of Medina and one of the four well known
founders of the major Islamic schools of law. He died in 179 A.H.s may Allah
have mercy on him.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) asked his God not to let his grave be
hallowed as an idol, for he was afraid that his nation might excessively revere
his grave as the Jews and the Christians did ta their prophets, This happened
when they fell into polytheism by turning the graves of their prophets into
idols worshipped besides Allah. In addition, the Prophet (PBUH) explained
that this act of polytheism was the reason for which Allah's wrath and curse
‘was Incurred upon the Jews and the Christians,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith proves that showing excessive reverence for the graves renders
them idols worshipped besides Allah, for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

"6 Allah! Do not let iny grave be an idol that is worshippe

The Prophet, further, explained the meaning of worship saying:

“..who take the graves of their prophets as places of worship.”

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

Excessive reverence for the Prophet's grave may render it analogous to
idols worshipped besides Allah.

% Taking graves as places of worship is a form of excessive reverence,
which eventually leads to polytheism.

Allah gets wrathful in a way appropriate for his Majesty.

te

Chapter 20; Excestive Reverence of Graves Leads to Idolatry 7
Commenting on the verse that reads, “So have you considered Al-Lat and
‏"فيسلا "له‎ (Qur'an: An-Najm: 19), Mujahid said:

“AL-Lat was a man who used to mix sawiq (a meal made of the flour
of wheat and barley) and when he died, people devoted themselves to
his grave."

(Reported by Ibn Jarir)

Abul-Jawza’ reported that Ibn ° Abbas said, “Al-Lar was a man who used 16
‘mix sawig for the pilgrims?”

Muhammad Ibn Jarir At-Tabari

Muhammad Ibn Jarir At-Tabari is an Imam, a prolific compiler of hadith,
and a well-known exegete of he Noble Qur'an. He died in 310 A.H.; may Allah
haye mercy on him.

Mujahid Ibn Jabr

Mujahid thn Jabr was trustworthy and a great exegete of the Noble Qur'an,
He studied under {bn ' Abbas and others and died in 104 A.H.smay Allah have
mercy on him,

Abul-Jawza?

‘The full name of Abul-Jawza is Aws Ibn ‘Abdullah Ar-Rab'i. He was
éustworthy and a well-known scholar, He died in 83 A.FL; may Allah have
mercy on him.

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

‘The tradition indicates that worshipping Al-Lat started with showing
excessive reverence for his grave. Then, people sculptured an idol and adored

it besides Allah.

178 (Concise Commentary on the Book of Tinwhid

‎‘Abbas (may Allah be pleased with them) said:‏ م15

‎“The Prophet (PBUH) cursed the women who visit graves and those
who take them as places of worship and put lights therein.”

‎(Related by the Compilers of the Sunan)

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎+ The Compilers of the Sunan: ‘Sunan’ refers to the compilations
of the Prophetic traditions, which are mainly concerned with the
normative practices of the Prophet and jurisprudential subjects,
‘The four compilers of Sunan are Abi Dawdd Ibnul-Ashiath, Ibn
Miajah, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasai. An-Nasfi did not, however,
relate this hadith.

‎+ Put lights: It refers to the (radition of some people who used to light
lamps near graves,

‎General Meaning of the Hadith

‎‘The Prophet (PBUH) curses those women who frequently visit graveyards
without behaving properly according to Islamic morals, Such women may wail
over the dead or show impatience. They may also be improperly dressed and
thus seduce men. In addition, the Prophet (PBUH) cursed those who take
‘graves as places of worship or use lamps to light them. Such practices connote
an exaggeration of revering the dead and may thus lead to polytheism.

‎Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‎According to the hadith, itis prohibited to decorate graves since they may
be turned into hallowed memorials,

‎Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

‎+ It is prohibited to decorate graveyards or take them as places of worship.
Such practices ultimately lead to polytheism.

‎+ Itis prohibited to put lights in graves.

‎% Showing excessive reverence for tombs is a grave sin,

(Chaprer 20: ‏اهمف‎ Reverence of Graves Leads ‏ف‎ Idolatry 179

4 The main reason behind the prohibition of offering prayersat the graves
is blockingall possible avenues leading to polytheism. The prohibition
of offering prayers at these places is not, however, due to their relative
impurity, This is because the Prophet (PBUH) coupled the practice
of taking tombs as places of worship with that of lighting them, and
cursed both practices. Cursing those who light tombs is by no means
for the uncleanness of tombs. Thus, cursing those establishing prayer
at them is similarly not for the uncleanness,

Endnotes

| Malik in his Miewatta' (85), and Ahmad in AbMusnad (2/246),
2. Abd Dawad (3236), At-Tirmidht (320), Ibn Majah (1575), and Ahmad in Al-Musand
(1/229, 287, 324, and 337),

2

The Prophet and Blocking All
Avenues Impairing Monotheism

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“There has certainly come to you a Messenger from among
yourselves. Grievous to him is what you suffer, (he is) concerned
over you (i.e., your guidance) and to the believers is kind and
merciful? (Quran: At-Tawbah: 128)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Up till now, the author demonstrated some examples of the Prophet’s
endeavors o protect the purity of Muslim belief, In this chapter, he demonstrates
the Prophet’s most remarkable efforts in this regard.

182 Cancise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Keywords and Phrases

+ Come to you: The addressees here are the Arabs.

+ From among yourselves: It refers to the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH)
who emerged from among the Arabs and spoke their tongue.

+ Concerned over you: The Prophet (PBUH) was so concerned to guide
his people ta goodness in both this life and the Hereafter.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah, Exalted be He, reminded His servants that He, out of His favor, had
sent for them a great Messenger, from among themselves, who spoke their
own language and felt so grieved for their sufferings, Moreover, he was ‏هد‎
‎concerned to guide them ta the straight path, so they would obtain benefits
in this life and in the Hereafter, and was further so merciful to the believers in
particular.

Relevance of the Quranic Verse to the Chapter

‘The attributes ascribed to the Prophet (PBUH) give an explicit indication
that he strictly warned his nation not to approach polytheism, which is the
gravest of all sins, Thus, the greatest purpose of his mission as a Prophet was
to protect the purity of Muslim belief

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

+ The Prophet (PBUH) warned his nation against approaching any act or
form of polytheism and, moreover, blocked all avenuies leading to it.

+ Allah bestowed a great favor upon the Arabs by sending this gracious
Messenger from among them,

+ The Qur’anic verse highly praised the Prophet's ancestries, who are
reckoned among the noble tribes of the Arabs.

4 The Prophet was depicted as retaining compassion and mercy toward
his nation.

> The verse implies the Prophet's harshness toward the unbelievers and

the hypocrites.
be

Chapter 21: The Prophet and Blocking All Avenucs Impaiting Monotheism ‏فقا‎

Abii Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

"Do not make your homes as graves, andl do not make my grave
a place of festivity, but invoke blessings on me, for your blessings
reach me wherever you may ‏"لهجا‎

(Related by Ahmad and Abii Dawéd with a good chain of trustworthy
transmitters)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Do not make your homes as graves: Do not refrain from offering
some devotional acts at your homes, such as supererogatory prayers,
supplicating Allah and reciting the Noble Qur'an, in order not to make
them void of worship like the graves.

+ Anddo not make my gravea place of festivity: Do nottake my grave
asa place haunted for offering prayers and supplications therein,

+ For your blessings reach me wherever you may be: Whether you
are near or far from my grave, your blessings reach me, and thus you
need not pay frequent visits to my grave.

General Meaning of the Hadith

Since the prohibition of establishing prayersat the graves has been set
tled, the Prophet (PBUH) commands Muslims not to make their homes
like graves by abstaining from offering some devotional acts therein,
Supererogatory acts offered at homes may include performing super-
erogatory prayers, supplicating Allah and reciting the Noble Qur’an. To
keep his nation far away from polytheism, the Prophet (PBUH) forbids
them to pay frequent visits to his grave or gather therein to supplicate
and get nearer to Allah. In addition, the Prophet (PBUH) commands
the believers to constantly ask Allah to confer His blessings and peace
on him wherever they are; as such a supplication reaches him, whether
supplicants are near or far. Therefore, there is no need for haunting the
grave of the Prophet (PBUH).

14 Concise Commentary on the Book of ‏لطس‎

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith decisively prohibits polytheism in addition (o all avenues and
causes leading to it, The Prophet (PBUH) prohibits Muslims from performing
prayers or congregating for worship at his grave, or even. paying it frequent
visits, for such practices ultimately entail polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Allavenues leading to polytheism must be blocked, Therefore,
establishing prayers at the graves, and showing excessive
reverence for the Prophet's grave by gathering there or paying
it frequent visits are prohibited.

& Wherevera Muslim may be, itis commendable to invoke Allah's bless-
ings and peace upon the Prophet (PBUH),

4 Drawing nearer to the Prophet's grave is not a meritorious act of
devotion.

4 Muslims are prohibited to go ona journey solely for the sake of visiting
the grave of the Prophet (PBUH).

+ The Prophet (PBUH) exerted great endeavors for the sake of protecting
the purity of Muslin faith,

She

Chaprer21: The Propherand Blocking, All Avenues Impairing Monotheism 195

‘Alt Ibnul-Husayn reported that he sawa man who used ta get into a niche
near the grave of the Prophet (PBUH) in order to supplicate. Thereupon, ‘Ali
Tbnul-Husayn prevented that man from doing so, and said:

“Shall I not relate to you a hadith which I heard from my father who
reported it on the authority of my grandfather that the Messenger of
Allah (PBUH) said, ‘Do not make my grave a place of festivity, nor
‘Your homes as graves; invoke blessings on me, for your blessings
reach me wherever you may be.”

(Related in Al-Mukhtarah)

‘Ali Ibnul-Husayn (the Sub Narrator)

‘The full name of the sub-narrator is "Ali Tbnul-Husayn Tbn ' Ali Ibn Aba.
‘Talib, He was nicknamed as Zaynul-' Abidin, and was the most virtuous one
from among the Successors of the Companions. He died in 93 ‏مقلم‎ may Allah
have mercy on him.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Al-Mukhtérah: A collection of the acceptable hadiths, which meet the
conditions stipulated by Al-Bukhari and Muslim but not included in
their authentic compilations of Hadith. Itis compiled by Diya’ ud-Din
Muhammad Ibn *Abdul-Wahid Al-Magdisi Al-Hanbali; may Allah
have mercy on him.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

The hadith affirms the prohibition of haunting the Prophet's grave or the
grave of any person for the sake of offering prayers or invocations therein.
‘The reason of this prohibition is that such an action is a form of taking the
grave as a place of festivity, which is regarded as one of the avenues leading to
polytheism,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

© It is prohibited to invoke Allah at the graye of the Prophet (PBUH), so.
as to protect the purity of Muslim belief

© Ibis recommended to forbid the evil and teach the ignorant.

186, Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawbid

4 It is forbidden to take a journey solely for the sake of visiting the grave
of the Prophet (PBUH).

+ The only legal purpose of visiting the grave of the Prophet (PBUH) is
to greet him (i.e. to ask Allah to confer blessings and peace upon him)
Such an act, however, may be offered anywhere,

Endnotes

{Abo Dawhd (3042) and Abmad in Al-Musnad (2/367).

CHAPTER

Some Muslims Worship Idols...

Allah, Exalted be He, say

“Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the
Scripture, who believe in jibt (superstition) and taghit (false
objects of worship)...” (Qur'an: An-Nis@: 51)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Having demonstrated the prerequisites of monotheism and acts contra-
dicting it or impairing its perfection, the author in this chapter affirms that
polytheism is committed by some Muslims. This chapter is thus intended for
disproving the fallacies of the idol-worshippers, who commit some acts of
polytheism, and claim that polytheism can never occur in the Muslim nation
as long as Muslims verbally proclaim that there is no deity but Allah and that
‘Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.

198 Concive Gammentary an the Book of Zui

Keywords and Phrases

+ Idol: Any image, tomb or person used as an object of worship.

+ Those who were given a portion of the scripture: The Jews and
the Christians

+ Jibt: vis an. Arabic word which refers to idols, soothsayers and sorcerers,

« Taghiit; (tis originally taken from the Arabic yerb, “Tagha’ meaning ‘to
exceed proper limits’ Contextually it refers to Satan and to whoever
exceeds the legal limits,

General Meaning of the Qur'anic Verse

By exclaiming and reprimanding the degrading status of the Jews and the
Christians, Almighty Allah asks His Prophet (PBUH) to consider the case of
the Jews and the Christians. Though they were given a portion of the divine
scripture in which both the truth and the falsehood were clearly demonstrated,
they still believe in falsehood such as idolatry, soothsaying, and sorcery in
submission to the satanic insinuations,

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

Since those given a portion of the Scripture believe in jib and léghit, then it
does not seem far-fetched that some Muslims, who were given the Noble Quran,
worship jibt and fight, Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) assured Muslims
that there would be among his nation some people who would follow in the
footsteps of the Jews and the Christians, and approve of their practices even if
these Muslims may be averse to such practices and aware of their falsity

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

>< Like the Jews and Christians, there are among the Muslims those who
worship idols.

+ 11 is not necessary to practice jibt and laghiit ‏نا‎ be held a disbeliever.
‘The mere acceptance of such practices, turns a person to disbelief,
even though he abhors them.

+ Disbelieving in jibt and fdghtit is an obligation according to all
divine scriptures,

4 The Muslim is duty bound to put whathe learns into practice, atherwise,
he will be like the Jews and the Christians.

oe

Chapéer 22: Some Muslims Worship Idols. 189

Allah, Exalted be He says:

“Say, Shall I inform you of (what is) worse than that as penalty
‘from Allah? (It is that of) those whom Allah has cursed and with
whom He became angry and made of them apes and pigs and
slaves of taghtit. Those are worse in position and further astray
{from the sound way.” (Qur'an: ‏كمف ةفاح لخ‎ 60)

Keywords and Phrases
٠ Say: The one addressed here is the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH).

+ (What is) worse than that: What is worse than your false accusation
of the Prophet and his followers, as you said about them, "Never have
we seen worse than you

+ Whom Allah has cursed: Those whom Allal destined to be deprived
of His Mercy.

+ And with whom He became angry: This wrath will neverbe followed
by gratification.

« And made of them apes: It refers to the Sabbath-breakers from
among the Jews, whom Allah transformed into apes.

« And pigs: The disbelievers from amongst the people who asked Jesus
if Allah could send down for them a table (spread with food). Some
scholars maintain that the youth among the Sabbath-breakers from
among the Jews were transformed into apes, whereas the aged among
them were transformed into pigs.

+ And slaves of tagh@t: Some of them worshipped Satan as they yielded
to his insinuations.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah commands His Prophet (PBUH) to ask the People of the Scriptures,
‘who have taken the Islamic religion in ridicule and amusement, if they would
like to know the features of those who would face the worst penalty in the
Hereafier. Such people are the cursed, those worthy of Allah's wrath, they
were visibly transformed into apes and pigs and invisibly subjected to Satan's
insinwation. Such attributes are, surely, typical of the People of the Scriptures
and those who follow their steps,

190 Concise Commencary an the Book of Tawhid

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

Since there were among the People of the Scriptures those who worshipped
tghit besides Allah, some of the Muslim nation do the same,

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

+ Some of the Jews and the Christians worshipped ‏,لق لوقن‎ and likewise,
some Muslims commit similar acts of polytheism.

% tis legitimate to argue with the patrons of falsehood and to disclose
their defects, in case they falsely accuse the people of truth.

#People are rewarded according to their deeds,
Allah gets angry and curses the disobedient.
‘> Obeying Satan by following his whispers is one of the sources of

polytheism.
obs

Chiapeer 22: Some Muslims Worship ‏.كفنا‎ 131

Allah, exalted be He says:

"\..Said those who prevailed in the matter, ‘We will surely take
(for ourselves) over them a masjid?” — (Quran: Al-Kahfi 21)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Those who prevailed in the matter: Those of influence who forced
their opinion after the death of the Companions of the Cave, and
decided to take their grave as a place of worship.

+ Masjid: The grave of the Companions of the Cave was taken as a place
of worship and people sought the blessings of those buried therein.
General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah, Exalted be He, denounced those who forced their opinion after the
death of the Companions of the Cave and decided to take their grave as a place
of worship so that people would pray and seek the blessings of the deceased
buried therein,

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

This verse indicates that some of the Maslim nation will build mosques at
the graves of the righteous, just as the previous nations used to do.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

% It is prohibited to build mosques at the graves of righteous persons.
Such an act ultimately entails polytheism

‎Like the previous nations, some among the Muslims build mosques at‏ يه
‎the graves.‏

‎Muslims are warned against showing excessive reverence for the
righteous.

‎4 Building mosques at the graves of righteous persons is an act of exces-

‎sive reverence.
eee

192 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tinh

‘Abi Sa‘id Al-Khudrt (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, "You will follow the ways
of those (nations) before you, just as a tail of an arrow resembles
another that even if they were to go into a hole of a Dabb, you
too would go there? They (the Companions) said, 0 Messenger of
Allah! Do you mean the Jews and the Christians? He replied, ‘Uf
not them,) then whom?"

{Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Keywords and Phrases

+ If they were to go into a hole of a Dabb, you tao would go there:
It means that even if the Jews and the Christians went into a hole of a
Dabb despite its narrowness, you would follow in their footsteps due
to your blind imitation of your predecessors.

General Meaning of the Hadith

The Prophet (PBUH) affirmed that his Muslim nation would blindly
follow in the footsteps of the Jews and the Christians even in trifles, just as
a tail of an arrow resembles another. In addition, He (PBUH) gave a more
exact description of such a blind imitation by stating that if the Jews or the
Christians were to do a trivial or a strange thing, some Muslims would follow
in their footsteps.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith proves that acts of polytheism are committed by some people
in Muslim nation, as they used to be committed by people of the previous
nations. Thus, there will be in the Muslim nation some people who will follow
the footsteps of the previous nations who committed such sins,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% For imitating the ways of the previous nations, many among the
Muslims usually fall into polytheism.

‘Chapter 22: Some Muslims Worship Idols... 193

% This hadith is a proof of the prophethood of Mubammad (PBUH), as
he foretold what would happen long after his death, and it has already
occurred exactly as the Prophet (PBUH) maintained,

4 Muslims are warned against imitating the unbelievers.

4 Muslims are warned against the sins committed by the previous
nations, especially those of polytheistic nature.

4

194 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

‘Thawban (may Alish be pleased with him) narrated:

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘Allah folded the earth
for me, and 1 saw its east and west, and the dominion of my
nation will reach as far as the earth was folded for me. The two
treasures, the red and the white, will be given to me. 1 invoked
my God that He may not destroy my nation by a widespread
famine, and not give sovereignty over them to an enemy who
destroys them in large numbers except from themselves. My.
God said, '0 Muhammad! Whenever I issue a decree, it is not
withdrawn. I promise you for your nation that Iwill not destroy
it by a widespread famine, and I will not give sovereignty over
them toan enemy not from among themselves who exterminates
them in large numbers, even if all the people from the different
parts of the world join hands against them unless they kill each
other, and take one another as captives.”

‘The same hadith is related by Al-Barqini in his authentic hook of Hadith,
with the following addition:

1 fear for my nation the misleading Imams (rulers); and if
they are afflicted with using the sword among themselves (killing
each other), it will not be removed from them until the Day of
Resurrection. The Hour will not be established until a tribe of my
nation follows the polytheists and groups of my nation worship
idols. There will be thirty liars in my nation, each one claiming
that he is a prophet, though I am the Seal of the prophets; no
prophet will come after me, But a group af my nation will always
hold to the truth, remain triumphant, and cannot be harmed by
their opponents until there comes the command of Allah, Blessed
and Bxalted be He."

Thawban (the Narrator)

‘Thawban was the freed slave of the Prophet (PBUH). He accompanied the
Prophet (PBUH) in his lifetime, and when the Prophet (PBUH) died, he lived
in Syria and died in Homs ‏كك ها‎ A.H.;may Allah be pleased with him,

‘Chapter 24: Some Muslims Worship Idols... 195

Keywords and Phrases

+ Allah folded the earth for me: Allah displayed the earth for
the Prophet (PBUH) in a compact size and enabled him to see the
dominion of his nation from east to-west.

+ The red treasure and the white treasure: The former referred to
gold. It belonged to Caesar; king of the Romans. The latter consisted of
diamond and silver and belonged to Chosroes; king of the Persians.

+ Misleading Imams: Rulers, scholars and devated worshippers, who
are usually taken as models by common people.

+ If they are afflicted with using the sword among themselves: In
case they fall a prey to dissension, killing and conflict, they will never
cease killing each other.

+ Until there comes the Command of Allah: The Command of Allah
refers to the nice wind which will blow immediately before the Day of
Resurrection. It will take the souls of the believers.

General Meaning of the Hadith

The hadith illuminates a number of significant issues and relates a true
incident. The Prophet (PBUH) related that Allah, Glorified be He, displayed
the earth for him in a compact form so that he could see the dominion of his
nation from east to west. This statement came true when the dominion of the
Muslim nation reached the most distant parts of the east and the west. The
Prophet also asserted that he would be granted the two treasures, and that had
already become true as his nation laid hands on the possessions of Chosroes
‘and Caesar including all their gold, diamond, and silver. Moreover, he (PBUH)
invoked Allah not to destroy his nation by a widespread famine, or fo give
sovereignty over them to an enemy (from not among themselves) who would
exterminate them in large numbers. He (PBUH) stated that His God promised
to fulfill his first petition, but stipulated that Muslims must eschew dissension,
and keep away from fighting each other, in order to fulfill the second petition.
But if they fall into dispersion and kill one another, they will be dominated by
their enemies; and this has already come true.

‘The Prophet (PBUH) feared the bad influence of the devious leaders and
scholars, who are always followed by common people. Then, the Prophet
(PBUH) stated that once the Muslims fall into dispute and become in conflict
with each other, they will suffer dissension until the Day of Judgment; and this

196 Gonclie Commentary an the Book of Tawhi

has already come true. The Muslim nation has been afflicted with dissension
and conflict ever since “Uthman Ibn °Affin was murdered. In addition, the
Prophet (PBUH) stated that some of his nation would follow the polytheists
and live in their homeland, and others would convert to polytheism, which has
already come true, as tombs, trees and stones have been worshipped.

Furthermore, the Prophet (PBUH) foretold the emergence of thirty
impostors who would claim prophethood, At the end of this hadith, the Prophet
(PBUH) gave a glad tiding that despite all these calamities; 2 small communion
of his nation would remain steadfast in theit adherence ‏مز‎ Islam without being
affected by their enemies’ machinations,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

{in this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) foretold that some groups of his nation
would worship idols. The hadith thus disproves the fallacies of some people
who deny the fact that some Muslims act upon polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

“Some among the Muslim nation commit acts of polytheism, which
refutes the allegations of those who claim otherwise.

+The Prophet (PBUH) foretold some events that havealready come true,
which isa clear proof of his prophethood,

© The Prophet (PBUH) had deep sympathy toward his nation, and he
invoked Allah requesting some favors for them; the greatest of which
is to keep faith pure. He, further, had fears of all that would cause
harm to his nation; the gravest of which is falling into polytheism.

Muslims are greatly warned against dissensions and devious leaders,
+ Muhammad (PBUH) is the seal of the prophets,

+ Thishadith gives two glad tidings: firstly, the truth cannotbe completely
overcome; and secondly, a group of Muslims remains steadfast in
adherence to Islam without being affected by whoever opposes or
fights them until the Day of Resurrection,

Endnotes

41 Al-Bukhari (3456) and Muslim (2669),
2 Muslim (2889),

Sorcery

Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“But they (i.e., the Children of Israel) certainly knew that
whoever purchased it [i.e., magic] would not have in the
Hereafter any share” (Quran: Al-Bagarah: 102)

He, further, says:

“..who believe in jibt (superstition) and taghitt (false objects
of worship).” (Qur'an: An-Nis@: 51)

“Umar Ibnul-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) said:
“The word ‘ibt refers to sorcery, whereas the word ‘ght’ refers to Satan”
Jabir (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“The word ‘taghit’ refers to the soothsayers assisted by devils. The
soothsayers of each tribe were supported by a devil”

i98 Cancise Commentary on the Book of wid

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Since sorcery is an act of polytheism, the present chapter is devoted to
elaborate on it and warn Muslims against its consequences.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Sorcery: Charms, incantations, drugs, smokes or knots Which have
effects on hearts and bodiesand may cause disease, death or dissensions
between the two spouses.

« But they (Le., the Children of Israel) certainly knew: The Jews,
who prefer practicing sorcery to following the Messengers of Allah.

+ Whoever purchased it (Le., magic): Those who adopt sorcery
instead of following the religion of Allah.

«Jib: tis an Arabic word, which originally refers to idols, sorcerers and
soothsayers. ' Umar's interpretation provides one of its connotations.

+ Taghdt: 1tis originally taken from the Arabic verb, ‘Tagha’ meaning ‘to
exceed proper limits! Contextually it refers to Satan and whoever exceeds
the legal limits. Jabir’s interpretation provides one of its meanings.

General Meaning of the Two Qur’anic Verses

Allah, Exalted be He, enunciates that the Jews who prefer practicing sorcery
to following the Messengers and believing in Allah, know well that whoever

does so will not have any share in the Hereafter, In the second verse, Allah,
Exalted be He, states that the Jews believe in the jibt, which includes sorcery.

Relevance of the Two Qur’anic Verses to the Chapter

“The two Qur'anic verses provide a proof of the prohibition of practicing
sorcery, and regard it ‏همه‎ type of jbt.

Lessons Drawn from the two Qur’anic Verses
4 It is prohibited to practice sorcery.

& A sorcerer is legally regarded as a disbeliever.

&% The Qur’anic verses imply a strict threat to those who turn away from
Allah's Book, and follow other laws,

4 Sorcery is an act of polytheism, as it implies seeking the devils’ help
and being attached to them.

ae

Chapter 23: Sorcery 199

Abii Hlurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:
“Avoid the seven great destructive sins.” It was said, ‘O Messenger of
Allah! What are they?’ He said, “Committing polytheism, practicing
sorcery, killing the life which Altah has forbidden except for a legal
right, consuming usury, eating up an orphan’ wealth, fleeing from
the battlefield at the time of fighting. and accusing innocent, chaste
and believing women (of adultery)."

Keywords and Phrases

+ Destructive sins: These sins are called destructive since they perish
their perpetrators both in this life and the life ta come,

+ Polytheism: It consists in setting false deities as rivals to Allah by
imploring, invoking or revering them.

+ Consuming usury: All possible means of consuming tinlawéul nsuri-
ous interests.

« Eating up an orphan's wealth: All means of devouring the orphan’s
property. The Orphan is defined as the child who loses his or her
father before reaching puberty.

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘The Prophet (PBUH) commands his followers not to approach seven
deadly sins. Upon being inquired about them, the Prophet (PBUH) mentioned
polytheism first for it is the gravest sin. The second sin is sorcery, and then
comes killing the soul which Allah has forbidden to be killed except by a legal
warrant. The fourth and fifth sins are making use of usury by any means, and
devouring the orphan's property. Fleeing from the battlefield at the time of
fighting, and accusing the free chaste women of committing adultery are the
sixth and seventh sins highlighted in this hadith,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith provides 2 proof of the prohibition of practicing sorcery: It
farther regards it as one of the deadly sins.

200 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tinohid

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

‎The prohibition of polytheism, which is the gravest major sin.‏ ني

‎The prohibition of practicing sorcery, which is one of the deadly major‏ في
‎sins. Such deadly sins ultimately result in apostasy.‏

‎The prohibition of committing a legally unwarranted murder‏ ب

‎Killing is permissible once itis warranted, stich as in case of retaliation,
apostasy and adultery committed by (previously) married people,

‎* The prohibition of usury, and its gross dangers
+ The prohibition of eating up the orphan’s property

‎+ The prohibition of fleeing from the battlefield at the time of fighting
% The prohibition of false accusation of adultery or sodomy.

‎# Accusing the unbelievers of adultery is not included in the major sins.

‎eee

Chapter 23: Sorcery 201

Jundub narrated:
“The prescribed punishment of a sorcerer is a stroke with the sword?”
(Related by At-Tirmidhi who graded it as a hadith mawaaf

Bajalah Ibn 'Abadah narrated:

“Umar Ibmul-Khattib sent usa message reading, ‘Killevery sorcerer
and every sorceress’ Thereupon, we killed three sorcerers?"

Hafsah (may Allah be pleased with her) gavean order to kill one ofher slave
girls who bewitched her, and this slave girl was thus executed ', In addition, it
is related that Jundub did the same.

According to Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, The execution ofsorcerersisauthentically
reported from three Companions; namely ‘Umar, Hafsah and Jundub (may
Allah be pleased with them all),

Keywords and Phrases
+ A stroke with the sword; It means that he must be killed,
« Hadith mawgaf (Discontinued Hadith); It is a report traced back toa
Companion of the Prophet (PBUH).
Relevance of the Hadith and Reports to the Chapter

the prescribed penalty
ing sorcery, which is one

‘The above-mentioned reports signify that killing
of a sorcerer. This indicates the enormity of pra
of the major sins.

Lessons Drawn from the Traditions

+ Killing is the prescribed penalty of practicing sorcery, without calling
the sorcerer to repent.

As sorcery was practiced in the era of ‘Umar (may Allah be pleased
with him), it has been much more widely practiced ever since.

202 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tinubid

Endnotes

1 AL-Bulkhari (2766), Muslim (89), and Abi Dawid (2874),
2 At-Tirmidhi (1460), Al-Bayhsql in his compilation entitled As-Sunam Al-Kubra (The
Greatest Compilation of Sunan) (8/136),and Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak (4/360),

3 Al-Bukhari (3156) and Abmad ln Al-Musnad (1/190),
4 Malik in Al-Muwatta’ (2/872).

Forms of Sorcery

Qatan Ibn Qabisah related on his father's authority that he heard the
Prophet (PBUH) saying:

"Indeed “Iydfah (releasing some birds to foretell the future), tarq
(practicing geomancy), and At-Tiyarah (believing in evil omen)
are acts of jibt.”

* Awf said, ““Iyafah means driving birds away, whereas targ is divination by
means of lines and figures.”

Al-Hasan Al-Basri said, “Jibt is the voice of devils.”
(Related with a acceptable chain of transmission)

‘The abovementioned hadith is also related by Aba Dawid, An-Nas@i and
Ibn Hibban in his authentic book.

204 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwi

Relevance of this Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In the previous chapter, we tackled the legal ruling regarding sorcery. In
the present chapter, we are going to elaborate on some ofits forms. Such forms
are widely practiced and mistaken for miracles produced by righteous people.
‘Moreover, people commit polytheism by worshipping those who produce such
abominable practices

‘Awf Ibn Abd Jamilah

* Awf ‏مطا‎ Abd Jamilah was known as * Awf Al-A*rabi, and wasa trustworthy
twansmitter of Hadith. ‘ Awf's father is Qabisah ibnul-Mukharig Al-Hilali, He
was a renowned Companion,

Keywords and Phrases

+ Releasing some birds: The Arab pagans used to release birds in the
sky. Ifsuch birds take a specific direction, they have good omens. They
also used to see good or bad omens on grounds of the birds’ names
and sounds.

« Acts of Jibt: Acts and forms of sorcery

+ Drawing lines on earth: Geomancers claimed their ability to foretell
the unseen events of the future by drawing lines and figures on sand.

+ Jibtis the voice of devils: It refers to one form of jibt, namely listening

to musical instruments.

Releyance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘The hadith affirms that foretelling events by releasing birds or by means
of geomancy and believing in evil omen are manifestations of jibl, which is
antithetical to the concept of monotheism in Islam.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% Itis prohibited to claim the knowledge of the unseen, since such an act
contradicts the concept of monotheism.

4 Itissimilarly prohibited to believe in evil omensas sucha practiceeither
contradicts the concept of monotheism or impairs its perfection.

Chapter 24: Forms of Sorcery 205
# It is also prohibited to use musical instruments, for such a practice
impairs true obedience to Allah and perfect belief in Him.

% All means of diversion such as singing and music are considered the
voices of Satan, which mislead people from the straight path of Allah.

Saad

ramenrary on the Book of Taulhid

206 Corel
Ibn ‘ Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“Ifanyone acquires any knowledge of astrology, he acquires a branch
of sorcery, He gets more as long as he continues to do so”

(Related by Abit-Dawtid)

Keywords and Phrases

+ He gets more as long as he continues to do so: The more he
acquires such knowledge, the more sins he commits, or it means that
the more a man acquires the knowledge of astrology, the more he
acquires branches af sorcery.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) gives an implied warning that whoever
gains knowledge of any branch of astrology incurs the same sin of learning a
branch of sorcery. Moreover, the more he gains knowledge of astrology, the
more he gets acquainted with sorcery; because astrology is an act of foretelling
the future, which is solely known by Allah.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter
In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) stressed that astrology is a type of

sorcery.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith:

© It is prohibited to practice astrology, which is defined as the study of
the positions and aspects of celestial bodies in the belief that they have
an influence on the course of natural earthly occurrences and human
affairs, as itis an allegation of knowing the unseen,

4% Astrology is a farm of sorcery, which contradicts sound belief.

4 The more a person learns about astrology, the more he gets acquainted

with sorcery,
+iS

Chapter 24 Forms of Sorcery 207

‘Abdi Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“Whoever ties a knot and then blows in it (with the purpose of
harming others) commits an act of sorcery, and whoever practices
sorcery commits an act of polytheism, and whoever attaches an
‏عانصو‎ will be left to its control.”

(Related by An-Nas@’)

Keywords and Phrases

«Whoever ties a knot and blows in it: Those who practice witchrafis
by tying knots and blowing dribbles into them.

+ Whoever practices sorcery commits an act of polytheism: Since
sorcery is originally based on acts of polytheism such as seeking the
aid of devils, it ultimately entails polytheism.

General Meaning of the Hadith

According to the Hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) warned his followers against
one form of sorcery by demonstrating its legal ruling, He (PBUH) enunciates
that tying knots and blowing dribbles into them is one of the common
practices of sorcery. When a sorcerer intends to practice a supernatural power
over others by means of witchcraft, he ties a number of knots with thread
and blows each knot until his purpose of sorcery is accomplished, Then, the
sorcerer’s malignant self gets adapted with such malicious practices and seeks
the assistance of spirits. By blowing knots and with the assistance of spirits,
a sorcerer manages to use supernatural powers over others and harm them
according to what is predestined.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith demonstrates one form of sorcery, namely, sorcery by blowing
knots, which is also called the casting of spells.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

+ This hadith demonstrates one type of sorcery which is practiced by
means of knotting and blowing,

Concive Commentary on the Book of Tsui

% Sorcery is an act of polytheism, as a sorcerer seeks assistance from
spirits and supernatural entities.

4 Whoeverrelies on any person or object besides Allah will be humiliated

and let down.
$e

Chapter 24; Forms of Sorcery 209
Ton Mas" id (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated, the Messenger of
Allah (PBUH) said;

"Should 1 inform you about al-'adh (sorce
sip which creates dissension amongst people.

(Related by Muslim)

Itisa malicious gos-

Keywords and Phrases

+ Al-’adh: it is an Arabic word which originally means falsehood, magic
and malicious gossip. Contextually it refers to sorcery.

+ Malicious gossip: The practice of spreading people's private news and
talks with the aim of sowing dissension among them.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) cautions his nation against sowing
dissension among people by means of malicious gossip. He (PBUH) prefaces
the hadith with an interrogative sentence so as to grasp people’ attention
and be more impressive. He (PBUH) explains that spreading news among
people in pursuance of causing mischief and sowing dissension among them
isa kind of sorcery, because the influence of such a practice is tantamount to
that of sorcery.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) states that malicious gossip isa form of
abominable influence on people's affairs,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Malicious gossip is a type of sorcery, as it causes dissension among
people. It breeds the same evil consequences resulting from prac
‘icing sorcery,

4 This hadith emphasizes the prohibition of malicious gossip, which is
classified as a major sin.

4 Raising questions to invoke answers is an effective method of teaching.

ad

200 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Tbn “Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

"Some eloquent speech has the influence of magi

Keywords and Phrases

+Ithas the influence of magic: Eloquent speech may grasp the hearts of
people to the extent that it may turn truth into falsehood or embellish
falsehood, Therefore, an ignorant person may be easily influenced by
eloquent speech.

General Meaning of the Hadith

The Prophet (PBUH) demonstrates another type of sorcery, namely elo-
quence, which has a cogent influence on the audience, Asa result, an eloquent
speech can present falsehood in the form of truth and vice versa, Hence, this
hadith censutes such a type of magic, which blurs the truth.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter
This hadith highlights a type of sorcery, namely deceptive eloquence.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

* The eloquent speech, which blurs the truth, isa form of influential
magic.

Such a type of eloquence is severely criticized, Yet, eloquence which
substantiates the truth and confutes falsehood, is highly recommended,

Endnotes

١ Abud in his Compilation Af-Musnad (3/477), Aba Dawad (3807), and ibn Bibban in
his Compilation Mawérid Az-Zam "dn (Fountains for the Thirsty) (1426).

2 Abi Dawid (3905), Tb Majah (3726), and’ Abad ‏ارا‎ bis compilation A-Musiad
(27,311).

3 This hadith is related by An:Nasalt and the last part of it is supported by text-related
shaditns (ce, hadifts whose wording or meaning is identical to another, but the narrator
‘Companion is different in both.) The text-related hiadits are related by At-Tirmidht
(2073), Ahmad (4/310, 311), and Al-Hakim (4/216),

4 Muslim (2606).

5 Al-Bukhart (5146) and Muslim (869).

2

Rulings of Soothsayers...

One of the wives of the Prophet (PBUH) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“He who visits a soothsayer and asks him about anything, his prayers
extending to forty days will not be accepted”

(Related by Muslim)

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

Assoothsayers and the like allege their ability to know the unseen or foretell
future events, which is an attribute exclusively belonging to Allah, the author
has dedicated this chapter to warning soothsayers and whoever believes them
against the severe punishment prepared for them in the Hereafter.

212 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Keywords and Phrases

+ And the like: Such as astrologers, diviners and geomancers.

+ One of the wives of the Prophet (PBUH) narrated that the
Prophet (PBUH) said: It refers to Hafsah (may Allah be pleased
with her) who narrated the aforementioned hadith.

+ His prayers extending to forty days will not be accepted: He will
not be rewarded for the prayers offered during the period of forty days.

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘The Prophet (PBUH) highlights the punishment inflicted upon those who
haunt a soothsayer for acquiring knowledge about future events, which is only
encompassed by Allah. According to the hadith, those who haunt soathsayers
will not receive rewards for the prayers they offer during a periad of forty days.
This penalty implies a strict warning and a crystal clear prohibition of such an
abominable act, which is one of the gravest sins. A soothsayer is thus, mare
entitled to receive a severer punishment for his wrongdoing.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith forbids Muslims to go to the soothsayers or the like or believe
them, as such an act violates the essence of monotheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

+ ‘The prohibition of visiting soothsayers and asking them about the
unseen, for this is an act of disbelief.

4 The prohibition of soothsaying, as it is regarded @ major sin.

+ If someone visits a soothsayer without believing him, his prayers
will not be accepted for forty days, Moreover, the one who believes
a soothsayer is regarded as renouncing what was revealed to
Muhammad (PBUH).

نعف

0 Rulings of Soothsayers. 213

‘Abii Hurayrah (may Allah be pleasedwith him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“Ff anyone visits a soothsayer and believes him in what he says,
then he is regarded as disbelieving in what has been revealed to
Muhammad (PBUH)."

(Related by Aba Dawid)

Abdi Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“If anyone visits a soothsayer and believes him in what he says,
then he will be regarded as dishelieving in what has been revealed
‏ما‎ Muhammad (PBUH).

(Related by Abit Dawad, Ibn Majah, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasd', and
Al-Hakim who judged it as meeting the conditions of Al-Bukhart
and Muslim)

‎Ya'la related the same hadith as a saying ascribed to Tbn Mas'éd‏ نطف
‎(may Allah be pleased with him) not to the Prophet (PBUH).‏

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎+ What has been revealed to Muhammad (PBUH): The Qur'an
and Sunnah.

‎General Meaning of the Hadith

‎The hadith promises a severe punishment for those who visit soothsay-
ers seeking their help to know the unseen. Whoever commits this grave sin
is regarded as renouncing what has been revealed to Prophet Muhammad
(PBUH).

‎Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‎The hadith stresses the prohibition of visiting soothsayers and threatens
those who commit this grave sin.

24 Concive Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% A Muslim is prohibited to visit soothsayers, ask them about fixture
events or believe their fables. Believing a soothsayer is tantamount to
renouncing the Muslim belief.

% Iisincumbent upon every Muslim to renounce koothsayers' allegations,

© Visiting a soothsayer and believing him is tantamount to the renun-
ciation of the Muslim belief.

 Soothsaying isan act of polytheism since itis an allegation of knowing

the unseen.

Chapter 25: Rulings ‏أن‎ Soothsayers, 215

Imran Ibn Husayn (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated the Prophet
(PBUH) as saying:

"He is not from us (Muslims) who practices tiyarah or has it
Practiced for him, who practices soothsaying or asks another person
to soothsay for him, and who practices sorcery or asks another
person to practice sorcery for him. If anyone visits a soothsayer and
believes what he says, he is regarded as disbelieving in what has
been revealed to Muhammad (PBUH).

(Related by Al-Bazzar with an acceptable chain of transmission. At-
‘Tabardni related the same hadith with a good chain of transmission on the
authority of Ibn ‘Abbas excluding the last sentence which provides, ‏لآ"‎
‎anyone visits a soothsayer

Al-Baghaw said:

“AL Arraf (soothsayer) is a name for the one who pretends to reach
conclusions through premises. He can thus detect stolen objects or
last things. Other scholars hold the view that Al-'Arraf is the very
same as AL-Kahin (diviner).

Al-Kahin is one who claims to be able to foretell events or predict the
‘future. Some scholars maintain that he is the one who tells about the
dictates of one’ conscience”

Abul: Abbas fbn Taymiyah said:

“AL Arraf is a contmon name for the soothsayer, the astrologer, the
geomancer and anyone who claims to be able to know unseen events
of the future with the aid of different means.”

Keywords and Phrases

+ He is not from us: Those who act upon such practices are not among
the followers of Islam or those who apply the shari'ah.

+ Practices Tiyarah: Tiyarah is the act of seeking evil omens in specific
birds or persons.

+ Or have it practiced for him: Those who ask others to practice
tiyarah for them,

26 Concise Conmmentary on the Book af Tawhial

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘The Prophet (PBUH) enunciates that whoever practices tiyarah, soothsaying
orsorcery, oraskothers ta practiceany form ofthem forhim, isnotincluded among
his followers who abide by the Islamic teachings. These practices, however, imply
a claim of possessing the knowledge of the unseen, which exclusively belongs to
Allah Alone. Moreover, engaging in such practices corrupts sound beliefs and
minds, In addition, believing those who practice these prohibited matters is an
act of disbelief in the Divine Revelation, which is sent down to nullify such pre-
Islamic fallacies and safeguard intellect against theit evil influences, Similarly,
the aforenientioned ruling is applied to whoever practices palmistry or believes
that constellations have their influence on people’ affairs and fortunes,

Imam Al-Baghawi and Imam Ibn Taymiyah explain that the Arabic word
Al-Kahin refers to the soothsayer, the astrologer, the geomancer, and whoever
claims to have knowledge of the unseen events, Moreover, Al-Kahin is the
name of whoever claims to be able to foretell future events with the wid of the
devils, These devils eavesdrop on the angels’ talks in the heavens as previously
mentioned at the beginning of the book.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

The hadith strictly prohibits soothsaying and other similar practices. It,
moreover, prohibits Muslims from believing the soothsayer

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith
* This hadith stresses the prohibition of claiming the knowledge of the

unseen, as it contradicts the concept of monotheism.

% Itis similarly prohibited to believe the fables of those who allege their
knowledge of the unseen.

+ Muslims are duty bound ta disprove the soothsayers' fables and
renounce their abominable practices,

4 Muslims are duty bound toadhere to the Divine Revelation sent down
to the Prophet (PBUH) and to reject whatever contradicts it.

oe

Chapter 25: Rulings of ‏كص بصطردهة‎ 27

In his commentary on those who write Abd-Jad, and those who ponder
over celestial bodies (for the sake of practicing astrology), Ibn ' Abbas (may
Allah be pleased with him) said, “I conceive that anyone involved in such
practices will have no share in the Hereafter.”

Keywords and Phrases

+ Aba-JAd: Itis an Arabic word referring to the Arabic alphabet,

+ Write Aba-Jad: Use of the letters of the alphabet as a means of
foretelling future events.

+ Who ponder over celestial bodies (for the sake of practicing
astrology): Those who believe that the celestial bodies have influence
‘on the course of human affairs.

General Meaning of the Tradition

Ibn ‘Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) states that those who use
the letters of the alphabet and meditate on the celestial bodies with the aim of
foretelling future events will have no reward in the Hereafter, and will suffer
the same punishment of the soothsayers,

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

This Tradition indicates that learning how to use the letters of the alphabet
with intent to claim the knowledge of the unseen, and meditating on the
celestial bodies in the belief that they have influence on the course of human
affairs, are acts of divination, Therefore, whoever engages in practicing them
will be of those who will have no reward in the Hereafter,

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

 ILis prohibited to learn Abd jd with intent to claim the knowledge
of the unseen, as it contradicts the concept of monatheism. However,
learning the alphabet to read or calculate is permissible.

4 This hadith stresses the prohibition of practicing astrology, as it results
in falling into polytheism.

4 Muslims must not be deluded by the science and knowledge acquired
by deviant people, for Allah ultimately leads them ‏ها‎ perish,

Seo

218 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Endnotes

| Abd Dawéd (3904) and Ahmad in Al: Musnad (2/408,429 and 476),

2 Al-Eiakim in Al-Mustadrak and Abmad in Al-Musnad (2/429),

23 Abt Ya" lain his Musyad (Compilation of Hadiths) (5408), Al-Bazzae in AI-Kashf(2067),
and Al-Haythami in Majma' Az-Zawéid” (The Compilation of Additional Hadiths)
(5/118), The hadith is related by Al-Buzzar, and its transmitters are those transmitting
the hadiths of Al-Bukhart or Muslim or both save Hubayrah ‏مطل‎ Yarim, vet, he is &
‘wustworthy transmitter;

An-Nushrah

Jabir Ibn * Abdullah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) was asked about An-Nushrah
and he said, ‘It is from the work of Satan: ”*

(Related by Ahmad with an acceptable chain of transmission, and Aba
Dawid) Aba Dawid remarked that when Imam Ahmad was asked about
An-Nushrah, he said, “bn Mas'itd (may Allah be pleased with him) dislikes
it altogether”

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In the previous chapter, the author illustrated the legal ruling on sorcery and
soothsaying. Now, he explores the legal texts on An-Nushrah. Its usually sought
from the devils and sorcerers and is antithetical to the concept of monotheism,

220 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Keywords and Phrases

+ An-Nushrah: It is incantations and spells recited to those believed to
be magically possessed.

٠ It is from the work of Satan: These acts belong to Satan since they
include devilish and magical practices

General Meaning of the Hadith

Being questioned about the way of treating magically passessed persons
which was commonly practiced during the Pre-Islamic Period of Ignorance,
the Prophet (PBUH) maintained that such incantations and spells are of satanic
origins since they entail magical practices and acts of polytheism which are
prohibited.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘The hadith prohibits An-Nushralt which is deemed as oneofthe abominable
satanic practices,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith:

4 This hadith prob
that entails disbelief

resorting to Nushral since it is an act of sorcery

% It is recommendable to question scholars about the legal rulings of

ambiguous issues,
oh

0 PI

Qatadah said:

“1 asked Sa*id Ibrul-Musayyab about a man who was under the
influence ofa magic spell or hindered from having sexual intercourse
with his wife (due to the influence of supernatural powers), ‘Should
we treat him with An-Nushrah or use some other means to cure the
spell?” He said, ‘It is permissible (to use An-Nushrah) since remedy
is intended. That which is beneficial is not prohibited’ ”

(Related by Al-Bukhari)
It was reported that Al-Hasan said, “Sorcery is removed only by a sorcerer”
Commenting on An-Nushrah, Ibnul-Qayyim said:

“An-Nushrah is a practice mainly intended to break spells and it
consists of two types. The first type consists in breaking spells by
reciting other spells, which is the work of devils, and this type is
what Al-Hasan means by his words. Thus, in order to break a spell
both the sorcerer and the one magically possessed are to offer some
practices dedicated and mostly endeared to the devils. The second
type of An-Nushrah breaks spells by reciting ruqid (legal incantation),
seeking refuge with Allah, taking permissible medicine and offering
invocations. The latter type is, however. permissible.”

Qatadah

‘The full name of Qatidah is Qatidah Ibn Du"amah As-Sadasi Al-Basri.
He wasa trustworthy tabi’ifrom among the great prolific narrators of Hadith,
Qatidah died some years after the year of 110 A.H. may Allah have mercy on
him.

General Meaning of the Two Traditions

Tn an inquiry about the legal ruling on practicing An-Nushrah, Ibnul-
‘Musayyab gives a fatwa legalizing it on the ground that it is intended for drawing
benefitand repellingharm. Ibnul-Musayyab intends thelegal typeof An-Nushrak,
such as practicing incantation by reciting Allah's Names and Words, in which
no prohibited practice is included. However, Al-Hasar’s commentary signifies
the invalidity of practicing An-Nushrah, on the ground that the influence of a
spell can only be broken by sorcerers. However, Al-Hasan’s commentary can be

22 00

interpreted as indicating that a spell ‏كد‎ to be broken by a similar spell, and ‏ع زجلا‎
the work of Satan. The division of Ibnul-Qayyim includes the implications of the
two aforementioned commentaries. His commentary indicates, in essence, that
treating the magically possessed person with lawful remedies, such as reciting
the Qur'an, is permissible, but treating him by means of other spells is, however,
impermissible.

Relevance of the Two Traditions ta the Chapter

The two traditions provide a detailed account of the legal ruling on An-
Nushrah demonstrating what is permissible and what is prohibited.

Endnotes

1 Abd Dawad (3868) and Ahmad in Al-Musnad (3/294),

2

Belief in Evil Omens

Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“, Unquestionably, their fortune is with Allah, but most of them
do not know.” (Quran: ‏عفش دلخ‎ 131)
He also says:
“They said, ‘Your omen [i.e., fate] is with yourselves. Is it because
you were reminded? Rather, you are a transgressing people.”
(Qur'an: Yasin: 19)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Since believing in evil omens is a form of polytheism, which violates the
principle of monotheism or at least impairs its perfection, the author dedicates
this chapter to warning Muslims against such an act.

224 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid:

Keywords and Phrases

+ Their fortune: It means that their fate is predestined by Allah.

+ With Allah: Pessimism afflicts the disbelievers by Allah's command due
to their disbelief in Him and their denial of His books and Messengers.

+ Your omen: Theit fate and whatever befails them

+ With yourselves: The disbelievers' evil consequences are caused by their
deeds, their disbelief and their rejection of the admonitions conveyed
to them through Messengers,

«Is it because you were reminded? When the disbelievers (dwellers
of the town') were exhorted, they accused the Messengers of Allah of
being an evil omen by saying, "Indeed, we consider you a bad omen.”
(Qur'an: Yasin; 18)

+ Rather, you are a transgressing people It means that due to your
transgression, you were afflicted with pessimism. Transgression is
equivalent to corruption, which connotes violation of all proper limits.

General Meaning of the Two Quranic Verses

‘The First Qur’anic Verse: When afflicted with a scarcity of resources
or a drought, the people of Pharaoh used to accuse Moses and his
companions of being evil omens, However, Allah, Exalted and Glorified
be He, confirms that whatever evil comes to them is by His Will and
Command as a punishment for their disbelief. Then, Allah depicts them as
ignorant and devoid of any contemplation, Had they pondered over what
afflicted them, they would have known that Moses brought nothing but
blessings, good and success for those who believed in him and followed
his message.

The Second Quranic Verse: Allah, Exalted be He, refutes the fallacies
of those who renounce His Messengers and accuse them of being the source of
all calamites. Allah, moreover, argues that the cause of such calamities is evil
deeds and their own disbelief. It would have been better for the disbelievers to
respond to the admonitions of the Messengers so as to avoid such calamities,
However, they were transgressors and, thus, were afflicted with such calamities
and evil omens.

‘Chapter 27: Belief in Evil Omens 225

Relevance of the Two Qur’anic Verses ta the Chapter

Allah states that believing in bad omens is one of the false beliefs commonly
retained by the Arab pagans and polytheists. Therefore, Allah abhors theit
doing and dispraises them.

Lessons Drawn from the Two Verses

% Believing in bad omens is one of the beliefs ofthe Arab pagans and the
polytheists,

4 The Quranic verses affirm the verity of Predestination and Divine
Decree.

% Calamities and afflictions are mainly caused by the commitment of
sins and other acts of disobedience.

Tis stated in the first Qur'anic verse that ignorance is dispraised as it
makes people unaware of polytheism and its means and eventually
leads them to fall into it.

4 ‘According to the second Qur'anic yerse, people should respond to
admonitions. Renouncing sincere adyice is one of the qualities of the
disbelievers.

4 Revelations sent down to Allah's Messengers are always the source of
all goodness and blessings.

ad

Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Aba Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated thatthe Messenger
of Allah (PBUH) said

“There is no ‘adwa (contagion), tiyarah, hamah, or Safar.
(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)”
‘Muslim in his Salith (Authentic Book of Hadith) adds, “.,.or naw' or ghoul.”

Keywords and Phrases

+ No 'Adwa (contagion); No contagious disease is transmitted to
others without Allah's Will. The reason is that people of the Pre-Islamic
Period of Ignorance used to believe that the contagious disease would
transmit to others by itself, not by Allah’s Will.

+ Tiyarah: No taking of evil omens in birds, names, certain spots or persons

+ Hamah: lt refers to the owl, ‘The Arab pagans used to take the owl as
an evil omen, The hadith came to invalidate such an act.

+ Safiar: Some scholars maintain that it refers to the parasites which infest
the stomach and intestines of humans and cattle, while others view
that it refers to the pagan belief that the arrival of the month of Safar
bodes evil. So, the hadith came to invalidate such beliefs,

+ Naw’: The belief that the position of the stars exclusively affects the
climate without a divine intervention

+ Ghoul; It refers to the evil spirit or demon. The disbelievers claimed
that such spirits could mislead them from their ways and even kill
them. Thus, the iadith invalidated such beliefs and explained that
such things could not mislead or kill anyone,

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘The Prophet (PBUH) invalidated what the Arab pagans used to believe in
suchas taking birds, months, stars, demons.and evil spirits as evil omens. They
used to believe that such things would cause harm. Besides, they used to believe
that disease could infect people without a divine intervention, Therefore, the
Prophet (PBUH) warded off such superstitious beliefs and called people to
exclusively rely on Allah and keep steadfast in pure belief.

Chapter 27: Belief in Evil Omens 227
Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter
‘The hadith invalidates seeking evil omens, which is a pagan belief,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith;

© The hadith invalidates taking evil omens in specific birds, names or
persor

The hadith similarly invalidates the pagan belief that contagious
diseases are conveyed without a divine intervention.

> It also invalidates taking owls and the month of Safar as evil omens.

4 The hadith similarly invalidates the belief thatcelestial bodies influence
the fall of rain and the change of weather.

+ Italso nulifies the superstition of ghouls.
A Muslim is incumbent to rely on Allah and trust in Him.

“ In order to attain perfect belief, one should be aware of the means
leading to polytheism.

4 ILis impermissible to take specific colors, figures or infected persons

as evil omens.
See

228 Concise Commentary on the Book of Fiwhid

‘Anas narrated that the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said:

“There is no ‘adwé, nor is there tiyarah, but I like good omen.
People asked, ‘What is the good omen?" He replied, ‘The good omett
is the good word!”

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

It indicates that seeing good omens is permissible unlike the act of seeing
evil omens.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith:

4 Seeing a good omen is not among the acts of tiyarah
+ The hadith explains the good omen as the nice word.

+ Itisincumbent upon each Muslim to trust Allah exclusively. A Muslim
is also prohibited to mistrust Him.

‘The difference between good and evil omens:
1. Good omens are always agreeable and pleasing in nature.

2, A good omen entails putting trust in Allah, and man is commanded
to frust Allah.

3, Evil omens are always displeasing in nature,
4. Evil omens indicate mistrust in Allah, and man is prohibited to

mistrust Allah.
‏نهف‎

Chaper 27: Belief in Evil Omens: 229
“Urwah Ibn ' Amir said that the issue of omens was mentioned before the
Prophet (PBUH) and he said:

“The best of which is the good onten. It (omen) does not, however,
discourage a Muslim from fulfilling what he wants (of good). If any
one of you sees what he dislikes, (when intending to do something),
he should say, "0 Allah! No one cart bring what is good but You,
and no one can repel what is evil but You, and there is no pawer or
‘strength save in ‏يرملا‎ "“

(Related by Abd Dawad with an authentic chain of transmitters)

*Urwah Ibn ‘Amir Al-Qurashi

The full name of the narrator is'Urwah Ibn ' Amir Al-Qurasht, and itis said
that his surname was Al-Juhant Al-Makki, may Allah be pleased with him.

Keywords and Phrases

+ It does not discourage a Muslim from fulfilling what he wants:
The disbeliever may, however, be discouraged from what he intends to
do due to his belief in evil omens.

«No one can bring what is good but You: Seeking omens can never
bring a benefit or avert harm,

General Meaning of the Hadith

The narrator related that omens were mentioned before the Prophet
(PBUH) to explain their legal ruling to people. The Prophet (PBUH) declared
the invalidity of taking evil omens, He further expounded that fa‘, which
was explained as the good word, was classified as a good omen and was
thus permissible, Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) demonstrated that omens
should never discourage a Muslim from fulfilling his objectives. A believer
firmly believes that no harm or benefit may affect him without Allah's Will.
On the contrary, such evil omens may deter a disbeliever from accomplishing
his ends. The Prophet (PBUH), however, guided Muslims to the proper
invocation they should say in case they were obsessed with evil omens. The
aforementioned invocation implies the attachment of the Muslim's heart to
Allah, for only He brings good and eliminates evil, and there is neither power
nor strength save in Him.

230 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawi

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘The hadith invalidates all forms of omens with the exception of good ones.
It further provides the means of eliminating evil omens.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% The hadith: invalidates evil omens and offers the proper invocation
recited when one is obsessed with them.

+ Evil omens, according to the hadith, may be eliminated by trusting
Allah exclusively and relying on Him.

4 A good and pleasing word is included in good omens.

4 A Muslim is incumbent to exclusively rely on and trust Allah, He
should also believe that there is no strength or power but in Him.

See

Chapter 27: Belief in Evil Omens 231

‘bn Mas’ dd narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) sai

“Believing in evil omen is (an act of) polytheism." The Prophet
(PBUH) repeated it twice and added, “And no one of us but may
‘fallin it, but Allah removes it by means of reliance (on Him):”
(Related by Abd Dawid and At-Tirmidhi who graded it sahih;
At-Tirmidhi maintained that the last part of the hadith was a
saying of Ibn Mas' tid)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Believing in evil omen is polytheism: It may be regarded so because
it involves attaching the heart to others besides Allah.

+ Allah removes it by means of reliance on Him: Sincere belief and
reliance on Allah remove the consequences of evil omens.

+ And no one of us but may fall in it, but Allah removes it by
means of reliance (on Him): It is a saying of Ibn Mas'ad who
directed it to his contemporaries and followers. This is the sound view,
as belief in evil omen is an act of polytheism and the Prophet (PBUH)
is protected from falling into it,

General Meaning of the Hadith

In order to affirm the prohibition of believing or retaining evil omens, the
Prophet (PBUH) ruled it an act of polytheism. This is substantiated by the fact
that such an act involves attachment of the heart to others besides Allah and
mistrusting Him,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter
The hadith affirms that the belief in evil omens is an act of polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

‘+ Belief in evil omensisa form of polytheism, asi implies the attachment
of hearts to other objects besides Allah.

+ Iris recommended to repeat legal rulings sa that it may be easily kept
by heart.

* Exclusive reliance on Allah eliminates the consequences of evil omens,

eho

232 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhidd

{bn ‘Amr narrated that;

“the Messenger of Allah said “If anyone stops doing something
because of (believing in) evil omen, then he has committed an act of
polytheism. They said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! What is the expiationt
{for that?" He (the Messenger) said, (The expiation for this is that)
one should say, ‘O Allah! There is no good but Yours, and no omen

but comes from You, and there is no deity but You.’
(Related by Ahmad)
Al-Fadl Tbnul-’ Abbas narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“The evil omen incites you to do something, or stops you from
accomplishing it?”

(Related by Ahmad)

* Abdullah Ibn ‘Amr (the Narrator)

‘The full name of the narrator of the first hadith is * Abdullah Tbn ‘Amr
Thnul-"as, He was one of the early Companians who narrated numerous
hadiths; may Allah be pleased with him.

Al-Fadl Ibnul-* Abbas
Al-Fad] Tbnul-" Abbas Ibn ' Abdul-Muttalib was the Prophet's paternal cousin.

Keywords and Phrases

+ He has committed an act of polytheism: Because such a person
does not rely sincerely on Allah as he attaches his heart to others
besides Him,

+ There is no deity but You: No deity deserves to be worshipped
besides Allah.

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘The Prophet (PBUH) explains that the prohibited form of omen, which is
regarded as an act of polytheism, discourages a man from accomplishing his
aim, Therefore, when a person is hindered by evil omen from taking a journey

Chapter 27: Belief in Evil Omens 233

of accomplishing something, he ultimately falls inta polytheism by renouncing
true reliance on Allah. According to the hadith, those who do not subject
themselves to omens ate not consequently influenced by them. The Prophet,
moreover, provides the proper invocations which have to be recited when one
is afflicted with evil omens. These invocations express sincere belief in Allah
and true reliance on Him.

Relevance of the Two Hadiths to the Chapter

The two hadiths demonstrate the true significance of evil omens.

Lessons Drawn from the Two Hadiths

Belief in evil omens is an act of polytheism.

% Evil omens which entail polytheism usually drive man to subject
himself to their evil consequences.

# Pessimism that does not discourage man {rom accomplishing his ends
is not regarded a form of believing in evil omens,

itis recommended to beaware ofthe invocations which are pronounced
to guard one from being affected by evil omens.

Endnotes

| itis said that the town was Antioch (Antakya),

2 Al-Bukhari (5757) and Muslim (2220) (106).

3 Al-Buldhdr (5756) and Muslim (2224),

4 ‏قاف‎ Dawad (3719).

5 Abii Dawid (3910) and At-Tirmidht (1614) and said, “It is ‏د‎ hasan (good) sath
(authentic) hadith?”

6 Ahmad (2/220),

7 Ahmad (1/213),

Astrology

Qatadah said:

“Allah created these stars for three objectives: First, to adorn the
heaven; second, as missiles against the devils and; third, as signs
by which (the traveler) may be guided. Whoever claims more than
this for them has committed a mistake, lost his reward (on the Day
of Resurrection) and taken upon himself that of which he has no
knowledge."

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Some forms of studying the stars are forbidden for they entail the conviction
that the knowledge of the unseen is shared by others besides Allah. These
forms of astrology also entail the attachment of the hearts to others besides

236 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Him, Finally, such practices imply the conviction that celestial bodies have an
influence on the natural earthly occurrences and human affairs, For all these
reasons, practicing astrology contradicts true belief in Allah, ‘Therefore, this
topic will be elaborated on in the present chapter to know both permissible
and impermissible practices in this regard.

Keywords and Phrases

٠ Allah created these stars for three objectives; These objectives
were indicated in the Noble Qur'an.

+ Toadorn the heaven: The meaning is derived from the Qur'anic verse

that reads:
“And We have certainly beautified the nearest heaven with lamps
fie., stars}. (Qur'an: Al-Mulk: 5)

+ As missiles against the devils”: It refers to the verse that reads:

and have made [from] them what is thrown at the devils.”
(Quran: Al-Mulle 5)

+ As signs by which (the traveler) may be guided: Travelers are
usually guided by stars which show them basic directions. This
meaning is maintained in the Quranic verse which reads:

“And it is He who has placed for you the stars that you may be
gitided by them through the darknesses of the land and sea...”
(Qur’n; Al-An'am; 97)

Whoever claims more than the three things mentioned by Allah in this
regard, is mistaken. Thus, if someone claims that through the stars he
can know future events, then he claims something of the Unseen.

+ Lost his reward: The person who consumes all time deriving further
benefits ofthe stars which are not maintained in the hadith, isregarded
as losing his time and effort in this life.

General Meaning of the Tradition

Qatidah (may Allah have mercy on him) mentioned the wisdom behind
the creation of the stars (as maintained in the Qur'an) as a reply to some of
his contemporaries who wrongly believed that stars were created for more

Chapret 28: Astrology 237

than what Allah maintained in His Book (the Qur'an), Such people claimed so
out of their ignorance. Besides, they wasted their lives in secking knowledge,
which would definitely harm them, The same ruling applies to whoever seeks
the truth from sources other than the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the
Prophet (PBUH).

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

‘The report demonstrates the wisdom of the creation of the stars (as
mentioned in Allah’s Book). Moreaver, itis considered an argument against
those who claim that the stars are created for reasons not maintained in
the Quran.

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

+ The report expounds the wisdom behind the creation of the stars as
maintained in the Noble Qur'an,

+ It further refutes the fallacies of those who claim that the stars are
created for reasons not maintained in the Noble Qur'an.

< People have to resort to the Book of Allah in order to distinguish the
truth from falsehood,

4 Whoever seeks guidance from sources other than the Book of Allah and
the Sunmah of His Prophet, ultimately deviates from the truth, wastes
his lifein vain and charges himself with that which he cannot realize.

a

238 Concise Commentary on the Book of Taub

Harb related that Qatédah maintained the detestability of studying the
lunar phases, while Ibn ‘ Uyaynah did not allow it. Abmad and Ishaq, however,
maintained that it is permissible.

Tbn ‘Uyaynah: He is Sufyan Tbn “Uyaynah,

Harb Al-Kirmani: He was regarded as one of Ahmad’s great disciples.
Ahmad: Imam Ahmad fbn Hanbal.

Ishq: Ishaq Ibn Rahuwayh.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Lunar phases; There are twenty-eight phases or positions of the moon
(i.e, the moon moves to a different phase each night).

The Objective of the Tradition

‘The tradition elucidates the difference of opinion among scholars regarding
the learning of lunar phases. Learning these phases may help realize the proper
direction of prayer, times of obligatory prayers and the four seasons. Some
scholars prohibited learning such phases while others allowed it. Therefore,
acquiring the knowledge of astrology is absolutely prohibited since it entails
grave deviation from the straight path,

Shs

‘Chapter-28: Astrology 239,

Aba Masa narrated that the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said:

“Three persons will not be admitted ta Paradise: The one who
habitually drinks alcohol, the one who severs his ties of relationship,
and the one who believes in magic.”

(Related by Ahmad and Ibn Hibban in his authentic book)

Abii Masa (the Narrator)

‘The full name of the narrator is Abd Masa ' Abdullah Ibn Qays Al-Ash ‘ari.
‘He was a well-known honorable Companion of the Prophet (PBUH), He died
at Kufa in 50 A.H.; may Allah be pleased with him.

Keywords and Phrases

«Three persons will not be admitted to Paradise: It implies a kind
of threat.

«The one who habitually drinks alcohol: The person who habitually
drinks wine until he dies without repenting his sins.

+ The one who believes in magic: Astrology is a kind of magic as
demonstrated in the hadith in which the Prophet (PBUH) says:

“Ifanyone acquires any knowledge of astrology, he acquires a branch
of magic.”

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘The Prophet (PBUH) warns Muslims that there will be three persons
who will not be admitted to Paradise. The first is the one who habitually
drinks wine; the second is the one who does not observe the duties of
family ties that Allah commands him/her to observe; and the third is the
one who believes in sorcery which includes many types and forms such
as astrology.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘The hadith implies a kind of threat directed to whaever believes in sorcery
which involves astrology; the topic of this chapter.

240 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawbld

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

+ It is prohibited to practice astrology which is deemed as one of the
major sins. Therefore, whoever believes in it will not be admitted to
Paradise.

+ It is similarly prohibited ‏ها‎ drink wine, The hadith entails a severe
threat for those who die without repenting of such a major sin.

* The Muslim is incumbent to maintain family tles.

“ A Muslim is incumbent to denounce all forms of sorcery.

Endnotes

1 ft is related by Al-Bukhari as anu ‘allag (suspended) hadith in the chapter entitled The
Beginning of Creation, section of celestial bodies (p, 614), published by Baytul-Afkar
Ad-Dawliyyah (House ofthe International Thoughts).

2 Ahmad in Al-Mucsnad (4/399) and ‏هذا‎ Hiibban in Mawdrid Az-Zenin (1380, 1381).

Seeking Rainfall by
Virtue of the Stars

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And make (the thanks for) your provision that you deny (the
Provider)?” (Quran: Al-Waqi' ah: 82)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

The compiler dedicates this chapter to warning Muslims against attributing
rainfall to the stars and believing in their influence, for this belief is considered
major polytheism just as believing that the dead and the absent possess the
power to benefit and harm. Moreover, if a Muslim believes that the stars are
just the cause of rain without attributing influence to them, he commits an act
of minor polytheism.

242 Concise Commentary on the Book of Taxi

Keywords and Phrases

+ Seeking Rainfall by Virtue of the Stars: There are twenty-eight
phases for the moon. Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“And the moon - We have determined for it phases.”
(Quran: Yasin: 39)

In other words, the moon moves to one position each night and it
becomes full on the fourteenth night, and then it begins to lessen and
so on, Those phases are called stars, as the moon looks different at each
phase. In the Pre-Islamic Period, Arabs used to attribute rainfall to the
‘movements of the stars and the positions of the planets and the moan.
They would say, “We have received rain due to such-and-such a star”

+ And make [the thanks for] your provision: Instead of thanking
Allah for His provision, the disbelievers deny the Noble Qur'an.

+ You deny (the Provider): This is when you attribute the blessings of
Allah to anyone other than Him. For example, you may say, “We have
received rain due to such-and-such star”

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah, Exalted and Glorified be He, disapproves of the polytheists who
deny the blessings of Allah, as they attribute rainfall to stars, Besides, Allah
informs us that such sayings are nothing but absolute lies. This is due to the
fact that rain falls out of Allal’s favor and His Divine Decree and the creatures
have nothing to do with it,

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

Allah, Exalted and Glorified be He, disapproves of attributing rainfall to
the movements of stars and planets and He calls this belief a lie.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

‘+ The falseness of attributing rainfall to the movements of stars.
+ Attributing rainfall to stars or planets js a lie.

% The obligation of thanking Allah for His blessings as well as attributing
rainfall to His Favor and Benevolence.

نعف

Chapee 29: Seeking Rainfall by Virwe of the Stars 243

‘Abi Malik AL-Ash’arl (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the
‘Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said:
“Among my nation are four characteristics belonging to the Pre-
Islarnic Period which people do not abandon: boasting of the nobility
of one’ ancestors, slandering other peoples’ ancestors, seeking rain
from stars, and wailing for the deceased.”
‘And he (PBUH) further added:
“If a wailing woman does not repent before she dies, she will be

made to stand on the Day of Resurrection wearing a garment of
pitch and a chemise of ntange.”

(Related by Mustim)

Abii Malik (the Narrator)
‘The full name of the narrator is AbO Malik Al-Harith Ton!

He was one of the Prophet's Companions; may Allah be pleased with him.
Keywords and Phrases

+ Belonging to the pre-Islamic period: It refers to the Pre-Islamic
Period of Ignorance. Itis called so due to the fact that there was excessive
ignorance in such an era. Every tradition or practice contradicting
what has been revealed to the Prophet is deemed an act of ignorance.

+ Do not abandon: Such matters will be always practiced by some of
this nation, whether people are aware of their prohibition or not.

+ Garment of pitch: Liquid copper will be poured over the wailing
‘woman until it takes the form of a garment on her body.

General Meaning of the Hadith
The Prophet (PBUH) informs us that some of the traits of the people before
the coming of Islam will remain in this nation, There are four of such traits:

1 Boasting of the nobility of one’s ancestors. This is despite the fact that
piety is the measure of honor and nobility:

2,Slandering the ancestors of others
3.Attributing rainfall to stars and planets
4.Excessive mourning and wailing over the dead

244 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

‘Then the Prophet (PBUH) stresses the punishment prepared for the wailing
woman who dies before repenting. On the Day of Resurrection, such a woman
will be made to wear a garment made of melted copper which will stick to her
body and cause her great suffering.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘The hadith provides a proof of the prohibition of seeking rain ftom stars or
planets pointing out that such a tradition prevailed in the Pre-Islamic Period
of Ignorance.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith:

+ It is prohibited to seek rain from stars or planets. Further, itis asserted.
that such a tradition was amongst the deviant practices that prevailed
in the Pre-Islamic Period of Ignorance,

+ Notall Muslims renounce the polytheistic traditions of the Pre-Islamic
Period of Ignorance.

+ Traditions and practices that were prevalent in the Pre-Islamic Period
of Ignorance, are dispraised in Islam.

‘ It is prohibited to imitate the traditions of the Pre-Islamic Period of
ignorance.

© 1: 16 prohibited to boast about the nobility of one's ancestors, Such a
tradition is one of the Pre-Istamic customs of ignorance,

+ It is prohibited to defame or slander others’ ancestors.

4 Wailing over the deceased is prohibited, and its punishment is grave
since it is one of the major sins.

+ Repentance expiates one’s sins, however grave they may be.

% A Muslim may be possessed of a trait of those which prevailed in the
Pre-Islamic Period of Ignorance, and yet this does not render him a

disbeliever.

Chapter 29: Secking Rainfall by Virte of the Sears 245

Zayd fbn Khalid Al-Juhani narrated:

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) led us in the Subh (Morning)
Prayer at Al-Hudaybiyah, There were some marks of the rainfall
that took place during the night. After he had finished prayer, he
turned toward people and said, ‘Do you know what your Lord
has said?” They replied, ‘Allah and His Messenger know best!”
Upon this, he (PBUH) said, (Allah said,) ‘In this morning, some
of My servants remained as true believers and some became hon-
believers’; whoever said, ‘The rain was due to the Blessings and
Mercy of Allah; is a believer in Me and a disbeliever in that star,
and whoever said, “The rain was due to such and such a star’ is ‏و‎
‎disbeliever in Me and a believer in that star!”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim),

Thn ‘Abbas narrated a hadith carrying the same meaning of the previous
hadith, Its last pact reads:

“Some people said, ‘The promise of such-and-such a star has come
true. For this reason, Allah, Exalted be He, revealed the verse
that reads, ‘Then I swear by the setting of the stars, and Indeed,
it is an oath - if you could know - [most] great. Indeed, it is a
noble Qurlan in a Register well-protected; none touch it except
the purified [i.e., the angels). [It is] a revelation from the Lord
of the worlds. Then is it to this statement that you are indifferent
and make [the thanks for] your provision that you deny [the
Provider}?” (Qur’an: Al-Waqi' ah: 75-82)”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Zayd Ibn Khalid: He is a well-known Companion; may Allah be pleased
with him. He belonged to the tribe of Juhaynah and was born in Medina.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Hudaybiyah; It was named afier the name of a well near Mecca, It is
now called Ash-Shimist

246 Concise Commentary on the Book of Ziwbiel

+ Disbelieyer: It refers to a person that has committed minor disbelief.

+ The rain was due to such-and-such a star: It means attributing
rainfall to others besides Allah while believing that the one causing it
to fall is Allah,

+ T swear by: Allah, Exalted be He, swears by whatever He wishes of
His creatures.

« Setting of the stars: This denotes the stars’ positions of rising and
setting according to the majority of exegetes.

General Meaning of the Hadith

The venerable Companion Zayd Ibn Khalid reports the instructions of
the Prophet (PBUH) concerning rainfall, and what a Muslim ought to say on
the occasion of the rainfall. The Prophet (PBUH) relates that when His Lord
tested people through sending down rain to relieve them, they divided into
tWo groups: while some acknowledged the favor of Allah and showed their
gratitude by attributing rainfall to Him Alone, others repudiated His favor
and attributed rainfall to the rising or setting of a particular star. Thereupon,
the reaction of the first group was considered an act of faith, while that of the
second group an act of disbelief.

‎‘Abbas narrated that the above-mentioned verses were revealed to‏ مطل
‎confute the claim of attributing rainfall to stars.‏

‎Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‎This hadith is closely related to the chapter since it indicates the pro-
hibition of attributing rainfall to stars deeming it a kind of disbelief and
a mere lie.

‎Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

‎* It is prohibited to attribute the rainfall to stars. This heinous act is
deemed a kind of disbelief.

‎+ Muslims are duty-bound ‏مز‎ instruct people and forewarn them of
what impairs the purity of faith.

‎% Itis obligatory to express gratitude to Allah for His blessings, and it is
prohibited to attribute those blessings to anyone other than Allah,

Chapter 29: Secking Rainfall by Vireue of the Stars 207

Raising questions to invoke answers is an effective method of teaching
and is thus highly recommended.

4 When a person is asked about ‏ع‎ matter and fails to produce an
effective answer, he has to refer it to the knowledgeable.

© The Ever-Bountiful and the Ever-Merciful are two attributes of Allah.

‘© There are kinds of disbelief that do not drive a Muslim out of the
fold of Islam:

oe

Love for Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And (yet), among the people are those who take other than
Allah as equals (to Him). They love them as they (should) love
Allah. But those who believe are stronger in love for Allah. And
ifonly they who have wronged would consider (that) when they
see the punishment, (they will be certain) that all power belongs
to Allah and that Allah is severe in punishment?”

(Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 165)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

The love for Allah, Exalted be He, is the essence of Islam, When one’s
love for Allah is perfect, one’ faith becomes perfect; and when this love is
blemished, one’s belief in the Oneness of Allah becomes imperfect. Therefore,
the author dedicates this chapter to demonstrating that subject.

250 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

General Meaning of the Quranic Verse

According to this Qur'anic verse, Allah, Exalted be He, informs us of the
state of the polytheists in this world and the punishment that will be inflicted
on them in the Hereafter; they set some of Allah’ creatures up as equals and
counterparts to Him. Besides, the polytheists render love and glorification to
such false deities like those they render to Allah, Moreover, Allah, Glorified be
He, indicates that the believers sincerely love Allah and dedicate all their other
acts of worship to Him.

Lessons Drawn from the Quranic Verse:

+ Whoever renders love to anyone equal to the love he renders to Allah
is regarded to have committed major polytheism.

+> Some polytheists may have a lot of love for Allah. However, their love
for Allah will avail them nothing, unless it is sincerely dedicated to

Him Alone.
See

Chaprer 30: Love for Allah aI

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Say, (O Muhammad), ‘If your fathers, your sons, your brothers,
your wives, your relatives, wealth which you have obtained,
commerce wherein you fear decline, and dwellings with which
you are pleased are more beloved to you than Allah and His
Messenger and jihad [i.e., striving] in His cause, then wait until
Allah executes His command. And Allah does not guide the
defiantly disobedient people?” (Qur'an: At-Tawbah:24)

Note

+ Executes His command: Executes His punishment.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah commands His Prophet (PBUH) to warn those who love the
individuals and objects referred to in the verse more than Allah, His
Messenger and the obligatory deeds that draw Ailah’s love and pleasure
such as Hijrah (Emigration in the cause of Allah), jihad (ie., striving in
Allah's Cause) and suchlike matters. Allah first mentions fathers, then
sons, brothers, friends and so forth, as they are the most beloved to man.
So, whoever claims to love Allah while he makes his love for such things
prior to his love for Allah, is a liar, and thus, will see what chastisement
awaits him in the Hereafter.

Relevance of the Verse to the Chapter

‘This verse involves the obligation of giving priority to the love for Allah
and all that He loves and is satisfied with over lave for anything else.
Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse:

> Loving Allah and all that He likes is an obligation.

Loving the Messenger (PBUH) is an obligation.

‘© Theverse includesa threat to whoever laves the eight things mentioned
in the verse or anything else more than his religion; Islam.

Soe

252 Concise Commentary ‏وه‎ the Book of Tiwhiel

Anas (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (PBUH) said:

“None of you will have (a complete) faith until he loves me more
than his father, his children and all mankind”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

General Meaning of the Hadith

‎this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) states that none will have perfect‏ هل
‎faith, by which he becomes acquitted from responsibility and entitled to enter‏
‎Paradise, unless his love for the Messenger (PBUH) is given priority over his‏
‎love for anyone else even the dearest persons fo him. This is because it is via‏
‎Allah's Messenger that one will achieve eternal bliss in Paradise and through‏
‎his love one will be brought out from deviation to guidance. In addition, loving‏
‎the Prophet (PBUH) entails obeying him, following whatever he commands‏
‎and giving precedence to his instructions over those of others,‏

‎Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‎‘The hadith provides a proof of the obligation of giving priority to one’s
love for the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) over that for anyone else, which is a
requisite for having a perfect belief.

‎‘Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

‎% It is obligatory to love the Prophet (PBUH) and this love should be
given priority over (he love shown to any other creature.

‎© Acts of worship are requisites of true faith. Therefore, since love is
an act of worship done by one's heart, thase to whom the Prophet
(PBUH) is not more beloved than the above-mentioned categories,
will not be regarded as true believers.

‎4 The negation of faith referred to in the hadith does not imply one's
exclusion from the fold of Islam,

‎Sincere and true faith must have its effects on the believer's behavior.

‎bee

Chapter 30: Lave for Allah 253

Anas narrated that Allah's Messenger (PBUH) said:

“Whoever possesses (the following) three qualities will relish the
sweetness of faith: (a) the one to whom Allah and His Messenger
become dearer than anything else; (b) the one who loves a person
‘and he loves him only for the Sake of Allah; and (c) the one who
hates to revert to disbelief, after Allah has saved him from it, as
much as he hates to be thrown into the Hellfire”

‘According to another version, itis stated, “None will relish the sweetness of
faith until...’

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Keywords and Phrases
+ Sweetness of faith: The delight, pleasure and happiness of the heart

+ Dearer than anything else: Dearer than the persons thatone naturally
loves like one’s children, spouse, etc.

+ As muchas he hates: Bath disbeliefand being thrown into the Hellfire
are equal in his sight.
General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) states that the sweetness of faith can
only be relished by thase who have the following three qualities:

1. Giving priority to one’ love for Allah and His Messenger over that for
people dear to him and wealth

2, Loving others due to their belief in Allah and their obedience to Him,
not because of any worldly purpose

3, Having absolute hatred for disbelief to the extent that returning to it is
‘equal in his sight to being thrown in the Hellfire

Whoever is possessed of these characteristics will relish the delight of faith
and thus will enjoy performing the acts of obedience and endure hardships
seeking Allah's satisfaction.

254 ‘Concise Commentary on the Boal of Tawi

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘The hadith indicates the virtue of giving priority to showing love for Allah
and His Prophet (PBUH) over showing it for anyone else.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith
% The hadith indicates virtues of giving priority to one’s love for Allah
and His Messenger Muhammad (PBUH) over anything else.
+ Italso highlights the virtue of showing love for the Sake of Allah.
The true believers sincerely lave Allah, Exalted be He.

+ He who is possessed of those three qualities is better than he who is
not, even if the former was a disbeliever and then embraced Islam or
was a sinner and then repented of his sin.

It is obligatory for Muslims to be averse to disbelief and disbelievers,
for the one who hates something hates whoever is possessed of it

Shs

‎Love fr Allah 255‏ :30 ستمفات

‎Ton ‘Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

‎“Whoever loves for Allah’ Sake and hates for Allah's Sake and
supports for Allah’ Sake and shows enmity for Allaks Sake, will
gain by this Allahs protection. And any servant of Allah will not
‘attain the (real) delight of faith, even though he may perform prayer
and observe fasting much, until he does all this (for Allah’ Sake).
Today, most of the people maintain relationships and love only for
some worldly gain, but this witl avail them nothing (on the Day of
Resurrection).”"

‎(Related by Ibn Jarir)

‎Ibn * Abbis said, concerning Allah's statement, “.. and cut off from themt
are the ties [of relationship)” (Quran: Al-Baqarah; 166) that it refers to
relations of love”.

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎« Love for Allah's Sake: ‘To love the believers because of their faith and
obedience to Allah

‎+ Support for Allah's Sake:'To be anally ofbelievers through supporting
them, respecting them and honoring them

‎« Hate for Allah’s Sake: To hate the disbelievers and the defiantly
disobedient persons due to their disobedience to Allah.

‎+ Showing enmity for Allah's Sake: To show enmity for the disbelievers
through one’ actions such as fighting them and dissociating from them

‎«+ Delight of faith: Relishing and enjoying the delight of faith

‎General Meaning of the Tradition

‎In this tradition, Tbn * Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) sheds light
on the means entailing Allah’ support and love for His servant. These means
lie in the servant's love for Allah’s intimate friends, and hatred for His enemies.
Such love and hatred are to be translated into action by supporting the true
believers and dissociating from the disbelievers and fighting them. Moreover,
Ton “Abbas states that whoever is not possessed of these qualities will not
relish the delight of faith even though he observes many acts of worship.

256 Concise Commentary on the Book of Zawbid

Furthermore, fbn “Abbas states that people deviated from such an upright
code of conduct during his age, as people used to love and hate for worldly
gains. He, further, stresses that the non-adherence to such an upright code of
conduct does not benefit those people; rather it causes them harm.

Tbn ‘Abbass comment on the Quranic verse that reads, “..and cut off
‘from them are the ties fof relationship)” (Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 166) signifies
that the relations of love that people have in this world for worldly gains will
be of no avail on the Day of Resurrection, while they will be in dire need of the
reward of such relations. This is due to the fact that people of such a class will
disassociate from each other, as their relations of love in the worldly life are
not for the Sake of Allah.

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

‘This tradition indicates that attaining Allah’ love and protection is contin-
gent on two elements:

1-To love Allah's intimate friends and hate His enemies from the deep
recesses of one’s heart

2-To show love for Allahis intimate Friends through advocating them, and
to show enmity for Allah's enemies through striving against them

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition:

% The tradition demonstrates the means by which one attains Allah's
love, protection and support.

4 It, further, proves the permissibility of characterizing Allah as having
the attribute of love in a way appropriate for His Majesty.

4 Ttalso states the desirability and virtue of loving the righteous persons
for Allah's Sake and hating Allah's enemies for Allah's Sake. These
two prerequisites cannot be dispensed with, even if one does good and
righteous deeds.

Iisa religious obligation to support the believers and to show enmity
for the disbelievers and strive against them.

© Those who love for Allah's Sake and hate for Allah's Sake will relish
the delight of faith.

*> The tradition dispraises loving some people and showing enmity to
others for the sake of worldly gains, which conduces to bad canse-
quences in the Hereafter,

Chapree 30: Love fir Allah 257

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhari (16) and Muslim (43).

2 Ibnul-Mubarak in his book entitled Az-Zuhd (Austerity) (353)

3 Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak (2/272) grading it sath and Adh-Dhahabi
agreed to his grading.

3

Fear of Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“That is only Satan who frightens (you) of his supporters. So fear
them not, but fear Me, if you are [indeed] believers.”

(Quran: Alu ‘Imran: 175)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

‘To fear Allah ‏كذ‎ one of the most comprehensive acts of worship, which must
be exclusively devoted to Him. Therefore, the author dedicates this chapter to
tackling this subject.

260 Concise Cannientary om the Book of Tiuwhld

Keywords and Phrases

+ Satan who frightens (you) of his supporters: Satan gives false
impression to Muslims that his supporters are of great power so that
Maslims may fear them

+ Fear Me; Do not disobey Me.
+ If you are [indeed] believers: Allah asserts the necessity of having
true belief because faith entails fearing Allah more than anyone else.

General Meaning of the Qur'anic Verse

In this verse, Allah, Exalted be He, states that Satan aims at making the
believers afraid of his allies and supporters, so that the believers may not fight
them nor command them to do good and forbid them to commit evil. Besides,
Allah forbids us to fear them and commands us to fear Him Alone, for this is
‘a requisite of true faith. The more the servant's faith gets stronger, the less he
fears Satan's supporters and vice versa,

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse:

“ Fearing is an act of worship and thus it must be solely devoted to Allah.

Expressing fear of anything other than Allah entails polytheism such
‘as fearing that-an idol or {aghiit (i.e. an aggressor) may cause harm,

+ Muslims are warned against Satan's plot.

She

(Chapter 31: Fear of Allah 261

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And of the people are some who say, ‘We believe in Allal; but
when one [of them] is harmed for (the cause of) Allah, they
consider the trial (i.e.,, harm) of the people as (if it were) the
punishment of Allah. But if victory comes from your Lord, they
say, ‘Indeed, we were with you: Is not Allah most knowing of
what is within the breasts of the worlds (i.e., all creatures)?”

(Qur'an: Al Ankabits10)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Who say, ‘We believe in Allah’; They claim to have faith, but only
by word,

+ But when one [of them] is harmed for (the cause of) Allah: When
one of those people is harmed because of his adherence to Islam.

+ They consider the trial (i,e., harm) of the people as (if it were)
the punishment of Allah: That person who is harmed by people
because of his adherence to Islam, considers such a harm as severe
as the punishment that will be inflicted on him by Allah due to
renouncing the religion. Regrettably, his wrong thought leads him
to escape from suffering the harm caused to him by humans to face
Allab’s punishment that will be inflicted on him because of apostasy.

+ We were with you: We are believers and we have supported you, so let
ug share with you the spoils of war.

+ Is not Allah most knowing of what is within the breasts of the

worlds: Allah, Exalted be He, surely, knows everything about people;
whether they are true believers or hypocrites.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this verse, Allah, Exalted he He, informs-us of a class of people who
adopt the religion of Islam without seeking the religious knowledge that
provides them with firm belief. Once any one of such a class is subjected
to such afflictions as those which usually harm the Messengers and their
followers at the hands of their opponents, he abandons his faith and compares

62 Coneise Commentary ou the Book of Tawhlat

this temporary punishment of man (o the eternal punishment of Allah from
which the believers strive to flee. Accordingly, such a person flees from the
torture received at the hands of the foes of God by renouncing his religion.
He is thus similar to the one who flees from the excessive heat and seeks
refuge in the fire. When Allah grants victory to His true believers, such a
person would say, “I took part in the battle’; ‏كذ‎ let me take my share of the
spoils of war, At the end of the verse, Allah enunciates that He is All-Knowing
of such hypocrisy.

Relevance of the Verse to the Chapter

The verse indicates that fearing the harm that one may receive at the hands
of people due to one’ belief in Allah isa kind of fearing others besides Allah,
which conduces to the weakness of one’s faith.

Lessons Drawn from the Verse

+ Fearing the harm that one may receive at the hands of people is
considered a fear of athers besides Allah.

‎It is obligatory for one to endure harm for the sake of Allah.‏ جد

‎+ The-verse highlights the weakness of the hypocrites’ will and deter-
mination.

‎4 The verse proves that Allah is All-Knowing.

‏ننها

Chapter 31= Feat of Allah 263

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“The mosques of Allah are only to be maintained by those who
believe in Allah and the Last Day and establish prayer and give
Zakéh and do not fear except Allah, for it is expected that those
will be of the (rightly) guided” (Quin: At-Tawbah: 18)

Keywords and Phrases.

+ The mosques of Allah are only to be maintained: The mosques
are maintained through worship and obedience to Allah.

+ Those who believe in Allah; Those who show their true belief by
both their hearts and deeds.

+ Do not fear except Allah: The word 'fear' refers to the fear implying
glorification, adoration and obedience, as no one can avoid the natural
fear such as fearing the worldly afflictions, Eyen in these matters
Muslims have to fear only Allah's Divine Decree and the course of
events He arranged.

+ For it is expected that: Expectation here refers to certainty.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Inthe Qur’anic verse mentioned right before the verse under discussion,
Allah, Exalted be He, disproves the polytheists’ moral maintenance of the
mosques, which lies in performing the acts of worship there. In this verse,
Allah proves that the mosques are maintained through the acts of worship
performed by the believers, who sincerely believe in Allah and put their
beliefs into practice. Those believers persist in performing prayers and
observing its pillars, duties and supererogatory acts, Besides, they pay the
Zakéh to the legal recipients, and express their sincere fear and adoration
to none but Allah.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‘This verse signifies the obligation of devoting fear, which is the essence of
worship, to Allah Alone.

264 Ganeise Commentary on the Book af Tawhid

Lessons Drawn from the Verse:
© Itis obligatory to express one's sincere fear to Allah Alone,
4 The polytheists’ good deeds avail them nothing in the Hereafter.

4 Mosques are maintained through obedience to Allah and good deeds,
not merely through construction,

This verse urges Muslims to maintain mosques both physically

and morally.
ets

‎Fear of Allah 265‏ :31 جومت

‎Abii Sa’ id (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated, in a marfit' hadith:

‎“A sign of lacking certainty of Faith is that you seek to satisfy
people at the expense of Allah: Wrath, and to praise them for the
sustenance provided by Allah, and to dispraise them for what Allah
did not grant you. The sustenance provided by Allah is not brought
to one because of a desire of anyone, nor is it prevented because of
someone’ dislike,”

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎» Certainty of Faith: Perfect belief in Allah

‎+ Satisfy people at the expense of Allah’s wrath: To prefer the
satisfaction of people to that of Allah.

‎+ Praise them for the sustenance provided by Allah: To attribute the
divine provision to some people whom Allah made as intermediaries,
forgetting about the Benefactor and Bestower.

‎= To dispraise them for what Allah did not grant you: That is,
dispraising people because of withholding what one asks them for.

‎General Meaning of the Hadith

‎In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) illustrates that Muslims should have
strong trustin Allah, rely on Him and believe that all matters go according to His
‘Will and Disposition, Muslims should also believe that Allah decrees whatever
results He wills for any causes taken so that they meet the required purpose.
Likewise, If Allah wills, he may withhold the causes from leading to results, In
other words, all matters are dependent upon Allalis Will. As such, He is the
only One worthy of praise in prosperity and adversity, Actually, praising Allah
at the time of adversity is the highest degree of certainty of faith. Some people
become heartily attached to the means owned by wealthy and powerful humans,
so that if they gain some benefits through people they praise them, and if people
withhold those benefits, they dispraise and blame them. Such a class of people
Jack certainty of faith and their reliance on Allah is impaired. Then, the Prophet
(PBUH) ends up his words by stressing what he has said at the beginning; that
Allah is the Only One Who gives and withholds according to His own Will and
Wisdom, regardless of the servants’ desires or detestations.

266 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘The hadith in question stresses the obligation of keeping one's heart
solely attached to Allah as regards drawing the good and repelling the evil. It,
further, highlights the obligation of having fear of Allah Alone. Moreover, it
proves the prohibition of praising or dispraising humans in return for what is
granted or withheld.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

+ [tis obligatory to rely on Allah Alone, fear Him and ask Him for provision.
+ The hadith isa proof of Allah’ Decree and Destiny.

# It is prohibited to attach one's heart to means,

>< Muslims are duty bound to prefer Allah's satisfaction to that of

His creatures.
‏نقفا‎

‘Chapter 31: Fear of Allah 267

*Kishah (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated:

“I heard the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) saying, ‘If anyone seeks
Allah satisfaction at the expense of peoples anger, Allah will be
pleased with him and will cause people to be pleased with him.
However, if anyone seeks people’s satisfaction at the expense of
Allah's anger, Allah will be angry with him and will cause people to
be angry with him.”

(Related by Ibn Hibban in his Authentic Book)

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) shows the way by which one may
attain the satisfaction of Allah and people as well as the way by which one
may incur the dissatisfaction of Allah and people. Allah always decrees
what is good for His creation, and people definitely gain this good, sooner
or later. However, the demands and desires of people may contradict
what Allah has ordained for their instant or late benefit, for they do not
know the consequences of their deeds and are influenced only by worldly
factors. Hereby, the stance of the true believers becomes distinct from that
of the ones whose belief is shaky; a true believer gives priority to Allah's
satisfaction aver that of people, and thus persists in acting upon Allah's Law
not fearing the blame of a critic. As a result of such a believer's keenness on
pleasing Allah, Allah constantly grants him victory over his opponents, as
He, Exalted be He says:

‎whoever fears Allah - He will make for him a way out.”‏ قوف"
‎(Quen: At-Talag: 2)‏

‎However, a Muslim of shaky belief prefers seeking the satisfaction of
people to seeking that of Allah, and thus seeks fulfilling people’ desires even if
they are contrary to Allah’s directives. In fact, such a person fears people more
than he fears Allah. Since this is his objective which motivates his actions,
he will be given the contrary of what he willed, Therefore, those who praise
him will turn to dispraise him, and those people will avail him nothing before
Allah, Hence, that person harms himself and those whom he wants to benefit
through disobeying Allah.

268 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tashi

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

The hadith indicates the obligation of fearing Allah and making His
satisfaction prior to that of the creatures,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

© Itis obligatory to fear Allah and make His satisfaction prior to that of
creatures.

# The fiadith demonstrates the punishment inflicted on whoever prefers
peoples satisfaction to Allahis satisfaction.

> Relying on Allah and trusting Him are obligatory,

4 The hadith demonstrates the pleasant results of giving preference to
Allahis satisfaction, and the bad consequences of giving preference to
people's satisfaction.

> The servants’ hearts are absolutely controlled by Allah.

Endnotes

1 AbO Nuvaym in his collection entitled Al-Hilyth (The Ornament) (5/106), (10, 41)
and Al-Bayhadl in Shu ‘ab Al-fmian (Branches of Faith) (203). At-Tabartnl related the
‘same hadith as narrated by "Abdullah Ibn Mas” Od ascribing ‏ها عد‎ the Prophet (PBUH).
See his collection of Hadith entitled Al-Mu“jam Al-Kabir (10/215 ~ 216 No. 10514).
However, Al-Haythami said in Majma” Az-Zawaid (4/70); “Khélid Ihn ‏لتعملا‎ Al-
"Umar, wha is accused of fabricating hadiths, is one of the transmitters of this narration
of the hadith?

2 bn Hibban in Mawdirid Az-Zamin (Fountains of the Thirsty) (154), 1542) and ‏يه‎

Reliance on Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“..and upon Allah rely, if you should be believers.”
(Quran: Al-Maidah: 23)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In this chapter, the author asserts that sincere reliance is a religious
obligation which must be solely directed to Allah, as it is one of the best
devotional acts, and one of the highest degrees of monotheism.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this verse, Allah, Exalted be He, states that Moses ordered his people to
enter the Holy Land of Jerusalem which Allah had allotted to them, and not

270 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawwhid

to turn in flight for fear of the giant people who dwelt therein, Moses, further,
urged them to go forward without fearing their enemies, and to rely on Allah
in their pursuit of defeating them, and to trust the promise of Allah if they
should be believers,

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

% Relying on Allah is a devotional act. Muslims are, thus, duty bound to
rely solely on Allah, Glorified be He. as relying on others besides Him
is deemed an act of polytheism

4 Relying on Allah isa prerequisite for the validity of one's faith; once
a person relies on anyone other than Allah, his faith becomes null

and void.
$30

Chapter 32: Reliance on Allah a7

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“The believers are only those who, when Allah is mentioned,
their hearts become fearful, and when His verses are recited to
them, it increases them in faith; and upon their Lord they rely.”

(Quran: Al-Anfal: 2)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Upon their Lord : Only on their Lord and no one else

«They tely: They resign themselves to Allah's Will, fear Him alone, and
inyoke none but Him.

General Meaning of the Verse

Allah, Exalted be He, describes the true believers as having three great
characteristics; they are as follows:

1) When Allah is mentioned, they get fearful, and thus comply with His

directives and refrain from what He prohibits.
2) Their faith increases when they listen to the recitation of the Noble
Quran,

3) They resign themselves ta Allah’s will, and rely on Him alone.
Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‘This verse indicates that reliance ‏مه‎ Allah is a typical characteristic of the
true believers.

Lessons Drawn from the Verse

+ A Muslim has a legal obligation (o rely on Allah as one of the typical
characteristics of the true believers

% One's faith may increase or decrease; it increases thanks to one's
obedience to Allah and decreases as a result of one's sins.

© Faith in Allah necessitates reliance on Him alone.
>< Submission and humility to Allah are two of the typical characteristics

of the true believers.

272 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tinwhid

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“O Prophet, sufficient for you is Allah and for whoever follows
‘you of the believers.” (Quran: Al-Anfal: 64)

And Hesays:

“And whoever relies upon Allah, then He is sufficient for hilt
(Qur'an; AtTalag: 3)

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verses

In these two verses, Allah, Exalted be He, informs Prophet Muhammad
(PBUH) and his nation that He is sufficient for them asa Supporter and
Protector, and thus, they are in no need of help from athers. Therefore, the
believers should rely only on Allah and seek only His bounty. Further, Allah
has set a reward for each good deed, Consequently, He grants His support as a
reward for whoever relies solely on Him, so no enemy can ever harm him.

Relevance of the Verses to the Chapter

The two verses prove the obligation of relying on Allah, as He is sufficient
for whoever puts his trust in Him.

Lessons Drawn from the Verses:
Reliance on Allah is obligatory as it is one of the greatest acts
of worship.

‎The two verses show the yirtue of relying on All2h and the benefit‏ يي
‎reaped from it, and that reliance on Allah is one of the major reasons‏
‎for drawing benefit and repelling harm.‏

‎One is always given reward according to one's deeds

‎abe

Chapret 32: Reliance on Allah

Ibn ‘Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“(The statement), ‘Allah is Sufficient for us and He is the Best
Disposer of affairs’ was said by Abraham when he was thrown
into the fire; and it was said by Muhammad when they (ie.
hypocrites) said, “Indeed, the people have gathered against you,
so fear them,’ But it [merely] increased them in faith, and they
said, ‘Sufficient for us is Allah, and (He is] the best Disposer of
affairs! (Qur'an: Alu ‘Imran: 173)""

(Related by Al-Bukhari and An-Nasii)

General Meaning of the Tradition

In this tradition, “Abdullah Ibn "Abbas (may Allah be pleased with
him) narrates that the great statement, “Allah is Sufficient for us and
He is the Best Disposer of affairs” was pronounced by the two friends of
Allah, Abraham and Muhammad (peace be upon them both); they faced
two critical situations in the course of preaching to their peoples. When
Abraham called his people to worship Allah, they refused, so he demolished
their idols. Upon that, his people decided to take revenge on him in support
of their idols. So, they collected firewood and kindled a big fire and threw
him by a mangonel to the center of that fire where he uttered the afore-
mentioned great statement. Consequently, Allah commanded the fire
saying, “..be coolness and peace for Abraham.” (Qur'an: Al-Anbiy’’: 69)
Likewise, when Quraysh sent messages threatening Muhammad (PBUH)
and Muslims that they had mobilized a great army in order to annihilate
them, he (PBUH) said this great statement ‘Allah is Sufficient for us and
He is the Best Disposer of affairs: In return for that Allah said, "So they
returned with grace and favor from Allah, and no harm touched them...”
(Qur'an: Alu “Imran: 174)

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

In this tradition, the great statement pronounced by the two Prophets
teaches us how to resign oneself to Allah and rely solely upon Him. Thus,
Muslims should repeat that statement at hard times. This statement
signifies the necessity of reliance upon Allah in repelling the enemies’
machinations.

274 Concise Commentary on the Book of Jewbid

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

% The tradition stresses the virtue of the statement, “Allah és Sufficient
‘for us, and He is the Best Disposer (of affairs, for us)” which Muslims
should utter at hard times.

% Italso highlights the fact that reliance upon Allah is one of the major
reasons of drawing benefit and repelling evil both in this worldly life
and in the Hereafter.

% One's faith may increase or decrease; it increases thanks to the
obedience to Allah and decreases as a result of sins.

% It may happen that man hates a thing which is good for him.

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukbari (4563 and 4564),

Feeling Secure from the Plan of Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Then, did they feel secure from the plan of Allah? But no one
{feels secure from the plan of Allah except the losing people.”
(Quran: Al-A‘raf: 99)

And He says:
“He said, ‘And who despairs of the mercy of his Lord except for
those astray?” (Qur'an: Al-Hijr: 56)

Relevance of Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In this chapter, the author elaborates on that security from the plan of Allah
and despair of His mercy are two of the most deadly sins, since each of them
violates the perfection of monotheism. Besides, the author points out that a
believer is duty bound to combine fear and hope in his relation to Allah.

276 Goiscige Commentary on the Book of Tauhidd

Keywords and Phrases

+ Plan of Allah: This refers to Allah's bestowal of graces on those wha
disobey him; he also prolongs their lifespan, then He, Exalted and
Glorified be He, pronounces a decree of eternal damnation on them.

+ Losing people: Those perishing themselves by committing sins.

General Meaning of the Two Qur’anic Verses

Allah, Exalted be He, portrays the states of the people of the towns who
denied the Messengers. Depicting that the reason why they did that was that
they felt secure from being gradually drawn into eternal damnation by Allah,
and did not fear Him. Thus, they went too far in their disobedience to Him
and did not expect any punishment from Him. This is exactly the state of thase
who are predestined to damnation,

In the second verse, Allah relates the story of His intimate Prophet
Abraham (PBUH) when the angels brought him good tidings that his wife
would give birth to Prophet Isaac (PBUH). Abraham (PBUH) thought that
it was impossible for him to have a son due ‏ذا‎ his old age, and thus the
angels said to him, “,. so do not be of the despairing.” (Qur'an: Al-Hijr: 55)
Abraham replied that he was not of the desperate, and asserted that he was
only astonished by the good tidings,

Lessons Drawn from the Two Qur’anic Verses

‘& The first verse implies an admonition against feeling secure from the
plan of Allah and, further, deems it a major sin.

4 The second verse implies an admonition against despairing of the
mercy of Allah and, further, deems it a major sin.

> The two verses point out that a believer is duty bound ‏ها‎ equally
combine fear and hope in worshipping Allah. Thus, one should not
depend only on hope so as not to feel secure from the plan of Allah,
nor should he only fear Allah till he despairs of His mercy,

4 Fear and hope are two devotional acts of the heart which a believer
must purely dedicate to Allah, Who has no partner.

ooo

Chapter 33: Feeling Sceure for the Plan of Allsh 27

Ibn ‘Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) was asked about the major sins
so he said, (They are) Associating others in worship with Allah,
despairing of relief from Allah, and feeling secure from the plan of
Allah?”

Ibn Mas’ ad (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“The major sins are associating others in worship with Allah, feeling
secure from the plan of Allah, despairing of the mercy of Allah and
despairing of relief from Allah.”

(Related by * Abdur-Raziq)

Keywords and Phrases

+ A majot sin: Itis the sin if committed Allah prescribes penalty in this
life for the doer, or threatens to cast him into the Hellfire, or to inflict
His Curse or His Wrath on him, or declares him to be bereft of sincere’
faith in Him.

+ The plan of Allah: His scheme is to gradually draw the disobedient
into eternal damnation, or for Allah to deprive him of the faith granted
two him before.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) highlights some of the major sins
as follows:

Firstly, 16 associate others with Allah in His rubibiyyah (lordship) or His
‘wlahiyyiah (divinity), This sin is mentioned firstas itis the most deadly sin.

Secondly, to despair of the mercy and relief of Allah, as it is an act of
mistrust in Allah and ignorance of His great mercy that embraces all things.

Thirdly, to feel secure from the plan of Allah; in this case the person is
bestowed Allah’ favors, then Allah suddenly overtakes him by pronouncing a
decree of eternal damnation on him,

‘This hadith does not mention all major sins, for they are so many. It rather

points out the most deadly ‏كد كاك‎ hn Mas' ‏قن‎ stated in the tradition mentioned
right after the hadith under discussion.

278 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhidd

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith indicates that feeling secure from the plan of Allah and despair-
ing of His mercy are of the major sins.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

+ It is prohibited to feel secure from Allah's Plan and despair of His
Mercy, These two sins are of the most deadly ones, the first of which
is committed by the Al-Murjiah’ whereas the latter is committed by
the Kharijites’.

© Ascribing partners to Allah is the most deadly sin.

% A Muslim is to be in a moderate state between fearing Allch and
hoping for His Mercy. He, thus, should fear Allah without despair
of His Mercy, and hope in His Mercy without feeling secure from
Allah's plan,

Endnotes

| Al-Haythamt said in Majma’ Az-Zawalid (1/104), “This hadith is related by Al-
Bazzar and At-Tabaréni, and its transmitters are judged trustworthy”

2"Abdur-Razzaq in his collection of hadith (0/459) No. (19701) and At-Tabarant in Al-
‘Mo jam Al-Kabir (9/156 No. 8784), Al-Haythramit said in his Majma" Az-Zawé (1/104),
“This hadith is related by At-Tabarint with an authentic chain of transmitters"

3 Al-Murjiah isan Islamic sect which holds the belief that sins do nat harm believers and
good deeds do not benefit disbelievers, They refer the case of those who commit major

4 The Kharijites (Al-Khawérij, i. the Seceders): An Islamic radical sect that broke away
from the reign of ‘AliTbn Abd Talib, the Muslim Caliph then, and murdered hiem, Their
followers believe that the Muslim whe commits a major sin isa disbeliever, They also
curse and revile the Prophets Companions and deem the blood of Muslims violabe,

Faith and Patience with
the Decree of Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“,.And whoever believes in Allah - He will guide his heart...”
(Qur'an: At-Taghabun: 11)
*Algamah says:

“This verse describes the man who, when afflicted with a tribulation,
believes it to be predestined by Allah, and thus gets satisfied and
resigns himself to Allak’s Will.”

280 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tizwhitd

‘Algamah (the Narrator)

His full name is ‘Algamah Ibn Qays Ibn ‘ Abdullah Ibn ' Alqamah. He was
born in the lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH), and was one of the great trustwor-
thy scholars from among the Successors of the Companions. He died after 60
AH; may Allah have merey on him.

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In this chapter, the author highlights the obligation of showing patience
with the Decree of Allah, and the prohibition of being discontented with it, as
such discontent violates the perfection of one’ faith.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Faith: Pronouncing one’s faith in Allah with one tongue, holding it in
one’s heart, and translating it into practice with one’s bodily organs.

+ Patience: Withholding oneself ftom discontent with Allahis Dectee,
and curbing one’s tongue from complaining or showing dissatisfaction
as well as withholding oneself from slapping one’ cheeks and/or
tearing one’s clothes when afflicted with a tribulation,

+ Whoever believes in Allah: Whoever believes that the tribulation he
is afflicted with is predestined by Allah, and thus says, “To Allah we
belong, and to Him is our return”

+ Guide his heart: Allah guides the heart of the believer afflicted with
a tribulation to be patient.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this verse, Allah, Exalted be He, states that if the person afflicted
with a tribulation accepts his fate with patience and hopes for Divine
reward, believing that it is the Decree of Allah, Allah will guide his heart and
compensate him for any worldly loss. Moreover, Allah may grant him better
than that which has been taken from him.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

This verse provides a clear proof of the merits of being patient with the
painful tribulations predestined by Allah,

(Chapter 34: Faith and Patience with the Decree of Allah 281

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

There are great merits for keeping patient when afflicted with the
painful tribulations which are predestined by Allah.

* Deed is one of the constituents of faith:

Showing patience at hard times isa means of having one's heart guided
by Allah,

* Guidance is one of the rewards that Allah grants in return for patience:

aad

282 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tauhiat
‘Abii Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah (PBUH) said:

“Two (things) are found among nien which are tantamount to
unbelief slandering others’ lineages and wailing over the deceased."

(Related by Muslim)!

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) stresses that two characteristics
tantamount to unbelief will incessantly be typical of people; namely slandering
others’ lineages and wailing over afflictions as a sign of discontent with the
Divine Decree, No one will be protected against these two sins except with the
help of Allah, However, if a Muslim does an act tantamount to unbelief, he is
not considered a disbeliever as long as he does not do an act of real disbelief.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith provides a clear proof of the prohibition of wailing over the
deceased, as it is a sign of impatience and discontent with one’s fate,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% It is prohibited to wail over the deceased, for this is a characteristic
tantamount to disbelief and is deemed a major sin,

% It is obligatory for the Muslim to be patient with tribulations, as the
prohibition of wailing over the deceased implies the obligation of patience.

‎Some acts of disbelief do not entail one's exclusion of the fold of Islam.‏ ف

‎% Itis prohibited to stander others’ lineages,

‎aad

(Chapter 34: Faith and Patience with the Decree of Allah 283

Tbn Mas’ Ad (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah (PBUH) said:

“Hie is not one of us (Muslims) who slaps his cheeks, tears his clathes
and follows the ways and traditions of the pre-Islamic period of
ignorance.”

Keywords and Phrases

+ Not one of us: This phrase isa kind of threat and it does not mean that
the person, who slaps his cheeks, tears his clothes and follows the ways
and traditions of the pre-Islamic period of ignorance, is a disbeliever.

+ The ways and traditions of the pre-Islamic period of igno-
rance: This phrase refers to wailing aver the deceased, and invoking
for one’s destruction,

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) threatens those who commit any of
the aforementioned sins with dire consequences. This is because doing those
acts involve the following harms: Firstly, those acts reflect one’s impatience
and discontentment with Divine Decree, Secondly, one is harmed by slapping
one’s cheeks. Thirdly, one’s belongings are damaged by tearing one’ clothes.
Fourthly, one curses oneself, and finally, committing any of these offenses
implies a complaint against Allah, Exalted be He.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith provides a proof of the prohibition of showing discontent with
the Decree of Allah whether by words or deeds, It, Further, proves that such a
practice is one of the major sins.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4% It is prohibited to show discontent with the Decree of Allah whether by
words or actions. Such a practice is deemed one of the major sins.

+ It is obligatory for one to keep patient when afflicted with tribulations.

4 Muslims are duty bound not ta imitate the practices of the pre-Islamic
period of ignorance, as contradicting the people of that period is an
objective prescribed by the All-Wise Lawgiver.

ie

284 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tewhid

Anas (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Messenger of
Allah (PBUH) said:

“Great affliction entails great reward (from Allah); and if Allah;
Exalted be He, loves a group of people, He tests (afflicts) them:
whoever is satisfied will be deserving of satisfaction (from Allah),
and whoever is dissatisfied will be deserving of (Allah’s) wrath.”

{At-Tirmidhi graded it a hasan hadith.)

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) states that a Muslim reaps a great
reward from Allah for the great afflictions he suffers if he keeps patient and
hopes for Allat’s reward. Furthermore, the Prophet (PBUH) emphasizes that
when Allah tries His servant with affliction, it is a sign that Allah loves him.
‘Thus, if the Muslim trusts Allah and shows satisfaction with His decree in
the hope for His reward, he will be deserving of satisfaction and reward from
Allah. But if he gets dissatisfied and impatient with the Divine Decree, he will
be deserving of Allah's wrath and punishment.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith shows a sign of Allah's love for His servant, and explains Allah's
wisdom behind trying His servant with afflictions.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

+ Affliction isa sign of Allah's love for His servant,

4 The kind of love, satisfaction and dissatisfaction attributed to Allah
suits His Majesty and is different from that ascribed to man.

4 The hadith proves that Allah is All-Wi
4 Rewards are always proportionate to deeds.

in His actions.

+ Muslims are urged to be patient with afflictions.
4 Man may hate what fs good for him.

$5

and Patience with the Decree of Alu 285

Chaprer 34: Fai

‘The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said

“When Allah wants ‏ها‎ do good for His servant, He gives him
punishment (for the sins he commits) beforehand in this world:
but when He wants to cause evil fo His servant, He suspends
‘punishing him for his sins util he comes with his sins on the Day of
Resurrection. (to receive a requital proportionate to his deeds.)”"

Since this hadith and the previous one are related by At-Tirmidht with the
same chain of transmitters and the same Companion (narrator), the author of
the book tackles them as one hadith.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Gives him punishment beforehand in this world: Allah inflicts
sufferings on His servant because of his sins, so that he departs this
life without any sins.

+ Until he comes with his sins on the Day of Resurrection (to
receive a requital proportionate to his deeds): Disobedient
servants of Allah whom Allah wants to cause evil will come on the
day of Resurrection with all his sins ‏مذ‎ order to be afflicted with the
punishment he deserves.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) states that one of the signs indicating
that Allah wants to do good for His servant ‏عل‎ to punish him in this world
for his sins, Once a servant receives that worldly punistiment, he departs this
life without any sins to be questioned about on the Day of Resurrection, In
addition, whoever is punished in this world, will receive an easy reckoning in
the Hereafter. If Allah does not punish his servant in this world for his sins, it
is a sign that Allah intends evil for him on the Day of Judgment. Consequently,
on the Day of Judgment, such a servant will receivea punishment proportionate
tohis deeds.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith urges Muslims to be patient with afflictions and content with
the Divine Decree as these manners draw all good for them.

286 Concise Commentary on the Boole of Taxuhiad

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Among the signs that indicate Allah's intention to do good for His
servant is to inflict sufferings on him in this world ‏هكد‎ penance for
his sins.

4 One of the signs that Allah intends evil for His servant is that He does
not punish him for his evil deeds in this world until he comes with his

sins on the Day of Resurrection to receive a punishment proportionate
to his deeds.

>< A Muslim is to fear when being continuously well lest it may be a sign
that Allah intends evil for him.

‘* When a Muslim is in distress, he is admonished to think well of Allah
and hope for his reward.

> Itmay happen that man hates thing which is good for him or loves a
thing which is evil for him.

Muslims are urged to be patient with afflictions,

Endnotes

1 Muslim (67).
2 AL-Bukhdri (1294) and Muslim (103),

3 At-Tirmidht (2398) and Iba Majah (4021),

4 At-Tirmidhi (2398), Abmad (4/87), and Al-Hakim (1/349),

3

Showing off

Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“Say, ‘Lam only a man like you, to whom has been revealed that
your god is one God. So whoever would hope for the meeting

with his Lord - let him do righteous work and not associate in
the worship of his Lord anyone?” (Qur'an: Al-Kahf: 110)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Since showing off violates the prerequisites of monotheism and renders
‘one’s good deeds null and void, the author intends, in this chapter, to admonish

Muslims against it.

284 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwihid

Keywords and Phrases

«Say : Allah addresses a command to the Prophet (PBUH) to speak to people.

+ A man like you: Nota god or a supernatural creature

+ Hope for the meeting with his Lord: Fear the Day of Resurrection
and long for seeing Allah on the Day of Resurrection,

+ Righteous work: Good deeds that are sincerely devoted to Allah and
meeting the rules of the Shari'ah (Islamic Law),

+ Not associate in the worship of his Lord anyone: To keep away
from showing off and devote Sharf ah-based deeds only to Allah.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this verse, Allah, Exalted be He, commands His Prophet (PBUH) to
inform people that he isan ordinary man justlike them, not possessed of any of
theattributes of Lordship or Divinity, Rather the Prophet Muhammad's mission
‘was to convey to people what Allah revealed to him, The most significant of the
revelation inspired to him is that Allah is the only One deserving of worship,
and that one is prohibited to associate anyone with Him in worship. People
will inevitably return to Allah on the Day of Resurrection, Therefore, whoever
hopes for salvation on that day, must persevere in doing good deeds which are
in accordance with the Shari'ah and solely devoted to Allah.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

This verse implies a command from Allah to His servant to be sincere in
his worship to Allah. Sincerity in one’s worship entails avoiding showing off
which is an act of polytheism,

Lessons Drawn from the Verse
5 The essenice of religion is to dedicate one's worship only to Allah.
% Showing off in worship is a kind of polytheism.
4 The polytheists commit polytheism with regard to the matters of worship.

% People are prohibited to worship others along with Allah, whether
idols, prophets, righteous people or any others.

Sie

(Chapter 35: Showing ofF 289

‘Abi Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrates that the Messenger
of Allah (PBUH) said:

“Allah, Blessed and Exaited be He, said, ‘Lam the One Who never be
in need of a.partner. if anyone does anything in which he associates
anyone else with Me, I shall abandon him to the one whom he
associates with Me.”

(Related by Muslim)

Keywords and Phrases

« Associates anyone else with Me: Intending to direct one’s work for
deities other than Allah.

٠ 1 shall abandon to the one whom he associates with Me: Allah
will not accept his work, and will abandon him to his false deity.

General Meaning of the Hadith

This is a qudsi (Divine) hadith as the Prophet (PBUH) conveys the Words
of Allah, Almighty and Ever-Majestic be He. The Prophet (PBUH) narrates
that Allah rejects any work intended for others besides Him through showing
offor the like, Indeed, Allah accepts only the work devoted entirely to Him.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter
This hadith indicates that Allah rejects any work intended for showing off
or is impaired by any other act of polytheism,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Muslims are warned not to approach any act of polytheism as it causes
the work to be rejected by Allah.

4 The obligation of having one's work sincerely dedicated to Allah, and
purely free of any type of polytheism

+ This hadith proves that Allah is the Self Sufficient.
% Italso provides a proof that Allah is possessed of speech,

Soe

290 Concise Commentaty on the Book of Tawwhid

‘Abii Said (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘Shall I tell you what I fear
for you more than Antichrist?’ They (the Companions) said, ‘Yes, 0
Messenger of Allah!" He said, ‘(It is) the hidden polytheism, that is,
«person stands in prayer and on seeing someone looking at him, he
tries to beautify his prayer?”

(Related by Ahmad)

‘Keywords and Phrases

+ Antichrist: The one who will cause the greatest ‏امداق‎ (trial) a short
time before the Day of Resurrection,

« Hidden polytheism: The modifier ‘hidden’ is inserted before the
word ‘polytheism’ as one's work appears to be devoted to Allah though
it is intended for deities other than Him.

+ Beautify his prayer: To make it longer and perform it perfectly.

General Meaning of the Hadith

While the Companions were talking about the fitnah (trial) of the An
tichrist expressing their fears from that event, the Prophet (PBUH) joined
them. Commenting on the topic under discussion, he (PBUH) informed
them that there was a matter he feared for them more than the Antichrist;
namely ascribing partners to Allah when making one’ intention which is
invisible to people, Then he (PBUH) explained that this type of polythei
represented in one’s interest in attracting people's admiration by beautifying
one’s work, which is supposedly intended for the sake of Allah,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith implies an explanation of the act of showing off and an
admonition against approaching it.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

* The hadith shows the Prophets pity for his nation and his concern to
advise them.

Chapter 35: Showing of 201

+ Showing off is more dangerous to the righteous people than the fitnah
(trial) of Antichrist.

‘Muslims are to be cautious of falling into showing off or any other kind of
polytheism,

Endnotes

1 Muslim (2985), Ahmad (2/301, 435), Ibn Majah (4202), and ‏مط‎ Khuzaymah (938),
2 ‏د15‎ Majah (4204) and Ahmad in Al-Musnad (3/30),

Acts of Polytheism: Righteous
Deeds Intended for Worldly Gain

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Whoever desires the life of this world and its adornments. We
{fully repay them for their deeds therein, and they therein will
not be deprived - Those are the ones for whom there is not in the
Hereafter but the Fire, And lost is what they did therein, and
worthless is what they used to do.” (Qur'an: Had: 15-16)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

The present chapter indicates that when good deeds are intended for worldly
gain, they entail polytheism. This act of polytheism violates the perfection of
monotheism and renders one’s deeds void. The present chapter differs from
the previous one in that the former tackles the deeds intended for worldly gain,
while the latter tackles the deeds intended for getting praise from people.

294 ‘Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawwhiad

Keywords and Phrases

+ Desire the life of this world and its adornments: ‘To intend by
one's deeds gaining a worldly reward.

+ For whom there is not in the Hereafter but the Fire: Because all
their deeds are intended for obtaining worldly gain.

+ And lost is what they did therein: In the Hereafter, those people
will have no reward for their deeds as they did not intend to gain the
reward from Allah,

General Meaning of the Two Qur’anic Verses

Allah, Exalted be He, enunciates that he who is attached to the worldly life
as his ultimate purpose, and intends it in all his deeds, paying no heed to the
Hereafter, will be repaid by Allah for his deeds in this life, if He wills. Allah,
Exalted be He says:

“Whoever should desire the immediate, We hasten for him from
it what We will to whom We intend...” (Qur'an: Al-Isra': 18)

Thus, in the Hereafter, such a person will have no good deeds to be
rewarded for.

Relevance of the Two Verses to the Chapter

‘These verses state the ruling on those who seek after worldly gain through
deeds of righteousness, and shows the dire consequences of such deeds both
in this life and in the Hereafter.

Lessons Drawn from the Two Verses
© Polytheism renders one's good deeds void, and similarly one's deeds
are rendered void if they are intended for worldly gain.

© In this life, Allah may reward the unbelievers and the seekers after
worldly gain for their good deeds, but in the Hereafter, they will have
no good deed to be rewarded for.

4 Muslims are warned not to seek after any worldly gain by deeds
supposedly intended for the sake of Allah.

> Muslims are urged to intend by their deeds the reward of Allah in the

Hereafter,
soo

295

‘Chapter 36: Acts of Polytheism: Intending Good Deeds for Worldly Gains

Abi Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Messenger

of Allah (PBUH) said:

“Ler the slave of dinar, dirham, and Khamisah (a striped garment
made of silk or wool) and velvet perish. He is pleased if these thirigs
are given to him, and if not, he is displeased. Let such a person
perish and relapse, and if he is pierced with a thorn, let him nat
find anyone to take it out for him. Taba (Paradise) is for him wha
holds the reins of his horse to strive for the Cause of Allah, with
his hair unkempt and feet covered with dust: if he is appointed in
the vanguard, he is perfectly satisfied with his post of guarding,
and if he is appointed in the rearward, he accepts his post with
satisfaction; (he is so simple and unambiguous that) if he asks for
permission he is not permitted, and if he intercedes, his intercession
is not accepted.”'

(Related by Al-Bukhari)

Keywords and Phrases.

Tia: A name for Paradise or a tree therein
+ For the Cause of Allah: For fighting the polytheists

+ His hair unkempt: Fighting in the cause of Allah makes him s0 busy

that he has no time to use hair oil or comb his hair,

+ Feet covered with dust: This image of the fighter in the cause of Allah

contrasts that of the person who leads a life of luxury in this life.
+ Asks for permission: To meet a leader, a prince, etc.

+ Is not permitted: Due to his humble character in the eyes of those in

authority

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) portrays the states of two men; the

first seeks only mundane benefits while the other seeks the reward of Allah in
the Hereafter, Therefore, the former is like a slave of this life, as he is pleased
when he gets its pleasures and displeased when deprived of them. The Prophet
(PBUH) invokes Allah notto save sucha slave of pleasures when he isin distress

296 Concise Commentary on the Book of Kawi

so that he neither gets what he desires nor protects himself against what he
fears. This person is enslaved to his lusts, and is thus not a true servant of
‘Allah. Thus, he does not deserve divine salvation. On the contrary, the Prophet
(PBUH) illustrates the characteristics of the true servant of Allah, who seeks to
please his God and keeps away from whatever conduces to His Wrath. Such a
‘Muslim patiently endures hardships in this life and does not devote himself to
seeking luxury and satisfying his mundane desires, In addition, such a devout
person does not perform any act of worship ostentatiously to attract people's
admiration or gain prestige among them. Asa reward for his sincerity to Allah,
he will be admitted into Paradise or granted a special tree therein.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

While the hadith censures seeking after worldly gain through acts suppos~
edly intended for Allah, it praises the acts intended for gaining a reward from
Allah in the Hereafter.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

5 While the hadith censures any deeds intended only for worldly gain,
it commends those intended for gaining a reward from Allah in the
Hereafter,

The hadith also highlights the virtue of being modest.
© Italso emphasizes the virtue of striving in the Cause of Allah.

4 While leading a life of luxury is dispraised, manly characteristics
like vigor and sturdiness are highly praised, for such qualities help a
Muslim to strive in the Cause of Allah,

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhart (2887)

Taking Scholars or Rulers
as Partners besides Allah

Ibn * Abbas said:

“Stones are about to fail on you from the sky (as a punishment):
I say, ‘The Prophet (PBUH) said so and so’ and you say, ‘But Aba
Bakr and ‘Umar said (something different)? ”

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Since obedience is a type of worship, the author highlights, in this
chapter, the obligation of dedicating it only to Allah, Exalted be He, The
author also stresses that no one is to be obeyed in any matter involving
disobedience to Allah.

298 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tibi

The Occasion of the Tradition

‘bn * Abbas said that statement to a person who argued with him over the
‘Mut 'ah of Hajj. Ibn ‘Abbas used to instruct people to perform Mut’ ah of Hajj
in compliance with the Prophet's directive. However, his opponent argued that
Aba Bakr and ‘Umar forbade such an act. Therefore, Ibn ' Abbi had recourse
to the Sunnah of Allah’ Messenger (PBUH).

General Meaning of the Tradition

In this tradition, Tbn “Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) expected a
severe punishment to befall thase who would give precedence to the saying
of Abi Bakr and ‘Umar, or anyone else, aver the saying of Allah's Messenger
(PBUH), fbn ‘Abbas was motivated by the truth that belief in the Messenger
Muhammad (PBUH) entails obeying him, and thus, giving precedence to his
sayings over those of anyone else.

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

The tradition indicates the prohibition of obeying scholars and rulers in
matters contradictory to the guidance of the Messenger (PBUH), for such an
act entails punishment.

Lessons Drawn from the Traditi

4 The tradition points out that itis obligatory ta give precedence to the
sayings of the Messenger over those of anyone else.

> Acting in violation of the guidance of the Messenger (PBUH) conduces

to punishment.

‘Chapter 37: Taking Scholars ur Rulets as Partners besides Allah 299

Abmad Ibn Hanbal said:

“Tam amazed at those people who know the chain of transmitters
of a hadith and its authenticity, and yet they adopt the opinion of
Sufyan, while Allah, Exalied be He, says, “...So let those beware
who dissent from his [ie., the Prophet's] order, lest fitnah strike
them...” (Qur'an; An-Nar: 63) Do you know what is meant by
Yitnah’? Fitnah refers to polytheism. If the Muslim rejects some of
the Messenger’s words, his heart may deviate and thereby he may
eventually destroy himself”

Profiles

« Abmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn Hanbal is one of the Four Imams of the
well-known schools of law. He died in 241 A.H.; may Allah have mercy
on him.

+ The full name of Sufyan is Abd * Abdullah Sufyan Tbn Sa‘id Ath-Thawri
He was an ascetic, a devout and trustworthy fagih. He died in 161
‏تليق‎ may Allah have mercy on him,

Keywords and Phrases

+ Who know the chain of transmitters of a hadith and its
authenticity: Those people knew that the chain of transmitters of

a certain hadith is authentic, for this signifies the authenticity of the
hadith concerned.

* Who dissent from his [i.e., the Prophet's] order: Those who act in
contradiction to the orders of Allah or His Prophet (PBUH).

The Occasion of the Tradition

Tm4m Ahmad uttered these words when he was told that some people
would leave the hadiths of the Prophet (PBUH) and adopt the opinion of
Sufyan or other fagihs (scholars of Islamic Jurisprudence).

General Meaning of the Tradition

In this tradition, Imam Abimad criticizes those who are aware of the
sahil hadith on a particular matter and yet adopt an opinion in violation

300 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhiel

of the Prophet's fradith, Those people resort to false excuses to justify their
view. Nevertheless, it is obligatory for the believer that once he is aware of the
evidence drawn from the Book of Allah or the Sunnah of His Prophet on any
matter, he must comply with it, no matter that many people may contradict
him. This is a command given by Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, as well
‘as His Prophet (PBUH), As for those who are aware of the authenticity of a
particular practice of the Prophet's Sunmah and then act in violation of it, Imam
‘Alimad fears that their hearts may deviate and thereby they may ultimately
perish in both this life and the Hereafter, Supporting his view, Imam Ahmad
quotes the above-mentioned verse. Similarly, there are several Qur‘anic verses
supporting this view, such as the verse that reads:

“..And when they deviated, Allah caused their hearts to deviate...”
(Qur'an: As-Saff: 5)

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

In this tradition, Muslims are warned not to follow the scholar’s opinions
which are not substantiated by legal proofs, and not to abstain from acting in
compliance with the Qur‘én and the Sunnah, for this is an act of associating
others with Allah in obedience.

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition:

Those whoareable to derive proofs and make deduction are prohibited
to imitate the scholars’ views blindly,

Those who are not aware of the legal proofs on a particular matter aré
permitted to imitate the trustworthy and pious men of knowledge.

نففا

(Chapter 37: Taking Scholars or Rulers as Partners besides Allah 301

‘Adiyy Ibn Hatim (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“I heard the Prophet (PBUH) reciting the Qur‘anic verse which
reads, “They have taken their scholars and monks as lords besides
Allah...” (Quran: At-Tawbah: 31) So, I said, 0 Messenger of
Allah! We do not worship them’ He (the Prophet) said, ‘Do they
not prokibit what Allah has made lawful, and then you deem it
prohibited, and do they not make lawful what Allah has prohibited,
and then you deem it lawful?’ Isaid, "Yes? Thereupon, he said, ‘This

is your worship of them:

(Related by Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi, who regarded it as hasan.
(good) hadith.

‘ Adiyy Ibn Hatim (the Narrator)

The full name of the narrator is ' Adiyy Ibn Hatim At-Tai. He was a well-
known righteous Companion. He died in 68 A.H., at the age of 120 years olds
may Allah be pleased with him.

Keywords and Phrases
+ Scholars: The scholars of Jews
+ Monks: The Christian monks

+ We did not worship them: ‘Adiyy thought that worship is confined to
prostration and suchlike acts intended for drawing near to those people.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this verse, Allah enunciates that the Jews and Christians have taken
their scholars and monks as gods besides Allah, Those scholars and monks
enact laws in violation of the legislation of Allah, and their people act
upon those laws. Hearing the above-mentioned verse, “Adiyy Ibn Hatim
got confused as he thought that worship is confined to prostration and
suchlike acts. Therefore, the Prophet (PBUH) informed him that following
the scholars or monks in prohibiting what is lawful and vice versa, is an act
of worshipping them.

302 Concise Commentary on the Book of Taw

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith asserts that obeying anybody ina matter of disobedience to
Allah, especially in enacting laws and rules in violation of those ordained by
Allah, is an act of worshipping them besides Allah,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% Following scholars or anyone else in changing the rulings of Islamic
Law is an act of major polytheism only if the follower knows that these
enacted laws are at variance with those of Allah.

It is exclusively Allah's right to prohibit something or to make
something lawful.

4 Thehadith demonstrates one further typeof polytheism;i.e. polytheism
of obedience.

+ The exhortation ‏ما‎ instructing the unlearned

Worship is ofa comprehensive meaning that includes all sayings and
visible or hidden deeds with which Allah is pleased.

Endnotes

1 At-Tirmidht (3104), Tbn Kathir in his Exegesis of the Glorious Qur’n (2/458) ascribing
it to Imim Abmad, AtTirmidhl, and Tbn Jarir. At-Tirmidht graded it a gharib
(unfamiliar) hadith

Seeking Judgment from Taghit

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Have you not seen those who claim to have believed in what
was revealed to you, (O Muhammad), and what was revealed
before you? They wish to refer legislation to taghitt, while they
were commanded to reject it; and Satan wishes to lead them far
astray. And when it is said to them, ‘Come to what Allah has
revealed and to the Messenger; you see the hypocrites turning
away from you in aversion. So how will it be when disaster
strikes them because of what their hands have put forth and
then they come to you swearing by Allah, ‘We intended nothing
but good conduct and accommodation”

(Qur'an: An-Nisa’: 60-62)

304 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tinwhiel

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In this chapter, the author demonstrates that adopting the creed of
monotheism entails that people should refer their disputes to the Islamic law
revealed to the Prophet (PBUH), for it isa prerequisite to the Two Testifications
of Faith. Therefore, whoever utters the ‘Iwo Testifications of Faith and then
resorts to a judgment other than that of the Prophet (PBUH) is insincere in
his declaration of faith.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Those who claim to have believed in what was revealed to you:
‘Those people who claim so are insincere with regard to their claim.

+ Tight: It generally refers to whoever is known to transgress. In this
context, it denotes Ka’b Tbnul-Ashraf, the Jew. However, it also applies
to anyone who passes judgments which are not in compliance with the
legislation revealed by Allah,

+ Satan wishes to lead them far astray: To make them refer their dis-
putes to the Laghiit and thus deviate from the right path of guidance.

« To what Allah has revealed: The rulings stated in the Noble Quran
+ And to the Messenger : To arbitrate between them

+ What their hands have put forth: Referring people's disputes to a
legislation other than that revealed by Allah

+ Then they come to you: To apologize only when in distress,
+ Good conduct and accommodation: Reconciliation among people

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verses

In these verses, Allah, Exalted be He, reproaches those who claim to
hold a belief in that which was revealed to Muhammad, and that which was
revealed to the prophets Before him, and yet seek judgment on matters of
dispute from legislation other than that of the Noble Qur'in and the Sunnah.
‘Those people refer their dispute to the ‏بغش رأف‎ which Allah has commanded
His servants to renounce, However, Satan seeks to lead them far astray from
the path of guidance.

Chapter 38: Seeking Judgment from Taghir 305

Moreover, if those people aré invited to accept the divine judgments rep-
resented in the Qur'an and the Sunnah, they arrogantly turn away in aversion.
However, Allah enunciates that when such people are in distress, they come
to the Prophet (PBUH) making apologies for seeking judgment from a source
other than him and begging him to invoke Allah for them and to solve their
problems. Moreover, they swear by Allah that they intended nothing but good
conduct and reconciliation among people, Thus, they resort to false excuses to
justify their deeds when exposed,

Lessons Drawn from the Verses

% Wis obligatory to seck judgment from the Book of Allah and the Sunnah
of His Messenger. Further, it is obligatory to accept the judgments
based on the above-mentioned sources with full submission.

© Whoever seeks judgment from a law other than the Islamic Shari'ah
is not a believer. Moreover, such a person is not a reformer, even ifhe
claims to be so.

* Whoever givesajudgmentcontrary to that revealed by Allah isa tdehat,
and whoever seeks a judgment of that type is seeking a judgment from
a ‏,اتيف‎ whatever he may call it.

% ‘The obligation of repudiating the taghiat
4 Muslims are warned of Satan's insinuations to avert man from the truth.

2 Whoever is invited to seek judgment from what Allah has revealed,
must comply and accept the judgment of Allah: otherwise, he is a
hypocrite.

+ The claim that applying laws other than those divinely revealed is
intended for reformation is an absurd excuse.

226

306 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhiel

Allah, Bxalted be He, says:
“And when it is said to them, ‘Do not cause corruption om the
earth; they say, “We are but reformers!”
(Qur'an; Al-Bagarah; 11)

Keywords and Phrases

+ And when it is said to them; to the hypocrites

+ Do not cause corruption on the earth: Out of disbelief and other
acts of disobedience.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this verse, Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, mentions one of the bad
characteristics of the hypocrites. Allah points out that when those people are
forbidden to perpetrate offenses that cause corruption on earth due to the
infliction of divine retribution, they explain that they intend nothing but
reformation. Likewise, when they are commanded to shaw obedience that
brings about reformation, they say they seek nothing but reformation. This
fallacy is caused by the hypocrisy of these people that made them perceive
corruption in the form of reformation.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

Whoever invites people to seek judgments from laws other than those
revealed by Allah, or invites them to perpetrate offenses, commits the gravest
corruption on earth.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

4 Muslims are warned against applying laws that contradict the Sharf'ah
even though it is claimed to be intended for reformation.

© The claim of seeking reformation is not an excuse to leave the divinely
revealed laws.

4 The verse implies a warning against admiring one's opinion.

Those suffering moral diseases in their hearts see what is right as
wrong and vice versa.

© Good intention does not justify acting in violation of the Shari'ah.

eee

Chapter 38: Seeking Judgment from ‏عغطية1‎ 307

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And cause not corruption upon the earth after its reformation...”
(Quran: Al-A‘ raf: 56)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Corruption upon the earth; Committing polytheism or any other
acts of disobedience

«+ After its reformation: Reformation here refers to sending prophets,
legislating rulings and doing good deeds.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

After reforming the earth at the hands of His Messengers who have
disseminated the divine Laws and called people to obey their Lord, Allah has
prohibited His servants from causing corruption on earth by committing sins
and inviting people to obey creatures in matters entailing disobedience to the
Creator; Therefore, worshipping others besides Allah, calling on people to
worship deities other than Him, associating partners with Him, oppressing
and committing sins constitute the gravest corruption an earth,

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

Whoever calls others to pass judgments from laws other than those divinely
revealed commits the gravest corruption on earth.

Lessons Drawn from the Verse

% Sins cause corruption.
* Obedience to Allah results in reformation:

+ Applying Jaws other than those divinely revealed causes corruption
on earth.

Reformation

;chieved only by applying the divine laws,

is

308 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhid

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Then is it the judgment of (the time of) ignorance they desire?
But who is better than Allah in judgment for a people who are
certain [in faith].” (Qur'an: Al-Mafidah: 50)

Keywords and Phrasea

+ The judgment of (the time of) ignorance: The conventions that
were prevailing in the Pre-Islamic eta. Similarly, any judgment at
variance with Islamic Law is regarded as a judgment belonging fo the
time of ignorance.

٠ A people who are certain [in faith]; The people who meditate on
matters and come to realize that no judgment is better than that of Allah,

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Since the Divine Law establishes justice and prosperity and forbids any
harm or evil, Allah, Exalted be He, criticizes those who deviate from it and
codify laws based not on the Divine revelation but rather on people's opinions,
inclinations and conventions. These positive laws are similar to those which
were practiced at the Pre-Islamic period and were drawn from perversities and
tribal conventions.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

Whoever seeks to apply legislation other than the divinely revealed one,
such as positive laws, is deemed as one seeking to apply the judgments of the
time of ignorance.

Lessons Drawn from the Verse

4 Judging in accordance with Shariah isan obligation.

Any judgment contradictory to the Shari'ah is deemed a judgment of
ignorance.

© The verse demonstrates the merits of the rules of Shariah and empha-
sizes that it isa means of establishing justice, mercy and bringing about
prosperity.

Applying the positive law and such western positive systems is an act

of disbelief.

Chapter 38: Seeking Judgment from Tighe 309

Abdullah Ibn "Amr (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said:

“None of you will have (a complete) faith until his own desire follows
what Tam sent with.”

An-Nawawi said:

“This isa sabih hadith related with an authentic chain of transmitters
inthe book entitled “Al-Hujjah (The Argument)”

A Profile About An-Nawawi

His full name is Mubyid-Din Abd Zakariyya Yahya Ibn Sharaf An-Nawawi.
He was called An-Nawawi after the name of the village where he was born;
Nawa in Ash-Sham (the region covering Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria
now), An-Nawawi is a well-known Imm who wrote many usefull books, He
died in 676 A.H. may Allah have mercy on him,

About the Transmission of the Hadith

‘Though the chain of transmission of this hadith lacks the criteria of authen-
ticity; the meaning of the hadith is definitely (rue. Moreaver, there are proofs
derived from the Qur'an in support of this hadith, such as the verse that reads:

“But no, by your Lord, they will not [truly] believe until they
make you, ]0 Muhammad}, judge concerning that over which
they dispute among themselves and then find within themselves
no discomfort from what you have judged and submit in [full,
willing] submission?” (Qur'an: An-Nisd': 65)

Keywords and Phrases

+ None of you will have (a complete) faith: None will reach the
required level of true faith or become a believer...

+ His own desire follows what I am sent with: To love whatever has
been commanded by Allah's Messenger (PBUH) and detest whatever
he has forbidden.

+ Al-Hujah (The Argument); Itisa book entitled “Al-Hujjah ‘Ala Tarikul-
Mahajjah”, (The Argument against Whoever Deserts the Right Path), written.
by Shaykh Abul-Fath Nasr Ibn Ibrahim Al-Maqdist Ash-Shafi't,

210 Concise Commentary om the Book of Tawi

General Meaning of the Hadith

Man will notbecomea true believer unless he loves whatever the Messenger
has commanded and detests whatever he has forbidden.
Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

According to this hadith, whoever does not love the divine laws not feel
satisfied with them or loves the positive laws is deemed bereft of faith,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

Muslims are duty bound to willingly act in compliance with all that is
revealed to the Messenger Muhammad (PBUH), especially the divine
laws.

+ Muslims are also duty bound to detest and avoid whatever is contrary
to the Shari'a

Whoever inclines to act in violation of the guidance of Muhammad
(PBUH) is deemed bereft of faith, even if he apparently acts in

compliance with it,

(Chapter 38: Seeking Judgment from Tahiti an

Ash-Sha’ bi said:

“There was a dispute between a man from the hypocrites and
aman from the Jews, and so the Jew said fo the hypocrite, ‘Let
us seek judgment from Muhammad’, for he knew well that
Muhammad would never accept bribes, However, the hypocrite
said, ‘No! Let us seek judgment from the Jews’, for he knew that
they would accept bribes. So, they both agreed to refer their case
to ‏م‎ diviner at Juhaynah. That is why Allah, Exalted be He,
revealed, “Have you not seen those who claim to have believed
in what was revealed to you, (O Muhammad), and what was
revealed before you? They wish to refer legislation to taghit,
while they were commanded to reject it; and Satan wishes to lead
them far astray.” (Qur'an: An-Nisa’: 60)”

The Profile of Ash-Sha' bi

His full name is ‘Amir Ibn Sharahtl Ash-Sha'bi, and it is said that he is
called ‘Amir Ibn ‘Abdullah Tbn Sharahil Ash-Sha'bi Al-Himyari, Ab@ ‘Amr
AL-Kafi, He is a trustworthy hafiz’, and a fagih’ from among the tabi'is‘, He
died in 103 A.H., and some say that the exact date of his death is unknown;
may Allah have mercy on him.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Hypocrite: Whoever apparently embraces Islam, but conceals disbelief
deep in his heart.

+ Juhaynah: A well-known Arab tribe
General Meaning of the Tradition

‘Ash-Sha"bi narrates that the above-mentioned verse was revealed when a
man, who pretended io be a believer, preferred to get judgment on his issue
from someone other than the Messenger (PBUH). Seeking to avoid a just
ruling, that hypocrite referred his issue to a f4ghat, and did not mind violating
his faith. As such, this man proved to be insincere in professing his faith, The
sare ruling applies to whoever refers any matter of dispute to anyone other
than Allah and His Messenger (PBUH).

a2 Concise Commentary an the Book of Tawa

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

‘This tradition indicates that referring matters of dispute to any law other
than that of Allah entails violating one’s belief in Allah and in His Books.

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

% Itis obligatory to apply the divine law when passing judgments,

4% Applying laws other than those revealed by Allah contradicts true
belief in Allah,

% The tradition discloses that the hypocrites are worse than the Jews.

< The tradition points out that accepting bribe is prohibited, and that it
is one of the bad manners of the Jews. Besides, the Prophet (PBUH)
cursed those who offer bribes or accept them,

ee

Chapter 38: Seeking Judgment from Tighiie 313

it is also said that the above-mentioned verse was revealed when two men
disputed over a certain issue: and one of them said:

"Let as refer the matter to the Prophet (PBUH)’, but the other
said, ‘Let us refer it to Ka'b Ibnul-Ashraf’ Thereafter, they went
to ‘Umar Ibnul-Khattab and one of them told ‘Umar the whole
story and therefore "Umar turned ta the one who did riot approve
of Allahis Messenger (PBUH) as an arbitrator and asked hint, ‘Is
that true?” The man replied ‘Yes. Thereupon, “Umar stroke him
with his sword and killed hit.”

A Profile about Ka’b

Ka'b Ibnul-Ashraf was An Arab Jew from the tribe of Tayyi, and his
mother from Banun-Nadir. He used to bear intense animosity towards the
Prophet (PBUH).

General Meaning of the Tradition

‘This tradition provides another reason of the revelation of the above-
mentioned verse that reads, “Have you not seen those who claim...” (Qur'an:
‘An-Nisi{: 60). It demonstrates that when "Umar Ibnnl-Khattab (may Allah be
pleased with him) heard the story and made sure of what happened, he killed the
‘one who did not approve of the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) as an arbitrator,

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

This tradition provides a proof that whoever refers a matter of dispute to
any law other than that of Allah is deemed a disbeliever and must thus be
killed as he becomes an apostate,

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

Applying any law other than that divinely revealed to the Messenger is,
an act entailing apostasy.

Killing is the penalty of apostasy.

4 The call for applying any law other than that of Allah is one of the
attributes of hypocrites, even if the one referred to for judgment is an
eminent Imam such as ‘Umar Ibnul-Khattab (may Allah be pleased
with him).

314 Concise Commentary an the Book of Tawhld

‎The legitimacy of being angry for the sake of Allah, His Messenger‏ يج
‎and His religion (i.¢, Islam)‏

‎% The legitimacy of forbidding evil whenever possible

‎4 Awareness of the correct way is of no avail unless one acts in
compliance with it.

‎Endnotes

‎| See ‏ميلم‎ ‘itn An-Nawawiyyah (The Forty Hadiths Compiled by An-Nawawi) p. 48,

‎2 Hifi: A title given to the person who knows most narrations of each class of narrators,
and whoever devotes himself to the study of Hadith, The term may also refer to a
person who memorizes one hundred thousand hadiths.

‎3 Fagih: A scholar of Islamic jurisprudence.

‎4 Tabi’ (Successor): A person who witnessed a Companion of the Prophet (PBUH), ic.
‘one of those who belonged to the first Muslim generation after the Prophet (PBUH).

Repudiation of Allah’s Names and
Attributes

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“,.while they disbelieve in the Most Merciful. Say, ‘He is my
Lord; there is no deity except Him. Upon Him Irely, and to Him
is my return?” (Qur'an: Ar-Ra‘d: 30)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

According to the Islamic Creed, monotheism consists of three major
elements, without any of which Faith can not be attained:

1. Tawhidur-Rubibiyyah (Maintaining the Oneness of Allah's Lordship)
2. Tawhtdul-Ulahiyyah (Maintaining the Oneness of Allah's Divinity)

316 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhidt

3, Tawhtdul-Asmé’ wa As-Sifat (Maintaining the Unity of Allah's Names
and Attributes)
In this chapter, the compiler tackles the third element of monotheism;
viz, maintaining the Unity of Allah’s Names and Attributes, with the aim of
demonstrating the ruling on repudiating this major element.

Keywords and Phrases

+ While they; The disbelievers of Quraysh.

+ Disbelieve in the Most Merciful: Repudiate that Name though they
believe in Allah. The ‘Most Merciful is one of the Names of Allah, and
“Mercy’ is one of His Attributes,

« Say: O Muhammad! Disprove of the disbelievers' repudiation of Allah’s
‘Name ‘The Most Merciful by saying, ...He is my Lord; there is no
deity except Him. Upon Him Trely, and to Him is my return,

« He is my Lord: The Most Merciful, Exalted be He, is my Lord even if
you disbelieve in Him.

+ There is no deity except Him: There is no deity worthy of worship
but Him.

+ Upon Him I rely: I resign myself to Allahé will and count only on Him.

+ And fo Him is my return: All people shall return to Allah and He is
the Only One to Whom one returns in repentance.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, ctiticizes the disbelievers of Quraysh
for repudiating His Name ‘the Most Merciful, He further commands His
Messenger (PBUH) to disprove that repudiation and profess his belief in
Allah, His Names and His Attributes, and that He is the One worthy to be
worshipped. One is thus duty bound (o rely only on Allah, have a recourse to
Him in all one’s affairs and always return to him in repentance.

Releyance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

This verse stresses that repudiating any of Allahis Names or Attributes is
an act of disbelief.

Chapter 39: Repudiation of Allah's Names and Actribuses 317

Lessons Drawn from the Verse

4 Repudiating any of Allah's Names or Attributes is an act of disbelief.
4 Believing in all Allah's Names and Attributes is obligatory.

4 It is also obligatory to rely upon Allah and return to Him in
repenttance.

5 Devoting all acts of worship to Allah alone is an obligation.

ote

318 Concise Commentary an the Book af Tawhid

“Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“Address people with what their minds can comprehend; will you
be pleased if Allah and His Messenger (PBUH) are belied?”'

(Related by Al-Bukhari in his Authentic Book of Hadith)

A Profile About Al-Bukhari

imam Muhammad Ibn [sma‘il Al-Bukhari was named after the name of
a city in the East called Bukhara. Al-Bukharis authentic book of Hadith is
considered the most reliable book after the Glorious Qur'an.

General Meaning of the Tradition

The number of Muslim preachers who were known for story telling
increased during the caliphate of ‘Ali Ibn Abd Talib, the Commander of the
Believers (may Allah be pleased with him). Therefore, he addressed those
preachers advising them not to address common people except with what
their minds can comprehend. It is sufficient for them to be acquainted
with the pillars of religion that benefit them, such as the Islamic Creed of
monotheism, what is lawful and what is prohibited. Moreover, ' Ali counseled
those Muslim preachers not to talk with the common people about unclear or
puzaling matters that may cause people to reject the truth out of their inability
to comprehend.

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter shall be Demonstrated
after the Following Tradition
Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

Even ifitis true, any puzzling or unclear matter should not be addressed to
the common people, for fear that their beliefs may be badly shaken.

os

Chapter 39: Repudiation of Allah's Names and Arcribures 319

Ibn Tawas narrated on the authority of his father that Ton “Abbas saw
‘a man shivering in disapproval, when he heard a hadith about the Sublime
Attributes of Allah, Thereupon, ” Abbas said:

“Why do these people fear such issues? They accept what is precise
(in meaning) and deviate from what is unspecific (and consequently
they may reject of misinterpret it)”

(Related by "Abdur-Razzéq)

Profiles

٠ ‘Abdur-Razziq Ibn Hammam As-San‘ani was known to be an Imam
and hafig. He had many compilations, He died in 211 A.H. may Allah
‘have mercy on him.

+ Abdallah Iba Tawds Al-Yamani is a trustworthy, virtuous and devout
narrator. He died in 132 A.H. may Allah have mercy on him.

Keywords and Phrases

« These people: Some common peaple who used to attend his
religious sessions.

+ What is unspecific: Matters that seem unclear to them.

General Meaning of the Tradition

Ibn “Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) criticized some common
people, who used to attend his didactic sessions, He criticized them for the fear
they used to show upon hearing any hadith about Allah's Sublime Attributes
due to their disapproval of them, This reaction indicates that their faith was
incomplete as they did not believe in all that was authentically enunciated by
the Prophet (PBUH), whether it was intelligible to them or not. Thus, those
people renounce the religious obligation of believing in the Quranic verses
whose meaning is unknown to them, though itis known that the whole Qur'an.
is an unquestionable truth, Moreover, some of those people interpret the
‘Quranic verses with a meaning that is not intended by Allah, so they perish by
committing such a grave sin.

320 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiawhid

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

Since the afore-mentioned tradition of ‘Alt (may Allah be pleased with
him) states that people should not be addressed except with what they can
comprehend, the author quotes this tradition which indicates that narrating
the religious texts concerned with Allah’s Sublime Attributes is not prohibited,
Rather, these texts mustbeaddressed tocommon people, despite the disapproval
expressed by some people. In addition, since the early years of Islam, scholars
have been enunciating the Qur'anic verses and hadiths on Allak’s Sublime
Attribute at their face value in the presence of both the common people and
those of distinction.

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

4 Itis permissible to enunciate the verses and hadtths of Allah's Sublime
Attribute in the presence ofthe common people and those of distinction
with the aim of teaching them.

4° Whoever denies or disapproves of any ofthe authentic texts on Allah's
Sublime Attributes is among the losers in the Hereafter.

‎The tradition also criticizes those who renounce any of the authentic‏ جه
‎texts on the Sublime Attributes of Allah.‏

‎ait

Chaprer 39: Repudliation of Allahs Names and Auributes 321

When Quraysh heard Allah's Messenger (PBUH) uttering (the Name)
Ar-Rahman (i.e. The Most Merciful), they denied such a name, so Allah,
Exalted be He, revealed, “... while they disbelieve in the Most Merciful...”
(Qur'an: Ar-Ra'd: 30)

General Meaning of the Tradition

‘When the statement “In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Mercifal”
was first written on the document of the Treaty of Al-Hudaybiyah, the
polytheists said, “We do not know the ‘Most Gracious, and thus the formula
will be ‘By Your Name, 0 Allah’ " On that occasion, Allah revealed the verse
that reads, ‘..while they disbelieve in the Most Merciful...”. However, it was
said that when the polytheists heard the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) saying
in prostration:

"0 You Most Gracious! 0 You Most Mercifull” They said, ‘This
‘man claims that he invokes One (God) while he invokes two: the
‘Most Gracious and the Most Merciful!”

‘Thisis another occasion of revealing the aforementioned verse, Thus, there
may be more than one occasion of revelation for one verse.

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

4 The tradition attests to the verity of attributing the Beautiful Names
and Supreme Attributes to Allah, Exalted be He,

4 The multiplicity of Beautiful Names does not signify the multiplicity
of the Named One. The legitimacy of invoking Allah by His Names
and Attributes.

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhart (127).
2 Al-Bukhart (2731 — 2732).

Denying the Favor of Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“They recognize the favor of Allah; then they deny it, And most
of them are disbelievers”” (Quran: An-Nahl: 83)

Interpreting this verse, Mujahid said what means, “This happens when
a man says, ‘This money belongs to me; I inherited it from my forefathers.”
Likewise, "Awn Ibn ‘Abdullah said, “Some people say, ‘Had it not been for
so and so, such and such a matter would not have happened. ” In addition,

Ton Qutaybah said, “Some people say, ‘We got such and such a favor thanks
to our deities?”

324 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In this chapter, the author highlights the obligation of showing de-
cency to the RubAbiyyah (Lordship) of Allah by avoiding the utterances
implying hidden polytheism, such as attributing blessings to anyone
other than Allah, as it is contrary to the perfection of one’s belief in
monotheism.

Profiles

+ Mujhid Tbn Jabr Al-Makkt is the Grand exegete of the Noble Qur'an.
He was a devout Imam and was one of the disciples of Ibn ' Abbas. He
died in 104 A.H.; may Allah have mercy on him,

«= The full name of ‘Awn is “Awn Ibn ‘Abdullah fbn ‘Utbah Tbn 3195 4
Al-Hudhali. He was a trustworthy and devout scholar who died in 120
A.H may Allah have mercy on him.

+ The full name of Ibn Qutaybah is ' Abdullah Ton Muslim Ibn Qutaybah
‘Ad-Diniir, He is a Hafiz who produced many Islamic writings, and
died in 276 A.H.; may Allah have mercy on him,

Keywords and Phrases

+ They recognize the favor of Allah: The disbelievers know well that
Allah is the bestower of all favors.

+ ] inherited it from my forefathers: Whoever repeats any of the
aforementioned utterances and the like is ungrateful for Allah's favors,
Such a man isa repudiator of the divine favors as he attributes them to
others besides Him. The Qur‘anic verse implies all the abovementioned
commentaries of Mujahid, ’Awn, and Qutaybah.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this verse, Allah enunciates that while the polytheists recognize
the favors of Allah, which are counted in the Chapter of An-Nalil
(The Bees) and other Chapters of the Noble Qur’an, they deny these
favors by attributing them fo others besides Allah, such as their false
deities, their forefathers and the like. Thus, the polytheists contradict
themselves,

Chapter 40: Denying the Favor oF Allah 325

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

+ Polytheists acknowledge tawhid Ar-Rubibiyyah (the Oneness of
Allah’s Lordship). It is obligatory to attribute blessings to Allah alone,
Glorified and Exalted be He.

4 Muslims are warned against attributing blessings to anyone other than
Allah as itis regarded as associating others with Allah in His exclusive
Lordship.

© It is obligatory to show decency to the Oneness of Allah's Lordship,
and it is prohibited to rely on means.

ote

326 Concise Commentary on the Book af Tashi

Commenting on the qudst hadith narrated by Zayd Ibn Khalid in which
Allah says, "In this morning, some of My servants remained as true believers and
some became non-believers .

‘Abul-’ Abbas said:

“There are several positions in both the Book (the Qurtin) and the
Sunnah in which Allah, Exalted be He, dispraises those who attribute
His favors to others and associate other partners with Hin. Besides,
some of the Salaf said, ‘Attributing favors to anyone other than Allah
may be seen in utterances such as ‘The voyage was safe thanks to
good wind and the skiliful captain, and other similar utterances
‘frequently repeated by many people”

Abul-' Abbas

Abul-* Abbas is the nickname of Shaykhul-Islam Ahmad Ibn Taymiy
may Allah have mercy on him.

Note

The above-mentioned qudst hadith is elaborated on in detail in| chapter
thirty; entitled Seeking Rainfall by Virtue of the Stars.

General Meaning of the Tradition

When ships sail safely via a good wind, by a command of Allah, some
people attribute the safe trip to the wind and the captain's cleverness while
they forget their Lord Who has made ships sail through the sea out of His
mercy. This is similar to attributing rainfall to stars.

‘The Rulings on Attributing Allah's Favors to Others

There are some detailed rulings on this point; they are as follows:

L-Repeating the aforementioned utterance with the intent of only
attributing that favor to the means while holding a belief that
wind, captain and the like act in compliance with the Command
of Allah, is an act of minor polytheism, as Allah's favor has been
attributed to others besides Him, while it is obligatory to attribute
it to Allah Alone.

Chaprer 40: Denying the Favor of Allah 27

2-Repeating that utterance believing that the means referred to act out

of their own will and without a command of Allah, is an act of major
polytheism.

The first case is commonly circulated on Muslims’ tongues, so they have
to be aware of It.

يفنا

Attributing Equals to Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“,.So do not attribute to Allah equals while you know (that there
is nothing similar to Him)?” (Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 22)

In his comment on the verse, Ibn ‘Abbas says:

“Attributing equals to Allah is an act of polytheism more hidden
than the movement of ants on a smooth rock in the darkness of
night. One commits that act of polytheism when saying, ‘By Allah
and by your life, O you so-and-so, or ‘By my life!” Moreover, one
commits an act of polytheism when saying, ‘Had it not been for
the little dog of so-and-so, we would have been stolen, or ‘Had it
not been for the ducks in the house, we would have been stolen?
Similarly, an act of polytheism is also committed when a man says
to another, ‘By the will of Allah and yours..’ One more example of

330 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiubid

committing an act of polytheism is when someone says to another,
‘Had it not been for Allah and you... So, never associate others
with Allah in such utterances as all of the aforesaid is nothing but
polytheism.”

(Related by Tbn Abd Hiatim)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

One of the corollaries of monotheism is to avoid utterances that imply
associating partners with Allah, even if one does not intend so, As such, the
auithor elaborates in this chapter on some of such prohibited utterances to help
people avoid them and the like.

Keywords and Phrases

+ So do not attribute to Allah equals; This is a Divine Command to
believers not to take people as rivals and peers to Allah by dedicating
acts of worship to them,

+ While you know: While you know that Allah Alone is your Sustainer,
and that no one is worthy of worship but Him.

+ The movement of ants: An example that indicates the difficulty of
perceiving this kind of polytheism.

+ So never associate others with Allah in such utterances: For
instance, one should never say, “Had it not been for Allah and so-and-
ss... Rather, one should say, “Had if not been for Allah only.

+ Asall of the aforesaid is nothing but polytheism: The aforemen-
tioned utterances and their like result in polytheism,

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this verse, Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, prohibits people from
setting created beings up as equal to Allah by attributing to them acts which are
exclusive to Him, while they know that Allah is the Only Creator and Pravider,
and that those equals are helpless and incompetent even to dispose their own
affairs as they will. The utterances quoted by Ibn ‘Abbas provide examples
of the practice of attributing equals to Allah, Though the aforementioned

Chapter 41: Ateributing Equals ro Allah 331

verse is revealed in regard to major polytheism and though these utterances
entail minor polytheism, they are included in the verse, for the Salaf used to
provide legal evidences on minor polytheism out of those attesting to major
polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

4 Muslims are warned against committing polytheism in acts of worship,

+ Polytheists acknowledge tawhid Ar-Rubibiyyah (the Oneness of
Allakis Lordship).

4 Minor polytheism is so hidden that only few can perceive it,

4 Muslims are enjoined to avoid utterances that entail polytheism, even
if polytheism is not intended.

oie

332 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Tbn ‘Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah (PBUH) said:

“He who swears by anything besides Allah is guilty ofan act of disbelief
or polytheism."
(Related by At-Tirmidhi, who graded it hasan, but Al-Hakim
graded it sath)

General Meaning of the Hadith

This hadith implies a prohibition against swearing by anyone other than
Allah, and deems that oath to bean act of setting a created being up as a partner
to Allah and an act of disbelief in Allah. The reason is that swearing by a being is
a means of exalting it while Allah is actually the only One worthy of exaltation.
So, swearing must be exclusively by Allah or any of His Sublime Attributes.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘The hadith indicates that swearing by anyone other than Allah is an act af
setting a created being up asa rival to Him.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

‎tis prohibited to swear by anyone other than Allah. Swearing as such‏ به
‎entails polytheism and disbelief.‏

‎4 Exaltation rendered in terms of swearing is due to Allah Alone, Glorified
and Exalted be He, so one is prohibited to swear but by Him.

‎Swearing by anyone other than Allah does not require expiation as the
Divine Law states nothing in this regard.

‎She

‘Chaprer 41: Attributing Equals to Allah 334

Tbn Mas' iid said:

“To swear falsely by Allah (however forbidden) is better for me than
truly swearing by any one other than Him.”

General Meaning of the Tradition

Tbn Mas’td (may Allah be pleased with him) states thathe prefers swearing
falsely by Allah to swearing truthfully by any one other than Him. tbn Mas‘tid
said so on the basis that swearing by Allah falsely implies the virtue of adhering
to monotheism together with the vice of lying, while swearing truthfully by
anyone other than Alleh implies the merit of telling the truth but the sin of
committing polytheism. Needless to say, the virtue of adhering to monotheism
is greater than the virtue of telling the truth, and the sin of lying is less than
that of committing polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition
+ Itis prohibited to swear by anyone other than Allah.

© Minor polytheism is graver than the major sins, such as lying, and its like,

+ Itis permissible to commit the lesser of the two evils when there is no
other way.
© Ibn Mas’ dd is possessed of deep knowledge and piercing understanding.

$26

334 Concise Commentary on the Book of Taswhid

‘Hudhayfah narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Do not say, ‘If Allah wills and so-and-so wills; but say, ‘If Allah
wills and then so-and-so wills.”

(Related by Abd Dawid with an authentic chain of transmitters)
Ibrahim An-Nakh'j said:

“ft is detestable for one to say, 1 seek refuge with Allah and you’
However; it is permissible ta say, ‘I seek refuge with Allah and then
‘you.” He also said, "It is permissible for one fo say, ‘Had it not been
{for Aliah and then so-and-so...: and impermissible to say, ‘Had it not
‘been for Allah and so-and-

Keywords and Phrases

+ If Allah wills and so and so wills: Using the conjunction ‘and’ here
signifies combination and equivalence between man and Allah, and
thus, putting them together at the same rank.

+ If Allah wills and then so and so wills: Using the conjunction ‘then’
signifies succession, which means that the servant’ will is subservient
to that of Allah.

٠ Detestable: According to the Salaf, the word detestable is used for the
prohibited.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) prohibits Muslims from coupling a
name of a creature with that of the Creator by means of the conjunction ‘and"
when talking about Allah’ will and the like. The reason is that using ‘and’
signifies equivalence between the two coupled items, not succession, and thus
such an utterance entails polytheism.

However, the Prophet (PBUH) permits coupling a created being with
the Creator by the conjunction ‘then’ which signifies succession. The
aforementioned tradition given by An-Nakh’i signifies the same meaning of
the hadith,

Legally speaking, seeking refuge with a creature is restricted to the living
one who can help, not the dead who is helpless. Thus, it is not permissible to
invoke dead persons in order to do something.

Chaprer 41: Attributing Equals co Allah 335

Relevance of the Hadith and Tradition to the Chapter

Both the aforementioned hadith and tradition stress the prohibition
of uttering the statement, “If Allah wills and so-and-so wills" and suchlike
statements as they imply setting a created being up as an equal to Allsh, Such
a heinous act of polytheism has been warned against in the verse stated at the
beginning of this chapter as interpreted by Ibn ‘Abbas,

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

© Itis prohibited to utter the statement, "By the will of Allah and Yours”
and suchlike statements that imply coupling a creature with Allah by
the conjunction ‘and’, for suchlike utterances imply attributing equals
to Allah,

% Itis permissible to say, "By the will of Allah, then yours” and suchlike
utterances that are free from forbidden wordings.

> The hadith attests to the fact that Allah has the Absolute Will and that
each of His servants has his own will. However, man’s will is definitely
subservient to the Will of Allah,

Endnotes

1 At-Tirmidhi (1535), Aba Dawad (3251),and Al:Hakim (4/297),

‘Haythamt said in Majma" Az-Zawélid (4/177):"This hadith is related by At-Tabarant
in Al-Mu jam Al-Kabir (The Great Lexicon) and its transmitters are among those OF the
hadiths related by Al-Bukhari in His Sahih (Authentic Collection of Hadith)?

3 Abd Dawad (4980) and Almmad in Al-Musnad (5/384),

Dissatisfaction with Oaths Taken
in the Name of Allah

‎‘Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet‏ مضل
‎(PBUH) said:‏

‎“Do not swear by your forefathers; whoever swears by Allah must
tell the truth, and the one for whom the oath is taken by Allah must
get satisfied with it, and whoever is not satisfied with it is not one
of the true servants of Allah.”

‎(Related by Ibn Majah with a hasan chain of transmitters)

‎Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

‎In this chapter, the author emphasizes that dissatisfaction with oaths
sworn in the name of Allah contradicts the perfection of one’s belief in

338 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawuhid

monotheism, for this dissatisfaction signifies that the person does not
duly exalt Allah, Almighty and Ever-Majestic be He.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Do not swear by your forefathers: This is a prohibition of swearing
by one’s forefathers. This is because people of the pre-Islamic era used
to swear by their forefathers. The Prophet (PBUH) has forbidden
swearing by anyone other than Allah,

+ Must tell the truth: The one who swears by Allah musf tell the truth in
veneration of that solemn oath. Besides, telling the truth is obligatory
even if one does not take an oath in the name of Allah.

+ Must get satisfied with it: In homage to that oath taken in the name
of Allah, one should be satisfied. This reaction is to be applied in legal
claims and in any other cases.

General Meaning of the Hadith

The Prophet (PBUH) forbids Muslims to swear by their forefathers, for
such oaths imply glorification of those who are sworn by; Needless to say,
glorificationis to be rendered exclusively to Allah, Glorified be He. The Prophet
(PBUH) then orders those swearing by Allah to tell the truth, for telling the
truth is one of the general obligations Allah enjoined for Muslims, and it is
highly stressed when it concerns swearing by Allah. In addition, the Prophet
(PBUH) orders those to whom one swears by Allah, whether in a dispute or
in any other circumstances, to be satisfied with such an oath in veneration of
Allah. He (PBUH) then threatens those dissatisfied with oaths sworn in the
name of Allah that they will not be among the true servants of Allah, for they
do not duly exalt Him.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith inchides an emphatic divine threat to whoever is dissatisfied
with oaths sworn in the name of Allah.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

“ The hadith implies an emphatic threat to whoever is not content with
oaths sworn to him in the name of Allah.

‘Chapter 42: Dissatisfaction with Oaths Taken in the Name of Allah 339

+ It is obligatory to tell the truth when swearing by Allah.
% Its prohibited to tell a lie when swearing by Allah,

‘+ Muslims should think good of each other unless things apparently
turn out otherwise.

© It is obligatory to believe whoever swears by Allah as long as he is
known to be a true believer,

Endnotes

1 Tbn Majah (2101),

foo ee ee 3 0 1 ‏له‎
Saying ‘By the Will of Allah and Yours’

Qutaylah narrated:

“A Jewish man came to the Prophet (PBUH) and said, ‘You (i.e., Muslims)
associate others with Allah as you say, ‘By the will of Alah and yours' and
‘say (when swearing), ‘By the Ka'bah’ Thereupon, the Prophet (PBUH)
ordered them (Muslims) to say ‘By the Lord of the Ka ‘bah; if they should
swear, and to say ‘If Allah wills and then you will)”

(Related by An-Nasii who graded it sahih)

Relevance of this Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

‘The topic of this chapter is included in the chapter elaborating on the
Quranic verse that reads, “..S0 do not attribute to Allah equals...” (Quran: Al-
Baqarah: 22). We have already shown its relevance to the Book of Tawhid.

342 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Qutaylah

Qutaylah Bint Sayfi Al-Juhaniyyah is a female Companion (may Allah be
pleased with her),

Keywords and Phrases

+ You associate others with Allah: Some Muslims perpetrate acts of
minor polytheism.

+ If Allah wills and you will: This utterance implies associating
partners along with Allah in His Will.

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘A Jewish man told the Prophet (PBUH) that some Muslims fall into specific
acts of minor polytheism by saying some utterances that lead to it. Thereupon,
the Prophet (PBUH) confirmed what that Jewish man said, so he (PBUH)
instructed Muslims to swear only by Allah, and also guided them to say instead,
“If Allah wills, then you will’, to make the will of the servant subservient to the
Will of Allah.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith illustrates that saying, “If Allah wills and you will is an
utterance implying minor polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% The statement, "By the will of Allah and yours" implies minor
polytheism. Likewise, swearing by anyone other than Allah is
considered minor polytheism, for the Prophet (PBUH) confirmed
what the Jewish man said. The Jews are acquainted with the acts
of minor polytheism.

 Musliins should earnestly try to understand the real intentions
of the speaker whether what he says is motivated by his personal
desire or not.

+ Muslims are urged to accept the truth even when told by a person
embracing a religion other than Islam.

+ Minor polytheism does not exclude the Muslim from the fold of Islam:

(Chapter 43: Saying “By the Will of Allah and Yours! 343

4 Muslims must refrain from utteting the words that contravene the
Islamic creed of monotheism, and they should use other words that
do not imply associating partners with Allah as a substitute.

4 Ifa scholar declares something to be forbidden, he is to offer a substi-
tute that-makes up for it, if possible.

4 The prohibition of swearing by anyone other than Allah is so general
that it also applies to swearing by the Ka’ bah. which is Allah's Sacred
House on the Earth.

The Hadith proves the verity of the Absolute Will of Allah and that each
of His servants has his own free will. However, man’s will is definitely
subservient to that of Allah.

See

344 Concise Commentary on the Book af Tinubid

Ibn * Abbas narrated:

“A man said to the Prophet (PBUH), “If Allah wills and you will.”
Thereupon, he (PBUH) said, ‘Do you make me an equal to Allah?
Say “If Allah wills Alone?”

(Related by An-Nasa'i)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Do you make me an equal to Allah?: This is a question introduced
in the form ofa reprimand,

+ Am equal: A partner to Allah.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) expresses his disapproval of coupling
his will with that of Allah through using the conjunction ‘and’ as that entails
setting a created being up as equal to Allah, He (PBUW) then declared that the
Absolute Will belongs to Allah Alone,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

Uttering phrases such as “By the will of Allah and yours" is considered an
act of attributing equals to Allah, and this act is prohibited according to the
verse that reads:

“4.80 do not attribute to Allah equals while you know [that there
is nothing similar to Himn]" (Qurfin: Al-Bagarah: 22)

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

‘ It is prohibited (o utter the statement, "If Allah wills and you will”, and
suchlike phrases that ascribe equals to Allah.

Whoever sets servants up as equals to Allah even in a matter regarded
as minor polytheism is regarded to have attributed rivals to Allah.

Muslims are duty bound to disapprove of evil.

# The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) has protected the Islumic creed of mono-
theism from corruption and blocked all avenues leading to polytheism.

she

(Chapter 43: Saying “By the Will of Allah and Yours! 345

At-Thfayl, “Aisha’s maternal brother, narrated;

“Tsaw in a dream that I came upon a group of Jews and said to them,
"You would be a good people indeed if you did not say, “'Uzayr (Ezra)
is the son of Allah? Thereupon, they said to me, ‘You (Muslims) also
would be a really good people if you did not say, ‘By the Will of Allah
and that of Muhammad? Then 1 passed by a group of Christians
and said to them, "You would be a good people indeed if you did
not say, ‘The Messiah is the son of Allah’ Thereupon, they said to
me, ‘You (Muslims) also would be a good people if you did not say,
‘By the will of Allah and that of Muhammad: _
some persons about the dream then I went to the Prophet (PBUH)
and repeated it to him. He asked me, ‘Have you fold anyone about
it?" I answered ‘Yes’. Thereupon, he (PBUH) (delivered a sermon
in which he) praised Allah and extolled Him and said, ‘At-Tufayl
had a dream which he has already related to some of you. You say
‏م‎ statement nothing prevented me from forbidding you to say but
such-and-such (i.¢., bashfulness). So, do not say ‘By the will of Allah
ard that of Muhammad’ but say ‘By the will of Allah Alone’

(Related by Ibn Majah)

A Profile About At-Tufayl

‘The full name of the narrator is At-Tufay] Ibn ' Abdullah Ibnul-Harith Ibn
Sakhbarah Al-Azdi, He was one of the Companions and narrated only this
hadith; may Allah be pleased with him.

Keywords and Phrases

+ If you did not say, ‘Ezra is the son of Allah’: You would be excellent
people if you did not commit polytheism by ascribing Ezra to Allah as
His son. The Jews called Ezra ‘the son of Allah’ for he committed the
Torah to his memory, or because he was said to be a prophet.

+ Ifyou did not say, “By the will of Allah and that of Muhammad.:
The Jews and the Christians argued with At-Tufayl in his dream about
this statement, which is an act of minor polytheism committed by
some Muslims.

+ Ifyou did not say, “The Messiah is the son of Alla”: The Christians
commit polytheism by setting Jesus, the son of Mary, up as a son of
Allah, on the basis that he was born without a father.

346 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwlid

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, At-Tufayl (may Allah be pleased with him) states that he
saw in a dream that he passed by a group of Jews and a group of Christians,
and reprimanded them for the polytheistic acts they commit by assigning sons
unto Allah, Exalted be He. Both the Jews and Christians argued that some
‘Muslims used to say some utterances entailing minor polytheism. Orr the next
morning At-Tufayl told the Prophet (PBUH) about his dream, ‘Thereon, he
(PBUH) gave a sermon on that dream and reprimanded those who repeated
that polytheistic utterance. He further enjoined them to only repeat utterances
thatare free from polytheism.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith signifies thatsaying, ‘By the will of Allah and thatof Muhammad"
and suchlike utterances are considered to be minor polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

>> The hadith shows the significance of dreams as occasions for setting
rules during the lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH).

+ The statement that reads, 'By the will of Allah and that of Muhammad’
and its like are all deemed acts of minor polytheism,

¢ Though the Jews and Christians hold beliefs that are regarded as major
polytheism, they learn about acts of minor polytheism with the intent
of disputing with the Muslims.

It is an Islamic ritual to preface a sermon with praising Allah and
extolling Him,

+ Tis desirable to attribute the Absolute Will solely to Allah though itis
permissible to say, 'If Allah wills then as so-and-so wills

Endnotes

1An-Nasit (7/6) No. (3773), Abad (6/371 - 372), Al-Bayhag{ (3/216), Al-Hiakim (4/297)
sgreding it saith, and Adh-Dhahabi agreed to that grading.

2 An-Nastit in. ‘Amal Al-Yawm wal-Laylah (Supplications of the Day and Night) (988)
and Abmad in Al-Musnad (1/214, 283, 347),

3 Ibn Majah (2118) and Ahmad (5/393).

Inveighing against the Vicissitudes
of Time Wrongs Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And they say, ‘There is not but our worldly life; we die and live,
and nothing destroys us except time’ And they have of that no
knowledge; they are only assuming” (Quran: Al-Jathyiah: 24)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Inveighing against the vicissitudes of Time is an act of polytheism; that is,
if the person who inveighs against the vicissitudes of Time thinks that they
affect things just as Allah does, he will be a polytheist.

348 Concise Commentary on the Book of ‏الشف‎

Keywords and Phrases
٠ Wrongs Alllah: By ascribing attributes of imperfection to Him
+ And they say: Those wha deny Resurrection
«But our worldly life: They deny the Afterlife

+ And they haye of that no knowledge: it means that their claim is
unfounded. Rather, their claim is traced back to their predecessors
who said so out of their ignorance.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this verse, Allah tells about the atheistic sects of Ad-Dahriyyah' and
those among the Arab polytheists who adopt the same doctrine of denying
the verity of the Resurrection, The adherents of these sects mistakenly hold
a belief that there is no Afterlife, and that the present life will continue as it
is; some are begotten while some pass away only due to the passage of time
and the revolution of day and night. Confuting their allegations, Allah asserts
that their denial of the Resurrection is based only on assumption, which is
aa baseless argument. Moreover, whoever denies or confirms something is
supposed to introduce evidence in support of their claim,

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

This verse illustrates that whoever inveighs against the vicissitudes of time
commits an act of polytheism typical of that committed by Ad-Dahriyyah,
even though he does not share with them in their atheistic beliefs.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

2 The verse proves the reality of Resurrection and refutes the arguments
of those who deny it.

‎Tt, further, dispraises those who attribute daily occurrences to the‏ يه
‎vicissitudes of time.‏

‎+ Whoever denies or proves something must introduce evidence in
support of his claim.

‎4 Assumption is not a reliable argument as far as beliefs are concerned.

‎See

Chaprer 44: Inveighing against the Vicissivudes of Time Wrongs Allah 349

Abd Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“Allah, Exalted be He, said, ‘The son of Adam wrongs Me for he
inveighs against the vicissitudes of Time though 1am (the One Who
manages) Time, and J cause the alternation of day and night!”

In another narration, it is related that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Do not inveigh against the vicissitudes of Time for Allah is (the
One Who manages) Time.”

(Related by Al-Bukharj and Muslim)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Wrongs Me

+ Inveighs against the vicissitudes of Time! It means that when man
is in distress, he censures the vicissitudes of Time.

+ Though 1 am Time: Though to Me belongs Time and I am the One
‘Who disposes all affairs and occurrences, which some people falsely
ascribe to time.

+ And I cause the alternation of day and night: It means that Allah
causes them to follow each other in succession and disposes whatever
‘occurs therein, whether good or evil.

« In another narration: A narration related by Muslim and other
compilers of Hadith.

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘The Messenger (PBUH) relates that Allah, Almighty and Ever-Majestic be
He, states that whoever inveighs against the adversities and vicissitudes of time
abuses Allah, Exalted be He, by ascribing attributes of imperfection ta Him.
This is because Allah, Glorified be He, is the One Who causes whatever occurs
while time is but a subjugated creature in which all occurrences take place by
His command, Exalted be He.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

iy ascribing attributes of imperfection to Allah

This hadith stresses that whoever inveighs against the vicissitudes of time
wrongs Allah; ie. ascribes attributes of imperfection to Him.

350 ‘Concise Commentary on the Book of Taidhied

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith
4 Itis prohibited to inveigh against the vicissitudes of Time.
+ Itis obligatory to believe in the Divine Decree and Destiny.
Time is but one of Allah's subjugated creatures.

4 Creatures may wrong their Creator by ascribing attributes of imper~
fection to Him. However, they can never harm Him,

Endnotes

1 Ad-Dahriyyah is an atheistic sect characterized by denying the Resurrection, the Day
of judginent, the Paradise and Hel.
2 Al-Bukhéri (4826) and Muslim (2246).

Names such as the Judge of Judges
and the Like

Abd Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“The most awful (meanest) name in Allah’ sight is (that of) a man
called ‘king of kings, for there is no Sovereign but Allah”

Sufyan said, “Such as the name of Shahanshal

In another narration, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“The most abominable and evil man in Allah’ sight on the Day of
Resurrection...”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

32 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhid

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

This chapter illustrates that bearing a name or title that implies an associa-
tion with Allah in the glorification due only to Him is an act of polytheism in
Allahis Rububiyyah (Lordship).

A Profile about Sufyan

The full name of Sufyén is Sufyén Ibn ‘Uyaynah Ibn Mayman AL-Hilali.
Heisa trustworthy héfiz and fagih. He was born in Kufa in 107 AH.,and lived
in Mecca, Sufyan died in 198 A.H.; may Allah have mercyon him.

Keywords and Phrases

+ And the like: Titles such as, the ruler of rulers, the sultan of sultans,
the master of masters

+ Called: To be known by such a name or title, and to be satisfied with it.
In other narrations, “calling himself”; viz, to name oneself as such.

+ There is no Sovereign but Allah: This statement provides an
admonition to whoever is satisfied with being called “the king of
kings" or suchlike names that demonstrate that he sets himself up as
pariner to Allah in an attribute peculiar to Allah Alone.

+ Shahinshah: It is a Persian title which means “the king of kings’:

٠ In another narration: Another version related by Muslim in his
authentic book of Hadith.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) states that the meanest person in the
sight of Allah, Almighty and Ever-Majestic be He, is the one who is pleased to
bear a name or a title exclusively indicating Allah’s grandeur and supremacy
such as “the king of kings" or suchlike names and titles for such an act entails
likeness to Allah. Moreover, the one who bears title like that, sets himself or
is set up as a partner to Allah, Therefore, whoever bears any such names is the
‘meanest and the most abominable person in Allah's sight.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith proves that one is prohibited to call oneself or anyone else
“a judge of judges” or suchlike names. This ruling is passed by drawing an
analogical deduction from the ruling given on the title “king of kings’,

‘Chapter 45: Names auch as the Judge of Judges ancl the Like 353

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Oneis prohibited to call oneself or anyone else a “judge of judges" and
suchlike titles.

“* Muslims are duty bound to show reverence to Allah's Best Names.

‎Muslims are urged to be modest and to select names and titles that are‏ ف
‎suitable for human beings‏

‎Endnotes

‎1 Al-Bukharf (6205, 6206) and Muslim (2143),

Reverence to Allah’s
Beautiful Names

‘Abd Shurayh (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“My nickname was Abul-Hakam’ (the judge). So, the Prophet
(PBUH) said to me, ‘Allah is Al-Hakam (the Judge), and to Him
judgment belongs’ I said, ‘When my people disagree about a
‘matter, they come to me, and 1 arbitrate between them, and both
parties accept my decision. He (the Prophet) said, ‘How good this
is! Do you have any children?’ I replied, ‘I have Shurayh, Muslim
and ‘Abdullah? He asked, ‘Who is the eldest of them?” I replied,
‘Shurayh So, He (PBUH) said, ‘Then you are Abt Shurayh, "*

(Related by Ab Dawid and others).

356 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tixobid

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Showing reverence to Allah's Beautiful Names and changing one’s name
for this very reason are of the corollaries of the creed of monotheism.

A profile about Aba Shurayh,

‘The full name of the Companion Abi Shurayh is Hani’ Ibn Yazid Al-Kindi.
He lived in Kufa and died in Medina in 68 A.H.; may Allah be pleased with him,

Keywords and Phrases

+ Showing Reverence to Allah’s Beautiful Names: In reverence for
‘Allah's beautiful Names.

+ Changing One’s Name: Bearing a name other than those that reveal
association to Allah.

+ The Judge: One of Allalis Beautiful Names; it means that Allah is the
Supreme Judge whose judgments are irrevocable,

+ And to Him judgment belongs: He arbitrates between His servants
in both this life and the Hereafter.

+ When my people disagree: This statement signifies that Abo Shurayh,
did not nickname himself as such, but rather his people did.

+ How good this ist: It is very good to settle people's disputes and
arbitrate between them ina fair manner,

+ You are Aba Shurayh: The Prophet (PBUH) nicknamed the man
after the name of his eldest son, for he is the most entitled one.

General Meaning of the Hadith

The Prophet (PBUH) criticized Abo Shurayh for being nicknamed
“Abul-Hakam” (the judge) while Al-Hakam is one of Allab’s Beautiful Names
that must be regarded with reverence. Abii Shurayh explained why he was
nicknamed Abul-Hakam; he used to arbitrate among the disputing parties
of his people and resolve their problems in a way that pleases both sides.
‘Thereon, the Prophet (PBUH) approved of that good deed but disapproved
of the nickname. Consequently, he (PBUH) substituted the nickname Aba
Shurayh for Abul-Hakam after the name of his eldest son.

Chapter 46: Reverence to Allah's Beautiful Names 357

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

According fo this hadith, Muslims are admonished against degrading the
Beautiful Names of Allah by means of giving names or nicknames like them.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% This Hadith prohibits Muslims from degrading Allah's Beautiful Names
and warns against giving names, titles or nicknames that imply irrever-
‘ence for these Beautiful Names, such as the nickname ‘Abul-Hakam’

© Al-Hakam “the Judge” is one of the Beautiful Names of Allah, Exalted
be He.

© Itis permissible to seek arbitration from those competent to arbitrate,
and the judgments they pass are binding even if they are not officially
appointed as judges.

% One's nickname is given after the name of one's eldest son.
© It is legitimate to give some precedence to the eldest.

‎Itis legitimate to substitute suitable names for unsuitable ones.‏ جد

‎Endnotes,

‎1 Abit Dawdd (4955), Al-Bayhagi (10/145), and Al-Hakim in Al-Mustadrak (4/279),

Mocking Allah’s Revelations or
Messengers

Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“And if you ask them, they will surely say, ‘We were only
conversing and playing...’ Say, Is it Allah and His verses and
His Messenger that you were mocking?”

(Qur'an: At-Tawbah: 65)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

‘This chapter illuminates the ruling on whoever mocks Allah’s Names, the
Noble Qur'an or His Messenger. It further regards such mocking as an act of
disbelief that violates belief in monotheism.

360 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiauhial

Keywords and Phrases

+ If you ask them: The addressee is the Prophet (PBUH) and the
pronoun “them” refers to the hypocrites. In this context, the Prophet
(PBUH) is ordered to ask the hypocrites about their mockery of Allah's
‘Messenger and the Qur'an.

+ They will surely say: Offering an insincere apology to the Prophet (PBUH)
٠ Conversing and playing: The hypocrites will claim that they did not
intend to repudiate or mock Allah, the Qur'an or Allahis Messenger,

+ Say “Is it Allah and His verses and His Messenger that you were
mocking?”: This is a Divine command to the Prophet (PBUH) to
inform those hypocrites, in a form of scolding, that the apology they
offer will be of no avail to them before Allah.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this verse, Allah informs Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) that if he
‘questions those hypocrites who mocked the religion of Islam by uttering
words of disbelief, they will offer an apology maintaining that they did not
mean to deny or mock religion, but only to joke. Thereon, their apology
Will be of no avail to them before Allah.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

This verse together with the one right after it in the same sitrah attest to
the disbelief of whoever mocks Ailah’s invocations, His Messenger or the
Noble Qur'an.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

4 Mocking Allah, His ayat (verses, signs, revelations, etc.) the Prophet
(PBUH), or the Noble Qur'an is an act of disbelief.

© Whoever perpetrates an act of disbelief and claims to be ignorant
about its being as such, his excuse will not be accepted,

* Man is duty bound to show reverence to the invocations of Allah, His
Book and His Messenger.

> Whoever utters words entailing disbelief is deemed a disbeliever, even
if he does not really believe in what he utters,

فنف

‘Chaprer 47: Mocking Allahs Revelations ot Messengers 361

It is related on the authority of Tbn ‘Umar, Muhammad Ibn Ka‘, Zayd Ibn
Aslam, and Qatédah that:

“One day during the batile of Tabak, a man said, referring to the
Prophet (PBUH) and the teciters of the Noble Quran among his
Companions, ‘We have not seen people who are as gluttonous, lying
and cowardly (in the face of the enemy) as those reciters of the Qur'an.”
‘Awf Ibn Malik replied, ‘You have told a lie and you are nothing
but a hypocrite, I shall inform the Messenger of Allah (PBUH).
and he went to the Prophet (PBUH) to tell him, but he found that
the revelation of the Noble Quriin preceded hima in informing the
Prophet (PBUH). Consequently, that hypocrite went to the Prophet
after he had mounted his camel and said, when he met the Prophet
(PBUH), ‘O Messenger of Allah, we were just conversing and playing
during our journey as a means of passing time’. Ibn ‘Umar said,
‘Tremember him clinging to the strap of the Prophet’ camel while
stones are hindering him and his saying, ‘We were just conversing
and playing’ However, the Prophet (PBUH) said to him, “Is it Allah
and His verses and His Messenger that you were mocking? Make
no excuse: you have disbetieved (i.e. rejected faith) after your
belief...” The Prophet (PBUH) did not look at the man nor did he
say more than the words of these verses.”

Profiles

«Ibn ‘Umar is ‘Abdullah Ibn ' Umar Ibnul Khattab; may Allah be pleased
with him.

+ The full name of Muhammad Ibn Ka'b is Muhammad Ibn Ka'b fbn
Sulaym Al-Qurazi Al-Madani, He was a trustworthy scholar. He died
in 120 AH may Allah have mercy on him,

٠ Zayd Ibn Aslam was the slave of ‘Umar Ibnul Khatt4b (may Allah be
pleased with him). He was well-known to be a trustworthy scholar,
nd died in 136 A.H.; may Allah have mercy on him,

«The full name of Qatddah is Qatidah Ibn Du’dmah As-Sudiisi, He
was an exegete and a héfiz. He died around 117 A.Hi; may Allah have
mercy on him.

٠ The full name of ' Awf is “ Awf Ibn Malik Al-Ashja't. The first battle he

witnessed was that of Khaybar. A group of the Successors related some
hadiths from him. He died in 73 A.H.; may Allah have mercy on him.

362 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwi

Keywords and Phrases

+ Reciters: Those who recite the Holy Qur'an and are knowledgeable
about its meanings.

+ Cowardly: When they come face to face with the enemy,

+ The strap: is a thong by which the baggage is fastened on the back of
the camel

General Meaning of the Tradition

The narrators of this tradition narrate that the hypocrites, out of their
disbelief and grudges, spoke badly about the Prophet (PBUH) and his
Companions and mocked them, However, Allah exposed the hypocrites’ bad
intentions through their own speeches, Hearing the hypocrites’ malicious
speeches, the believers who were present reprimanded them and one of
those true believers, aut of his jealousy for Allah and his religion, went to
inform the Prophet (PBUH). But Allah, Who knows the secret and that which
is yet more hidden, heard their speech and informed His Messenger before
that Companion would reach the Prophet (PBUH), Allah, Glorified be He.
declared those hypocrites to be disbelievers and regarded their apology as
unacceptable. Then, one of those hypocrites came to the Prophet (PBUH)
offering an apology. But the Prophet, in compliance with the command of
Allah, did not accept such an apology, and added nothing more than reciting
the Qur’anic verses revealed as.a rebuke for the hypocrites.

Relevance of the Tradition to this Chapter

‘This tradition provides an interpretation of the aforementioned noble
Quranic verse,

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

% The verse exposes the hidden hostility and grudges that the hypocrites,
bear for Allah, his Messenger and the believers.

% Whoever mocks Allah, His verses and His Messenger is deemed
disbeliever, even though he intends only to joke.

% Informing those in authority about the offenses committed by the
defiantly disobedient to deter them is not an act of backbiting or
talebearing. Rather, it is an act intended for the sake of Allah, His
messenger, the Muslim rulers and common folk.

Chapter 47: Mocking Allah's Revelaticns or Messengers 363

+ Muslims are to be tough with the enemies of Allah and His
‘Messenger (PBUH).

> Some excuses are not to be accepted.

4 Muslims are to be on guard against hypocrisy, for Allah, Exalted be
He, verified that those hypocrites had belief in Him before uttering
these words of disbelief.

4 Mocking Allah, His Messenger or the Holy Qur’én nullifies one’s belief
in Allah, even if one does not really believe in the ironic utterances

one repeats.
$e

48

Rendering Thanks to Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And if We let him taste mercy from Us after an adversity which
has touched him, he will surely say, ‘This is (due) to me, and Ido
not think the Hour will occur; and (even) if I should be returned
to my Lord, indeed, for me there will be with Him the best? But
We will surely inform those who disbelieved about what they did,
and We will surely make them taste a massive punishment.”

(Quran: Fussilat: 50)
Commenting on this verse, Mujahid says, “Man says, “This mercy is the
outcome of my capabilities and I deserve it.” Ibn * Abbas explains, “Man claims
that this mercy is due to his imaginative and inventive faculties.”
Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“He said, ‘Iwas only given it because of knowledge I have’...”
(Qur'an: Al-Qasas: 78)

366, Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

‘Commenting on this verse, Qatédah states, “Man claimed that he wasgiven
mercy because of his knowledge about the ways of getting benefits.” Other exegetes
comment on this verse saying, “Man says, T was given it because Allah knows
that 1 deserve it”. This bears the same meaning as Mujahid’s commentary that
reads, “Man says, ‘Iwas given this mercy because of my honor’ ”

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

‘This chapter asserts that man's claim that he deserves Allah's favors
granted to him after being in distress contradicts the perfection of his belief
in monotheism.

Keywords and Phrases

+ And if We let him taste; To grant him
+ Mercy: Wealth and health

+ If I should be returned to my Lord: This is a mere hypothesis that if
the Day of Resurrection comes and he is returned to Allah...

٠ For me there will be with Him the best: Such a man claims that
he will have the best reward from Allah because of his belief that he
deserves all favors granted to him in this life and that they are not due
to Allah's Grace.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this verse, Allah, Exalted be He, states that when man is in distress, he
humbles himself before Allah, returns to Him and invokes Him to remove his
afflictions. However, at times of ease and welfare, that man’s attitude changes so
he denies Allah’s Grace, renders no thanks to Him, claiming that he obtained
these favors through his skills and hard work. Moreover, such an ungrateful
man perpetrates a greater sin by denying the inevitable termination of this
life and the coming of the Day of Resurrection, He also claims that should
there be an afterlife, he would continue to lead a life of luxury as he deserves.
Commenting on these claims, Allah, Exalted be he, emphasizes that people
of such a kind will inevitably come to know the true nature of their heinous
deeds and thus receive the most painful punishment,

(Chapter 48: Rendering Thanks to Allah 367

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

Man is duty bound to render thanks to Allah for His favors, and to
admit that such favors are exclusively granted by Him.

4 Man is prohibited from being self-conceited and is warned not to be
deluded by his power.

4 Muslims are duty bound to believe in the Day of Resurrection.
+ Itis obligatory to fear the punishment of Allah in the Hereafter,
+ The verse implies a threat to those wha deny Allah's favors,

Sos

368 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhiid

Abd Hurayralt (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that he heard the
Prophet (PBUH) saying:

“Allah willed to test three from among the Children of Israel
(Israelites) who were a leper, a blind man and a bald-headed man,
So, hte sent them an angel who came to the leper and said, ‘What
thing do you like most?” He replied, ‘Good color and good skin, for
the people feel repulsion for me. "The angel touched him and he was
cured, and he was given a good color and beautiful skin. The angel
asked him, ‘What kind of property do you like best?" He replied,
‘Camels (or cows): (Ishaq, one of the transmitters of this hadith, is
in doubt whether the leper wished to be given camels or cows.) So
he (ie. the leper) was given a pregnant she-camel, and the angel
said (to him), ‘May Allah bless you in it? The angel then went to
the bald-headed man and said, ‘What thing do you like most?’ He
replied, ‘like good hair and wish to be cured of this disease, for the
people feel repulsion for me; The angel touched him and he was
cured, and he was given good hair. The angel asked (him), ‘What
kind of property do you like best?" He replied, ‘Cows’ So the angel
gave him a pregnant cow and said, ‘May Allah bless you in it? Then,
the angel went to the blind man and asked, ‘What thing do you like
most?” He said, ‘(I like) that Allah may restore my eyesight so that I
may see the people’ The angel touched his eyes. and Allah gave lim
back his eyesight, The angel asked his, “What kind of property do
you like best?’ He replied, ‘Sheep’ The angel gave him a pregnant
‘sheep. Afterwards, all the three pregnant animals gave birth ta
young ones, and multiplied and brought forth so much that one of
the (three) men had a herd of camels filling a valley, and one had
a herd of cows filling a valley, and one had a flock of sheep filling
a valley. Then the angel, disguised in the shape and appearance of
a leper, went to the leper and said, ‘Tam a poor man, who has lost
all means of livelihood while on a journey. So, none will satisfy my
need except Allah and then you. In the Name of Hiri Who has given
‘pou suck nice color and beautiful skin, and so much property, 1 ask
‘you to give me a camel 50 that I may reach my destination. The
man replied, Thave many obligations (so I cannot give you)? The
angel said, 'T think I know you; were you not a leper for whom the
‘people used to feel repulsion? Were you not a poor man, and then
‘Allah gave you (all this property)?" He replied, ‘(This is all wrong),

Chaprer 48: Rendering Thanks ‏م‎ Allah 369

I got this property through inheritance from my forefathers’ The
angel said, ‘If you are telling a lie, then let Allah make you as you
were before: Then the angel, disguised in the shape and appearance
ofa bald man, went to the bald man and said to him the same as he
told the first one, and he too answered the same as the first one did.
The angel said to him, ‘If you are telling a lie, then let Allali make
‘you as you were before’ Then, the angel, disguised in the shape of a
blind man, went to the blind man and said, ‘Tam a poor man and
a traveler, whose means of livelihood have been exhausted while on
4 journey. have nobody to help me except Allah, and after Hin,
‘you yourself, ask you in the Name of Him Who has given you back
‘your eyesight to give mea sheep, so that with its help, Imay complete
my journey’ The man said, ‘No doubt, I was blind and Allah gave
me back my eyesight; I was poor and Allah made me rich; so take
anything you wish from my property. By Allah, I will not stop you
for taking anything (you need) of my property which you may take
‘for Allah’s sake’ The angel replied, ‘Keep your property with you,
You (i.e. the three men) have been tested and Allah is pleased with
you and is angry with your two companions”.'

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Ishaq is in doubt: He is Ishaq Ibn ‘Abdullah Ibn Abi ‘Talhah; one
from among the transmitters of this hadith.

« To test: To try them by granting them favors to see whether they will
thank Him or deny His favors.

General Meaning of the Hadith

The Prophet (PBUH) relatés the story of three men; each of them was
afflicted with a deformity and suffered poverty. Allah, Exalted be He, willed to
try them and so He cured them of their deformities and granted each of them
great wealth, Then, Allah sent to each of them one and the same angel disguised
in their shapes and appearances before being healed (i.e. pretending to be a
poor man suffering leprosy, blindness and baldness respectively), This angel
begged each of them for a little assistance, whereupon their real characters

370 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

‘were exposed, As for the blind man, he recognized the divine favors bestowed
upon him, and attributed them to Allah, and thus observed Allah's right in
return for His favors, Accordingly, such a man won Allals satisfaction, On
the contrary, the other two men were ungrateful to Allah for His favors and
repudiated His Grace, and thus deserved His wrath.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith provides a contrast between those who are ungrateful for the
Divine favors and those who are grateful.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

Muslims are duty bound to be grateful to Allah for His favors and to
pay the amount of money Allsh has made obligatory on them.

Muslims are prohibited to be ungrateful for Allah's favors or to
withhold the due money that Allah enjoined them to pay.

5 One is permitted to tell about the fates of the preceding people with
the aim of making use of the lessons drawn from these stories.

+ Allah sometimes tries His servants by His favors.

+ Itis permissible for one to pronounce the statement, * ..with the help
of Allah and then yours”,

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhéri (3464) and Muslim (2964).

Giving a Name Signifying
Servitude to a deity other
than Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“But when He gives them a good (child), they ascribe partners to
Him concerning that which He has given them. Exalted be Allah
above what they associate with Him.” (Quran: Al-A’ raf: 190)

Tn Hazm says:

“Scholars agree on the prohibition of giving a name signifying that
one is a servant of others besides Allah, such as “Abd ‘Amr (the
servant of Amr), or ‘Abdul-Ka bah (the servant of Kabah), except
{for the name *Abdul-Muttalib.”

‘Commentary on the Book of ‏اشاسنا‎

372 oy

Commenting on this verse, ‏مطل‎ “Abbas says:

“When Adam kad sexual intercourse with Eve and she conceived, Satan

‘frightened thent saying, "1 am your companion who caused you to be
removed from Paradise. Unless you obey me, I will attach two stag horns
lo the head of your baby so that it cuts open your abdomen while coming
ut oft, and Twill do mich more to you. Name your baby ‘Abdul- Harith
(the servant of Al- Harith)! However, they refused to obey hint, and the
baby was born dead. Then, Eve couceived again; Satan repeated his
‘threat; they refused to obey him; andl the baby was born dead. The third
time Eve conceived, they experienced the feeling of love toward their baby,
decided to obey Satan and named the baby ‘Abdul-Hirith. This is the
‘meaning of the statement, “..they ascribe partners to Him concerning
that which He has given them...”' (Qur’an: Al-A’ raf: 190)”

(Related by Ibn Abd Hitim)

Tbn Abii Hatim relates with an authentic chain of transmitters that
Qatadah said:

"(This verse means that) they ascribed partners to Allah in their
obedience, not in their worship.”

Also, ‏مطل‎ Abii Hatim relates with an authentic chain of transmitters that

‘Mujihid, commenting on the verse, “..If You should give us a good child...
said, “It implies that they feared for the baby lest it should not be a well-

proportioned human.”
Besides, Ibn Ab@ Hatim relates other narrations with the same meaning
about Al-Hasan, Sa’id and others.

Profile about Ibn Hazm

fbn. Hazm is the great scholar of Andalusia. His full name is Abd
Muhammad, "Ali fbn Ahmad Ibn Said Ibn Hazm Az-Zahiri, from Cordoba.
He died in 456 A.H,; may Allah have mercy on him.

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

This chapter points out that giving children names indicating their being
servants of others besides Allah is an act of associating partners with Allah in
obedience and a sign of being ungrateful for Allah's Grace.

‘Chaprer 49: Giving a Name Signifying Servitude to.a deity ‏نغ رايت‎ than Allah 373

Keywords and Phrases

+ Concerning that which He has given them: The child whom they
named ‘ Abdul-Harith, though he is a servant of none but ‘Allah,

+ Scholars agree: This probably indicates a consensus of scholars on
this issue.

+ The prohibition of giving a name signifying that one isa servant
of others besides Allah: The reason of prohibition is that suchlike
names entail associating others with Allah in His Lordship and His
Divinity. Needless to say, all created beings belong to Allah and are
His slaves,

« Except for the name *Abdul-Muttalib; Scholars did not agree on the
prohibition of this name, Their disagreementis either because this name
originally refers to the servitude of being under the control of someone
else or because that name is a mere reference to the person who was
formerly known by such a name, but was not recently given it,

+ Name your baby ’Abdul-Harith: Al-Hérith was a name for Satan
who accordingly wanted them to give their child the name ‘Abdul-
Harith so as to make sure that they have fallen into polytheism.

+ Experienced the feeling of love toward their baby: They longed
to have a sound baby. ‘This feeling is part of the trial both Adam and
Eve faced,

+ Lest it should not be a well-proportioned human: That ié they
feared lest it might bea beast.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah, Exalted be He, states that when He answered the invocation of Adam
and Eve and granted them a well-proportioned child as they wished, they did
not render due thanks to Him as they promised before. Moreover, they named
their child ‘Abdul-Harith, and thus made him a servant of someone other
than Allah, though it is a sign of perfect gratitude to Allah that one annexes
this name ‘Abd (servant) to none but Allah. However, the name they gave to
their child entailed ascribing partners to Allah by naming, not in worship. At
the end of the verse, Allah enunciates that he is far above having any partner,
whether in worship or in regard to naming,

374 Concise Commentary an the Book of Tawbid

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse:

4 One is prohibited to give his child a name signifying that such a child
is a servant of someone besides Allah, such as ‘Abd Al-Hussayn (the
servant of Al-Hussayn), "Abd Ar-Rassdil (servant of the Messenger) or
” Abdul-Ka' bah (servant of the Ka’ bah).

+ Polytheism may be perpetrated only on account of the name one bears,
-even if one does not intend the meaning implied in that name.

When Allah grants someone a well-proportioned baby, itis a favor
worthy of rendering thanks to Him.

% Giving the child a name signifying thathe isa servant of Allah is a sign
of the parents’ gratitude to Allah,

Endnotes

1 At-Tirmidht (3077) and Al-Hakim (2/545) grading it ‏لالس‎

Invoking Allah by His Beautiful
Names

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And to Allah belong the best names, so invoke Him by them. And
eave [the company of] those who practice deviation concerning His
names. They will be recompensed for what they have been doing”

(Quran: AL-A*raf: 180)

Tbn Abd Hatim relates that Ibn “Abbas says:

“The phrase, “.. those who practice deviation concerning His
names...” means those people ascribe partners to Allah concerning
His Beautiful Names”

Ibn‘ Abbas also states that they named one of their idols Al-Lat deriving the
name from the word Al-Ilah, which is an Arabic word means “God’, and they

376 Concise Commentary on the Book. af Tawhid

named another idol Al-'Uszi from the Arabic word Al-'Aziz which means
‘the Exalted in Might, (and is one of Allah’s Beautifull Names). Commenting
on this verse, AI-A'mash says, “They wrongfully insert names irrelevant to
those of Allah.”

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Having written this chapter, the author intends to refute the fallacies of those
who seek means of approach to Allah through the deceased. Furthermore, the
author intends to affirm that the legal way for seeking approach to Allah is to
directly invoke Him by His Beautiful Names and Divine Attributes.

ALA‘ mash

He is Sulayman Ibn Mahran, from Kufa. He was a fagih, anda trustworthy
pious hafiz. He died in 147 A.H. may Allah have mercy on him.

Keywords and Phrases

+ The Beautiful Names: The Names that have reached the climax
of beauty and are equal to nothing. Thus, no other names can be
substituted for them.

+ Invoke him by them: Invoke Allah and seek means of approach to
Him through His Beautiful Names.

٠ Leave those who: Turn away from them and do not argue with them.

= Practice deviation concerning His Names: Those who twist the
Beautiful Names of Allah. Such people either repudiate these Names
or their meanings or render them as names for some created beings.
They further name others after Allah's Name as they named one of
their idols Al-Lat deriving the name from the Arabic word Al-Tlah
which means “the God",

+ They will be recompensed for what they have been doing: This
is a grave threat that the punishment will ineyitably be inflicted on
them.

+ They wrongfully insert names irrelevant to those of Allah: They
added to Allah's Beautiful Names other ones, though neither Allah
Himself nor His Messenger (PBUH) ascribed these names to Him.

Chapter 30: Invoking Allah by His Beaurital Names aT

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this verse, Allah, Exalted be He, enunciates that His Names have reached
the highest degree of beauty and perfection, Accordingly, He commands His
servants to invoke Him and seek means of approach to Him by these Beautiful
Names, Besides, Allah orders His servants to dissociate themselves from those
who twist these venerable Names and perversely deviate from the truth, As for
‘hese straying people, they will inevitably receive due punishment,

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse
4 The verse proves Allah's Nameand Attributes in a way appropriate for
His Majesty:
> Allah's Names are Beautiful.

* People are enjoined to invoke Allah and seek means of approach to
Him using His Beautiful Names.

% People are prohibited to twist any of the Beautiful Names of Allah,
whether by denying them or changing their meanings or rendering
them as names for some created beings.

4 Muslims are enjoined to turn away from the ignorant and those who
practice deviation concerning the Beautiful Names of Allah.

4 The verse implies a serious threat to whoever alters any of Allah's
‘Names or Attributes.

8 |

wise a

The Prohibition of saying,
“Peace be on Allah”

‎Mas‘ td narrated:‏ مطل
‎“We performed prayer along with the Prophet (PBUH) and we used‏
‎to say, ‘Peace be on Allah from His servants and peace be on so and‏
‎so’ Thereupon, the Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Do not say ‘Peace be on‏
‎Allah, for He Himself is Peace.”‏
‎(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)‏

‎Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

‎Since the greeting word “peace” indicates that the speaker wishes for the
addressee safety from every evil, it is prohibited to say, “Peace be on Allah”,
for He is the Self-Sufficient and the One who is free of any imperfections.

380 ‘Concise Commenrary on the Book of Tinuhidl

‘Therefore, Allah is to be invoked for aid, but nol invoked on His behalf, This
chapter stresses the obligation of deeming Allah far above any imperfections,
and the obligation of deeming Him Self-Sufficient and possessing all attributes
of perfection,

Keywords and Phrases

+ We used to say, ‘Peace be on Allah’: The Companions used to utter
this expression in the final ‏“انال لماعم‎ of prayer, as mentioned in other
narrations of the same hadith.

٠ Do not say ‘Peace be on Allah’: This is a prohibition given by the
Prophet (PBUH) for the Companions not to invoke peace on Allah.

+ For He Himself is Peace: Peace is one of the Beautiful names of Allah.

General Meaning of the Hadith

Ibn Mas‘td (may Allah be pleased with him) relates that the Companions
used to say, ‘Peace be on Allah’ in their prayer. Thereupon, the Prophet (PBUH)
prohibited them from saying so, and explained that such an invocation does
not suit the Majesty of Allah, for He Himself is Peace and the One who grants
peace, and it is thus improper to render peace to Him as He is the One who
keeps His servants free from any evil.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter
‘This hadith states that one is prohibited from saying, “Peace be on Allah.”
Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

* The hadith demonstrates that one is prohibited from saying, "Peace be
on Allah”.

The word “Peace” stands as one of the Beautiful Names of Allah,
Exalted be He.

4 Muslims are duty bound to instruct the unlearned.

Instructors should illustrate the reason on which legal rulings rest.

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhart (835) and Maslin (402),
2 Tashaliud isa certain invocation recited at the middle or end of the prayer while being
ina sitting position.

The Prohibition of Saying,
“O Allah! Forgive Me If You Wish.”

‘Aba Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Messenger
of Allah (PBUH) said:

“None of you should say ‘O Allah! Forgive me if You wish; 0 Allah,
be Merciful to me if You wish; but he should always appeal to Allah
with determination, for nobody can force Allah to do something
against His Will.”

‘There is another narration related by Muslim with a different wording that reads:

“One must ask (Allah) with a will and full devotion, for nothing
is hard for Allah to do."

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

20 تق

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

The saying that reads, “O Allah! Forgive me if You wish” indicates that one
is languid and careless of having his request achieved and, further, that one is
in no need of Allah’ help. Moreover, this supplication implies that Allah may
be forced to do something against His Will. Since all these implications violate
the essence of monotheism, the author dedicates this chapter for elaborating
on this topic.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Appeal to Allah with determination: 14 signifies that one should
invoke Allah while being sure that one’s supplication will be answered.

+ With a will and full devotion: It means that one should persevere in
invoking Allah.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) prohibits Muslims from making
their invocations for Allah's Forgiveness and Mercy contingent on His will,
and commands them to invoke Him while being certain that they will be
answered, He{PBUH) explains that stipulating the will of Allah while invoking
‘Him implies that Allah may be overburdened with His servants’ needs or
that He may be forced to fulfill them. Undoubtedly, such implications are
contrary to the truth, for Allah is the Self-Sufficient, the Praiseworthy, and
the Effecter of what He intends, Such a stipulated supplication also indicates
that the supplicant is languished and careless of having his need fulfilled, and
that he is in no need of Allah’ help, though nobody can do without Allah
even fora moment.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith prohibits supplicants from stipulating the will of Allah
while invoking Him for forgiveness, and further explains the reason behind
this prohibition.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

* Supplicants are prohibited from stipulating Allah's Will while invoking
Him, and are commanded to ask Allah with certainty:

(Chapter 52: The Prohibition of Saying, "0 Allah! Forgive Me IF You Wish.” 383

% Allah must be kept far above whatever isimproper for His Majesty, He
is absolutely Self-Sufficient and His Grace is infinite.

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhari (6339) and Muslim (2679).

The Prohibition of Saying,
“My Slave, or My Slave Girl”

‎Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet‏ نطف
‎(PBUH) said:‏

‎“The one of you must not say ‘Feed your rabb (Lord), help your rab
in performing ablution, or give water to your rubb, ‘but must say,
‘My sayyid, (master), (e.g. Feed your sayyid instead of rabb etc.) or
my mawlé (guardian). And one must not say ‘my ‘abd (slave), or
my amah (slave girl), but must say ‘my lad, my lass, and my boy."

‎(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

‎Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

‎Uttering any of the abovementioned words gives a false impression that
the one bearing that title is a partner to Allah in His Lordship. As such, one

386 Concise Commentary om the Book of Ziad

is prohibited from repeating these words as a means of showing reverence for
Allah, and to maintain the creed of monotheism through blocking all avenues
leading to polytheism.

Keywords and Phrases

«The one of you must not say ‘Feed your rabb (Lord) , orhelp your
rabb in performing ablution: People are prohibited from uttering
this term as it implies likeness between Allah and the addressee.

«+ Must say, ‘my sayyid (master)’: This is because the term ‘waster’
refers to the one who owns or controls a person. However, there is
some difference between the terms rab’ and ‘sayyid’; the first is
unanimously agreed on as one of the Names of Allah, while scholars
differ whether the word ‘sayyid’ is one of the Names of Allah or not.
‘However, in case it is one of Allah’s Names, it is not used as frequently
as the word “rabb’”

+My mawld: is a common Arabic word which has many significations,
In this context, it means ‘the owner,

+ One must not say ‘my ‘abd (slave) or my amah (slave girl)’: This
is because none is worthy of worship but Allah, and further these terms
express glorification which none among humans deserves.

+ Must say ‘my lad, my lass, and my boy’: These titles are chosen
as the implications of the words ‘my “abd’ and ‘my amah are not
included therein.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) prohibits Muslims from uttering
words that may imply polytheism, and indicate lack of courtesy towards
Allah, such as calling ‏د‎ human as someone’ rabb or as a human's ‘abd. This is
because Allah is the only rabb and He is the only one warthy of worship. Then,
the Prophet (PBUH) guides Muslims to the appropriate words to substitute for
the doubtful ones for the sake of maintaining the creed of Monotheism.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith stresses that one is prohibited from uttering the following
words, ‘my ‘abd’, ‘my amah' and ‘my rab.

Chaprer 53: The Prohibition of Saying, “My Slave, or My Slave Girl" 387

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

Muslims are prohibited from uttering any word that implies polytheism,
© Muslims have to block all avenues leading to polytheism:

+ When an instructor maintains that such-and-such a matter is invalid,
he should provide a legally appropriate substitute for such a matter.

Endnotes

1 Al-Bakhart (2552) and Muslim (2249)

Asking in the Name of Allah Is not
to Be Repulsed

Ibn ‘Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘if anyone asks (you) for

refuge for the sake of Allah, give him refuge: and if anyone asks
‘you (for something) in the Name of Allah, give him and if anyone
invites you, accept his invitation; and if anyone does you a favor,
reward him, but if you find nothing (enough) to reward him, then
invoke Allah for him until you feel that you have rewarded him."

(Related by Abit Dawad and An-Nas@'i with an authentic chain
of transmitters)

300 Concise Commentary on the Book of Zawhid

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book Tawhid

This chapter makes it clear that whoever refuses to fulfill the need
of those asking in the Name of Allah is in fact showing neither glorifi-
cation nor reverence for Allah, which impairs one's belief in the creed
of monotheism.

Keywords and Phrases

+ Asks (you) for refuge for the sake of Allah: Whoever secks refuge
with Allah so as not to be inflicted with harm by some Muslims, or to
be under their protection against others.

+ Give him refuge: Answer his appeal in veneration for the Name of Allah,
٠ Give him: Fulfill his need unless heasks fora sin or for severing any of
your blood relations.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) orders Muslims to observe a set of
good behavior in veneration of the rights of Allah, Exalted be He. That is,
to give whoever begs in the Name of Allah. to give refuge ta whoever asks
for it in the Name of Allah. These decencies include fulfilling Muslim's right
by accepting his invitation, and having his favors equally or more graciously
reciprocated if possible. If one is unable to do either, he has to invoke Allah's
blessings upon such a benevolent man,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

In this hadith, Muslims are enjoined to give anyone who asks for alms in
the Name of Allah, and not to repulse him.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% Itisan act of showing veneration for Allah not to repulse anyone who
asks for alms in His Name,

+ Muslims must protect and give refuge to whoever asks for it in the
Name of Allah.

2 It is legitimate to accept Muslim's invitation toa feast or the like.

(Chapter 54: Asking in the Name of Allah Is not to Be Repulsed, 391

‎legitimate to reciprocate people's favors, if possible.‏ 15 ك1 جه

‎4 It is also legitimate to invoke Allah's blessings upon the benevolent
person, whenever one ts unable to reciprocate.

‎Endnotes

‎1 Aba Dawid (1672, 5109), "Abd Ibn Humayd (806), and An-Nasaii (5/82).

سا

tee ‏ا‎ mma

Nothing Is to Be Asked for, by the
Face of Allah, but Paradise

Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said:

“Nothing is to be asked for, by the Face of Allah, but Paradise."
(Related by Aba Dawid)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

This chapter states that one is duty bound to observe good behavior
towards the Names and Attributes of Allah, and thus, nothing of the worldly
needs is to be begged by Allah's Honorable Face. Rather, only Paradise, the
ultimate purpose, is to be asked for by the Face of Allah. This act is deemed
one of the corollaries of monotheism.

394 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Keywords and Phrases

+ The Face of Allah: This is one of Allah's Personal Attributes that suits
His Majesty and Greatness,

+ But Paradise: As well as any means that helps approaching Paradise,
such as the grand deeds of righteousness:

General Meaning of the Hadith

‘The Prophet (PBUH) prohibits Muslims from asking Allah by His
Honorable Face for a lowly matter or a worldly need by way of rendering
veneration to Allah, Further, the Prophet (PBUH) teaches Muslims that only
Paradise, the ultimate purpose, is to be asked for by the Face of Allah.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith shows that one is prohibited to ask Allah by His Face for
anything but the Paradise.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

This hadith proves that Allah is possessed of a Face appropriate for His
Majesty as it is the case with all His Attributes,

% People ate enjoined to glorify Allah and show respect for His Names
and Attributes.

‘> It is permissible to ask Allah by His Face for Paradise as well as for ‘any
means conducive to it. However, it is prohibited to ask Allah by His
Face for any worldly need.

Endnotes

1 Aba Dawid (1671).

Dissatisfaction with the
Divine Decree

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“They say, If there was anything we could have done in the
matter, we [i.e., some of us] would not have been killed right
here? Say, ‘Even if you had been inside your houses, those
decreed to be killed would have come out to their death beds’
[lt was] so that Allah might test what is in your breasts and
purify what is in your hearts. And Allah is Knowing of that
within the breasts.” (Quran: Alu ‘Imran: 154)

396 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tinuhist

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

This chapter states that submission to Allahis Decree is a corollary: of
monotheism. It further highlights that using ‘if clauses’ is of no avail, and
moreover, itindicates that the speaker is dissatisfied with the Divine Decree,
which impairs one’s belief in the creed of monotheism.

Keywords and Phrases

+ They say: The pronoun ‘they’ refers to some of the hypocrites who
witnessed the Battle of Ubud.

« If there was anything we could have done in the matter: If we
had the choice

+ Here: In the Battlefield of Ubud

+ What is in your breasts: That is, what is in your hearts of sincerity
or hypocrisy

‎Purify what is in your hearts: That is to distinguish between your‏ ع
‎intentions.‏

‎+ Allah is Knowing of that within the breasts: Thats to say, Allah is
in no need of testing people so-asto know their real intentions. Rather,
He wills to expose people’ real intentions behind their actions, and
thus reward or punish them accordingly.

‎General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

‎Allah, Exalted be He, tells us of what was hidden in the hearts of the
iypocrites during the Battle of Ubud as to their complaint about the Divine
Decree and their discontent with what Allah predestined to befall them: They
said that had they had a choice, they would not have set out for the battle, and
would rather have escaped from defeat and none of them would have been
killed. Hence, Allah refutes their false claims asserting that what afflicted them
was predestined and thus could have never been avoided even by staying at
home. So, expressing regret and repeating ‘if clauses’ is absolutely of no avail.

‎Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‎One is forbidden to use ‘clauses’ that express one’ complaints about
predestined matters. Such clauses are frequently repeated by the hypocrites.

Chapter 56: Dissatisfaction with the Divine Decree 397

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

% One is forbidden to use “fclauses' that express one’ complaints about
the Divine Decree, as such an utterance denotes one’s discontent with
the Divine Decree and recalls one’s grief. However, no blame should
be attached to saying ‘if clauses’ with the intention of expressing regret
for missing an act of obedience, as such a regret denotes one’s desire
for doing the good.

‘ One is enjoined to submit to the Divine Decree, and not to be discon-
tented with it.

4 Precaution never saves one from being afflicted with a predetermined,
Divine decree,

Whoever is divinely decreed to be killed in a certain place will inevi-
tably come out to such a place, even if he tries his best to avoid it

Soe

398 Concise Commentary on the Book of Jisiel

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Those who said about their brothers while sitting [at home], If
they had obeyed us, they would not have been killed, Say, ‘Then
prevent death from yourselves, if you should be truthful’ ”.

(Quran: Alu “Imran: 168)

Keywords and Phrases

+ Their brothers: ‘The word ‘brothers’ stands for Muslims who were
fighting in the cause of Allah, Muslims are called the hypocrites’
brothers according to the description of the apparent state of the
hypocrites, or because they both are of the same ancestry.

+ While sitting at home: While refraining from fighting in the cause
oF Allah.

» If they had obeyed us: Had they stayed at home
+ Say: Allah commands his Prophet (PBUH) to speakcto those hypocrites.

+ If you should be truthful: If you are truthful in your claim that
staying at home saves one from death.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah, Exalted Be He, rebukes the hypocrites for being discontented
with His Decree as they claimed that those who had set out with the Prophet
(PBUH) and were Killed during the Battle of Uhud would not have been
Killed if they had responded to their advice not to set out for fighting together
with the Prophet (PBUH). Refuting their claim, Allah defies them to guard
themselves against death if they are truthful in their claim that they can guard
those foreordained to die from death. Needless to say, they are powerless to
guard themselves against death, and thus they similarly cannot guard others

against it.
Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

Using ‘fclauses' that express one’s complaints about divinely predestined
matters is a typical characteristic of the hypocrites.

(Chapter 56: Dissarisfaction with the Divine Decree 399

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse
Muslims are warned against saying 'if clauses that express one’s com-
plaints about Divine Decree and ones sorrow over tribulations.

12 Submission to the Divine Decree and Predestination is a prereq-
uisite of Faith, while dissatisfaction is a typical characteristic of
the hypocrites,

+ Muslimsare permitted to argue with the hypocritesand suchlike people
of falsehood in order to refute their fallacies and baseless claims.

Shs

400 ‘Concise Commentary on _

Aba Hurayrah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said:

“Abide by that which gives you benefit (in the Hereafter) and seek
help from Allah and do not lose heart, and if anything (trouble)
befalls you, do not say If I had not done that, so and so would not
have happened: but say ‘Allah did that which He had ordained to
do} fr (saying) ‘f* opens (the gate) for the Satan.”

(Related by Muslim)

Keywords and Phrases
« And seek help from Allah; Seek aid solely from Allah in all your affairs.

+ Do not lose heart: Never neglect seeking what brings you benefit
depending on the fact that it is previously decreed, and do not submit
to weakness and sloth,

« But say ‘Allah did that which he had ordained: this is because

whatever Allah ordains, will definitely occur, and Muslims are duty
bound ta submit to the Divine Decree.

‘If opens the gate for the Satan: This is due to the fact that ‘fclauses’
imply sorrow, regret, sadness and complaint about the Divine Decree.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) commands Muslims to be keen on
performing acts that bring benefit, to seek divine aid in their effort to carry
out these acts and to hope for the divine reward, He (PBUH) also prohibits
them from being sluggish, for such a bad characteristic prevents man from
doing what is beneficial. Since man is susceptible to adversities in this life, he
is ordained to show endurance and forbearance, and not 10 express regret by
saying ‘if 1 did so and so’ or ‘if I did not do so and so! Such utterances are of
no avail, but rather open a door for Satan to overcome the person and catise
him sortow.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith shows that Muslims are prohibited from saying ‘if causes!
when being in distress, and it highlights the bad consequences resulting from
such utterances.

Chapter 56: Dissatisfaction with the Divine Decree aut

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith
“% Muslims are urged to strive to do what is beneficial in both this life
and the Hereafter through legal means only.

Muslims are enjoined to seek divine aid in their effort to carry out acts
of benefit and are forbidden to rely only on their power and faculties.

> Muslims are forbidden to be sluggish, jobless and to abstain from
seeking the legal means for obtaining what is of benefit.

5 The hadith proves the verity of the Divine Destiny and Decree,
and affirms that seeking the legal means for gaining benefits never
contradicts one's belief in the Divine Decree and Predestination.

> Muslims are enjoined to show patience when being in distress,

* Muslims are prohibited from using ‘if clauses’ that show one’s
discontent with the Divine Decree when being in distress. The
hadith farther points out the bad consequences resulting from
using such clauses.

© Muslims are warned against the satanic insinuations.

Endnotes

| Muslim (2664) and Ahmad (2/366, 370)

5

The Prohibition of Inveighing
against the Wind

Ubayy Ibn Kab (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated thatthe Messenger
of Allah (PBUH) said:

“Do not curse the wind, but when you see that which you dislike,
say, "0 Allah! We ask You for what is good in this wind, what is good
in what it bears and what is good in what it has been commanded
to do. We seek refuge with You from what is evil in this wind, in
what it contains and in what it has been commanded to do”

(At-Tirmidhi graded it a sahth hadith)

404 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tahidt

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Wind is run by Allah's command, and therefore the author illuminates that
inveighing against it is tantamount to inveighing against Allah who disposes
it, Accordingly, perpetrating such an offense violates one’ belief in the creed
of monotheism,

A profile about Ubayy

The full name of the narrator is Ubayy Ibn Ka’ Ibn Qays Al-Ansari.
He was known to be the grand reciter of the Noble Qur'an amongst the
Companions, Ubayy witnessed the Pledge of Al-’ Aqabah, the Battle of
Badr, and all the other battles in which Prophet (PBUH) took part. It was
said that he died during the caliphate of ‘Umar Tbnul-Khattab, or during
thé caliphate of Uthman Tbn “Affan in 30 A.H.; may Allah be pleased
with him,

Keywords and Phrases

+ Do not curse the wind: Do never inveigh against it, even if it causes
you harm.

+ When you see that which you dislike: Such as a very hot wind, a
bitter wind, or a storm.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) prohibits Muslims from inveighing
against wind simply because it is one of Allah's compliant creation. Thus,
whoever curses wind is regarded to have cursed Allah and this indicates
one’s dissatisfaction with His Decree. Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) guides
‘Muslims to ask Allah, the Originator of the wind, for what is good in this wind
and to: seek refuge with Him from its evil. These manners reflect one’s true
servitude to Allah, Exalted be He. This is, of course, a characteristic of those
who adhere to the creed of monotheism,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith clarifies that Muslims are prohibited from inveighing against
the wind.

Chapret 57: The Prohibition of ‏يمتط هتسمل‎ against the Wind. 405

Lessons Drawn From the Hadith

4 Inveighing against the wind is prohibited, simply because wind is a
compliant being created by Allah and thus such an abuse is directed to
its Originator and the One veering it.

4 Muslims should always return to Allah seeking refuge with Him from
the evil of His creatures.

Winds are commanded to do good or cause evil according to the Will
of Allah,

4 When a Muslim sees what he hates, he is guided to repeat useful
utterances in order to be guarded against its evil.

Endnotes

LAL Tirmidht (2253) and Ahmad (5/123).

Hypocrites Mistrust Allah

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“thinking of Allah other than the truth - the thought of
ignorance, saying, ‘Is there anything for us (to have done)
in this matter?” Say, ‘Indeed, the matter belongs completely
to Allah: They conceal within themselves what they will not
reveal to you. They say, ‘If there was anything we could have
done in the matter, we (i.e., some of us) would not have been
killed right here? Say, ‘Even if you had been inside your houses,
those decreed to be killed would have come out to their death
beds: [It was] so that Allah might test what is in your breasts
and purify what is in your hearts. And Allah is Knowing of
that within the breasts” (Quran: Alu "Imran: 154)

408 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

This chapter elaborates on the fact that thinking well of Allah is a prereq-
uisite of one’s belief of monotheism, and that mistrusting Him violates one’s.
belief of monotheism,

Keywords and Phrases

+ Thinking of Allah: Hypocrites are the ones addressed.

» The thought of ignorance: It refers ‏ما‎ the thought adopted by the
people of ignorance. who thought that Allah would not give victory
to His Messenger, The word ‘ignorance’ stands for people of the pre-
Islamic period of ignorance,

+ Is there anything for us (to have done) in this matter; They meant
they would not be given victory, or that they had no choice to decide
whether to set out for battle or not.

+ The matter belongs completely to Allah: No one can prevent or
alter what Allah wills to occur,

+ They conceal within themselves what they will not reveal to
you: Those hypocrites conceal in their hearts the repudiation of Islam
and denial of the truth, which differs from what they reveal to you, ©
‘Muhammad, of their professed belief in your message and their claim
to seek guidance.

The rest of these keywords and phrases have been explained in Chapter
fifty seven entitled, ‘Dissatisfaction with the Divine Decree’.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

In this verse, Allah, Exalted be He, informs Muslims of what was concealed
inthe hearts of the hypocritesat the time of the Battle of Uhud, The hypocrites
retained a wrong thought about Allah claiming that He would not give victory
to His Messenger nor would His religion prevail. They, further, claimed
that none of them would have been killed, and they would have achieved
victory if they had had the upper hand, and if the Prophet (PBUH) and his
‘Companions had been subordinate to them. However, Allah confuted their
fallacy and affirmed that nothing takes place without being predetermined by
‘Him and written in Al-Lauh Al-Mahfiz (the Preserved Tablet) and that His
decrees are irrevocable.

Chapter 58: Hypocrites Mistrust Allah 409

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

4 Whoever thinks that Allah makes falsehood constantly prevail over
truth so that the latter never prevails is indeed tantamount to those
of the Pre-Islamic period of ignorance who retain wrong thoughts
about Allah.

© The verse attests to Allah's wisdom behind making falsehood occa-
sionally prevail over the truth,

The yerse discloses the hypocrites’ evil nature and shows that their
hypocrisy is exposed at times of hardship.

‎The hadith proves that the Divine Decree and Predestination are‏ ي
‎incontestable verities.‏

‎+ Muslims are duty bound to deem Allah far above whatever is
inappropriate for Flis Majesty, Glorified be He.

‎Muslims are duty bound to think well of Allah.

‎ee

‎Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid‏ لله

‎Allah, Exalted be He, says:

‎‘Ssthose who assume about Allah an assumption of evil na-
ture. Upon them is a misfortune of evil nature; and Allah has
become angry with them and has cursed them and prepared
‘for them Hell, and evil it is ‏م عه‎ destination”

‎(Quran: Al-Fath: 6)

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎+ Those who assume about Allah an assumption of evil natu
The word ‘those’ refers to the hypocrites who think wrongly of Allah.
‘They claim that He will not give victory to His Messenger (PBUH)
and the believers

‎+ Upon them is a misfortune of evil nature: Allah states that those
hypocrites will suffer a severe punishment and humiliation that they
can not avoid.

‎+ Allah has become angry with them and has cursed them: That is
Allah’s wrath befalls them and they will be deprived of His Mercy.

‎+ Prepared for them: Allah set in readiness for them in the Hereafter.

‎General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

‎In reply to the claim of those who falsely attribute misjudgment to Him
and think that He will not grant victory to His Messenger and the believers,
Allah, Exalted be He, enunciates that such people will suffer inseparable
punishment and will be deprived of His Mercy. Allah, further, stresses that He
set the Hellfire in readiness for them as the worst eternal abode which they
would inevitably meet.

‎Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‎Whoever thinks that Allah will not grant victory to Muslims aver His foes
is regarded as thinking wrongly of Him,

‘Chapter 58: Hypocrites Mistrust Allah au

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse

4 Muslims are warned against thinking wrongly of Allah, and are duty
bound to think well of Him.

4 Whoever thinks that Allah will neither support His Messenger nor
make His religion prevail is regarded as thinking ill of Him,

4 The verse proves that Allah gets angry with His foes and curses them.
+ Hellfire is the evil end for both disbelievers and hypoctites.

eee

412 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Commenting on the first verse in this chapter, Tbnul-Qayyim says:

“The assumption referred to in the verse is explained to be the evil
thought that the hypocrites had about Allah; that He would neither
give victory to His Messenger nor make his religion prevail, and that
what befell them was not due to the Divine Decree and Wisdons:
Therefore, their thought was based on their denial of the Divine
Wisdom and Decree, and their claim that Allah would neither
complete the mission of His messenger nor make his religion prevail
over all other religions. This is the evil thought retained by the
hypocrites and the disbelievers, which is referred to in the Sura of Al-
Fath, This thought is described as evil since it does not accord with
Allah’ Majesty, Wisdom and truthful Promise, besides it does not
accord with the homage due to Him.”

Thnul-Qayyim adds:

"Similar to those hypocrites is the person who wrongly thinks that
Allah always makes falsehood prevail over truth so that the latter
would disappear, By the same token, some people may deny that
whatever occurs is divinely predetermined or deny that there is a
Divine Wisdom behind what Allah foreardains for which He deserves
praise, but rather they claim that what occurs is due to an abstract
will, About that Allah, the Almighty, says, ‘.. That is the assumption
of those who disbelieve; so woe to those who disbelieve from the
Fire? (Qur'in: Sad: 27) Moreover, most people think wrongly of Allah
when considering their fates and the fates of others, The ottly peaple
who avoid falling into the offence of thinking badly of Allah are those
who are cognizant of Allah, His Beautiful Names and Attributes, the
corollaries of His wisdom, the praise He deserves, and His promise to
support His religion. Therefore, wise people should be alert in order
‘tof to conamit this sin, and those who happened to think wrongly of
Allah should repent of their sin and ask for Allah forgiveness, If one
should test the souls of people, one will find that a lot of them get
dissatisfied with the Divine Decree and start blaming the fate and
lain that such and such should have happened. However, people
differ in perpetrating this offense: So, one must examine one’s soul in
order to knaw wether one is free of this sin or not.

In case you are free of it, it isa real suecess
Otherwise, 1 deen you not to relish the bliss”

CChapter'58: Hypocrites Mistrust Allah 43

Keywords and Phrases

+ Ibnul-Qayyim says: The above-mentioned words are quoted from
a book entitled, Zédul-Ma'adl (Provisions for the Hereafter) written
by Tbnul-Qayyim, These words are produced in the course of Tbnu!-
Qayyim’s commentary on the Battle of Ubud, They are quoted in this
chapter as an explanation of the Noble Quranic verse.

+ Their denial of the Divine wisdom: The claim that what happened
to Muslims in the Battle of Ubud was not out of far-sighted wisdom.
However, what befell the Muslims in the Battle of Ubud was due to
‏ع‎ wisdom that Allah has referred to in the Quranic verse that teads,
“..(It was) so that Allah might test what is in your breasts and purify
what is in your hearts. And Allah is Knowing of that within the
breasts.” (Qur'an: Alu ‘Imran: 154)

+ Was not due to Allah’s Decree: The hypocrites claimed that Muslims
would not have been killed if they had not set out for fighting in the
cause of Allah.

And their claim that Allah would neither complete the mission
of His messenger: When the polytheists had the upper hand in the
Battle of Uhud, the hypocrites wrongly thought that it was the decisive
battle where Muslims would be annihilated, root and branch,

Deniers of the Divine Decree and
Predestination

Ibn ‘Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“By Him in Whose Hand my soul rests ifthe Muslim spends amounts

of gold equal to the Mount Uhud in the cause of Allah, Allah will

not accept his work till he believes in the Divine Predestination:”
Then Ibn ‘Umar supports his argument with the hadith that reads:

“Faith is to believe in Allah, His Angels, His Books, His Messengers,
the Hereafter, and to believe in the Divine Predestination, whether
good or evil?”

(Related by Muslim)

46 Concise Commentary on the Book of ‏لنفياسةة‎

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Since belief in Divine Predestination is a prerequisite of Tawhtd Ar-
Rubitbiyyah (i.e., believing in the Oneness of Allal’s Lordship), the author
states the legal texts which stress that Divine Punishment is prepared for
whoever denies Divine Predestination. The author mentions these texts as an
indication that it is obligatory to believe in Divine Predestination,

Keywords and Phrases

+ Uhud: A mountain near Medina on the way to Ash-Sham (the region
covering Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria).

+ Then Ibn ‘Umar supports his argument with the hadith: This
refers to the hadith which contains the prophetic reply to the question
raised by the Angel Gabriel about the Muslim Faith, Ibn ‘Umar cited
this hadith as a proof to support his argument against the deniers of
the Divine Predestination. Since the Prophet (PBUH) regarded belief
in Divine Predestination as a pillar of one’s belief in Allah, the author
deduces judgment maintaining that whoever denies this creedal
verity is not deemed among the righteous believers whose good deeds
are accepted by Allah.

General Meaning of the Tradition

When ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) was
informed that some Muslims denied Divine Predestination, he illumi-
nated that this false belief caused them to turn into disbelief as they
denied a prerequisite of the Muslim Faith. He supported his argument
with the above-mentioned hadith in which the Prophet (PBUH) stated
that believing in Divine Predestination is one of the six pillars on which
Muslim Faith rests. Needless to say, to be a true believer is to believe in
these six pillars. Thus, whoever denies any of these pillars is considered
a denier of all of them.

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

‘This tradition demonstrates the Islamic legal ruling on whoever disbelieves
in Divine Predestination.

Chapter 59: Deniers of the Divine Decree and Predestination 417

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

4 Whoever denies Divine Predestination is deemed to be an unbeliever.
16 Good deeds are accepted only from the true believers.
+ Legal rulings are to be supported by proofs drawn from the Qur’in

and the Sunnah,
See

dua Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawbid

“Ubadah [bnus-Samit related that he said to his son:

"© my son! You will not relish the delight of Faith unless you believe
that what happened to you (of good or evil) was not to miss you
and what missed you was not to happen to you. I heard the Prophet
(PBUH) saying, ‘The first thing Allah created was the Pen and
He said to it, ‘Write!’ The Pen said, ‘What should I write?’ Allah
said, ‘Write the predestination of every thing until the Last Hour
is established...’ ‘Ubadah adds, ‘O, my son, I heard the Prophet
(PBUH) saying, \...if anyone dies while denying this belief, he does
not belong to me,

(Related by Aba Dawud)
In another narration, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“The first thing Allah created was the Pen and He said to it, ‘Write!’
Then, the Pen wrote the predestination of every thing until the Day
of Resurrection”

(Related by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal)

According to another nartation related by Ibn Wahb, the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“If anyone does not believe in the Divine predestination,
whether good or evil, Allah will burn (punish) him with
the Hellfire.”

Profiles

+ The son of 'Ubadah Ibnus-Smit is called Al-Walid, He was born at the
lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH) and was one of the great Successors of
the Companions, Al-Walid died when he was over seventy; may Allah
have mercy on him.

٠ The full name of Ibn Wahb is ‘Abdullah Ibn Wahb Ibn Muslim Al-
Misri. He was a trustworthy fagih who was a companion ta Malik.
‘He was born in 125 A.H., and died in 197 A.H; may Allah have
mercy on him.

Chapter 59: Deniers ofthe Divine Decree and Predestinations aug

Keywords and Phrases

+ The delight of faith: The delightful feeling due to ones belief that
renders one in no need of any worldly pleasure,

+ The first thing Allah created was the Pen: The Penis the firs thing
Allah created before creating the heavens and the earth, not the first
thing created by Allah.

+ If anyone dies while denying this belief: Whoever dies while
disbelieving in Divine Predestination

+ He does not belong to Me: The Prophet (PBUH) lisassociates himself
from such a person who denies Divine Predestination, for he denies
Allalis Foreknowledge of the servants’ actions. Such a denial causes
one to be a disbeliever.

+ Allah will burn (punish) him with the Hellfire: This is due to
the innovative heresy and the disbelief that person has committed
through denying Allah's Omnipotence, His invincible Will and
His creation of everything, and further, he disbelieved in Allah's
Messengers and His Books.

General Meaning of the Tradition

In this tradition, ‘Ubddah Ibnus-Samit advises his son, Al-Walid,
to believe in the Divine Predestination, whether good or bad, In addition,
” Ubadah highlights the fruits and good results reaped from one’s beliefin this
tenet, in both this life and the Hereafter, and the bad consequences resulting
from denying this tenet, in both this life and the Hereafter, He supports
his argument with a hadith affirming that Allah predestined every thing
and commanded the Pen to write this Predestination before the creation.
Therefore, nothing takes place till the Day of Judgment but itis decreed and
predestined by Allah.

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

This tradition signifies that one is duty bound to believe in Divine
predestination, and gives admonition against denying it. it further points out
the bad consequences resulting from such a denial.

00 Concise Commentary on the Book of ‏اشاس‎

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition
4 Itis obligatory upon Muslims to believe in Divine Predestination.

‘ Painful consequences await those who deny Diyine Predestination.

4% The tradition proves the verity of the Pen and the predestination of
past and future destinies till the Day of Resurrection.

$66

‘Chapter 59: Deniers of the Divine Decree and Predestination 021

It is related in Al-Musnad and the Books of Sunan on the authority of
Thnud-Daylami who narrated:

"Lwent to Ubayy Tbn Ka*b and said to him, ‘I have some doubts
regarding Divine Predestination, so tell me something so that Allah
‘may remove it from my heart’ Thereupon, he (Ubayy) said, ‘If
‘you spend an amount of gold equal ta the Mount Ubud, Allah will
not accept it from you until you believe in Divine Predestination
and until you believe that what happened to you was not to miss
you and what missed you was not to happen to you. If you die
white disbelieving in this (tenet), you will be among the people of
the Hellfire’ Then I went to ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas'ttd, Hudhayfah
Ibnul-Yaman and Zayd fbn Thabit and all of them narrated to
me the same saying from the Prophet (PBUH).””

(A sath hadith related by Al-Hakim in his Authentic Collection
of Hadith)

Ad-Daylami (The Narrator)

His full name is “Abdullah Tbn Fayrtz, Ad-Daylami. He was known to be
trustworthy, and was one of the early Successors of the Companions; may
Allah have mercy on him. His father, Fayrtiz, was the one that killed Al-Aswad
Al-"Ansi, the liar.

Keywords and Phrases

+ L have some doubts regarding Divine Predestination: These
doubts and confusion cause one to deny Divine Predestination and
thus become a disbeliever,

«If you die why disbelieving in this (tenet); Disbelieving in Divine
Predestination

+ You will be among the people of the Hellfire: This is because
whoever denies any of the pillars of Muslim Faith is considered a
denier of all the pillars of Faith.

General Meaning of the Tradition

In this tradition, ‘Abdullah Ibn Fayriz Ad-Daylami states that once he
doubted the verity of Divine Predestination and feared that his doubt would

2 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhld

lead him to deny this verity; Thereon, he went to ask the knowledgeable among
the Companions so as to remove this ambiguity, thus a Muslim should ask the
scholars about what he doubts so as to conform with the Quranic verse in
which Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“80 ask the people of the message [i.e., former scriptures) if
‘you do not kno1 (Quran: An-Nabk: 43)

Alll the scholars asked by that Companion unanimously agreed that one
must believe in Divine Predestination and Decree, and stressed that whoever
dies disbelieving in this tenet will be among the dwellers of the Hellfire in
the Hereafter.

Relevance of the Tradition to the Chapter

Thistradition stresses thatbelievingin Divine Predestination isaninevitable
prerequisite of oneS beliefin Allah, and that was what the Companions narrated
from the Prophet (PBUH).

Lessons Drawn from the Tradition

+» Painful consequences await those who disbelieve in Divine Predestination.

+ Muslims are to ask scholars when having doubts over a creedal matter
or the like.

+ It is among the scholars’ duties to dispel doubts and disseminate
knowledge.

Endnotes

1 Muslim (8), AbG Dawid (4695), At-Tirmidht (2613), and fbn Majah (63).
2 Abt Dawdd (4699), Tb Majah (77), Ahmad in Al-Musnad (5/182, 183, 185, 189)/and
Ibn Hibban in Mawérid Ag-Zarn'én (Fountains for the Thirsty) (1817).

Pictures and Statues

Abd Hurayrah narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Allah, Exalted be He, said, ‘Who would be more unjust than the
one who tries to create the like of My creation? Let them create an
ant or a grain of wheat or that of barley’ "'

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Making a picture of a living being is a preliminary step to falling into
polytheism that contradicts a Muslim’ belief in monotheism. Therefore, the
author dedicates this chapter for highlighting the prohibition of such an act,
with an account of the painful consequences resulting from such an act.

424 ‘Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawbid

Keywords and Phrases

« Who would be more unjust: No one is more unjust than those who
try to imitate Allab's creation,

+ Let them create: Threatening those artists, Allah defies them to create
a living being so as to show their inability.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) narrates that Allah, Exalted be He,
‘emunciates that none is more unjust than the one who makes pictures or statues
of beings created by Allah. The reason is that whoever does so attempts to
imitate Allabis creation. With the aim of showing the inability of such a picture
maker, Allah defies him to even create the tiniest object of His created beings,
ie.an atom. Rather, Allah enunciates that such a person cannot even create
what is easier than that, ic. a tiny inanimate object, This is simply because the
ability to create is exclusively Allahs,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith proyides a proof of the prohibition of making pictures, and a
proof of regarding such an act as the most tinjust one.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% Muslims are prohibited from making pictures or statues, no matter
how they are made. Further, whoever does so is one of the most unjust
people and is thus rebuked for that.

% Allah is possessed of the Attribute of speech,

© Making pictures or statues of living beings is an act of imitating Allah's
creation, and an attempt to share Him in creation,

4 The ability to create is exclusively Allah's,

33

00 425

Kishab (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“The people who will receive the severest punishment on the Day of

Resurrection are those who try to imitate Allah's creation.”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

General Meaning of the Hadith

Using a deterrent language that implies a prohibition, the Prophet (PBUH)
declares that those who make pictures or statues will receive the severest
punishment in the Hereafter, The reason is that such people perpetrate a
heinous crime as they imitate Allah's creation by means of pictures and
statues.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith spotlights that a severe punishment awaits whoever makes
pictures or statues, which signifies that such an act is a major offense.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Making pictures or statues is prohibited, no matter how they are made.
‘This act is regarded as an imitation of Allah's creation.

4 Punishment on the Day of Resurrection differs according to one’s sins.
4 Making pictures or stattes is of the gravest sins, and is further a major sin.

bbe

426 Concise Commentary on the Book of

Ibn “Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“T heard the Prophet (PBUH) say, 'Whoever makes a picture or a
statue (of a living being) will enter the Hellfire, and there will be a
soul for every picture he made (in this world) with which he will be
tormented in the Hell.”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

In another narration on the authority of Ibn “Abbas, the Prophet
(PBUH) sai

"He who makes a picture or a statue (ofa living being) in this world
Will be ordered to breathe soul (life) in it on the Day of Resurrec-
tion, but he will not be able to do so.”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) states that Hellfire will be the
destination of whoever makes ‏ه‎ picture or a statue of a living being, The one
who makes such pictures or statues will be severely punished as there will be
‘a soul for every picture and statue he made (in this world), by whom he will
be tormented in the Hellfire. Thus, such a sinner will be punished with what
his hands made. Moreover, such a person will be charged to breathe souls into
the pictures and statues he made in this life, which is, of course, too far beyond
his reach.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith provides a proof of the prohibition of making pictures or
statues of living beings, and of the painful punishment that awaits whoever
makes stich pictures or statues,

Lessons Drawn from this Hadith

‎Making pictures or statues of living beings is prohibited. Such an actis‏ ف
‎one of the major sins.‏

0 42

% Muslims are prohibited from imitating Allah's creation, whether in
the form of pictures, statues, sculptures, paintings or photographs, as,
far as the object imitated is of a living being. However, in case anyone
does so out of necessity, he is tolerated in such a case.

4 The last narration of the hadith discloses the inability of those who
make pictures and statues, and provides a proof that whoever makes
these objects will suffer torment for a long period of time.

* No one can create or breathe souls into beings but Allah.

ee

28 ‘Concise Commentary on the Book of Zawhid

Abul-Hayydj narrated that ‘Alt Ibn Aba Talib (may Allah be pleased with
him) said to him:
“Shall 1 not direct you to the same mission as the Messenger of
Allah (PBUH) directed me? Do not leave a picture or a statue
(ofa living being) without obliterating it or a high grave without
leveling it.”

(Related by Muslim)

A Profile about Abul-Hayyaj

The full name of Abul-Hayyaj is Hayydn Ibn Husayn Al-Asadi. He was a
‘Tabi’f and was known to be a trustworthy narrator; may Allah have mercy
on him,

General Meaning of the Hadith

According to his hadith, ‘Alt Ibn Abd Talib (may Allah be pleased with
him), Commander of the Faithful, offers Abul-Hayydj to assume the same
mission with which Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) charged him. This mission.
is twofold: First, He was ordered to obliterate pictures and statues of living
beings, for this artis an act of making a likeness of Allahs creation, besides one
‘may be deluded by the captivating pictures and statues and thus glorify them.
Coming to this phase, one may fall into idolatry. The second task was to level
the high graves lest people should glorify those buried therein and set them up
as rivals to Allah in terms of adoration and glorification.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Making pictures and statues is strictly prohibited, and thus a Muslim
is enjoined to obliterate these works in all its forms,

© Muslims are instructed to advise each other to follow the way of
truth, to enjoin the right and forbid the wrong, amd to disseminate
knowledge.

4 Erecting buildings on graves is strictly prohibited, since it is a prelimi-
nary step to falling into polytheism.

‘Chapter 60: Picrures and Seasues 429

4 Muslims are to demolish the domes built on top of the graves,

Like raising buildings on graves, making pictures or statues of living
beings is a preliminary step to falling into polytheism.

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhari (5953) and Muslim (2111).

2 Al-Bukhari (2479) and Muslim (2107).

3 Al-Bukhri (2225) and Muslim (2110).

4 Al-Bukhéri ($963) and Muslim (2110, 100):

5 Muslim (969), Abd Dawid (3218), AL-Titmidhf (1049), and Abad (1/96, 129)

6

Oft-repeated Swearing

Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“‘,. But guard your oaths...” (Quran: Al-M@idah: 89)
Abdi Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“I heard the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) saying, ‘(the seller’)
Swearing may promote his goods but his earnings will be deprived
of the blessings of Allah. ”'

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Oft-repeated swearing is an act of showing irreverence for the Name of
Allah and rather disparaging it. Accordingly, to revere the Name of Allah and
avoid disparaging its dignity through oft-repeated swearing isa prerequisite for
holding a true belief in monotheism, (this is no merely a stylistic suggestion).

432 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhiel

Keywords and Phrases

+ Guard. your oaths: This Divine command either means, ‘Avoid
uncalled-for swearing’ or'Do not break your oaths’ or ‘Once you break
your oaths, you have to atone for them!

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) admonishes Musiims against making
their oaths insignificant by taking them for the sake of promoting their goods
and earning more money. A seller may falsely swear that he was offered such-
and-such amount of money in return for a particular article, or that he bought
it for suich-and-such amount of money. Accordingly, the customer would think
him telling the truth and thus pay for such an article an amount of money that
exceeds its market value on the strength of the seller’s oath. Therefore, some
greedy sellers may resort to taking false oaths in disobedience to Allah. Hence,
Allah punishes them by rendering their earnings bereft of His blessing.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith admonishes Muslims against taking oaths in an effort to pro-
mote their commodities. It further highlights the bad consequences resulting
from such an evil conduct.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

Muslims are warned not to take oaths in the Name of Allah to promote
their commodities, for sucha conduct disparages the dignity of Allah's
Name and weakens one's belief in monotheism.

+ The hadith highlights the bad consequences resulting from taking
false oaths.

Illegal earnings are bereft of Allah's blessing, no matter how much

they are.
Se

‎Oftrepeaced Swearing, 433‏ :61 وس

‎Salman narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎“Three persons Allah will not speak to on the Day of Resurrection,
nor will He purify them and they will incur a painful punishment:
an aged person who commits adultery, a poor person who is
arrogant, and a man who made (swearing by) Allah as his goods,
as he does not buy or sell without swearing (by Allah)?”

‎(Related by At-Tabarani with an authentic chain of transmitters)

‎A profile about the Narrator

‎Perhaps Salman is ‏فطق‎ ‘Abdullah Salman Al-Parisi. He originally came
from Isfahan or Ram Hormuz (located in Persia). He embraced Islam upon,
the arrival of the Prophet (PBUH) at Medina, and witnessed the Battle of
Al-Khandag (Trench) and the Battles following it with Prophet Muhammad
(PBUH). He died in 36 A.H.; may Allah be pleased with him.

‎Keywords and Phrases

‎+ Allah will not speak to: This is a grave threat to those who fail in this
category, for Allah, Glorified be He, will speak only to the Faithful,

‎٠ Made (swearing by) Allah as his goods: This implies that such a
man makes taking oath in the Name of Allah as his goods through
using this oath repeatedly in selling and purchasing

‎General Meaning of the Hadith

‎In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) talks about three categories of disobe-
dient people who will receive a painful punishment owing to the heinousness
of their offenses, These categories can be classified as follows:

‎Firstly, those who commit adultery despite their being aged. This is
because the motive for doing acts of disobedience becomes weak
when one is aged. Besides, committing adultery while one is aged is
an indication of one’s fondness of disobedience and immorality. Thus,
though adultery is generally condemned, itis more condemned when
committed by an aged person.

434 Concise Commentary on the Boolea Tiwhid

The second category is the arrogant poor people. Though arrogance is
generally condemned, a poor person has nothing to be proud about,
and when a person shows arrogance, this indicates that arrogance is a
characteristic inherent in his character.

‘The third includes those who repeatedly take oaths in the Name of Allah
‘when selling or purchasing. Whoever does so disparages the dignity of.
Allakis Name through using it as-@ means of earning money.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

In this hudith, Muslims are warned not to swear by Allah repeatedly when
selling or purchasing any commodities.
Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Muslims are warned against swearing repeatedly by Allah when selling
or purchasing. They are rather urged to show reverence for the Names
of Allah, Exalted be He, by taking oaths only when it is necessary.

+ The hadith proves that speech is one of Allah's Attributes and that He
‘honors His true servants with speaking to them.

% All Mustims, specifically the aged, are warned natto appruach adultery.
+ All Muslims, specifically the poor, are warned not to be proud at al.

Sos

Chraprer 61: Off-repeated Swearing 435

‘Imran Ibn Husayn narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“The best people among my nation are those livingin my generation,
then those coming after them, and then those coming after (the
second generation). ‘Imran, the narrator, said, ‘I do not know
whether the Prophet (PBUH) mentioned two or three generations
after the first generation: Then the Prophet (PBUH) added, ‘There
will be some people after you, who will testify and will not be asked
to testify, will betray and will not be trusted, and will vow but will
not fulfill their vows, ard fatness will appear among them.”

Keywords and Phrases

+ Those living in my generation: This phrase denotes the Companions.

٠ Then those coming after them: This refers to the Tabi'is' of the
Companions.

« Then those coming after them: The Followers of the Tabi‘is
+ Who will testify: Thats, will commit perjury

+ Will not be asked to testify: Because of their persistent acts of

disobedience, or because they make little of taking oaths for testimony
and thus tend not to tell the truth.

+ Betray: To betray those who trust them.

* Will not be trusted: People will not trust them as they will be known
for their betrayal.

٠ Fatness will appear among them: The word ‘fatness’ signifies that
they will be healthily fat due to the life of luxury they lead, and their
being heedless of the Hereafter.

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) declares that the first three generations
of the Muslim nation; namely the Companions, the Tabi’ is and the Followers’ of
Tabi is, are the most righteous generations. Indeed, those generations deserve
to be the best amongst Muslim nation simply because they are the first to
embrace Islam and are the nearest ones to the shining light of prophethood.

436 Goneise Commentary on the Book of Taiwhld

‘The Prophetadds that after the demise of those preferred generations, evils will
spread among Muslims, bid ‘ahs emerge and become wide-spread, and people
will come to make little of testimonies and further breach their trusts and
vows. Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) enunciates that these late generations
will tend to lead a life of luxury giving no heed to the Hereafter. Emergence of
these evils indicates the weakness of the late generations’ adherence to Islam.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith impliesa reprimand for whoever makeslittle of thetestimonies
they give while they know that testimony is a form of oath taking.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

‎This hadith emphasizes the superiority of the first three or four‏ هيه
‎‘Muslim generations; namely, the Prophet's Companions, the Tabi tin‏
‎and their Followers.‏

‎Rushing to give testimony is sternly dispraised.

‎Muslims are to fulfill their yows as making little of one's vows is a
reproached act,

‎+ Trustees are to pay trusts backs as the hadith rebukes those who betray
when trusted.

‎© The hadith censures whoever leads a life of luxury and pays no heed to
the Hereafter.

‎“ This hadith isa sign of the prophethood of Muhammad (PBUH) as he
foretold what already occurred later,

‎See

Chapter 61: Ofr-repeated Swearing 437

Ibn Mas‘tid (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:
“The best among people are those living in my generation, then
those coming after them, and then those coming after them (the
second generation). Then there would follow them some people
whose testimony would precede their oath, and their oath (would
precede) their testimony.”

Ibrahim An-Nakh'i said, “As children we were beaten whenever we gave
testimony or took oaths.

A Profile about Ibrahim An-Nakh‘i

His full name is Abd ‘Imran tbréhim Ibn Yazid An-Nakh’t ‏نكا لخ‎ He
‘was one of the fagihs of the Successors of the Companions. Ibrahim died in 96
‏يكلم‎ may Allah have mercy on him,

Keywords and Phrases

٠ Whose testimony would precede their oath, and their oath
(would precede) their testimony: This description is intended
for those whose testimony and oath are coupled together when being
called to testimony without being asked to take an oath, and thus, once
the former precedes the latter and vice versa. The reason is that they
make little of oaths taken in the Name of Allah.

+ We were beaten when we gave testimony or took oaths: The
Tabi is (Successors of the Companions) used to beat children whenever
they gave testimonies or took oaths lest they should be accustomed to
commit themselves to taking oaths; and thus be obligated to fulfill
them. By the same token, the Tabi'és used to treat their children in
regard to giving testimonies lest their children should make little of
giving testimony and thus rush to it,

General Meaning of the Hadith

In this hadith, Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) declares that the most
righteous generations in the Muslim nation are the first three ones. He further
enunciates that after these generations, there would be people who would

438 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tabi

show leniency with regard to giving testimonies and taking oaths out of their
weak faith and their little fear of Allah". In comment on this hadith, {brahim
An-Nakh't related that the Tabi' in used to teach their children how to think
highly of testimony and oaths so that they would grow up holding this notion
and thus beware of making little of them,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith gives admonition against making little of taking oaths or
giving testimony.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% The first three generations in the Muslim nation are the most righteous
ones and the best among this nation.

© Rushing to give testimony or take an oath is strictly condemned.

% This hadith isa sign of the prophethood of Muhammad (PBUH), as he
foretold what has already occurred later.

% The Salaf concerned themselves with bringing up and educating
the children.

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhar (2087) and Muslim (1606).

2 Al-Bukhari (2651) and Muslira (2535),

3 The Titbi"fs (Successors of the Companions): Plural of 11”: 3 person who witnessed a
Companion of the Prophet (PBUH), ie. one of those who belonged to the First Muslim.
generation after the Prophet (PBUH).

4 Followers of the Tibi'fs: This term applies to any of those who did not meet the
Companions, but met and narrated ftom one or more ofthe Tabi 7s, i.e. those belonging
to the second generation after the Prophet (PBUH).

5 Al-Bukkhéri (2652) and Muslim (2533).

6 Anas (may Allah be pleased with Him) narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) said, “Be
‘patient until you meet your Lord, for na time will come upon you but the time following
if will be worse thart it” Related by Al-Bukhari (7068).

Covenants of Allah and His
Prophet

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And fulfill the covenant of Allah when you have taken it, ]0
believers}, and do not break oaths after their confirmation while
you have made Allah, over you, a security [ie., witness]. Indeed,
Allah knows what you do” (Qur'an: An-Nahl: 91)

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

This chapter states that fulfilling one’s covenants isa sign of one’s veneration
for Allah, whereas breaking them implies irreverence for Him, and thus
disparages one’s belief in monotheism.

440 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Keywords and Phrases

+ Fulfill the covenant of Allah: Observe the obligations pertaining to
your pledges of allegiance, your oaths, etc

+ And do not break oaths: The word ‘oath’ denotes the oaths taken for
pledges of allegiance, or oaths in general.

» After their confirmation: After confirming your eaths by the Name
of Allah.

+ Indeed, Allah knows what you do: This is a threat to those who
break their pledges and oaths.
General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah, Exalted be He, commands Muslims to fulfill their covenants and
pledges, and not to break the oaths they take in His Name, for they as such
make Allah, Exalted be He, their witness and an Observer aver them. Needless
to say, Allah knows their actions and will proportionately recompense them.

Relevance of the Qur’anic Verse to the Chapter

‘This verse proves that fulfilling pledges is @ legal obligation. Covenants of
protection are one of the pledges referred ‏ها‎ in the Quranic verse, and are thus
to be fulfilled.

Lessons Drawn from the Qur’anic Verse:
+ Muslims are obliged to fulfill their pledges and oaths,

* Muslims are prohibited from breaking their oaths and pledges.

# The verse attests to Allah's Omniscience and to the verity that nothing
ishidden from Him, Exalted be He.

% There is a threat ‏ما‎ whoever breaks his pledges or covenants.

Soe

ااه

‘Chapter 62: Covenants of Allah and His Prophet

Buraydah Ibnul-Husayb (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

"When the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) appointed anyone as a
leader of an army or detachment; he would especially exhort him to
‘fear Allah and to be good to the Muslims who were with hina, Then
he would say, ‘Fight in the Name of Allah and in the way of Allah,
Fight against those who disbelieve in Allah. Fight in the Cause of
Allah, do not embezzle the spoils; do not break your pledge; do riot
mutilate (the dead) bodies, and do not kill the children. When you
meer your enemies who are polytheists, invite them to three courses
of action. If they respond fo any one of them, you should accept
it and withhold yourself from doing them any harm. Invite tiem
to embrace Islam: if they respond to you, accept it from them and
desist from fighting against them. Then invite them to emigrate
from their lands to the land of the Muslim Migrants (Muhdjirin)
and inform them that if they do so, they shall have all the privileges
and obligations of the Muslim Migrants. If they refuse to emigrate,
tell them that they will have the status of Bedouin Muslims and
will be subjected to the Commands of Allah like other Muslims,
but they will not get any share from the spoils of war or that of
the fay’ (spoils gained without war) except when they actually fight
with the Mustims (agains! the disbelievers). If they refuse to accept
Islam, demand from them the jizyah (land tribute). If they agree to
pay, accept it from them and hold off your hands, Jf they refuse to
‘pay the jizyah, seek Allah’ help and fight them. When you lay siege
toa fort and the besieged appeal to you for protection in the Name
of Allah and His Prophet, do not accord to them the guarantee of
Allah and His Prophet, but accord to them your own guarantee
and the guarantee of your companions for it is a lesser sin that
the security given by you or your companions be disregarded than
that the security granted in the Name of Allah and His Prophet be
violated. When you besiege a fort and the besieged want you to let
them out in accordance with Allah’s Command, do not let them
Come out in accordance with His Command, but do so at your own
command, for you do not know whether or not you will be able to

carry out Allak’s Command with regard to thera’
(Related by Muslim)

442 Ganvige Commentary on the Book of Fiwhid

Keywords and Phrases

« Fight against those who disbelieve in Allah: This is because of
their disbelief, however the Prophet (PBUH) would exclude those
whom Muslims are prohibited from killing, such as women, children
and those who have concluded a treaty with Muslims.

+ The land of the Muslim Migrants: ‘Land’ refers to ‘Medina’ at that time.

+ The privileges and obligations of the Muslim Migrants: The
word ‘Privileges’ refers to the fay’ and booty, and the word ‘obligations’
refers to fighting in the Cause of Allah and other commitments.

« Jizyah: Money taken from the disbelievers by way of humiliation to them.

General Meaning of the Hadith

Buraydah Ibnul-Husayb (may Allah be pleased with him) states the
commandments which Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) usedto give to the leaders
of Muslim armies and detachments before they set off to fight in the Cause of
Allah. According to the hadith, he (PBUH) used to advise leaders to make their
obedience to Allah as a shelter ftom His punishment through persevering in
piety. Furthermore, the Prophet (PBUH) used fo command them to go out to
fight seeking Allah's assistance in their effort to turn disbelievers to Islam so
that worship, all of it, be dedicated to Allah Alone, He (PBUH) used also to
command Muslim fighters not to break their covenants, embezzle the spoils,
‘mutilate the dead bodies, or kill children who are not involved in the fight.
Moreover, when coming face to face with the enemy, Muslims are required
to give the disbelievers three options before starting to fight with them; to
embrace Islam, to pay jizyalt, or ta be fought. In case they embraced Islam,
they were given two options; to immigrate fo the land of the Muslim Migrants
(Medina) and thus enjoy all the Migrants’ privileges and comply with their
obligations, or to stay with the Bedouin Mustims enjoying their rights and
complying with their obligations,

According to the instructions of the Prophet (PBUH), in case Muslims
lay siege to the disbelievers in their forts then the besieged asks them to
make a treaty of protection in the Name of Allah and His Prophet, Muslim
leaders should not agree, but rather should only accord to them their own
guarantees, The reason ‏كل‎ that breaking pledges taken in the Name of Allah
and His Messenger is graver than breaking one’s own pledges, Similarly, in
case those besieged ask to be treated in accordance with Allahs Law, Muslim

‘Chapter 62: Covenants of Aliah and His Prophec 443

fighters should not agree, but rather should treat them according to theit best
judgment, lest their judgment may not accord with that of Allah, and thus,
ascribe wrong judgments to Allah.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith prohibits Muslims from giving disbelievers the covenants of
Allah and His Prophet (PBUH) lest they should fail to fulfil these covenants.
Failing to fulfil these covenants isa great sin, an act of abusing Allah's pledge
and further indicates that one’s belief in monotheism is imperfect.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

4 Sending detachments and armies to fight in the Cause of Allah is
legalized in Islam.

+b Fighting in Islam should be intended to make the religion ordained
by Allah prevail and to cleanse Earth from all atheistic beliefs, not to
expand one's kingdom to seek worldly gain, or ‏ما‎ satisfy one's whims
or lusts.

s and detachments,

% This legitimate to appoint leaders for armi

4 Those in authority are legally required to instruct commanders of
armies and to detail the plan they should follow in fighting.

% ‘The permission of those in authority should be taken before fighting
in Allah's Cause.

4 Before starting to fight, Muslims should firs call the disbelievers to Islam.
#1

legitimate to take the jizyah from all disbelievers,
% Killing children during the battle is strictly prohibited.

+ Mutilating the dead bodies is strictly prohibited.

4 Muslims are forbidden to embezzle the spoils or to break their pledges.

4 Muslims are to show reverence for the covenants of Allah and His
Messenger, whose sanctity is higher thait that of Muslims.

+ Muslims should take precautions in order not to avoid falling into
what is prohibited,

A Mujtahid may give a correct judgment and may not. The hadith further
highlights the difference between Allahs judgment and that of scholars.

Concise Commentity un the Book of Zwbid

خف
‎If it is inevitable, Muslims are permitted to conimit the lesser of the‏ >
‎two evils.‏
‎Attempting a reasoned or deduced solution for unprecedented legal‏ ‘
‎problems is legitimate, when necessary.‏
‎Endnotes‏

1 Muslim (1731), Aba Dawad (2612, 2613), At-Tirmidht (1617), Tbn Majah (4858), and
‘Ahmad in Al-Musnad (5/352, 358),

Adjuring Allah

Jundub Ibn ‘Abdullah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“A person said, ‘By Allah! Allah will not forgivesoand-so’ Thereupon,

Allah, Exalted be He, said, ‘Who is he who swears about Me that I

would not forgive so and so; I have forgiven so and so and rendered
your deeds worthless? (The one who took an oath that Allah would
not forgive him).”"

(Related by Muslim)

Inanother hadith related by Ab Dawid, on the authority of Abd Hurayrah,
the person who swore was a righteous worshipper’.

Aba Hurayrah said:

“This man uttered a word that caused him to lose this world and
the Hereafter”

446 Concise Cummentary on the Book of fawhiad

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

Adjuring Allah contradicts one’s belief in Allah's monotheism if it is in-
tended to limit His Mercy; for such an adjuration shows lack of respect to
Allah, Exalted be He.

General Meaning of the Hadith

Inan admonition to Muslims not to give free rein to theirtongues, Prophet
Muhammad (PBUH) tells that once a man swore that Allah would not forgive
acertain sinner. In so doing such a man made himself asa judge and wanted to
limit Allah's Mercy: This is because that man thought that he had a high rank
in Allah's sight and deemed that sitiner to be humiliated because of his sins,
Such a man took liberties with Allah and showed bad manners to Him, which
caused him loss and suffering in both this life and the Hereafter.

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

‘This hadith proves that adjuring Allah in a way that entails limiting His
‘Mercy and shows self-admiration is strictly prohibited, This conduct further
indicates that one’s belief in monotheism is imperfect.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

* Muslims are prohibited from adjuring Allah unless the adjuration is
made when one thinks well of Allah and has great hope for His Grace,

© People are duty bound to observe good manners towards Allah.

% The tongue is a very dangerous organ and thus man is to try his best
to curb it,

‘Chaprer 63: Adjaring Allaly gy
Endnotes

{Muslim (2621),

2 This ladith is related by Abd Dawad (4901) on the authority of Aba Hurayrah who
narrated that he heard the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) sayiny
“There were two men among the Children of Israel (Israelites), who were on friendly
Leérms, One of them used to commit sits while the other was devated to worship, The
‘man who exerted himself in worship continited to see the other in sin and he would say
10 hin ‘Refeain from it! One day he found him in sin and said to him, ‘Refrain from
itd He said, ‘Leave me atone with my Lord. Have you been sent as an observer over
me?! He (the worshipper) said, ‘By Allah! Allal will not forgive you, (or ‘Allah will not
adinit you to Paradise! the narrator doubted the exact wording). Then their souls Were
taken back (by Allah), and they inet together with the Lord of the worlds. Allah said to
the man who had striven hurd in worship, ‘Had you knowledge about Me or had you
‘power over that which I had in My Hand?" He said to the man who sinned, ‘Go and
center Paradise by My mercy! He said about the other, “Take him to the Hellfire: ”

3 At-Tirmidhi related a hadith (No. 2320) which reads:
“The Prophet (PBUH) said, '..A ran speaks an evil word not realizing its importance for
which Allali records for hin: His displeasure until the Day he meets Hin.”

‘At-Tirmidht said, “This fradtth is a hasan (good) sahih (authentic) one.”

Seeking Allah’s Intercession with
One of His Creatures...

Jubayr Ibn Mut'im (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

‘A Bedouin came to the Prophet (PBUH) and said, ‘O Messenger
of Allah! People are fatigued, children are starving and properties
have ruined, so invoke Allah for rain, as we indeed seek Allah’s
intercession with you and yours with Him on our behalf. Thereupon,
the Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Glorified is Allah, Glorified is Allah; and
he continued glorifying Allah until fears appeared on the faces of
hhis Companions (because of the anger they noticed on the prophet’s
face). Then the Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Woe unto you! Do you not
know who Allah is? Allah’s greatness is far above that; it is not
permissible to seek Allah's intercession with one of His creatures."
(Related by Abi Dawid)

450 Concise Commentary on the Book of ‏كالسا‎

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

This chapter stresses the prohibition of seeking Allah's Intercession
with one of His creatures as it is an act of trespassing on the Rubdbiyyah
(Lordship) of Allah and impairs one’ belief in the monotheism. It is well-
known that an intercessor intercedes only with the one who is superior to
him, and it is taken for granted that Allah is far above any imperfection, as
none is superior'to His Majesty.

A profile about Jubayr

His full name is Jubayr Ibn Mut im Ibn ‘ Adi Ibn Nawfal Ibn “Abd Manaf Al-
Qurashi (i., he belongs to the tribe of Quraysh). He was one of the nobles of
Quraysh, Jubayr had embraced Islam before the conquest of Mecca, and died
in 57 AH. may Allah be pleased with him,

Keywords and Phrases

+ Glorified is Allah: His Majesty is far above all imperfections and
above whatever is inappropriate for His majesty.

+ Do you know who Allah is: This question denotes the addressee's
Jittle knowledge of Allah's Grandeur and Majesty,

General Meaning of the Hadith

jubayr (may Allah be pleased with him) narrates that a Bedouin came to
the Prophet (PBUH) and complained that his people were in distress due to
Jack of rain, and wanted him (PBUH) to ask Allah for rain. Yer, this Bedouin
did not observe good manners towards Allah as he sought His intercession
with the Prophet (PBUH). This was because of that man's unawareness of
Allah's due rights, for an interceder is admittedly inferior to the one who
is interceded, This is why the Prophet (PBUH) reproved that Bedouin and
explained that Allah is far above all imperfections, However, the Prophet
(PBUH) did not reprove this Bedouin for seeking his intercession with Allah
through invoking Him,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

This hadith signifies the prohibition of seeking Allah’s intercession with
‘one of His creatures as such an act implies attributing imperfections to Allah,
while He is incontestably far above all imperfections.

(Chapter 64+ Seeking Allahs Intercession with One of His Creattites.. 451

Lessons Drawn From the Hadith

4 Seeking Allah's intercession with one of His creatures is strictly
prohibited as this act shows one's little appreciation for Allah's Majesty.

% Man is duty bound to deem Allah far above what is inappropriate for
His Majesty.

% A Muslim is to disapprove of the evil and teach the unlearned.

© One is permitted to seek the intercession of the Prophet (PBUH) only
during his lifetime by asking him ta invoke Allah for satisfying people's
needs. This is because the Prophet's supplications are answered once
he (PBUH) invokes Allah, But after his death, one is prohibited from
asking him for intercession as his Companions never did s

4 Raising questions is a successful method of teaching since it highly
impresses one's soul.

Endnotes

1 Abt: Dawad (4726),

65

The Prophet and Blocking All
Avenues Leading to Polytheism

* Abdullah Ibnush-Shikhkhir (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“I proceeded along with the delegation of Bani ‘Amir to the
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) and said (to him), ‘You are our Sayyid
(master)’ So, he (PBUH) replied, ‘The Sayyid is Allah, Blessed and
Exalted be He’ Then, we said, ‘(And you are) the best of us and
the most honorable among us’ Thereupon, he (PBUH) replied, ‘Say
what you have to say, or part of what you have to say and do not let
Satan make you get carried away: ”

(Related by Aba Dawdd with a good chain of transmission)

454 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawi

Relevance of the Chapter to the Book of Tawhid

In this chapter, the author emphasizes the point that a Muslim can not
fully adopt the creed of monotheism unless he avoids sayings which result
in showing excessive praise for a creature, that may lead finally to falling
into polytheism.

A Profile about the Narrator

The full name of the narrator is “Abdullah Ibnush-Shikhkhir Ibn

‘Auf Ibn Ka'b bn Waqdan Al-Harishi, He embraced Islam on the Day

of the Conquest of Mecca and was one of the Companions who narrated
Prophetic hadiths.

Keywords and Phrases

+ The Prophet's maintenance of monotheism: His endeavors to
guard the creed of monotheism against the practices and sayings that
either contradict it or impair its perfection.

+ The Sayyid is Allah: The perfect mastership belongs solely to Allah,
‘Almighty and Ever-Majestic be He, whereasall beings are but servants
to Him.

» Say what you have to say: When giving praise, use familiar words of
praise and avoid any word that may lead to immoderation.

+ Or part of what you have to say: Or even avoid using some familiar
words in an effort to avoid immoderation.

+ And do not let Satan make you get carried away: Do not let him
prevail over you and employ you as his deputies and intermediaries.

General Meaning of the Hadith

When the delegation of Band ‘Amir overly praised the Prophet (PBUH),
he forbade them to do so, This instruction is intended in order to observe
due reverence for Allah and for maintaining the creed of monotheism.
Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) ordered them to only use familiar words of
praise, which do not imply immoderation or any prohibitions. He (PBUH)
ordered them to call him in the way Allah named him, i.e. “Muhammad, the
Messenger of Allah”.

Chaprer 65: The Prophet and Blocking All Avenues Leading to Polytheism 455

Relevance of the Hadith ta the Chapter

‘This lindith signifies that itis prohibited to exaggerate in praising someone
by using eulogistic words that show excessive praise, which may result in
falling into polytheism.

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

*% The hadith sheds light on the modesty of the Prophet (PBUH) and on
his courteous manners towards his God.

+ Itis prohibited to excessively praise others, particularly in their presence.

4% Mastership belongs to Allah Alone, and thus, the term ‘Ssayyid"is not to
be used in praise.

4 Using words that show excessive praiseis strictly prohibited, whereas
using plain words is highly recommended.

4 Muslims are duty bound to guard the creed of monotheism against the
practices and sayings that may impair its perfection.

aad

456 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tauvhie!

‘Anas (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated,

"Some people said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! You are the best of ts,
and the son of the best of us, and you are our sayyid (master) and
the son of our sayyid’ Thereupon, the Prophet (PBUH) said, 0
people! Say as you used to say (ke. call me the servant of Allah and
His prophet) and da not Jet Satan draw you (to say what is not
lawful), Lam Muhammad, Allah slave aud Messenger. By Allah! I
do not like you to raise me above the rank which Allah, Exalted be
He, put me in’

(Related by An-Nasaii with a good chain of transmission)

Note

+ Do not let Satan draw you; Do not let him prevail over your minds
and make your whims seem fair to you.

General Meaning of the Hadith

The Prophet (PBUH) detested to be praised with any of themany words
that show. excessive praise and that may finally lead to overly praising
him. Since Allah has described him as having the highest rank of slavery
to Him, the Prophet (PBUH) detested to be overly praised. This feeling
springs from the Prophet's interest in maintaining this honorable rank,
and in giving his nation an admonition to leave out any immoderation as
regards praising him, so as to maintain the creed of tawhd. Furthermore,
the Prophet (PBUH) instructed them to describe him as having two
attributes representing the highest rank that can be granted toa slave,
Allah's slave and Messenger. Allah has already described his Messenger
as having these two qualities in various Qur’anic passages. As such, he
(PBUH) does not need to be raised above this honorable rank granted
by Allah,

Relevance of the Hadith to the Chapter

In order to maintain one's belief of monotheism and block all avenues
of excessive praise which may result in committing polytheism, the Prophet
(PBUH) forbade Muslims to praise him with any words other than those
ascribed to him by Allah,

Chapter 65: The ‏الصدك طوس‎ Blocking All Avenucs Leading to Polyteirm 457

Lessons Drawn from the Hadith

% Using words that express excessive praise is strictly prohibited, lest it
should lead to falling into polytheism.

% The hadith shows the Prophet's modesty and keenness on guarding
the Muslim Creed against what may blemish it.

© Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) is but Allah's slave and Messenger, and
he has nothing to do with people’ fates which are solely determined.
by Allah.

© Muslims are warned against the satanic insinuations, which may take.
the form of enticing people to exceed the legal bounds.

Endnotes

| Abd Dawad (4806) and Ahmad (4/25).
2 An-Nasiit in his book entitled "Amal AU-Yawm Wal-Laylah (Supplications of Day and
Night) (248, 249), and Abmad in Al-Musnad (3/153, 241).

Polytheists have not Appraised
Allah with True Appraisal

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“They have not appraised Allah with true appraisal, while the
earth entirely will be (within) His grip on the Day of Resurrection,
and the heavens will be folded in His right hand. Exalted is He

and high above what they associate with Him.”
(Qur'an: Az-Zumar; 67)

Relevance of the Verse to the Book of Tawhid

The author ends his book with a chapter including some texts attesting to
Allah’s Grandeur, and to the verity that all creatures are subjected to Him. This
proves that Allah is the One worthy of worship and it, further, proves that all
attributes of perfection and majesty exclusively belong to Him.

460, Concise Commentary on the Book of Trwbid

Keywords and Phrases

+ They have not appraised Allah with true appraisal: The ‏رادم‎
‎theists have not exalted Allah duly, as they associate others along
with him in worship.

« The earth entirely will be: The earth with all its directions and layers.

General Meaning of the Qur’anic Verse

Allah, Exalted be He, enunciates that the polytheists have not exalted Him
ina proper manner as they worship others along with Him, though He is the
most Exalted, the Omnipotent and the Sovereign Owner Who has subjugated
all to His Will, while creatures in their entirety are so little and worthless in
His Sight. Thereafter, Allah, Exalted be He, enunciates that He is far above the
imperfection attributed to him by the polytheists and the ignorant ones.

Note

+ Regarding the verse that reads, “...while the earth entirely will be [within]
His grip on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens will be folded
in His right hand ,..”, the righteous Salaf (early Muslitn scholars) are
of the opinion that such a verse and its like should be apprehended
according to their face value with neither tahrif (distortion) nor takyif
(literalization and incarnation). The following hadiths and traditions
give a clear interpretation of this verse.

+ Lessons drawn from the verse in question will be stressed after high-
lighting the texts relevant to it in this chapter.

Ste

461

Chapter 66: Polytheists have not Appraied Allah with Truc Appraisal

"Abdullah Ibn Mas’ dd (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“A rabbi came to the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) and said, ‘O
Muhammad! We learn that Allah will put all the heavens on oné
‘finger, and the earths on one finger, and the trees on one finger,
arid the thard on one finger, and the rest of the created beings an
one finger. Then He will say, ‘Lam the Sovereign’ Thereupon, the
Prophet (PBUH) smiled so that his premolar teeth became visible,
and that was the confirmation of the rabbi. Then the Prophet
(PBUH) recited (the verse which means), ‘They have not appraised
Allah with true appraisal, while the earth entirely will be (within)
His grip on the Day of Resurrection...”

In another version related by Muslim, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‘.and the mountains and trees are on one finger, then Allah will
shake them as saying, Lam the Sovereign, fam Allah.”

In another version related by Al-Bukhari, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Allah will put the heavens on one Finger, and the water and thar
on one Finger, and all the created beings on ane Finger ...”'

Tbn ‘Umar narrated as a hadith marfa' that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‘Allah, Exalted be He, would fold the heavens on the Day of
Resurrection and then He would put them in His right Hand and
Say, ‘Iam the Sovereign; where are the tyrants and where are the
arrogant people (today)?" Then, He would fold the seven earths and
put thera in His left Hand and say, ‘Iam the Sovereign. Where are
the tyrants and where are the arrogant people (today)?""?

bn ‘Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“The seven heavens and the seven earths, in the Hand of (Allah)
the Entirely Merciful, are but like a seed of mustard in a hand of
one of you.”

Keywords and Phrases

+ Thara: Wet soil or it may be referring io the earth,

« The trees: Trees which have solid trunks, such as palm trees and the like.

462 Concise Cominencary on the Book of Titwhid

General Meaning of the Hadith

One of the rabbis informed the Prophet (PBUH) that the Jews read in
their Torah about the Grandeur of Allah and the low level of all His creatures
when compared to His Majesty, Exalted be He, and that He will place all His
creatures on His fingers. The Prophet (PBUH) agreed with the rabbi in what
he said, and was very pleased with him, Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) recited
a Quranic verse attesting to the rabbis account,

Lessons Drawn from the Verse
and the Two Narrations of the Hadith

4 Both the verse and narrations show the Grandeur of Allah and the low
level of all His éreatures when compared to His Majesty.

© Whoever associates partners with Allah, Glorified be He, does not
exalt Him in-a way which is appropriate for His Majesty.

4 The texts prove that Allah has two hands, fingers, right, left and palms
in a way appropriate for His Majesty.

4 They signify that the sublime knowledge stated in the Torah was still
approved of by the Jews at the era of the Prophet (PBUH) without any
denial or distortion of the meanings.

+ Sovereignty is exclusively possessed by Allah, whereas other beings’
dominions are but transient.

ooo

Chapter (6: Polytheists have nor Appraised Allah with True Appraisal 463

Ibn Jarir related thal Ibn Zayd reported on the authority of his father that
the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“The seven heavens, when compared to the Kursi”, are only like
seven dirhams thrown in a vast round-shaped plate.”

Ibn Jarir, further, related {hat Abii Dharr (may Allah be pleased with
him) narrated:

“Theard the Prophet (PBUH) saying, "The Kursi, when compared to
the Throne, is only like a ring of iron thrown in a desert”

General Meaning of the Two Hadiths

The prophet (PBUH) speaks about the greatness of Allah’: Kursi and
‘Throne, affirming that if the seven heavens, in terms of their vastness, thickness
and the remote distance between every consecutive one, are compared to the
Kursi, they would be like seven Dirhams placed in a vast round-shaped plate.
‘That is, the seven heavens would truly occupy an inconsiderable space.

Moreover, in the hadith narrated by Ab Dharr, the Prophet (PBUH)
illustrates that though the Kurs/is so vast and great, itis just like a ring of iron
thrown in a vast desert in the case when it {s compared to the Throne. This
account attests to the Grandeur and Omnipotence of the Throne’ Creator.

Relevance of the Two Hadiths to the Chapter

The two aforementioned liadifhs manifest Allah's Grandeur, Omnipotence
and infinite Sovereignty.

Lessons Drawn from the two Hadiths

© The Kursi is greater than the heavens, whereas the Throne is greater
than the Kursi.

+ The hadiths manifest the Grandeur of Allah and His Omnipotence.
Allah's Throne is other than His Kursi.

> The hadiths provide an argument against those who interpret the word
‘the Kursi’as an indication of the Sovereignty and Omniscience.

sos

464 Concise Commentary on the Book of Tine

bn Mas’ ‏قن‎ (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“The distance between the lowest heaven and the one next t0 it
is five hundred years travel, and between each two of the seven
heavens is the distance of five hundred years travel, and the distance
between the seventh heaven and the kursi is also five hundred years
travel and between the kursi and the water is also five hundred
‘years travel, and the Throne is above the water, and Allah, Exalted
be He, is above the Throne and nothing of your deeds is hidden
‘from Allah, Exalted be He."

(Related by Ibn Mahdi)
Adh-Dhahabi says:

“A hadith similar to this on
of ‘Abdullah Tbn Mas’ tid:

Adh-Dhahabi added, “The same hadith is narrated through other chains
of transmitters”

Itreported on the authority of Al-” Abbas Ibn" Abdul-Muttalib (may Allah
be pleased with him) that Allah's Messenger (PBUH) said:

“Do you know how far the distance between the heaven and the
earth is?” We said, ‘Allah and His Messenger know best’ He said,
“The distance between them is that of five hundred years travel, and
the distance between every two heavens is that of five hundred years
travel, and the thickness of every heaven is that of five hundred years
travel, and between the seventh heaven and the Throne there is a sea,
the distance between its bottom and its surface is equal to the distance
hetween the heaven and the earth; and Allah is over (all) this and
nothing is hidden from Him of the deeds of human beings!”

(Related by Aba Dawid and others)

lated by Al-Mas’ ttdi on the authority

Keywords and Phrases

+ Do you know: The Prophet (PBUH) used the interrogative man-
ner at the beginning of the hadith so as to attract the attention of
the listeners.

+ Allah and His Messenger know best: Referring the knowledge of
different matters to the Messenger (PBUH) is permissible only in his
lifetime, but after his death, one should say, ‘Only Allah knows best,

Chapter 66: Polytheists have not Appraised Allah with True Appraisal 465,

General Meaning of the Hadiths

Giving an account of the celestial bodies in termsof their greatness, vastness
and the remote distances between them, the Prophet (PBUH) demonstrates
that there are seven heavens one above the other, and that the distance from
the Earth to the first heaven is five hundred years travel, and that the same
distance separates one heaven from the other. Similarly, the thickness of each
heaven amounts to five hundred years travel. Moreover, the kursi is above the
seventh heaven, and a sea exists above the kursi whereas the distance ftom the
former to the latter also amounts to five hundred years travel. And over the
Throne Allah rises and that He is whally cognizant of man’s actions.

Relevance of the two Hadiths to the Chapter

‘The two hadiths manifest Allah's Grandeur, His Omnipotence, His being
above all creatures and His cognizance of all their affairs.

Lessons Drawn from the Two Hadiths

“ Both thetwo hiadiths manifest Allah's Grandeur and Omnipotence, and
thus the obligation of dedicating all devotional acts to Him alone.

% They give an account of the celestial bodies’ greatness, vastness and
the remote distances between each two of them.

% They also refute the argument of those who adopt the modern theories,
which deny the existence of the heavens, the kursi, and the Throne,
and claim that the celestial universe consists of just space and bodies.

% They prove the verity that Allah is above all creatures with His Sacred
Self, which is contrary to the claim adopted by Al-Jahmiyyah’, Al-
‘Mu’ tazilah’ and Al-Ash ‘ariyyah’ who disprove this truth.

‎These two hadiths also prove that Allah is cognizant of whatever takes‏ ع
‎place in His Dominion, though He is Most High above all creatures.‏

‎4 Men of Knowledge should preach about these great creedal truths so
that people can apprehend Allah's Grandeur and Omnipotence

466 Concise Commentaty on the Book of Tatohid
Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhart (4871) and Muslim (2786),

2 Muslim (2788),

3 Allah, Exalted be He, says, “..His Kursi extends over the heavens and the
earth...” (Quran: Al-Baqarah: 255). Itis related by Al-Hakim that Ibn “Abbas
said, "Al-kurst is a place for the feet" Ibn “Abbas is also reported to have said that Al-
Kurst denotes Allabis knowledge.

4 Aba Dawéd (4723), At-Tirmidhi (3317), fbn Majah (193), and Ahmad in A/-Musnad
(1/206, 207).

5 Al-ahmiyyah: This term refers to the followers of Jahm Ibn Safwan As-Samarqandt,
Among their heresies is their denial of Allah's Attributes,

6 Al-Mu''tazilah; This term refers to the followers of Wasil Ibn “ Ata", Among their
heresies are their denial of Allah's Attributes and their claim that those wha commit
major sins are in a state between belief and disbelief,

7 Al-Ash‘ariyyah (also Al-Asha' irah pl. of Ash'ari): An Islamic sect characterized by
departing from the direct meanings of the Qur'anicverses that tackle Allah's Attributes.
‘They give them figurative interpretations with the aim of avoiding any similarity
‘between Allah and humans. As such, Al-Asha"irah interpret Allah's Attributes in a
way different from that adopted by the Adherents of the Sunnah ever since the lifetime
‘of the Prophet (PBUH). The Adherents of the Suma also deem Allah far above any
likeness to humans. Yet, they interpret Allah's attributes according to their direct
‘meanings with an affirmation that these attributes suit Allah's Majesty and are totally
unlike those of humans.

APPENDICES
GLOSSARY

NOTE: For easier search for the terms beginning with ‏"اخ"‎ “Ar-" "Ad"
“As” etc, omit them, as they are in Arabic equivalents to the article “the”
For example, a term like As-Safa will be found under letter “S', and ‏عله‎
‎Wosilah under letter “W",

A

‘An Arabic word referring to the Arabic alphabet

‘The pledge in which the Prophet (PBUH) made covenant with
the people of Al-Aws and Al-Khazraj (the two main tribes of
Medina) that they worship Allsh and associate nothing with
Him,,and that they protect the Prophet (PBUH) just as they
protect themselves and their properties, and in return they would
be admitted into Paradise,

‘An Islamic sect characterized by departing from the direct
‘meanings of the Quranic verses that tackle Allahis Attribates

They give them figurative interpretations with the aim of
avoiding any similarity between Allah and humans. As such, Al-
‘Asha’ irah interpret Allah's Attributes in a way different from that
adopted by the Adherents of the Sunnah ever since the lifetime
of the Prophet (PBUH). The Adherents of the Sunnah also deem
Allah far above any likeness to humans, Yet, they interpret Allah's
Attributes according to their direct meanings with an affirmation
that these attributes suit Almighty Allah and are totally unlike
those of humans.

B

‘A matter innovated in religion

6

‘This term refers to those who represented both Al-Aws and
‘Al-Khazraj in the second pledge of Al-"Aqabah, Nine persons
represented Al-Khazraj and three for Al-Aws.

D

‘An Atheistic sect characterized by denying the Resurrection, the
Day of judgment, Hell and Paradise,

‘Annon-Muslim living in and under the protection of an Islamic state

Aba-Jad

‘ALL Agabab
Pledge

AL-Ash’ariyyah
(also AL Ashi irah
plof Ash’ari)

Bid'ah

(Nagibs)

‘Ad-Daburiyyah

Dhimmi
470

ع"

A scholar of Islamic jurisprudence

‘This term applies to any of those who did not meet the Com-
panions, but met and narrated from one or more of the tabi",
They are those belonging to the second generation after the
Prophet (PBUH).

G

A hadith reported by just one narrator at even one stage of the
chain of transmission

Itrefers to the evil spirit or demon. The disbelievers claimed that
such spirits could mislead them from their ways and cause their
damnation. Islam came and invalidated such beliefs.

H
I is a title given to a person who knows most narrations of
each class of narrators and whoever devotes himself to the
study of Hadith

‘Hamah is a nocturnal bird; mostly the owl, in which some people
‘wrongly see ill omen.

Hasan (good) hadith is a hadith whose chain of transmission is
linked to the narration of an authority with weak exactitude, and

They are the followers of Jahm Ibn Safwan. They denied the
Names and Attributes of Allah,

It refers ‏فا‎ all those wha are worshipped along with Allah or
those who have been obeyed in doing a sinful act that Allah
tras forbidden.

A tribute or tax incumbent on non-Muslims living in a Muslim
state, they, thereby, enjoy protection. Thus, when the Muslim
army conquers any territory, Muslims are to offer three choices
tw the conquered people; either to embrace Islam, to pay Jizyah
or to engange in fighting. The Non-Muslims who pay Jizyah are
exempted from military service and are entitled to be protected
by the Islamic State

Glossary

الوم

Followers of the
Tabi'ts

Gharib (Unfamil-
iar) Hadith

Ghoul

Hafiz

(Memorizer)

Hémah

‘Hasan (Good)
Hadith

Al-Jahmiyyah

Tibet

Jizyal

Concise Commentary on the Book of ‏لشلاسةة‎

It isa shrine in Mecea in Saudi Arabia which is the destination
‘of Muslim pilgrims and toward which Muslims direct their faces
during Prayer. The Ka’ bah was originally built for the first time
by the Angels and then rebuilt by Abraham and Ishmael. On the
Day of the Conquest of Mecca, the Prophet (PBUH) washed the
Ka'bah and demolished the idols around it. The Ka'bah was
subject to several renovations until it took its present shape.

An Islamic radical sect that broke away from the reign of Ali fbn
‘Aba Talib, the Muslim Caliph then, and murdered him. they
denied the doctrine of the Sunnat and were divided into various
sub-sects. One of their main beliefs is that whosoever commits a
major sin becomes a disbeliever and will eternally reside in the
Hellfire. They-also curse and revile the Prophet's Companions
and deem the blood of Muslims vioable.

L

‘This word is used in this book as a translation of the Arabic word
Rabb, ie, Allah, However, the term in English is not an exact
equivalent of the Arabic word ‘abl. Among other significations,
the term ‘rab’ means the Creator: the Fashioner, the Provider, the
one upon whom all creatures rely in all their affairs, the One who
{gives life and causes death.

M
‘This term literally means “The Position of Praiseworthiness” Itrefers
to the supreme position granted to the Prophet (PBUH) on the Day
‘of Judgment when he intercedes on behalf of people with Allah.

A hadith, word or deed, traced back to a Companion only, whether
its chain of transmission is connected or not.

A hadith, the beginning of whose chain of transmission has two
or more successive narrators missing.

‘A Muslim scholar vell versed enough in Figh (Islamic Jurispru-
dence) to practice itihdd, which is an independent judgment o0
an unprecedented legal question, based on the interpretation and
application of the Four Foundations: the Qur'an, the Prophet's
Sunnah, Consensus of scholars and Analogy.

‘An Islamic deviant sect that holds the belief that sins do not harm
believers exactly as good deeds do not benefit disbelievers, They refer
the case of those who commit major sins to Allah in the Hereafter,

eral

Ka’ bah

Lord

Al-Magam
Al-Mahmad

Mawgif (Discon-
Hinaed) Hadith

Mu‘allaq (Sus-
pended) Hadith

Mujtabiiad

AL-Murji’ah

472

‘A 116401 Whose chain of transmission lacks a Companion
transmitter; ‏رع‎ « hadith which a (dbi'i has directly ascribed to
the Prophet without mentioning a Companion asa link between
‘him and the Prophet.

‘A form Of compilation in which the author classifies the hadiths
according to the names of Companions, such as Musnad Ahmad,
the Great Musnad of AL-Bukuér.

According to the scholars of Hadith, it is a kind of compilation
in which the author compiles hadiths that meet the conditions
stipulated by the compiler of another book but were not compiled
by the Lauer,

‘The term literally means “Those who keep themselves apart”
deviant Muslim sect founded by Wasil fbn “Ati Its followers
believe that man has free-will, which is the same doctrine of anti-
fatalists. They further believe that the Glorious ‏مسي‎ is created
rather than constituting the direct Word of Allah,

R

Unit ‏كن‎ prayer; set of aétions which begins with recitation
and encls wil prostration, Tt consists of one bowing and two
prostrations with a sitting in between.

‘The terra rabb refers to Almighty Allah and means the Lord, the
Creator, the Fashioner, the Provider, the One upon whom All
creatures depend for their means of subsistence, and the One
Who gives life and causes death.

‘The beliéf that Allah is the Lord and Creator of all creatures and
that He is the only One to dispose all affairs of the universe,

‘An Arabic word referring to the legal incantation

5

Ii refers ta 2 worm which infests the stomach of men and animals
and thought by pre-Islamic Arabs to cause death and to be more
contagious than mange, Some view that it refers to the month of
Safar in which the pre-Islamic Arabs used to see evil omen. So,
Islam came and invalidated such bellets

A hadith whose chain of transmission has been transmitted by
truly piouspersons who have been known for their uprightness
and exactitude; such a hadith is free from eccentricity and
blemish,

Glossary

Mursal
(acompletely
‘Transmitted)

Hadith

Al-Musnad

Al-Mustadrak

Al-Mu' tazilah
(Mutazilites)

Rak'ah

Rabb

Rubiibiyyah

Rugyah

Safar

Sahih
(Authentic)
Hadith

(Concise ‏تربك معد نوه‎ on the Book ‏عن‎ Tiwihld

‘This term refers mainly to the early Muslims; namely, the
Prophet's Companions, their Successors, and their Followers,
It-also includes everyone that follows their footsteps until the
Day of Judgment.

(Of or related to the Salaf

It is one of the Beautiful Names of Allah, which refers to the verity
that Allah is the One Who dominates the affairs of all His creation.

"The Islamic Law

"This term refers to whatever has been ascribed to the Prophet
(PBUH); his sayings, his acts, and his approvals, in addition to all
the reports which describe his physical attributes and character.

Any of the 114 chapters of the Qur'an

T

Successor of a Companion; a person who witnessed a Companion
of the Prophet (PBUH), Le. one of those who belonged to the first
‘Muslim generation after the Prophet (PBUH).

The term is originally derived from the Arabic yerb, “Taghd'
meaning ‘to exceed proper limits? Contextually it refers to
Satan, and false objects of worship such as idols, heavenly
bodies, spirits, human beings, and to whoever exceeds the
legal limits.

The type of Hajj in which a pilgrim assumes im for performing
“Umrah during the months of Hajj, and then afier performing
‘Umrah, the pilgrim assumes ‏شرلا‎ for performing Hajj in the
same season

A pillar of prayer in which a certain invocation is recited at the
middle and/or end of the prayer while sitting,

‘Maintaining the Oneness of Allah Divinity; (The belief that no
‘one deserves to be worshipped except Allah) means that all kinds
cof worship should be directed to none bat Allah, The Arabic
word Al-Uldhiyyah means worship and the word “lah” means
‘the Worshipped One?

473

العامة
‎AsSayyid‏

Shart'ah

Sunnah

Sura (Quranic
Chapter)

Tabi'ts pl. Tabi is

سايم

Tamatr” Hajj

Tashahhud

Tawhidul-
Utitkiyyah

474

Maintaining the Oneness of Allahs Lordship, the belief that Allah
‘Alone is the Creator of the whole universe and its Designer, and
that it is He Who gives life and causes death, Besides, it also
entails belief that Allah is the Provider, the Powerful and the Firm
Possessor of strength,

Saying, “I testify that there is no deity but Allah and that Muham-
mad is the Messenger of Allah.”

‘A form of magic allegedly used to endear a woman to her husband.
‘A form of divination; reading the future in the omens of nature

‘This is one of the forms of validating a narrator.

Z

Zakah isan annual expenditure for the benefit of the Muslim
‘community, primarily to help the poor, required from those Mus-
lims who have excess wealth, Paying Zakah is one of the Five main
pillars of Islam.

0
Glossary

Tawhidur-
Rubabiyyak

‘The Two Testifi-
cations of Faith

Thwalah
Tiyarah

‘Trustworthy

Zakah

NAME INDEX

Abul-"AbbAS.......147, 215, 326

Abul-Fath Nasr Ibn Sbrahim
310

Adiyy Ibn Hatim ‏.اتيم‎

Ahmad. 2,45,
64, 69, 77, 80, 96, 123, 147,
157, 171, 173, 183, 201, 219,
232, 238, 239, 290, 299, 300,
301, 326, 372, 418

Abmad Ibn Hanbal,....201, 238,
299, 418
AL Abbas Ibn‘ Abdul-Muttalib
464
AL Aziz.,
Al-'Uzza.
177,376

56
*Abdul-Wahid Al-Maqdisi Al-
Hanbali.. 85

08,157,
159, 169, 170, 297, 298

Aba Bakr As-Siddiq
Abé Bashir Al-Ansirt....

Aba Dawad. 77,101,
178, 183, 203, 213, 219, 229,
231, 334, 355, 389, 393, 418,
445, 453

Aba Dhar.

33,137,
147, 183, 199, 207, 213, 226,

282, 288, 295, 349, 351, 368,
381, 385, 400, 423, 431, 445

Aba Jahl.. 51
Aba Malik Al-Ash’ ari.
Aba Mas:
‘Aba Sa‘id Al-Khudri.....26, 192

Aba Shurayh.

Abo Talib... 33, 54,
94, 148, 149, 151, 152, 153,
185, 318,428

Aba Wagqid Al-Laythi.

Aba Ya'l:
476

372

78, 203,
207, 213, 273, 341, 344, 389,
456

‘An-Nawwis Ibn Sim‘an...,..139

At-Tabarani........123, 215, 433

At-Tirmidhi. 8, 88,
133, 178, 201, 213, 231, 284,
285, 301, 332, 403

57
Bajalah Ibn ' Abadah.
Bana ‘Amir,

Bana Khudrah.
Band Malik Ibn An-Najja
Band Salim.

Barca,

Buraydah Ibnul-Husayb.34, 35,
441, 442

Buwanah, wl OT

215,216
194

AL-Bukhari. 14, 22,
24, 44, 50, 53, 101, 108, 129,
131, 133, 137, 151, 158, 159,
167, 185, 192, 213, 221, 226,
245, 252, 273, 295, 318, 349,
351, 369, 379, 381, 385, 423,
425, 426, 431, 461

AlL-FadI Ibnul-' Abbas.

355, 356, 357

Hi 26,213,
332, 421

Al-Harith,
131, 243, 373

Al-Harith Ibn * Aw!
Al-Harith Ibn Hisham.,

Al-Hasan..
222, 372

Al-Hasan AL-Basri.
Al-Hudaybiyah..,

35, 88,

Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

Ibn ‘Umar, 131, 132,
210, 332, 337, 361, 389, 415,
416,461

Ibn Aba Hatim..
372, 375

‘Ibn Hazm.

Ibn Hibban.
239, 267

73,330,

371, 372
26, 203,

Ibn Jari. 77, 255, 463

Ibn Mahdi. AGA

Ibn Mijah.. 178, 213,
337,345

‘Tbn Mas’ dd.., 12,44,

77, 78, 82, 163, 173, 209, 213,
219, 231, 277, 283, 324, 333,
379, 380, 421, 437, 461, 464

23, 324
319

418
A63
421
57, 158,

‘Ibn Waht

Tbnul-Qayyim.,
221, 222, 412, 413

Ibrahim An-Nakh’
437, 438

Ifriqiyyah
Imam Malik.
Isaac.
Isfaha

82, 334,

80
75,176
276
433

42

192

Fagimah, 53, 133
Fatimah Bint Mubammad...133

21,136,

73, 334, 421
‘Hudhayfah Ibnul-Yaman.,73, 421

Hunayn. 8

‘HusaynIbn‘ Abdur-Rahman..34,
35, 36

55

Ton ‏...مقططف'‎ 12, 34,
35, 50, 157, 158, 161, 177,
178, 206, 217, 245, 246, 255,
256, 273, 277, 297, 298, 319,
324, 329, 330, 335, 344, 365,
372, 375, 426,461

478

Mohammad Ibn‘ Abdal-Wahhab
161

361
177,323,

433

Pharaoh, 224
-Q-

Qabisah Ibnul-Mukharig,..204

Qatadah, 221, 235,
236, 238, 361, 366, 372

273, 316, 321, 450
Qutaylah.

Ram Hormuz..

Ruwayfi" Ibn Thabi

Sa‘id Ibn Jubayr., 4, 35,
36, 82

Sa’ id Ibnul-Musayyab.151, 221

126, 227
133

Safar.

Name Index

Ishig. 38, 368, 369
J-
Jabir Ibn * Abdullah, 45
£219, 393
Jubayr Ibn Mut*im......449, 450
Juhaynah. 245,311

Jundub.. 169, 171, 201, 445,

Jundub Ibn’ Abdallah.........169,
171, 445

Khalid Tbnul-Walid...
Khawlah Bint Hakim.
Khaybar,

86, 88, 245, 352

Medina. 5, 86, 129,
176, 245, 356,416, 433, 442
Messiah. 345, 346

Moses. 26,27,
34, 37, 88, 224, 269, 270

Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid

‘Zadul-Ma’ a

Zayd Tbn Aslam...

Zayd Ibn Khalid.

Zayd Ibn Khalid Al-Juhani.245
Zayd Ibn Thabi 421

Zaynul-* Abidin... 185

79,

‘Safwan Ibn Umayyah.
Sahl Ibn Sa’
Salman Al-Farisi.
Shahanshah.

شكس
352 ,351 ,299 ,238

SufyanIbn* Uyaynah.
238, 352

Suhayl fbn ‘Amr.

37, 169,

137,

131

‘Ubadah Ibnus-Samit.....21, 123,
418, 419

19,141
19
236

910,12
910,11
91

11
275
223

88
375

371,372

125

27
274

263
251
60,301
359
99
151
181

QUR’ANIC VERSE INDEX

-192.,

Sura 2: Al-Baqarah PP.
306
329,341,344
197

62,245
255,256

143

105

129,131,132
395,407,413
398
273
273
259

187,197

303,311,313
303
309
155

269
308
189

0 482

Sura 10: Yanus 21:69.
lis Sura 2:
117 23:59., 31
Sura 24 : An-Nor
293 24:63 ‏سس‎ 299
293 Sura 26: Ash-Shu’ ard?
+ ‏عسوملا‎ 26:52. 150
73 26214 133
47 Sura 27; An-Naml
ArRa'd 27:61 121
315,321 Sura 28 : Al-Qasas
: Ibrahim 28:56, 149,151
39
276
275
Sura 16: An-Nabl
422 145
3 135,137,145
323
439 127
31 127
Sura 17 ‏“قولف ؛‎
294 224
5 223
57 22
191 412
287 Sura 39 : Az-Zumar
39338. 67
147 39; 143

Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawohid

56:8: 241
Sura 60: Al-Mumtahinah

60: 32
Sura 61: As-Saff

61:5. 300

Sura 64: At-Taghabun

279
Sura 65: At-Talaq

267

272

157
723 12
7 111,112
Sura 76 ; Al-Insan
76: : 105
Sura 108: Al-Kawthar
108:2. 93

483,
39:6 459
‘Sura 41: Fussilat
365
151
59
2
347
119
410
1
585
53:26 144
Sura 56: Al-Waqi'ah
5675-8 245

PP.

12

12

14

21

24

26

48

50

53

HADITH INDEX

Hadith

“Whoever wants to know the will of Prophet Muhammad
(PBUH)
“The real calamity is that the Prophet (PBUH) pass ay
without leaving his will”
“The Prophet asked, '0 Mu'adh! Do you know Allah's
right on His servants and.
“Whoever testifies that none has the right fo be worshipped
fut All Alone Who has no partners

.. Allah has forbidden the Hellfire (to touch) those 5
say ‘There is no deity but Allah.
“Moses said, ‘0 My Lord! Teach me an invocation with
which I should remember and invoke You.
‘Almighty Allah said, ‘O son of Adam! If you meet ‘Mein
the state that your sins fill the eart
"0 Allah, grant hint plenty of money and children and admit
him into Paradise."
“T was sitting with Sa°id Tbn Jubayr when he said, ‘Who
among you saw the shooting star that fell last ‏الها"‎
‎"0 Allah, grant him (Ibn “Abbas) deep understanding of
the matters of religion and..
“The most dreadful sin 1 am afraid you may commit is...

“Whoever dies while still invoking anything other than
Allah.
“He who meets Allah without associating anything with
Him will enter Paradis
“When the Prophet (PBUH) sent Mu‘adh to Yemen, he
said to him.
“the Prophet (PBUH) said “Tomorrow, I will give the flag to
6 person who laves Allah and Hlis Messenger.

10

11
12

13

14

15
486

64

69

a
a

75

7

79

a0

82

82

88
4و

96

101
108

13

123

129
131

Hadich Index

“He who testifies that there is no deity but Allah and..

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) saw a man wearing a
bracelet of brass in his hand
“If @ person uses an amulet, may Allah not fulfill his

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) sent a messenger and
ordered him not to let any necklace of string or.

“Theard the Prophet (PBUH) saying ‘Using (illegal) incantations,
amulets, or iwalah,

“If anyone wears anything (like an amulet) (believing that
it brings good or repels evil) Allah wil
“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, '0 Ruwayfi'! You
may live for a long time after...
“Whoever removes an amulet worn by a man will be
rewarded as if h
“They (the followers of ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas"itd) disliked all
forms of arnule
“We went along with the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) to
(the Battle of) Hunayn, At that time.
“The Prophet (PBUH) told me four things...
“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘A man entered
Paradise because of flies and.
“During the ifetime ofthe Prophet (PBUH), a man vowed
to slaughter a camel at Buwanah,
“Whoever vows to obey Allah must obey Him, and.
“tal seek refuge with the Perfect Words of Allah from the
evil of what He has created
“the Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Do not seek my refuge, but
seek Alla refuge’.
“.cHow will these people (the disbelcvers), wha have
‘wounded their Prophet, attain salvation?
“O Allah! Curse so-and-so and so-and-so

16
17

18

19
20

21

22

23

25

26

27
28

29

30
31

32

33

34

Concise Commentary an the Book af Tawhid

131

133

137
139
147
151

157

159
let

163

165

167

169

17172

173
175-176
176

178
183
185

*..He used to invoke Allah against Safwan Ibn Umayyah,
Suhayl Ibn ‘Amr ar

"20 people of Quraysh! Buy (i.e, save) yourselves (from
the Helffire).

“The Prophet (PBUH) sai
some affair in the Heaven...

When Allah, Exalted be He, wants to send down a revelation...
“Who will be the luckiest person to gain your intercession.
“When the time of the death of Abit Talib approached...

“These are the names of some righteous men of the people
of Noah.

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘Do not exaggerate
in praising me as the Christians.

١ ‘When Allah has ordained

"Beware of excessiveness.
“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘Ruined are those
who are extremist.
“Umm Salamah made a mention (before the Prophet) fa
church which.
*.’May Allah curse the Jews and the Christians that they
took the graves of their Prophets as.
‘stand acquitted before Allah that I took any one 00
‘as intimate friend.

“wand the earth has been made for me (and my. ‘fllowers)
as a place for prayer and,

“Among the worst people are those who will be overtaken
by the (Last) Hour while they are still alive.
“O Allah! Do not let my grave be an idol that is worshipped.
“who take the graves of their prophets as places of worship”.

“The Prophet (PBUH) cursed the women who visit
graves and...
"Do not make your homes as graves..

“Da not make my grave a place of festivi

487.

35

36

37

38
39

41

42

43

45

47

49

50
51
532

53
54

‘Hadith Index 488

55 “The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘You will follow the

ways of those (nations) before you. 192
56 ‘../Allah folded the earth for me, and I saw its east and west. 194
57 J fear for my nation the misleading Imams (rulers)... 194
58 “The word jibt' refers to sorcery, whereas the word ‘taghtit’

refers to Satan. 197,
59 “Avoid the seven great destructive sins, 199
60 “The prescribed punishment of a sorcerer is a stroke with

the sword: 201
61 “Indeed “Iyafah (releasing some birds to foretell the future). 203
62 “Ifanyone acquires any knowledge of astrology... 206
63 “Whoever ties a knot and then blows on 207
64 “Should T inform you about al- ‘adh (sorcery). 209
65 “Some eloquent speech has the influence of magic: 210
66 “He who visits a soothsayer and asks him about anything... 241
67 "Ifanyone visits a soothsayer and believes him in what

he says. 213-215
68 “He is not from us (Muslims) who practices tiyarah or has

it practiced for hint. 215
‏و69‎ “The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) was asked about An-

Nushrah and he said. 219
70 “asked Said Ibnul-Musayyab about a man who was under

the influence of a magic spell ‏اه‎ 21
71 “There is no ‘adwa (contagion), no tiyarah, no hamah,

‎Safa 226‏ مدر
‎“and no naw' and no ghoul 26‏ 72
‎“There is no ‘adwa, nor is there tiyarah, but J like good‏ 73

‎omen. 228
74 “The best of which is the good omen. 229
75 “Believing in evil omen is (an act of) polytheism. 231
76 "Ifanyone stops doing something because of (believing in)

‎evil omen. ~ 232

Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawi

232
239

239

243
243

277
277

282
283
284

285

288
290

“The evil amen incites you to da something, or stops you

from accomplishing it
“Three persons will not be admitted to Paradis
“Wfanyone acquires any knowledge of astrology, he acquires
a branch of magic.”
“Among my nation ae for characteristics bilonging to the
pre-Islamic period.
“fa wating woman does not repent before she dies,
“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) led usin the Subk (Morning)
Prayer at Al-Hudaybiya :
“None of you will have (a complete) faith until he loves rie
more than his father.
“Whoever poseses (the following) three qualities wil relish
the sweetness of faith
“None will relish the sweetness of faith until.
“Whoever loves for Allah’ Sake and hates for Allahs Saki
“A sign of lacking certainty of Faith is that.
‘if anyone seeks Alla satisfaction at the expense of
peoples anger.
“Allah is Sufficient for us and He isthe Best Dispaser of
affairs.
“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) was asked about the
major sins so he said.

“The major sins are associating others in worship with Alla
“Two (things) are found among men which aretantamount
to unbelief.
“He is not one of us (Muslims) who slaps his cheeks.
“Great affliction entails great reward (from Allah). ‏د‎
‎"When Allah wants to do good for His servant, He gives
him punishment (for the sins he commits).
“Alla, Blessed und Exalted be He, said, Tam the One Who
never be in need of partn

“Shall tell you what I fear for you more than Antichrist...

489

77

78
79

80

81
52

83
84
85
86
87

88

89

91و
92

93
94
95

96

7

490

295
297

301

309

31
318
319

326

329
332

333

334
337

34]
344

345

349.

349
351

351

Hadith Inde

“Let the slave of dinar, dirkam, and Khamisah..
“Stones are about ofall on you fromthe sky (as a puaishsert) ue

“Do they not prohibit what Allah has made lawful, and
then you deem it prohibited.

“None of you will have (a complete) faith until his own
desire follows what Tam sent with.

“There was a dispute between a man from the hypocrites
‘and aman from the Jews, and so..
“Address people with what their minds can comprehend.
“Why do these people fear such issues?
“In this morning, some of My servants remained as true
believers an
“Attributing equals to Allah is an act of polytheism more
hidden than.
“He who swears by anything besides Allah
“To swear falsely by Allah (however forbidden) is better for
me than...

"Do not say, If Allah wills and so-and-so will
Allah wills and then so-and-so wills’

but say, Tf

"Do not swear by your forefathers.
“vathe Prophet (PBUH) ordered them (Muslims) to say ‘By
the Lord of the Ka‘bah, if they should swear
“asay "If Allah wills Alone.
“Tsaw in a dream that I came upon a group of Jews and
said to them
“Allah, Exalted be He, sai
‘for he.
"Do not inveigh against the vicissitudes of Time for Allah is
(the One Wha manages) Time’.

“The most awful (meanest) name in Allaks sight is
“The most abominable and evil man in Allaks sight on the
Day of Resurrection

“The son of Adam wrongs Me

98
99
100

101

102

103
104
105

106

107
108

109

110
111

12
113

114

15

116
117

Concise Commentary on the Book of Tiwhid

355

361

369

375

379
381
38

385

389
393

400

403

415

415

418

418

418

421

“My nickname was Abul-Hakam’' (the judge). So, the Prophet
(PBUH) said to me....

“One day during the battle of Tabak, a man said, referring
to the Prophet (PBUH) and.
"Allah willed to test three from among the Children of Israel
(lsractites) who were a leper.
“The phrase, ]“ .. those who practice deviation concerning
His names..."} means.
“the Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Do not say ‘Peace be on Allah;

‘for He Himself is Peace”.
“None of you should say ‘O Allah! Forgive me if You wish...
"One must ask (Allah) with a will and full devotio

“The one of you must not say ‘Feed your rab (Lord) , help
your rabb in performing ablution..
“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, ‘If anyone asks
(you) for refuge for the sake of Allah,
“Nothing isto be asked for, by the Face of Allah, but Paradise”.
“Abide by that which gives you benefit (in the Hereafter)
andl seek help from Allah.
“Do not curse the wind, but when you see that which you
dislike, say.
“By Him in Whose Hand my soul rests, ifthe Muslim spends
amounts of gold equal to

“Faith is fo Believe in Allah, His Angels, His Books, His
Messengers.
“O. my son! You will not relish the delight of Faith unless
‘you believe that...
“The first thing Allah created was the Pen and He said to it,
‘Write!
‘Ff anyone does not believe inthe Divine predestination,
whether good or evi
“Lwent to Ubayy Ibn Ka'b and said to him, ‘I have some
doubts regarding Divine Predestinatio

491

ile

119

120

121

122

123
124
125

126

127
128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

Hadith Index 492

136 “Allah, Exalted be He, said, ‘Who would be more unjust

than the one who tries te 423
137. "The people who will receive the severest punishment on

the Day of Resurrection are.. 425
138 “Theard the Prophet (PBUH) say, ‘Whoever makes a picture

or a statue (of a living being). 426
139 “He who makes a picture or a statue (of a living being) in

this world. 426
140 “Shall not direct you to the same mission as the Messenger

of Allah (PBUH) directed me?.. 428
141 5.1106 sellers) Swearing may promote his goods but his

earnings will be... 431
142. “Three persons Allah will not speak ‏قا‎ on the Day of

Resurrection. 433
143 “The best people among my nation are those living in my

generation, then. 433-437
144. “When the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) appointed anyone

as a leader of an army or detachment... 44

145 . “A person said, ‘By Allah! Allah will not forgive so and so.... 445
146 “This man uttered a word caused him to lose this world

and the Hereafter”. 44S
147. *.. Thereupon, the Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Glorified is Allah,

Glorified is Allah. 449.
148 5. So, he (PBUH) replied, ‘The Sayyid is Allah, Blessed

and Exalted be He.. 453
149. “Some people said, '© Messenger of Allah! You are the best

of us, and. 456
150 “A rabbi came to the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) and said,

‘O Muhammad! We learn that. 461
151 “..and the mountains and trees are on one finger, then

Allah will shake them as saying... 461
152 “Allah will put the heavens on one Finger, and the water

and thard on one Finger. 461

Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawwhid

461

461
463

463

464

464

“Allah, Exalted be He, would fold the heavens on the Day
of Resurrection and then..

“The seven heavens and the seven earths, in the Hand of
(Allah) the Entirely Merciful.
“The seven heavens, when compared ta the Kurst.. 3
“The Kursi, when compared to the Throne, is only like a
ring of iron thrown in a desert
“The distance between the lowest heaven and the one next
to itis five hundred years travel.

“Do you know how far the distance between the heaven
and the earth is?.

493,

153

154

155
156

157

158

TRANSLITERATION SYSTEM

Em | ‏اممو‎ Example gee Symbol {zane
af” | amen/"isha’ a f faith/fatwa
b | baarBitat Ff ‏مسو | و‎
o | t 1 ‏اك تلصبرة «عما/هها‎ k ‘Kill/Ka’ bah
L Oth | ‏مسف‎ J | 1 ‏مسو‎
‏أ‎ [| Jewfjandbah 5 | man/marwah
i tc | 4 | Mukamnmad al 6 n | Noah/nastiah
I-Buthart | | ‏ه‎ | *»
5 day/diyah [3 hit
Tos w
75 ‏م‎ faririba | | 5 1 ‘yard/talbiyah
3 z | ‏م = | رهم‎ | feat
o 5 | say/sura 1 i | figh
é sh ——J— Pes u | sunnah
ow “Asr Adam/siwak
ca d | ifadak Dawid
5 t | tawaf hadith/hanaft
ry 2 | ube await/‘awrah
t ‘| rak’ah ayman
3 gh | maghrib

