Aly rie il- ‏اد‎
© Dar-us-Salam Publications, 1996 / ‏6ه‎
‎ALL RIGHTS RESERVED ‏جميع حقوق الطبع محفوظه‎

No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and
recording or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
written permission of the publisher.

First Edition ‏الطبعة الأولى‎
Supervised by:
ABDUL MALIK MUJAHID

V ‏(صح)‎
‎Published by:

Dar-us-Salam Publications ‏دارالس لم للنشس‎
P.O. Box 22743, Riyadh 11416 ١١415 ‏ص.ب. 771747 - الرياض‎
Tel: 4033962 Fax: 4021659 €+Y1104% ‏فاكس‎ 1١75957 ‏ت:‎

Kingdom of Saudi Arabia ‏المملكة العربية السعردية‎

Branches in other Countries:

Dar-us-Salam Publications Dar-us-Salam Publications
P.O. Box: 737651, Corona 10107, Westview 308
Elmhurst Queen Houston,Tx 77043, USA
NY11373, USA Tel: (713) 935-9206
Tel: (718) 699-5366 Fax: (713) 722-0431

Dar-us-Salam Publications Dar-us-Salam Publications
50, Lower Mall Road Rahman Market
Near M.A.O. College Ghazni Street, Urdu Bazar
Lahore, Pakistan Lahore, Pakistan.
Tel & Fax: (042) 7354072 Tel: (042) 7120054 2

57 0

Text on
the Fundamental Beliefs of Islam
and Rejection of False Concepts
of its Opponents

written by:
‏شيخلاسلام ابنتيميةرحمهلله‎
Sheikh-ul-Islam Ibn Taimiyah
Commentary by:

Dr. Muhammad Khalil Harras
Translated by:
Muhammad Rafiq Khan
Translation revised by:

Hafiz Muhammad Tahir
Abdul-Qaadir Abdul Khaaliq

‎saul a 3‏ للنشسر

‎Dar-us-Salam Publications
Riyadh-Saudi Arabia
CONTENTS

7 ا ل انا
‎Sheikh-ul-Islam Imam Ibn Taimiyah -- a brief biography... 9‏

A brief biography of Dr. Muhammad Khalil Harras 17
Meaning of Bismillah .............. 19
Description of Hamd and Madh .. 21
Meaning of Shahddah.............. 24
Introduction of the Saved Sect and its Faith . 27
The six pillars of Faith ‏المع م.م‎ 28
Meaning of Tahreef, Ta ‘teel and Tamtheel 32
Allah could not be measured with His creatures .. 35

Affirmation and negation of the Attributes with which Allah
glorified Himself or by His Messenger ‏و سلم)‎ 4).
Description of the Attributes of Allah
The Greatest Verse of the Qur’4n.

Some Attributes of Allah and their meanings 52
Allah’s Knowledge encompasses all things .. 55
Affirmation of Hearing, Seeing and Intention for Allah . 60

The Attributes of Love and Justice
The Attributes of Mercy, Pleasure, Wrath, Curse, Coming ete. 69
Affirmation of the Face, the Eyes and the Hands for Allah.. 6

Verses of Qur’4n about Hearing and Seeing ‏لله‎ 82
Attributes of Allah regarding grip, planning, devising and
pardoning etc. ........ 85
Attributes of Negation. » 92
Affirmation of Istawa for Allah ‏ممم عمل ل مم م.م‎ 101

Affirmation of the Companionship of Allah and the meaning

of Whisper. 108
Affirmation of Speech for Allah ‏(عررحل)‎ . 111
The believers will have the vision of Allah in the Hereafter. 119
Some General Remarks about the Verses on Attributes . 122
Description of the Attributes of Allah from Sunnah.............. 126
Affirmation of the Foot and the Step for Allah ‏(عزوجل)‎ ........... 135
Some Names and Attributes of Allah approved from Sunnah. 141

5

ro:

mH ‏ذم مه مر و‎ aan

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19,
20.
21.

22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama ‘ah are moderate among all sects of

UM wesseccssssesseessesveesseseesesssessecseesecsscecaesneeeseesncanenneeenees 144
Rising of Allah over the Throne, does not negate His having
being with creatures ‏ا ا‎ 155

To have faith in the Attributes which Allah qualified for

Himself .. 158

To have faith in that which has been stated by the Prophet ‏صلى‎
‎(d+ ‏عليه و‎ at) and will take place after death ........secserners 163
Description of the Day of Resurrection and what will happen
there veces 166

Description of Haud, Siraat, Intercessions etc... 172
Belief in Qadar (Divine Decree)..............4 180
Definition of Iman (Faith) and its conditions. “190

The views of Ahlus Sunnah towards the Sahaba (Companions
of the Prophet ‏اعم ممم ممم عونمم م000 0000000000006 الإصلى الله عليه و سلم‎ 196
Ahlus Sunnah \ove the members of the family of the Prophet

Ahlus Sunnah believe in Karamat of Auliya
Ahlus Sunnah follow the Sunnah of the Prophet (Le ‏(مي الله‎ 214
Ahlus-Sunnah follow the basic principles of Shari ‘ah.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
4l.

42.
43.
Publishers Note

Among the very few, whom the world has ever produced as a man of
high calibre, status and quality, Sheikh-ul-Islam Ibn Taimiyah was
one of them. His exalted personality and dignified status as an Islamic
scholar is beyond any introduction. Many great scholars of our times
appear to be his gleaners in knowledge. He has contributed a lot to
almost all branches and faculties of Islamic learning.

His thoughts, views and judgements have widely affected the different
aspects of Islamic life.

Sheikh-ul-Islam had a firm grasp over the concepts and beliefs of
different Islamic sects as well as of Christianity. In his works, he has
taken a serious notice of all these beliefs and purged out of these the
correct and perfect Faith and teachings of Islam.

Sheikh-ul-Islam’s book Al-Ageedat Al-Wasitiyah deals with the
perfect and undefiled Islamic Faith and Creed of the As-Salaf-As-Salih
(Pious Predecessors) particularly in regards to Allah’s Names and
Attributes, with solid arguments in brief words and terminolgies.

The book is highly appreciated by the scholars for its brevity as
well as comprehensiveness; and for its contents produced perfectly in
line with the Qur’an and Sunnah in an appealing and manifest manner.

Various expositions of this book have come into existence but the one
by Allamah Khalil Harras stands out of them. He has explained it ina
concise and beautiful way along with the clear explanation of the
words and their import. Commenting on the book, Sheikh Abdur-
Razzaq Afifi states: Out of the several explanations of A/-Aqeedah Al-
Wasitia, this one is the most exquisite in style, clear-cut in
interpretation and comprehensive in composition.

Dar-us-Salam Publications has been publishing the Qur’dn, Ahadith,
their expositions and other Islamic literature in Arabic, English and
different other languages in line with its determination to
communicate the Islamic world with pure and perfect Islamic Faith,

7
and acquaint it with the teachings of the Qur’an and Sunnah.

Its main objective is to transmit the correct and beneficent rulings of
the pure religion contained in the Qur’an and Ahadith to the learned as
well as commoners.

Under this programme we are enjoying an extreme pleasure to
produce this precious work into English with lucid and eloquent
translation.

The book got rendered into English earlier by the Islamic research
Dept of Jamia Salafia, Banaras (India). But the translation contained
some shortcomings and many other defects..

We acknowledge our deeply heartfelt gratitude to the authorities of
Jamia Salafia Banaras and especially, Dr. Muqtada Hassan Azhari,
who have given us leave to reproduce the expurgated edition of the
book with additions, alterations and transposition as realised essential
to bring the book to the standard of scholarship after its thorough
investigation and research.

It would not be out of place to mention here that our research
committee has devoted more or less ten months to bring out the book
up to the mark. We feel pleasure in expressing our heartfelt thanks to
the brothers of the committee who have exerted their best endeavours
to present the book in high esteem of the readers, especially
Muhammad Tahir As-Salafi who is an authentic scholar and an
authority over the Islamic Faith. The publication of this edition of the
book owes to his sincere efforts, hard labour and sacrifices of his
invaluable time.

We pray to Allah to bless them with the best ability in the faculty of
research and scholarship.

Abdul Malik Mujahid
General Manager
Dar-us-Salam Publications
SHEIKH-UL-ISLAM IMAM IBN TAIMIYAH
— A BRIEF BIOGRAPHY

Imam Ibn Taimiyah’s full name is Taqi ud-Din Ahmad bin ‘Abdul-
Halim. He was born in Harran on 22 January, 1263 AD (10 Rabi‘
Al-Awwal, 661 AH). His family had long been renowned for its
learning. His father ‘Abdul-Halim, uncle Fakhr ud-Din and
grandfather Majd ud-Din were great scholars of Hanbalite school of
jurisprudence and the authors of many books. His family members
were forced to leave their native place in 1269 AD before the
approach of the Mongols and to take refuge in Damascus. At that
time, Ibn Taimiyah was seven years old. His father ‘Abdul-Halim
was appointed as Professor and Head of the Sukkariyah Madrasah.
Endowed with a penetrating intellect and a wonderful memory, Ibn
Taimiyah studied, at an early stage, all the disciplines of
jurisprudences, Ahadith of the Prophet ‏عليه رسام‎ wi ‏وى‎ commentaries of
the Qur’an, mathematics and philosophy, and in each he was far
ahead of his contemporaries. Among his teachers, was Shams ud-
Din Al-Maddisi, first Hanbali Chief Justice of Syria following the
reform of the judiciary by Baibars. The number of Ibn Taimiyah’s
teachers exceeds two hundred. Ibn Taimiyah was barely seventeen,
when Qadi Al-Maqdisi authorized him to issue Fatwa (legal
verdict). Qadi remembered with pride that it was he who had first
permitted an intelligent and learned man like Ibn Taimiyah to give
Fatwa. At the same age, he started delivering lectures. When he
was thirty, he was offered the office of Chief Justice, but refused, as

he could not persuade himself to follow the limitations imposed by
the authorities.

Imam Ibn Taimiyah’s education was essentially that of a Hanbali
theologian and jurisconsult. But to his knowledge of early and
classical Hanbalism, he added not only that of the other schools of
jurisprudence but also that of heresiographical literature, in
particular of philosophy and Sufism. He had an extensive
knowledge of Qur’an, Sunnah, Greek philosophy, Islamic history,
and religious books of others, as is evident from the variety of the
books he wrote. Though he preferred the Hanbali school of
jurisprudence, he was never biased in favour of it. In his writings,
he frequently quoted the opinions of all four of the well-known
schools of jurisprudence, even others. In a number of matters, he
himself held opinions different from those of the four schools. In
fact, he was an original thinker (Mujtahid) who merely drew upon
the wisdom of the four established schools.

In all his reformative efforts, Ibn Taimiyah accepted the Qur’an and
the Sunnah (traditions of the Prophet ‏علي وس‎ wit) as the basic
criteria. In matters where there was no clear guidance from the
Qur’an and the Sunnah, he never hesitated to venture into rational
thought and took the path of Jjtihad or creative originality and
initiative.

The thirteenth and fourteenth centuries AD have a distinguished
place in Islamic history. Ibn Al-Atheer described the political and
military conditions prevailing in the Muslim world during Ibn
Taimiyah’s lifetime in the following words:

“slam and Muslims had during that period been afflicted by
such disasters that no other nation had experienced. One such
affliction was the invasion by the Tatar. They came from the
east and inflicted overwhelming damages. Another was the
onset of the Frankish people (the Crusaders) from the West to
Mesopotamia and Egypt, they occupied its ports, and nearly
subjected all of Egypt to their rule, had it not been from
Allah’s Mercy and victory over them. But another affliction
was that the Muslims themselves had been divided, and their
swords lifted up against their fellows.

“In addition to such horrid conditions facing the Muslims on
the political and military front, Islam as practiced and
preached by Prophet Muhammad ‏عليه رسام‎ wi. and As-Salaf As-
Salih (the righteous predecessors) was being seriously
challenged by various deviant sects. The Sufi movement

10
which was sprearheaded by the teachings of Al-Ghazali had
won over many converts and was exercising a firm hold on
the intellect and patterns of thought of many people. Along
with this A/-Ash‘ari system of creed had been widely
accepted by the majority of the scholars of Ibn Taimiyah’s
day. Al-Ash ‘ari system of doctrine was a mixture of the Salafi
methodology which is based on revelation centered theology
and the Mu‘tazilah methodology which is based on a
rationalist thought system. 7001624 was practiced widely.
Even though information on the Deen, Figh, Ahadith, etc.,
was abundantly available, only a handful of scholars and
ordinary people took up the task of investigating the sources
of the knowledge and its vehicle. Most people blindly
accepted the teaching of their Sheikh or Imam without
questioning or investigating the sources from where the
knowledge had come.”

Imam Ibn Taimiyah’s struggles and persecutions

Tbn Taimiyah’s life was not confined to the world of books and
words. Whenever circumstances demanded, he took part in political
and public affairs too, distinguishing himself not only through his
writings and speeches but also with the sword as a brave warrior.

Participation in Jihad

In 1300, the Mongols under their king Ghazan, invaded Syria and
defeated the Sultan’s army. Ibn Taimiyah, by this time well-known,
flung himself into the stream of affairs, while the religious divines
and saints were leaving Damascus to take refuge in Egypt. When
the Mongol threat arose for a second time, Ibn Taimiyah exhorted
people to Jihad and encouraged them to confront the Mongols
boldly. He toured the cities, called the people to a holy war and
fired them with zeal. After a pitched battle at Shaqhab in which Ibn
Taimiyah fought bravely, the Syrian-Egyptian army won a glorious
victory that turned the tide against the Mongols. This victory, which
was to a great extent due to Ibn Taimiyah’s efforts and

11
commitment, stopped the Mongols advance.

Apart from the battle of Shaghab, he took part in some other
expeditions with the Mamluk authorities, and also undertook a few
expeditions without them.

Opposition of rival Ulama

Because of his brilliant performance on the battlefield and his
radical thinking, Ibn Taimiyah’s fame spread throughout the realm,
and he became a highly distinguished celebrity. This made a
number of jurists jealous. Ibn Kathir has pointed out this fact,
saying that: ‘A group of jurisprudents were jealous of Ibn Taimiyah,
as the people paid heed to him. To enjoin good and forbid evil was
his vocation, and because of this he became very popular among the
people. His followers were countless. His religious zeal, learning
and actions made them jealous of him? For the complaint of rival
Ulama, he was imprisoned several times.

His last imprisonment began on 13 July, 1326 and lasted until his
death. His opponents dug up an old Fatwa, related to tomb visits,
given by him some seventeen years before, which could be
provocatively interpreted. In his treatise on the subject (Risalah
Ziyarah Al-Qubur) Ibn Taimiyah had questioned the legality of
visiting tombs, even the tomb of the Prophet (1. ‏عليه و‎ w 1). His
opponents distorted the sense and context of this Fatwa to make it
objectionable in the eyes of the public and the Sultan. A great
dispute arose and Ibn Taimiyah was imprisoned in the citadel of
Damascus along with some of his pupils including Ibn Al-Qaiyim.

While in prison, Ibn Taimiyah spent all his time teaching and writing.
Many of his works were produced in this period. In 1328, he was
deprived of all means of writing, his pen and papers were taken away.

But this did not stop him from writing; he wrote many letters and
booklets with coal. He never complained to anybody about his
persecution. Only when all reading and writing materials were
taken away from him, did he say: ‘Now they really have put me into

12
prison.’ He breathed his last on 26 September, 1328 (20 Dhu-
Qa‘dah 728 AH) having endured harsh conditions for five months.
The whole country mourned. Schools, shops, hotels and markets
were closed to mark his death. His burial was attended by the great
numbers of Damascans; eyewitnesses confirm that, excepting some
invalids, all turned out for his funeral prayer, both those who had
been for him and those against. This is a clear testimony of his
place among the people, of their appreciation of his sacrifices for
public purposes and just cause. Including the two years and three
months of his last imprisonment, Ibn Taimiyah spent about five
years in different prisons.

A great reformer

In the Islamic perspective, ‘reform’ is understood quite differently
than in Christian terminology. In Islam, ‘reform’ means purification
of the original Islamic teachings, and the removal of un-Islamic new
practices (Bid ‘at) and misconceptions. In this sense of the word, Ibn
Taimiyah was a great reformer.

The main aspects of his reforms

The most important elements of Ibn Taimiyah’s reforms were: (a) to
bring about a revolution against un-Islamic practices (Bid ‘at) that
had crept into Islam and to emphasize the concept of Tauhid with
all its implications; (b) a return to the fundamental priorities of
Islam and its original spirit, instead of disputing over secondary and
nonfundamental problems.

Attack on pilosophy and logic

Another target of Ibn Taimiyah’s criticism was Greek philosophy
and logic. He knew that unless the crippling falsehood of Greek
philosophy was removed, the people would not be able to grasp the
Divine truth of Islam. He studied critically all the great Muslim
philosophers and their works in this regard, and then he opposed it
extremely.

13
Rejection of Sufism and deniers of Sifat

He abhored the Sufi ideas of pantheism, gnosticism, and deterministic
view of total religious resignation. According to him the implication of
these ideas upon the Muslim community were devastating, because
they led to political apathy, religious misconceptions, and withdrawal
from an active community life. A major portion of his intellectual
energies was spent refuting the doctrine of the Sufis.

The Shi‘ah were also subjected to harsh criticism by Ibn Taimiyah
because of the many flaws in their doctrines and beliefs. He
strongly denounced their falsification of the historical facts and
forging of the Sunnah to support their own political views.

Ibn Taimiyah also attacked Al-Jahmiyah and Al-Jabariyah — the
determinists — who denied the human being’s responsibility for
any of his actions. He also denounced Al-Mu ‘tazilah and Al-
Qadariyah — the rationalists — who held human free will as the
basis of human action. He also did doctrinal battle with the
followers of Abul-Hasan Al-Ash‘ari on various issues including
determinism/free will, the Names and Attributes of Allah ‏عزوجل‎ , and
other issues of the Islamic creed.

As a result of his confrontation with the Sufis and the scholasticists, he
made many enemies among them. Many of their leaders who
exercised political clout used it against him, and as a result, he was
once exiled in Alexandria and imprisoned on three different occasions.

Ibn Tamiyah gave himself relentlessly to pointing the way to the
knowledge which, in his own words, means: “The Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه)‎
‏(وسم‎ 885 shown the fundamentals and applications of religion, its
intent as well as its expression, its (intellectual) knowledge and its
action. This fact is the foundation of all fundamental knowledge and
belief; and he who most adheres to this foundation is most worthy
of the truth — both, to know it and to do it.”

14
Method of teaching

Ibn Taimiyah’s method of teaching was both elegant and striking,
replete with authentic references, strengthened with rational
arguments, and evidence from the Ahadith . Fora lecture on any
subject, he would refer to verses of the Qur’dn and discuss their
meanings with cross references from the Qur’4n. He would also
note evidence from Ahadith of the Prophet (1.5 a wi ‏(صى‎ and check
their authenticity. He would then expound the relevant opinions of
the four schools of jurisprudence and of other famous experts in
jurisprudence. Having discussed the matter fully in this way, the
problem and its solution would become clear in the minds of his
listeners. Ibn Taimiyah had a prodigiously good memory which
helped him overwhelm his adversaries in polemic.

Style of writing

His style of writing is clear and elegant. His writings are so richly
steeped in references to the Qur’an, to Ahadith, to the sayings of the
Companions and their followers, and to opinions of other experts in
jurisprudence, that any Muslim reader must feel that he is living in
the blessed age. From the literal point of view too, his writings have
great merit. Because of their clear expression and choice of idiom,
even his technical works seem to be literary ones.

His disciples

Imam Ibn Taimiyah’s disciples spread from Syria to Egypt and Cairo
to Alexandria. Some of them scattered to very far-off places. They
preached and developed his intellectual heritage, and shared their
master’s persecutions. One of the most famous of them is Imam Ibn
Qaiyim al-Jawziyah ‏رح اسك‎ (d. 1350), a great writer in his own right. He
so mingled his personality with that of his teacher that we find in his
books echoes of Ibn Taimiyah’s thought. Among other distinguished
disciples were Ibn ‘Abdul-Hadi (d.1343), who died at the age of forty
but left valuable works. He wrote a biography of his master, Al-‘Ugiid
Al-Durriyah; Yon Kathir (d.1373), the famous historian and

15
commentator of the Qur’an, whose book Al-Biddyah wan-Nihdyah
contains a detailed biography of his teacher; Hafiz Dhahabi (d.1348),
the great Islamic’ historian of traditions; Al-Mizzi (d.1341), another
expert on traditions; Muhammad bin Muflih (d.1362), writer of many
books; Abu Hafs Al-Bazzar (d. 1349), the author of a biography of Ibn
Taimiyah; Ibn Al-Wardi (4.1348), expert in literature, grammar and
some other branches of learning; and Qadi Ibn Fadl-ullah (d.1349), a
famous writer.

Impact of Ibn Taimiyah through the ages

Ibn Taimiyah created a climate of revolutionary thinking both
through his ideas and his reformist endeavours whose impact was
felt not only in his own time but ever since. In his lifetime people
were divided either into those who were strong opponents or strong
supporters fully in agreement with him, or uncommitted, those who
agreed with some views and disagreed with others. Ibn Taimiyah
left behind a large number of books and disciplines. His opponents
soon sank into anonymity, while the value of and appreciation for
his works has increased.

In his own lifetime, Ibn Taimiyah’s fame and influence extended
beyond the boundaries of Egypt and Syria. When he was
imprisoned for the last time in the citadel of Damascus, many letters
came from the inhabitants of Baghdad protesting against his arrest
and demanding his release. When he died, funeral prayers in
absentia were performed even as far as China.

Almost all historians have recognized his deep impact on the most
prominent reformer of eighteenth century, Sheikh Muhammad bin
‘Abdul-Wahhab (d. 1792).

16
A brief biography of Dr. Muhammad Khalil Harras

Dr. Muhammad Khalil Harras was a great Salafi Aalim and research
scholar. He was born in 1916 AD at Tanta in the western region of
the Arab Republic of Egypt. He was educated in Al-Azhar University
and received the doctorate degree in Islamic subjects from it.

On completion of his studies, he was appointed as a professor in the
Faculty of Islamic Fundamentals of Al-Azhar University.

Then he was selected by the Government of Saudi Arabia to serve in
Imam Muhammad bin Saud Islamic University at Riyadh for some
years. He was again selected as the Head of the Department of Islamic
Creed of Ummul-Qura University in Makkah Al-Mukarramah.

He then returned back to Egypt and was appointed as First Deputy
Chief of “Ansaar As-Sunnah Organization” and then Chief of that
Salafi Organization

In 1973, he along with Dr. Abdul Fattah Salaamah founded “Islamic
D‘awah Committee” in the western region of Egypt and was
appointed its first President.

He breathed his last in 1975 at the age of about 60 years.

He was a firm Salafi scholar, much strong in expressing the truth,
argumentation and exposition. He dedicated all his life in preaching
and propagating the true Islamic faith and creed.

His works and compilations are too many, out of which some best
ones are as follow:

1. Research and editing on the book A/-Mughni for Ibn Qudama.

2. Reserach and compilation of the book At-Tauhid for Ibn Khuzaimah.
3. Al-Amwal for Abi Ubaid Al-Qasim bin Salam.

4. Al-Khasaais Al-Kubra for As-Syooti.

5. As-Seerah An-Nabawiyah for Ibn Hisham.

6. Sharh Al-Qaseedah An-Nooniyah (2Vols.).

7. Ibn Taimiyah and his critisize on philosophers.

8. Sharh Al-Aqeedat-il-Wasitiyah, etc.

17
Messenger ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ that he should adopt endurance at the
behest of Allah and bear with the tortures he is receiving from his
community. With this command He is stating that he is under the
care and protection of Allah.

In the second verse, Allah is informing that when the community of
Noah (1: 4) rejected him and for this act it became necessary that
this community be doomed and hence it was overtaken by the
deluge, then Noah put himself and his companions in such a boat
which was built of big planks and nails. In Arabic, the word Dusur
is plural of Disaar which means nails and which are used to fix the
planks. That boat sailed before Allah under His watch.

In the third verse, Allah has addressed His Prophet Moses ‏(عليه السلام)‎
that He directed His love towards him, in other words, Allah
Himself loves Moses and made him beloved in the eyes of the
people also. He got him brought up under His Own Eyes and
trained him in such a way that he could be prepared to convey the
Message of Allah to the Pharoah and his community.

81
Meaning of Bismillah

In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful

There is a controversy among the Ulama regarding Bismillah as to
whether this is an initial verse of each Surah of the Qur’an or an
independent verse on its own, which has been stated to mark the
intermediate distances between the Surah, and for blessing. The
second opinion is preferred.

The Ulama are agreed that Bismillah is a part of the verse of Surah
An-Naml (The Ant) and likewise they are agreed that Bismillah has
been 168 out in the beginning of Surah At-Tauba (The Repentance)
for, this and the Surah Al-Anfal (The Spoils of War) occurring prior
to it are both like one continuous Surah.

The Arabic letter Baa in Bismillah stands for seeking help. From a
syntactical point of view it relates to anoun or verb dropped by
aphasia. The Qur’an contains examples of its relationship with both
verb and noun. The example of verb is /gra bism-e-rabbika ‏اقرأ باسم‎
‏ربك‎ (Read: “In the Name of your Lord...”) and the example of noun
is Bismillah-e-majreha ‏بسم الله رها‎ (In the Name of Allah will be its
moving course).

It is better to regard the word with which Bismillah is related as
occurring later, for the Name of Allah deserves priority. By giving
priority to the preposition and the word governed by the preposition
it is evident that the Name of Allah is particularly meant for
blessing.

A noun (A/-Jsm) in the Arabic language is defined as a word formed
to make a sense definitive or distinct. This word has either been
derived from Simatun which means a symbol,or from Sumoo which

19
means height. The second statement is preferred. The letter Hamza
occurs in it for providing conjunction. /sm and Musamma are not
the same for Jsm stands for that word which signifies and Musamma
is that sense which has been signified. Likewise Jsm and Tasmiya
are not the same for Tasmiya is the verb of Musamma.

The word ‘Allah’ has either been derived from Uloohiat which
means worship or from Aalehan which means amazement. The first
statement is correct and //ah means that which is worshipped.

Rahman and Raheem are from amongst the elegant Names of Allah.
They show that Allah has the attribute related to His Self. It is not
correct to say that Rahmah is meant in its implied sense such as
gratitude etc.

Tbn Al-Qaiyim writes that the word Rahmdn denotes that attribute
of Allah which exists along with His Self, and Raheem denotes that

the attribute is related to that Self which has been the recipient of
Rahmah.,

Tbn ‘Abbas reports that both these names comprise gentleness and
softness. The word Rahman is an attribute of Allah and so it is His
Name.

20
Description of Hamd and Madh
All praise is for Allah Who sent His Messenger with guidance and

True Religion so as to give it supremacy over all other religions. And
Allah is enough as a witness.

It is narrated that the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ said:

ac at

BC 0 ‏عع‎ Stel ‏يرا 3 بيد الله‎ a

“A statement that does not begin with praise of Allah and

blessing upon me, remains deficient and bereft of blessings.”
(Abu Daud, 13/184)

The same has been narrated about Bismillah also. That is the reason

why the present author has tried to follow both Ahadith and has
mentioned both Bismillah and Al-Hamdu lillah.

Hamd means praising orally a grace regardless of being benefited
by it, be it a favour or anything else, such as a statement that ‘I did
Hamd of a certain person in connection with the prize he had been
awarded or for his feat of boldness.’ Shukr (thanking) is that praise
which is done orally or emotionally or by any other organ of the
body in lieu of some favour. This shows that the word Hamd is
commonly used in one situation and the Shukr in another situation.

Describing the mutual difference between Hamd and Madh (praise)
Tbn Al-Qaiyim writes that Hamd denotes stating qualities with love
and respect; and Madh denotes only declaration of the quality, it
does not necessarily imply love and respect. That is why the
connotation of Hamd is of a special nature and that of Madha
general.

21
In the word Al-Hamdu, the prefix Al has been used for
comprehensiveness meaning that it includes all forms of Hamd.
Some people have described it as a generic noun and have
maintained that perfect Hamd is affirmed only for Allah. This word
shows that Allah has all the Attributes of perfection and beauty.

Lexicologically the word Rasool (Messenger) means a person who
has been sent with a message. In the technical terms of the
Shari‘ah, Rasool is that free man to whom Allah’s revelations come
and he is commanded to convey them to others. If he is not
commanded to convey to others he is called a Nabi. Thus every
Rasool is a Nabi but every Nabi is not a Rasool (Prophet). The word
Rasool signifies here the personality of Muhammad ‏.(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
The meaning of Hidd@yah is to describe, and to guide. The Qur’4n
says:
‏سْتَحبواالس قل امدى»‎ EG ‏رمتو‎ >
“And as for Thamud, We showed and made clear to them the
Path of Truth (Islamic Monotheism) through our Messenger

(i.e. showed them the way of success), but they preferred
blindness to guidance.” (V. 41:7)

In this Qur’anic verse Hiddyah means to guide. This meaning of
Hidayah is common for all. It is in this sense that the Qur’4n and
Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ are called Haadi (the guide).

Hiddéyah also means favour and revelation. In this sense it is
specially used for those whom Allah gives Hiddyah. Here it means
all the true information, right faith, profitable knowledge and good
deeds which were brought by the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ .

The word Deen has several meanings such as judgement, as has
occurred in the Qur’an (the Owner of the Day of Judgement); it also

means modesty and obedience. The Arabic phrase Daana Iahu
means submission and meekness.

Deen here means all commandments and laws which were sent to

22
the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ by Allah, whether they are related to
belief, statement, or deed. The word Haq means that which is
proved and is real; its antonym is Baatil which means a thing which
has no reality.

It has been stated in a Qur’Anic verse that Allah will make Islam
dominant over all other religions through reasons and arguments.
The sentence mentioned in the passage quoted above means that all
the Attributes denoting perfection are proved for Allah in the
highest degree. Allah is praised on account of those favours which
He has bestowed upon mankind and which are beyond our
comprehension. His greatest favour is that He sent Muhammad ‏صلى)‎
‏(الله عليه وسلم‎ with the real religion and made it dominant over other
religions on rational grounds. To bear witness in favour of Allah
means that He helped His Messenger with His assistance, miracles
and various evidences.

23
Meaning of 1207

aS ‏وَحْدَهُ لا شَرِيِْكَ لَه ]15158 به وَتَوْحِيْدَا. وَ أَشْهَدُ أنَّ‎ ay dy ‏لا‎ Slag th

I bear witness that there is no true God except Allah. He is alone and
has no partners. And I bear witness that Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
is His slave and Messenger. May Allah favour him, his family and his
companions with an abundance of Salaam.

Bearing witness means to explain a thing by having a knowledge of
it and having a belief regarding its being correct and evident. A
witness is reliable only when he has the qualification of affirmation
and conviction, and his heart supports the tongue. Since the

hypocrites bore witness with the tongue, Allah decreed them as
liars.

‎ildha illa Allah (There is no God to be worshipped except Allah)‏ قا
‎is that sentence of Tauhid (Oneness of Allah) about which all‏
‎Messengers of Allah are unanimous. This is the sum and substance‏

‎of their mission and Messengership. Every Messenger began his
mission with this sentence. The Prophet ‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ Le ) said:

‎Ae IS OG BG ‏الث‎ YAS sys ‏حَتَى‎ pn spol af ae

‎“I am commanded to fight with those people who do not say
Lé ildha illa Allah.” If they say La ilaha illa Allah, their life

‎and property will be safe and then their affairs will lie with
Allah.” (Al-Bukhari, 3/262).

‎This sentence negates Divinity of other than Allah in the beginning

‎24
and affirms the Godhood of Allah Alone in the last part. The
sentence means that there is no real being deserving of worship and
this sense is reinforced by the phrase that He is One and has no
partners. The phrase La ilaha illa Allah provides the basis for it.

By bearing witness in support of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ 8
with bearing witness for Allah, it has been indicated that it is
necessary to bear witness for both. One remains pointless without
the other. That is the reason why both have been mentioned
together in the Adhdn (call to prayer) and the Tashahhud (a state of
Salat). Some Ulama have stated in the explanation of the Qur’anic
verse Wa rafa‘na laka dhikrak (And We exalted your fame...) that
Allah says:

5 ‏إلا‎ ssity «

“)0 Muhammad) whenever I am mentioned, you too are
mentioned”. (Abu Y‘la, 2/522)

The Kalimah established both the Attributes of Messengership and
servitude of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ for these two are the most
important Attributes of a worshipper of Allah. Worship is the
rationale and aim behind the creation of jinns and mankind, and the
perfection of creation lies in realising this aim in practice. When the
worshipper goes up higher in servitude, his status is exalted. By
establishing the attribute of servitude for the Prophet (ale ‏صلى الله‎
‏,(وسلم‎ those extremists stand contradicted who raise the Prophet ‏صلى)‎
‏عليه وسلم‎ ati) to the position of godhood; such as the practice of the
misguided Sufi. The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has repeatedly warned:

“You should not deify me in the way as the Christians deified
the son of Mary. I am only a slave of Allah and His
Messenger”. (Al-Bukhari 12/144)

In bearing witness to this, the worshipper admits that Muhammad

25
‎is perfect in servitude and perfect in the Messengership‏ (صلى الله عليه وسلم)
‎of Allah. This also states that he occupies the highest position in‏
‎terms of the perfection of Attributes in the entire mankind. This‏
‎testimony will be completed only when a slave testifies to the ideas‏
‎when he obeys his‏ :(صلى الله عليه وسلم) ‎transmitted by the Prophet‏
‎commands, and keeps himself dissociated from those things which‏
‎he has forbidden.‏

‎The literal meaning of Saldt is prayer. The meaning of ‘Sa/ét on the
Prophet ‏*(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ is explained by the narrative of Abul-‘Alia
which has been reported by Imam Bukhari as:

‎“Salat on the Prophet ‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ 1) means Allah praises him
before the angels.”

‎The meaning of Salat pronounced by the angels is that they pray for
pardon for the Messenger of Allah; and the meaning of Salat
performed by a man is that it is an imploration and invocation.

‎The word Aal-e-Rasool means those kinsmen of the Prophet (45) ‏صلى‎
‏(عليه وسلم‎ who are interdicted from accepting Zakat (obligatory
charity), i.e., people belonging to Banu Hashim and Banu Al-
Muttalib. Likewise, the word Aa/ may also mean the followers of
the Prophet ‏.(صى الله عليه وسلم)‎ Ashaab means all those people who saw
the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ in the state of having become believers
in the Faith and died in the state of believing in the Faith.

‎Salaam means asking for security from the evil things. This is one
of the Names of Allah and means that He is free from all kinds of
defects and drawbacks and is safe and secure, or, that He will give
security to His faithful slaves in the Hereafter.

‎26
Introduction of the Saved Sect and its Faith

After Hamd and Salat, is being announced that this treatise will
describe the beliefs of the genuine followers of the Ahlus Sunnah wal
Jama‘ah, that is, the saved and the successful sect (4l-Firgatun-
Naajiyah Al-Mansoorah) to the Day of Judgement.

The belief is this: To have faith in Allah, His angels, His Scriptures,
His Messengers, and in being resurrected after death, and in having a
good or bad destiny.

The word Amma ba‘d is used to indicate the beginning of the main
theme. The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه رسلم)‎ would often use this word in the
beginning of his Khutbah (sermons) and writings.

The word ‘Aqeedah means accepting anything with the heart and
conscience and obeying Allah in doing it. The word conveys the
resoluteness of the intention and maturity of thought.

Firqah is used to denote a group of people. The author has qualified
it with salvation and assistance owing to the fact that one of the
Ahadith of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه رسلم)‎ says:

“One group from my Ummah will always hold fast to truth
and it will always have the assistance of Allah. No one who
dissociated from it will be able to do harm to it up to the Day
of Judgement.” (Al-Bukhari, 13/293)

In another Hadith, the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says:

27
“This Ummah will get divided into 73 Firgah, and except one
Firgah all the others will be destined to Hell. That one Firgah

will be such as will follow my way and the way of my
Companions.” (At-Tirmidhi, 7/397)

In the phrase of Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah, Sunnah means the way
and practice followed by the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ and the
Sahaba. The heretical innovation and different creeds had not come
into being till then. The word Jama ‘ah stands for the people who
assemble. Here it means those Sahaba and the Tabi‘een (the
generation immediately following the Sahaba) who unanimously
accepted the truth proved from the Qur’an and the Hadith and
gathered together.

The Six Pillars of Faith

The six things on which, the author says, it is compulsory to have
faith are regarded as the pillars of the Faith. Unless one has faith in
these six things in accordance with the Qur’an and the Sunnah, his
Faith will not acquire perfection. If someone denies even one of
these six things or does not believe in it in accordance with the
Qur’4n and the Sunnah, he is a KGfir. All these things have been
described in the Hadith known as the Hadith of Jibrael. It is
mentioned that Jibrael came to the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ in the
guise of a bedouin and put questions to him about Islam, Jmdn and
Ihsan. He said in reply to that:

و

“Iman means having faith in Allah, angels, heavenly

Scriptures, Messengers of Allah, life after death, and good
and bad destiny.” (Muslim 1/259)

Al-Malaika is plural of Malak. This word is derived from Al-
Ulooka, which means Messengership. By Malaika is meant the

28
creatures of Allah whom He has made to inhabit the heavens and
has assigned them the affairs of His creatures. He has mentioned
them in His Book explaining that they do not disobey Allah and
follow whatever they are commanded to do. They continue
narrating the glorification of Allah untiringly day and night. It is
enjoined upon us to have faith in all the Attributes and actions of
the angels described in the Qur’an and the Hadith, and keep quiet
about such as have not been mentioned, for these constitute the
affairs of the Unseen which are known to us only to the extent Allah
and His Messenger have told us.

Al-Kutub means those Scriptures which Allah has sent down from
the heaven upon His Messengers. From amongst these, we have the
knowledge of the Books of Abraham, Torah of Moses, Evangels of
Jesus, Psalms of David and the Qur’dn. The Qur’dn descended as
the last Scripture and it stands as the protector and the testifier for
all the earlier Scriptures. In addition to these books, it is also
necessary to have a general faith in the Scriptures of the other
Messengers of Allah.

The word Ar-Rusul means those people who receive revelations
from Allah. These revelations contain commandments of the
Shari‘ah and the Messengers are commanded to preach them. It is
necessary for us to have specific faith in the 25 Rasoo/ mentioned
by Allah in the Qur’an. A poet has collected the names in a verse:

ِدْرِيْسُ هُوْدُ ‎His gus dead‏ ذُو الكفْل آدَمْ ‎GMI‏ قد ‎Wak‏

“Eighteen have been mentioned in the Qur’anic verse of “Tilka

Hujjatuna, the remaining seven are Idris, Hud, Shu‘aib, Saleh,
Dhul-Kifl, Adam, and Muhammad ‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ Le)”.

In addition to these Rasool and Nabi, we must have a general faith
in other Prophets also, that, we do not have to wrangle about the
faith in their Prophethood and Messengership, their names and their
numbers, for Allah Alone has this knowledge. He has said:

29
“And Messengers We have mentioned to you before, and

Messengers We have not mentioned to you.” (Surah An-
Nis@’, 4:164)

It is necessary to have this Faith in connection with these
Messengers that they did convey the message to mankind which
Allah had commanded them to do, and explained them in a manner
that none remains in any doubt. And that they are free from flaws
of character like falsehood, betrayals, hiding knowledge and
ignorance. The most superior among these are: Muhammad,
Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Noah. They have been mentioned in
the following verse:

“And (remember) when We took from the Prophets their

covenant, and from you (O Muhammad ‏عليه وسلم‎ wi ‏,(صلى‎ and
from Nah, Ibrahim, Miisa and ‘Iesa-son of Maryam.”

(Surah Al-Ahzab, 33:7).

And the second verse is:

“He (Allah) has ordained for you the same religion (Islam)
which He ordained for Nah, and that which We have inspired
in you (O Muhammad ‏,(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ and that which We
ordained for Ibrahim, Miisa ‘Iesa saying you should establish
religion (i.e. to do what it orders you to do practically), and
make no divisions in it (religion) (i.e. various sects in
religion).” (Surah Ash-Shura, 42:13).

The meaning of the word Ba‘th is to raise and to give motion. In the
terminology of Shari‘ah it means to raise the dead from their graves

30
alive on the Day of Judgement so that they are judged. Allah will
see him who has done an iota of good and him who has done an iota
of bad. We must have faith in Ba‘th in the same sense in which
Allah has mentioned in the Qur’4n, that is, Allah will collect all the
organs that are dissolved and revive them again and bring back life
in them. The philosophers and the Christians who deny the bodily
Ba‘th are KGfir, and those who believe in Ba ‘th but hold that Alllah
will inspire soul into a body different from the body of this world
are heretical innovators and corrupt.

Al-Qadar means making an appraisal. In the terminology of
Shari‘ah it means that Allah has the knowledge of the quantity and
temporality of everything from the beginning of the creation. He
created them by His Power and Will and according to His
Knowledge, and He recorded them in the Safe Tablet (A/-Lauh Al-
Mahfuz — the Book of Decrees) before creating them. A Hadith
says:

“He first created the pen and commanded it to write. The pen

asked, ‘What should I write?’ Allah said, ‘Write out all that is
destined to happen’”.

Allah says in the Qur’an:
“No calamity befalls on the earth or in yourselves but is

inscribed in the Book of Decrees —{Al-Lauh Al-Mahfuz),
before We bring it into existence.” (Surah Al-Hadid, 57:22).

31
from the Qur’4n and the Sunnah and maintains that it is not the
manifest sense which is meant, and yet he himself does not
determine a sense, then it is called Tafweed. It is wrong to say that
Tafweed was the creed of the Salaf. It was the Asha rah" of the
later times who ascribed this thing to the Salaf: The Salaf did not do
Tafweed while trying to find out the meaning of something nor did
they read anything whose meaning they did not understand. On the
other hand, they understood the meaning of the passages of the
Qur’an and the Sunnah, and proved these meanings in favour of
Allah. Albeit, they would submit the knowledge of the reality and
state of these meanings to Allah. When Imam Malik was asked
about the state of Istiwaa (establishing, rising) of Allah on the
heaven (Throne), he said Jstiwaa is known but its condition is
unknown.

Takyeef means to have faith that the states of the Attributes of Allah
are such and such, or putting questions about the state of the
Attributes of Allah.

Tamtheel means to believe that the Attributes of Allah are like the
Attributes of the creature. The phrase Bi ghair takyeef means that
Ahlus Sunnah deny that they have any knowledge of His condition,
for Allah Alone knows the state of His Self and Attributes. But this
does not mean that they completely deny the states themselves, for
it is essential for everything that it has a state.

“There is nothing like unto Him.”

"1 ALAsha‘irah (Ash‘arite): They are the followers of Abul Hasan Al-Ash‘ari,
who was Mu'‘tazili. Then he left 2 ‘tizaal and adopted a way between E ‘tizaal and
Ahlus Sunnah wal-Jama‘ah. In his last age, he returned to the creeds of Ahlus
Sunnah and followed Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal in his theories, But some of his
followers still remanined on previous belief. They amplify the Attributes of Allah
and have belief similiar to A/-Murji’ah. They are closest to Ahius Sunnah among
all astrayed sects.

32
Meaning of Tahreef, Ta‘teel and Tamtheel

And it forms part of the faith in Allah that we believe in those
Attributes with which Allah has qualified Himself and with which the
Prophet ‏(صلى اللهعليه وسلم)‎ has qualified Allah. Neither should
alterations be made nor negations, nor attributing a state of being nor
of likeness to creation. The belief should rather be that the Self of
Allah is as He has mentioned in the verse: “There is nothing like unto
Him and He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.”

While explaining the meaning of Faith in detail, the author tells
about the Faith of the Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama ‘ah.

Tahreef means changing. Introducing change in a statement means
leaving out the meaning understood by it and accepting sucha
meaning which the words may indicate in a doubtful sense. Of
course, if there is a context to justify this sense then one must
explain its possibility.

Ta‘teel means leaving and vacating. In the present context it means
negating the Attributes of Allah and denying them with His Self.
The difference between Tahreef and Ta ‘teel is that in the latter case
that real meaning is denied which is proved by the Qur’dn and the
Hadith, while in Tahreef the explanation of the text is done with
such meanings that are false and the word does not prove them. So
Ta‘teel includes Tahreef. Wherever there is Tahreef, Ta ‘teel is
certainly there, but the reverse is not true. If someone tries to prove
the false meaning and denies the real meaning, he is committing
both Ta‘teel and Tahreef. If someone denies the Attributes proved

33
It 15 a clear Qur’nic verse. This is the code of conduct of the Ahlus
Sunnah about negation and affirmation. He has negated the
existence of anything like Him but has affirmed the Attributes of
hearing and seeing for His Self.

This shows that the correct creed is not that the Attributes are
completely denied as is the way of the Mu ‘attilah"" nor is it to try to
completely prove them as is the way of the Mumaththilah™! . The
true crerd is to make an affirmation of the Attributes without
similitudes. In the word Kamithlihi the Arabic letter Kaafhas been
added for emphasis as the poet says:

“There is none comparable to Zuhair in nobility.”

1 4L-Mu ‘attilah: One group of Mu ‘tazilah.

"1 4l-Mumaththilah, Al-Mushabbiha or Al-Mujassimah: They are opponent of
Al-Jahmiyah in affirmation of Names and Attributes of Allah. They believe that
Allah Possesses Hand similiar to the hand of creatures, Hearing as hearing of
creatures, Sight as sight of creatures etc. Exalted is Allah from that the
wrongdoers say about Him. He is High and Great.

34

Allah could not be measured with His creatures
BOY ‏عَنْ مَوَاضِعِِ‎ ISI ‏عَنْهُ مَاوَصَف 4 نَفْسَهُ وَلآيْحَرَفُْنَ‎ Sys ‏َلآ‎

سمي لَه وَلأكفء لَه ‎Bint DA, 21, DLV‏ وَتَعَالَى .

The Attributes with which He has qualified Himself, those Attributes
of His Self are not denied by Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah, nor do they
commit Tahreef on the basis of reasoning by different statements, nor
do they indulge in wrong Ta’weel (different interpretation of an
obvious meaning of a word) of the Names of Allah and His verses, nor
do they regard His Attributes as like the Attributes of the creatures
and nor do they describe their states. The reason is that nothing is in
the likeness of Allah, nor is anything comparable or partner to Him.
Not to follow analogy from amongst His creatures to demonstrate

likeness and comparability with Him.

The question of the denial of negation is based on the Faith
mentioned above. This means that when they will have faith in
Allah in this sense, then they will neither negate His Attributes nor
do Tahreef; neither will they describe the state nor will demonstrate
likeness.

The word A/-Mawadi is the plural of the word A/-Mawdi‘ ‏المرضع‎ This
implies those meanings on which it is necessary to base statements.
The reason is that at the time of using it the statement carries the
same meaning; and it is on that ground that the statement is not
separated from these meanings.

‘Allamah Ibn Al-Qaiyim ‏(رحه الله)‎ states the following regarding not
committing //haad in the Names of Allah and His Attributes:

“Doing Ihaad in His Names means turning away from those real
meanings of His Names which are proved for them. In this word the

35
sense of Al-Ma’il is crucial. The word Lahd is derived from it which
means that cleavage in side the grave which falls by deviating from
the middle. The phrase Mulhid fid-Deen is also derived from it and
it denotes the one who deviates from the Truth and who introduces
such things in religion which have no bearing on it.

Ihaad in relation to the Names and the Verses of Allah occurs
either by their total negation or by denying their meanings and
rejecting them altogether, or due to Tahreef from truth or by doing
false Ta’weel by deviating from the truth, or it may happen by
giving some self-coined words to those names just as the I/haad of
the Ahlul-Ittihaad.

The upshot of all this is that the virtuous Sa/afhad faith in all such
things which Allah has stated about His Self in the Qur’4n and in all
such things which the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has described. This
faith is absolutely free from Tahreef, Ta ‘teel, Takyeef and Tamtheel.
Their statement on the Self of Allah and His Attributes is the same;
the statement about the Attributes is an offshoot of the statement
about the Self in which the statement regarding Self is perfectly
observed. So when the aim to prove the Self is to prove existence
and not of the state, then the same is true regarding the Attributes.
They interpret this in one of their remarks: ‘We will pass them off
as exactly as they have been handed down, without Ta ‘weel.’ Those
who do not follow this remark suffer from an illusion that they
mean to say that only the word should be read and no controversy
should be raised about the meaning, although this is a wrong notion.
Negation of Ta’weel here aims at the reality of meaning, its essense
and its state. Imam Ahmad says:

“Allah shall be qualified only with those Attributes with
which He has qualified Himself or His Messenger has
qualified Him. Nothing should be said beyond the Qur’an and
the Hadith”. (Al-Fataéwa, 5/26)

36
Imam Bukhari’s teacher, No‘aim bin Hammad says:

“Whoever described Allah in the likeness of His creature, he
bas committed Kufr and if someone denied the Attributes by
which Allah qualified Himself, then he also has committed
Kufr. The Attributes by which Allah qualified Himself or
those that were narrated about Him by His Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه)‎
‏,(وسلم‎ will not be called Tashbeeh or Tamtheel.”

The reason why Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah do not do Takyeef or
Tamtheel is that there is no parallel to the Self of Allah which
deserves His Name nor is there anything of such a greatness which
equals Him in height. Allah says in Surah Maryam:
“Do you know of any who is similar to Him?”

The meaning of His having no likeness is not that none would be
named like His Name, for there are many such names that are
common between Him and His creatures. This in fact means that
when Allah uses these names for His Self their meanings are
specific to Him. No one other than Allah will be a partner to it.
Partnership takes place in the total sense of the name and this sense
exists only in mind; in the external cases the meaning is only partial
and specific. Its position is only relative. If the relation is with the
Rabb then it is specific to Him and the slave will not be a partner in
it. If the relation is with the slave then the meaning is specific to
him, Allah is not a partner to it.

Kufu’ means equal and having similar co-status. Allah’s Statement
is a witness to its negation:

“And there is none coequal or comparable unto Him.” (Surah
Al-Ikhlas, 12:4).

Nidd means equal and of co-status. Allah says:
4S OOS AIA ISD

37
“Then do not set up rivals unto Allah (in worship) while you
know (that He Alone has the right to be worshipped).” (Surah
Al-Bagarah, 2:22).

“Not to follow analogy” means that the use of no other such measure
is allowed which may imply an analogy made regarding Allah and
that which is the point of analogy, showing equality and similarity.

This analogy is like Tamtheel (likeness) which has been defined by
the Ulama of the principles of Figh as combining the derived with
the original in the precept as a whole e.g., combining Nabeedh with
alcohol under the command of interdiction since the reason behind
the command, that is, the question of intoxication is common in
both. The analogy on the identity of the offshoot and the root is
based ‏مه‎ the similarity. But this is not permissible that such a thing
should be allowed in the case of Allah in relation to the creatures.

In the terminology of the logicians, analogy is like Shamool (inclusion)
that is to argue in relation to a part from the standpoint of a whole on the
ground that this part is a component of that whole along with some other
parts. This analogy is based on the assumption that the elements forming
part of the whole are equal to the whole, and therefore what holds true
for the whole also holds true for the parts.

And this is known that between Allah, the Revered and the Exalted, and
His creature there exists no comparability in any thing. The highest level
of analogy is used for Allah, which means that in every quality which is
proved for the creature and there is a possibility that Allah is also
qualified with it, then in that quality the Creator is certainly superior to
the creature. And a defect from which the creature is free, from that
defect the Creator is definitely free in the first degree.

Similar is the principle for perfection also. The aim in this case is
that when two persons are compared and one of them has the
quality of perfection and the other does not, then the first will be
regarded as being more perfect. Thus, it is necessary to accept this
attribute for Allah also so long as the existence of this quality is a
perfection and its absence is a defect.

38
Affirmation and negation of the Attributes with
which Allah glorified Himself or by His

_ Messenger ‏الله عليه وسلو)‎ se)
‏ثم وشلة‎ ols ‏من خلقه‎ Bas Sash a) Gash ‏وَبِقَيْرو‎ dey Let a5

JG (sy ee as ihe i 4 ‏الَذِيْنَ‎ Sey AY ‏صَادِقُوْنَ [مُصَدُةُ‎

iis

سنح ‎aS‏ عا اله تتم ‎std cys‏ مت

Be play ‏لِلؤسْلٍء‎ sed « ar 65 kel Ed ¢ ‏الكتييت‎

as ‏جَمَعَ‎ 18 Git ‏وَهُوَ‎ aly ‏م ا لون التق‎ Hoes ste
For He knows best His Own Self and the selves of others. What He
says is the truest and the best and His Messengers are true. They have
been testified as against those who say such things about Allah which
they themselves do not know. That is why Allah says: “Glorified be
your Lord, the Lord of honour and power! (He is free) from what
they attribute unto Him! And peace be on the Messengers! And all the
praise and thanks are to Allah, Lord of the ‘4alamin (mankind, jinns
and all that exists).” (Surah As-Saffat,37: 180-182). He stated His Self
free from the things with which the opponents of the Messengers of
Allah qualified Him, and sent peace unto the Prophets since their
statements were free of defects and drawbacks. He also mentioned
negation and affirmation of the Attributes with which He qualified

Himself.
To have faith in the Attributes of Allah, mentioned in the Qur’4n
and the Hadith, is justified on account of the fact that Allah is the
Best Knower of His Self and all other things. The best and the truest
thing is that which He says; and whatever His Messengers say
about Him is always true. They are innocent of telling lies about

39
Allah, nor do they say anything which is against reality. That is why
it is necessary to have faith in whatever Allah and His Messengers
have said about the Attributes in a negative or positive form. Such
things should not be left for believing in the statements of those
people who falsify Allah and say such things about Him which they
do not know themselves.

The detail behind it is that a defect in the failure of a statement to
establish its intended meaning occurs because of one or more of the
three factors mentioned below:

1. The speaker is himself ignorant of what he says.

2. He does not have the power of eloquence and the required
amount of skill to communicate.

3. He resorts to lies, distortions, and adulteration.

The Qur’an and the Hadith are in every sense free from these three
things. The statements of Allah and His Messenger ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
are extremely clear and bright. These are in accordance with the
reality and the highest example of truth. These things have emerged
after cutting off all external relations. They also include the highest
admonition and guidance for the creatures.

In this way all the three elements of narration and understanding are
available in the statements of the Prophet ‏.(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ The
Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه رسلم)‎ has the highest knowledge of those things
which he wants the people to be apprised of. He adopts the best
style of narrating them. He is most willing to give admonition and
guidance to the creatures. That is why it is not possible that his
statements suffer from weakness or defect, while the statements of
others in these matters and also in other matters are not free of
shortcomings and defects. That is why it is not correct to regard the
statements of others and:equal to the statement of the Prophet ‏صلى)‎
‏عليه وسلم‎ 1), let alone having faith in the statements of others
compared with the statements of the Prophet ‏.(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ This is
an extremely shameful thing and leads astray.

40
That is the reason why Allah described His Own Glorification and
sent peace on His Messengers.

Subhaan is the infinitive of Tasbih which means keeping purified
and remote from evil. The root of this word is Sabh which means

speed, flow, and remoteness. That is why the horse that runs very
fast is called Sabooh.

Allah, the Pure, keeps His Self purified from all those things which
the polytheists attribute to Him (such as having a wife or a son) and
other defects and drawbacks. Then He sends peace on His
Messengers. This indicates that just as it is necessary to have faith
that Allah the Mighty and the Great is free from defects and
drawbacks, so also it is necessary to have faith in the purity of the
words and deeds of Prophets, for the Prophets and Messengers of
Allah neither tell lies about Allah nor associate partners to Him, nor
put their followers in make-believe positions. They never say
anything except the truth Tegarding Allah. The command of Allah
is: 4S ‏لمك‎ S my Bice) SH}

“And all the praises and thanks are to Allah, Lord of the

‘Aalamin (mankind, jinns and all the exists).”

On account of being in possession of perfection in Attributes, most
magnificent qualities and most righteous deeds, the Glorified Allah
Himself praises His Self.

Negation and affirmation are included in both general and specific
terms in His Names and Attributes. The meaning of generality in
negation is that all those defects and drawbacks are denied in the
Self of Al Allah which go against His Perfection, For example:

(sony ‏«عَزم وميه‎ Ata stp
“There is ‘nothing like unto Him,” (Surah Ash-Shura, 42:11);
“Do you know of any who is similar to Him? (Of course none

is similar or coequal or comparable to Him, and He has none
as partner with Him)” (Surah Maryam, 19:65);

41
“Glorified is Allah above all that they attribute to Him!”
(Surah Al-Mu’minun, 23:91).

Specificity in negation means negating the allegation that Allah is
associated in His Attributes with such defects and drawbacks as
father, son, partner, wife, peer, opponent, ignorance, helplessness,
misguidance, forgetfulness, drowsiness, sleep, uselessness and
falsehood.

The word negation does not stand alone in the Qur’4n and the
Hadith, for a mere negation does not denote any attribute; there is
rather the affirmation of the perfection of the Greatness of Allah
and the Uniqueness in His Attributes as against both the negations.
The negation of ignorance stands for the affirmation of His broad
and unlimited Knowledge; the negation of injustice is for the
affirmation of the perfection of His Justice, the negation of
uselessness is for the affirmation of His eternal life and stability.
That is the reason why negation has often come in the Qur’an and
the Hadith in a general sense in contrast with affirmation in which
there are greater specifications than generalities, for these are
intended for His Self.

The generality in affirmation means that absolute perfection,
absolute praise, absolute magnificence, etc. are proved. Allah says:

“All the praises and thanks are to Allah, the Lord of the ‘Aalamin

(mankind, jinns and all that exists) (Surah Fatihah, 1:2);

“And for Allah is the highest description..”(Surah Al-Nahl, 16:60).
The detail in this matter includes all nouns and adjectives
mentioned in the Qur’an and the Sunnah, and it is so frequent that it

cannot be counted. Some have been specified by Allah along with
His Knowledge as the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has said:

«سْبْحَائَكَ لأشخصِي تُناء عَلَيِكَ أَنْتَ ‎EAS‏ عَلَى نَفْسِكَ»

42
“Glorified are You, we cannot enumerate Your praise. You
are exactly as You have praised Yourself.”

In a Hadith regarding prayer, the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has said:

“T ask you through every name by which You have named
Yourself or You have revealed Your Name or taught someone

from amongst Your creatures, or kept it with You in the
knowledge of the Unseen”.

43
Description of the Attributes of Allah
bit 86 ‏به الْمُرْسلُوْنَ؛‎ ae us ‏وَالْجَمَاعَةٍ‎ ay ‏عُدُوْلَ لأخل ال‎ 36

‎Sok 1‏ جيذ وك ‎LI‏ كتهرك 4 ته
‎Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah do not deviate from those things which‏
‎The Straight Path is‏ .) عليهم السلام) ‎have been brought by the Prophets‏
‎the path of those on whom Allah bestowed His Favour, that is, the‏
‎path of the Prophets, the truthfulones, the martyrs and the virtuous‏
‎people. It is in this collection of the Attributes which includes those‏
‎ones also which Allah has mentioned in Surah AI-Ikhlas (the‏
‎Sincerity) which is equivalent to one-third of the Qur’an. Allah states:‏
‎‘He is Allah, (the) One. (The‏ (صلى الله عليه ‎“Say: (O Muhammad pl)‏
‎Self-Sufficient Master, Whom all creatures need, He neither eats nor‏
‎drinks. He begets not, nor was He begotten; and there is none co-‏
‎equal or comparable unto Him.” (Surah Al-Ikhias, 112).‏

‎Whatever the Messengers of Allah ‏(عليهم الصلاة ر السلام)‎ brought with
them, that alone is real. It is obligatory to obey it and forbidden to
deviate from it, for this alone is the Straight Path which has no
curves.

‎The Straight Path is only one and whoever deviates from it, he
strays into the wrong path and injustice.

‎4a ARGS ‏انيعو سبل‎ pS ht ‏وَأدَهَدَا ورك‎ >
“And verily, this (i.e. Allah’s Commandments mentioned in
the above two verses 151 and 152) is my Straight Path, so
follow it, and follow not (other) paths, for they will separate
you away from His Path” (Surah Al-An ‘am, 6:153).

‎44
The Straight Path is the path of a just and the best Ummah (nation)
which lies between two extremes. That is why Allah has
commanded us and taught us to recite in each Rak‘ah of the prayer
a supplication to Him to guide us on the Straight Path. That is, He
should tell us and help us how to obey Him. This is the path of
those who were favoured by Allah, that is, the Prophets, the
truthfulones, the martyrs, and the virtuous peoples; and it is these
who are best for keeping company.

Now we are discussing those texts of the Qur’an and the Hadith
which mention these names and Attributes, and to have faith in that
is necessary.

It begins from the Surah Al-Ikhlds for the reason that it contains this
matter in such a way that other Surah do not have it. The reason
why this has been named Surah Al-Ikhids is that the concept of
Tauhid (Oneness of Allah) has been explained in it by separating
and purging it from polytheism and idolatry.

Ubai bin Ka‘b («+ ‏(رضي الله‎ narrates the context of the revelation of
this Surah, as the polytheists said:

«LBs ‏أده‎ ii SD

‘O Muhammad! Tell us the genealogy of your Lord.’ Allah
thereupon revealed this Surah (Musnad Imam Ahmad).

It is proved from authentic Ahadith that this Surah is equal to one-
third of the Qur’an. The Ulama have made several statements in
this connection and among these, the statement copied by Sheikh-
ul-Jslam from Ibn Abbas, is the most authentic. The substance of

this statement is that the Qur’an consists of three fundamental
objectives:

1. Those dos and don’ts which comprise the commandments and
the practical ways, and these form the subject matter of the
discipline of Figh (jurisprudence) and ethics.

45
2. The tales and the narratives which include the stories of the
Messengers of Allah and their communities. Such disasters have
also been described which befell those who denied the Messengers
of Allah; they also mention the promises, the rewards and the
dooms.

3. The knowledge of Tauhid (Islamic Monotheism) and the
description of those matters which relate to the Names of Allah and
His Attributes and to believe in them is necessary for the
worshippers of Allah. This is the most important among all the
three.

Surah Al-Ikhi@s comprises this third objective and gives a general
description of it. It is therefore correct to say that this Surah is equal
to one-third of the Qur’an.

A question is raised regarding how this Surah contains
comprehensively the entire knowledge of Tauhid and its principles
which form the centre of the belief and rationality in one Allah.

The answer to this lies in the fact that Allah’s Command (Allah is
One) negates partnership with Him in every sense, whether it
concerns His Self or His Attributes, or His Deeds. It likewise
demonstrates the distinctiveness of Allah in greatness, perfection,
magnificence and majesty. That is why the word Ahad will not be
used in affirmation for anyone except Allah. This word is more
emphatic than Waahid.

Ibn Abbas has done the explanation of this phrase Alléh-us-Samad
(Allah the Eternal, the Absolute) with his statement which is as
follows:

The Master Who is the perfect in His mastery; the Great One Who
is the perfect in His greatness; the Tolerant Who is the perfect in
His toleration, the Omnipotent Who is the perfect in His
omnipotence; the All-Knowing Who is the perfect in His
knowledge; the One Who is perfect in all types of nobility and
greatness — that ‏ادع‎ is only Allah — the Most Revered and the

46
Most Powerful. He Alone has these qualities for they do not apply
to anyone else except Him. No one is equal to Him, and no oneis
like Him.

The explanation of As-Samad has also been done as follows: The
One Who has no fear; toward Whom all the creatures turn; and
Whom they seek after in all their needs and works.

Affirmation of Oneness for Allah includes negation of polytheism
and similitude. And the affirmation of all the meanings of Samad
includes all the noblest names and the most exalted Attributes. This
is called the Tauhid of affirmation.

The other type, that is the Tauhid of purity has been derived from
the statement of Allah:

“He begets not, nor was He begotten. And there is none
coequal or comparable unto Him.”

Moreover, this interpretation can also be derived in a general sense
from ‘He is Allah, the One,’ that is, nothing came out of Him nor
has He come out of anything; and that He has no equal, no likeness
and no similarity.

Please see how this Surah denominates the concept of the Oneness
of Allah in belief and recognition of Allah; the affirmation of
Oneness for the Lord which is absolutely contradictory to
polytheism; and His characteristic of being ‘Eternal and Absolute’,
which proves all the Attributes for Him that He cannot suffer from
any defect, that negation of the relationship of father and son which
is one of the implications that of His being in no need, all is
characterised by Samadiyah. Then there is the negation of an equal
which includes negation of similarity, resemblance and likeness.
This Surah denominates all those matters. A Surah which
comprehends all these issues is rightly deserving of being called
equal to one-third of the Qur’an.

47
his shoulder and said, “O Abu Mundhir! You must be happy
to learn this.”

A narration of Ahmad contains that the Prophet ‏الله عليه وسلم‎ Le said:

“T swear in the Name of the One Who holds my soul in His

possession, this verse has a tongue and two lips which
describe the glorification of Allah near His Throne.”

Indeed, this great verse comprises such Names and Attributes of
Allah as are not comprised in other verses.

Allah has in this verse given information about His Self that He is
Alone in His Godhood and no type of worship and no form of it
suits any other one except Him. Then after the matter of Tauhid, He
has mentioned those things which bear witness to His Qualities and
His Perfect Attributes. He said that He is Alive and has absolute
control on life, for life is one of the implications of His Self which

is eternal and the perfection of His life is implied in all His personal
perfections just as reverence, control, knowledge, information,
hearing, seeing, intention, will, etc. So, if any of these is left out, it
is due to defect in life. Therefore, perfection in life means
perfection in all the Attributes. Then He associated it with His
Name Al-Qaiyoom (the Eternal) which means the One Who is
established on its own and is absolutely without need from the
entire creation. There is not the slightest possibility in it of mixing
with want, for He is Allah and the existence of everything is owing
to him and they are all dependent on Him. In fact they cannot afford
to become independent of Him even for a moment. Only He is the
One Who invented the existing things in such a stable way that He
looks after their needs and provides them with all that they need for
survival, and for reaching that perfection which He determined for
these things. In this way, this name includes all the active
Attributes. That is why the Hadith mentions that Al-Hayy (the
Alive) and Al-Qaiyoom (the Eternal) are the greatest Names of

49
Allah. When He is asked for anything through these names He
awards it, and when He is invoked with these names He responds.

After this, that thing has been mentioned which argues for the
perfection of His Hayat (Life) and Qaiyoomiyah (Eternality). Thus
He said:

“Neither slumber nor sleep overtakes Him” etc.

For this is contrary to eternality; sleep is a form of death and that is
why the inhabitants of Paradise do not sleep. Then He mentioned
the expanse of His territory which includes all the worlds above and
all the worlds below and all are under His sway. Thus He said:

“Unto Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever
is on earth ...”

And _ thereafter He mentioned that attribute which constitutes a
proof of His kingdom, that is, He Alone has the right to intercede;
no One can recommend to Him unless He has allowed him.

These include two commandments-negation and exception:

1. Affirmation of correct intercession, that is, this intercession can
be taken up only by the Command of Allah by a person with whose
words and deeds Allah is pleased.

2. Refutation of the polytheistic intercession: The polytheists had
faith in their idols that these could intercede with Allah without His
Permission and Will.

Then He has mentioned His breadth and comprehensiveness of His
Knowledge that nothing yet to happen and nothing that has already
happened is unknown to Him. But the creatures cannot bring within
bounds His Knowledge except that which Allah Himself wants to

50
teach them through His Prophets or through discussion, insight,
investigation and analysis.

Then He mentioned that which forms a proof for the breadth of His
kingdom and for His greatness. Thus he said that His Kursi has
been encompassing all the heavens and the earth.

The correct meaning of the Kursi is that it is separate from the
Throne and it signifies the place lying beneath both the Steps. This
is in comparison to the Throne as a ring in a desert. And what Ibn
Kathir has mentioned in the interpretation of the Kursi with
reference to Ibn ‘Abbas saying that it means knowledge, is not
correct. This implies repetition in the verse.

After this Allah ‏سبحا‎ has mentioned His great control and perfect
power and said:

لم نزوو عقو
‎“And He feels no fatigue in guarding and preserving them.”‏

He is not tired of protecting the earth and the heavens. Sheikh-ul-
Islam Ibn Taimiyah ‏الله)‎ ««,) has done the explanation of Ya’ooduhu
from Yuthgilahu which means that He is not bored.

Later Allah has at the end of this blessed verse qualified Himself

with two great Attributes, that is, height and greatness, an absolute

height in every sense. Ali is that which possesses all forms of

absolute, and the height of Self is that, while Allah is established

over the Throne, He is above all creatures. ‘Uloo-ul-Qadr is that for

Him all Attributes are evident in perfect form and He has the

highest and the greatest level of all of them. ‘Uloo-ul-Qahr is that '
He is dominant over all his slaves and is the Wise and the Knower.

Al-Azeem means the One Who has the attribute of such a greatness
that nothing is superior to Him, nothing is higher and greater. In the
hearts of the Prophets, angels and the virtuous ones, perfect
reverence is only for Allah.

51
Some Attributes of Allah and their meanings
Beis ae at KH Bh Hob AIG IAT AY tne Uys
‏عرس مل و مج‎ Joe Paes ae ee ‏رر‎ 9% ee aoe

‎Wiss €S,5 9 oll Bi Js) BE‏ « وهر ‎AT‏ الك 4« وهر
‎And Allah said: “He is the First (nothing is before Him) and the Last‏
‎(nothing is after Him), and the Most High (nothing is above Him) and‏
‎the Most Near (nothing is nearer than Him). And He is the All-‏
‎Knower of everything.” (Surah Al-Hadid, 57:3) And Allah said: “And‏
‎t+) in the Ever Living One‏ الله عليه ‎put your trust (O Muhammad ply‏
‎Who dies not.” (Surah Al-Furgan, 25:58); And said, “He is the All-‏
‎Knower, the All-Wise” (Surah At-Tahrim, 66:2); “The All-Wise, the‏
‎All-Aware.” (Surah Saba’, 34:1).‏

‎The Statement of Allah: “He is the First and the Last, and the Most
High and the Most Near; and He is All-Knower of everything,” is for
the recognition of both the sides. This verse shows that all these
four names are specific for the Exalted Allah, and their meanings
are particularised for Him on account of His Grace and Grandeur.
For this reason nothing can be proved for anything other than Him.
There occurs inconsistency in the writings of the theologians in the
explanation of these names. However, in the presence of the
explanation done by the infallible Prophet ‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ t+), we stand
in no need of any other explanation. It is reported in Sahih Muslim
with the ascription of Abu Hurairah («+ ‏(رضي الله‎ that the Prophet
‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ would often say while lying in the bed:

‎8 1 ‏م شه 4 ذ‎ oy et Mg aS DB
535M ‏أَنْتَ‎

‎52
“OQ Allah! The Lord of all the seven heavens, and the Lord of
the earth, and the Lord of everything, the splitter of the seed
and the seed stones, Revealer of the Torah, the Evangels, and
the Qur’dn, I seek Your refuge from the mischief of every
mischievous being, for You are the First, there is nothing
earlier than You. You are the Last there is nothing after You.
You are the Most High nothing is over You, You are the Most

Near, there is nothing nearer than You! Repay my debts and
save me from wants.”

This is a clear exegesis which provides proof for the perfect
greatness of Allah ‏سبحائه‎ He has been encompassing everything in
every sense. The First and the Last are the indicators of the
temporal limits and the High and the Near are the indicators of the
spacial limits. Moreover, the name High reveals that He is above
the entire creation nothing is above Him.

The entire basis of these four names lies on His encompassing. The
fact that He is the First and the Last has encompassed the beginning
and the end, and His being the High, the Near has encompassed all
the far and the near things. The name First proves that Allah is the
ancient most and the name Last proves His being the Perpetual and
the Eternal. His farness is the proof of His height and greatness and
His nearness is the proof of His closeness and companionship. Then
the verse ends with the sentence which shows that His Knowledge
encompasses all the events of the past, present and future. Not an
iota of anything of the earth and the heavens is beyond His
Knowledge. In this way, this verse describes that the Grace of Allah
encompasses all the existence of all the creatures. The whole
universe lies in His Grip in such a manner as a mustard seed lies in
the grip ofa man. Nothing lies beyond His reach. In between these
Attributes only the word ‘and’ has occurred although all these are
the Attributes of the same One Who has been praised. This has
happened only for emphasis and firmness, because ‘and’ comes to

53
render the first attribute as proven and firm. Its utility becomes greater
on account of the fact that it has occurred between Attributes that are in
contrast to each other. It is inconceivable that to be qualified with these
Attributes is doubtful; apparently the “firstness” negates to “lastness”
and so also “farness” “nearness.” That is why the illusion of denial has
been removed by the emphasis of ‘and’.

Allah said: ‏ىس‎ keene ae 4G ete

KEV MET EIS >

“And _ put your trust (O Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ in the Ever
Living One Who dies not.” (25:58).

This verse is for the affirmation of some names and Attributes. It
includes affirmation of His Name ‘Living,’ and negation of death, which
is in contradiction of life. We have already described that Allah ‏سبحانه‎ is
living with life and this is an indispensable quality of His Self. It is for
this reason that there is no death or decline for Him. His Life is the most
perfect and for this reason the proof of His life is of the highest order
whose negation is the contradiction of the perfection of life. The rest of
the verses mention His Attribute of knowledge and affirm its derivatives
such as His being the Knower or that He knows or that He encompasses
everything by knowledge, etc.

Knowledge is the Attribute of Allah the Exalted and the
Magnificent. Through this He knows the realities of all that is to be
known. Nothing is obscure to Him.

The word Al-Hakeem is derived from A/-Hikmah. This signifies the
One from Whom only correct acts are performed by the words and
deeds. No useless and false move takes place by Him. On the other
hand whatever He creates or orders, remains under His obedience.
It has also been said that He is ‘One Who makes things firm.’ That
is why there is found no variation and deficiency in whatever He
creates, nor is there any disturbance and shakiness in His Plan.

The word AlKhabeer is derived from Al-Khibrah which means perfect
knowledge, certain and detailed encompassing of things and the access of His
Knowledge to the obscure and minute experiences and meanings of things.

54
Allah’s Knowledge encompasses all things

سه ‎a3‏ لت ال و1 5 0
4< دن مدو ‎“ar‏

aE LAY €: ‘sola eS Lyd Busy

‎AAA HG dys, 4) KIC‏ اليه لدي

‎Allah said: “He knows that which goes into the earth and that which
comes forth from it, and that which descends from the heaven and
that which ascends to it.” (Surah Saba’, 34:1, 2); He said: “And with
Him are the Keys of the Ghaib (all that is hidden), none knows them
but He. And he knows whatever there is in (or on) the earth and in
the sea; not a leaf falls, but He knows it. There is not a grain in the
darkness of the earth nor anything fresh or dry, but is written in a
Clear Record”. (Surah Al-An‘am, 6:59) And Allah said: “And no
female conceives or gives birth, but with His Knowledge.” (Surah Al-
Fatir, 35:11) And He says: “That you may know that Allah has power
over all things, and that Allah surrounds (comprehends) all things in
(His) Knowledge.” (Surah At-Talag, 65: 12); And He says, “Verily,
Allah is the All-Provider, Owner of Power, —the Most Strong.”
(Surah Adh-Dhariyat, 51:58).

‎Allah «t— has mentioned some such things in these Qur’anic
verses which relate to His Knowledge. He aims at imparting
information that His Knowledge is so perfect and encompassing
that no creature can approach it. Thus He said that He knows all
about grain, seed, water, insects and minerals that lie in the earth.
Likewise the crops, the trees, the flowing streams, and useful

‎55
minerals which come out of the earth, are all known to Him.
Similarly Allah knows all about the snow, hail, rains, lightning, and
the angels who descend, and the human acts which go up, and the
flying birds that soar in the sky. He has also mentioned that the keys
of the Unseen are with Him about which no one knows except
Him. The word Mafaatihul-Ghaib (Keys to the Unseen) has been
explained to its treasures and it has also been said that this signifies
its means and media which approach to Him.

The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has explained it like this:

es yee

SEG BE ‏تستكيب‎ NU JE 6555 GOAT at Ay LT URS ast

“The Keys of the Unseen are five in number which no one
knows except Allah”. After that the Prophet ‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ J.)
recited the following: “Verily, Allah! With Him (Alone) is the
knowledge of the Hour, He sends down the rain, and knows
that which is in the wombs. No person knows what he will
earn tomorrow, and no person knows in what land he will die.
Verily, Allah is All-Knower, All-Aware (of things).” (Surah
Luqman, 31:34)

The last two Qur’anic verses show that Allah st is the Owner of
such a knowledge which is His Attribute and exists with His Self.
The Mu‘tazilah"! have a difference of opinion in this matter and
deny His Attributes. Some of them say that He is the Knower and

١ ALMu‘tazilah: They deny the Attributes of Allah like Jahmiyah, and believe
in Qadar (destiny) that acts of slaves have been created already for them, same as
Qadariyah say. They deny the Vision of Allah on the Day of Judgement. They
make obligatory for Allah to give reward of punishment. They prefer
discernment against the traditions. They are the followers of Wasil bin ‘Ala who
separated from the companionship of Hasan Al-Basri. There are 20 groups of Al-
Mu ‘tazilah. Their original creeds are still found these days.

56

the Able by virtue of His Self and some have done explanation from
the negative meanings of His Names. They say that ‘Aleem

(Knower) means that He is not unaware of anything and Qadeer
(Able) means that He is not helpless from doing anything.

These Qur’dnic verses constitute a decisive argument against the
Mu 'tazilah, Allah «~~ has said in these verses that His Knowledge
is all-encompassing even to the extent of knowing every female’s
pregnancy and the time of birth, abortion as to when and how. He
has also stated that His general authority is related to everything
that is possible and His Knowledge encompasses all things. Imam
Abdul Aziz Al-Makki has aptly remarked in his book Al-Heyada
while discussing with Mu‘tazili Bishr Al-Mareesi on the issue of
knowledge that:

“Allah the Revered and Magnificent has not praised any angel
close to Him, any Prophet sent by Him, and any real believer
in a way that He negates being ignorant, and in a way that it
proves His Knowledge. But He has rather praised them by
proving that they have knowledge and this negates ignorance
of them. Thus one who proved knowledge, negates ignorance;
but one who negated ignorance did not prove knowledge.”
(Al-Heyada, ‏.م‎ 30)
A rational argument in favour of the Knowledge of Allah is that it is
impossible to invent things out of ignorance, for, in the invention of
things His intention plays a part and intention is indispensable for
the desired knowledge. That is why Allah «t said:

5

“Should not He Who has created know? And He is the Most

Kind and Courteous (to His slaves), All-Aware (of
everything).” (Surah Al-Mulk, 67:14).

And also for the fact that the creatures have such remarkable skill,
maturity and minutiae that it provides an argument in favour of the
knowledge of the Creator, for without knowledge it is impossible to
have its Sudoor (emergence).

57
And also because among creatures there are people who are
learned; and knowledge is a perfect attribute, so if Allah is not the
Knower then many among the creatures will become greater
knowers than Him.

And every kind of knowledge of the creature is derived from the
Creator, and one who gives this talent is entitled to be in possession
of it. How can one give a thing to anyone which he does not possess
himself? The philosophers have denied the knowledge of Allah
about parts. They say that He knows the things in their totality in a
positive manner. The essence of their statement is that He does not
know anything, for whatever exists in the external form is all
partial. The extremists of the Qadariyah!"! sect deny that Allah
knows the acts of His slaves before they are performed. They have
done so, because according to them, such a knowledge of Allah
leads to fatalism. But such a statement of these people is false from
the standpoint of every religion.

Allah says, “Verily, Allah is the All-Provider...”. In this verse
Allah’s Name has been mentioned as the Provider. The word in
Arabic is Razzdq formed by the word Rizg. Ar-Razzéq means One
Who gives His slaves livelihood constantly and in abundance.
Whatever gainful thing reaches them from Allah ‏سبحانه‎ is Rizg
whether it is lawful or unlawful, in as much as He has made it a
livelihood and provision for his slaves. Allah says:

CA oL SMELLS >
“And tall date-palms, with ranged clusters. A provision for
(Allah’s) slaves.” (Surah Qaf, 50:10,11).

" AL-Qadariyah: They area Al-Mu ‘tazilah and all those who agreed with them.
Their belief is taht Allah the Exalted has enjoined the slaves to do good and
forbided them from evil. He doesn’t know His obedient slaves from among
disobedients but after committing the good or bad deeds. They are opponent of
Al-Jabariyah,

58

He also says: Gih5 3, ‏راسد‎ «
“And in the heaven is your provision, and that which you are
promised.” (Surah Adh-Dhériyat, 51:22).

But if there is permission for its use it, will be regarded as lawful,
otherwise prohibited. However, all is livelihood. The fact that the
noun clause has been employed with a Proper noun and there is the
conjunction of Huwa (He) between both the clauses of the sentence,
means to explain that to provide livelihood to the slaves is specific
to Allah.

It is narrated by Ibn Mas‘ud:

toga 58153 ‏نا الاق‎ Jy ay ‏الل‎ 25
“The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ told me Allah says (in a Hadith
Qudsi - a Hadith received by the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم‎
directly from Allah): ‘I Alone am the 202269 (Provider) and

Owner of stable power’.”

Dhul Quwwa means Powerful in the sense of noun ‘Qawi’, but this
sense is in the superlative degree which shows that in the Power of

Allah there is no flaw or defect.

Al-Mateen is the Name of Allah which has been derived from
Mataanah. Ibn Abbas has explained it in the sense of intense, ie.,

strong.

59
Affirmation of Hearing, Seeing
and Intention for Allah

0

3 sascha this tisha Sasi

Allah says, “There is nothing it like unto ‘om, and He is the All-Hearer,
the All-Seer.” (Surah Ash-Shura, 42:11) and says, “Verily, how
excellent is the teaching which He (Allah) gives you! Truly, Allah is
Ever All-Hearer, All-Seer.” (Surah An-Nisa’, 4:58) and says, “It was
better for you to say when you entered your garden: ‘That which
Allah wills (will come to pass)! There is no power but with Allah’.”
(Surah Al-Kahf, 18:39). “If Allah had willed, they would not have
fought against one another, but Allah does what He likes.”(Surah Al-
Bagarah, 2:253 )

The Statement of Allah “There is nothing like unto Him and He is
the All-Hearer, the All-Seer’, negates the resemblance of all other
things to Allah and then mentions two of His Attributes—Hearing
and Seeing. But the negation of likeness does not mean negation of
the Attributes as is claimed by the Mu ‘attilah and argued falsely by
them. It rather means proving the Attributes of Allah by negating
their likeness with those of the creatures. Allamah Ibn Al-Qaiyim
says:

“In the Qur’anic verse ‘There is nothing like unto Him’, Allah
wants to negate that anything is His partner, or a god, or
deserving of worship and reverence as is done by the
polytheists. Nor does He mean the negation of His Perfect
Attributes, nor negating to His creatures the heights of the
perfection of Scriptures, communications with His
Messengers and seeing Him clearly by the faithful with the

60
inward eye. Just as you see the sun and moon while in the
waking state.”

As-Samee* means the One Who hears all the sounds however hidden
they are. He hears the secrets and the whispers also. Allah’s
Attribute of Hearing is not similar to the hearing of the creatures.

Al-Baseer as an attribute of Allah meaning that He sees all persons,
colours and all tangible things however fine and remote they are.
No curtain or impediment can obstruct His Vision. This word
proves the attribute of sight for Allah in the most befitting manner
for Him. Abu Daud contains a Hadith narrated by Abu Hurairah
(ce ‏رضي الله‎ (:

woh ‏عَلَى‎ ogy ‏فَوَضَعَ‎ die CEE SYD ‏هذه الآية:‎ i 0

“When the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ recited the Qur’a nic verse:
“Truly, Allah is Ever All-Hearer, All-Seer” he put his thumb
on his ears and the fingers close to the thumb on his eyes.”

The Hadith means that Allah hears through His Ears and sees
through His Eyes. This Hadith is an argument against those Ash ‘ari
who explain the Hearing of Allah in terms of the knowledge of
what is heard, and purport to mean by seeing the knowledge of what
is to be seen. This is a wrong explanation. A blind man is certain of
the existence of the sky but he does not see it; the deaf knows about
the existence of sound but does not hear it.

Allah says, “It was better for you to say...” These verses prove two
Attributes of Allah—Intention and Will. There are a large number
of texts about them. Ash ‘ari prove an eternal intention which is
related to all the events that were to take place in the beginning of
the eternity. In this way it implies that will comes after intention.
But Mut‘azilah while keeping within the confines of their creed
deny the attribute of intention also, and say that Allah makes a fresh
intention which does not imply an occasion. This implies that the
attribute exists by itself. But this is the falsest notion.

61
The Ahlul Haqq say that intention is of two types:

1. Intention related to do and create. This is synonymous to will.
Both these are related to whatever Allah wants to do or create.
Whenever He intended for any thing and wanted it to happen, it
came into being after His Intention; as Allah says,

“Verily, His Command, when He intends a thing, is only that
He says to it, ‘Be!’and it is!” (Surah As-Saffat, 36:82).

It has been stated in an authentic Hadith:

“Whatever Allah wills, that takes place; and whatever He
does not will, that does not take place.”

2. Intention related to Shari‘ah: This is about those commands of
Allah which He gives to His slaves according to His Will and
Pleasure, as He says:

“Allah intends for you ease, and He does not want to make
things difficult for you.” (Surah Bagarah, 2:185).

Both types of intentions are not dependent on each other. Rather,
each of them sometimes relates to such issues with which the other
has nothing to do. Among both these, there exists a casual
relationship regarding their being general or specific. One intention,
related to do and create, is general in respect of the fact that it
relates to such matters that He does not like or it is not agreeable to
Him such as Kufr and sin, and is specific in respect of the fact that it
does not relate to the Faith of the Kafir and the obedience of the
corrupt.

The intention related to Shari ‘ah is general because it is lined to all
the precepts laid down whether they are followed or not followed.

62
They are particular from the standpoint that the happening of any
would-be intention is sometimes not commanded.

In sum, both the intentions are sometimes together such as the Faith
of the Mumin and the obedience of the obedient, but the would-be
intention gets separated such as the Kufr of the Kafir and the
sinfulness of the sinful. And the Shari ‘ah intention gets separated
such as the Faith of the Kafir and the obedience of the sinful.

Allah says:

oar

ELST >
“It was better for you to say, when you entered your garden:

‘That which Allah wills (will come to pass)! There is no
power but with Allah” (Surah Al-Kahf,18:39).

This Statement of Allah related to the conversation of a Mu’min
man with his Kafir companion who had two orchards.The Mu’min
companion exhorts him that he should thank Allah for His favours
and leave them to the Will of Allah, and feel afraid of the Power
and Might of Allah, for the power lies in the Hands of Allah.

Allah says, “And if Allah had willed...” This relates to the
dissensions between the followers of the Messengers of Allah that
took place out of jealousies and hostilities. This was according to
the Will of the Mighty and the Magnificent Allah. If He had not
willed so, such things would not have happened. But He willed and
such things happened.

63
a ‏عه‎ of Love and Justice

od ‏لل‎ ee,

Aga ak ieatheemrecadaaey > is 4g
Ka ‏ركني‎ < Og Chat stan ec is fic ke
{2 arene ana : ‏ف لتنا» ( الل‎ 000
2 fogs ta ibaa
SEN BSD 4 ‏بن مَرَسُوسٌ‎ AE is ‏أت يتين‎ dA

ISI

Allah says: “Lawful to you (for food) are all the beasts of cattle except
that which will be announced to you (therein), game (also) being
unlawful when you assume Ihram for Hajj or ‘Umrah (pilgrimage).
Verily, Allah commands that which He wills”. (Surah Al-Ma’idah,
5:1) “And whomsoever Allah wills to guide, He opens his breast to
Islam, and whomsoever He wills to send astray, He makes his breast
closed and constricted, as if he is climbing up to the sky.” (Surah Al-
An‘am, 6:125); “And do good, Truly, Allah loves Al-Muhsinun (the
good-doers).” (Surah Al-Bagarah, 2:195) “... and be equitable. Verily!
Allah loves those who are equitable.” (Surah Al-Hujurat, 49:9); “So
long, as they are true to you, stand true to them, Verily Allah loves A/-
Muttageen (the Pious and righteous)”. (Surah At-Taubah, 9:7)
“Truly, Allah loves those who turn unto Him in repentance and loves
those who purify themselves.” (Surah Al-Bagarah, 2:222); “Say (O
Muhammad ,L., ‏على الله عليه‎ ) ‘If you (really) love Allah then follow me,
Allah will love you.’” (Surah Al-Imran, 3:31); “Allah will bring the
people whom He will love and they will love Him.” (Surah Al-

0

64

Ma’idah, 5:54); “Verily, Allah loves those who fight in His cause in
rows (ranks) as if they were a solid structure.” (Surah As-Saff, 61:4);
“And is Oft-Forgiving, full of love (towards the pious who are real
true believers of Islamic Monotheism).” (Surah Al-Buruj, 85:14).

Allah says: “And whomsoever... up to the sky.” This verse shows
that providing guidance and leaving strayed are the volitions of
Allah and whomsoever He wishes to give guidance, that is, wants to
bestow him with revelations and assistance, He opens up his heart
for revelation and fills it up with radiance which keeps it open, as
has been stated in the Hadith. And those whom Allah wants to leave
strayed and humiliated, He turns their breast extremely narrow and
the light of Faith cannot penetrate into it. Such a man has been
likened to one who is ascending into the heaven. These verses
contain the affirmation of those acts of Allah which take place from
His Attribute of love. The love of Allah for some people, some acts
and some manners is an Attribute established with His Self. These
are active voluntary Attributes which are related to His Will.

Out of His powerful Will, He likes certain things as against certain
other things. The Ash ‘ari and the Mu ‘tazilah deny the attribute of
love. Their contention is that it creates an illusion of shortcoming,
for among the creatures, love indicates an inclination towards the
person who is the object of love or derives pleasure from that
person. The Ash‘ari turn the attribute of love into the attribute of
intention and say that the love of Allah with His slaves is nothing
more than the fact that He intends to give them respect and reward.

They hold similar views about the Attributes of agreement, wrath
and aversion, etc. According to them all these are in the sense of
reward and retribution.

The Mu'‘tazilah do not accept that the Attributes of intentions are
established with the Self of Allah. They do the explanations of love
in the sense of the spirit of virtue which is due on Allah in favour of
such worshippers. Its basis for them lies in the belief that to reward
the obedient and to punish the sinful is due on Allah.

65
Ahlul-Hagq prove that the love, worthy of Allah is a real attribute
of Him. According to them there is no place in it for defect and
similitude. Ah/ul-Hagq prove that Allah has intention of rewarding
the beloved worshipper and giving him respect by way of an
implication of being His beloved worshippers. What answer will the
deniers of love give to that Hadith which has been narrated by Abu
Hurairah in which the Prophet (ploy ‏(صلى الله عليه‎ said:

‎Spe‏ الله 154 ‎site est‏ قَالَ لِجِبْرِئِلَ ‎ae‏ ه السام ‎“et 656 oi J i‏ قَالَ:
‎tale :‏ فل ‎J i en‏ :
‎“Indeed when the Mighty and Magnificent Allah loves a slave,‏
‎He tells Gabriel: ‘I love that particular person, You should also‏
‎love him.’ Then Gabriel says to the inhabitants of the heaven,‏
‎“Your Lord loves that particular person and so all of you love‏
‎him.’ Then the inhabitants of the heaven also love him, and he‏
‎is given recognition on the earth. And when Allah keeps‏

‎animus with someone then the same thing happens in this case
also.”

‎This Hadith has been reported both in Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

‎Allah says “And do good...” He has commanded here for goodness
in general, particularly in connection with providing the sanctioned
livelihood. Goodness in Nafagah (livelihood) takes place in
spending wealth and by preventing hoarding, or following the
middle path between spending and hoarding. This is an important
command stated by Allah in Surah Al-Furgqan (the Criterion)
(25:67)

‎Muslim has reported in his Sahih a narrative from Shaddad bin Aus

‎said:‏ (صلى الله عليه وسلم) ‎that the Prophet‏ (رضي الله عنه)
‎Op‏ الله ‎cs‏ الإحْسَانَ عَلَى ‎wads Oy Aid LS wis OB gt YS‏

‎a i Sich tots asses

“Allah has made it compulsory to do good for everything.
When you have to behead a person do it in a good manner,
and when you slaughter an animal do it well. You must keep
your knife sharpened and the animal to be slaughtered must
have been kept comfortably.”

Allah says, “Indeed Allah loves the good-doers”. This command for
doing good is causative, for, when people will come to know that
goodness is the cause of the love of Allah they will try to obey Him.

In another verse Allah says, “...and be equitable” which means
doing justice at the time of settling disputes between two hostile
groups of the believers. The word is derived from Qist which means
apportioning equally. One of the Names of Allah is A/-Mugsit also.
In the noble verse, justice has been raised above nobility and this is
a means of inviting the love of Allah.

Allah says, “So long as they are true to you, stand true to them...”
which means that when there is a covenant between you and some
other persons such as those with whom you made a treaty near the
Inviolable House of worship then you remain firm on your promise
till the time they remain firm in relation to you. Allah has again
stated the nature of this command in the verse: “Verily, Allah loves
Al-Muttageen (pious and righteous persons)” i.e. are afraid of
Him in everything, and one of these is not to violate promises.

Allah says, “Truly, Allah loves those ...” In this verse Allah gives the
tidings of His love for those slaves who are of the following two
kinds:

1. Repentant: Those people who repent a great deal and turn to
Allah with abundance of penitence, and because of which they
become purged and purified of open and secret sins.

2. Purified: Those people'who overstress their efforts in achieving
purity, that is, by performing Wudu to obtain cleanliness or by
bathing to remove pollutions. It has also been said that the better
among the purified are those who avoid having coitus with their

67
wives during their menstruation period or avoid having anal sex
with them. It is better to lay down this word as a general rule.

Allah says, “If you (really) love Allah...” The context of this verse is
narrated as follows: Some people claimed that they loved Allah.
Allah sent this verse for their trial. In this verse Allah laid down the
obedience of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ as a pre-condition, for this
love could be attained only by accepting his guidance and the grace
of his obedience.

Allah says, “And He is Oft-Forgiving, full of love.” This verse
mentions two Names of Allah which are included among the best
names. i.e. Al-Ghafoor and Al-Wadood.

Al-Ghafoor is derived from the root Ghafr which means the One
Who connives at His wrongdoing worshipper and is lenient in
seizing them. The real meaning of Ghafr is to cover. As is Mighfar
for covering the head.

Al-Wadood is derived from the root Wudd which means pure love
and refinement. This word either means One Who has enormous
love for those who are obedient to Him and He remains close to
them through His help and cooperation, or, it means that His
obligation is so great that His creature is bound to love Him,
worship Him and recite hymns in His praise.

68
The Attributes of Mercy, Pleasure,
Wrath, cus’ Coming, etc.

bE. 25> + ‏َولَهُ: 2 اقل ال#صس‎
bee. mean me ‏ؤس‎ Seas) 2 ic es eo
‏كيت‎ > SG ‏س1‎ Hae Hoe ta

CE Gch EG > 4 dips, 1,25 it ET GAT ah
ESSE Hap € kes tical ee SG Ce

SN ‏مِنّ‎ Sb ‏ف‎ it aaa ‏أن‎ Vi ‏وَقو َوْلهُ: : « هَل يَظرُونَ‎ KOE ‏ما لا‎
1 NAH SF SY fe 2 ON dite
462k si a5 0666 BY E> Css ‏بنش اي‎

“te
6

وي

١-2

And He said, “In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most
Merciful.” (Surah Al-Fatihah, 1:1); “Our Lord! You comprehend all
things in mercy and knowledge,” (Surah Ghafir, 40:7); “And He is
Most Merciful to the believers.” (Surah Al-Ahzab, 33:43); “And My
mercy embraces all things.” (Surah Al-A ‘raf, 7:156); “Your Lord has
written Mercy for Himself.” (Surah Al-An‘am, 6:54); “He is the Oft-
Forgiving, the Most Merciful.” (Surah Yunus,10:107); “But Allah is
the Best to guard, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show
mercy.” (Surah Yusuf, 12:64); and He said, “Allah well-pleased with
them, and they with Him.” (Surah Al-Baiyinah, 98:8); “And whoever

69
kills a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell to abide therein,
and the Wrath and the Curse of Allah are upon him,” (Surah An-
Nisa, 4:93); and Allah said, “That is because they followed that which
angered Allah, and hated that which pleased Him.” (Surah
Muhammad, 47:28); “So when they angered Us, We punished them ”
(Surah Az-Zukhruf, 43:55) and He said, “But Allah was averse to their
being sent forth, so He made them lag behind,” (Surah At-Tauba,
9:46); and He said, “Most hateful it is with Allah that you say that

which you do not do.” (Surah As-Saff, 61:3); and He said, “Do they
then wait for anything other than that Allah should come to them in
the shadows of the clouds and the angels? (Then) the case would be
already judged.” (Surah Al-Bagarah, 2:210); “Do they then wait for
anything other than that the angels should come to them, or that your
Lord should come, or that some of the Signs of your Lord should
come (i.e. portents of the Hour e.g., arising of the sun from the west)!”
(Surah Al-An‘am, 6:158); “Nay! When the earth is ground to powder,
and your Lord comes with the angels in rows.” (Surah Al-Fajr, 89:21,
22); “And (remember) the Day when the heaven shall be rent asunder
with clouds, and the angels will be sent down, with a grand descending.”
(Surah Al-Furgan, 25:25).

In Allah’s saying, “Bismillah-ir-Rahman-ir-Raheem” and also in the
verses that follow it, two Names of Allah, Ar-Rahman and Ar-
Raheem, have been affirmed. They also affirm the Attributes of
Mercy and Knowledge.

Ar-Rahman argues for the attribute of the Self of Allah and Ar-
Raheem for His active attribute. The Asha ‘irah and Mu ‘tazilah deny
the attribute of Mercy. They claim that this shows emaciation and
weakness in the creature, and the one who is the object of mercy
feels a sense of sorrow. However, this is the worst ignorance,
Mercy is from the strong on the weak. Thus emaciation and
weakness are not inevitable. It rather happens sometimes during a
state of extreme domination and control—a strong man is merciful
on his small child as also on his aged parents and infirm people.

70
Emaciation and weakness have no bearing on mercy when these are
condemned Attributes while Allah has Himself qualified His Self
with mercy, and praised His friends who are qualified with it, and
commanded them also to go on leaving a testament in favour of it
for the next generations.

Allah says, “Our Rabb (Lord)! You comprehend all things in mercy
and knowledge” (Surah Ghafir, 40:7). This is a description of the
statements made of the Throne bearers and of the angels around it
who seek Allah’s support for the faithful through their prayers to
the Ruboobiyah (Lordship) of Allah, the extent of His Knowledge
and His Mercy. This is from amongst those best means through
which one can expect the prayer to be granted. The real sentence
will be like this: Your Mercy and Your Knowledge are predominant
over everything. The mercy of the sacred Allah is common to every
one in the world be he a believer, or unbeliever, a pious man or a
wicked man. On the Day of Judgement it will be special for those
who ward-off evil, as Allah says:

“T shall ordain for those who are the Muttaqun and give Zakat
(obligatory charity)” (Surah A ‘raf, 7:156).

And Allah says, “Your Lord has written Mercy for Himself” (Surah
Al-An‘am, 6:54). He has made it compulsory for Himself by way of
generosity and obligation; none other has enjoined it upon Him.

It is transmitted from Abu Hurairah in the Sahihain:

“When Allah created the universe, He wrote a book which He

keeps with Him on the Throne that His Mercy takes
precedence on His Wrath.”

Allah says, “But Allah is the Best to guard,” (Surah Yusuf, 12:64).
The words Haafiz and Hafeez are derived from the root Hifz. Its

7
meaning is protection. The One Who protects His worshippers in a
general way, provides them with livelihood, protects them from the
causes of distress and destruction. He also protects their actions and
keeps count of their statements. He takes special care of His friends.
He saves them from being involved in sins and keeps them safe
from the intrigues of Satan. In other words, He guards them from all
that harms them in all the affairs of the world and religion.”

Allah says, “Allah well-pleased with them ...” These verses prove
some of the active Attributes of Allah such as pleasure, wrath,
condemnation, aversion, regret, etc.

According to the Ah/ul-Hagq, these are the real Attributes of Allah
in the manner that suits His Majesty and are free from similitude of
His creatures. These do not imply those things that are implied in
the case of the creature. Thus the Asha‘irah and the Mu ‘tazilah
have no proof for their negation. Their notion is that if Allah is
qualified with these attributes, it will be required that He has these
Attributes exactly as they are in His creatures. By entertaining this
notion for their Lord, they were thrown into the quagmire of denial
and negation. The Asha‘irah associate these Attributes to intention.
According to them Ridaa means the intention to reward, and the
wrath etc. And Sukht means intention to inflict doom.

And the Mu‘tazilah divert these Attributes towards the reward and
punishment itself.

Allah says, “Allah well-pleased with them and they with Him.” This
verse mentions the relationship of love and pleasure that exists
between Allah and His friends. The pleasure of Allah with the
Auliya’ (friends) is the greatest among all the favours that He has
bestowed. He says:

“And the pleasure of Allah is the greatest thing.”
And the pleasure of the slaves with Allah is that each one keeps

72
himself agreed with Him according to his station in life: and he
remains so pleased with his station that he believes that the amount
of goodness with which he has been favoured is such that no one
has been favoured with that amount of goodness. And this will take
place in Paradise.

Allah says, “And whoever kills a believer intentionally...” By saying
“believer’, He excepted the killing of the Kafir; and by
intentionally, He means deliberately. In other words such a killing
has been excepted in which one kills a person whom one regards
innocent and which creates the notion that the death of the person
took place through him. Killing by mistake has been excepted by
this.

“Forever” means one that lives forever. It has also been maintained
that Khulood means staying too long; and La ‘n means cursing and
keeping away from the favours of Allah. The cursed is that man on
whom curse has been proved or one on whom cursing has been
invoked. The Ulama differ regarding these verses and thus they
marshal arguments that the repentance of the one who has
committed a murder intentionally will not be accepted and he will
always remain in Hell. And this goes against the Statement of
Allah:

“Verily, Allah forgives not that partners should be set up with

Him in worship, but He forgives except that (anything else) to

whom He pleases” (Surah An-Nisa’, 4:48).

The Ulama have given various explanations for it.

1. This retribution is for that person who considers the intentional
murder of a believer justified.

2. This retribution is for that person who is deserving of it with
the possibility that he will not receive the retribution, and that he
does righteous deeds and is deserving of rewards. Even then if he
gets the retribution his bad deed will be given preference.

713
3. This verse was revealed by way of warning and rebuke and on
account of the gravity of the matter.

4. Khulood means staying for a long time.

The statement of Ibn Abbas and some others is that the repentance
of the man who commits murder deliberately is not accepted. So
much so that Ibn Abbas says that this verse is the last verse which
has not been cancelled by any other verse. The real thing ig that a
murderer has to meet three claims: (1) the Right of Allah, (2) the
right of the successors of the victim, and (3) the right of the victim.
The Right of Allah is dropped by repentance. The right of the
successors is dropped by paying them the blood-money in the world
or by obtaining forgiveness. Albeit the right of the murdered person
is not dropped until he meets the murderer on the Day of
Judgement, and placing his head in the hand of the murderer does
not say, ‘O Allah! Ask him about why did he murder me?”

Allah says: “So when they angered Us...” Asf means severe sadness
and severe wrath, while revenge means punishment derived from
Nugma- indignation, grudge etc.

Allah says, “Do they then wait...” These verses have destended to
confirm two active Attributes of Allah, that is, the Attribute of
Ityaan and the attribute of Maji’, in other words the Attributes of
Allah about His coming on the Day of Judgement. The Faith of the
Ahlus Sunnah in these Attributes is based on the fact that they are
real and are remote from such amplifications as are essentially
Ithaad and Ta‘teel.

It appears appropriate that we present here the statement of the
exponent of Tajahhum and Ta ‘teel of this time. We mean Zahid Al-
Kauthari . He writes on the footnotes of the Kitab-ul-Asma was-
Sifat by Al-Baihaqi,

“Az-Zamakhshari said that Allah will bring doom through clouds
from which people will expect mercy. This doom will be

74
tremendously horrendous and exciting.” Imam Fakhruddin Ar-Razi
says, “They will receive the command of Allah.”

The statement that Al-Kauthari has quoted from his preceding
Ulama who believed in Ta‘teel suffers from a great deal of
looseness in Ta’weel and Tashreeh. However, the verses are lucid
on their subjects in which there is no scope for these interpretations.
The first verse gives information to those who insist on Kufr and
follow the path of animus and Satan that they have only to wait for
Allah Who will come in the clouds to judge between them. This
will happen on the Day of Judgement. That is why He says after it
that the issues will be judged. The second verse is also perfectly
clear. The amplification of the word ‘to come’ in the sense of
command or doom, only on the ground that the word /tyaan has
been used in some other verses for the coming of the angels or of
others, is not possible.

Allah says, “And your Lord comes with the angels in rows.” It is not
possible to construe this verse in the sense of coming of doom for it
means the coming of Allah on the Day of Judgement to judge the
issues. At that time the angels will be standing lines up in respect
and awe of Allah. At the time of His arrival, the sky will be rent
with the clouds as is revealed from the last verse. Allah will come,
will descend, and will be close. He rose over His Throne and
separated from the creatures. These are the real acts of Allah, and to
claim that these are appearances, tantamount to denying Allah’s
Power over action. To believe that this coming will be like the
coming of the creature, and this is metaphorical, leads to denial and
negation.

75
Affirmation of the Face, the Eyes, and

the Hands for Allah
BEY BG RGIS sis

IQ ‏ممع‎ eee

DD ‏بل يداه مبسوطة‎
And He said, “And the Face of your Lord full of Majesty and Honour
will abide forever.” (Surah Ar-Rahman, 55:27); “Everything will
perish save His Face.” (Surah Al-Qasas, 28:88); He said, “What
prevents you from prostrating yourself to the one whom I have
created with both My Hands.” (Surah Sad, 38:75); “The Jews say:
‘Allah’s Hand is tied up (i.e. He does not give and spend of His
Bounty).’ Be their hands tied up and be they accursed for what they
uttered. Nay, both His Hands are widely outstretched. He spends (of
His Bounty) as He wills.” (Surah Al-Ma’idah, 5:64); and Allah says
“So wait patiently )0 Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ for the Decision of
your Lord, for verily, you are under Our Eyes,” (Surah At-Tur,
52:48); “And We carried him on a (ship) made of planks and nails.
Floating under Our Eyes, a reward for him who had been rejected!”
(Surah Al-Qamar, 54: 13,14); “And I endued you with love from Me,
in order that you may be brought up under My Eye.” (Surah Ta-Ha,
20:39),

Both these verses (i.e. 55:27 and 28:88) mention the attribute of
Face. There are numerous passages in the Qur’4n and the Hadith in
the affimation of Face which negate those amplifications of the
Mu‘attilah which they do in the explanation of Wajh (countenance)

76
by interpreting it in terms of side, direction, reward and being. The
creed of the Ah/ul-Hagqq is that countenance is an attribute separated
from Self. By proving this attribute it is not implied that Allah is
composed of organs as is the statement of the Mujassima""’. It is
rather an Attribute of Allah which is fit for His Self. This does not
resemble any countenance, nor is there a face like it.

The Mu‘attilah have argued from both these verses that what is
meant by countenance is the Self, for in His eternality and non-
extinction, countenance has no special position.

We disagree with this argumentation for if there is no real face for
Allah then to use this word in the sense of Self will also not be
justified. This is because when a word has been formed to express
one meaning, it is not possible to use it for other meanings unless of
course the real meaning is proved for the object so qualified, and it
is possible for the mind to be diverted from the one which is
implied to what is intended to be implied, from which its
appearance can be removed by any other way. It may be stated that
the word Baga is related to Wajh, and from this the eternality of the
Self becomes implied, instead of saying that Wajh has been
mentioned in an absolute way in the sense of meaning. Al-Baihaqi
has mentioned by quoting Al-Khattaabi that when Allah by saying

“And the Face of your Lord full of Majesty and Honour will
abide forever.” (55:27)

to His Self and as for the attribute of countenance He did not
mention countenance in lieu of anything. ‘Might and Glory’ are
Attributes of countenance and countenance is an attribute of Self.

How is the Ta’weel of countenance with Self or anything else
possible in the Hadith At-Taa ‘if. He says:

") See footnote on page No. 34

77

‘I take shelter in that radiance of Your Countenance by which
You illuminated the darknesses, etc.”

Moreover, it is narrated by Abu Moosa Al-Ash‘ari ‏رضي الله عنه‎ that the
Prophet ‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ Le) said:

! ‏سْبْحاتُ وَجْهِه مَا انتّهىَ‎ C5 SN ‏التو أ الا لَوْ كَسَفَهُ‎ dl

5000000
‏يه بصره من‎
“His cover is Radiance or Fire. If He uncovers it then the

brightness of His Countenance will burn up the creature up to
the end of His sight.”

Allah says: “What prevents ...”. In both the verses occurring
afterwards there is affirmation of the real attribute of both His
Hands suited to His Stature. In the first verse, He is rebuking Satan
when he had refused to lie prostrate before Adam whom Allah had
made with His own Hands. It is not possible for us to interpret
‘Hands’ in the sense of power, for Allah created all things including
Satan by His power. This gives no distinctiveness to Adam with
which he could be distinguished.

In a Hadith reported by Abdullah bin ‘Amr (c+ ‏(رضي الله‎ it is
mentioned:

“Allah created three things with His own Hands. He created
Adam with His own Hands: He wrote the Torah with His

Hands and planted the Garden of Eden with His Hands.”

Special mention of these three things, despite the fact that they
came into existence along with other creatures through His Power,
argues in favour of an additional feature in their creation.

Yadain (two hands) along with the grammatical form meant for two
is recognised for real hands alone. It has never been used in the
sense of power and favour. It will not be justified to say that Allah

78
created them with His two powers or two favours, because to
construe from hands the sense of power, favour or any other sense
than these, is possible only for such a one who really possesses two
hands. This cannot be stated for the wind that this is its hand or it is
the hand of water.

The argument of the Mu‘attilah that in some verses hand has been
mentioned in singular number and in some in plural, is not valid, for
some work is done by both the hands but according to usage the
hand is mentioned in singular such as when it is said, ‘I saw with
my eye,’ or ‘I heard with my own ear,’ but what is really meant is
that I saw with my both eyes or heard with my both ears. Moreover
sometimes a singular pronoun stands for the plural. Such as Allah

says: 5
“If you two (wives of the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ , namely
‘Aishah and Hafsah ‏(رضي الله عنهما‎ turn in repentance to Allah,
(it will be better for you), your hearts are indeed so inclined
(to oppose what the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ likes); (Surah At-
Tahrim, 66:4)

Despite the fact that the Arabic grammar is against it, the meaning
understood is “two hearts.”

How can ‘hand’ be interpreted to mean power when the text proves
mentioning of palm, fingers, right and left, closing, opening, etc.
Which can happen only in the case of a real hand.

In the second verse, Allah describes a statement of the Jews in
which they found fault with Allah and (Allah forbid me) they
described an attribute of His construing to mean that His Hand is
miserly in spending. On the contrary, Allah proves liberality for His
Self, that is, His both Hands are open to grant and to be generous.
He spends as He likes. It has been mentioned in a Hadith that:

79
“The Right Hand of Allah is generous day and night and His
Generosity does not decrease by spending.”

Look, if Allah did not have real hands how would this interpretation
of keeping them open be correct?

These arguments are enough to blacken the faces of those who
falsely interpret.

Allah says, “So wait patiently ...” In the latter three verses, Allah
proves that He has Eyes with which He sees all the tangibles. This
is a real attribute of Allah in accordance with His Grace. Its

affirmation does not need constitution with fat and nerves and their
being liable to be defective.

In the sense of vision, protection and watchfulness the explanations
of the Mu ‘attilah is denial and negation.

The fact that in some texts these have been mentioned in singular
number and in others in plural, offers no argument for the negation
of these meanings. There is scope for it in the Arabic language. The
language permits the use of pronoun for plurals (three or more)
even for two things, as the use of a singular number is also made for
two. We have already referred to it in the explanation of Yadain
(hands).

The basis for deciding as to which of the meanings of eye
mentioned above should be used, is possible to determine only
when the person meant in this connection has real eyes. So, do the
Mu‘attilah mean to say that Allah is seeking to be regarded as
worthy of praise for those Attributes which He does not possess?
He is proving eyes for Himself although He is bereft of this
attribute? Or, do they want to say that to see things is not associated
with an attribute specific to His Self, but rather He sees them with
His Self just as the Mu ‘tazilah say that He is Able by virtue of His
Self and an Intender by virtue of His Self, etc. etc.

In the first of these three verses, Allah is commanding His

80
Messenger ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ that he should adopt endurance at the
behest of Allah and bear with the tortures he is receiving from his
community. With this command He is stating that he is under the
care and protection of Allah.

In the second verse, Allah is informing that when the community of
Noah (ps 4) rejected him and for this act it became necessary that
this community be doomed and hence it was overtaken by the
deluge, then Noah put himself and his companions in such a boat
which was built of big planks and nails. In Arabic, the word Dusur
is plural of Disaar which means nails and which are used to fix the
planks, That boat sailed before Allah under His watch.

In the third verse, Allah has addressed His Prophet Moses ‏(عليه السلام)‎
that He directed His love towards him, in other words, Allah
Himself loves Moses and made him beloved in the eyes of the
people also. He got him brought up under His Own Eyes and
trained him in such a way that he could be prepared to convey the
Message of Allah to the Pharoah and his community.

81
Verses of Qur’4n about Hearing and Seeing

AEA 2 ‏م‎ cP ee
‏رَوْجهها ود‎ GAS SSS Ail ‏وَقَوْلهُ: « قَدسَيَِ‎

LB ‏ليت‎ IS tl ‏صبيع‎ EID 4 Ls ‏نيم‎ ail

fase ‏شامع م‎ ote toon ‏ب 6 ي‎ eee

سبو ‎Eats Ae YT‏ ورسلا

PB ‏في ألتَِدنَ0‎ Sas OFF bre His NY TREND >» ‏وك‎

eee

And He said, “Indeed All4h has heard the statement of her (Khaulah
bint Tha‘labah) that disputes with you (0 Muhammad ‏الله عليه‎ we
‏(وسلم‎ concerning her husband (Aus bin As-Samit), and complains to
Allah. And Allah hears the argument between you both. Verily, Allah
is All-Hearer, All-Seer” (Surah Al-Mujadilah, 58:1); and He said,
“Indeed, Allah has heard the statement of those (Jews) who Say:
‘Truly, Allah is poor and we are rich’” (Surah Al-‘Imran, 3:181); and
He said, “Or do they think that We hear not their secrets and their
private counsel? (Yes We do) and Our Messengers (appointed angels
in charge of mankind) are by them, to record” (Surah Az-Zukhruf,
43:80); and He said, “Verily! I am with you both, hearing and
seeing” (Surah Ta-Ha, 20:46); “Knows he not that Allah does see
(what he does)?” (96:14); “Who sees you (O Muhammad ‏صلى الله عليه‎
‏(وسلم‎ when you stand up (alone at night for Tahajjud prayers). And
your movements among those who fall prostrate (along with you to
Allah in the five compulsory congregational prayers). Verily! He, only
He, is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower” (Surah Ash-Shu ‘ara, 26:218-
220); “And say (O Muhammad ploy ‏(صلى الله عليه‎ ‘Do deeds! Allah will
see your deeds, and (so will) His Messenger and the believers” (Surah
At-Tauba, 9:105).

At this place the author is mentioning those verses of the Qur’an in
which Allah’s Attributes of hearing and seeing have been described.

82
The attribute of hearing has been proven in five forms. This means
the real attribute through which the knowledge of sound is obtained
as we have already explained earlier.

Basar is that attribute which provides knowledge about people and
colours. Ru’yat (seeing) is necessary for it. It is narrated in the
Hadith of Abu Moosa:

يا ‎gt‏ الَامنُ! ‎ay‏ عَلَى ‎SET‏ إَِكُمْ ‎S209‏ أَصَمَ وَلأعَائبَاء وَلَكِنْ ‎OPE‏

“0 People! Take it easy. You are not calling a deaf or an
absent man. You are calling a hearing and a seeing One. The
One Whom you are calling is nearer to you than the neck of
your riding animal.”

Each of the two Attributes of hearing and seeing exists in its perfect
form. In fact Allah has condemned the polytheists for it that they
worship such things which neither hear nor see. The first verse was
revealed regarding Khaulah bint Tha‘labah ‏(رضي الله عنها)‎ - 2 lady
Companion of the Prophet ‏,(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ with whom her husband
had entered into Zihar (a practice in which a husband declares his
wife as equivalent to the back of his mother and separates her). She
came to the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ and complained against the
attitude of her husband and talked to the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
about it. The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ told her:

We ‏حرمت‎ BY ‏«مآآرَاك‎
‎“In my opinion you have become forbidden for your
husband.”

Imam Bukhari has reported in the Sahih through ‘Aishah (a ‏رضي‎
‏(عنها‎ who says:
‏لَقَدْ جَاءتٍ الْمُجَادِلَةُ تَشْكُوْ إِلَى‎ Sr Ws ‏رَسِمَّ‎ ll ‏«الْحَمْدُ‎
‎83

“All praise is for Allah Whose hearing of all sounds is
limitless. The complaining woman came to the Prophet ‏صلى)‎
‏(الله عليه وسلم‎ and began to complain. I heard her talk from a
comer of the house. On this occasion Allah sent down the
verse, ‘And Allah has heard... Allah is All-Hearer, All-Seer’.”

The second verse descended about Finhaas, the Jew, when he said
to Abu Bakr in response to being invited to embrace Islam. “O Abu
Bakr! I do not stand in need of Allah; It is He Who needs me. If He
were rich He would not ask for loan from me.”

In the third verse, it has been stated by way of warning and
dismaying whether it is so that those who do a wrong thing
Stealthily, believe that Allah does not hear their whisperings. Allah
certainly hears them and his watchmen record their talks and deeds.

In the fourth verse, Allah is addressing Moses and Aaron. Both had
complained to Allah regarding the violence and oppression of the
Pharaoh. At this Allah asked them not to be afraid, He is with them.
He hears and sees.

The fifth verse descended regarding Abu Jahl. He had prevented the
Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ from offering Salaat (prayer) near the
Ka‘bah. The verse came on this occasion in which Allah says:

IF OSE Kk ya ofc ye or
‏شرك»‎ EO

“Have you (O Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ seen him (i.e. Abu
Jahl) who prevents a slave (Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ when he
prays? Tell me, if he (Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ is on the
guidance (of Allah) or enjoins piety. Tell me, if he (the
disbeliever, Abu Jahl) denies (the truth, i.e. this Qur’4n), and
turns away? Knows he not that Allah does see (what he
does)?” (Surah Al-‘Alaq, 96: 9-14).

84
Attributes of Allah regarding grip, planning
devising and pardoning etc.

te Ms,
002

KBE ‏كان‎ BEB ‏شوو‎ 2 1S HUE AGE yp sigs ‏ك4‎

0

ECE ‏ْنَا الى‎ C5 ‏وَهُالَحَندوهْرَ عل ل توء‎ HIS
bee oo 78. ‏هه موده‎

Seek ‏شاع‎ we ote ‏عد ني‎ 0

Bact bes TS EG ‏كل إل‎ OH GG
BY KE BS IS GHG Co se OA

a rege 5, 8

And He said, “And He is Mighty in strength and Severe in

85
punishment” (Surah Ar-Ra‘d, 13:13); and He said, “And they
(disbelievers) plotted (to kill Jesus ‏عليه السلام‎ ), and Allah planned too.
And Allah is the Best of the planners” (Surah Al-‘Imran, 3:54); and
He said, “So they plotted a plot, and We planned a plan, while they
perceived not” (Surah An-Naml, 27:50); and He said, “Verily, they
are but plotting a plot (against you 0 Muhammad ‏صلى الله عليه رسلم‎ (.
And I (too) am planning a plan” (Surah At-Tarig, 86: 15-16);
“Whether you (mankind) disclose (by good words of thanks) a good
deed (done to you in the form of a favour by someone), or conceal it,
or pardon an evil,.. verily, Allah is Ever Oft-Pardoning, All-
Powerful” (Surah An-Nisa’, 4:149); “And let them pardon and
forgive. Do you not love that Allah should forgive you? And Allah is
Oft-Fortgiving, Most Merciful” (Surah An-Nur, 24:22); and He said,
“But honour, power and glory belong to Allah, His Messenger
(Muhammad ‏و(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ and to the believers,” (Surah Al-
Munafiqun, 63:8); and He said, quoting Jblis (Satan), — “By Your
Might, then I will surely mislead them all.” (Surah Sad, 38:82); and
He said, “Blessed is the Name of your Lord (Allah), the Owner of
Majesty and Honour” (Surah Ar-Rahman, 55:78); and He said, “So
worship Him (Alone) and be constant and patient in His worship. Do
you know of any who is similar to Him?” (Surah Maryam, 19:65);
“And there is none coequal or comparable unto Him” (Surah Al-
Ikhlas, 112:4); and He said, “Then do not set up rivals unto Allah (in
worship) while you know (that He Alone has the right to be
worshipped)” (Surah Al-Bagarah, 2:22); “And of mankind are some
who take (for worship) others besides Allah as rivals (to Allah). They ‏ا‎
‎love them as they love Allah” (Surah Al-Bagarah, 2:165); and He said,
“And say: ‘All the praises and thanks are to Allah, Who has not
begotten a son (nor an offspring), and Who has no partner in (His)
Dominion, nor He is low to have a Wali (helper, protector or
supporter). And magnify Him with all the magnificence, [‘4la@hu-Akbar
(Allah is the Most Great)]’” (Surah Al-Isra, 17:111); “Whatsoever is in
the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth glorifies Allah. His is the
dominion, and to Him belong all the praises and thanks, and He is

86
Able to do all things” (Surah At-Taghabun, 64:1); and He said,
“Blessed is He Who sent down the criterion (of right and wrong, i.e.
this Qur’4n) to His slave (Muhammad ‏صلى الله عليه رسلم‎ ) that he may be
a warner to the Aalamin (mankind and jinns.). He to Whom belongs
the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and Who has begotten no
son (children or offspring) and for Whom there is no partner in the
dominion. He has created everything, and has measured it exactly
according to its due measurements” (Surah Al-Furgan, 25:1,2); and
He said, “No son (or offspring or children) did Allah beget, nor is
there any ilah (god) along with Him; (if there had been many gods),
behold, each god would have taken away what he had created, and
some would have tried to overcome others! Glorified is Allih above
all that they attribute to Him!” “All-Knower of the unseen and the
seen! Exalted is He over all that they associate as partners to Him!”
(Surah Al-Mu’minun, 23:91,92); “So put not forward similitudes for
Allah (as there is nothing similar to Him, nor He resembles anything).
Truly! Allah knows and you know not” (Surah An-Nahl, 16:74); “Say
(O Muhammad ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ ): ‘(But) the things that my Lord has
indeed forbidden are Al-Fawahish (great evil sins, every kind of
unlawful sexual intercourse etc.) whether committed openly or
secretly, sins (of all kinds), unrighteous oppression, joining partners
(in worship) with Allah for which He has given no authority, and
saying things about Allah of which you have no knowledge’ ” (Surah
ALA ‘raf, 7:33).

In the verses mentioned above Allah has proved His Attributes of
having a grip, scheming, devising and pardoning etc. All these
Attributes are active and voluntary. But by making a noun out of the
adjectives of scheming and simulating it will not be proper to call
Allah a schemer and a simulator. It is necessary to limit ourselves
only up to the words mentioned in the Qur’an.

The meaning of “Mighty in strength” is that Allah puts a very
strong grip for awarding punishment. He has stated at one place:

“Verily, the Grip of your Lord is severe.”

87
And at another place He says:
“Verily! His seizure is painful, and severe.”

The verse in which Allah has described Himself as the best in
planning means that Allah has the power to enforce planning
swiftly. Some Ulama of the Salafhave explained the meaning of
Allah’s planning with the slaves in the sense that He awards them
favours despite sins. This is the way he gives them a long rope.
When they commit a sin, He rewards them with a favour in return
but they do not understand it. The Hadith mentions that:

Bu
0

“When Allah rewards a slave inspite of his sin then he must
understand that Allah is giving him a long rope.”

The verse concerning planning was revealed in connection with
Jesus. When the Jews intended to kill him; he went into a house
which had a window. Allah got him lifted to the heaven by Gabriel
through that window. A man named Juda entered that house to lead
the killers to Jesus so that they could kill him. At that time Allah
turned the cheat Juda into a likeness of Jesus. When he came out of
the house and told the people that there was no one in the house
they killed this man in the belief that they had killed Jesus himself.
While making an indication towards this event Allah says:

es 2 ARC 3
“And they (the disbelievers) plotted [to kill ‘Iesa (Jesus)
‏عليه السلام‎ [ and Allah planned too...”

And Allah’s Statement: “They plotted and Allah planned” etc.
relates to the nine persons of the community of Prophet Saleh who
took an oath in the Name of Allah that:

88
“We will kill Saleh and the members of his household tonight
and will tell his protector that we have no information about
the murder at all.”

The consequence of their intrigue was that Allah played an intrigue
with them and destroyed their community root and branch.

Allah says: “Whether you (mankind) disclose ...” this verse proves
that Allah has the attributes of forgiveness, power, pardon, mercy,
reverence, blessing, grace and generosity.

Al-‘Afu (The Forgiver) is the Name of Allah which means that Self
Who avoids giving punishment to the slaves after they have
repented. Allah says:

“And He it is Who accepts repentance from His slaves, and
forgives sins, and He knows what you do” (Surah Ash-
Shura, 42:25).

Perfect ‘Afu (forgiveness) is that which is accompanied by possessing a
lasting power of revenge. That is why the names of Al- ‘Afi and Al-
Qadeer have occurred together in this verse and in other verses.

Ability is that attribute which relates to the existence and non-
existence of the probables. Whatever has come into existence in the
universe is because of His Will and Ability, as a Hadith says:

“Whatever Allah willed took place, and whatever He did not
will did not take place.”

And Allah says “Let them pardon and forgive.” This was revealed
about Abu Bakr ‏(رمي انس عن)‎ when he had taken an oath that he would
not spend anything on Mistah bin Athaatha. This man was one of
those who had taken part in the /fk (lie) regarding ‘Aishah ‏رضي الله عنها‎ .

89
The mother of Mistah was the daughter of the aunt of Abu Bakr (a ‏رضي‎
‎«s).When this verse descended Abu Bakr said:

“I wish that Allah pardon me and I reconcile myself.”
And Allah says:“But honour, power and glory belong to Allah.” This
verse descended about the chief of the hypocrites Abdullah bin
Ubaiy bin Salul who had sworn on the occasion of a battle that he

would drive out the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه رسلم)‎ and his Companions
from Al-Madinah. Allah sent down this verse on this occasion:
“They (hyprocrites) say: “If we return to Al-Madinah, indeed
the more honourable (‘Abdallah bin Ubaiy bin Salul, the chief
of hyprocrites at Al-Madinah) will expel therefrom the
meaner (i.e. Allah’s Messenger ‏الله عليه وسلم‎ 6)” But honour,
power and glory belong to Allah, His Messenger (Muhammad
‏الله عليه وسلم‎ Le), and to the believers, but the hypocrites know
not”, (Surah A/-Munafiqun, 63:8).

This cursed man considers that ‘more honourable’ means himself
and his companions. It was to refute this statement that Allah sent
down this verse.

Might is an attribute which Allah has proved for Himself. Allah says:
“He is the Mighty and the Wise,” and said:
ESI ‏«وكاب‎
‎“Allah is Strong and Mighty.”

Allah has sworn with this name as has been mentioned in the
Hadith for intercession:

‎Bs he"‏ وَعَظمَتِي؛ ‎Ge 85 BY‏ مَنْ 236 ‎YOY‏ اه

‎90

“1 swear by My Might, My Glory, and My Magnificence that
whoever says Ld ilaha illa Allah | will certainly take him out.”

He stated about Satan that he said:

x

“By Your Might, then I will surely mislead them all, —except
Your chosen slaves amongst them (faithful, obedient, true
believers of Islamic Monotheism) (Sirah Sad, 38: 82,83)

It is reported in Sahih Al-Bukhari etc., that Abu Hurairah narrates:

“Prophet Ayub (Job) was bathing naked, gold locusts
descended upon him. He began to collect them in his clothes.
His Lord called him, ‘O Ayub (Job)! did I not make you
independent of it?’ He said, ‘Yes, I swear by Your Might, this
is correct; but I am not independent of Your Blessing.’ ”

It has been reported in a Hadith of invocation which the Prophet
‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ taught a man who felt ache in his body. The
invocation is: .

“I seek refuge through Your Might and Power from that
, Mischief with which I am interacting and of which I am afraid.”

Might is also used in the sense of domination, and wrath. It is said,
‘Az-Zahu, that is, he became dominant over him. It will carry this
sense when the verb is used in a particular form of the Arabic
grammar, i.e. Ya‘uzzu. It is also the same when it is spelt as
Ya‘azzu, it is said, Ardun Ezazun (extremely hard earth). It is also
used to mean the height of respect and victory. This happens when
the nominative verb is pronounced as Ya ‘izzu. All these meanings

91
are proved for the Revered and Magnificent Allah.

And Allah says: “Blessed is the Name of your Lord.” This has been
derived from Barakah (blessing) which means eternality of
goodness and its abundance. And the meaning of Dhul-Jalal is One
of magnificence and greatness and this is the Only Allah Whom no
one is greater than. And /Araam means the One Who is so revered
as He deserves. It has also been stated that it means the One Who
gives all forms of honour to His virtuous slaves in this world and
the Hereafter. Allah knows better.

And Allah says, “So worship Him and be constant ....” This noble
verse consists of a number of negative attributes such as the
negation of there being an equivalent, a son, a companion to help in
lowliness and want, etc. But it has positive attributes too, such as
lordship, praise, control, greatness and blessedness.

Attributes of Negation

And Allah says, “Do you know of any who is similar to Him?”
Sheikh-ul-Islam Ibn Taimiyah said that the lexicographers state that
it means, ‘Do you know anything in the likeness of Him. Who
deserves this name?’ It has also been said, ‘Do you know any such
being who is comparable to Him?’ It is reported from Ibn Abbas
that this verse means similar or resembling.

The verse contains a negative interrogation which gives a negative

sense and accordingly the verse will mean “You do not know
anything comparable to Him.”

And Allah says, “And there is non comparable unto Him.” Kufu
means comparable and of similar status. This verse negates all
forms of resemblance and comparability with Allah. This is because
the word has been used negatively in a general sense. So, as regards
its meaning it is general. The complete explanation of the Surah
Al-Ikhias (the Sincerity) has already been given earlier.

92
And Allah says, “Then do not set up rivals unto Allah when you
know.” The word Andaad is the plural of the word Nidd whose
meaning as already explained is ‘similar and comparable,’ and it is
proverbial that no one can bea partner or rival to Allah. It means
negation of similarity as well as contrast. The meaning of ‘Antum
Ta‘lamoon’ will be that, when you know that Allah Alone has
created you and your provisions and your gods whom you regarded
as comparable and similar to Allah and made them equal to Allah in
regarding them as deserving of worship, cannot create anything;
they are rather themselves creatures; they are not owners of any
profit and loss. So give up their worship and make Allah the only
object of worship and reverence.

And Allah says, “And of mankind are some who take (for worship)
others besides Allah as rivals (to Allah), They love them as they love

Allah.” (2:165). Allah is giving information about the polytheists
that they keep their gods as dear as one should keep Allah, that is,
they regard these gods as equal to Allah in loving. And those who
become faithful, develop love for Allah more than the polytheists
do for their objects of worship. This is because the faithful have
particularised the love for Allah only while the love expressed by
the polytheists lies divided in between their objects of worship.
There is no doubt in it that if love is directed to one side alone it is
more lasting and strong. It has also been said that the polytheists
love their objects of worship in the same way as the faithful do with
Allah; but the faithful love Allah far more than the disbelievers do
with their gods.

Later He says, “And say: All the praises and thanks are to Allah ...
and magnify Him with all the magnificence.” We have already given
the explanation of the meaning of Hamd (praise) that is, praising
with tongue on the favours and the disfavours. The affirmation of
Hamd for Allah consists of such perfections for Him that He Alone
is deserving of absolute Hamd Who reaches the extreme of such
perfection.

93
Then Allah negated all such things from His Self which fall short of
the absolute Hamd such as having a son, a partner and a companion
for His Self, in other words, negating all wants and needs. This is
because Allah does not make a friend from His creatures to fulfill
His wants and needs.

Then He commanded to His Messenger ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ to magnify
Him with all the magnificence, providing all kind of respect to Him
and purifying Him from all defects.

And Allah says, “Whatsoever is... Able to do all things.” Tasbeeh
means purifying from defects and removing them as has already
been explained.

There is no doubt in it that all things of the heavens and the earth
say the Hamd of their Lord and bear witness to His Perfect
Knowledge, Ability, Reverence, Intelligence, Device and Mercy.
Allah says:

“And there is not a thing but glorifies His Praise. But you
understand not their glorification” (Surah Al-Isra, 17:44).

There is difference of opinion regarding the hymns recited by the
inanimate objects. Since they do not speak, is it that they recite the
hymn by their existence or by their tongue. I think the second
statement is preferable, for Allah says:

Kae

“And you understand not their praise.”

Thus if their hymns were recited by their apparent condition then
this would be known. So adding one’s own interpretation is not

correct, Allah said about Prophet 2200 (David):
‏لت‎ ARE AZ IS ost gabon SCAG >
“Verily, We made the mountains to glorify Our Praises with
him (David) in the ‘Ashi (i.e. after the mid-day till sunset) and

94
Ishrag (i.e. after the sunrise till mid-day). And (so did) the
birds assembled: all with him (David) did turn (to Allah i.e.
glorified His Praises)” (Surah Sad, 38: 18,19).

Allah says: “Blessed is He.” We have explained that Tabdraka is
derived from Barakah which means eternality of goodness and its
abundance, but this excess does not imply the existence of any
defective thing, for this means the rejuvenation of voluntary
perfections under the Will and Ability of Allah. These perfections
are born in His Self according to Wisdom. Prior to the demand of
wisdom the fact of being devoid of these perfections will not be
considered a defect.

Some people have done the explanation of Tabdraka with
permanence and absence of change. The word Birka is derived
from it which means a tank. This is because its water does not flow.
But this is a rather remote explanation. Furgaan means the Qur’an.
This name was given because the Qur’dn has great power of
discerning between truth and falsehood and between guidance and
being strayed. The word Nazzala describes the gradualness in the
descent of the Qur’4n, for the entire Qur’an did not descend all at
once. The word ‘Abd means Prophet Muhammad ‏الله عليه رسلم)‎ Le),
He was given the title of being a slave of Allah in order to award
him nobility, as has already been mentioned.

And ‘Aalamin is the plural of ‘Aalam. This is the Aagil plural and
there are differences of opinion in its meaning. One statement is
that this means human being and another is that this means both
humans and the jinns. The latter statement is correct. This fact is
proved that the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ was sent as the prophet for
the jinns also. He used to get together with them and would recite
the Qur’an to them. On hearing the Qur’an, one of their groups
embraced Islam and its members began to frighten their community
by it. Allah says:

Ace

“And (remember) when We sent towards you (Muhammad
‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ Nafran (three to ten persons) of the jinns,
(quietly) listening to the Qur’an, when they stood in the
presence thereof, they said: ‘Listen in silence!’ And when|it
was finished, they returned to their people, as warners”
(Surah Al-Ahgaf, 46:29).

And Nadheer and Mundhir is that person who frightens someone
with something. Its antonym is Basheer or Mubash-shir, that is, one
who gives you tidings that makes you happy.

Allah says, “No son did Allah beget...” This blessed verse consists of a
large number of deanthropomorphic attributes whose aim is negation of
the attributes which are not in accordance with the Grace of Allah. In
this verse Allah has proved Himself exalted and hallowed from having a
son, and various other attributes which fabricative small minds ascribe
to Allah, such as creators and objects of worship other than Him. He has
forbidden from ascribing anything similar to Him and ascribing partner
to Him without any valid rhyme or reason and saying anything about
His Self without knowledge and argument:

This verse consists of the affirmation of Tauhid-ul-Uloohiyah, the
Oneness of worship and Tauhid-ur-Ruboobiyah, the Oneness of His
Lordship. After giving the information that Allah has no partner He
has clarified it with evident arguments and definite reasons. Thus >
He says, “else would each god...” that is, if there were other gods as
the polytheists maintain:
‏كابشو عل م4‎ Sete gp ¥ BY

“ (if there had been many gods), behold, each god would

have taken away what he had created, and some would have

tried to overcome others!...”. (4/-Mu’miniin:91)

The clarification of this argument is that if there were a number of
gods then creation and other acts would not have been proved and
there would have been no means for mutual cooperation. This
would have made mutual differences inevitable just as the

96
individual weakness of each among the creatures makes the
existence of the evil or lack of cooperation inevitable. Thus it is
clear that the helpless and the weak cannot be Allah.

It is therefore necessary that each one is free in terms of its
creatures and its acts. This will, however, demand that either they
are equal to one another in power so that none of them could
dominate the other and would not take the subject, the creatures and
“he possession of the other as is done by the rulers in this world. In
fact, when they fail to acquire domination over others, they separate
themselves along with their country, or someone among them
proves to be the mightiest and by virtue of tact and treatment
becomes distinct among them. In such a situation two things are
necessary for the numerical position of gods. Either the creation of
others is snatched by the mightiest, or some demonstrate their
superiority over others and resort to rebellion.

But the segregation of each along with its creation from one another
goes contrary to what is probable, for this will certainly lead to
mutual hatred between the elements of the world, distance and
parcelling out into so many pieces. On the other hand, observation
shows that the entire universe is like an organism whose various
limbs are joined together and all its sides are mutually related. This
makes it necessary that there is sway of only One object of worship;
and the fact that one does not demonstrate superiority over others
and rebels, demands that Allah must be only One.

And Allah says, “So put not forward simulitudes for Allah (as there
is nothing similar to Him, nor He resembles anything). Truly! Allah
knows and you know not” (Surah An-Nahl, 16:74). This verse
forbids that people regard anything as resembling Allah, for His
resemblance is so high that no creature can partake of it.

We have already mentioned the laying down of such measures and
analogies about Allah which may display resemblance and equality
between Him and the creatures such as the analogy of Tamtheel and
analogy of inclusion etc. The analogy of the First will be used in

97
His case which means that in the case of each one of that existential
perfection with which the creatures are qualified , it does not imply
absence or defect, then in having the attributes of such perfections
the Creator occupies the first position. It is the Creator Himself
Who has bestowed that perfection of the creature. If Allah, despite
the possibility of being qualified with these perfections, were 1 ot
qualified with them, then there would be possibilities of existence
of such things which are more perfect than Him. But this is
impossible. Thus, all such defects from which the creatures are
immune and unpolluted, it is of the highest primacy that the Creator
is free from them.

Allah says, “Say: The things that...” /n-Nama is a word that denotes
delimitation of something. This shows the delimitation of
forbidding for the things that have been mentioned. This will
connote that all the sacred things other than these are allowed for
adoption; there is no objection therein, as has already been
explained by the verse mentioned above.

Fawahish is the plural of Fahisha which means an extremely base
action. Some people have meant from it particularly those acts of
sin which are characterised by lust and taste such as adultery,
sodomy, and other acts of shamelessness including the inner desires
such as conceit and pride, egotism and love for power, etc.

Ithm, that is (sin), the exegesis of sin has been done by some people
in terms of absolute sins. This will mean those sins which are in
addition to Fahisha. Some people have particularised it with
alcoholism which is the root of all the sins. And the meaning of
unjustifiable excesses is that people are subjected to such excesses
and harshnesses which have no aspect of retaliation or resemblance.

Allah says, “joining partners...” Allah has prohibited that you
worship anyone else with His worship, or look for the affinity of a
self other than Allah with any form of worship or any means of
bringing closeness and working as a medium such as invocations,

98
vowing, slaughtering animals, fear and expectations, etc. It is
therefore necessary that the slave of Allah purifies his heart in
relation to Allah and bows his head before Him. This is forbidden
that he invents such substitutes of Allah who lay down such ways of
worship and conducting social affairs which have not been
permitted by Allah. Such a thing was done by the Jews and the
Christians that they made their priests and rabbis their lords in
matters of legislating. This made them declare the things forbidden
by Allah as permissible and the things made permissible by Him as
forbidden and they followed the priests and the rabbis in these
matters, Allah’s command, “Which He has given no authority ...”
has been made a precondition so that the reality of the matter could
be described, for when man worships, obeys and follows anyone
except Allah, then that action will always be without a valid reason.

To say anything regarding Allah without knowledge is a wide issue
which will include every such thing which has been stated in
relation to Allah without a reason and argument, such as affirming
such things which have been denied by Allah or to negate such
things which he has affirmed, or to carry out distortions and
amplifications of the Qur’anic verses for adopting irreligion, etc.

Allamah Ibn Al-Qaiyim writes in his book E ‘laam-ul-Muwagqqi ‘een
that:

Allah has forbidden saying anything regarding Him without
knowing it while issuing a Fatwa (verdict) or a Judgement,
and has regarded it among the greatest prohibitions. In fact,

He has kept it on the top of the list. Allah says:

“Say (O Muhammad ‏:(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ ‘(But) the things that my
Lord has indeed forbidden are A/-Fawdhish (great evil sins,
every kind of unlawful sexual intercourse etc.) whether
committed openly or secretly”. (Surah AI-A ‘raf, 7:33).

99
Allah has laid down four classes of things that He has forbidden,
and began them by the easiest one, that is Fawahish. At the second
higher level, He mentioned those that are more severely forbidden
such as sin and injustice. At the third stage, He mentioned those
which are harsher than the second such as associating partners to
Allah. Then at the fourth stage, He mentioned that which is the
biggest of all forbidden things, that is, saying something regarding
Allah without having knowledge of it. This statement is general in
its application in relation to His Names, Attributes, and Acts, and
also in relation to religion and Shari ‘ah.

100
Affirmation of Istawa for Allah (.:,;)

وَقَْلْهُ: ‎Bee‏ عَلَى ‎ty‏ اشتوى» فِيْ سَبْعَةٍ ‎Malye‏ - فِيْ سُوْرَةٍ

2 GEL ‏في‎ ONG ‏السَّمواتٍ‎ SE ‏إرك رَيْثْ أله الى‎ « 208 Gr

م أستوف عل ‎Ko‏ وَقَالَ ِيْ سُوْرةٍ طة:
« لمعك امرش تو » وَقَالَ في ‎oy‏ اران : «اشرّ ستو عل ‎PA‏

أليّحْمنُ» وَقَالَ فِيْ ‎pli‏ السَجْدَة : < أنه الى ‎GE‏ لسوت ‎BNG‏ وما

MHASH Ds Col ‏ستو َل‎ ML ‏لسوت وَالْارْصَ فى‎
4 AS; BoE SG ‏أي‎ As hy EA IAS Hd 43
sen SOc MET A tis lho

AO AGEN K LEA ‏توف التق‎ kd 2A Sys

Allah’s Statement that “The Most Beneficent (Allih) Istawa (rose
over) the (mighty) Throne (in a manner that suits His Majesty)” has
occurred at seven places in the Qur’an. He said in Surah Al-A ‘raf,
“Indeed your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in
Six Days and then He Istawa (rose over) the Throne (really in a
manner that suits His Majesty).” (7 :54;); And in Surah Yunus,
“Surely, your Lord is Allah who created the heavens the earth in Six

101
Days and then Istawa (rose over) the Throne (really in a manner that
suits His Majesty).” (10:3) and said in Surah Ar-Ra‘d, “Allah is He
Who raised the heavens without any pillars that you can see. Then,
He Istawa (rose over) the Throne (really in a manner that suits His
Majesty”. (13:2); and said in Surah Ta-Ha, “The Most Beneficent
(Allah) Istawa (rose over) the (mighty). Throne (in a manner that
suits His Majesty).” (20:5); and said in Surah Al-Furgan, “Then He
Istawa (rose over) the Throne (in a manner that suits His Majesty).”
(25:59); and said in Surah As-Sajdah “Allah it is He Who has created
the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them in Six Days.
Then He Istawa (rose over) the Throne (in a manner that suits His
Majesty)? (32:4); and said in Surah Al-Hadid, “He it is Who created
the heavens and the earth in Six Days and then Jstawa (rose over) the
Throne (in a manner that suits His Majesty)? (57:4).

And He said, “And (remember) when Allah said: ‘O ‘Iesa (Jesus)! I
will take you and raise you to Myself’” (Surah Al-‘Imran, 3:55); “But
Allah raised him (Jesus) up (with his body and soul) unto Himself”
(Surah An-Nisa, 4:158); “To Him ascend (all) the goodly words, and
the righteous deeds exalt it” (Surah Fatir, 35:10); “O Haman! Build
me a tower that I may arrive at the ways, the ways of the heavens,
and I may look upon the 7/41: (God) of Moses but verily, I think him
to be a liar” (Surah Ghafir, 40:36,37); and He (Allah) said, “Do you
feel secure that He, Who is over the heaven (Allah), will not cause the
earth to sink with you, then behold it shakes (as in an earthquake)?
Or do you feel secure that He, Who is over the heaven (Allah), will
not send against you a violent whirlwind? Then you shall know how
(terrible) has been My Warning?” (Surah Al-Mulk, 67:16,17).

Allah says: “The Most Beneficent (Allah) Istawa (rose over) the
(mighty) Throne.” These are those seven places in the Qur’an where
Allah has given information about His rising over the Throne. The
proof of Istawa (rising over) in each verse is definitive, for these are
related to the Book of Allah. That is why the followers of the
Jahmiyah sect, who believe in the negation of the Attributes of

102
Allah, cannot refute and deny it. These verses are lucid in their
subject that there is no scope for amplification here. When the word
Istawa occurs in the dictionary as a transitive with the vowel ‘Ala’
then its only possible meanings are height and loftiness. That is why
the Salaf have explained this word with four expressions. Allamah
Ibn Al-Qaiyim has written in the Qasidah Nooniyah as follows:

There are four phrases used by the Salaf for this word which
are used for a rider who is a lancer. The first is /stagarra
meaning that which has been proved; the second is ‘ala
meaning that which has been raised high; the third is Irtafa‘a
which also means that which has been exalted, and this
meaning is widely recognised. The fourth word is Sa‘eda
which means that which has climbed up the height. The
contemporary of Abu Ubaidah Shaibani has favoured this

meaning in his exegesis who knew the Qur’n better than the
Jahmiyah.

Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah have faith in those things about which
Allah has Himself informed such as, He is occupying the High
position over the Throne and is separate from His creature. Allah,
the Magnificent, Alone knows the state of Istawa as has been stated
by Imam Malik etc., that ‘Zstawa is known but its state is unknown.”
The noise that the followers of Ta ‘tee! make about the emergence of
such mischiefs on /stawd being proved does not apply upon us for
we do not say that the state of Allah rose over the Throne is like the
domination over the creature by a creator.

103
These people who try to divert attention from the evident meaning

‘of the clear Qur’anic verses with mischievous amplifications, only
betray in their efforts their confused thinking, just as they make
exegesis of /stawa with Istawla (dominated), or construe the word
Ala as Eld (3; ) which begins with Arabic letter equal to ‘e’ and
explain the word /stawa in the sense of intention etc. All these have
been transmitted by Zahid Kauthari who was a great standard bearer
of Ta‘teel and Tajahhum. But all these tantamount to adulteration
and alteration of the truth which deserves no attention at all.

No one knows what these Mu ‘attila want to say? Do they want to
say that there is no Lord in the heaven Who intends or that there is
no Object of worship in the heaven Who should be worshipped?
Then where does He exist? May be our question regarding ‘Where
is He’ appears ridiculous to them. But they have forgotten that the
most perfect among the creatures and the most knowledgeable
about their Lord, ie. Muhammad ‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ Le) had put a question
regarding Allah with the phrase, “Where is He?” He asked a slave
girl ‘Where is Allah?’ and he felt pleased with her answer when she

said, ‘In the heaven.’ Likewise he answered a questioner who had
asked, ‘Where was our Lord before creating the heavens and the
earth? The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ said ‘In the clouds.’ The
narrative does not say that he had frowned upon the questioner or
had said to him that he had put an absurd question.

The substance of the statement of these people regarding this problem
is that ‘Allah did exist but there was no space. Then He created space
and He is at this time where He was before creating space.’

What do these conjecturers mean by saying that Allah was but there
was no space. Do they mean by it the present existential space
which is included in the circle of the universe. These places are
subject to change and we do not say that Allah lives in any one of
these, for nothing among His creatures can encompass Him.

And if from this they mean the space of non-existence which is an
absolute void and in which there is no existence then it cannot be

104
claimed about it that it did not exist and was created later for it has
no bearing on creation; it is a problem of non-existence. If it is said
that according to this meaning, Allah is in a place as is argued by
the Qur’anic verses and the Ahadith then what is the difficulty in it.
But the correct way to say is that Allah existed and nothing existed
before Him. Then He created the earth and the heavens in six Days
and His Throne was on the water, then He ascended Himself above
the Throne. The Arabic word Thumma ‏(ثم)‎ has been used to explain
the sequence of time; its purpose is not limited only to make one
sentence correspond to another.

Allay says, “‘O Jesus!’ etc.” This and some Qur’anic verses after it
have descended in support of the ascendence and rising of Allah
over the Throne. They also refute the non-acceptance and denial of
the Mu‘attilah. In the first verse “O ‘lesa (Jesus)!” etc. Allah is
giving a call to His Messenger Jesus, son of Mary, that He would
lift him from this world towards Himself. This call was given at the
time when the Jews had conspired to kill him, and in “and raise you
to Myself ” the pronoun is for Allah, the Magnificent. There is no
doubt in it about being any other. To amplify that it means,
‘towards My Mercy,’ or ‘towards the residence of My angels,’ is
irrelevant. The same could be said about that Statement of Allah
which was revealed to refute the claim of the Jews that they had
crucified Jesus and had killed him. Allah says, “But Allah raised
him up unto Himself.” The word Mutawaffeeka mentioned in the
verse has had a controversial meaning. Thus, some have interpreted
it to mean death, and most have said that this means sleep; and the
word Wafaat has been used in this sense. Allah says:

“It is He who take your souls by night (when you are asleep),

and has knowledge of all that you have done by day” (Surah
Al-An‘am, 6:60).

Some also think that there is an element of sequence in the
statement. The real passage should be “Indeed, | will raise you, and

105
reach you up to death after that.” The truth is that Jesus was lifted
alive and will descend again when the Day of Judgement is close.
This is the way it has been mentioned in authentic Hadith.

And Allah says, “To Him ascend the goodly words....” This verse is
clear about ascending towards Allah with the words and deeds of
slaves which the angels Kiraaman-Kaatibeen daily take after the
Fajr Salaat (morning prayer) and the ‘Asr Salaat (afternoon
prayer). As has been mentioned in the Hadith:

‎gah Ee‏ بَائوا ‎fy i ls Sa‏ أعْلَمْ - ‎S55 GS‏ عِبَادِي؟

‎ns aul ney Sy es‏ يُصلُونء وَتَركنَاهُمْ وَهُمْيُصَلُونَه
‎“The angels who have spent the night with you ascend to the‏
‎heaven and their Lord puts questions to them although He‏
‎knows all that much better. ‘In what condition did you leave‏
‎my slaves?’ They say, ‘O our Lord! When we came to them‏
‎they were offering prayers and when we left them, even then‏
‎they were offering prayers’.”‏

‎And Allah says, “(And Pharaoh said:) O Haman...” Allah describes
the statement of the Pharaoh. This statement supports the fact that
Moses had told the rebellious Pharaoh that his God lived in the
heaven. Pharaoh intended to look for means to reach Him and by
this he wanted only to hoodwink his community. He ordered his
minister Haman to build a lofty tower for him and afterwards said,
“though verily I consider him a liar.” Now see who then more
closely resembles and relates to Pharaoh? Is it we or the
Mu‘attilah? Pharaoh called Moses a liar on the grounds that the
Lord of Moses was in the heaven. The Mu ‘attilah are saying the
same thing. Allah says, “or do you... has been My Warning.” Both
these verses explain that Allah, the Magnificent, is in the heaven,
and it is not justified to assume that this means doom, or command,
or sovereignty as the Mu‘attilah say. The reason is that Allah has
used the word ‘Man’ ‏(من)‎ which is used for one endowed with
intelligence. So, to assume it to mean sovereignty without any

‎106
context is to deviate from the obvious.

And from the Word of Allah “Fis Sama” it is not proper to
understand that the sky is a container for Allah, the One free from
all imperfection (jLs). In fact the sky has this same obvious
meaning.The word Fi in it has been used in the sense of ‘Ala ‏(على)‎ as
Allah, the Exalted, says:

“And I will surely crucify you on the trunks of palm-trees”
(Surah Ta-Ha, 20:71).

And if it means the direction of the height, then the word Fi will be

interpreted in its real sense, that is, Allah, the Exalted, is in the
highest loftiness.

107.
Affirmation of the Companionship of Allah
and the meaning of Whisper
oe 0 By ‏وَكَْلَهُ:‎
‏مَك ماف وديا‎ Sas Ya Gas ‏يلس لتم‎ Ge CR CAG Na
oA Nace ‏رق لخر ول‎ tency toes 668

cat ‏م‎ 2-8

Kalua ee Ee BIAS %

Kec

SN ceatesil otis
fay FN GEG Mody ‏فِكَدٌ د حكيرَة‎ LEAS ‏من فكت‎

He said, “He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in Six Days
and then Jstawa (rose over) the Throne (in a manner that suits His
Majesty). He knows what goes into the earth and what comes forth
from it, what descends from the heaven and what ascends thereto.
And He is with you (by His Knowledge) wheresoever you may be.
And Allah is the All-Seer of what you do” (Surah Al-Hadid, 57:4) and
He said, “There is no Najwa (secret counsel) of three, but He is their
fourth (with His Knowledge, while He Himself is over the Throne,
over the seventh heaven), —nor of five but He is their sixth (with His
Knowledge), —not of less than that or more, but He is with them
(with His Knowledge) wheresoever they may be; and afterwards on
the Day of Resurrection, He will inform them of what they did.
Verily, Allah is the All-Knower of everything” (Surah Al-Mujadilah,
58:7). “Be not sad (or afraid), surely Allah is with us” (Surah At-
Tauba, 9:40); and He said, “Verily! I am with you both, Hearing and
Seeing” (Surah Ta-Ha, 20:46); “Truly, Allah is with those who fear
Him, (keep their duty unto Him) and those who are Muhsinun

108
(good-doers)” (Surah An-Nahl, 16:128); “And be patient. Surely,
Allih is with those who As-Sabirin (the patient ones etc.)” (Surah Al-
Anfal, 8:46); “‘How often a small group overcame a mighty host by
Allah’s Leave?’ And Allah is with As-Sabirin (the patient ones etc.)”
(Surah Al-Bagarah, 2:249).

Allah says, “Heit is Who created...” This verse proves the attribute
of the Companionship of Allah ( +! ) and this is of two types:

1. General Companionship: This comprehends all the creatures and
Allah encompasses everything with His Knowledge, Power, Subdue
and Expanse. Nothing is hidden from Him nor anything can render
Him helpless. This same companionship has been mentioned in the
verse. Allah is providing information about His Self in this verse
that His alone is the Self Who created the earth and the heavens,
ie., in a period of Six Days. He initiated them both as before and in
a systematic manner. After that to manage the entire affair of the
creatures, He ascended above His Throne. But despite His being
above the Throne nothing is hidden from Him that lies in the worlds
above and the worlds below. Whatever enters the earth and
whatever comes out of it, and whatever rises up to the heaven and
whatever comes down from it, is all known to Him. There is no
doubt in it that the One Whose Knowledge, and Power encompasses
everything, He will be with everything. That is why He says, “and
He is with you wheresoever...” And Allah says, “There is
noNajwa... every thing.” Here Allah proves the inclusiveness of
His Knowledge and its encompassing every thing. Even the
whispering of the whisperers is not unknown to Him, He is witness
to everything and informed of everything.

Najwa is related to Thalaatha (three) arid the quality is related to
the qualified. Here Najwa is the adjective and Thalaatha (three) is
being qualified by it, i.e., the whisperers.

2. Special Companionship: The rest of the verses are in the
affirmation of the special companionship, in other words, Allah is
with His Messengers and friends, in companionship, help and

109
support, love and assistance, and revelations.

And Allah says, “Be not sad... with us.” This is the description of
that statement which the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ made to Abu Bakr
‏(رضي الله عنه)‎ in the cave of Thawr. The polytheists had beseiged the
opening of the cave in search of the Prophet ‏.(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ When
Abu Bakr saw this, he became anxious and said, “O Messenger of
Allah! If someone from amongst these looks down below his steps,
he will see us.” At this the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ made this
statement which Allah the Magnificent has stated, and that is “Be
not 520... with us.” Here companionship means the companionship
of help, and protection from the enemies.

And Allah says, “Verily! I am with... Hearing and Seeing.” We have
already talked about it before. This was addressed to Moses and
Aaron that these two should not be afraid of the violence of the
Pharaoh, for Allah the Magnificent is with both of them with His
Assistance and Support.

In the rest of the verses Allah is giving information about the
companionship of Muttageen (those who fear Allah and do
righteous deeds) who make it obligatory to hold fast to obligation in
everything and stay within the limits set by Allah; and of the
Muhsineen who strive to do right in everything and /hsaan in each
thing according to its capacity. Jhsaan in worship is that you should
worship Allah as if you see Him, and if you can not achieve this
state of devotion then you must consider that He is looking at you,
as has already occurred in the Hadith of Gabriel.

Allah is also giving information about the companionship which the
patient ones will receive who keep their passions in check from the
undesirable thing, go through troubles and hardships for the sake of
Allah, they are patient in obedience to Allah as well as patient to
ward off the evil temptations and patient with Allah’s Decree.

110
Affirmation of Speech for Allah ‏(عروجل)‎

C15 1H GE ALG > 4 ‏من عَم أنه‎ ed CES

BOSE reall os « eas OKA NE ES > 4 ‏لين‎

PCIE AGI ASIN asd Ci zal

جرم ‎beer‏ 6 اكيم م2 ‎MAGICA‏ سر ده ةورع

« وََدْ كن ‎G5‏ مَنْهُمْ يَنْمَعُونَ كلم لَه 5 ‎ASS bye BS ag‏ ما ‎BARE‏ و

Ze a a Aizen ath od Ff fee
‏الك آم‎ KE GAB SSA KB I ‏«ربذوسك‎ doops

5 ‏سل ست ب عرس > سي عه‎ oe Kye Aye ae neg
‏إِنَّ عدا‎ « <0 IY 2 te DIT > CI ‏من‎
‎ESS NSS > ‏وَقَوْلهُ:‎ iit

‎AL‏ بل كر ‎AHS ME OSL‏ من ‎BBS‏ ليت لدت

‎3202

‎a Abe epee

‏فيه

‎And He said, “And who is truer in statement than Allah?” (Surah An-
Nisa, 4:87); “And whose words can be truer than those of Allah? (Of
course, none)” (Surah An-Nisa’, 4:122); “(Remember) when Allah will
say (on the Day of Resurrection). ‘O Jesus, son of Mary!’” (Surah Al-
Ma’idah, 5:110); “And the Word of your Lord has been fulfilled in

‎111

truth and in justice” (Surah Al-An‘am, 6:115); and He said, “—and to
‏و3165‎ (Moses) Allah spoke directly” (Surah An-Nisa’, 4:164); “to
some of them Allah spoke (directly)” (Surah Al-Bagarah, 2:253);
“And when Moses came at the time and place appointed by Us, and
his Lord spoke to him” (Surah AI-A ‘raf, 7:143); “And We called him
from the right side of the Mount, and made him draw near to Us for a
talk with him (Moses)” (Surah Maryam, 19:52); and He said, “And
(remember) when your Lord called Misa (Moses) (saying): ‘Go to the
people who are Zalimun (polytheists and wrong-doing)’,—” (Surah
Ash-Shu‘ara, 26:10); “And their Lord called out to them (saying):
‘Did I not forbid you that tree’” (Surah ‏اال‎ ‘raf, 7:22); and He said,
“And (remember) the Day (All4h) will call to them, and say: ‘What
answer gave you to the Messengers?” (Surah Al-Qasas, 28:65); “And
if anyone of the Mushrikun (polytheists, idolaters, pagans, disbelievers
in the Oneness of Allah) seeks your protection, then grant him
protection so that he may hear the Word of Allah (the Qur’an)”
(Surah At-Taubah, 9:6); “A party of them (Jewish rabbis) used to
hear the Word of Allah [the Taurat (Torah) then they used to change
it knowingly after they understood.” (4/-Bagarah, 2:75). “They want
to change Allah’s Words. Say: ‘You shall not follow us; thus Allah
has said beforehand.” (Sural Al-Fath, 48:15); “And recite what has
been revealed to you (O Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ of the Book (the
Qur’an) of your Lord (i.e. recite it, understand and follow its
teachings and act on its orders and preach it to men). None can
change His words,...” (Surah Al-Kahf, 18:27); and He said, “Verily,
this Qur’fn narrates to the Children of Israel most of that about
which they differ” (Surah An-Naml, 27:76); “And this is a blessed
Book (the Qur’an) which We have sent down,” (Surah Al-An‘am,
6:155); “Had We send down this Qur’an on a mountain, you would
surely have seen it humbling itself and rending asunder by the fear of
Allah” (Surah Al-Hashr, 59:21); “And when We change a Verse [of
the Qur’4n, i.e. cancel (abrogate) its order] in place of another, and
Allah knows the best of what He sends down, they (the disbelievers)
say: ‘You (O Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ are but a Mufiari (forger,

112
liar).’ Nay, but most of them know not. Say (O Muhammad ‏الله عليه‎ to
‏(وسلر‎ Ruh-ul-Qudus (Gabriel) has brought it (the Qur’An) down from
your Lord with truth, that it may make firm and strengthen (the
Faith of) those who believe and as a guidance and glad tidings to
those who have submitted (to Allah as Muslims). And indeed We
know that they (polytheists and pagans) say: ‘It is only a human being
who teaches him (Muhammad 4... ‏الله عليه‎ 1)’. The tongue of the man
they refer to is foreign, while this (the Qur’an) is a clear Arabic
tongue.” (Surah An-Nahl, 16:101-103).

The Qur’anic verses mentioned above contain the affirmation of the
attribute of Speech of Allah. A great controversy has arisen on this
question among the theologians. Some scholars have regarded the
Speech of Allah as created and as separate from His Self. They say
that the speaker means the creator of the speech. This is the creed of
the Mu'‘tazilah. The Kullabiyah"") and the Asha‘irah”! say that
speech is obligatory to the Self of Allah from the eternity. It is not
related to His Will and Power. They regard this Speech as free from
words and sounds, and say that it has a meaning in eternity.

Some extremists think that speech is the name of words and sounds
which is eternal and is part of the Self of Allah. They say that it
forms part of His Self from the eternity. Allah, the Pure and the
Exalted, does not make one speech contradictory to the previous one.

‎4L-Kullabiyah: They are the followers of Abdullah bin Sayeed bin Kullab.‏ ا
‎They believe that Attributes of Allah are not for Him, not for others. They say‏
‎that the Name of Allah are same of His Attributes. They do not differ between‏
‎attributes of Self of Allah and between attribution of actions of Allah.‏

‎2 4LAsha‘irah: They are the tollowers of Abul Hasan Al-Ash‘ari, who was
Mu‘tazili. Then he left E‘tizaal and adopted a way between E ‘tizaal and Ahlus
Sunnah wal-Jama‘ah. ‏هآ‎ his last age, he returned to the creeds of Ahlus Sunnah
and followed Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal in his theories. But some of his followers
still remained on previous belief. They amplify the Attributes of Allah and have
belief similiar to Al-Murji’ah. They are closest to Ahlus Sunnah among all
astrayed sects.

‎113

The Karraamiyah" (or Qaramatians) think that this is subject to
change and exists with the Self of Allah. It relates to His Will and
Power. They have a notion that it has an origin in the Self of Allah.
Allah was not a speaker in the beginning. If we go deep into their
statements and describe their defects this discussion will become
too long. Their defects are evident to those who have a right
understanding and a stable wisdom.

The substance of the creed of the AAlus Sunnah wal Jama ‘ah in this
matter is that whenever Allah wills He speaks and Speech is one of
His Attributes which is established with His Self. He speaks with it
according to His Will and Power and He is always speaking and

will always remain so whenever He wills. And whatever statement
Allah made that is established with His Self and it is not a creature
separate from Him as is claimed by the Mu ‘tazilah. Nor is it implied
in His Self in such a way as life is implied according to the claim of
the Asha ‘irah. It is rather obedient to the Will and Power of Allah.

Allah «t.—. called Moses aloud, called Adam and Eve aloud, and
will call His slaves aloud on the Day of Judgement; and He speaks
aloud while imparting revelation. But the words and the style with
which Allah spoke are His Attributes which are uncreated and they
do not resemble the words and style of the creatures even as the
knowledge of Allah which is established with His Self is not like
the knowledge of His slaves. Allah does not resemble His creatures
in any of His Attributes.

The first two verses negate the'statement that there can be anyone
more truthful than Allah the Magnificent. In fact, Allah is far
beyond every one in being truthful in whatever information He
imparts. The reason is that His Knowledge about whom He gives
information is most encompassing.

) AL-Karraamiyah:They are the followers of Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin
Karram. As-Sijistani who died in 255 H. They are similiar to Mushabbiha,
Mujassimah, Murji’ah and divided in 12 sects.

114
And Allah says, “When Allah will say ‘O Jesus, son of Mary.’” This
describes the question that Allah will put on the Day of Judgement
to His Messenger and His Word Jesus. This question will relate to
the matter that the Christians deified Jesus, and his mother as gods.
Allah will ask him whether he had ordered them to leave Allah
aside and make deities out of him and his mother. This question will
be put to prove the innocence of Jesus and the falsehood and
concoction of those misguided people.

And Allah says, “And the Word... justice.” That is, He is true in
giving news and just in giving orders, for the Words of Allah are
either news which are true to the highest level or they are dos and
don’ts which are based on the maximum amount of Justice. These
do not have even the slightest degree of injustice. The reason is that
these dos and don’ts are based on prudence and mercy. The word
Kalimah has _ been used here in the sense of the plural Kalimaat for
it has been related to the proper noun which will give the meaning
of plurality, just as when we say Rahmatullah, Ni‘matullah.

And Allah says, “- and to Musa ... directly” and the verses that have
occurred after it in which it has been told that Allah called Moses
and spoke to him and, in fact, whispered to him from behind a
curtain and without using an angel as a intermediary, refute the
position taken by the Asha‘irah, for they say that the Speech of
Allah is without a word and voice and is a meaning established with
the Self of Allah. They will be asked about how Moses heard this
physical speech? If they say that Allah put in his heart the essential
knowledge of the meaning which He wanted to speak to him, then
Moses alone will have no special position in that matter. And if
they say that Allah created the speech in the tree and the wind then
this will imply that it was the tree that said to Moses, “Verily! I am
your Lord!” (Surah Ta-Ha, 20:12).

These verses refute their that notion also that speech is a meaning
from the eternity. No speech admits of change in His Self. Allah says:

ChiBoiscsTy >
115
“And when Musa (Moses) came at the time and place
appointed by us and his Lord spoke to him.” (7:143).

This verse shows that the speech took place after the arrival of
Moses on the appointed place. Allah says:

4M ‏الطور‎ ol Sp
“And We called him from the right side of the Mount.” (19:52)

This shows that the Nidaa (call) occurred close to the valley of
Ayman; and Nidaa is that sound that can be heard. Allah says about
Adam and Eve:

oT
“And their Lord called out to them.”

This Nidaa occurred after they had already committed the error, and
so it has definitely taken place. Likewise Allah says:

“And (remember) the Day (Allah) will call to them” (28:65).

This Nidaa and statement will take place on the Day of Judgement.
The Hadith says:

“Allah will talk to each slave individually on the Day of
Judgement and there will be no interpreter between them.”

And Allah says, “And if anyone... Word of Allah.” These blessed
verses show that the pronounced Qur’én which has been recited,
heard and written from cover to cover of the Book alone is the true
Statement of Allah. This is not an interpretation and description of
the Statement of Allah as the Asha ‘irah do. Relating this statement
to Allah the Magnificent, it is clear that this is His Attribute which
is established with His Self. This is not a conjunctive phrase like
Bait-ullah (House of Allah) or Naagat-ullah (She-camel of Allah).
This conjunction of the meaning is towards the Self which argues

116
the proof of the meaning for the Self. The conjunctive phrase of the
house or the camel are conjunctions of the apparent and the
externally existent things. This thing refutes the statement of the
Mu ‘tazilah that the Speech of Allah is created and is separate from
the Self of Allah. These verses also tell that the Qur’4n has
descended from Allah. Allah spoke by using voice and this was
heard by Gabriel and he carried and gave it to Muhammad ‏صلى الله)‎
‏(عليه وسلم‎ exactly as he had heard it from Allah the Magnificent.

The substance of the discussion is that the Arabic Qur’dn is the
Speech of Allah; it has been sent down; it is uncreated. It began
with Allah and will return to Him. It is really Allah Who has spoken
this and therefore it is His Speech rather than of any other. If people
read the Qur’an or write it in a book form, then such an act will not
exclude it from being the Speech of Allah. In fact, the speech will
be related to Him Who uttered it originally and not to him upon
whom it was bestowed. Allah spoke with his syllables, words,
meanings. It does not have the speech of anyone else neither of
Gabriel nor of Muhammad ‏,(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ nor of anyone else other
than them. Allah called it His Speech in His Own Voice. When the
slaves recite it they do so in their own voice. For example when a
reader says in his voice ‘A/hamdu Lillahi Rabbil Aalmeen’ this
heard speech is the Speech of Allah and not the speech of the
reader. But he has recited it in his own voice rather than in the
Voice of Allah. And just as the Qur’an is the Speech of Allah so
also it is the Book of Allah, for He had recorded it in the Guarded
Tablet ‏(اللوح اللحفرظ)‎ and also because it is recorded in Scriptures.

Allah said: te 00

“That (this) is indeed an honourable recital (the Noble
Qur’an). In a Book well-guarded (with Allah in the heaven
ie. Al-Lauh Al-Mahfuz)” (Surah Al-Waqi‘a, 56:77,78);

and said: Ae ‏عر دي‎ teas
42 35 OZ A E>

117
“Nay! This is a Glorious ‏.صة'عد0‎ (Inscribed) in Al-Lauh Al-
Mahfuz (The Preserved Tablet)” (Surah Al-Buruj, 85:21,22);

and said,

“(It is) in Records held (greatly) in honour (Al-Lauh Al-Mahfuz).

Exalted (in dignity), kept pure and holy, In the hands of scribes
(angels). Honourable and obedient.” (Surah ‘Abasa, 80: 13-16).

In fact, the word Qur’4n is an infinitive like the word Qira’at as has
been mentioned in the Statement of Allah:

KGL LMI BY ٍ<

“Verily, the recitation of the Qur’an in the early dawn is ever
witnessed” (Surah Al-Isra’, 17:78).

This means a thing that has been sent down from Allah and
recorded from cover to cover of the manuscript, its recitation is an
act of worship, and by whose small Surah a challenge has been
thrown; the name of that speech is the Qur’an.

And Allah, the Exalted, says, “Say; Ruh-ul-Qudus... truth.” This
verse shows that the beginning of the descent of this speech is from
Allah the Magnificent. The sacred spirit Gabriel has obtained it
from Allah «~~ in a manner which only Allah knows.

118
The believers will have the vision of Allah

in the Hereafter
vote ue 2 2 he ‏عر‎ Mer 4 me ie oe <x
YET e > Cif aN Ld Cele Lovet eA « : ‏وَقَوْلهُ‎
‎Sob BLO EE he 5h Ub Ta 5.8 ‏من‎
‎And He says, “Some faces that Day shall be Nadirah (shining and
radiant) looking at their Lord (Allah).” (Surah Al-Qiyamah,
75:22,23); “On (high) thrones, looking (at all things)” (Surah Al-
Mutaffifin, 83:35); “For those who have done good is the best
(reward, i.e. Paradise) and even more (i.e. having the honour of
glancing at the Countenance of Allah (W% Jr)” (Surah Yunus, 10:26);
“There they will have all that they desire, - and We have more (for
them, i.e. a glance at the All-Mighty, All-Majestic ‏جل جلاله‎ )” (Surah
Qaf, 50:35). There is a great deal in the Qur’an on this subject.

Whoever will endeavour to seek guidance from the Qur’dn, the path
of the Truth will be clear before him.

These verses confirm that on the Day of Judgement the faithful
believers will have the Ré'yat (vision) of Allah in Paradise.

The Mu‘tazilah deny the vision. This denial is based on refusing to
accept Allah in any direction, for it is necessary for a thing being
seen to be in the direction of the seer. But when being in a direction
is impossible which is a condition for vision then vision is also
impossible. They have argued from this Statement of Allah:

GN BY >
“No vision can grasp Him” (Surah Al-An ‘am, 6:103).

When Moses asked Allah to give him the Ri’yat (vision) He said to
Moses:

119
“You cannot see Me, but look upon the mountain if it stands still
in its place then you shall see Me.” (Surah ‏ال‎ ‘raf, 7:143).

The Asha ‘irah while trying to refute the notion that Allah can be in
a direction prove the occurrence of vision. It is for this reason that

they have been led astray while doing exegesis of having the vision
of Allah.

The Asha‘irah while negating Jihat (direction) like the Mu ‘tazilah
prove the Ri’yat (vision) of Allah. Some of them say that they will
see Him from all the sides; some say they will see Him by inner
light rather than by sight. What they mean to say is that there will
be such an excess of inner light and disclosure that it will appear
like a real vision.

The verses that the author has mentioned here constitute arguments
against the theory of the denial of vision expounded by the
Mu‘tazilah. In the first verse, the word Nazar has been made
transitive with the word //a which will mean seeing just as when it
is said, “I have seen towards him” or, “I had a sight of him.” Both
these are in the same sense and the object of seeing here is Allah
the Magnificent.

The Mu‘tazilah interpret “Naazirah” in the sense of “Muntazirah”
(a waiting feminine) and Jia in the sense of favour and from these
the meaning of the passage will follow like this: These faces will be
waiting for the rewards and the favours of their Lord. This
amplification is extremely ridiculous.

From the second verse, it appears that the men of Paradise will be
sitting on thrones and looking towards their Lord. Araa’ik is the
plural of Areekah which means a throne or a cot. Regarding the two
last verses, an authentic Hadith from the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
gives more proof of Seeing the Face of Allah the Magnificent. This
is also borne out by the Statement of Allah about the disbelievers:

120
“Nay! Surely, they (evil-doers) will be veiled from seeing
their Lord that Day.” (Surah Al-Mutaffifin, 83:15).

The covering of these people argues for the fact that the friends of
Allah will see Him. According to the Ulama and scholars of Hadith
there are continuous Ahadith (Ahadith Mutawatirah) regarding the
vision of Allah (Ru pat) which can be denied only by the atheist and
the heretic (Zindeeg""}),

The Mu ‘tazilah have argued from the Qur’Anic verse:
“No vision can grasp Him.”

But, in fact, they have no solid basis for it. The reason is that
negation of perception does not imply that vision cannot occur.
What is meant is that the eyes will see Him but will not be able to
encompass Him by the vision, just as the cognitive faculties
perceive but cannot encompass Him. Perception means seeing a
thing in a way that it is encompassed and included. This is a definite
vision and a negation of the definite does not necessarily imply
negation of an indefinite vision. They also argue in favour of
denying vision on the basis of the Statement of Allah addressed to
Moses saying “Lan Taraani” (You cannot see Me). But even here
they have no solid argument. On the contrary this verse provides
proofs in favour of the vision from different sides.

1. The question about vision was put by Moses who is a Messenger
of Allah and a converser with Him. He indeed knows much more
than the Mu ‘tazilah about the impossible things regarding Allah. If
vision were improbable, Moses would not have asked for it.

2. At the time of Tajalli (Allah making appear His Majesty), Allah
the Magnificent related vision with the stability of the mountain and

") Zindeeq: Literally refers.to those people who appear outwardly to be Muslims
but who possess no Islam inwardly.

121
if the stability is probable then vision which is related to a probable
event must also be probable.

3. Allah carried out Tajaili in practice on a mountain which belongs
to the class of inorganic matters, so Tajalli cannot be improbable
for those who love Him and are the pious ones.

Their statement that in “Lan Taraani” the word Lan is meant to
support negation and proves that the event of vision had not taken
place in a purely personal way, is a fabrication on the Arabic
language and philology.While narrating about the disbelievers,

Allah said:
CNS Sd
“But they will never long for it” (Surah Al-Bagarah, 2:95).
And then further said:

“And they will cry: “O Malik (Keeper of Hell)! Let your Lord
make an end of us” (Surah Az-Zukhruf, 43:77);

In the first verse, He informs that they will never wish for death and
has used the word Lan in it; and in the second verse, He says that
when they will be in Hell they will long for death.

This shows that “Lan Taraani” really means that you do not have
the power to see Me in this world because the human powers are
too weak to have a vision of Allah in the world. If vision were
really improbable, Allah would have used a phrase like, ‘I cannot
be seen,’ or ‘it is not proper that I am seen, ‘or’ I am not the Self
meant for being seen.’ Allah knows better!

Some General Remarks About the Verses on Attributes

The readers can deduce some important rules and principles from
the verses on attributes mentioned by the compiler on this subject.

1. The Salaf are unanimous that it is necessary to have faith in all
the good Names of Allah, the attributes indicated to Him and the

122
actions implied by them.Take for example the word “Power” ‏.(قدرة)‎
‎It is necessary to have faith that Allah has power over everything.
Faith in the perfection of His Power; faith in the matter that the
entire universe has come into being on account of His Power, is
necessary. The same is true for all the good names. The good names
included in these verses are part of the faith in the names and the
qualities mentioned in them such as the reverence for Allah, His
Power, His Knowledge and Intelligence, Intention, and Will. All
these are part of the faith in the attributes. And the absolute and
definitive actions that have been mentioned such as, ‘He knows it
like this,’ ‘He orders for happening what He wills,’ and, ‘He sees
and hears,’ ‘He gives a voice and enters into whispers,’ ‘He spoke
and will speak,’ all these are included in the faith in actions.

2. These Qur’anic texts show that the Attributes of Allah are of
two types:

(i) Attributes related to His Self; from those, His Self is not
separate but it is rather implied that they are eternal. His Will and
Power have ‏مما‎ relation with them such as life, knowledge, power,
strength, reverence, kingship, grandeur, greatness, magnificence,
and majesty.

(ii) The active attributes with which His Will and Power are
constantly related, and they come into being with His Will and
Power. These active attributes are eternal forms in respect of their
quality but subject to change in regard to the individuals. That is
why Allah has always been qualified with them and will remain so;
whatever Allah wills He does and will do; He has always been
speaking and will speak: He creates and makes provisions and will
always do; these have been coming into appearance under His
Intelligence and Intention one after another. It is necessary for the
faithful to have faith in all these acts which are related to His Self as
Allah’s transcendence over the Throne, coming, descending on the
lowest heaven, laughing, being in agreement, wrath, displeasure,
love in relation to the creature such as creating, providing

123
livelihood, killing, and many other actions, etc.

3. To prove that Allah the Magnificent is distinct in every perfect
attribute and that no one is similar to Him in these attributes.

Just as_in the former verses the highest ideals are affirmed only for
Allah and anything conceived to be comparable or similar to Him,
has been negated, so also the argument holds true that Allah is Free
from all defects and drawbacks.

To affirm all the attributes that have been mentioned in the Qur’4n
and the Sunnah, there lies no difference in this connection between
the personal attributes such as Knowledge, Power, Intention, Life,
Hearing, Seeing, etc., and active attributes such as Pleasure, Love,
Wrath, Aversion, etc. Moreover there is no difference between
proving the fact regarding the Face and the Hand and affirmation of
Ascent above the Throne and the Descent, etc. All these attributes
are such about whose affirmation there is consensus among the
Salaf. There is no scope for any amplification or negation in this
connection, nor of resemblance and Ta ‘teel.

Two Groups are opposed to this Standpoint
1. Jahmiyah, who deny all the names and attributes.

2. Mu‘tazilah, who deny all the attributes but prove the names and
the precepts. They say that Allah is Knowledgeable without
knowledge, He is Powerful without power, He is Alive without life,
etc. This statement is absolutely wrong. For to prove the existence
of a qualified one without the existence of the qualifications, and to
prove for the abstract one such qualities as are meant for qualifying an
object, are rationally improbable and also false according to the Shari ‘ah.

But the Asha ‘irah and their followers are in agreement with the
Ahlus Sunnah in affirming seven attributes. They call them the
attributes of meaning and claim to have rational proofs for them.
These attributes are: Life, Knowledge, Power, Intention, Hearing,
Seeing, and Speaking. But except for these seven attributes they

124
support the Mu‘tazilah in denying all the communicated attributes
about whose accuracy information is given, although all the
attributes are usually proved from the Qur’an, the Sunnah, the
consensus of the Sahaba and the virtuous generations bestowed
with sound knowledge.

125
Description of the Attributes of Allah
from Sunnah

535

Bah, ale UN EE, Sa 2 Base EA Bae
wes ‏الأحآِيثٍ الصَّحَاحٍ التي‎ Ge Jess 55 ‏وكا وصّف الوَسُوْلُ به‎ he

8B AS fhe US Bd duis & ‏الإيْمَانُ‎ Cas Sisal ‏ال ارم ة‎
‏ذل الأب الآ قتكو: م‎ gs ‏كل‎ in sa ‏إلى‎ 6

a ab gutsy east Je ‏من‎ JB dyes opt

‎pars‏ وكوك ل «لله ‎Ep AP‏ بتؤبة عَبْدِهِ َب ‎ec) ott‏ من أحَدكم
‎am‏ امن 2 ‎ale‏ ده «يَضْحَكٌ الله إلى ‎wast’ iA gts‏

‎After this, the description 5 the attributes mentioned above is
available in the Sunnah of the Prophet ‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ W). The Sunnah
does the exegesis of the Qur’An, it clarifies its meanings, provides
proofs for it, argues in favour of it, and interprets it. And it is
necessary to have faith in the authentic Ahadith of the Prophet ‏صلى)‎
‏الله عليه وسلم‎ ( in which he has stated the Attributes of Allah the Mighty
and the Magnificent, and which have been acknowledged by the men
of vision. For example, the saying of the Prophet (ploy ‏الله عليه‎ Le):
“Our Lord descends to the lowest heaven nearer to the earth when
one-third of the night remains, and says, ‘Who is that who will call
Me so that I answer him. Who is that who puts a question to Me so
that I fulfill it. Who is that who implores pardon from Me so that I

‎126
pardon him’.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

And the saying of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ : “Allah is so pleased at
the repentance of that faithful slave as anyone from amongst you is
pleased after finding his lost riding animal.” (Al-Bukhari and
Muslim). “Allah the Blessed and the Exalted laughs at two such men
one of whom kills the other and both of them enter Paradise.” (Al-
Bukhari and Muslim). The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ then says, “Our
Lord has astonished when He looks at you on account of the
despondency of His slaves and the closeness of His goodness in the
condition that you are in misery and despondency. Then He starts
laughing knowing that your relief is nearby.” This is a Hasan Hadith
(Da‘eef: Ibn Majah/Musnad 4/11).

The statement of the author is joined with the sentence occurring
before it, after this is the Sunnah of the Prophet ‏عليه وسلم)‎ wi ‏.(صلى‎ It
means that all that is also included in the past attributes which the
Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ has described in words as Attributes of Allah
and has bequeathed for us in the form of the authentic Sunnah.

Sunnah is the second root towards which it is necessary for us to
turn and to believe in which, after the Book of Allah, is obligatory.

Allah says: 5 8 cee

“Allah has sent down to you the Book (The Qur’an), and A/-
Hikmah (Islamic laws, knowledge of legal and illegal things i.e.
the Prophet’s Sunnah— legal ways),” (Surah An-Nisa’, 4:113).

By Hikmat, He means Sunnah and He says:
“And instructing them (in) the Book (the Qur’an) and Al-
Hikmah [the wisdom of the Sunnah of the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه‎
‏وسلم‎ (ie. his legal ways, statements, acts of worship, etc)],”
(Surah Al- ‘Imran, 3:164).

And Allah said:

“And_ remember (O you the members of the Prophet’s family,
the Graces of your Lord), that which is recited in your houses
of the Verses of Allah and A/-Hikmah” (Surah Al-Ahzab, 33:34)

And He said: 5 7

“And whatsoever the Messenger (Muhammad ‏عليه رسام‎ wi ‏منى‎ )
gives you, take it and whatsoever he forbids you, abstain
(from it).”(Al-Hashr, 59:7).

And the Prophet ‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ Le) said:
‏وَمثله معن‎ SE aif ‏«آلا إن‎
“Listen! I have been given the Qur’an and resembling it one more
thing along with it.” [That is, Hadith Sahih (Abu Daud 12/355)].

Thus there is the order to follow Sunnah; its knowledge, conviction,
belief and practice is equivalent to following the Qur’an. Sunnah is
the elucidation of the Qur’an and describes its meanings.:This gives
details to its generalities, delimits what is specific and specifies
what is general, as Allah has said:

“And We have also sent down unto you (O Muhammad ‏على‎
‏عليه وسلم‎ ai) the reminder and the advice (the Qur’4n), that you

may explain clearly to men what is sent down to them”
(Surah An-Nahl, 16:44).

People of innovation (Bid‘ah) and lustful desires are divided into
two groups in face of the authentic Sunnah:

1. One partycomprises those who are not afraid of denying the
authentic Ahadith when they go against their creed. They claim that
these are miscellaneous Ahadith which are only conjecture while on
matters of faith total clarity is necessary. This is the party of the
Mu ‘tazilah and the philosophers.

128
2. The other party tries to prove them and has faith in the
authenticity of the narratives, but does not carry out amplifications
of these Ahadith in the same way as it carries out the amplifications
of the Qur’dn. So much so that it diverts attention from their
apparent meanings and turns them towards meanings related to
heresy and distortion. And these are the Asha ‘irah of the latter
period. Those who took the maximum liberty in this subject were
Al-Ghazaali and Ar-Raazi.

The author writes that it is enjoined to have faith in all of what
Allah has described in His Book without introducing distortion,
reduction, condition and resemblance, and likewise, it is also
enjoined to have faith in all those matters through which the
Messenger of Allah ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ) who knew most about his Lord
among the creatures and who knew all that is enjoined for it to
know, has described the Attributes of Allah. By using the word,
‘likewise’ the author has tried to say that it is enjoined to have faith
in them as in those mentioned above, which should be free from
distortion, reduction, condition and resemblance and should rather
affirm them in a manner which is worthy of the Greatness of Allah
the Magnificent.

The author says, “the saying of the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ( ...” This
Hadith will be discussed from two aspects:

1. This narrative is correct and the author says that there is agreed
upon about it. Haafiz Adh-Dhahabee says in his book A/- ‘Uloo:

“The Hadith regarding descent are continuous to the point of
being convincing and because of them there is no possibility
of denial.”

2. The meaning that this Hadith reveals, that is, Allah descends
every night signifies that descent is an Attribute of Allah which is
worthy of His Glory and Greatness. It does not resemble the descent
of the creature just as His being rose over (/stiwaa’) does not
resemble the rising of the creature.

129
The Sheikh-ul-Islam («ti ‏(رحمه‎ says in the explanation of the Surah
Al-Ikhlas (The Sincerity):

“According to the attribute described by the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه)‎
‏,(وسلم‎ Allah ‏سبحانه‎ descends from the Throne to the lower
heaven every night. He is close to the pilgrims of the Hajj in
the evening of Arafah, and He talked to Moses in the valley of
Ayman at the blessed Place of the Tree. Then He rose over
towards the heaven when it was smoke, and said, to it and to
the earth: Come both of you, willingly or unwillingly. This
does not imply that these acts form part of the genre of those
acts which are related to the descent of the creature, which
may be construed to mean that it signifies vacation of one
place by him and occupation of another place.” (Daga ’ig-ut-
Tafseer, 6/424)
The Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah have faith that descent is a real
attribute in the quality Allah wishes for Himself, just as they prove
all the attributes which are proved in the Qur’an and the Sunnah.
They stop at this point-neither do they describe the quality of these
attributes nor state their resemblance, and neither do they negate
nor reduce. They say that the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ told us, “Allah
descends, but he did not tell us regarding the way He descends.” He
taught us that Allah does what He intends to do, and that He wields
power over everything. That is why you see the select believers—
who try to obtain the mercies and disposals of Allah, worship Him,
pray and invoke Him with humility and submissiveness and expect
from Him whatever He has promised through the tongue of His
Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ )-that they will receive those objects.

The Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ) says, “ Allah is so pleased...”. The
explanation of this phrase in Sahih Al-Bukhari etc., has come in
this way:

27%

GS ‏وَقَدْ‎ BELG ‏رأسوء‎ Ue Sig pS ‏عَنْهَاء‎ IS ‏وَشَرَابُكُ‎ Bub Whe

130
a5 OS phat ‏أدْركَه الْمَوْتُ مِنَ‎ Lo ule us ‏في طَلَهَاء فَلَمْ‎ CA

“Allah is very happy with the repentance of that faithful of
His who was in a flat grassless plain. He had with him his
riding animal laden with his articles of food and drink. He
alighted from his animal and slept. His animal was close to
his head but when he woke up, he found his animal was
missing. He set out to look for it but did not find it. He was on
the verge of death due to thirst and he said, ‘By Allah, I-will
return and die there where I had alighted.’ So he returned and
slept at that place again. When he woke up he found his
animal standing close to his head. He felt overjoyed and said,
‘O Allah! You are my slave and I am your Lord.”

This Hadith affirms the Divine attribute of happiness and this is like
all other attributes. This is real attribute worthy of the Grace of
Allah. This is an active attribute which is subservient to His Will
and Power. This meaning of happiness is displayed at that time
when. the slave gives expression to repentance and penitence. From
a slave of Allah who is repentant, Allah’s Pleasure and His
acceptance of the penitence is implied.

There are several types of joys in the creature. Sometimes it is a joy
of physical comfort and pleasure and happiness and sometimes of
pride and conceit. Allah is free from all this. His joy does not
resemble the joy of the creature, neither in His Self, nor in the
causes and nor in the objects. The reason for this joy is the
perfection of Mercy-of Allah and His Obligation, on account of
which Allah wishes from His slaves that they achieve it. The aim is that
Allah accomplishes His favours on the repentant and contrite slaves.

The explanation of joy through its implied agreement and the
explanation of agreement through intention and reward, is negation

131
and damaging of the Joy and Pleasure of Allah. This is an illusion
of those Mu‘attilah about their Lord that they have developed a
notion that these meanings would be the same in respect of Allah as
in the case of the creature. Allah is far higher than their act of
showing resemblance and reduction.

The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “Allah laughs... and enter Paradise.”
Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah understand from Laughter of Allah
what is evident from this Hadith. Allah is qualified with this
attribute in the same way as is worthy of His Majesty. This laughter
does not resemble the laughter of the creatures in that when they
feel stimulated by happiness and pleasure they laugh. It is rather a
meaning that is born in His Self at that time when His Self demands
it. It comes into display along with His Will and Intelligence. The
attribute of Laughter is born in the creature at that time when he
sees in something a unique and interesting aspect compared with
others. This Hadith mentions the same condition.

Moreover, the killing of a Muslim by a Kafir by having him
overwhelmed is apparently the cause for Allah’s Wrath on that
Kafir and the cause of His Remorse and Doom, but afterwards if
Allah obliged him and helped him to become repentant and guided
him to enter the fold of Islam, and then he fought for the sake of
Allah and received martyrdom, and he will enter Paradise. These
are really from amongst strange phenomena. This is the obligation
of Allah, His Mercy and His Nobility on His slaves. A Muslim
fights for the sake of Allah and a Kafir kills him; the Muslim is
bestowed martyrdom by Allah, then Allah obliges the killer and
guides him to enter the fold of Islam and get martyrdom for His
sake. In this way both of them enter Paradise.

To amplify the Laughter of Allah in terms of pleasure and
acceptance or to say that a certain thing is worth laughing before
Allah but is really not laughter, negates the statement of the Prophet
‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ attributing to Allah. This is a negation of what the
Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ said, about his Lord, and so it does not
deserve attention.

132
The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “Allah felt astonished...”
This Hadith proves the attribute of astonishment for Allah.
The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says in this sense:

“Your Lord feels astonished at that youth who has no
eagerness,” (Da ‘eef: Musnad 4/151)

and Ibn Masood recited:
“] rather felt astonished and they cut jokes.”

The astonishment of Allah, the Exalted, is not due to unawareness
of the causes or ignorance of the truths of the matter as is found in
the astonishment of the creature. It is rather a meaning which comes
into being under the Will and Intelligence of Allah when its
presence is demanded; and it is such a thing about which itis
justified to feel astonished.

This astonishment, with which the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ 85
proved that Allah is attributed, form part of His Perfection and His
Mercy. When the rain has stopped and the people need it acutely
and despair has overwhelmed their face, their sight remains limited
to only the external factors and they think that they will not receive
relief anymore from Allah Who is so close and so responsive, then
Allah feels astonished at them.

In fact, this is a strange stage when the people become despaired
while the Mercy of Allah is so widespread over everything and the
means to achieve this Mercy are innumerable. The prayer to receive
rains and to remain hopeful from Allah about it is one of these
factors. The habit of Allah about the creature in general is that He
brings relief after pain and ease after hardship. The hardship does
not stay for long. When the slave of Allah takes help from
invocation, expressing desire of the nobility of Allah, with humility
and prayer, then Allah opens up the treasures of His Mercy upon
him, of which he did not have the slightest notion.

133
The word Qunoot means being disappointed of the Mercy of Allah.
Allah states:

“And who despairs of the Mercy of his Lord except those who
are astray?” (Surah Al-Hijr, 15:56).

The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “Wa qurba khairihi”, that is, the
nearness of the Mercy and Bounty of Allah. And in one narrative

the word Ghairihi has been reported in place of Khairihi and this
word is a noun. Just as when you say: ‘I have changed the thing and
it got changed’. In the Hadith regarding Istisqa’ (prayer for rain), it

has occurred: 2
“Whoever commits Kufr against Allah he will be subjected to
change,”

That is, his condition will be changed and will turn into a position
of wickedness from the position of betterment.

The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ said: “in misery and despondency.”
These two words have been as a circumstantial phrase governed by the
pronoun /laikum. The word Azileen (misery) is the plural of the active
noun Azil which has been derived from Azal. The word signifies
acuteness and misery such as when it is said, Azilar-Rajulu is from the
Baab Sami ‘a and means ‘the man fell into acuieness and misery.’

134
Affirmation of the Foot and the Step
for Allah ‏ع وجل‎

7 8 - وي روا لها فت فك

“rates bel uth “alg aa ti ey : ‏وَكَولَةُ‎ ie 8s ‏قط قط‎
. ‏عليه‎ ES ٠. 10) J Bass eA ‏الل يام مرك‎ By sey cos
‏وَقَوْلهُ في‎ ٠ S33 hay SS ‏ولس‎ Bs ‏ين أحدٍ إلا ْم‎ pi ‏ما‎ Beis
‏في السَمَآءِ‎ WAN ‏ني ال مآع تَقَدَسَ اشمُكٌ.‎ gill ‏الله‎ Gp “yal yall ‏رقية‎

Gt Gib ost ‏السّمَآءِ اجْمَلْ رَحْمَئَكَ في‎ fits pus eg
sles ‏من‎ Hits hess ‏رَحْمَةٌ مِنْ‎ Uz igh bs ‏وَخَطَايَانَاء أَنْتَ‎
Vo ‏د 346 وَغَيْدهُ. وَقَولَهُ:‎ Big ts hs ‏على هذا لوجع يَأ‎
Gs toy B55 ee Liss atl 3 ‏من‎ Sel thy ‏ني‎ sali
58 BN 152 Sat Saas le ‏م‎ eit U6 $s ‏وَهُوَ‎ PAN Sp ‏واف‎ «elt
‏أنا؟».‎ ta ‏قَالَ:‎ sa ‏في‎ ots ‏للْجَارِية: «أَيْنَ الله؟»‎ ais bs
i ‏رَوَاهُمُسَلِم. دقو‎ aps GB est ‏الله. قَالَ:‎ O85 GH ‏قَالّث:‎
‎76 Bp tabs  ٌنَسَح‎ Gigs cats cal ‏أن الله مَمَكَ‎ pls ‏أن‎ aa
‏وَجْهِو‎ GS HEB ah ‏قبل وَجْهدِء وَلأَعَنْ‎ GSE ‏الصّلآة؛‎ Asis
Be bw ‏أو تخت‎ kes ‏عَنْ‎ iss

The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says that people will be constantly
thrown into Hell but it will go on asking if there are some more. Thus,
Alléh the Lord of Might, will put His Foot in it, and in one narrative
it has occurred that He will put His Step in it, and Hell will get

135

contracted and say, ‘Enough, enough.’ (4/-Bukhari, 6/353). The
Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says that Allah will say, “0 Adam,” and they
will say, “We are present.” Then He will call with a voice that Allah
cammands you to take out a group of your progeny from Hell. (AJ-
Bukhari, 8/352). The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “Allah will speak
to each one of you in a condition that there will be no interpreter
between the two? (4/-Bukhari, 9/446). About the incantation of the
patient, the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “O our Rabb! O Allah!
Your Name is sacred in the heaven. Your Command runs in both the
heaven and the earth. Send Your Mercy on the earth as it exists in
heaven. Pardon our major and minor sins. You are the Lord of the
pious people. Send down Your Mercy and Cure so that the patient
recovers from the present agony” (Da‘eef, Abu Daud:At-Tibb). This
Hadith is Hasan and has been narrated by Abu Daud etc. The
Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “Why don’t you recognise me as a
trustee; [ am regarded as a trustee even by the Lord of the heaven”.
This Hadith is authentic. The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “And the
Throne is above the water and Allah is above the Throne, and He
knows on what you are”. This Hadith is Hasan and has been
transmitted by Abu Daud etc. The Prophet (gy ae ‏الله‎ le) had
asked a slave woman, “Where is Allah?” She said, “Above the
heaven.” The Prophet said, “Who am I?” She said, “You are the
Messenger of Allah.” The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ said, “Free her,
she is a believing woman.” (Muslim). The Prophet says, “The highest
degree of Faith is that you keep in mind that wherever you are, Allah
is with you.” This Hadith is Hasan, The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says,
“When any of you is engaged in the prayer, he should neither spit in
the front nor in his right side, Allah is in front of you. You should
rather spit on the left side or near the foot” (A/-Bukhari, 1/241).

The Prophet (L-; ‏(صلى الله عليه‎ said, “people will be... thrown into Hell.”
The Hadith affirms that Allah possesses feet and steps; and this
attribute is exactly like other attributes. This will be proved worthy
of the Grandeur of Allah. The rationale behind putting the step into
Hell is that Allah has promised that He will fill up Hell. He has said:

136
“Surely, I shall fill Hell with jinns and men all together”. (Surah
Hud, 11:119).

The demand of the Mercy and Justice of Allah was that He would
not bring doom on anyone without his committing a sin, and Hell is
very wide and deep. Allah will fulfill His Promise and put His Step into
it, which will close up both its ends and no space will remain vacant.

Albeit, enough space will remain unoccupied because of the
inhabitants of Paradise, due to the fact that Allah will bestow
Paradise to its inhabitants frequently and widely. For this Allah will
bring into being other creatures as is proved by the Hadith.

The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “Allah will say, ‘O Adam’...” Both
these Ahadith affirm the statement of voice and speech. We have
stated before this the creed of Ah/us Sunnah that they believe that
these are the active Attributes of Allah which are subordinate to His
Will and Intelligence. Allah has said and will say; He has given the
voice and will give the voice; He has made a speech and will make
a speech. His Statement, Voice and Speech take place with letters
and sounds. One to whom He speaks, he hears. This includes the
refutation of the stand taken by the Asha ‘irah that the Speech of
Allah is primeval and is without letter or sound.

The second Hadith shows that Allah will speak to each one of His
slaves directly. This speech is general, for it is the conversation
regarding accounting of the deeds which is common for all—
believers, disbelievers, good and bad. This does not negate that
Statement of Allah in which He says:
‏«ولاب كله الله‎
“And Allah will not speak to them,”
For here that speech is denied which is a source of pleasure for the
speaker and such a speech is specific. As opposed to this there is the

talk with the men of Paradise which is the speech of love,
agreement and obligation.

137
The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “O our Rabb, Your Name...” The
first Hadith is clear about the height and elevation of Allah such as
Allah says: 7

“Have you taken security from Him Who is in the heaven.”

We have already mentioned that these texts never mean that Allah
has adopted the heaven as if it were a container. In fact the word Fi
will be understood in the sense of ‘A/a that is at as it has been stated
by a large majority of lexicographers and linguists and, moreover,
Fi has been used in the sense of ‘A/a (over) in many places such 5
this Statement of Allah: ‏و‎

1 will surely crucify you on the trunks of palm-trees” (Surah

Ta Ha, 20:71).

And the word Sama means the direction of height. And in both
these forms the attribute of height will be proved for Allah by way
of elucidation.

In the Hadith of Rugyah (incantation) mentioned above while
praising the Ruboobiyah and Uloohiyah of Allah and the
sacredness of His Name, His domination over the creature, the.
generality of His legal and deterministic issues, means of His
approach has been adopted. Then the means of His Mercy has been
adopted, which is common to all the heavens, so that He givesa
portion of this Mercy to the people of the earth also. Then the
means of the pardon of the major sins has been adopted, then of
those faults which are below them; then of the virtuous slaves of
Allah, that is the means of His Lordship specially related to the
Prophets and the class immediately below them. The sign of that
special lordship is that they have been raised with the favours of the
material and spiritual, and of the external and the internal worlds.
The prayer of those who adopt these means of approach that are
related to Allah will not be rejected. That is why the Prophet ‏صلى)‎

138
‎prayed for recovery after these invocations for now it is‏ ( الله عليه وسلم
‎the recovery by Allah which never leaves without curing a disease‏
‎completely. It has no connection with anything other than Allah.‏

‎Will those people who adopt the intermediation of right, status,
personalities, and honour, etc., and who worship the graves follow
this point?

‎The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “The Throne is above the water...”
He has described in it, the Highness of Allah and His encompassing
the knowledge of all that exists. That Glorified is extremely Exalted
despite being close, and retains closeness in His Highness.

‎The fourth Hadith describes the evidence of the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه)‎
‏(وسلم‎ about the Faith of that slave-girl who recognised the (‘Uloo)
Highness of Allah over the creatures. This shows that Highness is
one of the great Attributes of Allah so that instead of putting other
questions, the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ put a question about it. This
Hadith also shows that to have faith in the Highness of Allah is one
of the great principles of Faith. Whoever denies this will remain
deprived of the right Faith.

‎One wonders at those Mu‘attilah who in their pride negate the
Attributes of Allah and consider themselves more knowledgeable
about Allah than the Prophet ‏.(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ They negate the word
‘where’ from the Self of Allah while exactly this same word was
used by the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه رسلم)‎ while putting questions to
others, as is contained in this Hadith, and he had given a similar
reply to a questioner who had asked “Where was our Lord...”

‎The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “The highest degree of Faith...”
This argues that the position of Faith, kind deeds and meditation is
the noblest, that is, the slave of Allah should worship Him in such a
way as if he is seeing Him and is observing Him, and keep in mind
that Allah is with him wherever he lives. Whatever a man says,
whatever he does, and in whatever he is engaged, Allah keeps a
watch over him in all conditions and remains informed of him.

‎139
Allah says:

“Whatever you (O Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ may be doing,
and whatever portion you may be reciting from the Qur’4n, —
and whatever deed you (mankind) may be doing (good or
evil), We are Witness thereof, when you are doing it” (Surah
Yunus, 10:61).

There is no doubt in it that when a slave will feel this
companionship in all conditions, he will feel ashamed of Allah
seeing him do a thing which He has forbidden him from doing, or,
that he does not do that which Allah has commanded him to do. He
will receive help in it from protecting himself from committing the
forbidden acts and in performing the acts of His obedience in the
best possible manner, whatever this is in respect of the external
matters or in respect of the internal ones. This is more specially true
when he performs prayer which is the best way of initimate
conversation between Allah and his slave. This will create humility
in his heart and the Glory and Majesty of Allah will remain in his
view. This will save him from being impolite to Allah, and will also
save him from spitting to his front or to his right.

‘The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “When any of you is engaged in the
prayer...” This shows that Allah remains in front of the worshipper.

Sheikh-ul-Islam has said in Al-Ageedatul Hamawiyah, that the
Hadith is true in its manifest meaning that Allah the Exalted is over
the Throne and that He is in front of the face of the worshipper.
This attribute is in fact proved for the creature also that if man prays
to the heaven or to the sun or the moon then the heaven, the sun anc
the moon will be above him and also in front of his face.

140
Some Names and Attributes of Allah

approved from Sunnah

G5 echt ral Ons Lec gel ‏السَموَاتٍ‎ Ss 5 pb 8 xb,

‎Oj “sls Ssh BE eid Ys Sos‏ التّْرَاةِ وَالإنْجيْلٍ وَالْقُرآنِء أعَوْدُ

‏بك ‎ie‏ َي ومن 53 5 ‎B15‏ أنت آذ مها نت الأول بن ‎st‏

‎Loy ial ‏مِنَ‎ ath ‏الدئْنَ‎ Fe ‏افْضِ‎ tid Oh GB tb ‏َأنْتَ‎
‎is

‎ee‏ 35 الصّحَابَةُ أضْوَاتَهُمْ بالذّكْر: «ُيْهَاالنَسسُ! ارْبعًُا عَلَى

‎Aas ei ih ‏تع ولخي‎ 26S ‏نكم‎ 98

‎Xp hy he GE ‏رَاحِلَيا‎ SS ‏أَحَدِكُمْ مِنْ‎ J dl Oye i

‏سَتَرَوْنَ ‎ll yg Us Re‏ يه ابكار لا تَصَاُوْنَ ني ‎US ad‏ اشتطلكم

‎ied ‏ُرْوْبهَا؛‎ Shey ‏طُلوْعٍ الشّمْسٍ‎ Bis Je ANY SI

‎And_ the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “O our Lord! The Lord of the
seven heavens and the earth, the Lord of the great Throne and our
Lord and the Lord of everything, the Splitter of the seed and the date-
stone, Bringer of the Torah, the Jnjeel, and the Qur’an, I seek
through You the refuge from the mischief of myself, from the mischief
of everything and the living being which is in Your possession. You
are the First, nothing is before You; You are the Last nothing is after
You; You are the High, nothing is above You; You are the Near,
nothing is nearer than You. Defray our debt and render us carefree

‎141
from poverty”. (Muslim).

When the Sahaba raised their voices at the time of the recitation of
Du‘a, the Prophet (ploy ‏(صلى الله عليه‎ said, “O people! Keep yourselves
under control. You are not calling a deaf or an absent Self. You are
calling a Hearing, Seeing and a close Self. He is nearer to you than the
neck of your riding animal”. (4/-Bukhari, 8/262). “You will see your
Lord in a way as you see the moon in the fourteenth night (of the
lunar month) in whose vision there will be no obstruction for you. If
you can regularly establish the worships to be performed before the
rise of the sun and before the sun sets, then do perform them.” (A/-
Bukhari, 6/355).

The Prophet says, “O our Lord...” This Hadith contains the Names
of Allah - the First, the Last, the High, and the Near, etc. These
names are from among the elegant ones, The Prophet («te ‏صلى الله‎
‏(وسلم‎ has done such an explanation of them that no one can find
scope to add anything more in it. He is the knower of the Names of
his Lord more than that of the entire creatures and also knows best
the meanings proved by these names. Therefore it is not permissible to
give heed to the statement of any other person whoever he might be.

The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has also taught us in this Hadith the
way we should praise our Lord before asking Him for anything. He
praises Allah through His general Lordship which is common to all;
then he praises Him through His special Lordship which is in the
form of those three Scriptures which contain light and guidance for
His slaves, Then he seeks refuge in Allah, the Glorified, against the
mischief of his lusts and the lusts of each creature; and then at the
end of the Hadith he requests for the acquital of debts, that is, being
free from poverty.

He says, “O people! Keep...” This Hadith shows the nearness of
Allah to His slaves. It is not necessary that one invokes Him loudly; |
He knows even the secrets and the whispers. The nearness
mentioned in the Hadith is a nearness that encompasses things in

142
general, such as knowledge, hearing and seeing. These are not
contrary to the Transcendance of Allah over the creatures.

These authentic and continuous Ahadith are witnesses and
reinforcers of the Qur’anic verses mentioned above which refer to
the vision of Allah and seeing the Face of Allah in Paradise by the
faithful ones. These two texts of the Qur’anic verses and the Ahadith
prove two facts:

1. The Transcendance of Allah over the creature, for the texts are
clear on the issue that the slaves of Allah will see Him above them.

2. The greatest of favours is to see the Noble Face of Allah.

The Prophet ‏عليه وسلم)‎ wi ‏(صلى‎ says, “You will see your...” This means
stating resemblance of one kind of vision with another kind of
vision rather than of a visible thing with another visible thing. In
other words, the seeing of Allah by His slaves will be so evident
and clear as the seeing of the moon in its complete form when it is
both complete and without the obstruction of a cloud. That is why
he further said, “There will be no obstruction...” which means
closeness to the point of being in touch, another meaning with
slightly different pronunciation will be injustice and the Hadith will
purport to mean that you will find no misplacement or defrauding in
His vision.

The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has in this Hadith particularly
mentioned the Fajr and ‘Asr prayers and has indicated that whoever
offers them in congregation he will get perfect favours compared
with which all the other favours are worthless. This Hadith gives an
indication of both these prayers. This is supported by the following
Hadith also. The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه رسلم)‎ says:

2

0 oy ita)
“The angels of night and the angels of day come amongst you
by turns and join one another in the Fajr and ‘Asr prayers.”
(Al-Bukhari 1/310, and Muslim).

143
Ahlus-Sunnah wal Jama‘ah are moderate
among all sects of Ummah

$y BE ‏كي عَنْ 5 بمَا‎ al Opts ‏فِيهَا‎ 5S ‏هذه الأحَاديْثِ الي‎ JET ‏ِلَى‎
‎wa te gal Gs ‏بِذْلِكَ؛‎ Spake ‏وَالْجَمَاعَة‎ La ‏التاجيّة أَهْلَ‎ a 0
‏فى يي‎ Aigks pauses hap 9s
Brac fon ily ‏التَّمطِيل الْبجهْمية‎ Belo Judy Gis ‏الله‎ oli,
Bees ‏وَفِيْ بكب‎ a fs Billy 3 ps ‏وَهُمْ وَسَطّ في باب أفْعَالٍ الل ينَ‎
obey! [elas] ‏وَفِي باب‎ ٠ ong BA Sys Sates [oly x ‏بين الْمُوْجِكةٍ‎
Sat AAT ‏وَالْجَهْمية» وَفِي‎ Berth 555 2 ‏ن 36 الحَوُوْرِية وَالْمُعْمَِلَ‎
ele Cals Mails G6 ‏يك‎ a
In such Ahadith in which the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ gives
information about Allah the Mighty and the Glorious, the men of the
Saved Sect, Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah, have faith in the same
manner as they have faith on the information given about them by
Allah in His Book without distortion and negation and without
adding quality and resemblance. In fact, among all the sects of the

Ummah, this sect alone is moderate just as the community of Muslims
is a moderate one among all the communities.

The followers of the Ahius Sunnah wal Jama‘ah occupy a moderate
position between the Ahlut Ta‘teel (Jahmiyah)"' and Ahlut-Tamtheel

©) Al-Jahmiyah: This sect of people came out in the last era of Umawi empire. It
belongs to “Jahm bin Safwan” At-Tirmidhi. They deny the Names and Attributes
of Allah, similiar to the extremists of Murji’ah and Jabariyah.

144

(Mushabbiha)"' , and are moderate between the Jabariyah"! sect and
the Qadariyah"! sect regarding the Acts of Allah, and are moderate
about the Promises of Allah between the Murji’ah'! and the
Wa‘eediyah®! sects among Qadariyah, and are moderate on matters of
the Faith and names of the religion between Harooriyah and

"1 4L-Mashabbiha: They are also called Al-Mujassimah They are opponent of
Al-Jahmiyah in affirmation of Names and Attributes of Allah. They believe that
Allah possesses Hand similiar to the hand of creatures, Hearing as hearing of
creatures, Sight as sight of creatures etc, Exalted is Allah from that the wrong-
doers say about Him. He is High and Great.

21 4)-Jabariyah: They are Al-Jahmiyah and all those people who follow them.
Their belief is that slaves have no will and power to do good deeds and avoid
bad. They are enforced to do all. Therefore, they are opponent of Al-Qadariyah.

‎4l-Qadariyah: They are Al-Mu'tazilah and all those who agreed with them.‏ اذا
‎Their belief is that Allah the Exalted has enjoined the slaves to do good and‏
‎forbided them from evil. He doesn’t know His obedient slaves from among‏
‎disobedients but only after committing the good or bad deeds. They are opponent‏
‎of Al-Jabariyah.‏

‎4 4l-Murji’ah: They believe that Jman (Faith) is the name of testimony of heart
and confession through tongue only. Actions through limbs are not the part of
Faith. One group of them called Karramiyah says that Iman is only the
confession of tongue. The extremists of them say: “It is only the testimony of
heart, and Shahadatain is not to be proclaimed. They say that committing sins
does not harm Iman, and likewise good acts do not benefit in state of Kufr
(disbelief).

‎‘| 4l-Wa‘eediyah: They are same as Qadariyah in the implementation of
Wa‘eed. They believe that if a person committing the major sin, dies without
repentance, he will be in Hell-fire forever. The reason is that Allah has promised
the sinners to Hell and Dooms and He never breaks His Promise.

‎when‏ ,», سك ‎4L-Harooriyah: They are Al-Khawarij who rebelled against Ali‏ كا
‎These people gathered in a place‏ .ردي ‎he accepted arbitration with Mu‘awiyah « w‏
‎named “Haroora” which is located at two miles from Kufa and named‏
‎Harooriyah in this respect.‏

‎145
“Mu ‘tazilah, and between Murji’ah and Jahmiyah, and are moderate
regarding the Companions of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ between the
Raafidah" and the Khawarij”! .

The author says, “In such Ahadith..” The Ahadith that the compiler
has mentioned here are not all the Ahadith related to the Attributes
of Allah proved by the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ but rather some of
them. The compiler has stated that such Ahadith, in which the
Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه رسلم)‎ has given information about the Exalted
Lord, also carry the same command about them, that is, the names
and attributes mentioned in them must be believed in. After that, he
has mentioned the beliefs of the Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama ‘ah that
they should have faith in the attributes existing in the authentic
Sunnah in the same way as in the matters stated by Allah about
Himself in the Book of Allah, that is, without amplifications,
distortions, reductions, and without giving them a quality or
resemblance.

Then the author says, that the Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah are the
moderate community between the deviationists and the misguided
of this nation just as the Muslim nation is a moderate nation
between the nations of the past, Allah says:

“Thus We have made you [true Muslims — real believers of

Islamic Monotheism, true followers of Prophet Muhammad
‏صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ and his Sunnah (legal ways)], a just (and the

1 Ar-Raafidah: They are the extremist sect of Shiite (Shi‘a) who gave up Zaid
bin Ali bin Husain when he showed love to Abu Bakr and Umar (us 1,2, ).
They disregarded him in Kufa and adopted the same attribute as they have done
with his grandfather i.e. Husain.

21 AL-Khawarij: They are Al-Khawarij who rebelled against Ali « ‏رمي س‎ when he
accepted arbitration with Mu‘awiyah « w ,»,. These people gathered in a place
named “Haroora” which is located at two miles from Kufa and named
Harooriyah in this respect.

146

best) nation, that you be witnesses over mankind and the

Messenger (Muhammad ‏عليه وسلم‎ wi ‏(صلى‎ be a witness over you”
(Surah Al-Bagarah, 2:143).

‘Just’ means - moderate and better, as has already occurred in the
Hadith. ‏هآ‎ this way this nation is moderate among all those nations
which fell into fatal extremism of deviation from the Straight Path
or got strayed due to short sightedness. There are many nations
which committed exaggeration about the creatures and ascribed
them the attributes and privileges of the Creator just as the
Christians committed exaggeration about the Messiah and the
monks. There are some in these communities who acted unjustly
with the Prophets and Messengers and went to the extent of
murdering them and rejected their mission such as the Jews who
killed Prophet Zacharia and Yahya (John) and tried to crucify Jesus
and levelled false charges against him. But this Muslim nation has
faith in all those Messengers who were sent by Allah; it believes in

their teachings and recognises their lofty status with which they
were bestowed.

There are some such communities also who refused to act according
to the prohibited or permissible things and some committed
extremism and made even the permitted and sacred things as
forbidden, but for this Muslim nation, Allah held the sacred things
permissible and the filthy and profane things as forbidden. These
things apart, there are a number of issues through which Allah
obliged this perfect nation and made it a better nation.

Likewise the ‏عاطق‎ Sunnah wal Jama ‘ah are on the Right Path and
a moderate people among the heretical innovators and from those
who strayed from the Straight Path.

The author says, “in matters of the Attributes of Allah they are
moderates...” The Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah are a moderate
group among those who negate and reduce the Exalted Self of Allah
from His Supreme Attributes and rather deny them, and divert the

147
correct meanings of the Qur’anic verses and the authentic Ahadith
that relate to the Attributes of Allah, to their own assumed
meanings without any valid reasoning and clear understanding. For
example, they call the Mercy of Allah, His Will for Goodness and
call His Hand as His Power, so also they call His Eye as His
protection and watchfulness, and His rising Himself over His
Throne as His domination. Likewise there are also many varieties of
negation and reduction of which, along with the belief in Allah,
they are captives of their own make -beliefs, and are under the
illusion that the establishment of these attributes with Allah can be

understood on the same lines as the establishment of the attributes
in the creatures. Someone has aptly remarked:

“The brief story of those who resort to amplification is that
they set up a number of notions and one of these is the various

things they say about the Most Merciful which they do not
know themselves.”

The Jahmiyah are called the people of nullification or negation.
This ideology relates to Al-Jahm Ibn Safwan At-Tirmidhi, the
leader of straying and misguidance. This term later acquired wider
meaning and began to be used for every such person who negates
any one from amongst the many Names and Attributes of Allah. In
this way, this word includes all the cynical groups such as the
philosophers, Mu ‘tazilah, Asha ‘irah, Qaraamitah and Baatiniyah, etc.

Likewise Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah are a middle group between
the negating Jahmiyah and the resemblers known as Mushabbiha
who have made Allah resemble His creatures and explained Him in

terms of His slaves. Allah has refuted both these groups in His

Statement as follows: 7
“There is nothing like unto Him.”

This refutes the Mushabbiha; and the Statement of Allah:

148
“And He is the All-Hearer and the All-Seer,”
refutes the Mu ‘attilah and Jahmiyah.

Ahlul-Haqq (The followers of truth) are those who prove the
Attributes of Allah without invoking resemblance, and keep Him
free from the resemblance with the creatures without denial. Thus
they have adopted a better path than both the groups that they
followed the path of Tanzeeh and Ithbaat and abandoned the path of
those who made the mistake of believing in resemblance and

negation.

The author says, “and are moderate between...” Sheikh Allamah
Muhammad bin Abdul Aziz bin Maani‘ says in the original notes of

this passage:

People have differed about the deeds of the slaves of Allah
saying whether or not they are within the Power of Allah?
Jahm and _ his followers Al-Jabariyah say that action is under
the Power of the Lord but not under that of His slaves. A/-
Ash‘ari and his followers say: That which is effective in what
is under the control is the Power of the Lord and not of His
slaves. The Mu ‘tazilah in general, that is the Qadariyah who
negate Qadar, say that the thing in which the slave of Allah
has the power, the Power of Allah is not exactly on that thing.
But they have differed on the question whether or not He has
power over something similar to that thing. The Basarians
such as Abu Ali and Abu Hashim accept it as proved, and Al-
Ka‘bee and his Baghdadi followers deny it.

Ahlul-Haqq say that the acts of the slaves are such that they
made the slaves obedient and also defiant. These acts are the
creatures of Allah and Allah ‏سبحا‎ is Alone in bringing into
being the creatures. There is no creator except Him. When the
Al-Jabariyah went to the extreme in the affirmation of Qadar,
they completely negated the actions of the slaves; and the

149
deniers of Qadar, the Mu ‘tazilah, regarded men as the creator
like Allah.That is why they became the Majoos''! of this
nation. Allah guided the Ahlus Sunnah in this controversial
matter with truth by His Command. “And Allah shows the
path of truth whomsoever He wills.” Thus they said that the
slaves of Allah are doers and Allah is the creator of their
selves and their acts. Allah says:
“Allah created you and all that you do.”

We have quoted this original passage, for this is an excellent

summary of the creed of the theologians on problems of the
fate and the human acts.

The author says, “in the matter about the promises...” That is the
Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah are on truth and justice from the
Murji’ah who hold the view that sin is not particularly harmful if
accompanied by Faith, just as obedience is useless if combined with
Kufr. Murji’ah, have the notion that Faith is the name of only
testifying by one’s heart even though one may not affirm it with the
tongue. This name of theirs is ascribed to the word Al-Irjaa’ which
means delay. In other words, they have given action a secondary
position to Faith.

There is no doubt in it that A/-Jrjaa’ is Kufr in this sense. One who
holds such a belief is an outcast from the Islamic fold. For Faith the
prerequisites are affirming with tongue, believing with heart, and
acting with limbs. If any of these three remains absent, the man
will not remain a believer (Mu ’min).

Al-Irjaa’ has been ascribed to some Jmam of Kufa such as Imam
Abu Hanifah, and others who say that deeds are not included in
Faith. However, they agree with the Ahlus Sunnah that Allah will

"l The Majoos or Magians believed that Allah and Satan were in competition

with one sometimes overcoming the other, and that Satan created evil while
Allah created good.

150

later take out those persons from Hell whom He will have punished
because their committing the major sins. This will take place
because of intercession etc. They also hold that an oral statement is
necessary for Faith and that the deeds which have been enjoined are
obligatory to perform and one who abandons them is deserving of
punishment. This type of A/-Jrjaa’ is not Kufr, although it is a false
and heretical statement in so much as those people have excluded
action from faith.

The Wa‘eediyah") sect says that from a rational point of view, it is
obligatory upon Allah that He punishes the sinful and rewards the
obedient. So according to them it is not permissible to believe that
Allah should pardon a person who died after committing a major sin

without atoning for it. This creed of theirs is false and runs counter
to the Qur’4n and the Sunnah, Allah has said:

“Verily, Allah forgives not that partners should be set up with
Him in worship, but He forgives except that (anything else) to

whom He pleases” (Surah An-Nisa’, 4:48).

The Hadith has frequent references that the sinful believers in
Tauhid will be taken out of Hell and will be admitted to Paradise.

The creed of Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah is that of moderation in
between that of the Murji’ah who negate the creed of the Wa‘eed
(menaces) and that of the Qadariyah who affirm it. According to
them (ie. Ah/us Sunnah), if a person dies after committing a major
sin and his case is lying before Allah, then Allah may, if He wills,
punish him or He may pardon him, as is clear from the Qur’anic
verse mentioned earlier. But if Allah punishes him, He will not
suffer from this punishment like the disbelievers but will get out of

1 Al-Wa‘eediyah: They are same as Qadariyah in the implementation of
Wa‘eed. They believe that if a person committing the major sin, dies without ,
repentance, he will be in Hell-fire forever. The reason is that Allah has promised °
the sinners to Hell and Dooms and He never breaks His Promise.

151

Hell and enter Paradise.

The author says,“On matters of the Faith...” The problem of the
names and the precepts is the first Islamic problem which created
controversies between different groups. The political events and
wars that took place between Ali and Mu‘awiyah on that time and
as a result of which, sects like the Khariji, the Rafidi and the
Qadariyah came into being, made a tremendous impact on them.
The words Asma means the terms used in religion such as Mu’min,
Muslim, Kafir and Fasiq etc. And precepts signify the precepts
meant about them in this world and the Hereafter.

The creed of the Khawarij, the Harooriyah and the Mu ‘tazilah is
that the term Jmdn (Faith) can be used only for that person who
testifies from heart, affirms by the tongue and acts upon all those
matters that have been enjoined, and avoids all the major sins.
According to them, a person who commits the major sins, is not
deserving of being called a Mu min (faithful). On this point both the
parties have agreed, but the difference among them lies on the issue
whether such a person will or will not be called a Kafir. Al-
Khawarij call such a man Kafir and consider it permissible to fight
with and pillage him. For this reason they called Ali and Mu‘awiyah
and their companions Kafir and regard all those matters permissible
about them which they regard permissible against the Kafir.

The Mu ‘tazilah say that one who is guilty of a major sin is excluded
from /man but not included in Kufr. He occupies a position between
both the extremes. This is one of those principles of which the creed
of E'tizaal (the Mu ‘tazilah) was founded.

Albeit both the parties have agreement on the fact that whoever dies
on major sin without repenting for it, he will always remain in Hell.
So there is agreement in both the groups on two matters:

1. Negation of Faith in those who are guilty of major sins.
2. Their eternal abode with the Kafir in Hell.

152
Of course, there have occurred differences among them at two
places. One is whether or not to call such men Kafir and consider
their blood and property permissible; and this is a worldly
command. The statement of the creed of the Murji'ah has already
been made before, that is, sin is not harmful to Faith because even
when one is guilty of a major sin he remains, in their view, a perfect
believer and does not deserve to be thrown into Hell.

The creed of the Ah/us Sunnah wal Jama ‘ah is the path of justice in
between these two. According to them, the guilty of the major sins
is a believer with a deficient Faith. His Faith has suffered to the
extent he has committed sins. They, however, do not deny his Faith
completely as the Khawarij and the Mu ‘tazilah do, and neither do
they say that such persons are perfect in faith as the Murji'ah and
the Jahmiyah say. According to them (i.e. Ah/us Sunnah), the end of
such sinners in the Hereafter will be that Allah will pardon them
and will enter them into Paradise at the very outset or infliction of
punishment to the extent of their sin. Then He will take such a man
out of Hell and put him into Paradise as has already been stated
before. This stand is also a moderate one between that which says
that they will always remain in Hell and that which holds that they
do not deserve to be punished at all for their sins.

The author says, “regarding the Companions (Sahaba)...” This
thing is widely known that the cursed Rawafid use abusive language
against the Sahaba; send abominations at them, and often call all of
them, or at least some of them, Kafir. A majority of them, despite
abusing the Sahaba and the Guided Caliphs, make hyperbolic
statements in favour of Ali and his progeny, and hold divine beliefs
(belief of Uloohiyah) in them. These people had already become
known during the life time of Ali ‏رضي الله عنه)‎ ) under the leadership
of Abdullah bin Saba’. This man was a Jew, but later turned
Muslim. He tried to cause a lot of damage to Islam and the Muslim
community just as the Jews did for Christianity and spoiled it
altogether. Ali («+ ‏رضي الله‎ ) burned them in fire to suppress this
mischief. In a statement ascribed to them he says:

153
“When I saw the matter (a forbidden matter i.e. apostasy) I
burnt my fire and asked Qumbar to come.”

The Khawarij countered these Rawafid and called Ali and
Mu‘awiyah and all those Sahaba who accompanied them, Kafir:

entered into a war with them and declared that it was permissible to
take their life and property.

The Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah adopted the path of moderation
between their overstatements and understatements. Allah guided
them to recognise the nobility of the Sahaba of their Prophet ‏صلى)‎
‏(الله عليه وسلم‎ for they are the most perfect men of the Islamic
community from the point of view of Faith, Islam and knowledge
and intelligence. But they did not overstate their importance either
and did not hold the belief that they were infallible. They rather
paid whatever was properly due to them. They loved them for
having been their vanguard in Islam, for having striven in the
growth of Islam and having taken part in the Jihad along with the

Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ٠

154
Rising of Allah over the Throne, does not
negate His having being with creatures

عَنْ ‎ays‏ وَ أَجْمَعَ ‎Goi Sit Oo a tls le‏ سَمَاوَاتِه؛ عَلَى
عَرْشِهِ بائنُ ‎cual Sy‏ وَهُوَ سبْحَائه مَمَهُم أيَْمَا كَانُوَاء ‎Ui es‏ هُمْ عَامِلُوْنَ؛

BS CAw doe AGM eee ese

. . ‏مطلع علتهم‎ le walt ie as ‏عرشو‎ Bi ‏شبنحاة‎ hg
‏يُصَانُ عَنٍ‎ Shy AAS ‏إِلَى‎ LOWY ccs ‏عَلَى‎ Baa ty ors
fis ‏الهمآء‎ feelin Bd a5 ath TGS ‏مث‎ sae opts

‎etree!‏ وَالأَرْضَء ‎GL shy‏ السَمَّارَاتٍ ‎Gag‏ أنْ تَرُوْلاً

‎deals Mai ‏نْ‎ :
‏السَمَاءُ وَالأَرْضٌ‎ Go ‏أنْ‎ tT ‏ومن‎ cab, Ys gash ‏عَلَى‎ A ‏السَمَاءَ أنْ‎
155
Whatever we have stated about having faith in Allah also includes having
faith in that thing too which Allah described in His Book and is repeatedly
proved from the Prophet ‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ ls); and the Salaf (elders) of the
Ummah have had consensus on it. In other words, Allah «tx,» rose over
His Throne and is separate from His creatures, But Allah the Exalted is
with His creatures wherever they are. He knows whatever people do, as
He says in the verse: “He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in
Six Days and then Jstawa (rose over) the Throne (in a manner that suits
His Majesty). He knows what goes into the earth and what comes forth
from it, what descends from the heaven and what ascends thereto. And He
is with you (by His Knowledge) wheresoever you may be. And Allah is the
All-Seer of what you do” (Surah Al-Hadid, 57:4). The meaning of Allah’s
Statement “And He is with you,”— is not that He is part and parcel of the
creation. Lexicography does not explain this. The moon is a sign from the
signs of Allah and amongst His small creatures; and it has been kept in the
heaven. But even then it is with the traveller and the non-traveller
wherever they are.

Allah the Exalted is keeping a watch on His creatures from His Throne
and is a watch tower to them, etc., etc. Whatever Allah has mentioned,
that is, He is above the heavens and is with us, is true in its essence; there is
no point for distortion in it, but one must avoid conjectures and hunches.
For example the hunch, that the Statement of Allah Fis-Samaa’ has the
apparent meaning as the heaven is overshadowing Him and is
surrounding Him, is false from the point of view of men of learning as well
as of the faithful ones. The Kursi of Allah is encompassed both over the
heavens and the earth. He protects the heavens and the earth from falling
apart and saves the heavens by His command that it might not fall on the
earth. This is from one of His signs that the heaven and the earth remain
established by His Command.

The author says, “What we have stated about... have consensus on
it.” The author has clarified here the points of the Highness of Allah, His
establishing Himself over the Throne and His being separate from His
creatures. This is what Allah has described in His Book and the same is
proved from the repeated Ahadith of the Prophet ‏,(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ and the
Salaf of the Ummah, who are the most perfect people from the point of

156
view of knowledge and Faith, are unanimous about it. The aim of this
description is to emphasize this point mentioned in the earlier pages and
to emphatically contradict the denials made by the Jahmiyah,
Mu '‘tazilah and their followers—the Asha ‘irah. Then he describes that
the fact, that Allah rose over the Throne, does not negate His having
companionship and closeness with His creatures. This is because
companionship does not mean intimacy and apparent closeness. He has
given an example saying that the moon which is in the heaven stays with
the traveller and the non-traveller everywhere, due to the extent of its
light and its appearance, wherever they are. So if such a thing could be
true for the moon which is a small creature of Allah, then why will it not
be true for that High and Most Informed One Who is encompassing
through Knowledge and Power over all His slaves; He is aware of them,
He hears them, sees them and knows their secrets and whispers. In fact
the whole universe, all the heavens and the earth, and everything from
the earth to Mighty Throne is before Him in the same way as a small
round fruit in our hand. Will it not be proper to say about Him who has
such a Grace that He is with His creation despite being high above it?
He is Exalted, and is separate from His creatures. In fact it is enjoined
that we should have complete faith on His Transcendency and
companionship and it is necessary to believe that all this is true in
respect ofits reality. It does not need corrupt interpretations and illusive
notions as is clear from this Statement of Allah: “He is with you.” The
belief in the companionship of intimacy and composition as is
understood by the Hulooliyah) or, to follow from Allah’s phrase ‘in
the heaven’ that the heaven is a spot which is encompassing Allah, is not
correct, for His Kursi (Place of His Two Feet) has covered all over the
heavens and the earth. Exalted is He up to Whom the conjecture of the
deluded can never reach nor the explanation of the scholars can
conceive it.

‎4l-Hulooliyah: Those who believe that Allah is everything and everywhere‏ ا
‎and vice-versa. They are extremists of Al-Mushabbiha.‏

‎157

To have faith in the Attributes
which Allah qualified for Himself

وق ل في يك لإا بن ني ين ‎ep EE‏ 0

‎Pe oe so ges‏ في ‎٠‏ وَمنَ ‎sey‏ بف وك
‎OG aS : ST BL Seay‏ عَيْدُ ‎Gyles‏ منه ‎ols i ss MG‏
‎Ny 5‏ هدَا ‎Te‏ الّذِي ‎Je OF‏ مُحَمَدٍ كله ‎2B‏ هُوَ ‎SS‏ اللو
حَقِيقَة لآكلآم ‎Gaby ASV . gb‏ الْقَوْلِ ‎a‏ كاي عن كلام الى أو
عِبارَكٌ بل إِذَا 15 التآمن ‎ages sf‏ في ‎teint‏ لَمْ يَحْرْجْ بذلك عَنْ أن
يَكُوْنَ كَلآم الله تَعَالَى حَقِيقَة ‎SSG as‏ يُضَافُ ف حَقِيقَة ‎Jy‏ مَنْ قَالَهُ ‎O22‏
‏لآ إِلَى مَنْ ‎ois 1358 Us JE‏ 55 للم ‎Syst‏ وَمَعَانيهء ‎ANAS Ga)‏
‎gai, ca cane‏ دُوْنَ ‎Sy Adi‏

‎Pieces oe FAY) Bisa y ‏يَرَوْنَ اليل البذر‎ Sy ‏سَحَابٌُ»‎ LG]
ILS ‏وَهُمْ ني عَرَصَاتٍ الْقَامَةِء ثُمَيَرَوْنَهُبَعَدَ 935 ل الْجَندٌ ؛‎

‎To have faith that Allah is close and Answerer of the invocation is
also included here as He has collected these attributes in this

‎158
Statement: “And when My slaves ask you (O Muhammad ‏صلى الله عليه‎
‏(وسلم‎ concerning Me, then (answer them), I am indeed near (to them
by My Knowledge)” (Surah Al-Bagarah, 2:186). And the Prophet
‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ says, “The One whom you are calling is nearer to you
than the neck of your riding animal” (Al-Bukhari: Tauhid). The
closeness of Allah and His companionship that is mentioned in the
Qur’fin and the Sunnah is not opposed to the Transcendance and
Dominance of Allah the Glorified, for in all the attributes there is
nothing like Allah, and He is high in His closeness and close in His
height.Having faith in Allah and in His Books includes having faith in
these things also that the Qur’an is the Statement of Allah, it has been
sent down and is uncreated. It began by His Self and will return to
His Self, and that Allah has really spoken it. And this Qur’an which
has been sent down on Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ by Allah is really
the Statement of Allah, not of any other one. To apply the word
“reporting” is not permissible for the reason that it purports to be the
Speech of Allah or is its interpretation, but rather when people read it
or write it in scriptures, then in reality it does not get excluded from
being the Speech of Allah. In fact the speech is related to that one who
has spoken at the beginning and not on that who has communicated it
from him or done a rendering of it. Thus, the Qur’an is the Speech of
Allah with letters and meanings. It is not so that the letters are the
Speech of Allah but not the meanings or that the meanings are the
Speech of Allah but not the letters.

In the category of the Faith in Allah, and the Faith in His Books, His
angels and His Prophets which we have already mentioned, this Faith
is also included that the faithful (believers) will see Allah face to face
with their own eyes on the Day of Judgement just as they see the sun
in the clear atmosphere in a cloudless sky, and just as they see a full
moon when there is no obstruction in its visibility. The believers will
likewise see Allah in the Plain of Resurrection. Then they will see Him
again after entering Paradise in whatever form Allah wills.

The author says, “To have faith that...” Allah qualified His Self with

159
such attributes that He is close by and answers. It is enjoined to
have belief in them. Allah the Glorified is close to him who calls Him
and who whispers to Him. He hears his prayer and whispers and
answers his invocations whenever and in whatever form he likes. Thus
Allah is close by through knowledge and encompassing, as He says:

Fare

* ‏وده اووس يه ْسُمٌ مَضن َو لمن حبْل اوري د‎ SoM GE Ky

“And indeed We have created man, and We know what his
ownself whispers to him. And We are nearer to him than his
jugular vein (by Our Knowledge)” (Surah Qaf, 50:16).

This shows that between the mention in the Qur’an and the Sunnah
regarding His closeness and companionship, and the mention in the
Qur’an and Sunnah regarding His transcendance and dominance,
there is no discrepancy. All these are the Attributes of Allah worthy
of Him, and there is nothing like Him in all matters.

The author says, “Having faith in Allah...” The author has included
the belief in the Qur’4n—on the grounds that this is the Speech of
Allah—in the belief in Allah, for this is also an Attribute of Allah
from amongst His Attributes. Without this, the Faith in Allah will

not be complete. The reason is that speech is an attribute of the
speaker and Allah the Glorified is qualified with the attribute that
He can speak about anything whenever He wishes, and will go on
speaking. In this sense, the variety of His Speech is the most ancient
although individual statements continue to appear one after another
according to His Wisdom.

We have already stated that the Qur’an is the Speech of Allah. The
relationship of the attribute is towards the One to Whom it is
attributed which shows that the Qur’4n is the Attribute of Allah the
Pure, and He has really spoken with words, meanings and the voice.
From amongst the Mu ‘tazilah those who entertained the notion tha
the Qur’an is created, have fabricated a great lie on Allah anc
denied the Speech of Allah as an attribute, and made it an attribut
of the creature. This is also a fabrication on the discipline ©

160
lexicography, for here the speaker is not in the sense of the creator
of the speech. And those who doubted that the Qur’4n, which is
present among us, is a narrative of the Speech of Allah such as the
Al-Kullabiyah' 11 or that it is an interpretation of His Speech as the
Asha‘irah say, they have agreed with half the statement of the
Mu ‘tazilah, that is, they have made a difference between words and
meanings. They regarded the words as creatures and the meanings
as an interpretation of the eternal attribute. They have also acted
like the Christians, that they believe that the Lahoot (god or divine
nature) entered into Nasoot (human nature i.e. Jesus), and Jesus is
eternal partly and creature partly. He is incarnation in the created
words. Thus, such people have regarded the meaning which is an
eternal attribute as incarnation in the sense of the created words.
Thus they have regarded words as Nasoot for the meaning.

And the Qur’an is the Speech of Allah in whatever way it is
utilized. So, our recording it in scriptures or reciting it by tongue,
does not exclude it from becoming the Speech of Allah. This is
because, the speech is ascribed to him who has said it at the outset
rather than to him who said it as a conveyer or communicator.

The meaning of this statement of the Sa/afis that this word (i.e.
Bada’a has been derived from A/-Bad’u ( ‏لبدء‎ ) that is, He is Allah
Who spoke it in the beginning. It has not emanated from other than
Him. It could also be assumed that after being derived from A/-
Budu it conveys the sense of manifestation, that is, Allah is that Self
Who spoke it, and it came into manifestation from Him and not
from other than Him. And the meaning of “Wa ilaihi ya‘ood” is
that it returns to Him in respect of the attribute, for this attribute is
established with His Self. It has also been said that it means its
return to Him at the end, that is, when it is lifted up from the records

1 4l-Kullabiyah: They are the followers of Abdullah bin Sayeed bin Kullab.
They believe that Attributes of Allah are not for Him, not for others. They say
that the Names of Allah are same as of His Attributes. They do not differ
between Attributes of Self of Allah and between Attributes of Actions of Allah.

161

and the hearts, as has been mentioned among the signs of the Day
of Resurrection. The issue of the faith in the Qur’an being included
in the faith in the Scriptures is for the reason that it is so demanded
by the correct faith in the Scriptures that the slave has faith that
Allah has spoken these Scriptures with these words and meanings,
and all this is His Speech rather than of any other. It is He Who
spoke the Torah in the Hebrew language, and the Evangels in the
Syriac language and the Qur’An in the Arabic.

The author says, “...which we have already mentioned...” We have
already quoted this discussion that the believers will see their Lord
in Paradise as is evident from the Qur’Anic verses and the clear
Ahadith. For this reason we do not consider it necessary to take up
this discussion again.

But from the statement of the author ‏يرونه سبحانه وهم فى عرصات القيامة‎ , 1
impression is created that this vision will also be specific to the
believers. The correct thing is that it will be general for all those
who will be present there when Allah will come among them to
judge them, as is clear from the Qur’Anic verse:

“Do they then wait for anything other than that Allah should
come to them in the shadows of the clouds” (A/-Bagarah, 2:210)

‘Arasaat is the plural of ‘Arasa which means all such open spaces
in which there is no construction.

162
To have faith in that which has been stated
by the Prophet ‏مى شعي رس)‎ ) and will take
place after death

10

« وَمِنَ ‎(ae op‏ الآخر ‎Seay‏ كل مَا أخير يه | مَا ‎by‏ بَعْدَ
‎OS bees‏

‎at ab sates 7B Ning « 3‏ َل امن

‎Cosel et‏ ف كي ‎spas‏ َل ‎SL ne sou‏ وَمَا ‎Shs‏ وَمَنْ
َبيِتَ؟ ‎“an 2S‏ الَِّيْنَ آمنْوًا بالْقَوْلٍ ‎cobs‏ فِي الْحَيَاةٍ ‎GAN‏ وفي ‎es‏

‎Lei uk Rs » ‏وني‎ By Ca ‏دي‎ 2a ‏َبعُوْلُ‎
‎Bm ‏رب‎ BS eS 5 oa ‏لأأذري؛ سَوِنتُ ال‎ AB ‏قَبَقْوْلُ:‎
‎eae NY ‏نَم كا عَدَابٌء‎ Ui Gab sed ‏الإنْسَانٌ؛ لَصَمِقَ.‎

‏الْكُبْرَىء قَْمَادُ الأرْوَاح إِلَى ‎et‏

‎As regards the matter of having faith in the Hereafter, it also implies
those things which have been stated by the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ (
and which will be disclosed after death. In this sense, the trial in the
grave, the affliction in the grave and the Favours of Allah, are to be
believed in. Al-Fitnatu means that people are put to trial in their
graves. The person is asked, “Who is your Lord? Which is your
religion? Who is your Prophet?” To those who have faith in Allah, He
grants stability in the world and the Hereafter. Thus the believer says,
“My Lord is Allah, and Islam is my religion and Muhammad ‏صلى الله)‎
‏عليه وسلم‎ ) is my Prophet.” But the one who doubts, says “Alas, Alas, I
do not know. I said what I heard other people say.” Then he is struck
by hammers of iron and at this he shrieks so loudly that every

‎3 tas bs

‎163
creature except man hears him. If man would hear it, he would
become unconscious. After this trial there is either favour or doom
until the time the Day of Resurrection is established and the souls are
returned to the bodies.

The author says, “Faith in the Hereafter” is one pillar out of the six
pillars of Iman on which it is established. So, faith in the Hereafter
cannot be perfect until the time one has faith in things which are the
issues of the Unseen and about which the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
has _ informed us and which will take place after death. The rule laid
down in this connection is that all those possible things about which
the true Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has given information, must be
believed in the same way as described. All these things are known
through the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ and so the Ahlus Sunnah wal
Jama ‘ah have faith in them exactly as they have been stated.

The skeptics and the atheists from among the philosophers and the
Mu ‘tazilah deny these things, i.e. the questioning in the grave,
favours and afflictions in the grave, the Path and the Balance, etc.
They claim that these are not proved by rational arguments.
According to them rationality is that first ruler without whose
consent it is not permissible to have faith in anything. The Ahadith
related to these things are rejected by them on the grounds that
these Ahadith can be ascribed to only one transmitter of a particular
grade (Khabar Waahid) and so they cannot be accepted as
components of beliefs. They amplify the Qur’anic verses related to
them in such a way which are far removed from their real meanings. '
In the phrase ‘Fitnatul Qabr’ the dependent relationship is in the
meaning of ‘fi’, that is have faith in that trial which will take place
in the graves. The original literal meaning of the word Fitna is to
put gold etc., on fire with a view to removing the impurities from it.
It was later used in the sense of testing. On the afflictions and the
favours in the grave, the Commandment of Allah that descended in
connection with the family of the Pharaoh argues that:

9

164
“The Fire; they are exposed to it morning and afternoon”
(Surah Ghafir, 40:46);

and Allah says about the community of Noah:

“Because of their sins they were drowned, then were made to
enter the Fire” (Surah Nuh, 71:25).

The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
“The grave is either one of the lawns of Paradise or one of the
ditches of Hell.” (Tirmidhi 7/160, Da‘eef).

165
Description of the Day of Resurrection
and what will happen there

Gs ‏وَعَلَى لِسَانِ رَسْوْلِه وَأَجْمَعَ‎ cabs ‏الله بها 3 فِيْ‎ FN i tied | ‏وَتَقُوْم‎
‎fit Ash ‏عُرَاةٌ‎ ti acho pa ev Gua

مِنْهُمْ الشّمْسُ ‎pools i‏ الْعَرَقُ» ‎Cas‏ الْمَوَاِيْنُ» ‎OSS‏ بها أَعْمَالُ العباد :

<“ قم ‎ee cE‏ عو مير 4 هع سم ‎ae Bh‏ -

5M Agi ‏هم اديت 9 مقن حلت مر‎ Agi Kage el
DEY Cate ay Sill Ey » ‏في جهنم حيرت‎ eS ‏حرأ‎
‏وَرَاءِ ظَهْرِه؛ - كما قَالَ سبْحَاتَهُ‎ be ‏أَوْ‎ + set, ‏كتابة‎ ey cae nis ‏ع‎ 1

ere 2 ‏ال‎ 2 2 DK Be ‏سس يي‎ a on
00 SES} : ‏الى‎

عل ‎he NG A ors A SN‏ يفده منشورًا

WS Go US ‏بوره دوه ؛‎ scp ein ‏يو بعد‎ ٠ IW Lutes
Bens = oi BS Fanta Hoe ats +i ‏أن‎ Bi wes] ‏في‎
‎[ge ‏[وَيُحُْرُوْنَ‎ «ly 09332

And the Day of Judgement will be established. Allah has given news
about it in His Book through the lips of His Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ),
The Muslims have consensus on it that people will rise from their
graves, barefooted, naked and uncircumcised for Allah, the Lord of
the worlds. The sun will come close to them; they will be drenched in
sweat. Then the Balance will be erected and through it the deeds will
be weighed. Those whose weight will be heavy are going to be

successful and those whose weight will be light are the ones who are
doomed to loss and they will always live in Hell. And the Records of

166
the deeds will be distributed. Some will take it by their right hand,
some by the left hand; and some will take it by putting their hands
behind the back, as Allah has said, “And We have fastened every
man’s deeds to his neck, and on the Day of Resurrection, We shall
bring out for him a book which he will find wide open.” “(It will be
said to him): ‘Read your book. You yourself are sufficient as a
reckoner against you this Day’” (Surah Ai-Isra’, 17:13,14). Allah will
check the account of the creatures and will remain with His faithful
slave in isolation and will prove his sins, as His Attribute has been
described in the Qur’an and the Sunnah. But the accounting of the
disbelievers will not take place with the balancing of the virtues and
the vices, for they do not have any virtues, albeit each of their deeds
will be enumerated one by one. They will be aware of them and
confess them.

The author says: “And the Day of Judgement will be established.”
This indicates a horrendous Doomsday. This adjective has been
used for particularisation which cannot be understood to mean the
Small Doomsday which happens at the time of death as has been
mentioned in the Hadith. The doomsday of the man is established
right at the time of his death. It will happen in the way that when
Allah will wish to end this world, He will command the angel
Israfil to blow the Trumpet. When he will blow the Trumpet the
first time then everything of the earth and the heaven will become
unconscious except those whom Allah will not like to be in that
state. The earth will become a plain without a leaf of grass and the
mountains like soft sand dunes. All that will happen about which
Allah has informed in His Book especially in Surah At-Takweer
(The Overshadowing) and Surah Al-Infitaar (The Cleaving), this
will be the last day of the world. Then Allah will order the heaven,
that it should rain, for forty days, a matter like the semen of man.
Then people will rise from their graves with the support of their
back-bones. And all the humans will have become rotten and
disintegrated, only their back-bones will remain. Then, when their
creation and development will become complete, Allah will order

167
Israfil to blow the Trumpet the second time and at this the people
will be revived in their graves and will rise up. The disbelievers and
the hypocrites will say at that time:

“Alas! Woe to us! Who has raised us up from our place of
sleep”.

And the faithful ones will say:
“This is what the Merciful had promised,” (Yasin, 36:52) and
the Prophets had truly prophesied most.

Then the angels will assemble them in the Plain of Resurrection.
They will be barefooted, naked and uncircumcised. Ghurlan is the
plural of Aghral which means,uncircumcised. The one who will be
dressed first on the Day of Judgement will be Abraham as is
mentioned in the Hadith. In the Plain of Resurrection the sun will
come down close to the heads of the creatures and all of them will
be drenched in sweat. Some up to the ankles, some up to the knees,
some up to the breast, and some up to the neck. This will happen
according to the deeds of each one. And there will be some who
will be under the Shade of Allah the Mighty and Glorious. When
the agony will become more acute then they will seek
recommendation through the Messengers and the Prophets ‏عليهم)‎
‏السلام‎ ( that Allah may give them relief from this torture. Every
Messenger will pass on the job to the one who followed him, until at
last they will come to our Prophet ‏.(صلى الله عليه رسلم)‎ He will say, “I am
for it.” Then he will intercede for them. Then they will be sent for
being judged. There will be Balances erected there, and the deeds of
the people will be weighed. Those will be real balances having one
stick and two pans. Allah will turn the deeds of the people into
bodies, which will have weights. The virtues will be kept in one pan
and the vices in the other. Allah has stated:

445 -e( RK

;

168
GSE SHE
“And We shall set up Balances of justice on the Day of
Resurrection, then none will be dealt with unjustly in anything.
And if there be the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it.
And Sufficient are We as Reckoners.” (Surah Al-Anbiya, 21:47).

Then the Record of deeds will be distributed. One who will be
given his Record in his right hand will be questioned lightly, and he
will return happily towards his group. And one whose Record of
deeds will be given in his left hand or from behind his back will
shriek for his destruction and will be thrown into Hell and will say,
“I wish that I had not been given my Record!”. “And that I had
never known, how my Account is” (Surah Al-Hagqah, 69:25,26),

and will say:

3 ‏إلآأحصهأوجدُوانا حيرا‎ as
“And the book (one’s 5 Record) will be placed (in the right
hand for a believer in the Oneness of Allah, and in the left
hand for a disbeliever in the Oneness of Allah), and you will
see the Mujrimiin (criminals, polytheists, sinners, etc.), fearful
of that which is (recorded) therein. They will say: ‘Woe to us!
what sort of Book is this that leaves neither a small thing nor
a big thing, but has recorded it with numbers!’ And they will
find all that they did, placed before them, and your Lord treats
no one with injustice.” (Surah Al-Kahf, 18:49).

But the’ Statement of Allah “And We have fastened...” about which

Raghib says that this means his that deed which has become

separate from him. But its apparent meaning is that the word Tair

means such portion of his in this world and whatever livelihood and

deed is destined for him as is mentioned in the Statement of Allah:
“For such their appointed portion will reach them from the
Book.”

169
The author says, “Allah will check...” The meaning from this accounting
is to remind them and to make them aware of whatever good and bad.
deeds they have sent earlier. Allah will enumerate them and they will
have forgotten it. Allah said:

“Then to their Lord is their return and He shall then inform
them of all that they used to do” (Surah Al-An ‘am, 6:108).
It has been mentioned in authentic Ahadith that:

The man who argues about his account will be punished.
‘Aisha ‏(رضي الله عنها)‎ said, “O Prophet of Allah! Is not Allah
saying ‘He surely will receive an easy reckoning” (Surah Al-
Inshiqaq, 84:8) He said, “This will be presented; but one whose
account will be false, he will be destroyed.” (AL-Bukhari, 1/81).

And the author says, “...and will remain with His...” It is reported
by Ibn Umar ‏:(رضي الله عنهما)‎

AOL yet ster ae oats ‏ند ووم مك‎

“The believing slave will be close to Allah the Mighty and the
Glorious. Allah will keep him under His protection and peace
and whatever transaction takes place between Allah and His
slave, he will audit it and will prove his sins. He will say,
‘Did you not do such and such things’? Did you not do such a
thing on that particular day?’ When he will confess his fault
and will be convinced that he is ruined then Allah will say, ‘I

170
kept these sins a secret in the world, and today I pardon them
for them” (Al-Bukhari, 3/372).

The author says, “They do not have any virtues...” that is, for the
disbelievers, for Allah says:

“And we shall turn to whatever deeds they (disbelievers,

polytheists, sinners etc.) did, and We shall make such deeds
as scattered floating particles of dust” (A/-Furgan, 25:23);

4 Penson
“The parable of those who disbelieve in their Lord is that their
works are as ashes, on which the wind blows furiously on a

stormy day, they shall not be able to get aught of what they
have earned” (Surah Ibrahim, 14:18).

The truth is that whoever performs good deeds, he gets its reward in
the world itself. When the Day of Judgement comes, he will find the
record of his virtues white, It has also been said that on account of
these virtues his afflictions excepting, of course, Kur wil be made

light,

171
Description of Haud, 517001, Intercessions etc.
«A ip Wg SAN AG af Sutil Jor ital ‏وي عَرَصآتٍ‎
‏مَنْ‎ sed ‏وعَرْضْهُ‎ sad Sb ‏السَمآوء‎ etd tae ‏آنه‎ ead ‏وَأخلَى‎
‎HE Je bys ‏وَالصَرَاطُ‎ uy LEY aie ons
peed ‏أمالهم»‎ SF ‏عَلَى‎ ae ‏امن‎ $45 Oty Bo 3 ‏الَّذِي‎ pooh oh
ES «INS ‏يَمُْ‎ be hs BS Hi ‏وَمِنْهُمْ مَْ‎ « al tls 5 ‏من‎
‎ES AW iy Balt 3 tp Ugly a Shad Ba ‏وول مَنْ يَستَفيح باب‎

CGS 256 ali ‏نِي‎ a Uy

eeeye be rede do

FBO SA ‏ابن‎ Aes ‏وَمُوْسى‎ telah ‏ومح‎ TEM Cts

4 ghee pears]

172
sh ‏وَهْذِهِ الشَّفَاعَهُ لَهُ‎ ol Ges ‏فَيَشْمَعُ فِيِمَنْ‎ uty Gy uf,
‏مي انعو ار رَأَنْ لأَيَدْخُلَهّاء وَيَشْفَعُ‎ beset ‏لين و و‎

08 ايز افر ‎Si‏ تيه ا ‎vigil gi‏ فَيدْخِلَُهُهُ الْجَن.
‎Stl,‏ ما ‎Eka‏ الدَادُ الآ+ ‎Gye‏ الْحِسَاب وَالقَوَابٍ وَالْعِقَابٍ ‎283g Badly‏

plait ‏من‎ 2 Oy ete ‏مِنَ‎ Dh AI ‏في‎ toys ‏لِك‎ cea
‏مَايَشْفِي‎ US ‏ين‎ BBS ‏الْمَوْدُوْثِ عَنْ عَنْ‎ plat 5 se of ah

‎a‏ . فَمَنِ ‎WEY‏ وَجَدَهُ.
‎There will be Haud Kauthar in the Plain of Resurrection and at it the‏
‎will come. Its water will be whiter than milk‏ (صلى الله عليه وسلم) ‎Prophet‏
‎and sweeter than honey; and there will be cups at it as many in‏
‎number as the stars in the sky. Its length can be covered in a month’s‏
‎journey and so also its breadth. Whoever drinks from it once, will‏
‎never feel thirsty again. Siraat is laid across the back of Hell. It isa‏
‎bridge between Paradise and Hell. People will be able to cross it‏
‎according to their deeds. Some will cross it within twinkling of an eye;‏
‎some will pass like lightning, some like fast wind, some like a speeding‏
‎horse and some like riding a camel; some will cross it running and‏
‎some walking. Some will be dragged across and some will be just‏
‎picked up and thrown into Hell. There will be hooks on this Bridge‏
‎which will pick up people according to their deeds. One who will cross‏
‎this Bridge will be admitted to Paradise. When they will cross it, they‏
‎will be stopped at the point between Hell and Paradise, and some will‏
‎have to give reprisals for some others. When they will become purged‏
‎from it, they will get the permission to enter Paradise.‏

‎The first person to have the gates of Paradise open will be
Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ and from among all the nations,the

‎173
nation of Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ will be the first to enter. On
the Day of Judgement, Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ will have the
privilege of making three intercessions.

The first intercession will take place in the Plain of Resurrection, and
Allah will pronounce His Judgements after this intercession. The
privilege to intercede will reach Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ after all
the Prophets like Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses and Jesus the son of
Mary, have expressed their inability.

The second intercession will take place regarding the people of
Paradise that they should be allowed to enter Paradise. Both these
intercessions are the special privileges for the Prophet ‏.(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
The third intercession will be in relation to those who deserve to be
cast into Hell. This intercession will be made by Muhammad ‏صلى ائله)‎
‏(عليه وسلم‎ and also by all the other Prophets and the pious men. The
intercession will be an appeal to Allah that he does not cast into Hell
the one who deserves it and the ones who have already been cast are
taken out. Allah will take out many people from Hell on account of
His Generosity and Mercy without any intercession. From the people
of the world who would enter Paradise, there would still remain
enough space. For this, Allah will create more people and put them in
Paradise.

And the accounts about the Hereafter, reward and punishment,
Paradise and Hell and the details about various other stages are
mentioned in the heavenly Books and the chosen knowledge of the
Prophets; particularly in the chosen knowledge of the Prophet
Muhammad ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ), a perfect outline is available. Whoever
looks for it will certainly get it’.

The author says, “in the Plain of Resurrection...” In the description
of the Haud (the pool), the Ahadith have been mentioned repeatedly
by transmitters of all grades. More than thirty Sahaba have narrated
them. One who denies it, for him it is appropriate that he is withheld
from the Haud at the time when his thirst is at the peak. It has been
mentioned in Ahadith:

174
“There will be a Haud for every Prophet”.
The Haud of our Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه رسلم)‎ will be the largest and the

sweetest, and the number of those who will drink from it will be the
biggest. May Allah include us among them.

The author says, “Siraat is laid across...” The meaning of Siraat is a
broad way. It is said that it is so named because the real meaning of
this word is characterised by devouring and the word suits the name
for it devours the convoys. It is also used in the sense of the usual
path as Allah says:

“And verily, this (i.e. Allah’s Commandments mentioned in
Verses 151 and 152) is my Straight Path, so follow it” (Surah
Al-An ‘am, 6:153).

The Bridge in the Hereafter is a Bridge on the Hell and lies
between Paradise and Hell. This is true, there is no doubt in it.
There is a Hadith of the Prophet (pL) ‏(صلى الله عليه‎ in favour of
it. Whoever remains firm on the path of Allah, that is, on His
religion in the world, he will remain firm on that path in the
Hereafter also. The Hadith thus describes its quality:

“This is thinner than the hair and sharper than the edge of the
sword”. (Da ‘ef: Al-Baihaqi, Shu ‘bul Iman, 2/247).

The author says, “Muhammad ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ) will be the first...”
that is, to open the gate of Paradise the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ) will
first of all move its doors, as he himself has said:

hy GANG ‏عَنْدُ الأرضٌ‎ S45 ‏مَنْ‎ sty GANG ata gg TL eh

“1 will be the chief of the human race on the Day of

Judgement and I feel no pride for it. My grave will be rent
first and I feel no pride for it. I will be the first to move the

175
door of Paradise then enter it, and I will be accompanied by
the poors of my community.” (Da‘eef: Al-Tirmidhi At-
Managqib).

In other words, after the Messengers and the Prophets the next to
enter Paradise will be the poors of the Ummah.

The author says, “Muhammad (pL) ‏صلى الله عليه‎ ) will have the
privilege of making three intercessions...” The essence of
intercession is in the sense in which we say, ‘We linked this thing
with this thing.” The word Shaafi‘ (intercessor) has been used for
the one who does Shafa ‘ah (intercession) that he links his aim and
hope with that person for whom Shafa ‘ah is being done.

Shafa‘ah forms part of those facts which are proved from the
Qur’4n and the Sunnah and there are Mutawaatir (continuous)
Ahadith about it. Allah said:

Cas yV rte GH GANS >

“Who is he that can intercede with Him except with His
Permission.” (4/-Bagarah, 2:255)

The negation of Shafa ‘ah without permission proves affirmation of
Shafa‘ah with permission. Allah said about the angels:

gece Fu ites ote ct

“And there are many angels in the heavens, whose
intercession will avail nothing except after Allah has given
leave for whom He wills and pleases” (Surah An-Najm,
53:26).

Allah has stated that true intercession is that which is according to
His Permission and is meant for him with whose words and deeds
He is pleased.

In negating the issue of Shafa‘ah the Mu ‘tazilah and the Khawarij
argue from this Statement of Allah:

176
QE G ICES
“So no intercession of intercessors will be of any use to them”
(Surah Al-Muddaththir, 74:48); “Nor shall compensation be

accepted from him, nor shall intercession be of use to him”
(Surah Al-Bagarah, 2:123).

The Shafa‘ah that has been negated here relates to the men of
polytheism and the polytheistic Shafa‘ah which the polytheists
prove for their idols and Christians prove for the Messiah and the
monks are included in the negative Shafa‘ah, for this takes place
without the Permission and Agreement of Allah.

The author says, “The first intercession...” This is the greatest
Shafa‘ah and the praised status regarding which the Prophets will
envy Muhammad ‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ Le); about which Allah has promised
Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ that He will send him to the praised
place. Allah says:

4 ‏مك نر‎ ES

BU LS BS SE Nae >

“It may be that your Lord will raise you to Magaman
Mahmuda (a station of praise and glory, ie. the highest
degree in Paradise)” (Surah Al-Isra’, 17:79).

That is, all the people present at the Resurrection will praise Allah.
Our Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ) has commanded us that when we hear
the Adhan, then when it is over, we should send peace and blessing
of Allah on the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ) and say:

aly Te tes oT cast ‏وَالضّلآة‎ ON ‏الدَعْرَة‎ ik ‏رب‎ gale

C8165 ‏تَحْمُودًا الذي‎ Ul aly
“O Allah! Lord of this perfect call and of the regular prayer
which is going to be established! Kindly give Muhammad ‏مى)‎
‎+» ‏عليه‎ wi) the right of intercession and superiority and send him

to the best and the highest place which you promised him.”
(Al-Bukhari, 1/338)

The author says: “The second intercession ...” That is they will

177
deserve to be admitted to Paradise but they will receive the
permission to enter it only after the Shafa ‘ah.

The author says: “Both these intercessions ...” that is, the doing of
Shafa‘ah (intercession) in favour of the people of Resurrection and
Shafa‘ah for the people of Paradise to enter Paradise is the special
prerogative of the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ).

The third Shafa‘ah is the Prophet’s Shafa‘ah for reducing the
torment of some polytheists, such as his Shafa ‘ah in favour of his
uncle Abu Talib on account of which he will be in a marginal part
of the fire as has been mentioned in the Hadith. (Al-Bukhari,
V:5/140).

The author says, “The third intercession...” This Shafa ‘ah is denied
by the Khawarij and the Mu ‘tazilah. Their creed is that one who is
deserving of Hell he will certainly be assigned to it; and one who
has been cast into it cannot come out. A number of Ahadith
repeated frequently regarding Shafa‘ah and the related matters
refute these notions of the Mu ‘tazilah and regard them as false.

The author says: “And the accounts about the Hereafter...” This
must be understood that the basis of the reward of good and bad
deeds is proved by rationality even as it is proved by hearing and
transmission. Allah has warned people in His Book on many
occasions regarding this. He says:

“Did you think that We had created you in play (without any

purpose), and that you would not be brought back to Us?”
(Surah Al-Mu’minun, 23:115);

“Does man_ think that he will be left Suda [neglected without
being punished or rewarded for the obligatory duties enjoined
by his Lord (Allah) on him]?” (Surah Al-Qiyamah, 75:36).

178
This is not worthy of the Omniscient that He leaves people idle,
giving them neither a command to do a thing nor to keep off it,
neither should they be rewarded for virtues nor punished for vices.
Likewise, this also is not worthy of His Justice and Knowledge to
give an equal status to both the Mu min and the Kafir, the virtuous
and the corrupt. Allah says:
“Shall We treat those who believe (in the Oneness of Allah—
Islamic Monotheism) and do righteous good deeds, as
Mufsidun (those who associate partners in worship with Allah
and commit crimes) on earth? Or shall We treat the Muttagun
[(e. pious and righteous persons who fear Allah much
(abstain from all kinds of sins and evil deeds which He has
forbidden) and love Allah much (perform all kinds of good

deeds which He has ordained)], as the Fujjar (criminals,
disbelievers, wicked, etc.)?” (Surah Sad, 38:28).

Upright thinking completely refuses to accept it.

Allah has warned and made aware the obedient with favours in this
world and the sinners with humiliating situations and events. The
position regarding the retributions and the details about their exact
measures can be found out from listening to transmissions or
authentic Ahadith whose narrator does not speak under the

promptings of the lust. Let Allah’s Blessings and Peace be upon
him.

179
Belief in Qadar (Divine Decree)
SING 1055 oF Hy ‏وَالْجَمَاعَةِ‎ Be Sl ‏من‎ Reh yah B35

Sue on BB,

«ed Less ‏دَرَجَةٍ‎ YS ES ‏عَلَىَ‎ Sail

5006 الأوّْى : الإيْمَانُ ‎Sb‏ الله ‎Ses‏ عَلِيِمٌ ‎By‏ دَهُم ‎sole Sis‏
‎a gil pial‏ وو به ‎SF‏ وأبَدَاء و ‎pel‏ لهم 4 الطَّاعَاتِ
: اللّْح الْمَحْمُوْظٍ ‎Gale‏
‎gis‏ أو ما ‎BE‏ اذل ‎tt 636 isis‏ قَالَ: ‎Liste‏ قَالَ: ‎GS‏
‏هُوَ ‎Ai‏ ْم ‎٠ ata‏ قَمَا ‎otal‏ الإنسَانَ لم يكن ‎iba‏ مَا ‎qo tas‏

is slp : ‏تَعَالَى‎ OG us ‏؛‎ Littl ‏وَطُوِيتِ‎ IW cS hdd ‏َكُنْ‎

5 il ED BYE ‏إن لك فى‎ GM Lal gu do aa
Adi fea || ‏ولا ف أَنشسِك‎ ea to AEP ‏وَقَالَ:‎
‎BOK Be ‏لتاب ليه‎ gat By 4 ‏د‎ Sb Hg ‏ما‎
‎BE ‏وَإِذَا‎ cb ‏كب بي اللّوح الْمَحْفْوْظٍ مَا‎ a Sealy ‏جئلة‎ pats

tls ook 35 AK Sy ‏بَعَتَ‎ a ‏فيه‎ Cab OS ‏جْسَد الْجَيينِ‎
5

Wb US ‏وَنَحْوَ‎ teas ‏أمْ‎ tats ths ‏و‎ Aish, 53, SI 0 ‏َيْقَالُ‎
‎ES ‏قَدِيْمَاء وَمنكرؤة اليوْمَ‎ BS SE 88 ‏قَدْ كَانَ‎ 2p

وَأمَا الدَرَجَةُ ‎seat‏ فَهِيَ ‎eas‏ اللر ‎AO‏ و ‎tc tab‏ وَهُوَ: الإيْمَانُ

180
Sig KY Sas ‏الله‎ Bey 4 ‏وَلأسْكُوْنٍ؛‎ BS by ro
‏شَيْءِ 5 مِنَ الْمَوْجُوْدَاتِ وَالْمَعْدُوْمَاتء‎ I ‏عَلَى‎ Gs hy a Au
BEY His BE ‏إلا الله‎ rea ‏ولا في‎ ei Bae ty

(a ‏شو‎ ibs s lly stl AS ‏م ذلك‎ Age 5g OS
Pal ‏يع يي لش عي‎ cobs tas eas. 2
‏الْقَسَاة.‎ Baty Sh ‏لعباده‎ VSG Tiny ply Gant

وَالْعِبَادُ فَاعِلَوْنَ ‎Ge “ity eas‏ أفْمَالِهِمْ. ‎tally‏ هُوَ: الْمُؤْمِنُء وَالْكَافْف
‎Sig‏ وَالْقَاجِوُ وَالْمْصَلَي وَالصَّائِم . ‎stabs‏ 538 عَلَى مالم ‎ain‏

ab ‏كما قَالَ تَعَالَى: «لَمَنْ‎ - ESD ‏خَالِقُهُمْ وَخَالِقُ كُذرتهم‎ “ly ‏إِرَادَةٌ‎
‏الْعَالَمِيْنَ‎ bya Ate af WSs A ‏وَمَا‎ Ars weed ‏أَنْ‎ Re

ail phic opal ‏يد‎ a ‏الدَرَجَةُ مِنَ الْقَدَر يُكَد بها عَامَةُ‎ odds
Sal ls BS ‏د ها ْم من أهْلٍ الإنبات.‎ ten a ca A ks

Al-Firgatun Najiyah (The Saved Sect) of the Ahlus Sunnah wal
Jama‘ah believe in Qadar (Divine Decree) both the good and evil of it.
There are two stages of having faith in Qadar and each stage includes
two factors.

The first stage is faith in the fact that Allah knows the creature and
creature is acting within His Eternal Knowledge and He has the
attribute of this knowledge from the Beginning and will have it
throughout Eternity. His knowledge encompasses all the obedience,

181
sins, livelihood and fixed times of death. Then Allah recorded the
fates of the people in Al-Lauh Al-Mahfuz (the Safe Tablet). First of all
Allah created the pen and then said to him, “Write.” The pen said,
“What should I write?” Allah said, “Write out all that is destined to
take place up to the Day of Judgement.” Whatever has been fixed for
man cannot be missed and whatever has been missed cannot have been
fixed for him.

The pens are dry and the papers are rolled up. As Allah says, “Know
you not that Allah knows all that is in heaven and on earth? Verily, it
is (all) in the Book (A/-Lawh-Al-Mahfuz). Verily! That is easy for
Allah” (Surah Al-Hajj, 22:70); and said, “No calamity befalls on the
earth or in yourselves but is inscribed in the Book of Decrees — (A/-
Lauh Al-Mahfuz), before We bring it into existence. Verily, that is
easy for Allah” (Surah Al-Hadid, 57:22), The fate which is obedient to
Allah is sometimes in wholistic terms and sometimes in detail. So He
wrote in the Safe Tablet whatever He wished to write. And when He
creates the foetus before blowing the spirit into it, He sends an angel
towards it and gives it four commands. He is told to write all about its
livelihood, its death, its deeds, and whether it is wretched or blessed
one. The extremists of the sect of the Qadariyah"" refused to accept
this element of Qadar in the olden times but its deniers are fewer
today.

The second stage is that it is the Will of Allah which is in force in
everything, and it is His Power which includes everything, and to
have faith that whatever Allah willed took place and whatever He did
not will did not happen, and whatever motion and the absence of it is
in the heavens and the earth is all because of the Will of Allah and His
Control and whatever He does not will does not take place. And that,

"١ Al-Qadariyah: They are Al-Mu ‘tizalah and all those who agreed with them.
Their belief is that Allah, the Exalted has enjoined the slaves to do good and
forbided them from evil. He doesn’t know His obedient slaves from among
disobedients but after committing the good or bad deeds. They are opponent of
Al-Jabariyah.

182

Allah the Glorified controls everything whether it is in existence or is
absent. There is nothing in the heaven and the earth which has not
been created by Allah the Exalted. Exeept Him there is no other
creator of these things and no other Lord. Despite this, He has
commanded His slaves to obey Him and His Messengers, and
forbidden from His disobedience. Allah likes the pious, the virtuous
and the just ones, and is pleased with those who have Faith and do
good deeds. He does not love the unbelievers nor is pleased with the
corrupt, nor does He allow the obscene acts. He is not pleased with
those who commit Kufr, nor does he like mischief.

The slaves of Allah have the real choice to act and Allah is the
Creator of their acts. And there are all kinds of slaves — believer,
disbeliever, virtuous, wicked, observer of prayers and fasting. The
slaves have power over their deeds and they have intention. Allah is
the Creator of their power and their intention, as Allah says, “To
whomsoever among you who wills to walk straight, And you will not,
unless (it be) that Allah wills, —the Lord of the ‘Aalamin (mankind,
jinns and all that exists)” (Surah At-Takwir, 81:28,29).

The Qadariyah in general refuse to accept this stage of predestination
whom the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه رسلم)‎ ) has given the title of the Majoos
of this Ummah. On the contrary, from among those who believe in
predestination there is a group which exaggerates so much so that it
denies all power and authority of the slaves, and excludes them from
the acts of Allah and His Command.

To have faith in the good and evil of Qadar laid down by Allah, is
one of those six pillars on which the whole of the Faith depends, as
has been proved by the Hadith of Gabriel etc. mentioned above.
They are also described by the clear verses of the Qur’an.

The author says that there are two stages of predestination and each
stage includes two things.The first stage includes the Eternal
Knowledge of Allah which encompasses all things; it also means
that Allah knows through this eternal knowledge and has this

183
attribute all through eternity. All such acts which the creature
carries out and also His obedience, commission of sin, livelihood,
and the time fixed for every things, are all known to Him in all
situations. All things and attributes, all acts and events that take
place, are eternally according to the Knowledge of Allah. This is
the first thing of the first stage.

The other thing is that Allah has kept all these things recorded in
Al-Lauh-Al-Mahfuz (the Safe Tablet). Whatever Allah has known
about the happening of a thing, of livelihood, of events regarding
the creatures and qualities, acts and all subtle and major issues, all of
these He ordered the pen to write out. The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
said:

“Fifty thousand years before the creation uf the earth and the

heavens, Allah determined the fate of the creatures when His
Throne was on the water.” (Muslim, 16/442 with Nawawi).

And it has been said in the Hadith reported by the author that:
‏مُوَ كَائِنٌ‎ C351 ‏قَالَ: وَمَاأَكْمْت؟ قَالَ:‎ C251 I OG + ‏الل الَْلّم‎ GLE ‏ما‎ gl Sp

“The first thing Allah created was the pen. He asked it to
write and the pen asked what should it write about. Allah
asked him to write out whatever is determined to take place
up to the Doomsday.” (Abu Daud: Al-Qadar).

There is difference of opinion among the scholars about the words
‘Arsh’ (Throne) and ‘Qalam’ (pen) regarding which of the two was
created first. Allamah Ibn Al-Qaiyim has quoted two statements

about it and has given preference to the belief that ‘Arsh’ was
created earlier than Qalam. He says in Qasidah Nooniyah:

184
People have differences about the point whether that which
wrote the decisions on behalf of Allah was created before the
Throne or after it. Abul-‘Ala Hamdani has made two statements
about it. The correct thing is that the Throne was created before
the Pen, for at the time of writing, the Throne had pillars and the
writing was proceeded immediately after the birth of the Pen in
which there is no separation in time.

Thus the Pen wrote out everything that is destined to happen up to
the Day of Judgement and whatever incidents and events will take
place in the universe will be according to what it has written. Man
cannot hide what he has done and was really unable to do whatever
he failed to do. This is what has been mentioned in the Hadith of
Ibn Abbas etc. (Narratted by Abu Daud etc...)

This destiny which is in accord to the eternal knowledge is
sometimes stated in broad terms as recorded in the “Safe Tablet”
and sometimes in detail on several occasions which is specific for
individual cases as is given in the four words to write which is a
command given to the angels at the time of blowing the spirit into
the foetus. He writes about his livelihood, his death, his deeds and
that whether he will be wretched or blessed. This is special destiny.
About the existence, the fate mentioned above was denied by the
old extremist Qadariyah such as Ma‘bad Al-Juhni and Ghailan Ad-
Dimishqi. They said that the command is given later. One who
denies this stage of Qadar is a Kafir for he is denying a thing
recognised in religion which is proved from the Qur’4n, the Sunnah
and consensus of Ulama.

The author says, “As far as the second stage of predestination ...”
This also includes two things: (1) To have faith that the Will of

185
Allah is general and that whatever He willed it happened and what
he did not will it did not happen. And what He does not intend to
happen in His domain does not happen. The deeds of the slave
whether they are related to obedience or with sins, come into
display only through His Will, nothing is beyond it, whether these
deeds are related to those things which are dear to Allah or those
with whom He is not pleased. (2) Faith in the matter that everything
has come into being through the Power of Allah. They are the
created beings of Allah and none except Him is their creator. In
this there is no difference between the deeds of men and other
things as Allah has said:

“While Allah has created you and what you make!” (Surah
As-Saffat, 37:96).

Faith in the issues related to Shari‘ah is compulsory. Allah has
bound His slaves and has commanded obedience to Him and the
obedience to His Prophets. He has Himself forbidden them from
commitiing sins. Between affirmation of the proof regarding the
general Will of Allah about all the things and making the slaves
bound to follow His dos and don’ts there is no contradiction, for
this Will does not negate the freedom of the slave and his power to act.
That is why Allah has combined His both the Wills in this Statement:

“To whomsoever among you who wills to walk straight, And
you will not, unless (it be) that Allah wills, —the Lord of the

‘Aalamin (mankind, jinns and all that exists)” (Surah At-
Takwir, 81:28,29).

Moreover, between this Will and the limits of the Shari‘ah which
Allah likes and finds agreeable, there is no interdependence.
Sometimes Allah wills a thing which He does not like and likes
such a thing whose occurrence He does not will. For example His
Will about the existence of Satan and his hoard and love of faith in

186
the Kafir, of obedience in the corrupt, of justice in the oppressor,
and of repentance in the ignominious one; if Allah wishes, all these
can happen. And only that happens which He wills and that which
He does not will does not happen.

Likewise, “There is nothing in the...” the generality of creation of all
things by Allah and the slave being the doer of his deed. A slave is
the one who is characterised by his acts. Some are believers, some
disbelievers, some virtuous, some corrupt, and some performers of
prayer and observers of fasts. Allah is his Creator and the Creator of
his deeds, for He has created power and intention in him with which
he works.

Allamah Sheikh Abdur-Rahman bin Nasir Aal-e-Sa‘di says that:
“When the slave has offered prayers and observed fast, and did a
good thing or a bad thing, then it is he who is the doer of this good
act or bad act. The act referred to has undoubtedly taken place
under his authority and he has apparently an awareness of it that he
is not under a compulsion of doing or not doing this work. If he
wished he would not have done it. This is the reality which Allah
has stated in His Book and the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ in his
Hadith, and both have related the deeds regardless of their being
good or bad to the slaves. It has been stated that they alone are the
actors. If they are virtuous, they will be appreciated and rewarded.
If they are bad, they will be condemned for their bad deeds and will
be punished. This clearly reveals without the slightest doubt that
these acts occur under the authority of the slaves. They are free to
do them when they like, and ignore them when they like. This thing
is evident by reason, sensation, Shari ‘ah and observation.

If you wish to know how these acts which are carried out by His
slaves form part of the fate and how they include the Will of Allah,
then the answer is that these acts that take place by the slaves
whether good or bad come into being by their power and freedom
which every one admits. Now the question is who created their
power, intention and will. The answer is: The One Whom everyone

187
accepts, that is, Allah, He created the power and the intention. One
who created that thing, which carried out the acts, He has created
the acts also. This removes the ambiguity and it becomes possible
for the slave to understand deeply the integration of fate, decision
and power. Along with this Allah has bestowed upon the believers
the resources, the means and various favours and rewards and
removed the obstacles as the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has said:

“Whoever is from amongst the blessed, he is provided with
facilities for doing the work of the blessed.” (A/-Bukhari 4/287)

And He has likewise shamed the corrupt and left them in their
condition, for they did not have faith in Him, nor did they rely on
Him. For this reason they were enabled to do that work which they
chose for themselves.

The substance of the creed of the Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah
regarding Qadar and the acts of slaves which are supported by the
texts of the Qur’an and the Sunnah is that Allah the Glorified is the
Creator of all things whether they are the slaves, the attributes, or
acts, etc., and the Will of Allah includes the entire universe and
pervades over all. Nothing comes into being except by His Will.
Allah the Glorified creates all things by His Will which happens
according to His Awareness based on His Eternal Knowledge. And
likewise everything happens according to what He has recorded in
the Safe Tablet and has destined. Power and intention are proved
for the slaves from which their acts emanate. They are the real doers
of those actions by virtue of their power. On this basis they deserve
their recompense either by praise and reward or by condemnation
and punishment. The relationship of these deeds towards slaves is
not contrary to relation of these deeds towards Allah for their
inventive and creative relationship, for He alone is the Creator of all
these causes which bring these actions into being.

Two groups got misled on the question of Qadar, as has already been
described before. The first group is of the Qadariyah which denies

188
Qadar and who are called the Majoos of this Ummah as has been stated
in some Marfi‘ (traceable) and Mauquf’ (untraceable) Ahadith. And
because of this shortsightedness and denial of fate, they developed the
illusion that between the power that man has, over his action and the
responsibility that he has regarding it, which is clearly proved, on one
hand and the generality of the Creativity and the Will of Allah which are
proved from the texts, on the other, no correspondence is possible. The
reason is that this generality, according to their notion, negates the
responsibility of the man regarding his own acts, and he is not to be
considered responsible. It was for this reason that they gave preference
to the aspect of affirmation and negation; and the texts that provide
proofs for the generality of the Creativity and Will which exist in
addition to the human acts, have specified and proved that the slave is
the creator of his act with his power and intention. In this way they
proved other than Allah as the creator and it was because of this that
they were called the Majoos of this Ummah. The Majoos have a notion
that Satan creates mischief and pernicious things and in this way they
regard him as a creator along with Allah. Similarly these people have
also regarded human beings as creators along with Allah.

The other group which is called the Jabariyah'"! is a victim of an
extremist view in asserting the role of fate. These people deny any real
role for man, and in fact, according to their notion man has no freedom
and power over any of his acts just as no one has control over the gale of
wind. The relationship of acts to humans is merely apparent. When it is
said that one offered prayer and observed fast, committed murder or
theft, this is like saying the sun rose, the wind blew and the rains came.
In this way they have accused their Lord of injustice and of making
man responsible for a thing over which he has no power. And while
giving him recompense for a thing which is not his act, they have
accursed Allah for making man responsible for doing that which is not
his responsibility and regarded the Sacred Decree of Allah in affirmation
and negation as false. How bad is the verdict of these people!

1 4L-Jabariyah: They are Al-Jahmiyah and all those people who follow them.
Their belief is that slaves have no will and power to do good deeds and avoid
bad. They are enforced to do all. Therefore, they are opponent of A/-Qadariyah.

189
Definition of ‏رمز‎ (Faith) and its conditions
ai ‏قَوْلُ‎ abs OS ‏وَالْجَمَاعَةٍ أنَّ الديْنَ وَالإيْمَانَ‎ Sau Jal ‏ومن أضُو ل‎
eit ‏يَزِيْدُ‎ Stay! ‏وَاللّسَانِ وَالجَوَارح . وَأنَّ‎ la Ar) gles
po js, ata agi ‏يفون‎ aus ‏مَعَ‎ 3s ‏بِالْمَعْصِبَة.‎ ais 4 aks
us ¢ ‏الْمعَاصِي ؛‎ as Ya tay fy ana ‏الحوارج»‎ las ‏كما‎ ay
* ‏بِالْمَعروفٍ‎ FOG 2h Bask dy ‏لم من‎ Ge Sa> ‏ة الْقصّاصّ:‎ a ‏في‎ BEL ‏قَالَ‎
‏تبأ نا مت اعد هنا ع‎ a ‏تتا‎ eT ‏مِنَ‎ EL ‏وَقَالَ: « وَإن‎
‏هتنت سيم وأيتبئمايالمدل يطو إن‎ Ais ‏ين حي‎ Ais ‏الروك‎
‎aphids (Rela iach ‏ير‎ segs > «Gh ‏له يب‎
‏بل‎ Byes pi US {hg Bytes DSi, ‏الإشلام‎ gal ‏الْمَاسِقَ‎
‎BEF VS 5p : ‏في اشم الإيْمَان؛ كما في قَولِه تَعَالَى‎ Bu kone)
CAD ‏قَولِهِ تَعَالّى:‎ pS ‏قد يذل في اشم الإيْمَانٍ الْمُطْلقِ؛ٍ‎ 155 >

6a) EG ‏َم‎ oie EE ay eek chs ‏أل‎ ad LEI
eS Stes bs A ‏وَهُوَ‎ Sh
ee nant Bes ‏حِيْنَ‎ AAU OG EY ar ‏يَسْرِقَ وَهُوَ‎

‎OG‏ شَرَفٍ 235 م ‎Est‏ ِلَيْهِ فيِهًا أَبصَارَهُمْ ‎segs‏ وَهُوْ مُؤْمِنٌ

‎BES ‏بكرتو‎ Gob lei So ‏أذ‎ iors Jat ‏من‎ BH : Osi

‎It is part of the principles of the AAlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah that

‎190
Religion (Deen) and Faith (Jman) are names of profession and
Practice-profession by the heart and tongue, and the actions by the
heart, tongue and the limbs. Faith increases by obedience and
decreases by committing sin. Along with this, they do not call the
people of Qiblah (ie. Muslims) Kafir on the ground of their
committing absolute and major sins as the Al-Khawarij do. On the
contrary the brotherhood in Faith is proved despite committing sins
as Allah the Glorified says, “But if the killer is forgiven by the
brother (or the relatives, etc.) of the killed against blood-money then
adhering to it with fairness...” (Surah Al-Bagarah, 2:178). “And if
two parties or groups among the believers fall to fighting, then make
peace between them both, but if one of them rebels against the other,
then fight you (all) against the one that which rebels till it complies
with the Command of Allah; then if it complies, then make
reconciliation between them justly, and be equitable. Verily! Allah
loves those who are equitable. The believers are nothing else than
brothers (in Islamic religion). So make reconciliation between your
brothers” (Surah Al-Hujurat, 49:9,10). Ifa corrupt person holds fast
to Islam, he is not denied of Islam as a whole, nor is it said that he will
always live in Hell as the Mu ‘tazilah say. The corrupt man is rather
included in the category of the Faith as Allah says, “Thus it is to free
one Mu’min head,” (Surah An-Nisa, 4:92) and sometimes he is not
included in the absolute faith as Allah has stated: “The believers are
only those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a fear in their hearts
and when His Verses (this Qur’an) are recited unto them, they (i.e,
the Verses) increase their Faith” (Surah Al-Anfal, 8:2). The Prophet
‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ said, “When an adulterer commits illegal sexual
intercourse, then he is not a believer at the time he is doing it, and
when a drinker of an alcoholic liquor drinks it, and when a thief
steals, then he is not a believer at the time of stealing, and when a
robber robs, and the people look at him, then he is not a believer at the
time of doing robbery” (4/-Bukhari, 3/394) We say that he is a man of
deficient faith or he is faithful believer by virtue of faith and a
corrupt man because of committing major sins. So, he will not be

191
assigned to an absolute category nor an absolute category will be
snatched away from him.

We have already mentioned while discussing the Names and
Commandments of Allah that Ah/us Sunnah wal Jama ‘ah believe
that the Faith is the term used for professing with the tongue,
believing with the heart, and acting with the limbs. All these three
are included in the term Al-Jman-Al-Mutlag (the Absolute Faith).
The entire Faith is included in absolute religion—its external and
internal aspects and its roots and branches. Thus only such a one
can be deserving of being regarded as having Absolute Faith who is
a blend of all these things; he does not lack any one of them.

When practice and profession form part of Faith, then Faith is
certainly entitled to increase or decrease. It will increase by
obedience of Allah and decrease by committing sin. This is obvious
from the clear proofs from the Qur’an and the Hadith. Moreover,
the Faith of the believers is evident from the observation of the
differential between what they believe and what rejectable things
they do.

This also forms part of the arguments regarding increase and
decrease of Faith that Allah has divided the believers in the three
categories. He says:

ree ‏جع‎

“Then We gave the Book (the Qur’n) for inheritance to such
of Our slaves whom We chose (the followers of Muhammad
‏.(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ Then of them are some who wrong their
ownselves, and of them are some who follow a middle course,
and of them are some who are, by Allah’s Leave, foremost in

good deeds” (Surah Fatir, 35:32).

The last mentioned are those who performed all that was enjoined
as obligatory and all that is desirable, and abandoned the prohibited
and the odious things. These are the people nearest to Allah. The

192
middle classes are those who restricted themselves to performance
of the obligatory deeds and renounce the prohibited; and such as are
unjust to themselves are those who made certain prohibitions
permissible to themselves and avoided the performance of some
obligatory things but retained real Faith along with them.

One more argument regarding increase or decrease of Faith is that
the believers have the benefit of the sciences of Faith. Some enjoy
great advantages on account of believing in the details of Faith and
this increases their Faith, and their conviction becomes complete.
Some are at a lower stage than this and some have Faith only in a
general sense. One may not have gained anything in a detailed
sense and yet despite this one is a believer. Moreover, in many
matters of spiritual and physical acts and in abundance and paucity
of obedience to Allah, the believers are at different levels from one
another.

Men whose creed is that Faith is the name of a pure testification of
heart, do not accept increase or decrease in Faith as is reported
about Imam Abu Hanifah etc. But such a notion is false for reasons
given above. The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ said:

iN thy ‏وَأَدئَاهَا‎ car YY 23,5 asad ‏بض وَسَبْعُوْنَ شعْبَة؛‎ Saye

ahi
“Faith (Belief) consists of more than seventy subdivision or
branches (i.e. parts) the highest among them is to confess La

ilahé illa Allah and lowest is to remove a stumbling block
from the path.” (Muslim)

Absolute Faith is composed of words, acts and belief. But all these
three are not of the same grade. Creeds are the root of Faith: Jman is
belief in Allah, His angels, His Books, His Messengers and the Last
Day, and the recognised teachings of the religion such as the
obligatoriness of Salaat (prayers), giving Zakat, prohibition against
adultery and murder, etc. One who denies these will become outcast
from Faith on account of this denial.

193
The Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah do not deny the term Jman (Faith)
as a whole to a corrupt person who remains associated with the
Ummah, and who, while believing in what has been prohibited,
commits some major sins. Nor do they say that such a person will
always lie in Hell, as is maintained by the Mu ‘tazilah and the Al-
Khawarij. According to the Ahlus Sunnah, he is rather a believer
with damaged Faith. His Faith has been damaged to the extent he
has committed the sin. Or such a believer is corrupt and is not given
the name of being a faithful unconditionally; he is not considered
one who is completely deprived of Faith.

What the author has mentioned about unconditional Faith along
with committing sins has evident proofs from the Qur’an and the
Sunnah. Allah says:
<5)
“O you who believe! Take not My enemies and your enemies
(i.e. disbelievers and polytheists, etc.) as friends” (Surah Al-
Mumtahinah, 60:1).

Allah has addressed them as believers although sinning is present,
that is, making friends with the disbelievers.

The substance of this discussion is that Jman and Islam are
interdependent to each other, one will not be found without the
other, rather whenever a reasonably correct Faith is found, Islam
will also be found along with it. The opposite is also true in the
same way. That is why when one is mentioned, the other is taken
for granted, for when one has already been mentioned, the other is
considered to be included in it. If both of them are mentioned
conjointly together then Faith will be construed to mean testifying
and belief; and Islam will mean the external submission such as
affirmation by tongue and action by limbs. But this is so in relation
to the implication of Faith. Unconditional Faith is unconditionally
specified to Islam. Sometimes Islam is found without it also as the
following statement of Allah contains:

194
“The bedouins say: ‘We believe.’ Say: ‘You believe not but

you only say: We have surrendered (in Islam).’ ” (Surah Al-
Hujurat, 49:14).

Allah has mentioned here about their having Islam but has negated
their having Faith. Hadith Gabriel has mentioned three levels:

(1) Islam, (Submission);(2) Iman (Faith); (3) Ihsan (Righteousness
and Sincerity).

This shows that each of these is related to what comes before it.

195
The views of Ahlus Sunnah towards the 0
(Companions of the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ )
pre ‏من‎ SE ‏تعَالَى: «واليت‎ AS op ‏الل به‎ og US a a

G53 be 28 Vorb aes &

pe G5 ai) Coe oul

Bt plead BAH : ‏ئ قَولِهِ‎ Be ‏وَطَاعَةُ الوَسُوْلٍ‎

‎i‏ (وَمُوَ صُلْحُ ‎Je (by Es‏ مَنْ ‎GN‏ من بد و قَائَلَ. وَبقَدمُونَ

‏تخت ‎we‏ كما ‎GE‏ به التو يك ‎٠‏ بل لَقَدْ رَضيّ الله ‎phe‏ وَرَضُوًا

‎te‏ وكائوا أكثَرٌ مِنْ ‎sues ull‏ وَيَشْهَدُوْنَ ‎dle‏ لِمَنْ ‎aS‏ لَهُ

‎“BH 85 - ‏بن أبي طَلِبٍ‎ de ‏الْمؤْمِيينَ‎ wl be (Eg aos ‏يقن‎
‎2 oe god oh 26 ae

‎196
شاي لي يم اق يم أبِي بكر

1 is crag Ng ‏قَوْمٌ عُثْمَانَ وَسَكَتْوَا‎ GB Sal ‏وَعُمَرَ - أَبُّهُمَا‎
GUS als ‏عَلَى‎ Ban ‏أهْلٍ‎ ol sik ‏لكن‎ ys ‏وَقَوْمٌ‎ «tle
vena ‏لس من ال‎ a ‏مدأ ا‎ BS ‏ول‎

لق و ‎us 5 ae Uy‏ بعد ‎Hi is pt‏ كي ف

“alters

Among the principles of the Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah lie the
attitude of peace and purity of their heart and tongue towards the
Sahaba (Companions) of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ as Allah has
stated their attributes in this verse: “And those who came after them
say: ‘Our Lord! Forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us
in Faith, and put not in our hearts any hatred against those who have
believed. Our Lord! You are indeed full of kindness, Most Merciful”
(Surah Al-Hashr, 59:10) they obey this statement of the Prophet ‏صلى)‎
‏:(الله عليه وسلم‎ “Do not abuse my Companions for it anyone of you spent
gold equal to Uhud (mountain) (in Allah’s cause) it would not be
equal to a Mudd (2/3rd of a kilogram) or even half Mudd spent by one
of them” (4/-Bukhari: V:5/22).

They accept all the superiorities and grades that have been described
about them in the Qur’4n, the Hadith and by consensus. They give
superiority to those who spent and fought for the sake of Allah before
the victory, that is, truce of Hudaibiyah over those who spent and
fought after that. They consider Al-Muhajireen (those who migrated
from Makkah to Al-Madinah for Islam) to be superior to Al-Ansar
(the helpers of Al-Madinah who supported Al-Muhajireen). They have

197
faith in what Allah has said about the 313 persons on the occasion of
the battle of Badr that “they are free to do what they like, their sins
are pardoned” (4/-Bukhari, 5/212). And none of those who gave their
pledge to the Prophet ‏صنى الله عليه وسلم‎ under the tree will get into fire as
the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وملم)‎ has stated: “Allah is doubtlessly pleased
with them and they are pleased with Allah”. And they were more
than 1400 about whom the Prophet ‏وسلم)‎ ale ‏(صلى الله‎ bore witness that
they will be admitted to Paradise. (Muslim, 16/290). The AAlus
Sunnah also bear witness the admission to Paradise for them such as
the ‘Asharah Mubashsharah (ten Companions of the Prophet ‏صلى الله‎
‏عليه وسلم‎ who have been given glad tiding of Paradise in this world by
the Prophet ‏,صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ and the Sahaba like Thabit bin Qais bin
Shammas etc).

They affirm the frequent traditions which have come down about
Amirul Mu’minin Ali bin Abi Talib ‏.(رضي الله عنه)‎ In other words, they
regard Abu Bakr ‏رضي الله عنه)‎ ( as the best person after Muhammad
‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ gle), then comes Umar (a+ ‏(رضي الله‎ They give the third
position to Uthman ‏,(رضي الله عنه)‎ and the fourth to Ali (a ‏,(رضي الله‎ as is
proved by the traditions, and as the Sahaba had unanimously agreed
at the time of offering Bai‘ah (oath of loyalty) to Uthman («+ ‏الله‎ 5),
Albeit, some Ahlus Sunnah have a difference regarding Uthman and
Ali ‏(رضي الله عنهما)‎ as to who is superior between the two, but they also
are unanimous about Abu Bakr and Umar ‏.(رضي الله عنهما)‎ As to who
among Uthman and Ali is superior, some have given priority to
Uthman and have then kept quiet and have given the fourth place to
Ali. Some have given priority to Ali and some have kept silent. But in
the case of Ahius Sunnah it is established that Uthman has priority
over Ali, although according to the mass of the Ahius Sunnah the
problem regarding priority to Uthman over Ali is not such that
opposition to it may be called misguidance. This will, of course, be
considered misguidance on the question of caliphate. The Ahlus
Sunnah believe tht Abu Bakr is the caliph after the Prophet (Ui ‏صلى‎
‏,(عليه وسلم‎ then Umar, then Uthman, then Ali. Whoever objects against
anyone of these regarding this order of caliphate, he will be regarded

198
more misguided than the domestic donkey.

The author says that one of those principles which distinguish Ahlus
Sunnah wal Jama‘ah from other sects is that they do not revile
anyone from amongst the Sahaba of the Prophet ‏:(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
they do not curse them and neither do they feel animus and malice
towards them or talk contemptuously about them. Their heart and
tongue are pure. They say only such things about them as have been
said by Allah about them, that is:

“Our Lord! Forgive us and our brethern who have preceded
us in Faith” (Surah Al-Hashr, 59:10).

The supplications have been invoked by those who came after them
and followed them sincerely. This proves their perfect love for the
Sahaba of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ and their honouring them.
They deserve this love and respect due to their superiority and
nobility in Islam and their special relationship with the Prophet ‏صلى)‎
‏الله عليه وسلم‎ ( and the good that they have done for the entire Ummah.
These were the people who became instrumental in conveying the
message that the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه رسلم)‎ came to deliver. Whatever
knowledge and learning was made available to the latter people,
was through them. Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah while obeying the
Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ pay respect to these men for the Prophet
‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has forbidden them from reviling them and having
animus against them. The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has pointed out
that even a few deeds of a Sahabi are of greater importance than
many deeds of any other Muslim. This is because of the perfect
sincerity and true Faith of the Sehaba.

The author says, “They give superiority ...” This statement is
supported by the verse of the Qu’ran:
Cg seg 51355

199
“Not equal among you are those who spent and fought before
the conquering (of Makkah) (with those among you who did
so later). Such are higher in degree than those who spent and
fought afterwards. But to all, Allah has promised the best
(reward).” (Surah Al-Hadid, 57:10).

The explanation of ‘Victory’ has been done in terms of the truce of
Hudaibiyah. It is authentically proved that Surah Al-Fath was
revealed after that. The name ‘victory’ was given to this truce
because 1) brought far reaching consequences. The domination of
Islam and its power, its publicity and the entry of the people in its
fold; form part of its consequences.

The author says: “They consider Al-Muhajireen ...” “The Muhajireen
have two qualities—help and migration. This is the reason why the
Guided Caliphs and the ‘Asharah Mubashsharah were from
amongst the Muhajir. Surah Taubah (Repentance) and Surah Al-
Hashr (The Gathering) contain superiority of the Muhajir over the
Ansar. This superiority is in a general sense; it does not mean that
some from the Ansar are not superior to some from the Muhajir.

It is reported by Abu Bakr while delivering the address at As-
Saqifa:

erga ely ain ‏قَنَْنْ‎
‎“We are the Muhajirun; we accepted Islam first of all; we
embraced Islam before you did; and we have been given
priority in the Qur’dn also. So we will be the rulers and you
the advisers.” (Al-Bukhari, 5/16).

The author says, “They have faith in...” It is reported that when
Umar («+ ‏(رضي الله‎ wanted to kill Hatib bin Abi Balta‘a ‏(رضي الله عنه)‎
(who had participated in the battle of Badr) on the ground that he
had written a letter while spying for the Quraish regarding the
journey of the Prophet ‏,(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
said to Umar:

200
‎a5‏ يُدْرِيا
‎“Umar! What do you know, may be, Allah is aware of the‏
‎men of Badr and said, ‘Do whatever you like, I have forgiven‏

‎you”.

‎278 ‏قد‎ hu ‏اعْمَلُوا‎ 05 «6 Jal ‏عَلَى‎ iba fo ‏عُمَرُ؟‎ 3

‎The author says, “And none of those who gave their pledge...” This is
because the Prophet ‏صنى الله عليه رسلم)‎ ) had told it and Allah has stated:

‎ERM ‏عت‎ LG ‏المؤييس‎ Bh SDD
“Indeed, Allah was pleased with the believers when they gave

‎their Bai‘a (pledge) to you (O Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم‎
under the tree,” (Surah Al-Fath, 48:18).

‎Indeed Allah is pleased with those faithfuls when they were
offering Bai‘a to you under the tree: This pleasure will protect them
from receiving affliction and implies their honour and reward.

‎The author says, “...such as the ‘Asharah Mubashsharah’. Abu Bakr,
Umar, Uthman, Ali, Talha, Zubair, Sa‘d bin Abi Waqgas, Saeed bin
Zaid, Abdur Rahman bin ‘Auf, and Abu Ubaidah bin Jarrah.” In
addition to them there are others like Thabit bin Qais, Okashah bin
Mihsan, and Abdullah bin Salam, etc., and others about whose
being destined to receive Paradise is mentioned in the authentic
narratives.

‎The author says, “They affirm the frequent traditions which have
come down about Amirul Mu’minin Ali bin Abi Talib ...” It is

‎narrated that Ali said this on the pulpit in Kufa and a large crowd
had heard it. Ali had said:

‎53 sass Cail Sf cue
“After the death of Allah’s Messenger ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم‎ we have
come to know that Abu Bakr is superior-most amongst us all,

‎201
and after his death we feel that Umar is the most superior
amongst us.” (‘As-Sunnah’, of Ibn Abi ‘Aasim 2/570).

;The author says, “They give the third position to Uthman ...” The
creed of the majority of the Ah/us Sunnah is that the order of
superiority among the Guided Caliphs is in accordance with their
turn in occupying the seat of caliphate and it is on this ground that
the Ahlus Sunnah give superiority to Uthman over Ali. Their
argument is that the Sahaba gave priority to Uthman over Ali in
offering Bai‘a. Some Ahlus Sunnah give superiority to Ali on the
ground that the narratives transmitted about the qualities and virtues
of Ali are too many. But some people keep quiet about it. However,
the question of according superiority as the author has said, does
not form part of those fundamental problems in which the
opponents may be regarded as misguided. This is only a peripheral
issue having enough scope for difference of opinion. Of course, it is
obligatory with regard to the problem of caliphate to believe that
the caliphate of Uthman was rightful, for it had been established in
consultation with those six persons whom Umar («+ ‏(رضي الله‎ had
appointed to choose the caliph after him. So, whoever has the
notion that the caliphate of Uthman («es ‏(رضي الل‎ was false and Ali
was more entitled to caliphate, he will be considered a misguided
innovator. He will be considered to be overwhelmed by Shia-ism
and, as the author says, guilty of ascribing evil, to the Muhajir and
the Ansar.

202
Ahlus Sunnah \ove the members of
the family of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
Bes ped ‏وَيَحْمَظُونَ‎ isl alts oS ET Gets
ad a A Bau Bah: i¢ fab ‏يَوْمَ‎ OG Le Hw ‏رَسُوْلٍ الله‎
ip: O65: \eatals é : hot Ss ha ‏بيده؟‎ Spe gain ‏َقَالَ:‎
‏وَاصْطْفَى من‎ Ets fet ‏من بي‎ tats Sete ‏بي‎ Ati ‏الله‎
‎pth ‏وَاصْطفَانِي من بنِي‎ ptf + ‏قُرَيْشٍ‎ le ‏وَاصْطْفَى‎ iS Sls
‏في‎ el SEL Sets Ge ‏أُمَهَاتٍ‎ ae Quit hes
‏به‎ A ‏وَأَوَلَ مَنْ‎ asst FT ‏اللاعَنْهَا أمَ‎ G25 - ss ‏خُصُوْصًا‎

- GA ‏ْقَهُ بنْتَ‎ Bay ‏الْمَالِيةُ.‎ Dh de ‏وَكَانَ‎ cap ‏وَعَاضَدَهُ عَلَى‎
jus Ln ‏عَلَى‎ Te ‏الب 3 «فَضْلُ‎ YS IG ‏لذ عند الي‎ 535
. ‏الطّعَام»‎ glo Je 6 ur

كه وى م 502

ea DEAS byati Gu 0 9
we ‏وَيُمْسِكُوْنَ‎ . fae ‏بقَوْلٍ أو‎ oo ih by ‏الَِّيْنَ‎ erg a
‏مَا‎ Ups piglet ‏إنَّ هذه 50 الْمَْويْة في‎ sippy ‏الصّحَابك‎ Go Ad
‏هُمْ‎ hs Rey et ‏عَنْ‎ Boo Sally Gy BU Gs OS ‏هَوَ‎
‏مُجْتهِدونَ مُخطلؤد. وهم مع‎ Uy teat Saket YY ‏فِنِمَمْدوُوْنَ:‎

egies ‏عَنْ كبائر ر الإنم‎ tats SS Se dots JS ‏لأَيَعْتقَدُوْنَ أنّ‎ ay

203
LB ‏السوَابقٍ وَالْقَضَائِلٍ‎ Se aly ea ‏فِي‎ Cell agile ‏يَجُوْرُ‎ Jp

NaN

DRY AEE Spe A) SAR ‏إنّهُمْ‎ SE - ‏مَْفِرَة مَايَصْدرٌ مِنْهُمْ  إِنْ صَدَرَ‎
Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah love the members of the household of the
Prophet (ploy ‏الله عليه‎ 1), regard them as friends, and protect the will
of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ about them which he had stated on the
day of Ghadir-e-Khumm: “I remind you of Allah about my Ahle Bait
(household).” (Muslim, 15/188 with Nawawi). And said to his uncle
‘Abbas when it was complained that some people of Quraish are
oppressing Bani Hashim: “I swear by the One Who holds my soul in
His Hand that these people cannot be believers unless they love you
and my relatives”. (4t-Tirmidhi). He also said, “Allah chose the Bani
Ismail, and from Bani Ismail He chose Bani Kananah, and from Bani
Kananah He chose the Quraish, and from Quraish He chose Bani
Hashim, and He chose me from Bani Hashim.” (Muslim 15/41). Ahlus
Sunnah wal Jama‘ah regard the wives of the Prophet ‏عليه وسلم)‎ allt ‏(صلى‎
‎with reverence on the ground that they were like Mothers of the
Believers They have a faith that these will be the wives of Prophet
‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ in the Hereafter also, particularly, Khadijah who is
the mother of most of his children and was the first among the
faithful ones . She cooperated with him in his work and she enjoyed a
high status due to him. And Siddiqah bint Siddiq ‏رضي الله عنهما‎ about
whom the Prophet (ly ‏(صلى الله عليه‎ said, “Aishah has a superiority over
all other women in the same way as Thareed has superiority over all other
foods.” (A/-Bukhari 4/428).

Ahlus Sunnah express their dissociation from the way of Ar-
Rawafid" for they keep malice against the Sahaba and revile them,

1 Ar-Rawafid: They are the extremist sect of Shiite (Shi‘a) who gave up Zaid
bin Ali bin Husain when he showed love to Abu Bakr and Umar ‏رضي الله عنهما)‎ (.
They disregarded him in Kufa in the same way as they have done with his
grandfather i.e. Husain.

204

and also from the ways of the An-Nawasib'! who inflict pain on the
Ahle Bait by word or act, and keep themselves uninvolved into the
differences that arose among the Sahaba. Ahlus Sunnah believe that
the narratives reported about the shortcomings of the Sahaba are
either false or have been exaggerated or reduced, or perverted. The
right stand in this connection is that they (Sahaba) are excused.
Either they grasped the correct position by Jjtihad or they committed
a mistake. Along with this the AA/us Sunnah do not believe that every
Sahabi is innocent of the minor or major sins, but rather it is possible
in general, that they can commit sin. But they have some such
superiorities and virtuous deeds to their credit which cause the
pardon of the errors committed by them. Even those errors of theirs
will be pardoned which will not be pardoned if committed by the
people of the latter period. The reason is that they have to their credit
such virtues to compensate for the errors which the people who came
later do not have.

The Ahle Bait of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ are those on whom
Zakat (obligatory charity) is prohibited. These are Aal-e-Jafar, Aal-
e-Aqil and Aal-e-Abbas; all of these belong to Bani Hashim. These
include Banul-Muttalib also, for the Prophet ‏وسلم)‎ ie ‏(صلى الله‎ has said:

“They have left us neither during the Period of Ignorance nor
in the Period of Islam.” (A/-Nasai, 7/131).

For this reason Ahlus Sunnah wal Jama‘ah respect the Ahle Bait and
pay due regard to their relationship with the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ),
exactly as they love them for the trial they underwent in helping
Islam, the religion of Allah, and were the precursors of the religion.
The word Ghadir-e-Khumm has been used because Khumm was the
name of a person who was a dyer by occupation. The word Ghadir

1 4n-Nawasib: They are the people who have enmity with Ah/e Bait,(Family of
the Prophet ‏الله عليه وسلم‎ Le) slander them and consider them disbelievers. They
are the opponents of Ar-Rawafid.

205
has been related to him. This is a pond at Johfa which lies between
Makkah and Al-Madinah.Another statement is that Khumm is the
name of a tree towards which Ghadir has been ascribed.

The Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ said to his uncle: “I swear by the One
Who holds my life in His possession that these people cannot
become believers unless they love me and, because of my kinship,
love you for the sake of Allah.” This means that no one’s faith can
acquire perfection until he loves for the sake of Allah, the Ahle Bait
of the Prophet ‏.(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ The reason is that they are from
amongst those friends of Allah and His obedient people whose love
and friendship for Allah is obligatory. Also because they have a
kinship relation with the Prophet ‏.(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎

The wives of the Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ( are those with whom he
contracted Nikah. The first among these is Khadijah bint Khuwailid
whom he married in Makkah before being entrusted with
Prophethood. The Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ( was 25 years old at that
time and she was older than him by 15 years. He did not marry
anyother woman during her lifetime. Except for Ibrahim, all his
children were born to her. She was the first to have faith in him and
provided him with strength in sustaining the burden of Prophethood.
She died at the age of 65, three years before the Hijrah (migration).
After her, he married Saudah bint Zam‘ah and then performed the
nuptial ceremony with ‘Aishah (ys ‏.(رضي الله‎ At that time ‘Aishah
was six years old. She came to the Prophet’s house after the Hijrah
to Al-Madinah when she had become nine years old. One of his
wives is Umm-e-Salma (\y ‏(رضي الله‎ whom he married after the death
of Abu Salma. Another is Zainab bint Jahsh whom he married after
she had been divorced by Zaid bin Haritha. The fact is that this
marriage took place under a special plan of Allah. Additionally,
Juwairiyah bint Harith, Safiyah bint Huyai, Hafsah bint Umar, and
Zainab bint Khuzaimah all are his wives, and Mothers of the
Believers. These are his wives in the Hereafter also. Khadijah and
‘Aishah (4+ ‏(رضي الله‎ are unconditionally superior to them all.

206
Unlike the Rawafid, Ahlus Sunnah dissociate themselves from the
extremist position in favour of Ali. The Rawafid keep an animus
with the senior Sahaba, revile them and call them Kafir. The name

Rawafid was given to them first of all by Zaid bin Ali. When the
Shi‘a asked him to dissociate himself from the obedience of the two
Sheikh Abu Bakr and Umar, so that the Shi‘a might offer Bai ‘a to
him, he refused to do so. When they left his company, he said:
‏رفضتمونيئ“‎ You have left me.” They began to be called Rafida from that
day. They have a large number of sects — some are more extremist
than others.

Ahlus Sunnah dissociate themselves from the way of the An-
Nawasib also, who developed hostility against the Ahle Bait of the
Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ on account of certain known political
factors. They do not exist at present any more.

Ahlus Sunnah do not go into verifications of the mutual differences
that took place among the Sahaba, particularly after the
assassination of Uthman, among Ali, Talha and Zubair and also the
latter events that took place between Ali, Mu‘awiyah and Amr bin
al-Aas, etc. Ahlus Sunnah believe that whatever narratives have
been narrated about their shortcomings are often false or have been
perverted. Of course, regarding those that are true, they consider
them excused and say that they occupy in it the position of a
Mujtahid. Despite this they do not believe that the Sahaba are
innocent of the minor and the major sins, but their superiorities and
feats and the company they kept with the Prophet (1-5 ‏(صلى الله عليه‎
and the Jihad they carried out along with him ‏,(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
justify their pardon.

207
Sahaba are the best ones of this Ummah
‏من أَحَدِهِمْ ذا‎ SU Shy ‏القَرُوْنِء‎ 3s wel ‏كله‎ ol ‏رَسُوْلٍ‎

3 4 كان ‎Gel pee sag‏ مِمَنْ ‎By Shae‏ صَدَرَ مِنْ
عي 5 ‎B55‏ قد تاب ‎he‏ أو أتى ‎phase‏ تَمْحُوْ أؤ غُفْرَ له
ِفَضْلٍ ‎cake‏ أن ‎yt Sele ool 2g ats Bad Bad‏ ِشَفَاعَيه أؤ اب
يك في ال َِدَا كان هذا في ‎sth sh‏

‎ake‏ أو ‎‘Gia te‏ إن ن صاب ‎re Aes‏ وَإِنْ اخطؤُوا؛

‎wt

‏قَلِيلٌ 33 3 ‎getty Pal ree se 3 sys‏ م ين ‎SY‏ بالط
وَرَسُوْلِه» وَالْجِهَادِ فِي ‎vats‏ وَالْهجْرَق ‎«git rain ally‏ وَالْعملٍ
الصّالح . ‎ae‏ ول وه وا ع ال عل ين
الْقصَائلٍ ؛ ‎oe‏ يقبا ‎I‏ حَيْدُ ‎lt‏ بعد الأنيياء؛ لآكَانَ وَلآيكُوْن ‎spools‏

‎at Je Wists AN sh ‏الأ الى ن‎ oy ‏الطفرة بن‎ ob hy

‎It is evident from the statement of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ that
the Sahaba were the best men of their times and even one Mudd (a
measure of about 600 grams) of their charity is superior to the charity
of gold equal to the size of Uhud mountain. Moreover, if anyone of
them committed a mistake, he either repented for it or performed
such virtues deeds which would negate them or they are pardoned
because of the rewards of their virtues and with the intercession of the
Prophet ‏,(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ for they are the most deserving of his
intercession. Or they were put to some worldly suffering so that it
serves as a penance. This is about those errors that are proved. As for

‎208
as the issues in which they performed Jjtihad, the position regarding
them is that if they arrived at a correct conclusion, they would get two
rewards and if they made a mistake, they would get one reward. And
the mistake will be pardoned. Some of their acts which are considered
undesirable are very few in number and inconsequential. They will
pardoned on account of their superiorities and nobilities, faith in
Allah and His Prophet ‏صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ ), performing Jihad for the
sake of Allah and doing Hijrah and providing help, acquiring gainful
knowledge and doing good deeds, etc. Whoever will read their
biographies with understanding and insight, and will come to know
the rewards bestowed by Allah upon them, he will certainly realise
that these are the best among humans after the Prophets. Neither
there has been anyone like them nor will there be. Among all the
periods of this Ummah which is the best among all the other Ummah,
and most honourable with Allah these are the pious men of Allah.

The evidence given by the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ about the Sahaba is
that they are the best people of their times. Even a charity of one Mudd
(600 grams) by them or even its half is superior to the charity of the
latter people in gold equal to the size of Uhud mountain. Therefore,
their errors will be pardoned on account of their sinless virtues.

The author aims at highlighting the point that no Sahabi of the
Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has died while engaged in committing such
a sin which justifies the Wrath of Allah. If someone practically
committed a sin then this is certainly related to a few facts
mentioned by the author. That is, he has either repented before
dying, or has performed such virtues which has outdone the sins, or
he will be pardoned due to have been among the foremost in
embracing Islam such as the Sahaba who participated in the battle
of Badr or those who offered Bai ‘at-ash-Shajarah, (pledge under
the tree) or they will be pardoned through the intercession of the
Prophet ‏,(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ for they are most deserving of the
intercession of the Prophet ‏.(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ Or, they were made to
go through sufferings of life, property and progeny which worked

209
as_a forgiveness for the sin. When this is the position with regard to
the proved errors to believe in which is enjoined upon us, then the
issues 01 [jtihad in which the errors are forgiven, argue in favour of
their purity of the first level. Thus, an estimate of their errors
compared with their virtues and superiorities is like comparing a
drop to an ocean. The same Allah who chose His Prophet (wi ‏صلى‎
‏,(عليه وسلم‎ He also chose the companions of his. For this reason they
are the best men among the humans after the Prophets and the pious
men of this Ummah which is the best of all other Ummah.

Whoever reads the author’s statement carefully about the grace of
the Sahaba, will feel highly astonished at the charge levelled
against him by ignorant and prejudiced people that the author
attacks at the reputation of the Sahaba and ignores their greatness
and tears their consensus in pieces, and similar other fabrications.

210
Ahlus Sunnah believe in Karamat of Auliya

مِنْ ‎Ga wl Syl‏ التَضْدِيْقُ ‎ota! SUIS‏ وَمَا ‎beh‏ يُجْري الله عَلَى
‎we ye 7‏ الْعَادَاتِءِ ني ‎A‏ اع ‎ola‏ وَالْمُكَاسَفَاتِ 15 ‎es‏ الْقُدْرَة
‎AN a‏ ذ في سُوْرَة الْكَهْفٍ ‎by‏ وَعَنْ ‎ge‏
‎AI G3 £5 &‏ وَهِيَ ‎NEES‏

The testimony of the Karamat (charismata) occurred by the Auliya
(those righteous people who are close to Allah) also forms part of the
principles of Ahlus Sunnah, as also the testimony of all those
extraordinary occurrences and habits which Allah manifests through
them in terms of various knowledges, spiritual experiences, powers,
influences and those that are mentioned in the Qur’anic Surah Al-
Kahf etc., regarding former communities and about the initial period
of the Sahaba and the Taabe‘een of this Ummah, and also those that
exist in all groups of this Ummah till today and will continue to
remain till the Day of Judgement.

From the frequent references in the texts of the Qur’an and the
Hadith and from the ancient and modern events, the happenings of
the charismata through the followers of the guidance of Allah’s
Messengers is proved. Karamat is an unusual event which Allah
manifests through some of his Auliya for supporting a mundane or
spiritual matter. The difference made between Karamat and miracle
implies that miracle is the claim of Prophethood but Karamat does
not imply this. There are a number of points of wisdom and aims in
the manifestation of Karamat. The important ones among these are:

1.They are like miracles which prove the perfection of the Power of
Allah and of the dominance of His Will. And whatever Allah wills

211
He is the Greatest Performer of it. Allah has in addition to these
methods and known causes, other methods also which are beyond
the access of the human knowledge; nor can the human sense
organs perceive them. The story of the Ashabul-Kahf (People of the
Cave) is one of such events including that sleep that Allah imposed
upon them for a long time along with protecting their bodies from
being disintegrated. Another of these is provision being given to
Mary, daughter of Imran, in the arches on which Zacharia had felt
astonised, and said:

sid
“Where do you get it from?”

Likewise, the fact of Mary becoming pregnant and the birth of Jesus
without a father and talking by Jesus while still in the cradle, etc.

2. The Karamat of the Auliya’ are in fact the miracles of the
Prophets, for the Auliya’ receive these Karamat by following the
guidance of their Prophets and acting accordingly.

3. The Karamat of the Auliya’ is that glad tiding which Allah has
given them in the world itself. Bushra (tiding) means every such
thing which proves their being Wali (protector, supporter, friend
etc.) and having a good end in the Hereafter.

Karamat are still in existence in this Ummah and will be found till
the Doomsday and observation is the best argument to prove them.

The philosophers have denied the Karamat of the Auliya’ even as
they have denied the miracles of the Prophets. The Mu ‘tazilah and
some Asha ‘irah have also denied the occurrence of the Karamat
claiming that these are like miracles. But this is a false claim as we
have mentioned that it does not imply a claim of Prophethood.

But one must remain vigilant from the Dajjal (false liars) of these
innovators and the deeds of the misguided people and satanic show
of extraordinary occurrences who call themselves Sufi - such as

212
entering into fire, striking one’s body with weapons, catching hold
of snakes, and foretelling about the Unseen, etc. In fact these are
not charismata. Charismata is performed by the ‘Auliya Allah
(friends, supporters, protectors and helpers of Allah) and these
people are not Auliya but satans.

. 213
Ahlus Sunnah follow the Sunnah
of the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
‏الل 2 باطنا وَظاهِرّاء‎ Sty UT pH ‏وَالْجَمَاعَةِ‎ Zen jl we Bb i
Bes Py Ula ‏الْمْهَاجِرِيْنَ‎ oe Gash ‏السَابقيينَ‎ 38 ae
“pagel ‏الوَاشِدِيْنَ‎ lA day 22 ee ‏ملك‎ OG Ess Be att ‏سول‎
‎Ai has ots eth le ‏وَعَضُوًا‎ Uy ‏تَسَمَكُوًا‎ «gat Se
(9S ‏قَ‎ Gaal Sf ayy, dias wa ffs ey ‏مُحْدَثٍ‎ Fs 3g

0 ‏علخو مز‎ ee baa ‏الى وَحَيْدُ الْهَذي‎ 2S
gly a5! ‏عَلَى هذ‎ HE ESE gia ‏وِبْقَدَمُوْنَ‎ «GI GET ‏كَلآم‎
‎ca ‏الْجَمَاعَةَ‎ 3 cael Sal hey htt wes) ‏آهل‎ ie

© Sere

aa) ‏صَارَ اشمًا‎ By ‏الْجَمَاعَةِ‎ BD U6 ‏وَإِنْ‎ Syl hay ‏[الإجماع]»‎

plat ‏ني‎ oe 2a od RCC INS ‏الْمُجْتَمِعِْنَ. وَالإِجْمَاعٌ هُوَ‎ eal
ak ro ‏جَمِيْعَ ما عَلَيْهِ التَآمن‎ HOH ‏الأصُوْلٍ‎ oy ‏وَالدَيْنِ. وَهُمْ رودب‎
‏وَالإِجْمَاعٌ الي يبط و‎ ٠ re ‏نبالا‎ Dt ‏ظَاهِرَةٍ‎ of ‏باط‎ gusty

كَانَّ عَلَيْهِ الل ‎As ae ye eo‏ الالختلكف» و1
‎This also forms part of ways of Ahius Sunnah wal Jama ‘ah that they‏
‎in both‏ (صلى الله عليه وملم) ‎‘follow the reminiscences of the Prophet‏
‎manifest and inward sense, and adopt the path of those, who became‏
‎the first believers of the Muhajireen and the Ansar, and obey the will‏
‎in which he said, “It is obligatory on‏ (صلى الله عليه وسلم) ‎of the Prophet‏
‎you that after I am no more, you adopt my Sunnah and the ways of‏
‎the Sahaba (Rightly Guided Caliphs) who have received guidance‏

214
from me. Catch hold of it; and hold it firmly with your clenched teeth,
and guard yourselves from the acts of innovation, for every
innovation is misguidance.” (4t-Tirmidhi - Al-‘Iim 7/438 with Tuhfa).
Ahlus Sunnah know that the most truthful statement is the Statement
of Allah, and the best way of life is that of Muhammad ‏صلى الله عليه)‎
‏.(وسلم‎ They give preference to the Statement of Allah over all kinds of
statements of others than Him. They give primacy to the guidance of
Muhammad ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ over the guidance of everyone else. That
is the reason why they are called Ahlul Kitab was-Sunnah. They are
also called Ahlul Jama‘ah. This is because Jama‘ah is the other term
for Ijmaa‘ which is the opposite of schism, although the word
Jama‘ah was coined for denoting all those who assemble; and Jjmaa‘
is the third base of Shari‘ah. On it, reliance is placed about knowledge
and religion. Ahlus Sunnah evaluate with these three principles all the
external and internal words and deeds which people follow about
religion. The right Jjmaa‘ is that which was the stance of the
venerable ancestors. For after them, differences multiplied and the
Islamic community got disintegrated.

The author says “This also forms part of ways of Ahlus ...” This is a
description of the source of inference of the fundamental and
peripheral principles of the Ahlus Sunnah. This source is based on
three principles: (1) The Book of Allah which is the best and the
truest book. Ahius Sunnah do not give priority to anyone else’s
statement over the Statement of Allah. (2) They do not give
primacy to anyone else’s Sunnah over the Sunnah of the Prophet
‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ and wheatever is reported by him. (3) The Jjmaa‘
occurring in the first period which was the best phase of this
Ummah before disintegration, schism and misguidance set in it. The
words and deeds of the people which the Ah/us Sunnah got after
that initial period, are evaluated by them in terms of these three
principles—the Book, the Sunnah, and the Jjmaa‘. If those
statements are in tune with these principles then they accept them;
if they are contrary to them, they reject regardless of whoever be
the person who has stated them. This is the just and the straight path

215
that if followed no one is misguided, and those who obey it are not
doomed. This is the balanced position among them who play with
the texts, misinterpret the Qur’an and refute the authentic Ahadith,
and do not pay heed to the jmaa‘ of the Salaf, (venerable and pious
ancestors) and among them who stray like a misguided camel and
accept every opinion and statement and make no distinction
between the real and the forged, and the right and the wrong.

216
Ahlus Sunnah follow the basic principles
of Shari‘ah

3 هُمْ مَعَ ‎ok‏ الأصُوْلٍ ‎tot‏ بلْمَمْرُوفٍِء وَيَْهُوْنَ عَنِ ‎Je Sei‏ ما
تُوْجبَهُ ‎a‏ وَيَرَوْنَ كام الح ‎ately‏ وَالْجْمَعٍ والأغياد مع الأمرَاءِ
‎Hus of se wel‏ وَيُحَافِظُوْن عَلَى الْجَمَاعَاتِ. ‎easy 59 iy‏
‎otis ay‏ مَنْتى قَوْلِهِ ه: ‎esti (AC yb Gyn‏
‎an a ais canal Se Sok tak Lat Ae‏ الْمُؤْميينَ في
‎ih pis‏ وَتَعَاطْفِهمْ ‎furs‏ الْجَمَدٍ ‎hy Sibi Gy‏ عَضُوٌ؛ تَدَاعَى لَهُ
سَائِرُ ‎Ady yoshi‏ وَالسَهْرِ» ‎rhs,‏ مُرُوْنَ ‎DNL‏ عِنْد ‎SOM, SH‏ عِنْدَ ‎EG‏

we

‎Fy Lag‏ القَضَا. ‎SHEN Pid 5 Seal‏ وَمَحَاسِنٍ الأعْمّالٍ.
‎ct pecs Grey‏ وَيَنْدُبُوْنَ
إلى أن يل 6ن كك يي من حَرمك مَك ‎gitiy‏ عَمّنْ ‎Gelb‏ وَبَأموُؤنَ
4 الْوَالدَيْنِء ‎pee they‏ و ‎had it‏ وَالإحْسَانٍ إِلَى ‎AB‏
‎steal‏ وان الكبيل» ‎sh Hp ٠‏ وَيَْهنَ عَنِ ‎AB‏ والخيلآء .
‎hy‏ ولاشيطالة ‎oe Gla Je‏ أز ‎phe‏ حَقٌ. .يمرن ‎gies‏
‎bess GE‏ عَنْ ‎tops (A eis eae J a‏

‎Sos yo tes

‏الله به مُحَمَّدَا يكل . «لكن ‎wi‏ لك أغير ‎Ska A aman‏ على قود
وَسَبْعِيْنَ ‎is Bb‏ 3 في )0 ‎Y‏ وَاحِدَة وَهِيّ الْجَمَاعَةُ. وَنِي ‎HS‏ عَنْهُ
217

‎i
نَّهُ 205 «هُمْ مَنْ كَانَ عَلَى مثل ما أن ‎dle‏ اليم ‎reels‏ صَارَ
الْمْتَمَعَكُوْنَ ‎Sey‏ الْمَخْضٍ ‎At‏ عَنِ الشَّوْبٍ هُمْ أَهُل ‎paca‏

pel res ‏وَالصَّالحُوْنَ‎ Igy ‏الصَّدَيْقُوْن‎ ay) ‏َالْجمَاعَةٍ.‎
‏الْمَذكُوْرَة رق‎ Blaby ald eh Jf ‏الذجىء‎ &

“en : ‏فيهم نهم البَئ كله‎ JG ‏الَّذيْنَ‎ 5 spc Penal ‏وَهُمْ‎ Ll

Bi Ay Gis ‏من‎ BLS Gud lo ‏أي‎

‎OL‏ الله أن ‎yb BS Sy ee Gas‏ بَعْدَ 3 هَدَانا وَأنْ ‎Cg‏ لَنَا من
‎Joy lel ity 8h Hass oS‏ الل" عَلَى ‎als Lost‏ 23

‎The Ahlus Sunnah follow the commanding principles of the Shari‘ah
doing what is recognised and refusing to do what is prohibited. They
adhere to these principles and believe in performing Hajj and Jihad,
the Jumu‘a and Eid with the leaders whether they (leaders) are good
or bad; they preserve the congregations. They follow the principle of
exhorting the Ummah and have faith in the statement of the Prophet
‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ gle): “A Mu’min is like an edifice for another Mu’min,
some parts of which hold fast the other parts.” He joined his fingers
with one another and explained the point. (4/-Bukhari, 3/374). The
Prophet (ely ‏(صلى الله عليه‎ said,“The mutual love, mercy and affection
among them could be likened to an organ; whenever one part of an
organ is hurt the whole body becomes restless with fever.” (A/-
Bukhari, 8/24). Ahlus Sunnah advise fortitude at a time of calamity
and hardship and exhort thankfulness during the time of ease and
acceptance of the Decision of Allah, invite people to follow the best
manner and noble character and morals, perform good deeds and

‎218
have faith in the meaning of the statement of the Prophet ‏صلى الله علية)‎
‏:(وملم‎ “The man of most perfect Faith among the Mu’mineen is that
one who is best in character”. (4t-Tirmidhi, 4/325). They exhort to
mend ties to him who cuts you off. To give to him who has forbidden
you, and forgive him who has done wrong to you. They order for
righteous treatment with parents, keeping ties of kinship, good
treatment with neighbour, the orphans, the destitute, travellers, and
compassion to the slaves. They prohibit pride and conceit, and just or

unjust torture to the people. They teach high morals and check from
low morals. In all these things which they profess and practise, they
follow the Qur’an and the Hadith. Their creed is the religion of Islam
which was sent to the world by Allah through Prophet Muhammad
‏الله عليه وسلم)‎ Le), But the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ said, “My Ummah
will get divided into 73 sects and each one will go to Hell except one
and that one is the Jama‘ah” (Abu Daud: As-Sunnah 12/341). Also in
one Hadith he said, “They are those people who will follow this path
which I and my Sahaba follow today”. (At-Tirmidhi, 7/397).
Therefore, they hold tightly to Islam, free from every adulteration,
and these are the people of Ahius Sunnah wal Jama‘ah. This group
includes the truthfulones, the martyrs and the virtuous persons; it
includes the signposts of guidance, lamps in the darkness and owners
of such superiorities and virtues which have been already mentioned.
It includes the Abdaal and also those Imam on whose guidance,
Muslims are unanimous. It is this successful group about which the
Prophet (ploy ‏(صلى الله عليه‎ has said: “One group from my Ummah will
always remain dominant upon the truth; their opponents will never
be able to harm its members or afflict them up to the establishment of
the last Hour” (Al-Bukhari, 9/309).

We request Allah to include us also among such people and do not
flinch our hearts after giving guidance; and bestow His Mercy upon
us. He is certainly the Generous. And Allah is the Most-Knowing. The
Mercy and Blessing of Allah may be on Muhammad and his family
and on his Sahaba abundantly.

219
The author says “The AAlus Sunnah ...” thus he has assembled all
the noble conducts in this section which characterize the Ahlus
Sunnah wal Jama‘ah, such as ‘Amr bil Ma ‘roof i.e., ordering that
which is recognised as good by Shari ‘ah and intelligence and Nahi
‘anil Munkar i.e., forbidding all those things which are both
rationally and according to Shari‘ah regarded as undesirable. This
is what the Shari‘ah enjoins upon us and this is what is understood
by the statement of the Prophet ‏الله عليه وسلم)‎  ىلص(:‎ |

7 ‏الاي‎ Cl 3 eats
“Whoever sees an undesirable thing, he should change it by
his hand; if he does not have the power to do that, he should
change it by his tongue; if he does not have even that power,

he should regard it as an evil in his heart—and this is the
weakest form of the Faith” (Muslim, Al-Iman 2/380).

Same is the position of remaining things i.e. to be present in the
Jumu‘a congregation prayer and other meetings, of taking part in
Hajj and Jihad along with the ruler whatever character he has, for
the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has said:

“You can offer prayer behind anyone whether he is righteous
or sinful” (Da ‘eef, Ad-Dar-al Qutni 2/57).

So also it is to exhort the Muslims, for the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎
has said:

«الدَيْنُ النَصِيِحَة»
‎“Religion is exhortation and sincerity” (Muslim, 2/396).‏

Similar is the status of appreciation of the brotherhood in Faith
which enjoins mutual love and cooperation as has been mentioned
in the following Ahadith in which the Prophet ‏(صلى الله عليه وسلم)‎ has
likened the Muslims with a wall built of molten lead and whose

220
bricks are intermeshed with each other; or has given them a simile
with the body whose organs are joined with one another. So also it
is to invite people to noble conduct. Thus the Ah/us Sunnah invite
people to remain enduring in hardship, thankful for Allah’s favours,
and acceptance of what He wills.

The author says “This group includes the truthful ...” The Arabic
word Siddig is derived from Sidg and has a superlative form. This
means one who testifies to Allah to an extreme degree. Abu Bakr is
the first Siddiq (truthful one) of this Ummah. The word Shuhadaa
is the plural of Shaheed i.e. one who was killed in the battlefield of
Jihad. The word Abdaal is plural of Badal and means those men
who are born one after another for the rejuvenation of the religion
and for its defence as has been narrated in the Hadith:

“Allah will create for this Ummah after every hundred years
one such person who will rejuvenate the religion for the
Ummah” (Abu Daud, Al-Malahim, 11/385 with ‘Aunul
Ma‘bood)

And Allah is The Best Knower.

May Allah send Mercy and Peace on Muhammad, and on his
family and Sahaba.

221
Names of the sects mentioned in this book

Al-Ashaa ‘irah (Ash‘arite) — P: 33,113

Al-Jabariyah P: 145,189
Al-Qadariyah P: 58,145,182
Al-Jahmiyah P: 144
Al-Mushabbiha P: 34,145
Al-Murji’ah P: 145
Al-Harooriyah P: 145
Al-Hulooliyah P: 157
Ar-Rawafid (Ar-Rafida) P:146
Al-Wa‘eediyah P:145, 151
AL-Kullabiyah P: 113,161
Al-Karramiyah 2: 114
Al-Nawasib P:205
Al-Mufawwidah P: 145
Al-Mu ‘tazila P: 54
Zindiq P: 121
Al-Mujuss P: 150
Al-Khawarij P: 146

222
