‎SUMMARY OF‏ م
‎IsLamic JURISPRUDENCE‏

‎Dr. Salih Al-Fawzan
Professor ‏ا‎
‎ember of the Board of Senior Vlora & Member
‘of he Permanent Commitee for Fatwa nnd Ravearch
A SUMMARY OF

ISLAMIC JURISPRUDENCE

الملخص الفقهي

Volume 4

Dr Salih Al-Fawzan

of Isfamle Jurisprudence,
Men ard of Senior Ulema & Member
‘of the Pormanent Committee for Fatwa and Research

Al-Maiman Publishing House
Saudi Arabia, P.0.80x 90020, Riyadh 11613

Al-Mulakhkhas Al-Fiqhi, First Edition
ih Al-Fawein

by Professor!

Copyright © 2005, Al-Maiman Publishing House. All rights reserved.

‘Translated by Al-Arabia for Information Technology, Cait.

49th Noobar St,, Bab Al-Log, 2d Floor, City Mall Building,

vel: 4202 7949370

Fax: #202 7962730

Published by Al-Maiman Publishing House, Saudi Arabia, Riyadh,

PO.B: 90020 Riyadh 11613

Riyadh: Tel: + 966 1 4627336 —AG15594 - 4645581 - 4026194
Fan; + 966 1 4612163 - 2800587

“To arrange bulk purchase discounts or book distributors outside Saudi Arabi
contact Al-Maiman Publishing House at the above address, For information on translated

books, please contact Al-Arabia at the above address or info@arabia-it.com.

Copyright © 2005 by Al-Maiman Publishing House. All rights reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced of distributed in any fornt or by any
means, or stored in a database of retrieval system, without the prior written permission

ofthe publisher

‘This book was composed with Adobe InDesign
‎the Name of Allah, the Entirely Merciful, the Especially Merciful‏ هل

‎CONTENTS

‎‘English Islamic Library
Editorial Staff
Acknowledgement
‘Translator’s Preface

‎Introduction

‎I: PURIFICATION

‎Purification and Water,

‎Disbelievers’ Pots and Clothes ...

‎‘Things Ritual Impurity Prohibits Doing .

‎Etiquette of Answering Call of Nature.,

‎Siwak and Acts of Natural Disposition.

‎Ablution:

‎Way of Performing Ablution

‎Wiping over the Khufis
Things Nullifying Ablution....

‎Ritual Bathing...

‎‘Tayammum (Dry Ablution)...

‎Removal of Impurity.

‎‘Menstruation and Postnatal Bleeding.

‎Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter?
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12

‎Chapter 13

93

97
13

ug

129
135
139
143
149
157
159
163

Obligation of the Five Prayers. 5

Prayer Call (Adhan) and Immediate Prayer
Call (Igamah)..

Prayer Conditions...

Etiquette of Heading for Mosque.

Prayer: Integral Parts, Obligatory Practicesand
Acts of the Sunnah. 7

000

Jetestable Acts .

sirable and Permissible Acts

Prostration of Forgetfulness...
Dhikr (Remembrance of Allah) Following Prayer,
Voluntary Prayer.
Witr Praye

‘Tarawih Prayer.

Sunnah Ratibah: Prayers Performed along with
Obligatory Prayers

‘Duha (Forewoon) Praye

Prostration of Recitation,

Non-regular Supererogatory Prayer.

‘Times When Prayer is Forbidden ‏سمس‎

Congregational Prayer..

The Latecomer to Congregational Prayer.

‘Women’s Attendance in Mosques...

Tmamate (in Prayer}

Invalid Imamate ...

Duties of the Imam....

CONTENTS

II: PRAYER
Chapter 1
Chapter 2

Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5

Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14

Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Chapter 19
Chapter 20
Chapter 21
Chapter 2
Chapter 23
Chapter 24

A Summary of Islamic Jurisprudence

233
27
265
281
287
293

403
a
aS
417

Prayer of Those Having Legal Excuses...

Jumu’ah (Friday) Praye

‘Two Feasts ("Ids) Prayer

Eclipse Prayer

Rain Praye

Death and Burial,

Zakah: Legality and ‏سمس تس سد سطعلا‎
Zakah: Grazing Animals and Livestock.

Zaki: Gruins, Fruits, Honey, Minerals and Rika...
‏تللم‎ Gold and Silver.
Zakah; Trade Goods,
Zakatul-Fitr (Fast-breaking Zakih).
Giving Zakah
Entitled Recipients of Zakah.
Desirable Chari

Fasting Ramadan: Obligation and Timing,

Beginning and End of a Fasting Da
‘Things Nullifying Fasting.
Making up for Missed Days of Ramadan

Breaking the Fast: Illness or Old Age.

‘The Obligation of Hajj (Pilgrimage!
“Womens Haj & Performing It on Someones Behalf...
‘Virtues of Hajj and Its Preparations...

Chapter 25
Chapter 26
Chapter 27
Chapter 28

Chapter 29
Chapter 30

111: ZAKAH
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter’
Chapter 9

IV: FASTING
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5

V: HAJJ
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter

471

481
489
493
499
503
527

CONTENT

Chapter 5 How to Assume [hram...

Chapter 6 Acts Prohibited during Ihram,.
‘Chapter7 Rites of Tarwiyah and ‘Arafah Days...
Chapter 8 Acts on Muzdalifah and Mina
Chapter 9 Days of Tashrig and Farewell Tawat,
Chapter 10 Sacrificial Animals (Hady and Udhiyah).
Chapter 11 Aqigah (Sacrificial Animal for the Newborn)...
VI: JIHAD

Chapter 1 Jihad (Fighting in the Cause of Allah).
APPENDICES

Glossary.

Name Index.

Subject Index...
Quranic Verse Index...
Hadith Index.

‘Transliteration System..

ENGLISH ISLAMIC LIBRARY

nglish Islamic Library: A series in English covering central
jand various issues in Creed, Jurisprudence and Islamic Sciences by
authors who have expert knowledge in theie fields. It targets both the Muslims
and the non-Muslims in the west as well as those who study Islamic Sciences in
English in Arab countries. Italso targets those who are engaged in propagating
Islam in the West,

IN THIS SERIES:

1. Concise Commentary on the Book of Tawhid: Sheikh professor
Salih Al-Fawzan

١ A Summary of Islamic Jurisprudence (Volume one): Sheilt
professor Silih Al-Fawain

3. A Summary of Islamic Jurisprudence (Volume two): Sheikh
professor Sélih Al-Fawzin

4, Guide to Sound Creed: Sheikh professor

5. A Brief Account of the Prophet Biography: Sheikh Muhammad
Ibn ‘Abdul-Wabhab

. Allah's Insightful Signs: ‘Tawfig 'Ulwan

The Way of the Travelers: An Explanatory Book on Islamic
Jurisprudence: Sheikh ‘Abdur-Rahman As-Sa'di

8. Exonerating the Great Imérms from Blame: imam hn Taymiyah
9, Universality of Islam: Imam Ibn Taymiyah
10) Ibu Taymiyal’s Collection of Fatwas (Volumes 21 & 22 & 23)

EDITORIAL STAFF

MAINEDITORS NATIVEEDITOR
© De Attia Es-Sayyed Atti. + ‏رونا‎ Abaultah

» Dr Muhammad Yahya

١ Dr Fahad M, Al-Malik, KESC, Saudi Arabia

REVISERS CONTRIBUTING TRANSLATORS

+ Mahmood Fouly Mtubavnmad * ‘Muharomad Abdil-Moneim Ali

= Bahaa El-Din Ibrahim + Hani Mahmoud Abdul-Fattah
DESIGN AND TECHNOLOGY. SHAR'LAND ARABIC CONSULTANTS
= Graphic Designer: Muhammad Salih + Sheikh Hatem Amin Aly

+ Layout: Mokhtar 'Thamy * fiomis Ebeid Abed

+ Muhammad Nussir Mogahed

About the Author

Sheikh Salih Al-Fawzin (born in 1935) has obtained a PhD in Islamic
Jurisprudence and has a long history in teaching jurisprudence.

He is a member of many academic institutions including the Board of
Senior Ulema, the Permanent Committee (or Fatwa and Research, the Islamic
‘Academy of Muslim World League, the Committee of Supervising Du’ ah, and
many other scholastic bodies.

He has written more than sixty published works covering Muslim Creed,
Islamic Jurisprudence and Muslims Conduct.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Alll praise and thanks are due to Allah, our Lord Who facilitated translating
and completing this invaluable book. In the course of translating this invaluable
book into English, we find ourselves indebted to more people than we can
possibly nominate here, without their help, this book would have never come
to the light. At the outset, we deeply appreciate and thank sheikh professor
Salih Al-Fawzan for giving us exclusive permission to translate and publish his
books as well as his follow-tip with the different stages of publishing the books,
May Allah give him success in this Worldly Life and Hereafter.

We are pleased to have the opportunity to express our gratitude and
profound thanks to Dr. Muhammad Mahmiid Ghali, professor of Linguistics
and the ex-dean of Faculty of Languages and Translation, Al-Azhar University,
for the great help and moral support he rendered us when we started the
process of translation,

‘We would also like to extend our gratitude and deep appreciation to Dr.
Muhammad Muhammad ‏فط‎ Layla, professor of Islamic Studies in English
and Head of English Department, Faculty of Languages and Translation, for
his penetrating advice and inspiration throughout the process of translation,
Moreover, we are beholden to’ heartily thank Dr, Ahmad Zaki Hammid,
professor of Islamic Studies in English, Faculty of Languages and Translation
for providing us with invaluable suggestions and important insights on
translation.

In addition, we extend our thanks to Dr. Muhammad Yahya, professor
of Literary Criticism at Faculty of Arts, Cairo University, for his editorial
assistance. Thanks are also due to Dr: “Attia Es-Sayyed Attia, lecturer in
ELT and Applied Linguistics, Faculty of Education, Al-Azhar University for
having professionally edited this work and others. His pertinent comments
and valuable touches at the final stage of writing the book added much to the
final version of the book. Finally yet importantly, we thank Umm Abdullah,
the native editor, who exerted great efforts in editing the book, and with whose
final touches she made it more appealing to the target audience.

Publisher
‘Sulaiman A. Almaiman
Translator’s Preface

This book is an English translation of sheikh professor Salih Al-Fawzan's
eal ‏اللخصص‎ ‘4 Summary of Islamic Jurisprudence’: Dar Al Asimah,
2001 (ISBN:3967/21). Our main aim in providing the English translation is
propagating the true Da’ wah that derives from Allah's Book and His Messenger’s
Sunnah. ‘This is a duty that every Muslim should cherish. Allah says: “And let
there be [arising] from you a nation inviting to [all that is] good, enjoining
what is right and forbidding what is wrong, and those will be the successful.”
(Alu "Imran; 104), With this in mind, this translated work is, then, a humble
response to our realization of a great responsibility to give the English speaking
reader access to rich Islamic Jurisprudence Literature that simply focuses on
the rules of jurisprudence and their proofs from the Quran, Sunnah and the
practice of the Righteous Salaf in addition to the opinions of the scholars of
jurisprudence on controversial issues as well as the proofs they quote in support
of their opinions. In doing so, we have left no stone unturned to make sure
that the final copy of a translated book meets a specilic high quality standard
that would convey the same meaning intended by the author and expressed in
the original source text. In effect, we have tried to set a balance between the
originality of thought and the nature of the style of language.

To attain this aim, our work (in this book and others) exhibits certain
distinctive features, namely, the process of translation, the style, the attention
paid to the sociolinguistic aspects (i.e,, transliteration, glossary and endnotes).
‘We touch upon these features in the following section,

1.PROCESS

Before reaching the publisher, our work goes through a developmental
process to guarantee that the final version of the translated book is as perfect
ascan be.

In effect, this process commences with the first-hand translation, which
is done by some very carefully chosen translators who are native-speakers
of Arabic and have a native-like command of the target language. The main
principle that governs the translation process is that the translator is after
integrity. With integrity as the main target, the translators would not be
tempted to impose their own ideas on the text nor would they glass over the
difficult paragraphs instead of taking the trouble to find out what is really
meant. Translators would do their best to convey both the content and spirit
of the original.
Translavor’s Preface xv

The next step of the process is undertaken by a reviser who has a high
profile in translating religious lexts and Is aware of the traps that one might
fall into. In addition, he has a thorough religious background knowledge that
enables him to detect any unintended error in conveying the meaning.

The revised version is then submitted to a picky editor who is well-versed
in the target language and has substantial knowledge of Islamic Sciences.

Finally; the edited version is handed over toa native-speaker of English
who is knowledgeable in Islamic Sciences to make sure that the translation is,
readable and meaningful to the target audience.

2.STYLE

A natural outgrowth of the processes adopted in translation is the style
the final version has come out in. ‘The intended meaning of the author has
been conveyed in a style that is authentic and as close to the original as
possible, It really sounds authentic: So natural that the work does not read
like a translation, but an indigenous piece of writing. The translation version
is marked by remarkable variety and richness as well as tremendous skill at
Writing within formal religious genre, Moreover, attempts have been made to
have it simple, clear and appealing to the target audience,

3.ATTENTION TO SOCIOLINGUISTIC ASPECTS

As a way to fill up the gap caused by sociolinguistic differences between
the two languages (source language and target language), our work includes
some additional features (i.e., transliteration, glossary and endnotes) that
would guarantee better understanding of the concepts and ideas that might
conse the English speaking reader due to the lack of schemata in this field

A- TRANSLITERATION SYSTEM
In the process of translation, we made a serious attempt ta limit the use oF
transliterated Arabic terms (se¢ table in p. X) to the following two situations:

4) There is no English expression that can reflect the same meaning
as the original term.

ii) The Arabic term is of such importance that it is essential to
familiarize the reader with it.

B-GLOSSARY
At the end of the book, we have included a glossary defining common

Arabic terms that fulfil the above criteria, Included in the glossary also are
terms that need further explanation.

xv A Summary of Islamic furispeudenee

C-ENDNOTES

In the endnotes, we have given clear and concise explanations of the terms
that are not clear or understandable to the target reader due to the sociolinguistic
differences in addition to the commentaries written by the author himself.
Furthermore, each hadith mentioned in the text of the baok is ascribed in the
endnoies to the book it is quoted from.

D-INDICES

To facilitate the process of going through the book and save the reader's
time, we have included two indices, namely, subject index and name index. So,
ifthe reader is looking for specific information or a given name, s/he would go
directly to the index to find the page number,

4. QURAN TRANSLATION

‘The Quran is Allah's exact words. These words can never ever be exactly
translated into other languages because of, among other things, possible
misinterpretations and limited human understanding. What is followed in
the book is to translate the meanings as understood by Muslim scholars, We
solely depended on the ‘Translation of the Meaning of the Qur‘in’, translated
by Saheeb International - Riyadh and published by Abulqasim Publishing
House. When a verse is cited, the English interpretation is given between
quotation marks *.,.”” in indented, bold, and italicized format. ‘The location
of the Qur'anic verse, the name of the sura is given below to the verse as jt is
illustrated in the example below:

“And We sent not before you any messenger except that We
revealed to him that there is no deity except Me, so worship Me.”

(Al-Anbya: 25)

5. HADITH TRANSLATION

Similarly, when we cite a adit, we mention the bool: of hadith it is
quoted from in addition to its number in the book, Further, the translation of
Prophetic Hadith is represented in an indented format, italicized and between
quotation marks *..”as it is illustrated in the example below:

“Do not drink in gold or silver vessels nor eat in similar bowls
(ie. bowls made of gold or silver), for they belong to them (the
disbelievers) in this world and to us in the Hereafter”

NTRODUCTION

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds, and peace be upon our
Prophet Muhammad, the Seal of prophets, and upon his household, his Com-
panions, and whoever follows their example with good conduct until the Day
of Recompense.

‘To commence, this is a brief account of juristic issues, in which views are
provided with proofs from the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) and the Quran.
Thave previously delivered the content of this book in the form of sermons
broadcast on radio, and I have been repeatedly asked by the audience to
redeliver them, and to publish them as a treatise, for the sake of continuous
benefit, if Allah wills. In fact, I never intended this book to be published when it
‘was under preparation, but in response to the wish of many people, I reviewed
it, arranged its contents, and presented it to be published. And here it is now,
gentle reader, between your hands; whatever correctness and benefit you find
therein are out of the Grace of Allah, Alone, and whatever mistakes you find
are mine, and I seek the forgiveness of Allah for them.

A Sunyeuaty of Islamic Jurisprudence

This treatise is an abstract of a book entitled Ar-Rawdul-Murbi' ff Shalt
Zadul-Mustagni’ including its footnotes, written by Sheikh * Abdur-Rahman
Ibn Muhammad Ibn Qasim (may Allah have mercy on him), bearing in mind
that added some remarks, when necessary.

Task Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, to guide usall to useful knowledge
and righteous deeds. May Allah confer peace and blessings upon our Prophet
‘Muhammad, bis houschold, and his Companions,

The Virtues of Understanding Religion

All praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds, and peace be upon otit Prophet
‘Muhammad, and upon his household, his Companions, and whoever follows
their example with good conduct until the Day of Recompense.

To commence, understanding the religion is considered one of the best
deeds, and a sign of goodness. The Prophet (PBUH) says:

“If Allah wants to do good for a person, He makes him understand
the religion."

This is because comprehending the religion leads to useful knowledge

upon which righteous deeds depend, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“It is He Who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the
religion of truth..." (Quran: Al-Fath: 28)

“Guidance” here refers to useful knowledge, and “the religion of truth” is
that which leads to righteous deeds. Besides, Allah commanded the Prophet
(PBUH) to invoke him for more knowledge; Allah, Exalted be He, said:

And say, ‘My Lord, increase me in knowledge!”
(Que’an: Taba; 114)

Al-Hafiz, Ibn Hajar comments that the aforesaid Quranic verse,"..-And
say, ‘My Lord, increase me in knowledge?” isa clear indication of the merit and
excellence of knowledge, for Allah never commanded His Prophet (PBUH) to
invoke Him for more of anything other than knowledge’, The Prophet (PBUH)
used to refer to the assemblies wherein useful knowledge is taught as "The
Gardens of Paradise,” and he (PBUH) stated that “Men of knowledge are the
inheritors of prophets.”

nteoduetion 3

‘There is no doubt that before one starts doing something one should know
how to perform it in the best way,so as to perform it well to harvest its desired
fruits. Likewise, it is by no means reasonable that one starts worshipping one’s
Lord - the way through which one’s salvation from Hellfire and admittance to
Paradise are gained - without having due knowledge.

As such, people are divided into three categories regarding knowledge
and deeds:

The first category is represented in those who combine useful knowledge
along with righteous deeds. Those are the ones whom Allah has guided
to the straight path; the path of those upon whom Allah has bestowed
favor of the prophets, the steadfast affirmers of truth, the martyrs and
the righteous, and excellent indeed are these as companions.

The second category is represented in those who learn usefull knowledge
but do not act accordingly. Those are the ones who have evoked Allah's
anger, like the Jews and whoever follows their footsteps.

The third category is represented in those who act without having
knowledge. Those are the ones who are astray, namely the Christians
and their likes,

‘These three categories are mentioned in the Sura of Al-Fatihah (the
Opening Chapter of the Quritn), which we recite in every rak'ah (unit of
prayer) of our prayers:

“Guide us to the straight path - the path of those upon whom
You have bestowed favor, not of those who have evoked [Your]
anger or of those who are astray.” (Qur'an: Al-Fatihah: 6-7)

‎his interpretation of the aforesaid verses of the Sura of Al-Fatihah,‏ صل

‎Sheikh Muhammad Ibn *Abdul-Wabhab (may Allah have mercy on him)
has stated:

‎“The scholars meant in the verse that reads, ‘those who have evoked
(Altalis) anger” are those who do not act in accordance with their
knowledge, and *..those who are astray’ are the ones who act without
knowledge. The former is the quality of the Jews, while the latter is
that of the Christians, Some ignorant people mistakenly believe that
those two qualities are restricted to the Jews and the Christians,
‘forgetting that Alla commands them to recite the above-mentioned
Quranic invocation seeking refuge with Him from being one of the

0 A Sumumary of Islamic Jurisprudence

people of these two qualities. Glory be 10 Allalit How do those ignorant
people think that they are safe from these qualities, though they are
taught and commanded by Allah to keep on invoking Him (through
the aforesaid verses) seeking His refuge against them?! Are they nol
aware that they thus assume evil about Allal?!”*

This shows the wisdom behind the obligation of reciting this great Sura
(ie, AEFatihah) in every rak'ah of our prayers (whether obligatory or
supererogatory). It is because this sura contains many great secrets, among
‘them is the great Quranic invocation that reads, “Guide us to the straight path -
the path of those upon whom You have bestowed favor, not of those wha have evoked
[Your] anger or of those who are astray." (Qur'an: Al-Fatihah; 6-7) Through this
invocation, we ask Allah to guide us to follow the conduct and the way of the
people who have useful knowledge and perfarm righteous deeds, which is the
way to salvation in both this world and the Hereafter, We also invoke Him to
safeguard us from the pathway of the ones astray, who have neglected either
the righteous deeds or the useful knowledge.

we could argue that useful knowledge is that derived from the
Qur'in and the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition). It is gained by means of deep
understanding and comprehension of both, which can be achieyed through
the help of religious instructors or scholars. This can also be achieved through
the books of exegesis of the Qur'an and those of Hadith, as well as the books
cf jurisprudence and those of Arabic grammar - the language in which the
Quran has been revealed. Such books are the best means of comprehending
the Qurin and the Sunnah,

‘Thus

Soas ‏فا‎ perform the acts of worship so perfectly, you should, dear Muslim
brother, leam what leads fo the perfection of your performance of these
various acts of worship, such as Prayer, Fasting and Hajj (Pilgrimage). You
should also be aware of the rulings on Zakdh’ as well as the rulings on the
dealings that concern you, $0 as to make use of what Allah has made lawful
for you and avoid what He has made unlawful, You should observe this to
ensure that the money you éarn and the food you eat are lawfully obtained, in
order to be one of thase whose supplications are granted by Allah. In fact, you
have to know about all these matters, and this could be easily achieved, Allah
willing, provided that you haye resolute determination and sincere intention
So, be keen on reading useful relevant books, and keep in touch with religious
scholars to ask them about whatever ruling you are in doubt about and to be
acquainted with the rulings of your religion,

Tneroduetion 5

Inaddition, you should take an interest in attending religious symposiums
and lectures delivered at mosques and the like, listening to the broadcast
religious programs, and reading religious magazines and publications. If you
concern yourself with such good activities, your religions knowledge will
increase, and your insight will be enlightened,

Also, do not forget, dear brother, that knowledge increases and grows when
it is practically applied. Thus, if your deeds are according to your knowledge,
Allah surely will increase your knowledge. This corresponds with the thaxim
stating, "He whose deeds are done in accordance with his knowledge, Allah
will bestow upon him the knowledge of that which he has no knowledge
about." This is confirmed by the Glorious Quranic verse that reads:

“.. And fear Allah. And Allah teaches you. And Allah is Knowing
of all things.” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 282)

In fact, the worthiest thing to spend your time on is seeking knowledge,
for which the people of good judgment compete. It is through knowledge that
hearts maintain living and deeds are pucified

Allah, Exalted be His Words and Glorified be His Attributes, praises the
scholars who act in accordance with their knowledge, and states their elevated
degrees, as He mentions in His Glorious Book, the Qur'an:

“.. Say, ‘Are those who know equal to those who do not know?"
Only they will remember [who are] people of understanding."
(Qur'an; Az-Zumar: 9)
Allah, Exalted be He, also says:

‎Allah will raise those who have believed among you and‏ .ب"
‎those who were given knowledge, by degrees, And Allah is‏
‎Acquainted with what you do.” (Qut’in: Al-Mujadilah: 11)‏

‎So, Allah, Glorified and Exalted he He, shows the merit of those given
knowledge along with faith, and tells us that He is Acquainted with and
Aware of what we do, Thus, Allah shows us the necessity of combining both
knowledge and righteous deeds, and tells us that both have to be out of one’s
sincere faith and fear of Him, Glorified be He

‎In accordance with the Qur'anic duty of cooperating in righteousness
and piety, we will - if Allah wills - provide you, gentle reader, through this
book with some information of the juristic inheritance which our scholars
extracted and wrote down in their books, We will provide you with what can
be easily understood, so that it can benefit you and help you in gaining more
Useful knowledge.

3 00

Finally, we invoke Allah ‏ما‎ bestow useful knowledge upon all of us, and to
guide us to the righteous deeds, We also invoke Him, Glorified and Exalted be He,
to make us see the truth asit really is,and guide us to follow it, and to see falsehood
as it really is,and grant us the ability to avoid it, He is Hearing and Responsive.

Endnotes

1 AL-Bukhiart (71), Mustim (2385)

2 See Fathul-Béri (1/187)

3 See ‏مطل‎ Ghannim’s Tarik Nay

4 Zak is an annual expenditure for the benefit of the Mustim community, primarily to
hetp the poor, required from those Muslims who have excess wealth, Paying Zakal is one
‘of the five main pillars of Islam (for more elaboration, refer to the chapter on Zaki).

100101111

CHAPTER

Purification and Water

Prayer is the second pillar of Islam, after the Two Testifications of Faith’
Prayer is what distinguishes Muslims from disbelievers; it is the cornerstone of
Islam, and it is the first thing one is questioned about when called to account
(on the Day of Judgment). Therefore, if it is correctly performed and (thus)
accepted (by Allah), all ones good deeds will be accepted, but if rejected, so
will be all one’ deeds.

Prayer is mentioned in many different contexts in the Glorious Quran,
stressing its various virtues; sometimes Allah commands establishing it
regularly, and sometimes He demonstrates its merits; at times, Allah shows
the reward for establishing it, and at other times He associates it with patience,
enjoining seeking His help through both (patience and prayer) in adversity.
Hence, prayer has been made the comfort of the eyes of Allah's Messenger
(PBUH) in this world, as it is the ornament of prophets, the sign of righteous
servants, and the connection between servants and the Lord of the Worlds.
Prayer, in addition, prevents immorality and wrongdoing.

10 1: PURIFICATION

Prayer is not deemed valid unless the one performing it is in a state of both
minor and major ritual purity, as much as possible. The means of purification
for prayer is either water (in ablution) or clean earth (in tayammunt, ie. dry
ablution) in case water is unavailable, Due to the above, agihs' (may Allah have
‘mercy on them) used to start their books with handling the issue of purification,
Since Prayer isat the head of the Pillars of Islam, following the Two Testifications
of Faith, itis appropriate to start with handling its prerequisites, among which
is purification, the key to prayer as mentioned in the following hadith: “The
key to prayer is purification.” This is because a state of minor ritual impurity is
like a padlock that hinders one from performing prayer. But once one performs
ablution, that padlock is unlocked, as purification is the ‘key’ to prayer. Thus,
purity is one of the most central conditions of prayer; a condition isto be fulfilled
before performing the action stipulating it.

Linguistically, purity means cleanliness and purification from all matters
and spiritual impurities. Jurisprudentially, purity means the removal of
ritual impurity as well as the impure objects. The removal of ritual impurity
can be achieved by using water with the intention of purification, In case of
major ritual impurity, one uses water and washes one’s whole body, Yet, one
only washes the four parts of ablution in case of minor ritual impurity. One
can use the substitute for water (namely clean earth) if water is unavailable
or one is unable to use it (i.e, one can perform fayammum’ instead). We will,
Allah willing, elaborate on how to purify oneself from both minor and major
ritual impurity,

Let us now point out the qualities of the water used for purification, and
those of the water that is not. Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And We send down from the sky pure water?”
(Qur'an: Al-Furgan; 48)

Allah also says:

‘.. And sent dawn upon you from the sky, rain by which to
purify you...” (Qur'an: AJ-Anfitl: 11)

Pure water is that which is originally pure and can be used as a means of
purification, It is also that water which has not undergone any change (ie. it
retains its original characteristics), whether itis sent from the sky such as rain,
snow or hail water, running water, such as the water of rivers, springs, wellsand
seas, ot distilled water. This is the proper kind of water to be used for removing
ritual or physical impurity. However, itis indisputable that if the characteristics
of such water change due to an impure material, itis impermissible to use it for

‘Chapter 1: Purification and Water 1

purification. Yet, ‏لآ‎ itis just a slight change and is caused by a pure material,
itis permissible to be used as a purifier, according to the preponderant of the
two opinions maintained by scholars in this regard.

Shaykhul-Istim Ibn Taymiyah states:

“There are many cases in which the characteristics of little or mutt
water are affected by pure objects, such as potash, soap, lote tree
leaves, dust, dough, and suchlike things that may change water. For
example, water might be put in a pot containing traces of lote tree
leaves that would affect its characteristics, though the water would
not be completely changed in this case. Scholars hald two well-known
opinions regarding such cases”

Tbn Taymiyah then mentions those two opinions with the arguments they
are based on. He supports the opinion maintaining that it is permissible ta use
such water for purification, saying:

“In fact, this is the sound opinion, for Allah says, “... But if you are
ill or on a journey or one of you comes from the place of relieving
himself or you have contacted women and do not find water, then
seek clean earth and wipe over your faces and hands with it...”
(Quran: Al-M@idah: 6) Water here is an indefinite noun in a
negative phrase, which, in Arabic, implies that ‘water’ in the above-
mentioned verse includes every ting referred to as ‘water’ in general,
with no distinction between different kinds of water!”

‘That is to say, Allah has made ‘lean earth’ the substitute for water (as ‏د‎
‎purifier) in case water is tinavailable or one is unable to use it. The way clean
earth is used for purification has been pointed out by the Prophet (PBUH)
through the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) - which will be dealt with, Allah
willing, in a special chapter: So, decreeing such a substitute for water (ie. clean
earth) is kind of divine mercy and a way by which Allah makes things easier
for His servants, Alla, Exalted be He, saysi

And if you are il or on a journey or one of you comes from the
place of relieving himself ar you have contacted women [i.e. had
sextial intercourse] and find no water, then seek clean earth and
wipe aver your faces and your hands [with it]. Indeed, Allah is
ever Pardoning and Forgiving?” (Quran: An-Nis?’ 43)

2 I: PURIFICATION

Ibn Hubayrah states:

“Muslins scholars uniformly agree that purification with water is
obligatory for whoever is obliged to perform prayer, provided water
is available; in case water is unavailable, one should use its substitute:
(i.e. clean earth), in accordance with the Quranic verse in which Allah,
Exalted be He, says. ., And find no water, then seek clean earth...’
(Qur'an: An-Nisi': 43), and, ‘.. And sent down upon you from the

sky, rain by which to purify you... (Quran: Al-Anfal: 11)"

‘This shows the greatness of Islam, the religion of purity, and both physical
and spiritual cleanliness; It also shows the loftiness of prayer which one cannot
enter upon without heing in two states of purity. The first is the spiritual purity
from polytheism, by means of testifying the Oneness of Allah and worshipping
Him sincerely and devoutly, ‘The second is the physical purity from ritual
and tangible impurities, which is performed by means of water or its legal
substitutes. We should also know that provided water is still in its original
state, mixed with nothing else, itis deemed pure as scholars uniformly agree.
‘They also agree that if any of its three basic characteristics - odor, taste, and
color - change due to any impure object, then water is deemed impure and it
is impermissible to use it as a means of purification, Yet, some scholars differ
regarding the purity of water when any of its characteristics has changed due
toa pure object - such as tree leaves (like lote tree leaves), soap, potash, or
suchlike pure materials - provided that such a material is not predominant in
that the resulting water is
still deemed pure, and it is permissible to use itasa means of purification from
both ritual and tangible impurity.

the resulting mixture, In fact, the sound opinion

Due to the above, we can state that water is divided into two categories:

1- Pure water, which can be used as a purifier, whether it is in its
original state, or mixed with a pure object provided it is not prevalent
enough to change the composition of water or turn it into another
object.

2- Impure water, which cannot be used for purification fromeither ritual
or tangible impurity. It is also the water any of whose characteristics
(odor, taste, or color) has changed due to an impure object, And Allah,
Exalted be He, knows best.

Chaprer |: Purification and Water 13

Endnotes

1 The Two ‘Testifications of Faiths Saying, "I testily that there is no deity but Allah and
that Mubammad is the Messenger of Allah?

2 Fagih: A scholar of Islamic Jurisprudence,

3 Ahmad (1005) (1/151], Aba Dawid (61) [1/42], At-Tirmidhi (3) [1/8] and fbn Majah
(275) 11171.

4 Tayammum: Performing dry ablution with clean earth {when water is unavailable ‏عه‎
‎‘one cannot use it),

5 See Majmit'ul-Fatdwé [21/24,25] und [21/331]

Disbelievers’ Pots and Clothes

Pots could be made of iron, wood, leather or the like. The original ruling
is the permissibility of using such pots. That is to say, it is permissible to use
every pure pat, except two types:

1- Pots made of gold or silver, and the pots having anything related
to gold or silver, such as being inlaid or plated with gold or silver,
or anything of the kind that makes pots connected with them. The
exceptional case here is the pots inlaid with little silver for the sake
of repairing them,

‘The legal proof of the prohibition of using gold and silver pots is the
following hadith related by the Group of Compilers of Hadith’:

“Do not drink in gold or silver vessels nor eat in similar bowls (ie.
bowls made of gold or silver), for they belong to them (the disbelievers)
in this world and to us in the Hereafter.”

[PURIFICATION

Thanother hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) also says:
“Fle who drinks in silver vessels is only filing his abdomen with Hellfire.”

‘When something is legally prohibited to. use, the prohibition is
applicable whether this thing is used partially or totally. Therefore,
it is prohibited to use pots inlaid or plated with gold or silver or
containing anything related to these two materials, excluding
the case ofa pot inlaid with a little silver, which is permissible as
mentioned above; this is illustrated in the hadith related by Al-
Bukhari, on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik (may Allah be pleased
with him), who said:

“The cup of Allah's Messenger (PBUH) got broken, and he fixed it
with a silver wire at the (place of the) ‏“اعم‎

An-Nawawi (may Allah haye mercy on him) said:

“Muslim scholars uniformly agree that it is prohibited to eat or drink in
such pots or even to use them in purposes related to eating or drinking”

‘This prohibition of using or keeping golden or silver objects applies
to both males and females, as the addressee of this prohibition is
generalized (i.e. the prohibition applies to both sexes). There is nothing
specified for a certain sex in this concern, except for the permissibility
for women to make use of both silver and gold for purposes of
adornment for their husbands.

On the other hand, itis permissible to use the utensils of disbelievers
unless one knows that they are impure. In this case, one can use them
only after washing them.

The hides of dead animals: Itis prohibited to use them unless they are
tanned, Yet, scholars differ regarding whether it is permissible to use
them after tanning or not. The sound opinion, which is maintained
by the majority of scholars, is that it is permissible to use the hides
of dead animals after tanning, due to the many sahil (authentic)
hadiths’ indicating that. This is because their impurity is temporary,
‏مم‎ it is removed by tanning. The Prophet (PBUH) said that the hides
of dead animals:

Are purified by water and garz (leaves of a kind of tree which is
used for tanning):

2

18

Chapter 2: Disbelievers Pots and Clathes 7

He (PBUH) also said:
“Tanning is the purifying means for hides”

As for the clothes of disbelievers, it is permissible to wear them unless
they are known to be impure. This is because the original ruling on
their clothes is that they are pure, and they cannot be deemed impure
‘out of mete suspicion. Likewise, it is permissible to use whatever is
weaved or dyed by the disbelievers, for the Prophet (PBUH) and his
Companions used to wear clothes weaved and dyed by disbelievers.
And Allah, Exalted be He, knows best.

Endnotes

| The Group of Compilers of Hnditlr are Al-Bukhari, Muslim, Ahmad, Abt Dawid, At-
Tirmidh, An-Nasdii, and Ibn Majah,

2 Al-Bukhari (5633) [10/119], Muslim (5361) (7/261), Ahmad (23356) (5/491), Abd
Dawid (3723) [4/73], At-Tirmidht (1883) (4/299), An-Nasi
Majah (3414) 14/77).

3 Al-Bukhari (5634) [10/119], Muslim (5353) [7/254].

4 Al-Bukbari (3109) [6/255]

5 See Al-Majmui [1/306] and The Expounding of Mustinrs Salih [7/255}.

6 Sahid (authentic) hadith is a hadith whose chain of transmission has been transmitted
by truly pious persons who have been known for thei uprightness and exactitucléy
such a hadith is free from eccentricity and blemish.

7 Muslim (813) [2/279] and Amad (2521) [1/346]

0

0

_

ee
‏ا‎

Things Ritual Impurity
Prohibits Doing

‘There are some deeds which Muslims are prohibited to perform unless
they are in a state of purity, due to the greatness and the loftiness of these
deeds, What follows is a discussion of these deeds accompanied with the
related proofs, so as to familiarize the reader with such deeds and not to
perform any of them unless he/she is in the proper state of purity. Fur-
thermore, there are deeds that one in a state of ritual impurity, be it major
or minor, is prohibited to do. On the other hand, there are some deeds
specifically prohibited only for those in a state of major ritual impurity.

Deeds Prohibited for One in a State of Minor or Major Ritual Impurity

1- Touching the Glorious Book of the Qur’an

It is prohibited for one in a state of (minor or major) ritual impurity to
touch the Glorious Book of the Quran unless with something that prevents
direct contact, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

20 1: PURIFICATION

“None touch it except the purified..." (Qur’an: Al-Wagi' ah: 79)

‘That i, it is prohibited to touch itunless by those purified from minor and
major ritual impurity, according to the opinion that the words “the purified”
in the verse refer to human beings. However, there are some exegetes who state
that the words ‘the purified’ in the aforesaid verse refer to the noble angels.
Even if the verse is interpreted that the words ‘the purified’ refer to the angels,
they also refer to human beings by implication. To illustrate, it was mentioned
in the letter sent by Allah's Messenger (PBUH) to the people of Yemen, as
narrated by ‘Amr Ibn Hazm, that:

“No one should touch the Book of the Qurlin unless they are pure.”

(Related by An-Nasa'i and other compilers of Hadith with a continuous
chain of transmitters)

In addition, Ibn‘ Abdul-Barr said:

“This hadith is more likely ‏ها‎ be a mutawatir (continuously recurrent)
hadith’ as it is commonly accepted by scholars.”

Shaykhul-Iskim (Ibn Taymiyah) states that the prohibition of touching
the Book of the Quran while being in a state of (major or minor) ritual
impurity is agreed upon by the Four Imams'”. Ibn Hubayrab also states in
his book entitled AL-ffsah (Enunciation), “They (i.e, the Four Imdms) agree
that it is impermissible for one in a state of ritual impurity to touch the Book of
the Quriéin.” However, one in a state of ritual impurity is allowed to hold the
Book of the Quran in a cover or a bag so as not to touch it directly. Similarly,
one in sucha state of impurity is allowed to read or browse through the Book
without touching it.

2- Offering Prayer (neither Obligatory nor Supererogatory Prayers)

Scholars uniformly agree that it is impermissible for one in a state of
minor or major ritual impurity to perform prayer af all, be it obligatory or
supererogatory, provided one is able to purify oneself, This is because Allah,
Exalted be He, says:

“O you who have believed, when you rise to [perform] prayer,
wash your faces and your forearms to the elbows and wipe over
your heads and wash your feet to the ankles. And if you are in a
state of janabah,' then purify yourselves...”

(Qur’in: Al-Maiidah: 6)

Chapter 3: Things ‏انسلا‎ Impurity Probibles Hing ‏د‎
‎Besides, the Prophet (PBUH) said, as related by Muslimand other compilers
of Hadith:
“Allah does not wccept a prayer without purification...”
He (PBUH) also said:

“Allah does not uccept the prayer of anyone of yott if he passes
wind, urine, or stool until he performs the ablution (anew).

The above hadith shows that it is impermissible for one to pray while
being in a state of impurity, provided one is able to purify oneself. Thus, the
prayer offered by one ina state of impurity is invalid, whether itis performed
in such a state while one is aware of the ruling or not, and whether one
performs it inattentively or intentionally. If one is aware of the ruling and
offers prayer intentionally, one is regarded asa sinner who has to undergo
discretionary punishment, But if one is unaware of it, and offers prayer
inattentively, one in this case is not regarded as a sinner, yet one’s prayer is
deemed invalid.

3- Performing Tawaf (Circumambulating the Ka’ bah)

It is impermissible for one in a state of minor or major ritual impurity to
perform fawaf, for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

"Tawaif is (considered) a prayer: the difference is that Allah made it
lawful to speak during it.”

The Prophet (PBUH) used to perform ablution before performing tawa/”
It was also authentically narrated that he (PBUH) forbade a menstruating
woman to perform tawaf unless she purified herself. All the above shows
that one in a state of minor or major ritual impurity is prohibited to perform
tawéf until one purifies oneself.

Among the proofs that one in a state of major ritual impurity is prohibited
to perform tawaf'is the following Quranic verse:

“O you who have believed, do nat approach prayer while you are
intoxicated until you know what you are saying or in a state of
jandbeh, except those passing through [a place of prayer], until
‘you have washed [your whale body)..." (Qui’an: An-Nisi; 43)
‘The verse means that one should never enter a mosque while being ina state
of major ritual impurity except for those who are passing through it on their

22 i: PURIFICATION,

way. Since one in a state of jandbal is prohibited to stay in a mosque, then,
with greater reason, one in the same state is prohibited to perform ‏سدم‎

Ina ntshell, the above-mentioned deeds are prohibited to be performed
by one ina state of ritual impurity, whether minor or major

Deeds Prohibited for One in a State of
Major Ritual Impurity in Particular

As for the deeds specifically prohibited for one in a state of major ritual
impurity, they are as follows:

1- Reciting the Qur’in
One in a state of major ritual impurity is prohibited to tecite the Qui’an

according to the following hadith relaled by AVTirmidht and other compilers of
Hadith on the authority of "Ali bn ‏متلق طق‎ (may Allah be pleased with him):

"Nothing prevented him (i.e, the Prophet, PBUH) from (reciting) the
Quriin other than beirig in a state of jandbah (major ritual impurity).”"*

‘The wording of At-Tirmidht of the aforesaid hadith is as follows:

“He (PBUH) used to recite the Qurtin for us unless he was in a state
of janabal”

‘This proves that it is prohibited for the person in a state of major ritual
impurity to recite the Quran. The same ruling applies to both menstruating,
woman and a woman in a state of postnatal bleeding. Yet, some scholars,
such as Shaykhul-Iskim (Ibn Taymiyah), maintain that it is permissible for a
menstruating woman to recite the Qur'in for fear of forgetting it"

Itis permissible for one ina state of major ritual impurity to use the wording.
of the Qur’in with no intention of recitation, rather as a way of remembrance

of Allah, such as saying:

“In the Name of Allah, the Entirely Merciful, the Especially Merciful.”
(Qur'an: Al-Fatibal

)

And:

“All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds;"
(Qur'a

Al-Fatibal

Chapter 3: Things Ritual Impurity Prohibies Doing 4
‘There are many other examples of that- This is illustrated in the following
hadith narrated by ‘Wishah (may Allah be pleased with her):
"The Prophet (PBUH) used to merition Allah in all his conditions?"
2 Staying at a Mosque

It is prohibited for one in whatever state of major ritual impurity, be it
janabah, menstruation or postriatal bleeding, to stay ina mosque unless one
performs ablution, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“O you wha have believed, do not approach prayer while you are.
intoxicated until you know what you are saying or in a state of
janabah, except those passing through [a place of prayer}, until
‘you have washed [your whole body]... (Qur'an: An-Nisa: 43)

‘This means that one in a state of major ritual impurity is prohibited to enter

a mosque to stay therein. In addition, in the hadith related by Aba Dawod,

on the authority of ‘Aishah, and graded as sahih (authentic) hadith by ‏وما‎

Khuzaymah, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Tdo not deem the mosque lawful for a menstruating woman or for
6 person who is in a state of janabah.”"

However, if one in a state of major ritwal impurity performs ablution, itis
permissible for one then to stay at the mosque, as ‘Ate’ reported:

“I saw some of the Companions of the Prophet (PBUH) staying at
the mosque while being in a state of janabah only after performing

the (ordinary) ablation performed for prayer. "

‘The significance of performing ablution here, though one is in a state of
Janabah, is tessening the state of janabal so as to make it permissible to stay
at the mosque, Likewise, it is permissible for one in a state of jandbah to pass
through the mosque without staying therein, for Allah says:

“.. Except those passing through [a place of prayer)...”
(Quran: An-Nisi’: 43)

That is, one in such a state is only allowed to pass through it for the sake
oF mere passing,

‘Whenever there is an exceptional case ofa certain prohibition, itis deemed
permissible, So, being a passerby is the exceptional case of the general ruling
stated by the hadith of the Prophet (PBUH) that goes;

24 L PURIFICATION

“Ido not make the mosque lawful jor a menstruating woman or far
«i person who isin janabah."

Similarly, it is prohibited for the one ina state of major ritual impurity,
without even being in astate of ablution, tobe presentatthe place of performing
the Feast ("Id) Prayer. Yet, itis permissible for one fo pass through it, for the
Prophet (PBUH) says:

“Menstruating womenshould keep away from the place of performing
prayer”

Endnotes

| Malik (297) [p, 196], Ad-Ditraquini (433) |1/(29}, Al-Bayhagi (409) (1/141), Al-Hakim
(6122) [3/595] and Ad-Darimi (2183) [2/602],

2 Mucawatir (continuously recurrent) hadith _
srarrators whose agreement upon telling lie is inconceivable (this condition must be
‘met in the entire chain from the beginning ‏ها‎ the end),

3 See At-Tanihiid [17/ 338, 339]

4 the Four fmams are Imim Abi Hantfah, Indimy Malik, mdm Ash-Shafii, and lnvam Abad.

5 See Ibn Taymiyah’s Majmii'ul-Fataw [21/266].

6 Jandbak: A state of major ritual impurity related to sexual tlischarge.

7 Muslim (536) [2/99].

8 Al-Bukhri (6954) [12/411] and Mastim (1536) (2/99),

9 At-Tirmidhi (961) [3/293].

10 Al-Bukhart (1614) [3/627] andl Muslim (2991) (4/444),

11 Al-Bukhari (294) [1/519] and Muslim (2910) [4/381],

12 Abad (627) (1/101), Abii Dawid (229) [1/114], AL-Tirmidhi (146) [1/673], An-Nasii
(266) [1/158] and ‏مطل‎ Majal (594) [1/331].

13 See Ibn Taymiyah’s Majmdi'ul-Ratiwa [26/ 179].

4 Muslims (824) [2/390],

15 Abo Dawad (232) 1/116), Ibn Khuzayrnah (1.327) [2/284] and Jn Majah (645) [1/358],

16 Ab-Bukhri (974) [2/597] and Muslim (2051) [3/418].

Etiquette of Answering
Call of Nature

It will not escape you, my dear reader - may Allah grant you, me and all
Muslims success - that Islam is a perfect, unique, integral religion. There is
nothing required for our worldly and religious lives that is not clearly pointed
out in Islam. Even the etiquette ‏عط ما‎ observed upon answering the call of
nature is pointed out, so that man - whom Allah has honored over animals
- becomes distinguished from animals in this concern with such proprieties.
Islam is the religion of cleanliness and purity. Therefore, there are Islamic
etiquettes to be observed on entering the bathroom, while answering the call
of nature, and on leaving it.

Upon entering the bathroom, it is desirable for a Muslim to say, “In the
Name of Allah, I seek refuge with Allah from all offensive and wicked things
(evil deeds and evil spirits)” stepping in with his left leg. When leaving, it is
desirable to step out with the right leg invoking, “I seek Your forgiveness. Praise
be to Allah, Who removed harm from me and gave me health.”

26 i: PURIFICATION

This is because the right (hand or leg) is used for whatever is related to
honor and beautification, whereas the left is used for whatever is related to
removing impurities and the like.

In case one has to answer the call of nature out of doors, (at a place not
prepared for that purpose), it is desirable for one to do so away from people,
screening oneself behind a wall, a tree, or the like. In addition, while answering
the call of nature out af doors, one is prohibited to face or turn one's back towards
the qiblah’ *. Rather, one should move eastward or westward to avoid facing or
turning ones back towards the giblals, as the Prophet (PBUH) has forbidden
both to be done while answering the call of nature. On the other hand, one must
be cautious of splashing one’s urine least it might soil one’s body or clothes.
Hence, one is recommended to select 3 smooth ground when having to urinate
out of doors, so as to avoid being soiled by the scatter of ones urine.

Besides, while answering the call of nature, it is impermissible for one to
touch one’s stool and urine exits with one’s right hand, Itis also impermissible
to answer the call of nature at a public road or at a place used by people as a
shelter, o in a source of water used by people. This is because the Prophet
(PBUH) has forbidden doing so,’ as such deeds cause harm to people.

On the other hand, one should never enter a bath while having something
(like a paper, a document, or anything else) containing the Name of Allah,
Exalted and Ever-Majestic be He, or any Quranic verses, If one fears that one
may lose them (that paper or document) when they are left outside the bath
until one finishes, it is permissible for one to enter the bath while having them,
provided that they are covered.

Moreover, one is not allowed to speak while answering the call of nature,
because it is mentioned in a hadith that Allah hates such a deed' One is also
prohibited to recite the Qur'an in a bath or while answering the call of nature.

‘When one finishes answering the call of nature, one must perform istinja’’
istijmar,’ or their substitutes, In fact, it is better to combine both istinja’ and
istiimar when cleaning one’s stool and urine exits following defecation or
urination, yet performing either is sufficient, During istifmar, one should
clean one’s stool and urine exits with stones or what may substitute for them,
such as a coarse paper, a rag, or the like, ensuring the cleanness and dryness of
the stool and urine exits; one must clean them thrice or more, if necessary. TE
is impermissible to perform istijmdr sing bones or dung, because the Prophet
(PBUH) has forbidden that’. One should also remove any trace of impurity
and dry it; least any impurity remains on one’ stool and urine exits, or soils
one’s clothes or other parts of the bady,

Chapter 4: Exiquette of Answering Call of ‏عسعنلة‎

Some fagihs (scholars of [slamic Jurisprudence) maintain that istinja’
or istijmar is one of the conditions of the validity of ablution that must be
performed before it (in case of answering the call of nature). According ‏ما‎
‎this opinion, ablution is invalid if itis performed without being preceded by
istinja’ or istijmar after answering the call of nature. ‘This ruling is based on a
hadith narrated on the authority of Al-Miqdad stating:

“One should wash one’s penis and then perform ablution.””
(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Imam An-Nawawi states thatitisan act of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition)
to perform istinjé’ before ablation, so as to avoid any controversy or suspicion,
and to ensure the validity of one’ ablution.

Therefore, one must purify oneself from urine, as negligence in this
regard is one of the reasons for the torture in the grave. To illustrate, Abd
Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) reported that Allah's Messenger
(PBUH) sai

“Purify yourselves from urine for most of the punishment in the
grave is because of it.”

Gentle reader, you should be aware that the perfection of purification
leads co the easiness and perfection of performing acts of worship, and the
full abidance by their integral parts. Imam Ahmad (may Allah have mercy
on him) narrated on the authority of one of the Prophet’s Companions that
when he (PBUH) was leading the people in the Subh (Morning) Prayer and
reciting the Sura of Ar-Riim (the Byzantines)," he was not certain about what
he recited. So, when he (PBUH) finished prayer, he said:

“The Qurtin becomes dubious to us because some of you perform
prayer with us without performing ablution properly, so whoever
witnesses the prayer with us should perforra ablution properly."

Allah hasalso praised the people of Qubi' Mosque because of the perfection
of their purification, saying:

Within it are men who love to purify themselves; and Allah
Toves those who purify themselves.” (Qur'an; At-Tawbah: 108)

Al-Bazzar related that when those people of Quba’ were asked about the
way they purify themselves, hey replied saying, “We use water after using
stones.” (iien they perform istijmar followed by istinjit)!™

28 L PURIFICATION

‎this connection, it might be worth mentioning that some people‏ صل
‎mistakenly believe that jstinja’ is an integral part of ablution. They think‏
‎that one has to start with istinja’ whenever one desires to perform ablution,‏
‎even if one has previously performed it (i.e, istinja’) after answering the call‏
‎of nature, This is completely wrong; istinja’ is not part of ablution, but it is‏
‎just one of its requirements - as previously mentioned - and is performed‏
‎only after answering the call of nature, ‘Thus, one does not have to perform it‏
‎unnecessarily before ablution, without a reason such as answering the call of‏

‎nature and the impurity of one’s stool and urine exits.

‎‘To sum up, we would like to state that our religion, Islam, is the religion
of purity and cleanliness; the religion of the best standards of behavior and
the noblest of manners, It stresses and clarifies whatever issues Muslims may
need, and whatever principles that may rectify their lives. There is nothing
that benefits Muslims unless it is stated, stressed and enjoined in Islam, so
praise be to Allah for all His graces. We invoke Allah to make us steadfast in
establishing and observing this great religion, grasping its rulings, abiding by
its teachings, faithfully, sincerely and devoutly, so that Allah may accept our
good deeds.

‎Endnotes

‎I The giblah: The direction of prayer, namely towards the Ka*balt

‎2 Al-Bulkhari (144) [1/322] and Maslim (608) [2/148].

‎3 Abt Dawid (26) [1/27] and ‏مما‎ Maja (328) [1/208].

‎4 Ahmad (11296) [3/45], Abd Dawad (15) (1/23) and fbn Majah (342) [1/215]

‎5 Istinja: Cleatting one stool and urine exits after defecation or urination with watet,

‎6 Jstinmdr: Cleaning one’s stool and tirine exits after defecation or urination with stones
oor what may substitute for them,

‎7 Muslim (605) [2/144] and (607) [2/148

‎8 Al-Bukhart (268) [1/492] and Muslim (693) [2/203].

‎9 Thishadith was narrated by Ad-Daragitni, and Al-Haz states that its chain of transmission
is authentic, and there are witnesses to the incident of this hadith, and that is origin is
stated in the Two Subths (the Two Authentic Books of Al-Bukhiti and Muslim), Ad-
Diraquini (458) [1/136], Al-Bukhiri (218) [1/420] and Muslim (675) (2/191

‎10 Chapter No, 30 ofthe Que‘in,

‎11 Ahmad (15855) [3/616].

‎12 Tbn Majah (355) and (357) [1/222, 224], See also Nash Ar-Rayah [1/218-219]

Siwak (Tooth-Stick) and Acts
of Natural Disposition

*Rishah, Mother of the Believers, (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated
that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Siwak (tooth-stick) is a way of purifying the mouth and satisfying
the Lord.”
(Related by Imam Ahmad and other compilers of Hadith)'
Itis reported in the Two Sahihs’ that Abd Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased
with him) narrated that Allah's Messenger (PBUH) said:

“Five (practices) are of the natural disposition: circumcision, istindad,”
cutting the moustache short, removing the hair of the armpits, and
clipping the nails.”
It is also stated as a marfit’ (traceable) hadith’ in the Two Sahihs that Ibn
* Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Cut the moustaches short and leave the beard grow.”

30 1: PURIFICATION

Dueto the aforesaid Hadiihsas welt as other related hadiths stressing the same
points, fagihss (scholars of Islamic Jurisprudence) derived some rulings among
which is the preference of using siwvak, which isa kind of stick used in brushing
the teeth and gum in order to remove yellowness and undesirable smell.

It is stated that using siwik is one of the practices of Allahs messengers
Prophet Abraham (PBUH) was the first to use siwak: Prophet Muhammad
(PBUH) has pointed out that siwik is a means of “purifying the mouth” ie. itis
amouth cleaner that removes bad odor and the like. He (PBUH) has also stated
that siwak is a way of “satisfying the Lord," ie. using sia is an act that pleases
and satisfies the Lord, Blessed and Exalted be He

‘There are more than one hundred hadiths stressing the desirability of using
siwik. This indicates that using siwdk is a stressed act of the Sunnah (Prophetic
‘Tradition) enjoined and made desirable by the Lawgiver of Shari'ah’. iwak has
great benefits and virtues, the greatest and most comprehensive of which is that
stated in the following hadith:

“Siwak is a way of purifying the mouth and satisfying the Lord.”

Brushing the teeth with siwdk is to be done with a soft tooth-stick of an
ardk or olive tree, with a dty date-stalk, or with suchlike tooth-stick that does
not crumble or hurt the mouth. Moreover, using siwak is an act of the Sunnah
to be observed at all times, even when one is in a state of fasting, according
to the sound ‏زه‎ in this regard, and it isa stressed act of the Sunnah at

specific times. To illustrate, using siwak is stressed when performing ablution,
for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“But for my fear that it would be hard for my followers, 1 would have
ordered them to use siwak on every performance of ablation.”

Thus, during ablation, siwdk is to he used when rinsing one’s mouth with
water to ensure the purity and cleanness of the mouth.

Using siwak is also a stressed act of the Sumah to be observed when
standing for prayer, whether it is an obligatory prayer or a supererogatory
one. This is because we are commanded upon any act of worship to be ina
perfect state of spiritual and physical purity befitting the honor and glory of
worshipping Allah. Moreover, using stwdk is also stressed on whenever the
smell of the mouth changes due to eating or the like. Furthermore, using siwak
isa stressed act of the Suinah to be observed upon reciting the Ever-Gloriaus
Qur‘in, so as to clean and purify the mouth to be worthy of reciting the Words
of Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He,

Chapter 5: ‏الس‎ (Tooth-Stick) and Acts of ‏ألسسسدك!‎ Disposicion 3

‘The way siwik is used is by rubbing the gum and teeth starting from the
right side of the mouth (and then moving towards the left), and one should
hold siwak with the left hand.

Among the merits presented by Islam, the ‘True Religion, are the acts of
rarural disposition mentioned in the aforesaid hadith. They are called the acts of
natural disposition as they are observed by those who adhere to innate, natural
acts of purity upon which Allah has created all His servants, urged them to
‘bserve them, and desired such acts to be observed by them. Allah, Glory be to
Him, desires such acts of natural disposition to be observed by His servants so
that they attain the most perfect, honorable, dignified qualities, and combine
the best appearance with the best manners, These acts of natural disposition
are the old, inherent acts and practices of purification observed by all prophets
and unanimously agreed upon by all Heavenly Laws. These acts are:

1- Istihdéd: [stiilad means shaving the pubic hai. This act, in Arabi
called ‘stiliddd becauseiitis derived from the word ‘hadid, ie. the razor
used for shaving hair. Removing such hair is away of beautification as
Well as purification. Also, one is free either to remave it by shaving or
anything else.

2- Circumcision: Itis the remoyal of the loose foreskin covering a males
penis. Itis preferable to be done during childhoad, as the wound would
heal faster, and in order to let the child grow in the healthiest way.
‘Among the numerous Virtues of circumcision is to purify the organ
from the impurities caused by the foreskin.

3+ Cutting the moustache short: Cutting the moustache too short is a
way of beautification, purification, and avoidance of imitating the
polytheists. There are many hadiths stressing the act of cutting the
moustache too short as well as growing the beard and beautifying it,
‘as the beard is a sign of manish beauty and is among the features
of manhood. Ironically, many people reversed this matter; they
would leaye their moustaches and shave their beards, cut them
short, or depilate parts of them. This is regarded as excessiveness in
contradicting the acts of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition), as well
4s an imitation of the enemies of Allah and His Messenger (i.e. the
polytheists and the disbelievers), In addition, shaving the beard and
growing the moustache is also a way of abandoning the features of
manhood and gallantry, and adopting those of women and low men,
Such a meaning is what the poet intended when he composed:

Man at times of moral affliction

‘May see what is ugly as perfection

2 1: PURIFICATION

Another poet says:
No wonder that women have masculinized
But wien ferninized is the real wonder,

4 Clipping the nails: Clipping the nails is among the qualities of
natural disposition, asit isa way of beautification, a means of removing
dirt beneath the fingernails, and avoiding being just like beasts.
Unfortunately, this act of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) is being
violated by some reckless youth and light-headed women, as they leave
their nails without clipping, out of blind imitation of the polytheists
and contradicting, by this, the honorable Prophetic Tradition,

5- Removing the hair of the armpits: This is also among the acts
of natural disposition. It can be done through plucking, shaving, etc.,
as a way of purification, and getting rid of the increasing bad odor
associated with the presence of such hair.

Those acts, dear gentle reader, are enjoined in the religion of Islam, due
to the beautification, purification, and cleanliness they involve. Therefore,
Muslims who adhere to such acts would attain the most favorable and perfect
‘appearance, manner, and condition, contrary to the path of the polytheists
and their practices. Such practices are also enjoined in Islam as a means of
distinguishing between males and females so that each could have a distinct
character befitting his or her nature and role in life. However, many of those
straying people, who really wrong themselyes, prefer imitating the strange
traditions and fashions that agree with neither the Iskamic religion nor the
‘Muslim character rather than following the guidance of Allali’s Messenger
(PBUH). Moreover, they take the wicked, low people from both the East
and West as examples to be followed. They, thus, exchange that which is
beiter for that which is worse, that which is good for that which is evil, and
that which is perfect for that which is imperfect. In this way, such people
wrong themselves as well as their Muslim community, as they innovate bad
acts and practices contrary to the Sunnah. Therefore, they shall bear the
burdens (i.e. the sins) of their own innoyation in religion, as well as the
burdens of those who would follow their innovation, There is neither might
nor power exceptin Allah.

We invoke Allah to guide Muslims to what may benefit them and lead them
to the righteous deeds. O Allah, bestow upon them sincerity and devotion
to Your Ever-Honorable, Ever-Glorious Countenance, and adherence to the
Sunnah of Your Prophet (PBUH),

Chaprer 5: Siwdd ) ‏ولع كسا روص‎ and Acts of Naural Disposition 33
Endnotes

1 Ahmad (24196) [6/57] and (7) [1/5], An-Nastt (5) (1/17), thn Majah (289) [1/146],
Al-Bokhari [4/202]

2 The Two Sakis: The Two Authentic Books of Al-Bukhari and Muslin.

43 Istibdad: Shaving the pubic hair.

4 AL-Bukhari (5889) [10/412] and Muslim (597) [2/140].

5 Marfa” (traceable) hadith ig whatever word, deed, approval orattribule which istraced directly
‘back to the Prophet (PBUH) with a connected or disconnected chain of transmission.

6 Al-Bukhari (5893) [10/431] and Muslim (599) {2/142}

7 Abmad (23470) (5/421) and At-Tiennidhi (1081) [3/381]

8 The Lawgiver of Shari ab (Islamic Law) is Allah, Exalted be He: the termi can also refer
to the Prophet (PBUH) as he never ordained bat what was revealed to him by Alls.

9 Abmad (9910) [2/607] and (10676); see also Al-Bukhari (7240) |13/276] and Muslim
(588) [2/135].

Ablution

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“O you who have believed, when you rise to [perform] prayer,
wash your faces and your forearms to the elbows and wipe over
your heads and wash your feet to the ankle:

(Quran: Al-M@idah: 6)

This verse states that performing ablution whenever rising to prayer
is obligatory, and tells us which organs should be washed and those which
should be wiped during ablution, and specifies what part of them should be
washed or wiped. Then, the Prophet (PBUH), through his sayings (hadiths)
and practices, has clearly shown the way ablution is to be performed.

Every Muslim should know that ablution has certain conditions, obligatory
acts, and practices of the Sunnah to be observed while performing it. Both
conditions and obligatory acts must be fulfilled as much as possible in order to

‎PURIFICATION‏ نا

‎censure the validity of ablution, As for the acts of the Sunmab related ]6 ablution,
they are considered complementary practices that guarantee the perfection of
ablution, Observing these acts of the Sunnah during ablution increases one’s
reward, yet abandoning them does not alfect the validity of ablution,

‎The Conditions of Ablution

‎There are eight conditions of ablution:
1- Being a Muslim
2- Being mentally sound
3+ Having discretion
4 Having the intention of performing ablution

‎According to the aforementioned four conditions, ablution is invalid if
performed by a disbeliever, an insane person, a young child who does
not distinguish (between right and wrong), or one who does not have
the intention of ablution (upon performing it), such as performing it as
a way of refreshment in a hot weather, or as a means of cleaning one’s
body organs or removing certain impurities or the like.

‎5- Using pure water: Water used for performing ablution must be pure,
sso impure water is inadequate for performing ablution.

‎6- Using legally-obtained water: If the water used for ablulion is
unlawfully acquired, or taken by force, ablution will not be valid.

‎7-Being preceded by istinja’ or istijmar (when necessaryas previously
mentioned),

‎8- Removing what may prevent water from reaching skin of the
ablution organs: That is, the one performing ablution has to remove
anything covering the organs of ablution, such as mud, dough, wax,
accumulated dirt, thick paint, ccs, in order to allow water to reach the
skin of the organ directly without hindrance,

‎The Obligatory Acts of Ablution

‎There are six obligatory acts, related to the organs of ablution:

‎i-Washing the whole face: Washing the whole face involves rinsing
the mouth and the nose with water. Accordingly, one’s ablution is vord
if one washes one's face without rinsing ‘both’ the mouth and the nose
‎Ablation‏ :6 عرست

‎With water. This is because the mouth and the nose belong to the face,
and Allah, Exalted be He, says (regarding ablution), ‘.. Wash your
faces...” (Qur'an: Al-Ma'idah: 6) Thus, Allah commands washing the
whole face during ablution, so whoever disregards washing any pati
of the face is considered to be disobedient to the Command of Allah,
Exalted be He. Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) used to rinse his mouth
and nose with water while performing ablution.

‎2-Washing the forearms including the elbows: Allah, Exalted
be He, says, “..And your forearms to the elbows...” (Qur'an: Al-
Ma’idah: 6), ie. washing them including the elbows, as the Prophet
(PBUH) used to do according to a hadith narrated in this regard’. It
is also stated in another hadith that the Prophet (PBUH) “...washed
his hands (during ablation) until he reached the upper arms.” This
indicates that the elbows are included when washing the arms
during ablution.

‎3-Wiping over the whole head: Wiping over the head includes the
ears, for Allah, Exalted be He, says, “...And wipe over your heads...”
(Qu I-M@idah: 6) Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) said, “The ears
are treated as part of the head.” (Related by Ibn Majah, Ad-Daraqutni,
and other compilers of Hadith)’ Therefore, it is incorrect to abandon
wiping over the ears, for it is insufficient to wipe over one part of the
head and neglect another during ablution.

‎4-Washing the feet including the ankles: During ablution, the feet
must be washed including the ankles, for Allah, Exalted be He, says,
‏لصفب"‎ wash your feet to the ankles...” (Qur'an: Al-Maiidah: 6) Here.
the preposition ‏ما"‎ means ‘with’ according to the hadiths pointing out
how ablution is performed, and through which it is stated that the
whole feet must be washed ‘including’ the ankles

‎5-Sequence: The decreed sequence has to be observed while performing
ablution. To clarify, one begins with washing the face, followed by the
hands, then wipes over the head, and finally washes the feet, as clearly
shown in the verse; Allah, Exalted be He, says:

‎"© you who have believed, when you rise to [perform] prayer,
wash your faces and your forearms to the elbows and wipe over
your heads and wash your feet to the ankles.

‎(Qur'an: Al-Ma’idah: 6)

38 1 PURIFICATION
‘The Prophet (PBUH) used to follow that order while performing
ablution, saying:

“This is an ablution without which Allah docs ot accept any prayer”
This is as related by Abo Dawdd and other compilers of Hadith.

6-Succession: This means to wash the organs successively without any
interval between washing two organs, ie. the organs must be washed
successively without pause, as much as possible,

‘Thesearethe obligatory acts ofablution that mustbe fulfilled ascommanded
by Allah in His Ever-Glorious Book, the Qur'an.

Scholars disagree concerning the ruling on tasmtiyal’ upon starting
ablution; they differ whether itis an act of the Sumah oran obligatory practice
of ablation. At any rate, according to all Muslim scholars, it is permissible to
startablution with tastmiyah and it should not be abandoned.

The reason - Allah knows best - behind specifying those four organs for
ablution (ic. the face, hands, head, and the feet) may be because they are the
commonest bodily parts related to sins, so their physical purification may be
an indication of spiritual purification (from the sins committed by them),
‘The Prophet (PBUH) has stated that whenever a Muslim washes one of these
organs (during ablution), the misdeeds committed through it are remitted,
and that such misdeeds fall and vanish with the flow of the water used for
washing that organ, until the last dtop of it. In addition, the Prophet (PBUH)
enjoined saying the Two Testifications of Faith following washing these organs
(ie, following ablution) as a sign of combining both physical and spiritual
purity. The physical purity is achieved through washing those organs in the
way prescribed by Allah in His Ever-Glorious Book, the Quran. As for the
spiritual purity, it is achieved by uttering the Two Testifications of Faith that
purify one from polytheism and disbelief.

In the last part of the aforesaid verse related to ablution, Allah, Exalted be
He, says

“Allah does not intend to make difficulty for you, but He
intends to purify you and complete His favor upon you that you
imay be grateful” (Qur'an: AL-M@idah: 6)
‘Thus, gentle reader, every Muslim has to know that Allah has decreed
ablution in order to purify them from sins, and to complete His favor upon

Chapter 6: Ablation ‏لله‎

them. Likewise, if you contemplate the opening of the same verse, “O you ‏الب‎
‎have believed...” you will find that it is a generous, gentle call through which
Allah, Glorified be He, addresses those who have faith, as they are the ones
who will listen to, obey, abide by and benefit from what Allah says and enjoins.
‘That was why the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“No one keeps being inva state of ablution except the believer”

The Acts of the Sunnah to Be Observed during Ablution

Whatever acts done in addition to the above-mentioned obligatory acts of
ablution are deemed desirable; he who observes them will be rewarded and
there will be no blame upon him who refrains from observing them, Hence,
scholars call such acts as the acts of the Surah to be observed during ablution,
or the desirable practices of ablation.

‘Those acts areas follows:

1- Using siwak (tooth-stick) during ablution; The virtues and the
way of using siwak have been previously clarified. In particular, ‏و‎
‎is to be used while rinsing the mouth with water during ablution,
in order to ensure the cleanness of the mouth and to be ready for

pping Allah, reciting His Ever-Glorious Book, Qur'an, and
invoking Him, Almighty and Ever-Majestic be He.

2- Starting ablution with washing the hands three times, before
washing the face, as enjoined in various hadiths. This is also because
the hands are the means through which one dips out water and washes
the other organs, so washing the hands is regarded as insurance and a
prerequisite for the purity of all the other parts of abluition,

3- Starting with rinsing the mouth and the nose before washing
the face, as stated in various hadiths. When one is not in a state
of fasting, one should rinse them inside and out (making water
spread all through the mouth, and sniffing water when rinsing
the nose).

4. Inserting one’s wet fingers into one’s (thick) beard, ensuring
that water reaches all its parts, and washing one's fingers and toes well,
especially between them:

5- Starting with the right organs before the left (as in washing the
hands and the feet).

40 ‏با‎ PURIFICATION

6 Washing the face, hands and feet up to three times instead of once,

‘Thus, we have tackled the conditions, the obligatory acts, and the acts of
the Sunnah to be observed during ablution, So, you, gentle reader, should learn
them, and keep observing them whenever you perform ablution to ensure the
legal perfection and validity of your ablution as well as the reward for it.

Weask Allah to grant us all more beneficial knowledge and guide us to the
righteous deeds.

Endnotes

1 Ad-Daraqutni (268) 1/86] and Al-Bayhagi (256) [1/93].

2-Mustim (246).

3 Abii Dawid (134) [1/72], AtTirmnidh (37) [1/53}, ‏مطل‎ Majah (444) (1/262) anil d=
Daragunt (353) [1/108}.

4 ‏مطل‎ Majah (419) [1/250], Abd Ya'lé (5598) and Ad-1Déraquitt (257) [1/83].

5 Tasmiyale: Saying “Bismillah” (ie. in the Namve of Allah),

6 Ahmad (22429) [5/355] and Ibn Majab (278) (1/178)

Way of Performing Ablution

Since you are now acquainted with the conditions, the obligatory acts,
and the acts of the Sunnah to be observed during ablution, then you are
aware of the proper way ablution is performed, which is an application of
the above-mentioned rulings. Put differently, the perfect way of performing
ablution is achieved by observing these conditions, obligatory acts, and acts
of the Sunnah, which are derived from the texts of Shari'ah (Islamic Law).
So, every Muslim has to spare no effort in observing them once he knew
them, Allah willing.

The Way of Performing Ablution

1-Intention: To intend performing ablution for the acts of worship for
which ablution is required, such as prayer and the like

2-Tasmiyah: To say “Bismillah” (ie. In the Name of Allah)
3-To wash the hands three times

1: PURIFICATION

4-To rinse the mouth three times and then to rinse the nose three
times (by sniffing water and then blowing it out using the left hand)

'5-To wash the face three times, from the upper part of the forehead
(the beginning of the normal hairline) to the lower parts of the
jaws lengthwise, and from one ear to the other widthwise (without
‘washing the ears, as they are treated as part ofthe head, nottthe face, as
previously mentioned). The beard, as well, must be washed: if the hair
of the beard is not thick, one has to wash it internally and externally.
But fit is thick, ithas to be washed from the outside, and it is desirable
to insert wet fingers washing it internally, as mentioned above.

6-To wash the hands up to the elbows three times; each hand isto be
washed from the upper parts of the fingers and nails to the beginning,
of the upper arm, Moreover, one has to remove whatever sticks ta the
hands or the fingernails (such as dough, mud or thick paint) before
‘washing them, so as to allow water to reach such parts.

7-To wipe over the whole head only once, including the ears, with
‘wet hands (provided the water used for wiping over them is fresh one,
unlike that remaining from washing hands). The proper way of wiping
cover the head is to be by putting one’s wet hands on the upper part of
the forehead and let them pass backwards till they reach one’s nape,
then return them forwards to the starting point, After that, one is to
insert one’s two wet forefingers in the holes of the ears while wiping
over their outer parts with one’s two thumbs.

8-To wash the feet three times including the ankles. As for one
‘whose hand or foot is amputated, such one is to wash whatis left of the
arm or the feet. To clarify, iFthe arm is amputated from the joint of the
elbow, one is to wash the front part of the upper arm, and if the foot is
amputated from ankles, one is to wash the tip of the (amputated) legs
Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“So fear Allah as much as you are able ..”

(Qur'an: At-Taghabun: 16)

Similarly, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“If command you to do something, then do (of) it as much as you can."

Accordingly, if a person washes what is left of an amputated limb, it
will be sufficient as one thus does what one can,

Chaprer 7: Way of Performing Abhution ‘a

9. After finishing performing ablution, in accordance with the
above stated form, one may raise one sight towards the heaven and
invoke Allah with some of the invocations of the Prophet (PBUH) in
this regard, such as saying:

“L testify that there is no deity but Allah, Alone, with no partner, and
L testify that Muhammad is His Servant and His Messenger: 0 Allah!
Make me among those wha are constantly repentant, and make me
among those who purify themselves,”

Or Saying:

“Exalted are You, 0 Allah, and all praise be to You. | testify that there is wo
deity but You. I ask You for forgiveness and turn to You in repentance”

‘The reason behind mentioning dhikr' and invocation following
ablution is to combine both physical and spiritual purity, for ablution
isa means of physical purity, whereas dhikr and invocation (implying
monotheism and repentance) are signs of spiritual purity, In this
way, one becomes in the most perfect state of purity (combining
both physical and spiritual purity), and becomes pure enough to be
admitted to stand before Allah (in prayer), imploring Him humbly.
and submissively.

By the way, itis all right to dry ones argans with a towel or the like after
ablation.

Every Muslim has to know that ablution should be performed perfectly,
ensuring that water reaches all parts of the organs washed during ablition,
without negligence. fo illustrate, when the Prophet (PBUH) saw a man who
had left a spot on his foot, as small as a fingernail, unwashed (after ablution),
he (PBUH) said to him, “Go back and perform ablution well.” Moreover, some
of the Prophet's Companions reported that when the Prophet (PBUH) saw a
man offering prayer while there was on the back of his foot a small part equal
to the space of a dirham (an Arab coin) which was not washed, ie. water did
not reach it, he (PBUH) commanded him to re-perform both ablution and
prayer’, In addition, the Prophet (PBUH) said;

“Woe to the heels (if not washed during ablution) from the Fire!”

This is because one might be so reluctant concerning washing therm that
one washes them carelessly and water can hardly reach one’s ankles during,
ablution and some spots remain unwashed, which causes them to be tortured
in the Helifire. Furthermore, in the hadith related by Aba Dawid and other
compilers of Hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

0 I: PURIFICATION

“The prayer of any of you is not complete wniil he performs ablution
perfectly, as Allah, Exalted be He, has ordered hin. He should wash
his face and hands up to the elbows, wipe over his lead and (wash)
his feet up to the ankles...”

However, Muslims should know that the perfection of ablution is not to
use a lot of water, but it means to let water reach all parts of the organ being
washed, In fact, mere over-use of waler is regarded as prohibited wastefulness
of water, Also, one may pour water wastefully during ablution. without
performing it perfectly; the perfection of ablution with little water is exactly
what is legally enjoined. Itis stated in the Two Sahihs that the Prophet (PBUH)
used to perform ablution with one mudi’ and to take a bath with one sd" up
to five muds".

‘The Prophet (PBUH) also forbade wastefulness of water; once he (PBUH)
passed by Sa°d while the latter was performing ablution and said to him:

“Why are you wasting all this water?” Sad said, “Is there wastefulness
even in performing ablution?" The Prophet (PBUH) replied, “Yes,
even if you were performing it from a river of running water."

‘This hadith was related by Ahmad and Ibn Majah, and supported by other
narrations", The Prophet (PBUH) alsa stated that there would be some people
of the Muslim nation who would exceed the limits in purification, ie. who
would purify themselves excessively, wastelully and having unsubstantiated
doubt".He (PBUH) also said:

“There is a demon of ablution called Al-Wathan, so be on your
guard against insinuation in ‏"زرو يله‎

Excessiveness in pouring water, which is considered wastefulness, leads to
other illegal, detestable consequences, such as:

Incomplete purification: One may dependon using waterinabundance
during ablution and so does not make sure that water reaches all parts
of the organs. Consequently, some spots may remain unwashed while
one is unaware. Hence, one’s ablution becomes incomplete and thus
one performs prayer without purification.

Excessiveness in worship: Ablution is an act of worship, and ifany act
‘of worship is excessively performed, it becomes void.

Chapter 7: Way of Performing Ablurion 45

Insinuation in purification: One may get insinuation and be doubtful
concerning purification due to excessiveness in using water while
performing ablution,

In fact, the best way to avoid the aforesaid consequences is to follow in the
Prophet's footsteps and abide by his Sunmaly, for the most evil of (religious)
miatfers are those newly innovated. May Allah guide us all to that which He
likes and ta what pleases Him

To sum up, you have, dear gentle reader, to be keen to ensure that your
ablution and all the other acts of worship are legally and perfectly abserved,
with neither excessiveness nor negligence, for both extremes are dispraised,
and moderation isthe best of all matters, Negligence in acts of worship makes
them imperfect, and excessiveness makes them subject to religious innovations;
following the example of the Prophet (PBUH) and abiding by his Sunnah is the
optimum way to perform acts of worship with due perfection, © Allah, make
us know what is right and guide us to follow it, make us knaw what is wrong
and guide us to avoid it, and do not make things obscure for us, lest we may

go astray,

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukbndet (7288) [13/308] and Mustim (6066) (2/108).

2 At-Tirmidht (55) [1/77], Mastin (5$2) [2/112], Abd Dawad (169) [1/89], An-Nastt
(148) [1/100] and thn Majah (470) [1/273].

3 See tbnus-Sunnt's ‘Amal AI-Yawet wal-Laylah, p21.

4 Dhikr: Invocations implying reimembrance ofand mentioning Allah,

‘5 Musliny (575) (2/126)

6 Abi Dawid (175) [1/92].

7 Al-Bukhaci (165) [1/350], (60) (1/189), and Muslim (572) [2/125), (568) (2/123).

8 Aba Dawrid (858) [1/376], An-Nasi't (1135) [1/574], Ibn Majah (460) [1/268]; see also
At-Tirmidhi (302) [2/101]

9 Mudit A standard measure that equals $43 grams.

10 34: A standard measure that equals 2172 grams.

11 Al-Bukhart (201) [1/398] and Mustim (735) [2/233]

12 Almad (7062) [2/291 | and Tn Majah (425) [1/254]

13 Abmad (16778) [4/123] and Abo, Dawad (96) [1/59].

U4 At Tirmidht (57) [1/84] and Ibn Majah (421) [1/252].

Wiping over the Khuffs'

Islam is a religion of easiness and simplicity, not difficulty and strictness;
it decrees suitable rulings for each case, which ensure fulfilling legal purposes
and duties with no difficulty.

This applies to the rulings on ablution decreed by Allah, To illustrate,
sometimes there is something covering the organs washed during ablution
which is hard to remove and maybe needed as a means of protection, either
for the feet (such as khuffs and the like), or for the head (such as turbans and
the like), or for protecting wounds or the like (such as splints, bandages, etc. It
is deemed permissible for the one performing ablution to just wipe over such
coverings instead of removing them and washing what is underneath. This
is the easiness made by Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, for His servants,
relieving them from difficulty and strictness.

As for the permissibility of wiping over the khuffé (and their likes, such as,
socks) during ablution, instead of removing them and washing underneath, it

ae 1 PURIFICATION

is stated in many mrutawétis ‘hadiths that the Prophet (PBUH) used to
wipe over them whether at home or on a journey; he (PBUH) enjoined doing
the same,

As regards the legal proofs of the permissibility of wiping over the khuff&
Al-Hasan said, “T was told by seventy of the Companions of Allaks Messenger
(PBUH) that he used to wipe over his khuuffs (with his wet hands during ablution)?”*
Moreover, An-Nawawi said, “The permissibility of wiping over the kiuffs was
reported by innumerable Companions” Imam Ahmad also said,”There is not
a shadow of doubt in my mind concerning the legality of wiping over the Khu,
‏قم‎ there are forty hadiths of the Prophet (PBUH) indicating its permissibility”*
Inaddition, Tbnul-Mubarak and others stated that there was no disagreement
among the Companions concerning the permissibility of wiping over the
khuffs during ablation’, Likewise, thnul-Mundhir and others reported the
scholars’ consensus on the permissibility of such an act during ablation, In
addition, the Adherents of the Smal and Muslim Community unanimously
agree on its permissibility, unlike those innovators in religion who do not
deem it permissible.

Wiping over the Khuffs during Ablution

‘This act is permitted and observingiit is better than taking off the kiufjsand
washing the feet, as the former is a sign of making use of the legal permission
made by Allah, Almighty and Ever-Majestic be He, following the example
of the Prophet (PBUH), and contradicting the religious innovators. Wiping
over the kia is a spiritual removal of the impurities underneath. Also, the
Prophet (PBUH) never changed the condition of is feet to perform ablution;
if he (PBUH) was wearing two khuffs, he used to wipe aver them, and ifnot, he
used to wash his feet, Therefore, i is impermissible to put on khuff
ablation in order to wipe over them whilé performing ablution,

‘The Duration of the Validity of Wiping over
the Khuffs without Taking Them off

It is permissible for a resident (i.e. not a traveler) ‏ما‎ keep wearing khuffs
and wipe over them during ablution for a period of one day and night. As
for a traveler whose journey legally allows shortening prayer (Le. when the
destination is far enough), the period of permissibility is three days and nights,
according to the hadith related by [mam Muslim, which states that the Prophet
(PBUH) specified three days (during which one can wipe over his khuffs) for

Chapter 8: Wiping over Kuff 49

a traveler and one day and night for a resident’. For both (the resident and
the traveler), the period of permissibility (of wiping over the khuffé) starts
from the time of being in a state of ritual impurity (caused by passing urine,
stool or wind) after wearing the khuffs, as ritual impurity necessitates ablution
(for prayer). Still, some scholars view that the duration begins from the first
ablution after being in a state of ritual impurity.

The Conditions of Wiping over the Khuffs, the Socks, and the Like

| To be ima state of ritual purity (i.e. a state of ablution) upon wearing
them, for itis stated in the Two Sahihs" and other hooks of Hadith that
the Prophet (PBUH) said to the one who wanted to help him (ie. the
Prophet) in taking his kliuffs off to perform ablution:

“Leave them as T had put them after performing ablution.’"
Itis also narrated that Safwan Ibn  Assal sald:

“We are commanded (by the Prophet) to wipe over the khufy’ if we put
them on while being in a state of ritual purity (Le. after performing
ablution).”"

‘Thus, it is quite obvious that the ruling is dependent on being in a
state of ritual purity when patting the Khuffs on, so if one is in a state
of ritual impurity when putting them on, it is impermissible for one
to wipe over them.

2- The Khuffs must be lawfully acquired, gotten, and made. To clarify, if
they are taken by force, or made of silk (for men), it is impermissible
to wipe oyer them during ablution. Ina word, a legal permission is not
applied to what is already illegal

3- The Ahuffs and their likes must completely cover the feet up to the
ankles. One cannot wipe over them unless they are thick enough and
covering the parts of the feet which are to be washed. Thus, if they are
too short to cover the feet up to the ankles, or are not thick enough (o
conceal underneath, it is impermissible to wipe over them.

Since it is permissible to wipe over the kluufs, itis permissible to wipe over
any foot coverings, such as socks made of woo! or suchlike material, which
are thick enough to cover underneath. That is due to the fact that the Prophet
(PBUH) wiped over his socks and his shoes while performing ablution, as

30. 1: PURIEICATION

stated in the hiadith related by Ahmad and other compilers of Haditi, and
deemed sahth (authentic) by At-Tirmidhi”, Wiping over such things during
ablution is valid until the legal period of permission ends regardless of the
frequency of taking them off and putting them on.

‘As regards the turban, it is permissible to wipe over it on two conditions.
‘The first is that the turban must be covering the area of the head which is
traditionally covered. The second condition is that the turban must be wrapped
round the lower jaw up to the head, one or more than one turn, orto be with
a back tail, It is stated in many hadiths related by more than one of the Imams
that the Prophet (PBUH) wiped over his turban doring ablation. To illustrate,
“Umar Ibnul-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“He who is not purified by wiping over the turban (i.e. does not
deem it sufficient for wiping over the head), then may Allah not
purify him.”

It is worth mentioning that it is permissible to wipe over the khugffs and
turbans only in case of purification from the state of minor ritual impurity, but
not major ritual impurity (eg. jandbah); one has to take off one’s khuffs and
turban and wash underneath in the latter case.

As for splints, bandages, and the like, itis permissible to wipe over them
during ablution (without removing them). Moreover, one is permitted to wipe
over plasters that cover wounds; all such coverings are permitted to be wiped
over provided they cover only the injured area or the necessary parts which
need to be covered for treatment, However, if the splint, the bandage, or the
like, covers more than the injured area unnecessarily, the unnecessary parts
must be removed. In addition, it is permissible to wipe over splints in both
states of ritual impurity (minor and major ritual impurity), and there is no
fixed period for the permissibility of wiping over them. In other words, itis
permissible to wipe over the splint until it is removed or the broken limb heals.
Ina nutshell, the permissibility of wiping over the splint during purification is
dependent on the necessity of the cover,

‘The proof of the permissibility of wiping over the splint is the following
hadith narrated by Jabir (may Allah be pleased with him); he reported:

“Once, we were on a journey and one of us was injured in his
head by a stone. Then that man had a wet dream, so he asked his
companions saying, ‘Ist permissible for me to perform fayammmum

Chapter 8: Wiping over 67176 51
(dry ablution with clean earth)?’ They answered him saying, “We
do not see any legal permission for you as you are able to use water’
So, the man had a ritual bath after which he died. When we came
to Allah's Messenger (PBUH), we told him about this. He (PBUH)
said, “They killed him; may Allah kill them! Why did they not ask
when being ignorant, for inquiry is the cure for ignorance? It would
have been sufficient for him to perform tayammum (instead of
nblution) and to bandage his wound with a piece of cloth over and
then to wipe over it (the piece of cloth).

{Related by Aba Dawdd and Ibn Majah, and deemed saltfh (authen-
tic) by Thnus-Sakan) '*

The Areas to Be Wiped over

ing is to be applied to the upper part of the kluiffs or the socks. As for
the turban, most of it should be wiped over, especially its folds. However; the
splint has to be wholly wiped over.

‘The Way Wiping over the Khuffs is Performed

Wiping over the khuffs (during ablution)is to be by passing one’s wet fingers
from one’s toes towards one’s leg. ‘The right foot is to be wiped over with the
right hand, and vice versa. Also, one should open one’s fingers during wiping,
and should not repeat wiping. May Allah guide us all to useful knowledge and
righteous deeds,

Endnotes

1 Khujf: Leather socks or shoes or theit like.

2 Miuawatir (continaousty recurrent) hadith is a hadith reported by a large number of
narrators whose agreement upon telling a lie is inconceivable (this condition must be
met in the entire chain from the beginning to the end)

5 Salih (authentic) hadith is a hadith whose chain of transmission has been transmitted
by truly pious persons who have been known for their uprightness and exactitude;
such a lndith is free from eccentricity and blemish.

4 See Ibtul-Mundhir’s Al-Awsal [1/430, 433],-Az-Zayla'Ts Nash Ar-Rayal (1/162), and
Tbaul-Mulaggic’ ‏ادا" لاه‎ Befawi'l ‘Uindad Al-Abkam (1/615)

5'See AL lam Refawitid “Umidat Al-Akkdmn [11615],

6 See Al-Awsat (1/434)

52 I: PURIFICATION

7 Ibid.
8 Muslim (637) [2/167]
‏و‎ The Two Sahihs: The Two Authentic Books of Al-Bukhari and Muslim.

10 Al-Bukkart (206) [1/404] and Mustim (630) [2/162],

11 Ahmad (18011) [4/240],

12 Abmad (18167) [4/343}, Abt Dawid!
Majah (559) [1/341].

13 Abi. Dawid (336) [1/172]: see also Abi Dawid (337) [1/172] and thn Mijah (572) [1/321],

) (1/85), At-Tirmidhi (99) |1/167) and ‏مطل‎

Things Nullifying Ablution

Given that you have become now aware of how ablution is performed, what
its conditions are, and what its obligatory practices and acts of the Sunnah are,
you need now to know what causes ablution to be nullified, In this way, you
will avoid performing an act of worship (such as prayer) while your ablution
is null, and so will be the act of worship performed in that state, Every Muslim
should know that there are things that nullify ablution and that it becomes
completely null if any of them is done; in this case, one has to re-perform
ablution to do any act of worship necessitating ablution,

‘The things nullifying ablution (any of which makes it invalid) are certain
matters identified by the Lawgiver' to be affecting the validity of ablution.

The Things Nullifying Ablution are of Two Types

1- Direct nullifiers: They are the matters that cause the nullification of
ablution directly, such as urine, stool, and whatever comes out of the
anus and the sexual organ.

[: PURIFICATION

2+ Indirect nullifiers: They are the matters that cause nullification
of ablution indirectly, or makes the validity of ablution suspicious.
Such matters include unconsciousness or similar states like sleeping,
fainting, insanity, etc. The reason is that if one is in a state of uncon-
sciousness, one becomes unable to feel what comes out of one’s body
or what one does, Thus, doubt in such cases is regarded as an actual
nullifying factor.

For more clarification, we can classify the things nullifying

1) Whatever comes out of the stool and urine exits, such as stool, wind,
urine, sperm, pre-seminal fluid, and unusual menstrual blood. Stool
and urine are among the direct things nullifying ablution, according
to the religiotis texts and juristic consensus, as when Allah, Exalted be
He, revealed the cases that obligate ablution He said:

“,. Or one of you comes from the place of relieving himself...”
(Quran: Al-Ma'idah: 6)

As for sperm and pre-seminal fluid, they nullify ablution according to
the sahih (authentic) hadiths reported in this regard, and the juristic
consensus reported by Ibnul-Mundhir and others’

As regards istiliddah,’ it nullifies ablution according to the hadith
reported by Fitimah Bint Abd Hubaysh mentioning that she was
afflicted with istiddah, and when she asked the Prophet (PBUH)
about its ruling, he (PBUH) said to her:

“Perform ablution and then (you can) offer prayer, for it is (due only
to) a vein"

‘This hadith was related by Abd Dawid and Ad-Daraqutni,’ who said
that all the transmitters of that hadith were trustworthy.

Likewise, breaking wind nullifies ablution according to the sabilt
(authentic) hadiths narrated in this regard, as well as the juristic
consensus, For example, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Allah will not accept the prayer of anyone of you if he passes urine,
stool or breaks wind until he performs ablution.”

ablution as follow:

Chapter 9: ‏موماطا"'‎ Nullifying Ablation 55
Also, he (PBUH) said regarding one’s uncertainty whether one had
broken wind or not:

“One should not leave prayer (to re-perform ablution) unless one hears
sound (of breaking wind) or smells something.”*

As for what comes out of one’s body other than urine, stool, and the
aforesaid secretions, such as blood, vomit, nosebleed and the like,
scholars disagree whether such things nullify ablution or nat. Yet, the
preponderant opinion is that it does not nullify ablution. However, if
one re-performs ablution in this case to avoid such a juristic disagree-
ment, it will be better.

2)Among the things nullifying ablution is mental unconsciousness either
due to insanity or due to sleeping, fainting and the like. Thus, the
ablution of one in such a state is deemed null, as there is suspicion in
this case that something has come out of one’s body (such as a drop of
turine, wind, or the like) while one is unaware, Still, dozing is regarded
san exceptional case (ie, it does not nullify ablution) as the Prophet's
‘Companions (may Allah be pleased with them) used to doze while
waiting for prayer at the mosque’. Ina word, only deep sleeping causes
the nullification of ablution according to the ample legal proofs.

3) Eating meat of camels, little or much, is also one of the things nullifying
ablution, according to the explicit sali (authentic) hadith of Allah's
‘Messenger (PBUH) in this regard”. Imam Ahmad (may Allah have
mercy on him) said that thereare two sahith (authentic) hadiths ascribed
to Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) in this connection. Stil, eating any lawful
meat ather than that of camels does not cause ablution to be null,

‘There are some other issues on which scholars disagree whether they nullily
ablation or not, such as touching one’s penis, touching ‏د‎ woman lustfully
washing the body of a deceased person, and apostasy. Some scholars view that
each of the above-mentioned matters causes the nullification of ablution, while
others maintain that it does not. The issue is still controversial and subject to
analogical deduction, yet re-performing ablution in such cases so as to avoid
that juristic disagreement will be better,

There is still an important issue in this regard that should be clarified,
namely the case when one is cettain about the validity of one’s ablution, then
fone suspects that any of the things nullifying ablution has taken place: what

36 1: PURIFICATION

should one do in this case? It is stated that the Prophet (PBUH), in the hadith
related by Imam Muslim on the authority of Abd: Hurayrah (may Allah be
pleased with him), said:

“Ifany one of you feels any flatulence (while being ina state of ablution)
tand is doubtful whether anything (like wind) has issued from him or
not, he should not leave the mosque (to re-perform ablution) unless
he hears a sound (of breaking wind) or perceives a smell.”

This honorable hadith, as well as similar ones that state the same
meaning, indicates that if one who is certain about one’s purity then
doubts it, one should deem oneself pure (despite one’s suspicion) and act
accordingly. This is because the original ruling is that one is still in a stale
of purity, as purity is certain in this case, and the nullification of ablution
here is based on mere suspicion. Thus, certainty is not to be eliminated
because of suspicion, This is, in fact, a great generic ruling to be applied in
all cases; namely, the original ruling is to remain applicable until otherwise
is verified, By contrast, if one is certain about the nullification of one’s
ablution and suspects its validity, one has to re-perform ablution, as the
original case here is one’s minor ritual impurity, which is not abrogated
due to mere suspicion.

0 Muslim reader, you should keep yourself pureand verify yourablution
whenever you stand for prayer, and care for the validity of your ablution as
much as you can, for prayer without valid ablution is invalid. You should
also beware of insinuation and Satan's whispers that cause you to doubt the
validity of your ablution, making you in a state of doubt and confusion.
‘Therefore, you should seek refuge with Allah from the evils and pay his
insinuations no attention, Moreover, you should ask the people of juristic
knowledge about whatever confuses you of the issues of purification and
purity, inorder to be certain about your purity. You should also care for
the purity of your clothes so as to verify the validity of your prayer and
the perfection of the acts of worship you perform, for Allah, Glorified and
Exalted be He, says:

*.. Indeed, Allah loves those who are constantly repentant and
loves those who purify themselves.” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 222)

May Allah guide us all to useful knowledge and righteous deeds.

Chapter 9: Things Nullifying Ablution 5

Endnotes

1 The Lawgiver of Shar! ‘at (Islamic Law) és Alla, Exalted be He; the term can also refer
to the Prophet (PRUH) as he never ordained but what was revealed te bie by Alla

2.See Al-Awsat [1/134]

3 stihiadalt: Vaginal bleeding other than menstruation.

4 Abit Diwwid (286) [1/143], An-Nasai (360) [1/203] and Ad-Daraqutni (778) (1/213)

5 Al-Bukhari (137) [1/312] and Muslim (802) (2/272).

6 Muslim (833) [2/296].
7 Muslim (800) [1/271]; see also Abad (18495) [4/4190), Abo Dawad (184) [1/96], Al-

“Tirmidht (81) [1/122] and thn Majal (494) | 1/243}
8 Mustiny (803) [2/272].

0

Ritual Bathing

You have already been introduced to the rulings on ablution, which is a
‘means of purification from minor ritual impurity (caused by passing wind,
excrement or urine), and the things nullifying it. So, the focus is now given
to highlighting the rulings on purification from major ritual impurity, be it
janabah, menstruation, or postnatal bleeding. This kind of purification is
called ritual bathing, during which one washes one’s whole body in a specific
way on which we will elaborate on below. The legal proof that ritual bathing ‏كذ‎
‎obligatory in such cases is that Allah, Exalted be He, says:

*<,.And if you are in a state of jandbah, then purify yourselves...”

(Quran: Al-Ma'idah: 6)

It is said that ritual bathing from jandbah was practiced by the
disbelievers during the Jahiliyyah (Pre-Islamic Period of Ignorance),
and it was among the remaining teachings of the religion revealed to
Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham) (PBUH)

an ‏ا‎ PURIEICATION

‘There are six cases in Which performing a ritual bath is obligatory for
a Muslim:

Ejaculation by a man or a woman, being awake or asleep, provided
that itis associated with sexual pleasure in case of wakefulness. If not,
owing toan illness or inability to control it, then a ritual bathing is not
obligatory. However, it isabsolutely obligatory for one to take a ritual
bath ifone ejaculates while being asleep, which is called wet dreaming,
as one in this case is unconscious and may not feel any pleasure. On
the other hand, ifone wakes up and finds the traces of ejaculation, itis
obligatory for one to take a ritual bath then, but if there 1s no trace of
ejaculation, ritual bathing is not obligatory.

Inserting a man’s penis into a woman's vulva, even if without ‏عد‎
‎ulation, as it is stated in ‏م‎ hadith related by Imam Muslim that the
Prophet (PBUH) says:

“When anyone sits amidst four parts (of the woman) and the circum
cised parts (of the genitals) touch each other, a ritual bath becomes
obligatory (for both).

‘Thus, sexual intercourse, even if without ejaculation, obligates ritual
bathing for both the man and the woman according to the aforesaid
hadith as well as the consensus of Muslim scholars.

Embracing Islam; when a disbelieve embraces Islam, forthe Prophet
(PBUH) commanded some ofthe new converts to Islam to perform ritual
bathing following declaring their Islam’. However, many scholars view
that itis desirable, not obligatory, for a new convert to take a ritual bath
as the Prophet (PBUH) has never been reported to have commanded
every new convert to do so. So, the ruling here is that it is regarded as
desirable according to reconciliation between the various legal proofs in
this regard; and Allah knows best

Death is the fourth case that necessitates ritual bathing (i.e. washing the
body of the deceased) except for martyrs (see rulings on funerals).

Menstruation and postnatal bleeding are the fifth and the sixth cases
in which ritual bathing is obligatory (for women), for the Prophet
(PBUH) said to a waman:

Chapter 10: Ritual Bathing 03
“So, when your metistruation period begins, give up performing prayer,
and when itends, wash off the blood (ie. take a ritual bath) and then
perform prayer”’

Moreover, Allah commands men not to approach their wives in
case they are in a state of menstruation until ‏..؟"‎ they have purified
themselves..." (Qur'an: Al-Bagatah: 222), i. through ritual bathing
following the menstrual period.

The Way a Complete Ritual Bath is Taken

+ Having the intention to take a ritual bath
+ Beginning with tasmiyah

» Washing one’s hands thrice

+ Washing one’s genital

+ Performing full ablution

+ Washing one’s head; pouring water over the head thrice so that it
thoroughly reaches one's scalp

+ Pouring water over one’s whole body and rubbing it with one's hands,
making sure that water reaches all parts of the body

The menstruating or the woman in a state of postnatal bleeding has to
undo her hair braids or pigtails when taking a ritual bath. However, a woman
ina state of jandbah does not have to undo her hair braids to have a ritual
bath, as it does not affect the validity of her ritual bathing in this case, This is
because jandbah is a frequent state, and undoing hair braids every now and
then might cause her difficulty: Still, it is obligatory for a woman in that state
(of jandbah) to make water reach her scalp,

In general, it is obligatory for one performing ritual bathing, a man ora
woman, to ensure that water thoroughly reaches one’s scalp, and to wash the
hidden body parts well, such as the skin of the neck, the skin of the armpits,
the navel, and the back parts of the knees. Moreover, if one wears a ring,
a wristwatch, or the like, one has to move it to let water reach underneath,
‘Thus, one has to perform ritual bathing so perfectly, verifying that there is
not a single body part but water has reached, for the Prophet (PBUH) said in
a hadith related by Abi Dawad and At-Tirmidhi:

“There isjanabah under every single hair, so wash the hair well and
cleanse the skin.”

@ i. PURIFICATION

Moreaver, one should by no means use water wastefully while taking a ritual
bath, Rather, one should use little water provided ritual bathing is performed
properly and perfectly as prescribed in Shari'ah. Muslims should follow the
example of the Prophet (PBUH) and rationalize their use of water during
purification, for he (PBUH) used to perform ablution with one mudd andl to
take a bath with one sd’. Also, it is obligatory for a Muslim to screen himself
while taking bath for itis impermissible to take a bath naked while being seen
by people, as stated in the hadith in which the Prophet (PBUH) says

“Verily, Allah is Modest and He likes modesty and veiling, so when
anyone of you takes 4 bath, he should screen himself (50 as not to
be seen by others).”

(Related by Abd Dawid and An-Nasi‘i)’.

‘Taking a ritual bath to purify oneself from the state of major ritual imputrity
is one of the trusts between a servant and his Lord, ‏مد‎ one should be keen on
fulfilling this obligation properly and observing its rulings carefully, so as to
perform it legally and perfectly. If one is uncertain about any of the rulings
on ritual bathing, one should consult scholars; shyness should never prevent
‘one from doing so, for Allah Himself (as stated in the Qur'an) is not shy of the
truth. If shyness prevents a Muslim from asking about his religious affairs, it
is then regarded as a condemned kind of shyness and cowardice whispered by
Satan ta keep him away from learning the religious rulings necessary for him
and fulfilling the obligations of his réligion perfectly

Purity is a serious issue, and being negligent regarding it is a grave legal
mistake, for itis a condition of the correctness of prayer which is the pillar of
Islam, We ask Allah to bestow upon us, as well as all Muslims, insight into His
religion, and to grant us sincerity in our words and deeds.

Endotes

1 Janabal: A state of major ritual impurity related to sexual discharge.

2 Muslim (783) {3/265}; see also Al-Bukharl (291) [1/512] and Muslim (781) [2/261].
3 Abdi Dawid (355) [1/180], At-Tirmidhi (604) [2/502] and An-Naséi (188) [1/118].
4 Al-Bakhart (228) and Muslim (333).

5 Tastniyai: Saying “Bismiah” (ie, In the Name of Allah.

6 Abu Dawe (248) [1/126], AtTirmidht (10) [1/178] and Tbn Maja (597) {1/332]
7 Al-Bukhdri (201) and Muslim (325).

8 Afpmad (17935) [4/306], Aba Dawid (4012) [4/196] and An-Nasd't (404) [1/218

Tayammum (Dry Ablution)

Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, has decreed purification for prayer
from both states of minor and major ritual impurity by using pure water,
which He sends down from the sky. Purification with water (when being in
either states of ritual impurity) is obligatory for a Muslim as long as water is
available. However, in some cases, either water is unavailable or one is unable
to use it due to a legal excuse, for that Allah, out of His grace and mercy,
has kindly provided a substitute for it, namely fayammum with clean earth, to
make things easy for His servants and to spare them difficulty.

Allah, Exalted be He, in His Precise, Glorious Book, the Qur‘an, says:

“O you who have believed, when you rise to [perform] prayer,
wash your faces and your forearms to the elbows and wipe over
your heads and wash your feet to the ankles. And if you are in
‏م‎ state of jandbah, then purify yourselves. But if you are ill or
on a journey or one of you comes from the place of relieving

54 1: PURIFICATION

himself or you have contacted women and do not find water,
then seek clean earth and wipe over your faces and hands with
it, Allah does not intend to make difficulty for you, but He
intends to purify you and complete His favor upon you that
‘you may be grateful” (Quran: AL-M@idah: 6)

Linguistically the word ‘tayammunn’ in Arabic means intention, and legally
{according to the Islamic rules) it means wiping over the face and hands
clean earth in a specific way. Tayammum is stated in the Noble Qur'an,
prescribed in the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition), and approved by consensus.
‘Tayammum isa privilege which Allah, out of His grace and mercy, has specified
for the purity of the nation of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) in order to make
things easy for them. In the Two Sais, itis related that the Prophet (PBUH)
said:

“Thave been granted (by Allah) five (things) which were not granted
to anyone else before me (and they are) (1) Allah made me victori-
ous by awe (by His frightening my enemies) for a distance of one
months journey. (2) The earth has been made for me (and for my
followers) a masjid (a mosque or a clean place for prayer) and a
means of purification, so anyone of my followers can pray anywhere
whenever the time of a prayer is dite...”

Tayammum is a substitute for purification with water in case one is legally
unable to use it, Purification with fayammum also enables a Muslim to perform
all the acts of worship that require ablution with water, such as prayer, tawaf
(circutmambulating the Ka’ bah), reciting the Noble Qur'an, etc. This is because
tayammum has been decreed by Allah as a legal substitute for purification with
water, The Prophet (PBUH) also said:

“And its clean carth has been made (by Allah) as a purifying means
for us."

The Cases in which Tayammum Substitutes
for Purification with Water

1- Unayailability of water; when one finds no water, whether one is at
home or on a journey: Allah, Exalted be He, says:

1. And do not find water, then seek clean earth
(Quran: Al-M@idab: 6)

Chapter 11: Tiyan (Dry Ablation) 6

2. Availability of water but insufficient; when theavailable waterisenough
only for drinking, cooking, and such necessities, and purification with
Water might cause it to run out when it is needed to quench the thirst
of one, one’ family, people, animals, etc.

3- Probability of harm; when purification with water might cause harm
due to an illness, or cause the delay of one’s recovery, or the like, for
Allah, Exaltéd be He. says:

But if you are ill... then seek clean earth,
(Qur'in: Al-M@idah: 6)

4- Inability to use water due to illness; when one is unable to use water
due to an illness that prevents one from moving to get waler and
there is nobody to help him perform ablution, so one fears to miss
performing prayer at its due time,

5: The fear of catching cold; when one fears the harm of catching cold if
one purifies oneself with water, provided one is unable to heat it, for
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

‎do not kill yourselves for one another]...”‏ فصقب"

‎(Quran: An-Nisa’: 29)

‎In any of the aforementioned cases, one can perform tayammum (instead
of ablution with water) and offer prayer. In addition, if water is enough only
to wash some of the organs of ablution, one can use it and then perform
(ayammum for the rest of the organs; Allah, Exalted be He, says:

‎“So fear Allah as much as you are able...”
(Qur'an: At-Taghabun: 16)
‘Moreover, if there is a wound that hurts if it is washed ot wiped over, one

‎can perform tayammum for that wound, and continue performing ordinary
ablution (with water) for the rest of the organs, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

‎“.., And do not kill yourselves [or one another].

‎(Qui

‎However, if wiping over the bandage of the wound with water does not hur}
or cause any harm, it is sufficient for one to wipe aver that bandage instead of
wiping overt with clean earth (ie. tayammsn),

‎An-Nisd’; 29)

66 1: PURIFICATION

It is permissible to perform tayanmnunt with clean earth, saline earth,
sand, and suchlike pure earthy stuff, according to the preponderant of the two
juristic opinions in this regard, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Then seek clean earth...” (Quran: Al-Ma‘idah: 6)

When it was time for prayer, the Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions
used to perform tayammun wherever they performed prayer (when water was
unavailable), using earth or anything of the kind; they never took clean earth
with them everywhere fo use it (for performing tayammum) in case they did
not find water,

How to Perform Tayammum

When performing tayantum, one strikes the earth with one’s hands
while parting one’ fingers. Then one wipes over one’s face with the palm of
‘one’s hands, and wipes over the hands with the palms of one’s hands, provided
both the face and the hands are wholly wiped over, It is permissible to strike
the earth twice, wiping over the face after the first strike and over the hands
after the other. However, the former way of performing tayammum is the one
authentically narrated to have been abserved by the Praphet (PBUH).

Things Nullifying Tayammnum

% Whatever minor ritual impurity nullifies ablution (such as stool,
urine, wind, ete.) nullifies fayammum.

% Whatever major ritual impurity necessitates ritual bathing (such as
jandbah, menstruation, and postanal bleeding) nullifies tayammunr.
‘The ruling here is that the substitute act (i.e. tayanumuin) takes the
same ralings on the original act (i. ablution and ritual bathing),

‎When water is found (in case tayammum is performed because of lack‏ هد
‎of water)‏

‎4 When there is no longera legal excuse such as illness and the like.

‎Ione finds neither water nor earth, oris unable to use either, itispermissible:
for one then to perform prayer with neither ablution nor tayammum, for Allah
“does not charge a soul except with that within its capacity"; one also is not
legally required to re-perform such a prayer for one, thus, (by adopting easiness)
acts in accordance with Allah’s Commands, as Allah, Exalted be He, says:

Chapiee ‏ج11‎ Tigwnrminn (Dry Ablation) 07

“So fear Allah as much as you are able..."
(Qur'an; At-Taghabun: 16)
Furthermore, the Prophet (PBUH) said:
“ff command you ta do something, then do of it as much as you can.”

Thus, we have explained to you, gentle reader, a summary of the rulings
on tayanimum, and if you are doubtful about any of them or any other rulings,
you have urgently to consult men of réligious knowledge; you should never
neglect any religious issues, especially those related to prayer, the pillar of
Islam, for the issue is really serious.

‘May Allah guide us all to felicity and righteousness regarding our words
and deeds, making our righteous deeds sincerely done for His Sake, and in
devotion ta His Honorable Face! May Allah grant our invocation, for He is
verily the Hearing and Responsive!

Endnotes

‎Tayammum: Performing dry ablution with clean earth (when water is unavailable oF‏ ل
‎ne cannot use it).‏

‎2 AL-Bukhari (335) [1/565] and Muslina (1163) (3/6),

‎3 Mustim (1165) [3/7].

‎4 Al-Bukha (338) [1/574] and Muslim (818) [2/28]

‎5 AL-Bukhari (7288) (13/308] and Muslim (6066) (8/108),

2

Removal of Impurity

‘As a Muslim is legally required to be pure from minor and major ritual
impurities in order to perform prayer, he is also commanded to purify his
body, clothes and remove any spot of impurity. Allah says

“And your clothing purify.” (Quran: Al-Muddaththir: 4)

‘The Prophet (PBUH) commanded a woman to wash the menstrual blood
from her garment’. With this in mind, it is our duty to shed more light on this
issue, namely the removal of impurity, illustrating the most important related
rulings, hoping that it may benefit Muslims. Fagihs (may Allah have mercy on
them) used to specify a separate chapter in their volumes entitled “A Chapter
on the Removal of Impurity” ie. the removal of the impurities that afflict pure
objects, such as clothes, utensils, sheets, floors, etc. Water is the basic means
used for the removal of impurity, as it is the original means of purification, as
described by Allah Who says:

70 1: PURIFIGATION

And sent down upon you from the sky, rain by which to
purify you...” (Qur'in: Al-Anfal: 11)

Kinds of Impure Objects That Must be Removed

Impurity may be linked 16 the ground, the floor, or what is connected to
them, such as walls, water basins, rocks, etc, In such a case, it is sufficient to
remove such impurity by washing it only once, ie. to pour water once until it
cavers the impure object, as the Prophet (PBUH) ordered to pour a bucket of
water over the urine of the Bedouin who had urinated in the mosque’. Such an
impurity is naturally removed when covered with rainwater o floods. So long
as the impure object is removed by pouring water, or by rainwater or floods,
it is sufficient to deem the area concerned pute, On the other hand, impurity
may not be related to the ground, the floor, or what is connected to them, such
as the impurity caused by dogs, swine, or what is related to them. In this case,
the impure object must be washed seven times, one of them with earth, for the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“When a dog licks a utensil belonging to anyone of you, let him wash
it seven times, the first of them with earth.”

(Related by Muslim and other compilers of Hadith)

Still, this ruling is not restricted to utensils; it is also applicable to clothes,
sheets, and the like, If the impure object is related to neither dogs nor swine,
such as urine, stool, blood, and the like, it has to be washed, rubbed, and
wrung out until itis completely removed, leaving neither sign nor color.

In general, things washed can be divided into three categories:

1, Squeezable things such as clothes, so they must be wrung out after
washing.

2 Unsqueezable things such as leather and the like, so they have to be
overturned during washing.

3. Things that can neither be wrung out nor overturned such things have
to be washed, scrubbed and then pressed with a heavy object until
most of their water dries.

When the filthy area on one’s body, clothes, a small place of prayer, or the
like, cannot be Tocated, the whole suspected area has to be washed until itis
certain that impurity has been removed, Still, if the impure area itself cannot
be identified, the whole object has to be washed.

Chapter 12: Removal af lmpurity 71

As fora pure material soiled with urine of an infant, itis sufficient to purify i
with sprinkling water, not washingit, asstated in the hadith narrated on the authority
‘of Umm Qays Bint Mibsan (may Allah be pleased with her), She narrated:

“I brought my baby son (who had not started eating ordinary food
then) to Allah’ Messenger (PBUH) who took him and made him
sit in his lap. The child urinated on the garment of the Prophet
(PBUH), so he (PBUH) asked for water and sprinkled it over the
soiled area without washing it.’

However, if the child is old enough to eat ordinary food, the ruling on
his/her urine is regarded as that of grown-ups, In such cases, urine is to be
removed by washing as in the case of other kinds of impurity.

There are three kinds of impure objects:

+ Major impute objects, such as those caused by dogs and the like

+ Minor impure objects, such as the urine of infants (who have not yet
started eating ordinary food)

+ Moderate impure objects, which include all other impure objects

At this point, there must be distinction between pure and impure urine
and manure of animals. Those of legally edible animals, such as camels, cows,
sheep and the like, are pure, according to a hadith related by Al-Bukhari and
Muslim stating that the Prophet (PBUH) gave permission to the people of

Uraynah to take the urine and milk of the camels of charity as medicine’, This
‘hadith implies that the urine of camels is pure, for itis impermissible to take an
impure object as medicine, Some may argue that the Prophet permitted taking
or drinking such urine as medicine only in case of necessity. To this, we say that
the Prophet (PBUH) never enjoined washing the trace of the urine of camels
before performing prayer, which shows that he did not deem it impure. It is
also stated in a sehih (authentic) hadith that the Prophet (PBUH), before the
Prophet's Mosque was built, would perform prayer at sheepfolds’ and would
command his Companions to perform prayer in such folds,’ though they had
been surely urinated in.

Shaykhul-Islim Ibn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“Purity is the original ruling on ull kinds of manure except for those
which are ruled out..."

2 1: PURIFICATION

The leftover of legally edible animals is pure and so is the leftover of
cats, according to the hadith narrated on the authority of Aba Qatadah, who
reported that the Prophet (PBUH) said about cats:

“Te (ie. a cat) isnot impure; it 8 one of tose (male or female domestic
animals) which go round among you."

(Related by At-Tirmidhi, who deems it sahih (authentic), and other
compilers of Hadith)”

In the hadith at hand, the Prophet (PBUH) resembled cats to servants who
go round among their masters waiting for their orders. Thus, deeming cats
pure as stated in the hiadith is a way of relieving Muslims from strictness and
difficulty. Some scholars maintain the same ruling on legally inedible animals
smaller than cats, such as birds and the like. They view that the leftover of
such small animals (or birds) is as pure as that of cats. On the other hand, the
manure, urine, and the remaining food of any legally inedible animals other
than cats and their likes are impure,

Thus, taking care of physical and moral purity is central in a Muslim's
life. Moral purity requires monotheism and devotion to Allah, in both
words and deeds. As for physical purity, it includes purifying oneself from
major and minor ritual impurities, as well as purification from all kinds
of tangible impurities, This is because our religion, Islam, is the religion
of purity, cleanness, and purification from both physical and spiritual
filthiness. A Muslim must always observe purity and cleanness, for the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Purification is half of faith."

So, 4 Muslim must concern himself with purity and avoid all kinds of
impurity; Allah's Messenger (PBUH) has stated that the commonest reason
for the torture in the grave is one’s being soiled with urine without purifying
oneself ''. Hence, if you are soiled with impurity, you must hasten to purify
yourself in order to keep yourself pure, especially when you want to perform
prayer, Always check your state of purity, and when you want to enter a
masque, for example, you should check the cleanness of your shoes; ifyou find
something filthy, you have to remove it and clean your shoes, and do not ever
enler a mosque with filthy shoes. May Allah guide us all to whatever pleases
Him of words and deeds.

Chaprer 12; Removal of Impurity 3

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhari (227) [1/430] and Muslim (673) (3/190)

2. Al-Bukhar (6025) (10/552] and Muslim (657) [2/181]

3 Muslin (649) [2/175]; see also Al-Bukhari (172) (1/3

4 Al-Bukhari (223) (1/425] and Mustim (663) [2/185].

5 Al-Bukhati (233) [1/436] and Muslim (4329) ]6/1541.

6 Al-Bukhari (234) [1/444] and Muslim (1174) [3/11]

7 Muslim (800) [2/271]; see also Faye Al-Quulir (4/415) and As-Sislah Ad-Da ‘fh (2902).

8 See [bn Taymiyah's Maj l-Fatawa (20/539), (21/40, 74,75, 534, 587, 613) and (25/239)
See also Al-Thhtiyarat Al-'thniyyah pt,

9 Aba Dawad (75) [1/49], At-Tirmidht (92) (1/153), An-Nasit (68) [1/58] and thn
‘Majab (367) [1/228].

10 Muslim (533) [2/95]

11 AL-Blakim (657) (1/280] and Ad-Daraquani (460) [1/136].

9),

3

Menstruation and Postnatal Bleeding

First: Menstruation

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And they ask you about menstruation. Say, ‘It is harm, so keep
away from wives during menstruation. And do not approach them
until they are pure. And when they have purified themselves, then
come to them from where Allah has ordained for you. Indeed,
Allah loves those who are constantly repentant and loves those
who purify themselves? ” (Quran: Al-Bagarah: 222)

Menstruation is the flow of a type of natural blood from the womb at
specific times. This blood is habitually discharged every month for six or seven
days, and the period can be more or less than that. In other words, a woman's
monthly period can be longer or shorter depending on the different nature of
each woman as predetermined by Allah,

26 |: PURIFICATION,

Rulings Stated in the Noble Qur’an and the Sunnah
Concerning Menstruation

Itis prohibited fora menstruating woman either to perform prayer or observe
fasting, as the Prophet (PBUH) said to Pitimah Bint Abit Hubaysh:

"Give up prayer when your menstrual period begins.”

‘Thus, the prayer and fasting of'a menstruating woman are deemed invalid,
as the Prophet (PBUH) has prohibited that,” and the Prophets prohibition
means it is invalid to perform what he has prohibited, Therefore, a woman
who performs such acts of worship in that state of impurity is considered to be
disobedient to Allah and His Messenger (PBUH),

When the menstrual period is over,a woman has to make up for the missed
days of fasting according to the juristic consensus, without making up for the
prayers she has missed. ° Xishah (may Allah be pleased with her) said:

"When we menstruated during the life of Allalts Messenger (PBUH),
we used to be commanded (by Allah's Messenger) lo make up for
the missed days of fasting, burt we were not ordered to make up for
the missed prayers.”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

it is impermissible for a menstruating woman to make fawaf (circamam-
bulating the Ka’bah), to recite the Noble Qur'an, or to stay in a mosque. In
addition, it is prohibited for her husband to have sexual intercourse with her
until her period is aver and she takes a ritual bath. Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And they ask you about menstruation. Say, ‘It is harm, so keep
away from wives during menstruation. Aud do not approach
them until they are pure. And when they have purified themselves,
then come to them from where Allah has ordained for you...”

(Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 222)
‘The phrase “..keep away from wives during menstruation” means not to

have sexual intercourse with them within that period, ‘The Prophet (PBUH)
also said:

“You can do everything (with your wives during menstruation,
except sexual intercourse (or éopulation; as in another version).”

(Related by the Group of Compilers of Hadith except Al-Bukhart)

It is permissible for the husband ofa menstruating woman to enjoy her by
kissing, touching, and the like, except for having sexual intercourse with her.

Cluapter 13) Menseruasion and Posmacal Bleeding 7

{tis impermissible for the husband of a menstruating woman to divorce
her before her menstrual period is over, as Allah says:

“O Prophet, when you [Mustims] divorce women, divorce them
at [the commencement of] their waiting period...”

(Quran:

\L-Talag: 1)

That is, when they become pure (ftom menstruation, sexual intercourse,
etc.), Also, the Prophet (PBUH) ordered a man who had divorced his wife
during her menstrual period to take her back and to divorce her (if he insisted)
when her period was over.

Once the menstrual blood stops discharging, a woman becomes pure and
her menstrual period is deemed over, She must then take a ritual bath, after
which she is allowed to do whatever acts of worship which were prohibited for
her during menstruation. Afler blood staps discharging, a woman does nol
have to be concerned about any secretion or yellowish discharge, as indicated
‏ما‎ the hadith narrated on the authority of Umm “Atiyyah (may Allah be
pleased with her) who said:

“We never considered yellowish discharge as a thing of importance
(as menstruation)?”

This hadith is related by Al-Bukhari and other compilers of Hadith,’ and it
is deemed a murfii' (Traceable) hadith, for the Prophet (PBUH) has approved
of its content.

N.B,

Ifthe discharge ofa woman in a state of menstruation or postnatal bleeding
stops before sunset, itis obligatory for her to perform both the Zur (Noon)
and the “Agr (Afternoon) Prayers of the same day, and if the discharge stops
before dawn, itis obligatory for her to perform both the Maghrib (Sunset) and
the ‘Isha’ (Night) Prayers of the same night. This is because the time of prayer
for the latter is a permissible time of prayer for the former in case of a legal
excuse, Shaykhul-Islim Ibn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“So, the majority of scholars, such as Malik, Ash-Shafi's, ancl Alimad
view that if a menstruating woman's discharge stops at the end of
daytime, itis obligatory for her to conibine performing both the Zuhr
and the ' ‏جيل‎ Prayers of the same day, and ifthe discharge stops at the
end ofthe night, iris obligatory for her ta combine performing both the

7 ‏زا‎ PURLFLCATION

Maghrib and “Ishd’ Prayers of the same night. This is because there
is a legal common specified time for every two successive prayers to
he combined due to a legal excuse. To clarify, if a woman’ discharge
stops at the end of the day, it is obligatory for her to perform the
Zubr Prayer before the “Asr Prayer, for it is stil a permissible time
to perform the Zuhr Prayer, ic. she is still at the specified period of
the Zuhr Prayer, Likewise, if that was at the end of the night, it is
obligatory for her to perform the Maghrib and the “Ishai' Prayers, as
she is still at the specified time of the Maghrib Prayer. This ruling was
narrated on the authority of ‘Abdur-Rakmnan, Abit Hurayrah, and
Thx “Abbas.”

Ifa woman starts discharging before she can perform an abligatory prayer
at its specific time, the preponderant opinion is that she is not required to
make up for such a prayer alter her discharge stops. In this respect, Shaykhul-
Islam Tbn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“The opinion of the Hanafi anid Maliki Schools is the Wiost cogent, as
they maintain that 2 woman is not required to make up for such a
‘missed prayer after her discharge stops. This is because making up for
such a prayer necessitates a new legal command, and there is none in
this case. Her delay of prayer is based ona legal excuse, so she is nut
to blame, as the delay is not out of negligence. Ifa Muslim oversleeps
or forgets to perform a prayer ‏أن‎ its due time, though it is not out
of negligence, the tine of prayer starts for him when he gets up or
remembers, and thus his prayer is not considered a way of making up
‘for amissed one.”

Second: Istihadah

Istihddah is an irregular vaginal bleeding other than menstruation,
catised by a vein called in Arabic ‘AL-'Adhil: The case of mustaftidah is
80 confusing, for the blood of menstruation resembles that of Istihadah.
The question here is: Since the mustaladah is legally considered pure, how
can she distinguish between menstruation and bleeding of istihddal: when
her bleeding continues all the time? How can she distinguish then between
menstruation and istihddaly, bearing in mind that she is legally and ritually
deemed pure in the latter case?

(Chaprer 13 Menstruation and Postal Bleeding ‏و2‎

In fact, there are three cases of the mustahddah;

1- When a woman used to have a stable, regular menstrual period (ice.
having certain duration of menstrual period) before she had istihddah.
In such ‏ل‎ case, a woman can distinguish between both states relying
on her stable menstrual period, (i.e. the bleeding that contradicts the
duration of her menstrual periad is regarded as that of istih@dah).
Thus, such a woman can wait until her usual period ends, then deem
any other bleeding as istihddah, as the Prophet (PBUH) said to Umm
Habibah in this regard:

“Remain away (from prayer) equal (to the length of time) that your
menstrual period used to prevent you, After that (after the period of
usual courses), bathe yourself and perform prayer”

(Related by Imam Muslim)”
Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) said to Fatimah Bint Aba. Hubaysh:

“This (ic. istihadat) is from a blood vein, not (usual) menstruation. So,
when your real menstrual period begins, give up performing prayer:

(Related by Al-Bukhariand Muslim)"

2+ When a wontan does not have a regular menstrual period, but her
bleeding is always distinguishable; sometimes she bleeds malodorous,
thick, and black blood (i.e, having the characteristics of menstruation
blood), and some other times she bleeds red blood which is neither
thick nor malodorous. Sich a woman is to consider the former kind
of blood as that of her menstrual period, during which she gives up
prayer and fasting, regards the other kind of blood as that of istihadah,
the period in which she can perform prayer and observe fasting, for
she is considered ritually pure in this case. The Prophet (PBUH) said
to Fitimah Bint Abi Hubaysh:

“When the menstruation blood comes, it is black blood that can be
recognized. So, when that comes, give up performing prayer, but when
a different type of blood comes, you can perform ablution and perform
prayer...”

‘This hadith is related by Aba Diwd and An-Nasi‘i, and deemed saliih
(authentic) by Ibn Hibbin and Al-Hakim'". It states that the ruling
depends on the judgment and the recognition of the woman herself.

8 I: PURIFICATION

3-When a woman has neither a regular menstrual period nor a
distinguishable kind of blood (e.g., the perplexed woman). Such a
woman must follow the prevalent womanly menstrual period (i.
average of six or seven days a month) and deem whatever discharge
after this period as istihitdah; the Prophet (PBUH) said to Hamnah
Bint Jahsh:

“This (i.e. istinddah) is a strike (i.e. harm) caused by Satan, so you
should count six or seven days for menstruation, then you should
take a ritual bath, If you see that you have purified yourself, then
petform prayer for twenty four or twenty three days and fast for this
will be sufficient for you, So, you should do as women do during their
menstrual period.”

‘This hadith is related by the Five Compilers of Haditli,”” and deemed
sahil (authentic) by At-Tirmidhi™.

‘To sum up, we can say:

+ Awoman with a stable, regular menstrual period distinguishes istihddah
according to her habit.

+ A woman with a distinguishable blood depends on her own judgment
and her ability to. distinguish between her menstruation and istiliddah.

+ A woman that has neither (a regular period nor distinguishable blood)
is to consider six or seven days a month and then take a ritual path.

‘These aforementioned rulings combine the three rules stated by the
Prophet (PBUH) concerning a woman ina state of istiddah.

Shaykhul-Iskim Ibn Taymiyah (niay Allah have mercy on him) said;

“There are six distinctive features between menstruation and istihaidah,
‘The first isthe regular, stable menstrual period, whiclt is the most cogent,
reliable distinctive sign (between menstruation: and istifyédah), as any
discharge other than that of menstruation is regarded as istihadah, The
second is the distinguishable blood; the malodorous, thick, and black
blood is considered with greater reason as menstruation blood, rather
than the red one. The thitd distinction is to follow the prevalent womanly
‘menstrual period, as the original juristic rule is that the ruling on the
inudividual follows that on the majority, These three cases are stated in the
Sunnah and by means of legal consideration. ..°"*

Chaprer 13+ Menstruation and Postnatal Bleeding. al

Then he (Ibn Taymiyah) mentioned the remaining three cases and in his
conclusion he said:

“a. The most valid opiniois to abide by the first (three) cases as they
were stated in the Sunnah, and to reject the others."

Obligatory Acts to be Observed by a Mustahadah
in Case She is Deemed Ritually Pure

1)She has to takes ritual bath when herestimated period formenstruation
ends, as mentioned above.

2) She hus to wash her vulva upon every performance of prayer, put a piece
of cotton or the like in there ‏نا‎ prevent bleeding, tie it well so as not to
fall, and perform ablution for every prayer. About a woman in a state of
istihddah, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“She should give up prayer during her menstrutal period, after which
she should take a bath and then she can perform prayer.”

This hadith is related by Abd: Dawid, fbn Majah and At-Tirmidht; the
latter maintains that itis a hasan (good) hadith’, The Prophet (PBUH) also.
said about a mustaluadah:

“Tadvise you to use cotton (to stuff the vagina with it.) forit absorbs
the blood”

Women also can use the sanitary napkins available nowadays.

‘Third: Postnatal Bleeding

The ruling on a woman in a state of postanatal bleeding is like that of a
menstruating one concerning the permissibility of the husband to enjoy her
without sexual intercourse. They also have the same rulings regarding the
prohibition of sexual intercourse, observing Fast, performing prayer, divorce,
performing fawdj,” reciting the Noble Qur'an, and staying in a mosque,
Moreover, the rulings on both cases are the same regarding the obligation of
taking a ritual bath when bleeding stops, and making up for the missed days of
Fast, but not the missed prayers, just like the menstruating women.

The womb of a woman in a state of postnatal bleeding discharges blood
during, and after giving birth, and this is the blood accumulated during
pregnancy. The maximum period of pastanatal bleeding is forty days, according,
to the majority of scholars, At-Tirmidhi states:

5 ‏بر‎ PURIFICATION

"People of religious knowledge among the Companions of the Prophet
(PBUH) and their successors uniformly agree thal a wontat in a state
of postnatal bleeding must give up prayer for forty days tnless her
bleeding stops before that; in this case, she has to take a ritual bath
and perform prayer”

So, if the bleeding of a woman in a state of postanatal bleeding stops before
the fortieth day, her period of postnatal bleeding ends, and she must have a
ritual bath, perform prayer, and practice all acts of worship that have been
prohibited for her during her postnatal bleeding period.

Ifa pregnant woman miscarries and starts discharging, and the stillborn
has reached a distinctively recognizable form, she is considered a woman in
a state of postnatal bleeding, An embryo takes about eighty-one days to three
months in order to have a distinctively recognizable shape. If the embryo is
a mere lump of flesh or a clinging clot (without a distinctively recognizable
form), the woman is not considered in a state of postnatal bleeding, even if
she starts discharging; she is not to give up prayer or fasting, and none of the
rulings on postanatal bleeding is applicable in this case,

N.B.

Ik seems suitable to thoroughly complete our discussion at this point by
mentioning that some women may take some kinds of medicine that prevents
menstrual bleeding in order to observe fasting in the month of Ramadan,
or to perform Hajj (Pilgrimage). Such medications are permissible if they
prevent blood only for a period of time, not forever, If this medicine prevents
‘menstruation forever,a wonian isnot permitted to takeit without her husband's
permission, since her ability 1o give birth is also prevented asa result of taking
this medicine.

Thus, we have briefly highlighted the rulings on menstruation, which
needs a much longer time to elaborate on, [fa Muslim is confused or in doubt
regarding any of the aforementioned rulings, or any other ones, he/she must
consult fagilts (scholars of Islamic Jurisprudence), and surely they will find
‘what eliminates their confusion and doubt, Allah willing. We invoke Allah to
grant us success,

chapter 13: Mensttuarion ail Postnatal Bleeding 83
Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhari (331) [1/84] and Muslim (751) [2/241).

2.See Al-Rukhart (304) [1/526]

3 ‏مقط للق‎ (321) [1/546] and Muslim (761) (2/2511.

4 Muslim (692) [2/202], Alymad (12339) [3/167], Aba Dawad (285) (1/129), At-Tirmidht
(2983) [5/214], An-Nasaft (287) [1/167] and ln Majah (644) (1/357),

5 Al-Bukhari (326) [1/552], An-Nasdli (366) [1/204], Ibn Majah (647) [1/359] and Abo
Dawid (307) [1/155].

6 See Ibn Taymiyah's Maja _

7 See Ibn Taymiyah's Majni'ul-Farawa [23/335]

8 Mustahadab: A woman in a state of istiidah (Lea woman having yaginal bleeding
other than menstruation).

‘9 Muslim (757) (2/249).

10 Al-Bukhéri (228) [1/432] and Muslim (751) [2/2411

11 Aba Dawod (286) [1/143], An-Nasd'i (215) [1/133], Ibn Hibbin (1348) (3/180] and
Al-Hakim (620) [1/268),

12 The Five Compilers of [Hadith are Alimad, Abo Dawad, At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasift, and
bn Majah,

13 Ahmad (27463) [6/489], Abi Dawa (287) (1/144), At-Tirmidhi (128) [1/221] and
‏مطل‎ Majah (622) [1/347]; see also An-Nas@ (354) [1/201].

14 See Tbn Taymiyahis Maja ‏فالا شامع سان"‎ (21/630).

15 Ibid.

16 Hasan (good) hadith isa hadith whose chain of transmission islinked to the narration of
aan authority with weak exactitude, and the hadith is free from eccentricity or blemish

17 Abi Dawad (297) [1/151], At-Tirmidhi (126) [1/220] and Tn Maja (625) (1/346).

18 Ahmad (27463) [6/439], Abo Dawid (287) [1/144], At-Tirmidhé (128) [1/221] and
bn Majah (622) [1/344

19 Tawaf Circumambulating the Ka’ bah

20 At-Tinmidhi (1/258).

IT:PRAR

Obligation of the Five Prayers

Prayer is the most obligatory of the Five Pillars of Islam next to the Two
‘Testifications of Faith,’ and it was ordained in the best and the most perfect
way for an act of worship. Prayer includes many of the acts of worship, like the
remembrance of Allah, the recitation of the Qur'an, standing humbly before
Almighty Allah, bowing, prostration, supplication, and takbir’, Prayer is also
the head of the physical acts of worship, of which none of the religions brought
by any of Allah's Messengers is void. Prayer, unlike all other acts of worship,
was enjoined by Allah on His Messenger, Muhammad (PBUH), the Seal of
Messengers, on the Night of Al-Mi'rdj (Muhammad’s Ascension)’, This is an
indication of its greatness, a confirmation of its being obligatory, and a sign
of its high status in the Sight of Allah. There are many ftadiths indicating the
virtues of prayer and showing its being obligatory on all Muslim individuals.
‘The fact that prayer is an obligatory act of worship is primarily known in Islam.
So, whoever denies this fact is considered to be an apostate; such a person is to
be asked to recant, and if he does not, he is to be killed as unanimously agreed
upon by Muslim scholars,

88 ‏نلا‎ PRAYER

Linguistically, prayer means invocation; Allal), Exalted be He, commands
the Prophet to ‘pray’ for the believers, saying:

‘<.And invoke [Allal’s blessings] upon them
(Qu

According to the Shari'ah (Islamic Law), prayer is defined as a special kind
of sayings and deeds beginning with takbir and ending with tastim’. Ibis called
‘prayer’ because it includes invocation; during prayer, the worshipper is in a
state of invocation through worshipping Allah, praising Him, or supplicating
Him for something. This is why it is called ‘prayer! Prayer was decreed by
Allah on the Night of AI-Mi ‘raj, before Hijrah,’ as five prayers to be performed
everyday and night at specified times by every legally accountable Muslim.
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

-Tawbah: 103)

Indeed, prayer has been decreed upon the believers a decree
of specified times." (Qur'an: An-Nisa’: 103)
‘Those prayer times are the times pointed out by Allab’s Messenger (PBUH)
through his words or his deeds (i.e, through the Sunnah), Allah, Exalted be He,
also says:

“And they were not commanded except to worship Allah [being]
sincere to Him in religion, inclining to truth, and to establish
prayer.” (Qur'in: Al-Bayyinah: 5)

In addition, in many yerses of Allah's Glorious Book (the Quin), Allah,

Exalted be He, sayss

“And establish prayer. Al-Bagarah: 43)

(Qu

Allah also says:

*{0 Muhammad}, tell My servants who have believed to establish
prayer..2” (Qur'an: Ibrahim: 31)

Moreover, Allah, Glorified be He, says:

“So exalted is Allah when you reach the evening and when you
reach the morning. And to Him is [due all] praise throughout the
heavens and the earth, And [exalted is He] at night and when
you are at noon." (Qur'an; Ar-Ram: 17-18)

Therefore, itis obligatory for whoever reaches one of the specified times
of prayer, being adult and sane, to perform it, excluding women in a state
of menstruation or postnatal bleeding, Scholars unanimously agree that jt

‘Chaprer 1: Obligation of the Five Prayers ”

is not obligatory for women in the aforesaid two cases to perform prayer,
nor to perform it later after purification, On the other hand, whoever is
in a state of unconsciousness, as in sleeping, fainting, and the like; has to
perform the prayer(s) he/she has missed when he/she wakes up. Allah,
Exalted be He, says:

“<.,And establish prayer for My remembrance.”
(Qura

‘Taha: 14)
Inaddition, the Prophet (PBUH) sa

“Whoever misses a prayer out of oversleeping or forgetfulness let
him perform it once he remembers it.”

A guardian of a child has to command him to perform prayer when the
child reaches the age of seven, though it is still not obligatory for him, But the
purpose is to make the child interested in prayer and used to it. Thus, the child
and his guardian will be rewarded when the former performs prayer, for Allah,
Exalted be He, says in general:

“Whoever comes [on the Day of Judgment] with a good deed will
have ten fimes the like thereof [to his credit

نه "مهلف ‎(Qurin;‏

:160(

Moreover, when a woman showed the Prophet (PBUH) a young boy who
was with her saying:

"Does this one have to perform Hajj (Pilgrimage), O Messenger of
Allah?” He (PBUH) replied, "Yes, and you will have a reward,

So, a guardian has to teach his child how to perform prayer and how to
perform ablution for it. A guardian has also to beat his child if the latter is ten
years old and neglects prayer, for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Command your éhildren to perform prayer when they become seven
years old, and beat them for (not performing) it (.e. prayer) when
they become ten years old; and arrange their beds (so that boys and
airls sleep) separately.”

(Related by Ahmad, At-Tirmidhi, Aba Dawid, and other compilers
of Hadith)

Itisalso impermissible to perform prayer later than its due time, for Allah,
Exalted be He, says:

mH Ui: PRAYER

“vw Indeed prayer has been decreed upon the believers a decree of
specified times.” (Qur'an; An-Nisa’: 103)

The meaning is that prayer has specified times at which it has to be
performed. A prayer is impermissible to be deferred except for those who
would like to combine it with the following prayer, provided that the said
ed with another, and that the case is among those in
which combining two prayers is permissible as well as the person being one
who is allowed to combine prayers in this way. As for delaying performing
a night prayer until the morning, a day prayer until the night, or the Fajr
(Dawn) Prayer until sunrise, it is by no means permissible, whether the
reason isa state of major ritual impurity, minor ritual impurity, or anything
else. Rather, one has to perform them at their specified times, regardless
of one’s state.

prayer can he com

A person might happen to be detained in hospital where he is confined
to a bed that he cannot leave to pray, or cannot change the impure clothes
he wears, or cannot find pure earth to perform tayammum (dry ablution)
instead of ablution to pray. Some ignorant people in this case defer prayer
on the pretext that they will perform it later when possible. In fact, this is a
grave mistake and a meané of missing prayer whose reason is unawareness
and lack of juristic consultation. What they have to do is to perform: prayer
avits specified times regardless of their states. Their prayer will be sufficient,
even if it is performed without fayammum or in impure clothes; Allah,
Exalted be He, says:

“So fear Allah as much as you are able...”
(Qur'an: At-Taghdbun: 16)

Even if they pray without facing the qiblah,’ provided they are unable to
face it, their prayer is still valid.

As regards those who abandon performing prayer out of negligence
or slackness, even if without denying the fact that it is obligatory, they are
considered disbelievers according to the more valid of the two juristic opinions
in this regard. This is whar is indicated in the prophetic hadiths, like the one
related by Imam Muslim that states:

“Verily, between man and between polytheism and disbelief is the
negligence of prayer.”"

Chaprer 1: Obligation of the Five Prayers 0

‘There are many other legal proofs. Those who abandon prayer are to be
pointed ont among people so as to be ashamed of themselves and perform
prayer. In addition to this, they are to be discarded to the extent that they
are not to he greeted and their invitations are not to be accepted until they
repent and establish regular prayer: This is because prayer is the basic pillar
of religion, and the main difference between a Muslim and a disbeliever. So,
whatever good deeds one might do are useless if one is negligent of prayer, we
ask Allah for safety:

Endnotes

1 The Two Testifications of Faith: Saying, "I testify vhat there Is no deity but Allah and
that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah"

2 Takbir: Saying, “AUl@hu-AKbar” (i.e, Allah is the Greatest),

3 See Al-Bukhari (7517) [137583] and Mustim (409) [384]

44 Talim Saying the final Salamasin prayer (saying, “As-saldmue ‘alaykun wa Rabnatullah
Le. "Peace be upon you, and the mercy of Allah") when concluding prayer

5 Hijrah: The Prophet’ Immigration to Medina.

6 Al-Bukhari (597) [3/93] and Muslim (1566) [3/198]

7 Muslim (3240) (5/103]

8 Aboiad (6753) [2/248], Abd Dawud (495) [1/239], Al-Hakim (951) [1/378]; see alsa
At-Tirmidhi (407) [2/259}, bn Khuzaymah (1002) [2/102].

9 The qiblah: ‘the direction of prayer, namely towards the Ka’ bah,

10 Muslim (243) |2/259(

Prayer Call )42042:( and
Immediate Prayer Call (Iqgémah)

The Five Prayers have specified times, before which it is impermissible
to perform them. Many people (at the time of the Prophet) did not know the
exact time of prayer, or were so busy that they did not pay attention to the time
of prayer. Therefore, Allah decreed the prayer call (adhdn) to notify them of
its due times. The prayer call was decreed in the first year after the Prophet's
Immigration to Medina, The reason behind its prescription was that it was
difficult for the Muslims then to observe the exact times of prayer. Therefore,
they conferred and agreed to have a certain sign to gather them for prayer.
‘Afterwards, the wording of the prayer call was revealed to * Abdullah Ibn Zayd
in a vision, which was confirmed by the Divine Revelation;' Allah, Exalted be
He, revealed:

54 I PRAYER,

“Oyou who have believed, when [theadhén] iscalled for the prayer
on the day of Jumu'ah [Friday], then proceed to the remembrance
of Allah and leave trade...” (Quran: Al-Jumu'ah: 9)

Allah also revealed:

“And when you call to prayer...» (Quran; Al-Ma'idah: 58)

Each of the prayer call (adhdn) and the immediate prayer call (iqamah) has
special wording, which express creed and faith. Both of them begin with takbir
(saying, “Allélite-Akbar" ie, “Allah is the Greatest") which isa sign of glorification
of Allah, Almighty and Ever-Majestic be He. Then the Two Testifications of
Faith are to be declared,’ as an acknowledgement of the Oneness of Allah,
Exalted and Glorified be He, and the prophethood of our Prophet, Muhammad
(PBUH), After that, a call for prayer, the basic pillar of Islam, is pronounced,’
following which a call for prosperity is pronounced,’ inviting all Muslims for
prayer, the way to felicity and eternal delights. Finally, the wording of the prayer
call ends with tkbir, which is the best way of the remembrance of Allah, and
the word of sincerity of faith, whose greatness and Virtues outweigh the seven
heavens with all beings therein (excluding Allah) and the seven earths with all
beings therein,

There are many Hadiths stating the great virtues of the prayer call, and
indicating that prayer callers (ie., muezzins) will have the longest necks of
all people on the Day of Judgment”. Both the prayer call (adan) and the
immediate prayer call (iq@mah) are collective duties,’ and they are among the
apparent Islamic rituals. They are decreed on men, residents or travelers, at
each of the five prayer times, The town whose people abandon the prayer call
and the immediate prayer call are ta be fought, because they are among the
manifest Islamic rituals, so it is impermissible to abandon them.

‘The basic characteristic of a prayer caller is to be a loud-voiced man, so
as to be more convenient to call for prayer informing people at its due times.
He has also to be an honest man, because he is considered to be an entrusted
person, as his calling for prayer decides the times when people pray, fast, and
break their fasting. A prayer caller has also to be acquainted with the due times
of prayer to call for each prayer once its time is due

‘The prayer call consists of fifteen sentences, as if used ta be made by
Bilal during the lifetime of Allah's Messenger (PBUH), It is desirable to be
deliberate while calling for prayer, without lengthening. It is also desirable

Chapter 2: Prayer Call (Adan and Linmediate Prayer Call Uigdmnah) 95

to pause after pronouncing each sentence of the prayer call, and to face the
giblah while calling, inserting one’s index fingers into one’s ears. In addition,
it is desirable, while calling for prayer, to turn to the right when saying, “Hayy
‘alas-Saléh’, i.e. “Come to prayer?’ and to the left when saying, "Hayy ‘alal-
Falah”, i.e. “Come to success!” When calling for the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer, after
saying "Hayy ‘alal-Falah” twice, it is desirable for the prayer caller to call
saying, “As-Saldtu Khayrun minan-Naim’, i. “Prayer is better than sleep,’
twice, That was commanded by the Prophet (PBUH),’ ax dawn is a time
when people are often asleep. It is impermissible for the prayer caller ‏ما‎ add.
any words to the original wording of the prayer call before or after calling,
as this is considered to be a bid’ ah (i.e. a matter innovated in religion).
Whatever is pronounced other than the wording of the prayer call approved
of by Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) is regarded asa prohibited and an innovated
act in religion. For example, uttering words of tasbif,” chanting, invoking
Allah; or conferring Allah's peace and blessings upon the Prophet loudly
before or after calling for prayer, all are nothing but bid’ ahs. These acts are
prohibited, and one must express one’s disapproval of whoever follows any of
them (while calling for prayer).

Itis not right ‏ها‎ call for a prayer before its due time, because the prayer call
is to notify people of the exact time of prayer, but an early prayer call causes
confusion instead, Still, it is permissible to call for the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer
earlier than its due time, in order to allow people to get ready for prayer (in
that late hour). But there must be another prayer call at the exact time of the
Fajr Prayer, so as to acquaint people with the due time of prayer and fasting (as
fasting starts from the Fajr).

When listening to the prayer call, it is an act of the Sunnah (Prophetic
Tradition) to repeat what the prayer caller is saying while calling. Also, when
the prayer caller calls saying, “Hayy ‘alas-Salah” (Come to prayer) and "Hayy
‘alal-Falay” (Come to success), one is to say, “Li Hawla wala Quwwata ila
Billdh,” i.e, “There is neither might nor power but in Allah" Afterwards, when
the prayer caller finishes calling for prayer, one is to say:

"O Allah, Lord of this perfect call and of this established prayer,
grant Muhammad the place of Al-Wasilah’ and the most virtuous
place, and raise him to a praiseworthy position (in Paradise) that
‘you have promised him (of)."

Following the prayer call, it is prohibited for one to leave the mosque
without having a legal excuse or an intention to return soon. In addition, ifone

03 (i: PRAYER:

is sitting while the prayer caller is calling for prayer, one should not stand, but
‘one should rather be patient until the prayer caller finishes calling so as not
to resemble Satan (who flees when hearing the prayer call), Once ‏ه‎ Muslim
hears the prayer call, he has to head for the mosque (to offer prayer), leaving all
worldly affairs. Allah, Exalted be He, says;

“(Such niches are] in houses [i.e. mosques] which Allah has
ordered to be raised and that His Name be mentioned [i.e. praised]
therein; exalting Him within them in the morning and the evenings
~ fare] men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the
remembrance of Allah and performance of prayer and giving of
Zaki, They fear a Dayin which the hearts and eyes will fearfully)
thir about...” (Qur'an: An-Nir: 36-37)

The immediate prayer call is in eleven sentences that are uttered quickly,
There is no need to be slow in pronouncing them because they are merely
addressed for those already present for prayers. Itis preferable that the person
‘who calls for prayer is the same one who undertakes the immediate prayer
call. He should only perform the latter by permission of the mm (ie, leader
in prayer) who is the one who determines the commencement of the prayer,

Endnotes

1 Abii Dawid (499) [1/241], At-Tirmidhi (189) (1/358) and thn Majah (706) [1/389]; see
also Muslim (835) [2/298]

2 Sayings “Asihadi alld ildha illallth (twice) Ashhadu anna Mubammadar-Rasilullah
(tovice)"ie. “testify that there is no deity but Allah (twice). I testify that Muhammad.
is the Messenger of Allah (twice).”

3 Saying, "Hayy ‘alas-Salah” (twice), ie: “Come to prayer”

4 Saying, “Hayy ‘alal-Falah”,i¢."Come to prosperity”

5 Muslim (850) (2/311

6 Collective duty: A religious duty which if sufficiently fulfilled by some Muslims, the
rest will not be accountable for i asin obligation, and ‏)أ‎ becomes an act of the Sunnah
for them

7 Abi Dawid (500) [1/242], ‏مادا‎ (632) [1/334], AtTiemidhi (198) [1/378] ‏همه‎ Joa.
Miajah (715) [1/396],

8 Tasbilt: Saying, “Subla-Allah” (ie. Glory be to Alla),

9 Al-Wasilaby Itis the greatest and the most superior degree in Paradise reserved for only
‘one of Allah servants, and Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) hopes to be that one. So, he
(PBUH) asks everyone of his nation to pray to Allah following each prayer call (adhd)
to grant him that place, Al- Waste,

Prayer Conditions

The conditions of prayer are those on which the validity of prayer depends
so long as one is able to fulfill them, Prayer has certain conditions if they, or
any of them, are neglected, prayer is nullified. Among those conditions are
the following:

The first condition: To be performed at its specified times; Allah,
Exalted be He, says:
“Indeed, prayer has been decreed upon the believers a decree of
specified times? (Qur'an: An-Nisa’: 103)
That is to say, prayer is decreed to be performed at certain times specified
by Allah, Glorified be He. Thus, Muslim scholars uniformly agree that prayer
has five specified times and it is insufficient to perform a prayer before its due
time. The Commander of the Believers, “Umar Ibnul-Khattab (may Allah be
pleased with him) said:

“Prayer has specified times stipulated by Allah, without observing
which prayer is invalid.”

5 Ms PRAVER.

So, prayer is obligatory on a Muslim once its due time begins, for Allah,
Exalted be He, says:
“Establish prayer at the decline of the sun,.."
(Qur'an: Al-Isra': 78)
Moreover, scholars Uniformly agree on the great virtues of performing

prayer atits specified times in general according to the verse in which Allah,
Exalted be He, says:

(Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 148)

‘0 race to [all that is] goo
Allah, Exalted be He, also says:

“And hasten to forgiveness from your Lord,
(Quran; Alu ‘Imran: 133)

Furthermore, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And the foremost, the foremost. Those are the ones brought
near [to Allah].” (Qur'an: A-Waqi ah: 10-11)

In addition, it is related in the Two Sabihs that when the Prophet (PBUH)
‘was asked about the dearest deed in the Sight of Allah, he replied;

“Performing prayers at their specified times.”"
Further, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Maintain with care the [obligatory] prayers.”
(Quran: Al-Baqarah: 238)

And performing prayer at its specified times is a sign of such care enjoined
by Allah,

The obligatory prayers are five ones to be performed daily, and each has a
due time of performance specified by Allah so that it suits the life conditions of
His servants; that is, times of prayer are specified in a way that does not hinder
people from managing their worldly affairs, but helps them manage such
affairs. In addition, prayer is a way through which people's sins are forgivery,
the Prophet (PBUH) has likened prayer to a river in which a Muslim takes a
bath five times a day, sana trace of dirt would be left on him~

‘Those specified times of prayer are as follows:

1- The Zubr (Noon) Prayer: Its specified time begins when the sun
passes its meridian and declines westward, and this is what is indicated
in the verse in which Allah, Exalted be He, says:

Chapter 3: Prayer Conditions 7

“Establish prayer at the decline of the ‏".مه‎ (Qur'an: Al-Isri’: 78)

Such a decline of the sun is known when the shadow of an object
becomes eastward instead of westward, and this specified time for
the Zuhr (Noon) Prayer continues until an object’s shadow becomes
approximately the same ih length as the object itself and ends at this
time, for the Prophet (PBUH) said, as related by Imam Muslim:

“The time of the Zuhr-(Noon) Prayer is when the sun passes the
meridian and a mani shadow is the same (length) as his height."

Itis desirable to hasten performing the Zuhr Prayer at the beginning
of its specified time unless it is extremely hot, in which case it is
desirable to delay performing it until it is cooler, as the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“In a very hot weather, delay the Zuhr Prayer until it becomes (a bit)
cooler, because the severity of heat is from the raging of the Hell-fire,”"

The ‘Agr (Afternoon) Prayer: It begins when the time of the Zuhr
(Noon) Prayer ends, ie. when the shadow of an object is of the same
length as the object itself, and continues until the sun sets according
o the valid of the two juristic opinions in this regard. Itis an act of the
‘Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) to hasten performing the ‘Asr Prayer at
the beginning of its due time, as itis the Middle Prayer whose virtues
are stated by Allah, Exalted be, when He says:

هن

“Maintain with care the [obligatory] prayers and [in particular]
the middle [i.e. "Asr] prayer...” (Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 238)

Itis also stated in the Sunnah that itis the ‘Agr (Afternoon) Prayer

he

The Maghrib (Sunset) Prayer: The time of the Maghrib Prayer
begins when the sun sets; i.e. when it completely disappears so that
it can by no means be seen, neither from a plane hill nor a mountain:
The time of the sunset is known by the coming of the darkness of
night from eastward; the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“When night falls from this side and the day vanishes from that side
and the sun sets, then the fasting person should break his fast.”*

‘The time of the Maghrib Prayer lasts until the red twilight ends,
and it is an act of the Suntiah to hasten performing the Maghrib at
the beginning of its due time, according to the hadith related and

Ul: PRAVER,

deemed sahih (Le. authentic) by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of
Salamah, which states that the Prophet (PBUH) used to perform
the Maghri (Sunset) Prayer when the sun disappeared from the
horizon’, At-Tirmidhi commented, “This is also the opinion of
most of the people of religious knowledge of the Prophet's Companions
and their follow

The ‘Isha’ (Night) Prayer: The time specified for this prayer begins
when the time of the Maghrib Prayer (i.e. the time during which it is
performed) ends, Thus, the time of the ‘Isha’ Prayer begins when the
red twilight disappears and continues up to halfof the night. This time
is divided into two parts;an optional time and an obligatory time. The
optional time continues until the third of the night, and the obligatory
time begins from the third of the night until the second (real) dawn. It
is desirable to delay performing the ‘Isha’ Prayer until the end of the
preferred time for it, which is the third of the night, if possible, Yet, if
this might cause difficulty to the Muslims, itis then desirable to hasten
performing it at the beginning of its due time so as to avoid difficulty.
On the other hand, itis detestable to sleep before the ‘Isha’ Prayer so
as not to oversleep and miss it. Moreover, it is letestable for people to
gather and chat following performing the “Isha” Prayer so that they
can sleep early and get up early. So, a Muslim should sleep following
performing the ‘Isha’ Prayer so as to be able to get up early and offer
‘Tahajjud* and then the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer actively, as the Prophet
(PBUH) disliked sleeping before the ‘Isha’ Prayer and talking after
(performing) it’. Thus, itis detestable to stay up after the ‘Isha’ unless
one has something useful or urgent to do.

ay

5+ The Fajr (Dawn) Prayer: The time of the Fajr Prayer begins with
the true dawn and lasts until sunrise, and it is desirable to. hasten
performing it provided that the rise of the true dawn is certain.

‘These are the specified times of the five obligatory prayers decreed by

100

Allah, so you should, gentle Muslim reader, perform them at their specified

es without delay, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:
‏وك"‎ woe to those whe pray - [but] who are heedless of their prayer.”
(Qur'an: Al-Ma’ ‏بصن‎ 4-5)

‘Thats, woe to those who perform prayer but delay it and do not perform

tim

it tits specified times. Allah, Exalted be He, also says:

Chaprer 3: Prayer Conditions Wi

“But there came after them successors [i.e. later generations] who
neglected prayer and pursued desires; so they are going to meet
evil - except those who repent...” (Qur'an: Maryam: 59-60)

‘The phrase “neglected prayer” in the above verse means that those people
used to neglect observing prayer at ils specified times. In brief, Allah refers
to those who do not perform prayer at its due times as “heedless” people who
“neglect” prayer, and He states that such people will be severely tortured in
the Hellfire and that ‏..؟‎ they are going to meet evil.” If one forgets performing
one of the five obligatary prayers or misses it out of oversleeping, one has 6
perform it once one remembers or gets up; the Prophet (PBUH) said:

"If anyone forgets a prayer or misses it because of sleeping,
tre should perform it when he remembers it; there is no other
expiation for it.”

Thus, it is obligatory to make up for a missed prayer as soon as possible.
One should by no means wait to perform a missed prayer with the same prayer
‘on the following day, as mistakenly done by some people. Also, one should not
put off performing a missed prayer until such time when its regular time is
overdue, but one has to perform it immediately instead,

The second condition (of prayer): To conceal one’s ‘awrah" while
performing prayer, ie. to screen the parts of the body that have to be covered,
as exposing them is offensive or causes one embarrassment; Allah, Exalted be
He, says:

“O children of Adam, take your adornment [i,e. wear your cloth-
ing] at every masjid...” (Quran: ALA ‘rab 31)

“Masjid” means a place for prayer or a mosque, so the meaning of the verse
is that people have to wear their clothing that conceal their private parts upon
each prayer. Moreover, in the hadith related and deemed fiasan (good) by At-
Tirmidhi, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Allah does not accept the prayer of a woman who has reached
puberty unless she wears a veil!”
Ibn 'Abdul-Barr said:

“Scholars uniformly agree on the invalidity of the prayer of one who
refrains from clothing, and performs it naked though able fo clothe
oneself and conceal one’ ‘awrah?”

102 I: PRAYER

So, il is indisputable that it is obligatory to conceal one’ “awrah during
prayer, in the presence of people, ar even while being alone according to the
valid opinion implied in the hadith narrated on the authority of Mu’ awiyah
Tn Haydah Al-Qushayri who reported:

“Allalis Messenger (PBUH) said to me, ‘Conceal your ‘awrah (private
parts) except from your wife and from whom your right hands
possess (i.e, slave-girls)' Isaid, 'O Messenger of Allak! What (should
we do) if the people are assembled together?" He (PBUH) said, ‘fit
is within your power that no one looks at it (i.e. your ‘avrah), then
let no one look at it then said, 0 Messenger of Allah! What if one
is alone (ie. should one conceal it tao)?" He (PBUH) replied, “Allah
is more entitled to be shown bashfulness than people’ ”

(Related by Abo Dawid and other compilers of Hadith)"*

Allah also refers to exposing ‘awrah as an act of ‘immorality’ as the
unbelievers used to circumambulate the House (ie, the Ka' bah) while being
naked, claiming that it was an act of religion; Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And when they commit an immorality, they say, ‘We found our
fathers doing it and Allah has ordered 1s to do it? Say, ‘Indeed,
Allah does not order immorality..’" — (Quin: Al-A’raf: 28)

In the light of the above, exposing one’s ‘awrah and looking at it leads
tograve evil and such an actis a means ofimmorality and debauchery: We
see in those dissolute societies nowadays that their honor is lost and their
morals are gone due to exposing their ‘awrah, which led to the spread
of vice and the disappearance of virtue among them. On the other hand,
concealing ‘awrah isa means of maintaining virtue, and this ts why Satan
is keen to tempt people to expose their ‘awrah. Therefore, Allah warns us
against Satan, saying:

"© children of Adam, let not Satan tempt you as he removed

your parents from Paradise stripping them of their clothing to

show them their private parts...” (Quran: AL-A' raf: 27)

So, exposing ‘awrah is a satanic scheme in which many commiunities are
entrapped nowadays, calling it fashion and modernity, As a result, there have
become strip clubs, and women have become sa dissolute that they expose
their bodies before men so shamelessly.

Chaprer3: Prayer Conditions 103

So, you should know, gentle Muslim reader; that ‘awrali (private parts) has
to be concealed in a way that makes stich parts unnoticeable; Allah, Exalted
be He, says:

“O children of Adam, We have bestowed upon you clothing to
conceal your private parts...” (Quran: Al-A raf: 26)

‘Thus, concealing one's *awrah (private parts) with clothing is a necessary,
obligatory act,

i ‏مآ‎ Aba Talib narrated

‘A man’s ‘anyrah is from his navel to his knees, for’
that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Do not unveil your thigh, and do not look at the thigh of the living
or the dead”

(Related by Aba Dawad and Iho Majah)
In another hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Cover your thigh for a mans thigh is a part of his ‘awrali (private
atts)!"

(Related by Malik, Ahmad, and At-Tirmidht who deemed it a hasan
(good) hadith)

In spite of all the above, regrettably, we find that a lot of men nowadays
when practicing certain sports expose their bodies and cover only their sexual
organs, which is an explicit contradiction to the aforementioned religious
texts. Such men have to beware of that, and to abide by the teachings of their
religion, refraining from whatever contradicts them.

As for a woman, all her body is cansidered “awrah, as the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

‘A woman is (regarded as) ‘awralt (i.e, she has to be concealed just
like ‘awrah)?”

This hadith is deemed sakih (aurthentic) by At-Tirmidhi. Also, itis narrated
on the authority of Umm Salamah that she asked the Prophet (PBUH) saying:

“Can a woman perform prayer while wearing a dir’ (a long upper
garment) and a veil but not wearing a loincloth? He (PBUH) replied,
“(Yes,) only if the dir’ is long enough to cover her instep.”"”

(Related by Aba Dawad)

104 Ue PRAYER

‘Moreover, Abi Dawid, At-Tirmidhi, and Tbn Majah narrated on theauthority
of 'ishah (may Allah be pleased with her) that the Prophet (PBUH) said:
“Allah does not accept the prayer of a woman who has reached
puberty unless she wears a veil.”"

At-Tirmidhi commented:
"The opinion of scholars is that ifa woman who has reached puberty

performs prayer whilew certain part of her ‘awrah is exposed, her
prayer is deemed invalid”

In addition to the aforesaid hadiths concerning a woman's “awrah, Allah,
Exalted be He, says:
‘.. And not display theiradornment exceptthat which [necessarily]
appears thereof and to wrap [a portion of] their head-covers over
their chests and not display their adornment [i.e. beauty] except
to their husbands...” (Qur'an: An-Nary31)

Allah, Exalted be He, also says:

“O Prophet, tell your wives and your daughters and the women
of the believers to bring down aver themselves (part) of their
outer garments...” (Quran: Al-Ahzab: 59)

‘Moreover, Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“And when you ask [his wives] for something, ask them from
behind a partition. (Quran: Al-Ahzab: 53)

For more illustration, “Aishah (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated:

“Men would pass by us when we accompanied the Messenger (PBUH)
While we were in the state of ihirdm (a state of ritual consecration
during Hajj or "Umerah), When they came by us, every one of us
would let down her veil over her face, and when they had passed ont
we would uncover our faces.””

‘The aforesaid texts as well as their likes in the Quran and the Sunnah
(Prophetic Tradition), which are so numerous, stress that everything in a
woman is considered “awrah that has to be concealed in the presence of men
who are ajnabis (foreign, marriageable males); nothing of a woman's body is
permissible to be exposed in the presence of an ajnabi (a foreign, marriageable
sale), whether in prayer orelsewhere. However, if'a woman performs prayer
in a place void of ajnabis, itis permissible for her to uncaver her face, as itis
not regarded as ‘avrah during prayer provided there is no ajnabi to see her
face, as it is impermissible in this case,

Chapter 5: Prayer Conditions 10s

is really shameful, upsetting and disappointing that many of the Muslin
females of this modern age have reached a dangerous extent of dissoluteness
and debauchery; they compete in exposing their bodies and wear see-through
clothing and the like, imitating the unbelieving and apostate females, There is
neither might hor power except in Allah, the Most High, and the Most Great!

‘Allah, Exalted be He, does not only command concealing “awrah during
prayer, but He also enjoins Muslims to appear well when going to perform
prayer; Allah, Exalted be He, says:

"0 children of Adam, take your adornment [ie, wear your
clothing] at every masjid.,.” (Qur’in: AL-A'raf: 31)

This means that Allah commands His servants to wear their best, cleanest,
and most beautiful clothing when heading for mosques to perform prayer, as,
they will stand in prayer between the Hands of Allah, Blessed and Exalted be
He. Therefore, one has to appear perfectly well, physically and spiritually, to
stand before Almighty Allah in prayer.

The third condition (of prayer): To avoid impurity. One of the
conditions of the validity of prayer is the avoidance of impurity, and being in
a perlect state of purity, whether related to one’s body, clothing, or the place
in which one stands to perform prayer. Impurity here means a special kind of
filthy materials that makes it impermissible for one to perform prayer, such
as the flesh of dead animals, blood, wine, urine, and stool, Allah, Exalted be
He, says:

“And your clothing purify” (Qur'an; Al-Muddaththir:
Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Purify yourselves from urine, for most of the torture in the grave
is because of it”

He (PBUH) also commanded a woman to wash her garment and purify it
from menstruation blood before performing prayer in it,” and enjoined scrubbing
the soles of one’s shoes to clean them before performing prayer wearing them”, ‘The
Prophet (PBUH) ordered his Companions to pour a bucket of water over the
place in the mosque where a Bedouin had urinated. Such incidents, as well as
many others, are proofs of the necessity of avoiding impurity while performing
prayer, as prayer is invalid if there is something impure afflicting one’ body,
ones clothing, or the place in which one performs prayer; the same ruling is
applicable in case one is carrying something impure.

106 ‏زا‎ PRAYER

Ifone notices something impure on one’s body or clothing after performing
prayer, one’s prayer is deemed valid so long as one has not been aware of it,
Likewise, if one has been aware of impurity and has forgotten to remove i
before performing prayer, one’ prayer is deemed valid according to the sound
juristic opinion in this regard. However, ifimpurity is noticed during prayer and
‘one is able to remove it without making much movement during prayer (such
as taking off one’s impure shoes or turban), one is to remove it and continue
performing prayer. But if unable to remove it, one’s prayer is deemed invalid.

Prayer is invalid if performed ata graveyard, except for the Funeral Prayer,
for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

"The whole earth is a masjid (a place for prayer) except bathrooms
and graveyards.”
This hadith is related by the Five Compilers of Hadith except An-Nasii,

and was deemed sahih (authentic) by At-Tirmidhi”. The Prophet (PBUH)
also said:

“Do not face groves in prayer and do Hot sit on them.”

(Related by the Group of Compilers of Hadith except Al-Bukhari)”
‘The Prophet (PBUH) said:

"Do not take graves as masjids

places for prayer):
The reason for such prohibition is not just to avoid impurity, but for fear
that graves might be taken as sacred places or idols to be worshipped by people.
‘That is, the prohibition of performing prayer at graveyards is intended toavoid
worshipping their dwellers (the dead) afterwards, Still, the Funeral Prayer is an
mn of that ruling, as itis permissible to be performed at graves, as done

by the Prophet (PBUH),” which makes the Prophetic prohibition restricted to
certain cases. So, whatever is related to graves is prohibited to perform prayer
therein, such as graves themselves, graveyards, etc.

Shaykhul-Islim Ibn Taymiyah said:

“The lmdms agree that it is impermissible to build a mosque over a
grave, or to bury a dead person in a mosque. if the mosque has been
built before the grave, the grave inside has to be leveled to the mosque
‘floor, or to be disentombed if it has been recently built. However, if
the mosque has been built ajter the grave, we should either pull down
the mosque or pull down whatever indicates that the place is a grave
rather than a mosque, for tis prohibited to offer prayer at a mosque
built ona grave, be It obligatory or supererogatory prayer."

Chapter 3: ‏تعرس"‎ Conditions 107

On the other hand, prayer is invalid if performed at a mosque whose
qiblah” faces a grave, for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Do not face graves in prayer”

Itis also prohibited to perform prayer in a toilet, as they are places specified
for urination and defecation and connected with impurity; since the Lawgiver””
prohibits mentioning the Name of Allah in a toilet, then, with greater reason,
itis prohibited to perform prayer in such places, which are inhabited by devils.
Moreover, it is prohibited to perform prayer in bathrooms, where one gets
washed, because they are places where people's.” awrahs (private parts) are
exposed and where devils live; this prohibition includes all the places inside
the bathroom,

Inaddition, itis impermissible to perform prayer at camel stalls; Shaykhul-
Islam Tagiyynd-Din Ibn Taymiyah said:

“Wt is prohibited to perform prayer at their stalls (i.e. the camels’)
fas their stalls are shelters for devils, and it is alsa prohibited to
perform prayer in a bathroom, as it is a shelter for devils, So, such
places of evil spirits reasonably necessitate avoiding performing
prayer therein?”

It is detestable to perform prayer in a place containing pictures or the like;
Imam Ibnul-Qayyim saic:

“Such places are more deserving of avoiding performing prayer therein
than bathrooms. The delestability of performing prayer in a bathroom
is out of fear that the place is impure, or because it is the devils’ dwelling
place which is the sound opinion. Yet, the detestability of performing
prayer in a place containing pictures or the like is intended to avoidd
polytheism, for the polytheism of most of the previous nations was
related to paintings and graves."”

Dear gentle Muslim reader, you should take care of your prayer and be
keen on its validity, verifying your purity before being engaged in it, and
avoiding the places where performing prayer is invalid, so. as to ensure that
your prayer is legally performed in the way decreed by Allah. In addition, you
should never neglect any of the rulings on prayer or disregard it, for prayer
is the basic pillar of your religion, if perfected, your faith will be perfected as
well; if not, your faith will be imperfect. May Allah guide us all to that which
leads to goodness and righteousness!

08 HI; PRAYER

The fourth condition (of prayer); Facing the giblah (direction of
prayer). Among the conditions of the validity of prayer is facing the qiblal,
the honorable Ka’ bah, It is called giblah because all Muslims turn their face
towards it during prayer. Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“<..S0 turn your face [i.e. yourself] toward Al-Masjid Al-Hardm
(the Sacred Mosque). And wherever you [believers] are, turn your
faces [ie. yourselves] toward it [in prayer]...

(Qurin: Al-Bagarah: 1441)

So, whoever is so near to the Ka" bah that he can see it, itis obligatory for
him to turn his whole body toward it during prayer, as such a person can face
it well, as he sees it with his eyes. Thus, itis impermissible for such a person to
deviate from its direction. On the other hand, iFone is near to the Ka‘ bah but
thete is something that hinders one from seeing it, one in this case has ‏ما‎ try
facing it as much as possible. However, if one is anywhere in the world so that
one is away from the Ka’ bah, one then can face the direction believed to be
that of the Ka*bah, and moving a bit leftward or rightward does not matter, as
the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“There is qiblah (direction of prayer) between the east and the west.”

This hadith was deemed satis (authentic) by At-Tirmidhi, andwas narrated
by miany of the Prophet's Companions. Surely, this hadith specifies the qiblal
for Medina and all the places of the same direction and location. However, the
giblah for the east, for example, is between the south and the north, and so is
the qiblah for the west.

Generally, prayer is invalid without facing the qiblab, for Allah, Exalted be
He, sayss

‎wherever you [believers] are, turn yourfaces i.e, yourselves]‏ نيف"
‎toward it [in prayer...” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 144)‏

‎“Wherever” here indicates that the giflah is to be faced during prayer no
matter where one is; traveling by land, sea, air, eastward, westward, etc. Yet, one
is notobliged to face the giblalt if unable to, such as being tied up or crucified in
away that one cannot facet In such a ease, one is to perform prayer facing the
available direction even if it is not the giblal, as this condition is inapplicable
in such case according to juristic consensus, Similarly, if one is engaged in a
fierce war, or one flees froma flood, fire, a wild animal, or an enemy, ‏عه‎ one is

Chapter 3: Prayer Conditions toy

soiill that oneis unable to face the qiblal, one in such cases can perform prayer
in the same state one isin, even if one is nol facing the giblah, and one’ prayer
will be deemed valid as well, This is because the condition is nullified in case
of inability; Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“So fear Allah as much as you are able...”
(Qur’in: At Taghabun: 16)

The Prophet (PBUH) said:

“If command you to do something, then do (of) it as much as you can”

‘Also, it is stated in a hadith related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim that the
Muslims in case of extreme fear used to perform prayer with and without
facing the giblah”.

How to Identify the Qiblak

‘There are many ways through which one can know the giblah, among
which are:

Informing; One can be informed by a legally responsible, trustworthy
person of the direction of qiblalt, provided that the informer is certain
about it.

Following the qiblah observed by mosques and mihrabs: One can
identify the giblah by following the qiblah observed by a mosque ora
mihrab (prayer niche), which would show one the right direction of
the giblah,

Astronomy: The gilah can also be identified by means of stars; Allah,
Exalted be He, says:

“And by the stars they are (also] guided?”
(Qur'an: An-Nabl: 16)

The fifth condition (of prayer): Intention; to intend performing
an act of worship to draw near to Allah, Exalted be He. The heart is the real
place of intention, so one does not have to declare it overtly, for this is regarded
as an act of innovation in religion that had never been observed either by the
Prophet (PBUH) or by his Companions. So, one is to intend performing a
certain prayer only with one’s heart, not tongue, in accordance with the hadith
that states

nv Us PRAYER,

"Deeds (te. their correctness and rewards) depend upon intentions.””

‘One intends performing a certain prayer upon the opening takbir™ of that
prayer, so that the intention becomes associated with the act of worship: there
is no harm if one intends a bit earlier. It is 2 condition that intention must
last until the end of prayer. However, prayer becomes invalid if intention is
cancelled during it. If one has said the opening takbir in an obligatory prayer,
whether one is led in prayer or performs it alone, it is permissible for one
to.change one’ intention and perform it as a supererogatory prayer provided
there is a valid excuse, such as joining a congregational prayer instead of
praying alone.

Itis important to know that some people have done strict innovations in
religion concerning interitions of prayer which have never been decreed by
‘Allah. For example, when intending to perform a certain prayer, some declare
overtly which prayer they are going to perform, how many rak’ahs (units of
prayer) they intend to perform, and who the imam (leader) of prayer is, and so
on. Such acts had never been done by the Messenger (PBUH) who had neither
been reported to have declared his intention, whether secretly or overtly, upon
performing prayer, nor had he been reported to have enjoined that.

Shaykhul-Islim Ibn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

"Declaring intention overtly is neither obligatory nor desirable as
uniformly agreed upon by Muslim scholars, Rather one who pronounces
it overtly is regarded to be an innovator in religion who contradicts the
Shariah (Islantic Law). If one does 50 intentionally, thinking that itis
an act of Shari'ah, one is deemed an ignorant, straying Muslin who
deserves discretionary punishment for that, If such a person insists on
declaring intention overtly upon each prayer after being informed and
enlightened, especially if he disturbs his prayer mates with his voice
or repeats it several times, he deserves ‏ها‎ receive severe discretionary
punishment for that..."

Ibn Taymiyah then added:

‘\. Sonie of the modern scholars maintained the obligation of doing
so (ie. pronouncing itention overtly) basing their opinion on
misinterpretation of an opinion of imam Ash-Shaji't. However, the
majority of the followers of Imam Ash-Shafi't viewed the invalidity
of such an interpretation of the Shafi'is opinion. This is because,
Imam Ash-Shafi'i said about prayer, ‘It is obligatory to begin it with
overt pronunciation. So, those modern schalars mistakenly thought

chapter 3) Prayer Conditions tH

that Imavw Ash-Shafi'i meant that it was obligatory lo pronounce
one’ intention overtly upon each prayer. However, all the followers of
Imm Ash-Shafi'i deemed this a misinterpretation, pointing out that
Imiim Ash-Shafi't only meant the overt pronunciation of the opening
takbit of prayer, not the intentio

In addition to the fact that expressing intention overtly is bid‘ah (a matter
innovated in religion), it could also lead to hypocrisy; one’ intention has to
be expressed secretly in one’s heart as a sign of sincerity and devotion to Allah
while performing acts of worship.

‘To sum up, a Muslim has to abide by the limits set by the Shari'ah (Islamic
Law), to adhere to the acts of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition), and to avoid
whatsoever kinds of innovation (in religion) regardless of its adherents, Allah
Exalted be He, says:

"Say, Would you acquaint Allah with your religion while Allah
knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth,
and Allah is Knowing of all things?” (Qur’an: Al-Hujurat: 16)

Allah is Knowing of the intention of the heart, so'a Muslim does not have
to pronounce it overtly whether upon performing prayer or in any other act of
worship; Allah, Exalted be He, knows best. May Allah guide ws all to what He
likes and pleases!

Endnotes

1 Ab-Bukdhari (527) [2/13] and Muslim (85)

2 Al-Bukhari (528) [2/15] and Muslim (1520) (3/173).

3 Muslim (1387) (2/114)

4 AL-Bukhari (536) [2/25] and Muslim (1394) [3/118].

5 See Muslin (1424) [3/130] and AL-Bukhari (4533) [8/245]; see also Muslim (1425) [3/130].

6 AL-Bukhart (1954) [4/249] andl Muslita (2553){4/209].

7 Al-Bukhari (561) [2/55], Muslim (1438) [3/137] and At-Tirmidhi (104) [1/304]

8 Tahajjud: The Night Vigil Proyer

5 AL-Bukhari (568) [2/65] and Muslim (1460) [3/147],

10 "Awralt: The private parts or parts of the body which are illegal ‏وا‎ expose to others: ‏د‎
‎‘ale’ awrah is from the navel to the kriees whereas in another view it is Said to be the
external organs of sex and excretion, As fora female’ “wna, it includes all her body In
‘one view Whereas in another i ésall her body with the exception of her face and hands,

11 Ahmad (25823) [6/248], Abt Dawa (641) [1/298], At-Tirmidhi (377) (2/215) and
Ibn Miajah (655) [1/362]

12 Us PRAYER

12 Ahmad (19978) (5/5). Abo Dawdd (3017) (4/197), At-Tirmidbi (2799) 5/110), ‏م15‎
‎Majala (192) (2/448); see also Al-Bukhri (1/500) (1/500).

13 Aba Dawad (3140) (3/327) and Jbn Majah (1460) (2/200)

14 Ahmad (2492) [1/342] and At-Tirmidhi (2801) [5/111]; ‏مله عمد‎ Aba Dawid (4014)
(4/197] and At-Tirmidhi (2803) [5/111]

15 At-Tirmidhi (1175) [3/476]

16 Abt Dawid (640) [1/297].

17 Ahmad (25823) [6/248], Abt Dawad (641) [1/298], At-Tirmidhi (377) [2/215] and
hn Majah (655) [1/362].

18 See Jimi” At-Tirmidhi (2/216).

19.Abi Dawid (1833) (2/285) and Ibn Mijah (2935) [3/429]

20 Al-Bukhati (277) [1/430] and Muslim (673) [3/190].

21 Aba Dawad (650) [1/302].

22 Aimad (11903) [3/121], Abd Diweid (492) |1/236), ‏عم‎
‎fl Majab (745) [1/412].

23 Muslim (2248) [4/42], Ahmad (17184) [4/185], Aba Dawid (3229) [3/359], At-
Tirmidhi (1051) [3/367] and An-Nas#i (759) [1/401].

24 Muslim (1188) (3/17).

25 Al-Bukhii (1336) [3/261) and Muslim (2208) [4/27]; see also Al-Buikhaei (1337)
{3/261 and Muslim (2212) [4/29],

26 See Ibn Taytiyah's Maja ul-Fatawa (4/521-5
[19/41], (21/304, 321-322], [22/194-195}, [27/140].

27 The giblah: The direction of prayer, namely towards the Ka' bah,

28 The Lawgiver of Sharf ah (Islamic Law] is Allah, Exalted be He; the term can also refer
to the Prophet (PBUH) as he never ordained but what was revealed to him by Allah.

29 See Ibn Taymiyah’s Majmt‘ul-Fatawai (25/240).

30 See Zadul-Ma ‘td [2/147, 183],

31 At-Tirmidhi (342) (1/171) and thn Maja (1011) [1/534]

32 AL-Bukhairt (943) [2/555]; see also Muslim (1941) [3/64].

33 Al-Bukhici (1) [1/12] and Muslim (4904) (7/55).

34 The opening takbir (in prayer): Opening prayer with saying, “AUlthu-ARbar” (ic.
Allah is the Greatest),

ee Ibn Taymiyahis Moyjnit'ul-Fati

irmidhi (317) (2/131 and

, (11/290, 2911, [17/502 503],

35 22/218-2211, [37/57],

Etiquette of Heading for Mosque

Gentle Muslim reader, you really have to know the legalized standards of
behavior prior to prayer, so as to get ready for it properly. This is because prayer
isa great act of worship that must be preceded with the proper preparation and
readiness, so that a Muslim can engage in such a glorious act of worship in the
best state.

Therefore, if one heads for the mosque to join one’s fellow Muslims in
a congregational prayer, one should walk calmly, peacefully, and tranquilly,
without haste. One should be in a state of solemnity and calmness, averting
‘one’ vision (from looking at what Allah prohibits), lowering one’ voice and
‘trying as much as possible not to look around.

Itis stated in the Two Sahihs that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Ifthe igdmah is declared - (in another narration, ‘When you hear
the iqdmah....)' - proceed to perform the prayer with calmness and
solemnity and do not make haste. And pray whatever rak’ahs
(units of prayer) you get (with the people) and complete the rest
which you have missed.”)"

ud I: PRAYER,

Moreover, Imam Muslim related that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“When one of you is preparing for prayer, he is in fact engaged
in prayer”

When a Muslim heads for the mosque to perform prayer, he should not
be late, so as not to miss the opening takbir, ie. to attend the congregational
prayer from the beginning. In addition, while making towards the mosque,
one should make one’s pace slow, taking one’ steps close to one another to get
more rewards. Itis stated in the Twa Sabi that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Wf ‏م‎ person performs ablution and does it perfectly, and then
proceeds to the mosque with the sole intention of performing prayer,
then for each step he takes toward the mosque, Allah raises hint a
degree in reward and blots out (i.e. forgives) one of his sins”

‘When a Muslim reaches the mosque, he should step in with his right leg,
saying the following invocation:

“In the Name of Allah, 1 seek refuge with Allah the Most Great, in
Hlis Honorable Face, and in His infinitely preexistent Sovereignty,
from the accursed Satan. O Allah! Confer Your blessings upon
‘Muhanimad, O Allah! Forgive my sins amd let the doors of Your
Mercy be open for me.”

‘When one wishes to come out of the mosque, one should step out with
one’ left leg saying the aforesaid invocation, but instead of saying, “.. and
let the doors of Your Mercy be open for me", one should rather say, “... and let
the doors of Your Favor be opened for me.” This is because the mosque is the
place of seeking Allah's Mercy, while outside the mosque is where one seeks
livelihoad, which Allah bestows upon His servants out of His Favor.

Once one enters the mosque, one should perform two rak‘ahs before
sitting, for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“If anyone of you enters a mosque, he should perform two rak‘ahs
before sitting.”

‘Then one sits waiting for the iqdmah; while waiting for the igdmah, one
should spend the time between the two rak ‘alts and the igdmah in glorifying
and praising Allah, and in reciting the Qur‘én, One has also to avoid frivolous
play, such as interlacing one’s fingers and the like, for the Prophet (PBUH)
forbade doing so while waiting for the iqarnah, saying:

(Chapter 4: Eriquette of Heading for Mosque ‏كا‎

“When anyone of you is in the ‏عبوعقار‎ he should not interlace (his
Jingers), for interlacing (fingers) is from Satan.

As for those im the mosque for reasons other than waiting for the iqamah,
they are allowed to interlace their fingers, as it is stated that the Prophet
(PBUH) ance interlaced his fingers after concluding prayer with taslin’-

While waiting for prayer in the mosque, one should not enter into talks
unrelated to religion, because its stated in a hadith that doing so eats up rewards
in the same way as fire eats up wood’. In another hadith, the Prophet stated that
when anyone enters a mosque, he is considered to be in prayer as long as he is
waiting for the prayer, and the angels keep on asking for Allah's forgiveness for
him’. Therefore, a Muslim should not miss such great rewards by being engaged
in frivolous play or idle talks.

When the igamah is declared, one should stand up when the prayer caller
says “gadi-qimatis-salah" (ie, “Prayer is commenced”), for the Prophet
(PBUH) used to do so. Itis also allowed for one to stand up on the beginning
of declaring the igamah if one sees the inavn (prayer leader); if not, itis better
not to stand up until one sees the imam. Besides, one should always be keen

on standing in the first row (in congregational prayers), for the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“if the people knew the reward for pronouncing the adhan (prayer
call) and for standing in the first row (in congregational prayers),
and found no other way to get that reward except by casting lots,
they would cast lots?"
(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

He (PBUH) also said:

“The best rows for men are the first rows...

As for men, it is belter to be close to the inant, as the Prophet (PBUH),
\ho used to lead the Muslims in prayer, said

“Let those of you who are sedate and prudent be near me (i.e. bein
the first row)"

As regards women, ‏ال‎ is better Jor them to be in the last rows, for tne
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“..And the best rows for women are tte last ones”

This is because women will not be visible to men in this way,

013 li: PRAYER

The imam and the ones led behind him ought ‏ما‎ be cautious to straighten
rows, for the Prophet sai

"Straighten your rows, for the straightening of a row és part of the
petfection of prayer.”

(Related by Al-Bukharl and Muslim)
In another hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) said:
“Straighten your rows or else Allah will alter your faces."

Thus, when standing for congregational prayer, Muslims should straighten
their rows so that their shoulders and ankles become aligned, leaving no space
between one another, for the Prophet (PBUH) said in this regard:

“Straighten your rows and stand close ta one another?"

‘This hadith means that the ones led in prayer ought to stand dose to one
another, leaving no gaps between them for Satan.

‘The Prophet (PBUH) has always been greatly concerned with straightening
rows and making the ones led in prayer stand close to one another, which
indicates how important and useful itis, This does not mean that people should
widen between their feet in a way that disturbs those standing beside them,
a8 mistakenly done by some ignorant people. Such people thus leave gaps in
rows, causing harm and annoyance to those standing next to them without
having any legal proof supporting such an act, Therefore, Muslims should pay
more attention to such issues and care for straightening their rows in prayers,
following the example of the Prophet (PBUH) and ensuring the perfection of
their prayer: may Allah guide us all to whatever He likes and pleases,

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhitri (636) [1/53]

2 AL-Bukhari (908) [2/105] and Muslim (1358) [3/100]

3 Mastim (1359) (3/101),

4 Al-Bukhiri (477) [1/73] and Muslim (1504) (3/168),

5 Al-Bukhari (1163) (3/63] and Muslim (1652) [3/232].

66 Abymiad (11324) [3/43] and Ibn Aba Shaybah (4824) (1/420), Al-Haythami in his book
‘Maja’ Az-Zawé'id (The Collection of Additional Hadithes) (2125).

‎and Muslim (1288) [3/69‏ ]1/731[ )482( مقط لسك ل 7

‎8 This tradition was not mentioned by any one of the comy
Al-TIrdqi in his book Takbrijul ‘Taya (1/136); Ton As
Shafi’ iyyal? (4/145) and ‏حالم لتم‎ in his book As

‎rs of Hadith as said by
+ Subki in his book “Tabagdt Ash-
silat Ad-Da’ fal (4) (1118)

Chaprer 4: Etiquette of Heading for Mosque iz

‎Al-Bukhari (477) [1/730] and Muslim (1504) [3/168‏ و
‎Al-Bukhari (615) [2/126] and Muslim (980) [2/378]‏ 10
‎Musliny (984) [2/38]‏ 11

‎12 Muslimn (973) [2/376]

‎13 Al-Bukhari (723) [2/271] and Muslim (974) [2/376]
14 ‏فق لله له‎ (717) [2/268] and Muslim (977) [2/377]
15 Al-Bukhart (719) [2/269]

Prayer: Integral Parts, Obligatory
Practices and Acts of the Sunnah

Prayer is a great act of worship which includes decreed statements
and postures forming the perfect form of its performance. Scholars define
prayer as special statements and postures starting with takbir and ending
with taslim.

‘These statements and postures of prayer are divided into three sections,
namely the integral parts, the obligatory practices, and the acts of the Sunnah,
The integral parts of prayer are those the negligence of any of which,
intentionally or inattentively, invalidates prayer or invalidates the rak“ah (unit
of prayer) in which it is neglected; being replaced by the next one, as we will
point out later. As for the obligatory practices of prayer, if any of them
is intentionally neglected, prayer is invalidated, but if inattentively, it is not
invalidated, and performing the Prostration of Forgetfulness will be obligatory
then. Concerning the acts of the Sunnah to be observed during prayer,

U: PRAYER

the negligence of any of them neither affects the validity of prayer nor makes it
incomplete. Still, we have to bear in mind that whenever the Prophet (PBUH)
performed prayer, he observed its integral parts, obligatory practices, and acts
of the Sumah, and we have to follow his example, for he (PBUH) said:

“Perform prayer in the way you see me performing prayer."

A-The Integral Parts of Prayer

They are fourteen:

The first is tostand while performing an obligatory prayer; Allah, Exalted
be He, says:

“..And stand before Allah, devoutly obedient."

(Quran: Al-Baqarah: 238)
Moreover, in the mavfit' (traceable) hadith narrated on the authority
of ‘Imran, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

"Perform prayer while standing; if you cannot, perform it while sittin
if you cannot, then perform it while lying on your side.

‘The above-mentioned verse and hadith prove that standing is obligatory
while performing one of the obligatory prayers sa long as one is able
to, Yet, if one is unable to pray while standing due to an illness, one
is allowed then to pray while sitting or lying on one’s side, The same
goes for one in a state of extreme fear, one who is naked (finding no
clothing to conceal one’s ‘iwrah), one whose recovery requires sitting
of lying on one’ side rather than standing, or one who is unable to
stand because the roof of the place where one prays is not high enough
provided one is unable to go out (to pray in the mosque). Likewise, in
case the regular imam of a mosque leads the people in prayer while
sitting, due to a legal excuse, the people led in prayer behind him
should also perform it while sitting, following their regular imam, This
is because the Prophet (PBUH) was once ill and led the people in prayer
while sitting, commanding them to do the same, i.e. to sit as well’,

‘As for a supererogatory prayer, it is permissible to perform it while
standing or sitting. In other words, itis not obligatory to perform it while
standing, as itis stated that the Prophet (PBUH) sometimes performed
supererogatory prayers while sitting, without any legal excuse’.

Chapter 5: Prayer: Lotegtal Pars, Obligatory Practices anu ets oF the ‏امسق‎ Hit

‘The second integral part of prayeris the opening takbir (in the beginning
of prayer); the Prophet (PBUH) sai

"... Then face the qiblah (direction of prayer towards the Ka°bak) and
say takbir?”

This is also supported by the hadith in which the Prophet (PBUH) said!

And takbir is the beginning of prayer (that makes all lawful acts
outside prayer unlawful in prayer”

The Prophet (PBUH) was never reported to have started performing
prayer without the opening takbir (saying, “Allahu-Akbar’, ie, “Allah
is the Greatest”), There is by no means any other sufficient substitute
for it when opening a prayer, according to what is reported to have
been observed and enjoined by the Prophet (PBUH).

The third integral part of prayer is the recitation of the Al-Fatihah (the
Opening Chapter of the Quelin), The Prophet (PBUH) said:

“No prayer is (accepted) from whoever does not recite Al-Fatibiah (int it).”

Reciting Al-Fatihak ig one of the integral parts of each rak’ah in
prayer, as authentically narrated to have been abserved by the Prophet
(PBUH). Moreover, when the Prophet (PBUH) taught the one who
used to perform prayer improperly, he ordered him to recite Al-
Pétihah in each rak' al

‘The question here: Is everyone performing a congregational prayer
obliged to recite Al-Fatihah, or is it only obligatory to be recited by the
imam in case ofa publicly-recited prayer and by the single worshipper?
In fact, scholars disagree in this concern. So, toavoid any doubt and to
bein the safe side, one is to recite Al-Falihah if one is led in a secretly-
recited prayer, and to recite it during the pause made by the indi
(after his recitation of Al-Fatihah) in case of publicly-recited prayers

The fourth integral part of prayer is howing in every rak‘al; Allah,
Fxalted be He, says:

“0 you who have believed, bow and prostrate.
(Qur'an: Al-Hajj: 77)
Moreover, bowing during prayer is authentically stated in the Sunnali

(Prophetic ‘Tradition), so it is an integral part of prayer according to
the Qur'an, Sunnah, and consensus’,

Ds PRAYER

Proper bowing during prayer is done by bending one’s body forward
so that one’s hands can reach one’s knees in normal cases (ie. when
one’s hands are neither longer nor shorter than normal). Otherwise,
one tries to bend one's body in a degree similar to that of normal cases
asmuch as possible. It is also sufficient for one praying while sitting
to bend one’s face instead, so that itis aligned with one’s knees

The fifth and the sixth integral parts of prayer are rising following
bowing, and standing upright, as the Prophet (PBUH) used to do so
while performing prayer; he (PBUH) said:

“Perform prayer in the way you see me performing prayer”

‘The seventh integral part of prayer is prostrating, ie. making one’s
forehead touch the ground, as well as the other organs of prostration,
namely the nose, the hands, the knees and the bottom of the toes.
Prostration is to be done twice in each rak’ al it isa Divine command,
as Allah, Exalted be He, says, “..And prostrate...” (Quin: Al-Hajj:
77) Itis also a Prophetic command according to many hadiths,"” forhe
(PBUH) said, as mentioned above:

“Perform prayer in he way you see me performing prayer?"

‘The organs of prostration are seven as previously mentioned (the
forehead and the nose together, bath hands, both knees, and the
bottom of the toes of both feet). Each of them has to touch the ground
well, as much as possible, In fact, prostration is the greatest integral
part of prayer; the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“The state in which a servant is nearest ‏ما‎ his Lord is while prostrating
himself”

Thus, the Prophet (PBUH) teaches us that prostration is the optimum
state that draws one near ta the Lord, Allah.

The eighth integral part of prayer is raising oneself from prostration and
{ing erect between the two prostrations; Imam Muslim related that
* Aishah (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated:

“When he (the Prophet) raised his head after prostration, he did not
prostrate himself (again) until he had sat erect."

‘The ninth integral part of prayer is being tranquil while performing all
the actions of prayer. Tranquility here means performing the acts of

Chaprer 5: Prayer: Integeal Darts, Obligatory Practices and Acts uf the Sina 1
prayer serenely, humbly and submissively, moving as less as possible,
The Qur'an and Suanah state that the prayer of one who does not
perform it ina state of tranquility and devotion is deemed incomplete,
and itis obligatory for one to re-perform it in this case.

‘The tenth and the eleventh integral parts of prayer are the Final
Tashahhud “and the posture of sitting for it. It is authenticated
that the Prophet (PBUH) used to recite Tashahhud during prayer
and never abandoned it,” so we must follow in his footsteps, as he
(PBUH) sai

“Perform prayer in the way you see me performing prayer"

Ibn Mas’(d (may Allah be pleased with him) said, “Before Tashahhud
was decreed, we used to recite instead...”", the phrase "was decreed”
here implies that it is obligatory (o recite Tasliahhud in prayer

The twelfth integral part of prayer is invoking Allah to confer His
blessings upon Muhammad, by saying:

"0 Allah! Confer Your blessings upon Muhammad...”

Whatever is recited more than this is an act of the Sunnah, not an
obligatory act.

The thirteenth integral part of prayer is observing succession when
performing the above-mentioned integral parts of prayer, as the
Prophet (PBUH) used to perform them successively, and he (PBUH)
commanded Muslims to follow his example while performing prayer,
saying, as mentioned above:

“Perform prayer in the way you see me performing prayer”

Inaddition, when the Prophet (PBUH) taught the one, who performed
prayer improperly, the right way of performing prayer, he pointed out
the aforesaid acts successively, one after another"

The fourteenth integral part of prayer is concluding prayer with taslim,
for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

*...And its conclusion is ‏"اهما‎

So, after tastim, what has been unlawful to be done during prayer (such
4s eating, drinking, talking, etc.) becomes lawful once again, as taslint
is decreed as a sign of the end of the prayer,

124 MWPRAYER

Gentle reader; you should be aware that a Muslim should never neglect
any of the aforesaid integral parts of prayer. As for the opening takbir, i
not pronounced, then prayer is not begun, and one thus will not be considered
in a state of prayer. Regarding the other integral parts of prayer, intentional
negligence of any of them causes prayer to be invalid. However, if it is
inattentively neglected, such as bowing or prostrating, and one remembers
that before starting another ‏,تله لمم‎ one then performs whatever one has
inattentively missed. But, if one remembers after the following rak ‘alt has been
started, the previous rak’ah (one of whose integrals is inattentively neglected)
will be null and the following one will take its place. Still, prayer is not
invalidated in the latter case, provided that one performs the two prostrations
of forgetfulness even if one realizes the missed integral part alter tastim. In case
the forgotten integral part is the Final Tashahiud or one of the two taslins,
and one remembers it after concluding prayer with taslim, one can re-perform
it, perform the wo prostrations of forgetfulness, and then say taslim. However,
ifthe forgotten part is something other than the Final Tashahhud or one of the
‏مدو‎ faslims, such as bowing or prostrating, one makes up for it by performing a
whole rak’ ah then performing the twa prostrations of forgetfulness, provided
that there is no long interval between ending prayer and remembering the
forgotten integral, or that one’s ablution is not invalidated by then. Otherwise,
the whole prayer must be re-performed,

What a great act of worship prayer is, and how glorious are its words and
actions! May Allah grant us success in establishing it regularly and observing
it perfectly!

B-The Obligatory Acts of Prayer

‘There are eight obligatory acts to be observed during prayer:

1- All the takbirs of prayer - other than the opening takbir - are among
the obligatory acts, not the integral parts, which have to be observed
during prayer. The example for this is the transition takbirs.

2- Tasmi®." which is only obligatory to be said by the anam or by one
praying alone, not the one(s) led in prayer.

3- Tahmid,” which is obligatory to be said by the imam, the one praying
alone, and the one(s) led in prayer, for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“When the imdm says, ‘lah listens to the one who praises Him’ you

should say, ‘O our Lord, to You be (all) the praise:

Chapter 5: ‏عرفا‎ Integral Pis, Obligsuy Practices and Aes ofthe Surah as

4 Saying, “Subhdna Rabbiyal-‘Azim” (i. “Glory be to my Lord,
the Most Great") only once while bowing; it is an act of the Sunnah
(Prophetic Tradition) to say it three times atleast, or ten times at most,
for the sake of perfecting prayer.

5- Saying, “Subhana Rabbiyal-A'la” (2, “Glory be to my Lord, the
‘Most High”) only once while prostrating; itis also an act of the Suymalt
fo say it up to three times,

6- Invoking Allah saying, "0 my Lord, forgive me,’ once between the two
prostrations, and it is an act of the Stwinah to say it up to three times.

7-Reciting the First Tashahhud, saying:

“(All) compliments, prayers and good things are due to Allah; peace
be upon you, © Prophet, and the Mercy of Allah and His blessings (be
upon you). Peace be upon us and upon the pious servants of Allah.
1 testify that there is no deity (worthy of worship) but Allali, Alone,
with no partner, and I testify that Muhammad is His servant and His
Messenger.”

OF the like of what is reported to have been observed by the Prophet
(PBUH).

8- Sitting for reciting the First Tashahhud, as reported to have been
regularly observed by the Prophet (PBUH), who said:

“Perform prayer in the way you see me performing prayer”

{tis worth mentioning here that prayer is invalidated if one abandons
any of the aforesaid eight obligatory practices of prayer intentionally, as one
thus alters and distorts prayer. Yet, if one does not perform any of them by
Temissness or ignorance, it is obligatory for one to offer the two prostrations
of forgetfulness instead, as a way of making up for ones negligence of an
obligatory practice of prayer whose nonperformance is forbidden.

C-The Acts of the Sunnah to be Observed during Prayer

‘They are divided into two types; verbal and physical practices of the Surah,
abandoning any of which does not invalidate prayer, unlike the previous two
sections (theintegral parts and the obligatory acts of prayer).So, there are two kinds
of the acts of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) to be observed during prayer:

126 Ul: PRAYER

1- Verbal Acts of the Sunnah

‘There are many verbal acts of the Sunnah to be observed during prayer,
among which are the opening in f prayer, seeking refuge with Allah
from Satan, saying Basmalah, and reciting some of the Quran
following reciting Al-Fatiliah (the Opening Chapter of the Quritn) in the Fajr
(Dawn) Prayer, the jurnt'ah (Friday) Prayer, the ‘id (Feast) Prayer, the Eclipse
Prayer, and in the first two fak ‘alis of the Maghrib (Sunset) Prayer, the Isha”
(Night) Prayer, the Zur (Noon) Prayer. and the “Agr (Afternoon) Prayer.

Amionig the verbal acts of the Sunnah of prayer is saying, following tabimid:

“(Qur Lord, to You be (all) praise) with which are filled the heavens
and the earth, and what is between then, and whatever You will
afterward.”

Itis only an act of the Suah to say, “Subhiina Rabbiyal-‘Azim” (Glory
be to my Lord, the Most Great) while bowing and “Subhdina Rabbiyal-A’la”
(Glory be to my Lord, the Most High) while prostrating; such verbal acts
may be said more than once, Moreover, iis an act of the Sunnah to say more
than once, between the two prostrations, "0 Allah! Forgive me” Also, among
the verbal acts of the Sunviah to be observed during prayer is to invoke Allah
saying, following the Final Tashahhucl

*O.Allaht I seek refuge with You from the torture of the Fire, from
the torture in the grave, from the trial of life and death, anc from
the evil of the trial of Al-Masthud-Dayjal (Antichrist).”

In addition, one can invoke Allah with other invocations that the Prophet
used to say in the Final Tashahfuid.

2- Physical Acts of the Sunnah

‘There are physical acts of the Suunah to be observed while performing
prayer, stich as raising one’s hands (so that the thumbs be near the ears) when
saying the opening takbir; the same is ta be observed before bowing, and also
when standing upright after bowing. Itis also an act of the Sunnah to put one’s
right hand on the left one, putting the latter elther on the chest or under the
navel when rising from bowing. Moreover, it is an act of the Sunnah to keep
looking at the position of prostrating during prayer, Also, one is to put one’s
hands on one’s knees while bowing, straightening one’s back (as if forming
8 right angle), and making one's head in alignment with ones back without
lowering or raising the head, Ducing prostration, it is an act of the Sunnah to
Keep one's abdomen apart from one’s thighs, and one’s thighs apart from one
Jegs, making one’s forehead, nose and the rest of the aforesaid seven parts of
prostration well settled on the ground (ar the place of prayer).

Chapeer 5: Prayer: Integral Parts, Obligatory Practices and Acts ofthe Sian 5

In addition to the above, there are many verbal and physical acts of the
Sunnah concerning prayer pointed out in details in juristic books. At any
rate, it is not obligatory to observe these acts of the Sunnah during prayer;
whoever observes them or any of them will be rewarded, and there is no sin
‘on those who do not observe them, just like the ruling on all otheracts of the
Sunnah, We do not find any logical justification for the strictness and narrow-
mindedness observed by some youth nowadays when applying the acts of the
Sunnah during prayer, which may lead them to perform it in a very strange
manner. For instance, some of them may bow their heads while standing as
if they were in a state of bowing. They may also put their hands on the upper
part ofthe chest, under the neck, instead of putting them on the chest or under
the navel as stated in the Suamah, In addition, some of them are so strict in
keeping themselves screened while praying (so that no one can pass in front
of them) that they do not perform the supererogatory prayer in the same
raw (where they have offered a congregational prayer); they rather perform
it elsewhere in the mosque provided it is a screened place. Some of those
strict youth also stretch their heads forwards and their legs backwards during
prostration that they look as if they were lying on the ground rather than
prostrating. Furthermore, some of them, while being in a standing position,
keep their feet wide apart ina way that disturbs those beside them. These are,
in fact, strange practices that may lead to strictness and excessiveness, which
are detestable in religion.

May Allah guide them and us to the straight path, and make us work
accordingly.

Endnotes

1 AL-Bukhart (6008) [10/538]

2 Al-Bukhari (1117) [2/758], Abo Dawid (952) [1/409] and At-Tirmidhl (372) [2/208

‘Al-Bukhari (805) (2/375] and Muslim (920) [2/351

4 Muslim (1696) [3/253].

5 Al-Bukhari (6251) [11/44] and Muslim (884) [2/330],

{6 Muslitn (L130) [2/438] and also in (1810) (3/502),

7 Al-Buihari (756) [2/306] and Muslin (872) (4221

8 Al-Bukhiri (757) [2/306] and Muslin (883) (2/329. Concerning the Prophet’ order to
recite Al-Fatibah as reported in Sahth of ton Hfibban (1787) [5/88

8 See the book of A Muc jamul-Mufahras’ (2/298).

410 See the book of ‘A-Mu’famul Mufahnas’ (2/415).

11 Al-Bukhés (6008).

12. Mustim (1083) [2/423],

138 Uy PRAYER

13 Muslim (498)

14 (The Final) Tashalthud: Reciting, "VAl) compliments, peayers and good things are due to
Allah peace be upon you, © Prophet, anit the Mercy of Alah and His blessings (be upon
You). Peace be upon us and upon the pious servants of Ail I testify that there is no deity
(worthy of worship) but Allah. Alone, with no partner. and L testify that Muhammad is
His servant and Fis Messenger. O Allah! Confer Your blessings upon Muhammad and the
Sanity of Mubanimad as You conferred Your blessings upon Ibrahim (Abraham) and the
‘family of Ibrahim, Verity, You are Praiseworthy and Honomble, And bless Muliarinad
und the family of Muhaonmact as Yau blessed Thrihiny aur the family of Tonihin, Verily,
You are Praiseworthy and Honorable,”

15 ‘This may be concluded from a lot of hadiths such as that one related by Muslim
(1110) [24438].

16 An-Nasdi (1276) [2/247], Al-Bukhart (6328) [11/137] andl Muslizy (895) (2/337).

17 Al-Bukhart (757) [2/306] and Mustim (883) {2/329},

18 Maslim (1110) [2/438]

19 Tain’: Saying “Sam allahu linidn hutimidah” i. "Allab listens to the one who praises
Him,’ when standing following bowing in prayer.

20 Talymid (in prayer): Saying asa feply to last, “Rableand-walakal-hamd ie, “Our Lord,
to You be (Al) praise”

21 Al-Bukhari (689) [2/225] and Muslim (920) [2/:

22Basmalahe: Saying, “Aismilldhir-Rakménir-Rabim®
Merciful, the Especially Merciful

23 Tamir: Saying, “amin” Le, “Amen” after the recitation of Al-Rititiah in prayer

1
“Inthe Name of Allah, the Entirely

Manner of Prayer

We have dealt with the integral parts, the obligatory acts, and the verbal
and the physical acts of the Sunnah of prayer. Therefore, we would like now to
point out the way prayer is performed, as stated to have been observed by the
Prophet (PBUH), so as to follow the Prophet's example in this regard and in
accordance with the hadith in which he (PBUH) said:

“Perform prayer in the way you see me performing prayer.”

Here is the Prophetic way of performing prayer:

+ Whenever the Prophet (PBUH) stood for prayer, he faced the ‏علطتو‎ raised
his hands making the palms face the giblah, saying, “Allahu-Akbar? ie.
“Allah is the Greatest”

+ He (PBUH) then holds his left hand with his right one, putting it on his chest.

+ Then, he (PBUH) says the opening invocation; he (PBUH) did not
observe a certain opening invocations regularly, soit is permissible to
say any of the opening invocation reported to have been said by the
Prophet (PBUH). Among these invocations is:

IL: PRAYER

“Glory ‏ماعط‎ You, © Allah, and to You he all praise, and Blessed is Your
‘Name, and Exalted is Your Majesty, and there is no deity (worthy of
worship) but You."

The Prophet (PBUH) then says:

“Lseek refuge with Allah from Satan, the expelled (fromthe mercy of Allah).
In the Name of Allah, the Entirely Merciful, the Especially Merciful”

Then, he (PBUH) recites Al-Fatihah (the Opening Chapter of the Quran),
following it with saying “Amin (Amen)?

+ After that, he (PBUH) recites a sura (a long, a short, or a medium
one). It is narrated that he (PBUH) used to prolong reciting the
Qur'an in the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer in particular. The Prophet also
used to recite publicly in the first two rak' ahs of the Fajr (Dawn),
the Maghrib (Sunset), the ‘Isha’ (Night) Prayers, and recite quietly
tohimselfin any other rak' ahs. Moreover, he (PBUH) used to make
the recitation of the first rak'aht longer than that of the second one
in every prayer.

+ He (PBUH) then raises his hands in the same way he does while saying
the opening takbir of prayer, saying, “Allahu-Akbar" Hab is the
Greatest”). He then bows putting his hands on his knees firmly, parting
between his fingers, and stretching bis back, making his head aligned
with his back, neither raising nor lowering it, and says, “Subhana
Rabbiyal-' Azim” (ie. “Glory be to my Lord, the Most Great”).

+Then, he (PBUH) raises his head saying, ‘Allah listens to the one who praises
‘Him, raising both his hands in the same way he does upon bawing.

+ Affer that, he (PBUH) stands up straight saying, (following tasmi"),”
“Our Lord, to You be (all) the praise.” 11 is important to point out that
the Prophet (PBUH) used to prolong standing following bowing.

+ He (PBUH) then says takbir (without raising his hands this time) then
prostrates, In prostration, he (PBUH) used to settle his forehead, nose,
hands, knees, and the bottom of his toes on the ground (or the place
of prayer), making his fingers and toes face the qiblah. He (PBUH)
‘used to lean on the palms of his hands during prostration, keeping his
upper arms apart from his sides, his abdomen apart from his thighs,
and his thighs apart from his legs, saying, “Subhdna Rabbiyal-A la”

130

Chapter 6: Manner ‏اذ‎ Prayer 134

(ie. "Glory be to my Lord, the Most High’); he (PBUH) used to make
his prostration neither long nor short,

+ Following the first prostration, he (PBUH) raises his head saying takbir;
placing his left foot on its side and sitting on it, keeping the right foot
as it was since prostration (i.e. resting on the bottom of its toes while
the heel is up). He (PBUH) also places his hands on his thighs saying:

“O Allal! Forgive me, have mercy on me; set me right, guide me, and
sustain me.”

+ He (PBUH) then says takbir and prostrates, doing in the second
prostration the same as he did in the first.

+ After that, he (PBUH) raises his head saying takbir, and then he stands
upright afier resting on the bottom of his toes and leaning on his knees
and thighs.

+ When he (PBUH) stands upright, he starts recitation, performing the
second rak’ah in the same way he did in the first,

+ At the end of the second rak'ah, the Prophet (PBUH) sits for the First
Tashahhud, placing his left foot on its side and sitting on it just as
he does while sitting between the two prostrations, Then he (PBUH)
places his right hand on his right thigh and his left hand on his left
thigh. He (PBUH) also places the thumb of his right hand on his
middle finger making them like a ring, leaving the index finger
extended forward as if pointing, and keeps looking al it, reciting the
First Tashahhud, saying:

“(All) compliments, prayers and good things are due to Allah; peace
be upon yowt, O Prophet, and the Mercy of Allah and His blessings (be
upon you). Peace be upon us and upon the pious servants of Allah.
1 testify that there is no deity (worthy of worship) but Allah, Alone,
with no partner, and I testify (hat Muhammad is His servant and His
Messenger”

+ He (PBUH) used to make this sitting as short as possible,

+ After this, he stands upright saying takbir, performing both the third
and the fourth rak ahs just like the first two, but making them shorter;
he (PBUH) also recites Al-Fatiah in both the third and the fourth
rak ‘ahs.

132 Il: PRAYER

+ He (PBUH) sits for the Final Tashahiliud, placing his left foot on its side
and sitting on it, Keeping the right foot as it was since prostration (i.e,
resting on the bottom of its toes while the heel is up), or putting his left
calf under his right one, keeping his right foot vertical, and sitting on
the ground (or the place of prayer) instead.

+ Then, he (PBUH) recites the Final Yashalhud, which is the same as the
first with the following addition:

"!..0 Allahl Confer Your blessings upon Multammad and the family of
‘Muhammad as You conferred Your blessings upon brahim (Abraham)
and the family of Ibrahim. Verily, You ure Praiseworthyand Honorable.

And bless Muhammad and the family of Muhammad as You blessed
Ibréhim and the family of tbréhion. Verily, You are Praiseworthy and
Honorable, "

+ Following the Final Tashahhud, he (PBUH) seeks refuge with Allah
from the torture of the Fire, from the torture in the grave, from the
trial of life and death, and from the evil of the trial of Antichrist. A
Muslim may then invoke Allah with invocations mentioned in the
Quran and Sumah,

+ Finally; he (PBUH) closes prayer with taslim, turning his head to
the right saying, “As-slamu ‘alaykum wa rahmatullah” (i.e. “Peace
and Mercy of Allah be upon you"), then turning to the left saying
the same, He (PBUH) used to start uttering taslim while facing the
giblah and finish it when he completed turning his head to the right
or the left.

+ When the Prophet finishes taslim, he says:

"0 AllahtIseek Your forgiveness (thrice). O Allah! You are the Perfection
and You are the One Who grants perfection; Blessed are You. O Owner
of Majesty and Honor. *

» Then, he (PBUH) used to remember Allah with the invocations reported
to have been observed by iim,

This is, gentle Muslim reader, a brief description of the way the Prophet
(PBUH) used to perform prayer according fo the texts of hadiths mentioned
in this regard. Therefore, you should take an interest in your prayer, trying
your best to perform it perfectly, following in the Prophet's footsteps as much
as possible; Allah, Exalted be He, says:

Chapter 6: Manner of Prayer 133

“There has certainly been for you int the Messenger of Allah art
excellent pattern for anyone whose hope is in Allah and the last
day and [who] remembers Allah often.”

(Qur'an: Al-Ahzab: 21)

May Allah grant us.all success and acceptance of our good deeds,

Endnotes

1 ‘The giblah ‘The direction of prayer, namely towards the Ka’ bal
2 asm: Saying, "Sami allt lian amidah’ ie, “Allah listens to the one who praises
Him] when standing following bowing in prayer

Prayer: Detestable Acts

It is detestable to turn around with one’s face and chest, for the Prophet
(PBUH) said about turning around in prayer, as related by Al-Bukhari:

“It is what Satan steals from the prayer of any one of you.”’

‘There are exceptional cases such as turning around in case of fear or for
a valid excuse. However, if one turns around with all one’ body, or turns his
back to the Ka‘ bah in cases other than fear, one’s prayer will be invalid, for one
thus turns and does not face the giblah during prayer without a legal excuse.
‘This shows that it is permissible to turn around in prayer only in the case of
fear, for it is one of the things that fighting necessitates, So, in cases other than
fear, it is permissible to turn with one’s face and chest only when necessary. Yet,
it is detestable to turn around unnecessarily during prayer, and if one turns
around with one’s whole body, one’s prayer becomes invalid.

It is also detestable to look toward the sky during prayer, as the Prophet
(PBUH) disallowed this saying:

“What is wrong with those people who look toward the sky during
prayer?”

136 ‏لل‎ PRAYER

The Prophet (PBUH) criticized such an act so bitterly that he continued saying:

“They should stop (looking toward the sky during prayer) or else
their eyesight would be taken awa

(Related by Al-Bukhari)

As we have previously mentioned, one should look only at the position of
prostrating during prayer. One should never let one’s sight wander everywhere
during prayer, looking at the walls, engraved patterns, writings, and the like, as,
this distracts one during prayer.

Il is detestable to close one’s eyes during prayer unnecessarily, as this is a
Jewish practice. Yet, it is not detestable to close one’ eyes when necessary, such
as closing them to avoid looking at what may distract one during prayer, like
decorations, ornaments, etc. This is the opinion tbnul-Qayyim (may Allah have
mercy on him) mentions in this regard’,

It is detestable to lean on one’s forearms when sitting during prayer, as the
Prophet (PBUH) sai

“When you raise your head after prostration, do not squat as a dog
squats”

‘This hadith is related by Ibn Majah,' and there are other Hadiths stressing
the same point.

It is also detestable to lean on a wall or the like when standing during
prayer, unless in case of necessity, such as an illness or the like, as leaning on
something facilitates standing up.

It is detestable to put one’s forearms flat while prostrating, stretching them
with elbows touching the ground, for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Perform the prostration properly and do not put your forearms
flat with elbows touching the ground like a dog.”

It is detestable as well to trifle in prayer, such as playing with one’s leg,
beard, garment or anything else during prayer, or playing with one’ hand on
the ground, and so on,

Among the detestable acts is placing one’s hands on one’s waist during
prayer, as such a posture is related to the unbelievers and the arrogant people,
and the Prophet (PBUH) forbade Muslims to imitate them; it is authentically
stated in a hadith related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim that the Prophet (PBUH)
forbade performing prayer with the hands on the waist".

Chapter 7= Priyers Detestable Acts 137

Interlacing one’ fingers and cracking one’s knuckles are also detestable
in prayer.

Itisalso detestable for one to perform prayer while there is some distracting
thing in front of one (such as drawings on the prayer mat) as this negatively
affects the perfection of one’s prayer

Itis detestable to perform prayer ina place where there are paintings or
drawings, as this in a way resembles idolatry, be they hung on walls or not,
according to the valid view in this regard.

It is detestable to perform prayer while being disturbed by something such
need to answer the call of nature (to urinate, excrete or break wind) ‏عه‎
‎being disturbed by extreme hot or cold weather, or extreme hunger or thirst, as
such issues hinder one from performing prayer tranquilly and submissively.

as one’

It isalso detestable to perform prayer in the presence of delicious food one
desires, as the Prophet (PBUH) said in the fudith related by Muslim:

“No prayer should be performed when the food is present, or when
one is prompted by the call of nature.”

‘The Muslim should avoid such detestable issues to observe the obligations
decreed by Allah, Exalted be He, devoutly, and to stand before Allah in prayer
attentively, tranquilly, and humbly.

It is detestable as well to make prostration restricted to the forehead
excluding the nose, as maintained by a group of heretics called the Rafidah,”
imitating whom is prohibited.

Itisalso detestable to wipe whatever attaches to one’s forehead or nose during
prayer following prostration, yet one is allowed to do so after finishing prayer.

During prayer itis detestable to play with one’s beard, to hem one’s garment,
to clean one’s nose, or the like, as this distracts one’s attention in prayer.

In brief, Muslims are required (o stand before Allah during prayer in full
devotion, in both heart and soul, doing nothing that may distract them, for
Allah says:

“Maintain with care the [obligatory] prayers and [in particular}
the middle [i.e. "Asr] prayer and stand before Allah, devoutly
obedient.” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 238)

138 Il: PRAYER

Accordingly, Muslims are required to perform prayer attentively, sub-
missively, and devoutly, observing what is decreed to be done therein, and
refraining from whatever acts or words that may affect its validity. By doing
so, their prayer will be performed properly, both in form and essence. It will
bea valid and sufficient prayer,

May Allah guide us all to goodness aiid felicity in both this world and the
Hereafter.

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhat (3291) [6/407],

2, AL-Bukhari (750) [2/302].

3 See the book of “Zédd Ma ‘dl'(1/75-76),

4 thn Majah (896) [1/483].

5 Al-Bukhari (532) [2/21] and Muslim (1102) [2/433].

6 AL-Bukhari (1220) (3/115) and Muslim (1218) (2/38)

7 Maslim (1246) [2/49],

£8 The Rafidal: A Shiite group who refused the callphates of Abi Bakr As-Siddiqand "Umar
Tbpul-Khattab and waged accusations against them and against many of the Prophet's
Companions as well.

Prayer: Desirable and
Permissible Acts

It is an act of the Sunnah for the one performing prayer to let no one pass
in front of him, for the Prophet (PBUH) said in a hadith related by Muslim:

“When anyone of you performs prayer, he should not let anyone pass
in front of him; if he (the passer) refuses to go, he (the prayer) should
turn him away forcibly for there is a devil with him (the passer).”"

However, if there is a concrete object in front of the one performing prayer,
such as a wall or the like, itis permissible to let others pass behind that barrier.
Similarly, it is permissible for the one performing prayer to let others pass in
front of him if the place is not wide enough and they have no other way to
pass from: in this case, the one performing prayer should not turn them away
if they want to pass in front of him. In addition, if one is performing prayer
in the Precinct of Mecca, one should not turn away those passing in front of
‘one, as it was related by the Five Compilers of Hadith that the Prophet (PBUH)
used to perform prayer in Mecca while people were passing in front of him
and there was no barrier or screen between both’.

140 Il: PRAYER

It is an act of the Surah for the imam (ie, leader in prayer) or the one
praying alone to perform prayer placing a concrete object in front of him as a
barrier so as to let no one pass in front of him. This is illustrated in the hadith
related by Abd Dawad and Ibn Majah on the authority of Abd Sa°id, in which
the Prophet (PBUH) says:

“When any one of you performs prayer he should have (or place) a
concrete object in front of him and keep close to ‏“باز‎

As for the ones led in prayer, they are screened by their imdin, so they do
not have to place any concrete object in front of them if their imam does. Itis
worth mentioning that it is not obligatory for one to place a concrete object as
a screen while performing prayer, for Tbn * Abbas reported:

“The Prophet (PBUH) performed prayer in an open space without
placing a concrete object in frant of him as a screen."

(Related by Imim Ahmad and Abi Dawid)

‘The concrete object put in front of one during prayer should be something
erect, which is approximately one cubit high, be it thin or wide. It is put,
as mentioned above, to hinder anyone from passing in front of one while
performing prayer. In case one is performing prayer in a desert, one should
perform prayer behind something fixed such as a tree, a stone, a stick, or the
like. 1f one is unable to insert a stick into the ground, it is permissible to put it
in front of oneself in a crosswise position.

1) is permissible for the ones led in prayer to correct the imam publicly
during prayer if the latter makes a mistake while reciting the Qur’an therein.

During prayer, it is permissible for one to put on a garment and the like,
‏ها‎ carry something or put it down, and to kill a snake or a scorpion, for the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Kill the two black things during prayer: the snake and the scorpion.”

(Related by Aba. Dawid and At-Tirmidht, and deemed salils (authentic)
by the latter)

Yet, one should not do many of these permissible acts during prayer
unnecessarily. So, ifone does such permissible acts excessively, repeatedly, and
unnecessarily, one’s prayer becomes invalid, as they distract one’s attention
during prayer.

‎Prayer: Desieable and Permissible Acts ta‏ :8 وات

‎Itis permissible for the one engaged in prayer to draw another's attention to
something urgent, such as answering someone knocking at the door, drawing
the imdm's attention to the latter's inattention in prayer, warning someone
‘who is in danger, and so on, Still, this is not to be done freely; men are only
allowed to say, "“Subhdn-Allah” (i.e. “Glorified be Allah), and women just fo
clap when they want to draw someone’ attention to something urgent, for the
Prophet said:

‎“If some problem arises during prayer, then the men should suy,
‘Subhén-Alla’ (i.e. Glorified be Allah), and the women should ‏"زم‎

‎(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

‎tig not detestable to greet the one performing prayer if the latter knows
how to return it; the one performing prayer is allowed to return greetings by
means of gesture, not words. In other words, if the one performing prayers
returns greeting by speaking, his prayer becomes invalid, as it is regarded
among the kinds of human speech which are prohibited during prayer; one
is allowed in this case either to return a greeting by gesture or to postpone
returning it until one ends prayer with taslini,

‎It is also permissible for the one performing prayer to recite more than
one sura (following the recitation of Al-Fatilah) in one ‏يلما عتم‎ according to
the sash (authentic) hadith stating that the Prophet (PBUH) recited the Suras
of Al-Bagarah (the Cow), An-Nis@? (Women), and Alu “Imran (the Family of
“imrdn) in one rak’ah while standing in prayer’, It is also permissible for
the one performing prayer to recite the same sura in two rak‘ahs, to divide
3 sura, reciting it in two rak'ahs, or to recite certain parts of a sura (such as
the middle or the last verses) during prayer. To illustrate, Imam Ahmad and
‘Muslim related on the authority of Tbn ° Abbas that the Prophet used to recite
the following verse in the first rak ‘ah of the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer’:

‎“Say, [0 believers], ‘We have believed in Allah and what has
5 (Quran: Al-Baqarah: 136)

‎been revealed to us.

‎And in the second rak'alt:
*, Say; '0 People of the Scripture, comteto a word that is equitable
between us and you...” (Quran: Alu 'Imrane64)

‎Moreover, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

‎‘.. So recite what is easy [for you] of the Quriin...”
(Qur'an: Al-Muzzammil: 20)

142 li: PRAYER

Yel, a Muslim should not keep doing so (i.e. reciting certain verses of the
Quran during prayer), but itis permissible to do it from time to time,

During prayer, itis permissible for one to seek refuge with Allah from the
Fire when reciting or listening to a verse in which the torment of the Fire is
mentioned, and to ask Allah for mercy when reciting or listening to a verse
in which Allah's mercy is mentioned. Likewise, it is permissible for the one
performing prayer to ask Allah to confer His blessings upon the Prophet
(PBUH) when reciting or listening to a verse in which the Prophet (PBUH) is
‘mentioned, as this is what the Prophet (PBUH) enjoined (us) to do whenever
he is mentioned.

Gentle reader, these are in brief the desirable and the permissible acts to
be observed during prayer, We have pointed them out so that you may benefit
from them and observe them when performing prayer, and be aware of the
rulings of your religion on prayer, We invoke Allah to grant all of us more
useful knowledge and guide us to the righteous good deeds.

To conclude, a Muslim should know that prayer is a great act of worship,
during which it is not permissible to do or say anything other than what is
enjoined by Allahis Messenger (PBUH), Therefore, you should, gentle reader, be
keen on the perfection of your prayer, and be aware of what makes it perfect and
what makes it imperfect, ‏مه‎ as to ensure performing it in the best way ever.

Endnotes

]2/447[ )1130( ستاساة 1

2 Abo Dawad (2016) [2/354]: An-Nasd'i (757) [1/400] and thn Majah (2958) [3/440

3 Abd Dawad (698) [1/316] and thn Majah (954) ]1/510[-

4 Abit Dawid (718) [1/324]; An-Nasati (752) [2/398] and Al-Bayhagi (3480) (2/387),

5 Aba Dawid (921) [1/369]; At~Tirmidhl (390) [2/233] An-Nasati (1203) [2/14] and ibn
Majah (41245) [2/82]

6 Al-Bukhari (719) [13/225] and Musliry (948) [2/365}

‘7 Muslim (1811) [3/303}.

‎Muslirn (1689) [3/249],‏ لل

CHAPTER

Prostration of Forgetfulness

Man is subject to forgetfulness and inattention, and Satan is eager to dis-
tract a Muslim from his prayer through whispering distractive thoughts to
turn him away. This may cause one’s prayer to be incomplete or over-per-
formed, out of inattention and distraction. Therefore, Allah has ordained
Muslims to prostrate at the end of prayer in case of inattention in order to
please Allah, the Most Gracious, to defeat Satan, and to make up for whatever
decrease or addition made inattentively in one’s prayer. Such a prostration is
called, by scholars, “Prostration of Forgetfulness.” It is worth mentioning that
the Prophet (PBUH) once forgot while performing prayer; this is one of the
signs of Allahs favor upon the Muslim nation to guide them to the perfection
of their religion through following the example of the Prophet (PBUH), and
to follow in his footsteps when they inattentively err during prayer.

It is authentically narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) sometimes forgot
while performing prayer. To illustrate, he (PBUH) once ended a four-rak ‘ah
prayer with taslim after performing only two rak ‘ahs (instead of four) and then
offered the prostration of forgetfulness in compensation ', It is also narrated

144 H-PRAVER,

that he (PBUH) once ended a four-rak ‘ah prayer with taslim after performing
only three ‏كلم لمم‎ (units of prayer)’. Another time, he (PBUH) forgot to sit
for the First Tashahhud in the second rak’ah of a prayer and prostrated for
forgetfulness afterwards’. The Prophet (PBUH) said;

“When any one of you forgets (i.e. errs inattenttively during prayer),

he should perform two prostrations.

Prostration of Forgetfulness is to be performed in three cases:

1- When one inattentively performs something additional during prayer
2- When one inattentively misses something integral in prayer

3- When one is uncertain whether he has performed somethingadditional
or missed some integral partin prayer

So, ‏ه‎ Muslim is to perform the prostration of forgetfulness in any of the
above-mentioned three cases according to the authentic proofs stated in the
Sunnals, yet not for every unintentional decrease, addition, or doubt during
prayer. The prostration of forgetfulness can be performed in both obligatory and
supererogatory prayers, as generally indicated in the legal proof’ in this regard.

The first case (that obligates the prostration of forgetfulness) is when
‏د‎ Muslim absentmindedly adds acts or words to his prayer. Concerning the
addition of acts, if one inattentively adds acts which are considered integral
‘parts of prayer, such as standing instead of sitting or vice versa or performing
extra bowing or prostration, one has to perform the two prostrations of
forgetfulness in compensation. This is because it was narrated on the authority
‘of [bn Mas' dd that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“When one (inattentively) adds or omits something in one’s prayer,
one should perform two prostrations.””

(Related by Imam Muslim)

Since addition in prayer causes the imperfection of one’s performance of
prayer, the prostration of forgetfulness has been ordained to make up for such
imperfection. Likewise, if one absentmindedly performs an extra ‏العام‎ and
does not remember until he finishes prayer, then one must perform the two
prostrations of forgetfulness. Yet, when one remembers while performing this
additional rak ‘ah, one has to sit immediately, recite Tashakhud (if one has not
already recited it), perform the two prostrations of forgetfulness, and then end
prayer with taslis,

Chapter 9: Prostration of Forgetfulness 45

If an imam (one who leads a congregational prayer) inattentively adds
such acts to a congregational prayer, men performing prayer behind him must
draw his attention by saying "Subhan-Alldh (Glory be to Allah), but women
can only clap their hands. Then, it is obligatory for the imam to respond to
them unless he is sure he is right; this is the legal way to be followed. Also, the
people led in prayer must draw theattention of the imm in the same way ifhe
inattentively omits any of the acts of prayer.

‘As for a verbal addition in prayer, if a Muslim absentmindedly recites
something inopportunely during prayer, such as reciting some verses of the
Qur'an while bowing or prostrating, or reciting a sura following Al-Fétihah
while standing in the last two rak“ahs of a four-rak"alt prayer or in the third
rak‘ah of the Maghrib (Sunset) Prayer, it is desirable for a Muslim in such
cases (0 perform the two prostrations of forgetfulness.

‘The second case (that obligates the prostration of forgetfulness) is when
a Muslim inattentively misses any of the acts of prayer. If the missed act is
‘one of the integral parts of prayer, such as the opening takbir, one’s prayer
becomes null and the prostration of forgetfulness does not make up for it,
It it is an integral part other than the opening lakbir, such as a bowing or
‏م‎ prostration, and one remembers before starting another rak ‘ak, one then
must go back to it and perform it first, and then perform what comes after
it, Yet, if one remembers such a missed integral part after starting another
rak’ah, this missed act nullifies the rak‘ah in which it was omitted so the
whole ‏وله علوم‎ must be re-performed before ending prayer with taslim and then
the prostration of forgetfulness is to be performed, This is because the missing
integral part cannot be made up for during the same rak ‘at in this case, Still,
if one remembers that missed integral part after taslim, it is considered ‏نه‎
‎complete, missed rak'ah, and one in this case must re-perform it individually,
perform the prostration of forgetfulness, then end it with taslin, provided the
remembrance is soon enough and one’ ablution is still valid. However, if one
remembers the missed integral part after a long interval after taslim, or when
one’s ablution is invalidated, one must re-perform the whole prayer.

Incase the missed integral part is the Final Tashahhud or taslim, it is not
regarded as missing a full ‏,ززم" مه‎ so one has only to perform it, offer the two
prostrations of forgetfulness, and then end prayer with tastim. On the other
hand, if one misses the First Tashalthud and remembers it before completely
standing upright for the following rak ‘ah, one can go back to perform it, But
if one has already stood upright, it is detestable for one to sit to perform it,
yet if he sits it does not nullify one’s prayer. However, if one has already stood

146 TI: PRAYER

upright and started recitation, it is prohibited for one then to sit to perform
it ‏بع.ة)‎ the missed First Tashalshud). This is because one in this case is already
engaged in another integral part of prayer (which is recitation) that must not
be interrupted.

Tf one misses glorifying Allah while bowing or prostrating, one has to go
back andl do it unless one has completely stood upright for the following rak’ah.
‘After that, one is to perform the two prostrations of forgetfulness (before faslinr)
and then end the prayer with taslim.

The third case (that obligates the prostration of forgetfulness) is when
one doubts whether one has added or missed some parts of one’ prayer. If
one is uncertain about the number of rak’ahs one has performed (whether
one has performed two or three rak'als for example), one has to proceed
taking the smaller number of rak ‘ahs for granted and base one’s prayer on
that assumption. Then, one completes ones prayer and performs the two
prostrations of forgetfulness before taslimt, So, the original ruling here is that
one is to re-perform what one is uncertain about whether one has performed
it or not. This ruling is implied in the following Hadith narrated by “Abdur-
Rahman Ibn *Awf (may allah be pleased with him):

“The Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘When anyone of you is in doubt
‘whether he has performed one or two rak"ahs (ie. uncertain about
(he number of rak ‘ahs he performed), he should regard it as (only)
one. Also, when one is in doubt whether he has performed two or
three rak‘ahs, he should regard them as two (rak ahs). "”

(Related by Imims Ahmad, Muslim, and At-Tirmidhi)

Ina congregational prayer, ifa Muslim is uncertain whether he has joined
the prayer from the first rak“al of the second, he is to consider it from the
second rak"ah, and perform the two prostrations of forgetfulness at the end
of his prayer. Likewise, when one joins a congregational prayer late and is
‘uncertain whether one has caught a full rak’ah or not, one is to disregard this
rak'ah (ie. must be re-performed) and then one performs twa prostrations
of forgetfulness at the end of one’s prayer.

‘To conclude, if one doubis that one has missed an integral part pf prayer,
one has to go back and perform jt, then perform what comes after it within
the same rak'ah, a5 mentioned above in detail. Yet, if the doubt concerns an
obligatory act of prayer, not an integral part, it has to be disregarded and one

then is not obliged to perform the two prostrations of forgetfulness. Moreover,

Chapter 9: Prossration of Forgetfulness 147

when doubt is related toaddition, not omission, such doubts to be disregarded,
as the original ruling is to offer the prostration of forgetfulness to make up for
inattentive omission, not addition, in prayer.

These are the rulings on prostration of forgetfulness in brief, and whoever
seeks more elaboration, he may refer to the books on fight rulings. May Allah
grant us success,

Endnotes

1 AleBuldhéri (482) [1/731] and Muslion (1288) ]3/69[

2 Muslim (1293) [3/73]

3 Al-Bukhari (829) [2/400] and Mustiny (1269) [3/60].

4 Muslin (1283) ]3/671

5 Mustins (1287) [3/69]

{6 Muslim (1272) (3/62): Ahmad (1655) [1/236]; At-Tirmidhi (398) [2/244] and tbr Majah
(1209) [2/63].

|CHAPTER |

10

Dhikr (Remembrance of Allah)
Following Prayer

Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, says:

“O you who have believed, remember Allah with much remem-
brance- and exalt Him morning and afternoon.”

Al-Ahzab: 41-42)

(Qu

Allah, Glorified be He, has enjoined dhikr (Remembrance of Allah) to be
said following the different acts of worship. To illustrate, Allah, Glorified be
He, says regarding prayer:

“And when you have completed the prayer, remember Allah
standing, sitting, or [lying] on your sides...”

(Qur'an: An-Nis@’: 103)

0 Us PRAYER,

Allah, Glorified be He, also says:

“And when the prayer has been concluded, disperse within the
land and seek from the bounty of Allah, and remember Allah

aften that you may succeed.” (Qur'an: Al-Jumu'ah: 10)

As for fasting, Allah commands Muslims to remember and glorify Him after
completing the fasting of the month of Ramadan; Allah, Glorified be He, says:

‎complete the period and to glorify Allah for that [to] which‏ هت"
‎He has guided you: and perhaps you will be grateful”‏

‎(Quran: Al-Bagarah: 185)

‎‘The same goes for Hajj (Pilgrimage); Allah commands Muslims to remember
Him after performing the rites of Hajj saying:

‎“And when you have completed your rites, remember Allah like
your [previous] remembrance of your fathers or with [much]

‎greater remembrance.” (Quran: Al-Baqarah: 200)

‎‘This Divine Command (ie. to remember Allah following acts of worship)
may be decreed to help a Muslim make up for any imperfection or evil
whisperings affecting the act of worship he performs. It may also be decreed
to make a Muslim feel that he is legally required to continue remembering and
worshiping Allah, and that his legal duty (towards Allah) is not restricted to
the performance of acts of (obligatory) worship.

‎A Muslim has to follow the Smal (Prophetic Tradition) in remembering
Allah (saying dhikr) following obligatory prayers, not to follow the invented
ways of Sufi groups who are innovators in religion. It is stated in Sahil: Muslim
(Muslints Authentic Book of Hadith) that Thawban (may Allah be pleased with
him) narrated:

‎“Whenever Allah's Messenger (PBUH) finished performing prayer
he wsed to ask Allalts Forgiveness thrice then say, ‘O Allaly, You are
the Perfection and You are the One Who grants perfection; Blessed
are You, O Owner of Majesty and Honor.”

‎In addition, itisstated in the'Two Sabjihs, on the authority of Al-Mughirah
Ion Shu’ bah (may Allah be pleased with him) that the Prophet (PBUH) used
to say following prayer:

‎Phere is no deity but Allah, Alone, Who has no partner. To Him
belongs dominion, and to Hin belongs (all) praise, and He is over

Chapter 1 Dhikr (Remembrance nf All} Following Prayer i

all things Omnipotent. © Allah! None cart withhold what You grant,
and none can grant what You withhold, and the fortune of aman of
means is useless before You (i.2, only good deeds are of value).

Tris also stated in Sahih Muslim (Muslims Authentic Book of Hadith), ov
the authority of ‘Abdallah [bnuz-Zubayr (may Allah be pleased with him)
that the Prophet (PBUH) used to say following every prayer:

"There is no deity but Allah, Alone, Who has no partner: To Him
belongs dominion, and to Him belongs (all) praise, and He is over
all things Omnipotent. There is neither might mor power except in
Allah. There is no deity but Allah and we worship none but Fim,
Alone, Ta Him belong all bounties, to Him belongs all grace, and to
Him is worthy praise accorded. There is no deity but Allah;
sincere to Him in religion, although the disbelievers dislike it

e are

‘Moreover, it is stated in the Sunan, on the authority of Aba Dharr (may
Allah be pleased with him), that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Whoeversaysten times immediately after finishing the Eajr (Dawn)
Prayer, before moving from his place or talking to anyone, “There
isno deity but Allah, Alone, Who has no partner, To Him belongs
dominion, and to Hirn belongs (all) praise. He gives life and causes
death, and He is over all things Omnipotent; ten good deeds will be
recorded for him, ten sins will be eliminated from him, he will be
upgraded ten degrees (in reward), he will be safeguarded from all
kinds of harm all that day, he will be guarded against Satan, and
no sin can overtake him on that day (and nullify his good deeds)
except associating others in worship with Allah.”

At-Tirmidhi commented on this hadith saying, “This is a hasan, sa
hadith (i.e. a good and authentic hadith). Likewise, iis an act of the Sienriah to
say the aforesaid supplication of dhikr ten times following the Maghrib (Sunset)
Prayer, according to a hadith related by Imam Ahmad on the authority of Umm
Salamah,’ and another hadith stated in Sahil Ibn Hibbidn (Ibn Hibban’s Authentic
Book of Hadith) on the authority of Abt ‏اروم‎ Al-Ansirt". Moreover, it isan act,
of the Sunnah to say seven times following the Fajrand the Maghrib Prayers

"0 my Lord, protect me from the Fire."”

‘This is according to the hadiths related by Imams Ahmad, Aba Dawid, An-
‘Nasali, Ibn Majah and other compilers of Hadith.

152 Ul: PRAYER

Among the ways of dhikr is saying, “Subhdn-Ailah” (Glory be to Allah),
“Al-hamdu-lillah” (Praise be to Allah), “Allahu-AKbar” (Allah is the Greatest)
respectively thirty-three times each, and then saying to complete a hundred:

“There is no deity but Allah, Alone, Who hias no partner. To Him
belongs dominion, and to Him belongs (all) praise, and He is over
all things Omnipotent.”

This stated in Sahih Muslim (Muslims Authentic Book of Hadith) that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

"Yfanyone extols Allah (saying, ‘Subhdn-Allah i.e, ‘Glory be to Allah)
after (performing) every prayer thirty-three times, and praises Allah
(saying, Al-hamdu-lillalt ie. ‘Praise be to Allah’) thirty-three times,
and declares His Greatness (saying, ‘Allahu-Akbar’ i.e, ‘Allah is the
Greatest’) thirty-three times, ninety-nine times in all, and says ‏وا‎
‎complete a hundred: ‘There is no deity but Allah, Alone, Who has no
Partner. To Him belongs dominion, and to Him belongs (all) praise,
and He is over all things Omnipotent; his sins will be forgiven even
if they are as abundant as the foam of the sea."

After saying that dhikr following the performance of prayer, it is preferred
fora Muslim to recite the following suras and verses:

1. Ayatul-Kurst (ie, the Verse of the Throne)!

2. The Sura of AL-khlas (Sincerity of Faith)"
3, The Sura of Ai-Falag (Daybreak)
4, ‘The Sura of An-Nas Mankind)"

‘An-Nas@i and At-Tabarani related on the authority of Abd Umamah (may
Allah be pleased with him) that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

"Whoever recites Ayatul-Kursi (ie. the Verse of the Throne) following
(performing) every prayer, nothing will be between him and (entering).
Paradise but death”

‘This means that nothing delays him from entering Paradise except being
alive. In another hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Whoever recites Ayatul-Kursi following (performing) every prayer
will ben Allah’ covenant of protection until the following prayer."

Chapter (0: Die (Remembrarice of Allah) Folloiving: Prayer 153

Itisalsa stated in the Sunan that ' Ugbah Ibn ’ Amir (may Allah be pleased
with him) narrated:

"Allah Messenger(PBUH) commandedmetorecite Al-Mu ‘awwidhatan
(the Suras of AL-Falag (Daybreak) and An-Nas (Mankind) following
every prayer.”

Alltheaforementioned honorable hadiths state the legality of these religious
supplications of diikr following obligatory prayers, and the great rewards
prepared for those who observe them. So, we should keep on observing them,
following in the footsteps of the Prophet (PBUH). We should also bear in mind
that they are to be said after concluding prayers with taslim (i.e. immediately
after finishing performing prayers), before moving from the place where we
have performed prayer.

Immediately after concluding prayer with faslim, these supplications of
dhikr are to be said in the following sequence:

+ Asking Allah's Forgiveness three times

+ Saying, "© Allah, You are the Perfection and You are the One Who
grants perfection; Blessed ure You, O Owner of Majesty and Honor.”

+ Saying, “There is no deity but Allah, Alone, Who has no partner. To
Him belongs dontinion, aid to Him belongs (all) praise, and He is over
all things Ommipotent. O Allah! None can withhold what You grant,
and none can grant what You withhold, and the fortune of a man of
means is useless before You (ie. only good deeds are of value).”

+= Saying, “There is neither might nor power except in Allah. There is no
deity but Allah and we worship none but Him, Alone. To Him belong
all bounties, to Him belongs all grace, and ‏هل‎ Him is worthy praise
accorded. There is no deity but Allah; we are sincere to Him in religion,
although the disbelievers dislike it.”

٠ Saying, “Subhan-Allah” (Glory be to Allah), “Al-hamdu-lillah” (Praise
beto Allah), “Allahw-Akbar” (Allah is the Greatest) respectively thirty-
three times each, and then saying to complete a hundred, “There is no
deity but Allah, Alone, Who has no partner, To Him belongs dominion,
and to Him belongs (alt) praise, and He is over all things Omnipotent?”

+ Saying ten times following the Fajr (Dawn) and the Maghirib (Sunset)
Prayers, “There is na deity but Allah, Alone, Who has no partner, 15
Him belongs dominion, and to Him belongs (all) praise. He gives life
and causes death, and He is over all things Oranipotenc” then saying
seven times, "0 my Lord, protect mie from the Hellfire.”

Us PRAYER.

+ Reciting Ayatul-Kursi (the Verse of the Throne), and the Suras oF
Al-Ikhlas (Sencerity of Faith) and ALMu ‘awwidhatén (the Suras of
‘Al-Falaq (Daybreak) and An-Nas (Mankind)), It is also desirable to
recite each of these suras three times following the Fajr (Dawn) and
the Maghrib (Sunset) Prayers.

+ Following prayers; it isalso desirable to say tahlil," tasbih," tahmid,"and
takbir" aloud, individually not chorally, To count saying tasbih, talumicl,
and fakbir thirty-three times each, one can use one’ fingers, as they
will be questioned (by Allah) and will speak and testify about one’s
deeds on the Day of Judgment, It is also permissible to use a rosary
instead of one’s fingers for that purpose, provided one is aware that it
by no means has a special virtue over using one’ fingers. Still, using a
tosary is deemed detestable by some scholars. So, if Muslim believes
that a rosary used for counting the times of the aforesaid dhikr has
any special virtue or superiority, it becomes an innovation in religion,
as is the case with the Sufis who wear rosaries as necklaces or make
them like bracelets in their hands, This aforementioned behavior is
not only an innovation in religion, but it is also a kind of ostentation
and affectation

+ After finishing the aforesaid supplications of dhikr, a Muslim should
invoke Allah secretly asking Him for whatever he desires, for invocation
after performing prayer and saying those glorious supplications of
dhikr is more likely to be granted by Allah, Itis prohibited for a Muslim
to raise his hands while invoking Allah after obligatory prayers as
some people mistakenly do, for this is an act of innovation in religion;
this may sometimes be done after supererogatory prayers. Similarly,
‘A Muslim should not raise his voice while invoking Allah, so as to be
nearer to sincerity and submissiveness and far away from ostentation.

In some countries, some people are used to raising their voices and hands

chorally while invoking Allah after performing prayer, and sometimes the
imam (one who leads people in prayer) invokes Allah while raising his voice
and hands, and the attendants reply “Amin (amen))” raising their voices and
hands as well. Such a practice is an abominable innovation in religion, as it has
neither been narrated to haye been observed by the Prophet (PBUH) following
prayers - be it the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer, the “Agr (Afternoon) Prayer, or any
other obligatory prayer - nor deemed desirable by any Muslim. Shaylhul-
Islam Ibn Taymiyah said” in this regard:
‘Chapter (0: Dhikr (Remembrance of Allah) Following Prayer 155

“Whoever reported that Indi Ash-Shafi't deemed it desirable (i.e.
deemed raising the yoices and hands chorally in supplication desivable)
‘must have misquoted hint.”

According to the above, we have to follow in the footsteps of the Prophet
(PBUH) and stick to his Swinah (Prophetic Tradition), for Allah, Exalted be
He, says:

‘..And whatever the Messenger has given you - take; and what
he has forbidden you - refrain from. And fear Allah; indeed,
Allah is severe in penalty.” (Quran: Al-Hashr; 7)

Allah, Glorified be He, also says:

“There has certainly been for you in the Messenger of Allah an
excellent pattern for anyone whose hope is int Allah and the last
day and [who] remembers Allah often.”

(Quran: Al-Abzib: 21)

Endnotes

1 Muslim (1333) [5/92].

2 The Two Satis: The Two Authentic Books of A-Rukhart and Muslin,

3 Al-Bukhart (844) [2/420] and Mustim (1337) [3/93]

4 Muslim (1342) [3/94].

5 The Siolan refers to compilations of the Prophetic hadiths classified according to the
Islamic jurispradential subjects; the main four compilers of the Suna are Abd Dawad,
Ibn Majah, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasit

6 At-Tirmidhi (3484) [5/515]

7 Ahmad (26430) [6/298] and Haythami mentioned, in his book Majma* Az-Zawal i
(The Collection of Additional Hadiths), deenaad it hasan hadith (10/108),

8 Ibn Hibban (2023) [5/369],

9 Abi Dawa (5079) [5/200].

40 Muslim (1351) [3/971

11 Verse No. 255 of the Sura of Al-Bagarah (the Cow): Chapter No. 2 of the Quran.

12 Chapter No. 112 of the Qurin.

13 Chapter No. 113 of the Quen.

14 Chapter No. 114 of the Quran, ‏بع‎ the last Chapter of the Qur'in.

15 An-Nast{i in his book “Amal A/-Yawm Wal-Laylat (Supplications of the Day and
‘Night) (100); At-Tabarint in his book AL-Mu jan Al-Kabir (The Great Lexicon) (7532)
[8/114] and tbnus-Sunni in his book ‘Amal Al-Yawm Wal-Laylah (Supplications of the
Day and Night) (124)

‎PRAYER,‏ با

‎1-Tabaran it his book ‏دام ااام‎ AL-Kabir (The Great Lexicon) (2733) |3/83-84],
17 Abit Dawiid (1523) [2/123 At-Tirmidhi (2908) [5/171] and An-Nasd' (1335) [2/77].
4 Haha ill” (ive. There is no deity but Allah),

‎Glory be to Allah).

‎20 Tabi: Saying, “Al-hemidu-tllah” (ie. Praise be to Allah)

‎21 Takbir: Saying, “Allélur-Akbar” (ie, Allah is the Greatest).

‎Fatdwn (22/512),‏ ال “تامزا

Voluntary Prayer

We should know that our Lord, Glorified and Exalted be He, has ordained
voluntary prayers, side by side with the obligatory ones, as a means for His
servants to draw near to Him. Performing voluntary prayers is considered
among the best means of bringing oneself nearer to Allah. It ranks next to
jihad (fighting or striving in the Cause of Allah) and seeking knowledge, for
the Prophet (PBUH) always drew himself near to Allah by means of voluntary
prayers as he (PBUH) said:

“Keep on the right course and (know that) you will not be able to
do all good acts; and know that the best of your (good) deeds is
prayer.”

Prayer combines different acts of worship such as reciting the Noble Qur'an,
bowing, prostrating, supplicating Allah, being humble and submissive to Him,
imploring and glorifying Him, declaring His greatness (by saying takbir), and
praying to Him to confer His blessings upon the Prophet (PBUH).

158 Il: PRAYER.

Generally, voluntary prayers are of two types:

‘The first is called “regular supererogatory prayers” as they have specified
times of performance, and the second is called “non-regular supererogatory
prayers,” whose performance is not restricted to certain times. The first type
of voluntary prayers has some subcategories of which some are more stressed
than others: the most stressed of them are the Witr Prayer, the Terdivth Prayer,
the Prayer for Rain, and the Eclipse Prayer respectively. Each of these prayers
‘will be dealt with separately in detail in the following chapters, Allah willing.

Endotes

1 ‏مها‎ Majah (277) (1/178); Ahmad (22278) [5/277] and Al-Hiakim. Al-Hkim graded itas
authentic, and Adh-Dhababi was of the same opinion as that of Al-Hakim. l-Albant
also graded it as authentic in his hook ‘Sahil Jami’ (952)

2 the Witr Prayer; A supererogatory prayer consisting of an odd number of rak ahs
(one, three, five, seven, nine, eleven or thirteen) and it is performed any time between
the ‘sha’ (Night) and the Eajr (Dawn) Prayers.

3 The Tariwilt Prayer: Supererogatory prayer performed afiet the “Isha! (Night) Prayer
during the month of Ramadin,

2

Witr Prayer

Letus start with the Witr Prayersinceitisimportant,asitis the moststressed
voluntary prayer, and some scholars are of the opinion that it is obligatory to
perform it. Generally, the act of worship whose incumbency is disputable is
more stressed than any other act which is agreed to be not obligatory. Muslims
agree on the legality of the Witr Prayer so it should not be abandoned. The
testimony of whoever insists on leaving this prayer is not to be accepted. Imam
Ahmad says, “Whoever abandons (performing) the Witr Prayer intentionally
is a bad man whose testimony is not to be accepted." Ahmad and Abi Dawid
relate as marfii’ (traceable) hadith that the Prophet (PBUH) says:

“Whoever does not perform the Witr Prayer does not belong to us.”

“The Witr is the name of the rak’ah (unit of prayer) separated from its
preceding rak'ahs, or three, five, seven, nine, or eleven (continuous) rak“ahs
(performed with only one final taslim). If these rak ‘ahs are separated by two or
more taslims (final Salams in prayer), the Witr is the rak’ah separated alone.
The time for the Witr Prayer starts immediately after the ‘Isha’ (Night) Prayer
and continues until dawn, In the Two Sahihs, ‘Aishah (may Allah be pleased
with her) says:

160. Hl: PRAYER

“Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) performed the Witr Prayer at different
nights at various hours extending (from the Night Prayer) up to the
last hour of the night.”

It is stated in many hadiths that the time of performing the Witr Prayer is
the whole night except the time before the ‘Isha’ Prayer. If a Muslim is sure
to wake up late at the last time of the night, it is desirable for him to perform
the Witr Prayer then; however, if he is not certain (to be awake at this time),
he should perform this prayer before going to bed as recommended by the
Prophet (PBUH). Imam Muslim relates on the authority of Jabir (may Allah
be pleased with him) that the Prophet (PBUH) says:

“If anyone of you is afraid that lie may not be able ta get up at the
end ofthe night, let hint perform the Witr Prayer and then sleep. And
if he is confident of getting up and performing prayer at night, then
let him perform it at the end of it, for the recitation (of the Qurtin) at
the end of the night is witnessed (by angels), which is better"

‘The Witr Prayer can be as short as one rak‘alt (unit of prayer) according
to the faddiths (related to this ruling) and as narrated from ten of the Prophet's
‘Companions (may Allah he pleased with them all). Yet, itis desirable to perform
the Shaj’” before the Witr Prayer. The rak’ahs of the Witr Prayer can be as
many as eleven or thirteen, uttering tastint at the end of every two rak ‘alts and
performing the Witrwith a single ‏ماله "لمر‎ Imam Muslim relates that ° Aishah
{may Allah be pleased with her) narrates:

“Allalis Messenger (PBUH) used to perform eleven rak ahs at night,
performing the Witr with a single rak’ alt”

In another narration, she says:

uttering taslim at the end of every two rak’alis and performing
the Witr with a single ont”

Moreover, a Muslim is permitted to perform eleven continuous rak'ahs,
with one Tashahhudin the tenth rak at and another Tashahhud in the eleventh,
and then end his prayer with fastim. Also, he may perform eleven continuous
rak’ahs with only one Tashahhud in the last one (before ending his prayer with
taslint). Yet, the first way of performing the Witr Prayer is more desirable.

Besides, a Muslim is permitted to perform nine continuous rak‘ahs, with
a Tashahhud in the eighth rak'ah and another in the ninth, and then end his
prayer with faslim, He also may perform seven or five continuous rak‘als,
with one Tashahlud in the end after which he is to end the prayer with taslim,
Umm Salamah (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated:

Chapcet 12: Wier Prayer Hot

“Allali’s Messenger (PBUH) used to perform the Witr with five or
seven rak'‘ahs (units of prayer) without talking or uttering tastinn
between them."

A different way to perform the Witr Prayer is to perform two rak'ahs ancl
say taslim then perform a single (last) one.

It is desirable to recite the Sura of Al-A'Id (te Most High)’ in the first
rak’ah, the Sura of Al-Kafiriin (the Dishelievers)" in the second and the Sura
of AL Ikhlés (Sincerity of Faith)" in the third.

‘Therefore, it became evident that itis permitted to perform eleven, thirteen,
nine, seven, five, three, or one rak'ah, yet the highly desirable is to perform
eleven rak"ahs and the least desirable is three rak'ahs, but it is sulficient to.
perform only one rak‘ah. In addition to this, it is desirable to recite quot
(invocation) after rising from bowing in the last rak'ah, invoking Allah and
saying the following supplication related about the Prophet (PBUH):

"0 Allah! Guide me among those You have guided...”

Endnotes

1 See: ‘Majmi'ul Farawet [23/127.253),

2 Ahmad (9678) [2/443] and Aba Dawa (1419) [2/87].

3 Al-Bukhaei (996) [2/626] and Muslin (1734) [3/267],

4 Muslim (1764) [3/277]

5 The Shaf’: I generally refers to any prayer consisting of all even mumber of ‏يكلم" ما‎
and it particularly refers to the even number of rak “ahs performed before the final
rak’ alt of the Witr Prayer.

6 Muslim (1714) [5/259].

7 Muslim (1715) [3/259],

8 An-Nasd't (1713) [3/266] and Ibn Majah (192) [2/55)

9 Chapter No, 87 of the Qur'an,

10 Chapter No, 109 of the Qur'én,

11 Chapter No. 112 of the Qur'an.

12 Abo Dawad (1425) [2/90]: At-Tirmldht (465) [2/328]; An-Nasdi (1744) (3/275) and
‘bn Majah (1178) [2/49]

3

Tardwih Prayer

The Tardwih Prayer (Nightly Supererogatory Prayer during the month
of Ramadan) is among what Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) has ordained for
Muslims in Ramadan, and it is a stressed act of the Sunnah. It is called ‘the
‘Tarawih’ which means in Arabic ‘intervals of relaxation; because Muslims
used to take an interval of relaxation after every four rak‘has' of the Tardwiht
Prayer as they used to prolong the prayer. It is more desirable to perform the
Tarawih Prayer in congregation in the mosque, as the Prophet (PBUH) led his
Companionsin performing the Tardwih Prayer for some nights then he stopped
for fear that it (Le, the Tardwih Prayer) might become a burden on Muslims. In
the Two Sahihs, * Aishah (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated:

“One night, Allahs Messenger (PBUH) performed prayer in the mosque
and some people followed him. The next night he also performed
prayer and too many people gathered. On the third or the fourth night,
‘more people gathered, but Allahts Messenger (PBUH) did not come
out to them. In the morning he said, 1 saw what you were doing and
nothing but the fear that it (ie. the prayer) might be enjoined on you,
stopped me from coming to you."

164 Hy PRAYER

Inthe narration of Al-Bukharl the words ".. avid that happened jn the month
of Ramadan” were added, It is well-known that the Companions performed
the Tardwih Prayer after the death of the Prophet (PBUH) and the Muslim
nation has accepted and followed this practice.

‘The Prophet (PBUH) says:
“Whoever stands (performing prayer) with the imam until he

{finishes prayer, (the reward for) performing prayer all the night wil
bbe recorded for him.”

‘The Prophet (PBUH) also says:

"Whoever performs prayer during the nights of Rarnadan faithfully
out of sincere faith and hoping for Divine reward (not for showing
off), all his past sins will be forgiven?”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

‘Thus, performing the Tardwih Prayer isa stated (stressed) act of the Sunnah
that a Muslim should not leave.

Concerning the number of rak’als (units of prayer) performed in this
prayer, nothing definite is narrated about the Prophet (PBUH) and hence
Muslims are free to choose. Shaykhul-tslim Ibn Taymiyah said:

‘A Muslim can perform twenty rakahs (in the Tarawilt Prayer)
according to the famous opinion of the Hanbali and Shafi'i Schools,
thirty six rak*ahs with regard to the Maliki School, eleven rak'ahs,
or thirteen, Thus, all is good and a Muslim can perform more or less
rak’ahs according to the (long or short) time of his standing reciting
the Qurtin

When “Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) gathered Muslims to
perform the Tarawih Prayer in congregation behind Ubayy Ibn Ka’b, the latter
performed twenty rak‘ahs, Some of the Companions used to perform more
‏كاله" زمر‎ and other Companions performed less. So, there is no definite text
related about the Prophet (PBUH) determining a certain number of rak'ahs
to be performed in the Tardwih Prayer. Many imdms of mosques perform the
Tardwih Prayer without paying attention or feeling tranquil while bowing or
prostrating. Feeling tranquil is an integeal part of prayer and ‏ه‎ Muslim must
pay attention while standing before Allah, Exalted be He, and learn from the
Words of Allah (ue. the Qur’n) while they are being recited. Of course, a
‘Muslim cannot fulfill this when performing prayer with detestable haste. It is
more befitting to perform ten rak‘alis in a state of tranquility and recite the

Chapeer 13 init Prayer ‏كنا‎

‘Noble Qur'an fora long time than to perform twenty yak’ alts with detestable
haste, This is because the essence of prayer is to turn one’s heart to Allah,
Exalted and Ever Majestic be He, Verily, a few rak’ahs (with tranquility and
reflection) can outweigh so many ones. Also, it is better to recite the Quran
with measured recitation than recite it with haste. It is allowable to be quick in
reciting the Qur'an provided that no letter is neglected since itis prohibited to
neglect a letter for the sake of quick recitation, However, it is good for an imam
{in congregational prayer) to recite the Qur'an in a way that benefits those
performing prayer behind him. Allah dispraises those who recite the Quran
without understanding its meaning as Allah, Exalted be He, reveals

“And among thene are unlettered ones who da not know the
Scripture except [indulgence in] wishful thinking..."
(Quran; Al-Baqarah; 78)
The verse refers to those people who recite (the Book) without understand-

ing its meaning, Allah has revealed the Quran for Muslims to understand its
meaning and carry out its rulings, not only to recite it,

Some imams of mosques do not perform the Tardwih Prayer as it should
be performed, for they recite the Qur‘in so hastily that they violate the sound
reciting of the Quran. Moreover, they do not feel tranquil while standing,
bowing, or prostrating though feeling tranquil is an integral part of prayer.
Furthermore, they may perform only a few rak’aks (units of prayer). That is,
those imams combine many detestable acts which are performing only a few
rak ahs, shortening the time of prayer, and reciting the Qur'an in a bad way.
‘Thus, they perform worship heedlessly’. They must fear Allah, establish their
prayer well, and not deprive themselves and those (performing prayer) bebiind
them from performing the Tariiwiht Prayer according to the legal way’. We
invoke Allah to guide all Muslims fo success.

Endnotes

(The Tindwitt Prayer isto be performed in two ‏عل‎ ahs successively the same as Tahajjud
(the Night Vigil Prayer). Some imams oF masques who are nol well-versed in. Figh
Uslamic Jurisprudence) may not say lastim after every (wo rik as in the Tarawih or
Tahajjud, which is wrong and contradictory to the Surah. Scholars state that whoever
stands to perform a third ‏اله لم‎ in the Taniwib or Tahajjud is the same as him who.
(mistakenly) stands to perform a thied rak'ah in the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer (hich,
consists only of two ruk'ats). Thus, his prayer is invalid. Sheikh “Abdul-' Ade bn
Baz. (may Allah have mercy on iin) lis cumposed a reply to those people in which
he shows their Fault,

166 Us PRAYER

2 Al-Bukhari (1129) [3/14] and Muslin (1780) [3/283]

3 Abt Dawid (1375) [2/71]; At-Tiemnidhi (805) [3/169}; An-Nasal (1363) [2/93 and tn
‘Maja (1327) [2/122]

4 Al-Bukhicl (37) [1/124] and Muslim (1776) (3/282).

5 See: Al-Akhbar AL-"Ihniyyah win ALIKhtivantt Al-Fighiyyal!’ written by Shiykhul-
[skim Ibn Taymiyah

6 Some of the imdms of mosques niise their voices in recitation of the Qur’in using

loudspeakers, thus, they confuse the people performing, prayer jn other mosques; a
thing which is not permissible, Shaykhul-Iskira Ibn Taymiyah said:
“If there is anyone reciting the Qur’tn while the people are performing
supererogatory prayer, he should not raise his voice in a way that may
distract their attention. This is because the Prophet (PBUH) came ott! to his
Companions while they were performing prayer in the mosque and said to
them, 'O people, everyone of you is calling his Lord, so let no one of you raise
hhis voice in recitation over others."

7 Some of the imams of mosques become in haste while reciting the Qur'an in the
Tardwiki Prayer in order ta finish reciting all the Qur'an by the beginning of the last
ten days of Ramadan or by the middle of them (the last ten days of Ramadan), When
he finishes the Qua, he leaves the mosque and travels to perform ‘Umrah (Lesser
Pilgrimage) leaving another idm instead of him who may not be fit to undertake
the duties of the iniém, This is @ great mistake that wastes the duty he is assumed to
tandertake, which is leading the people in prayer until the end of Ramadin, Doing
‏عط‎ duty (i. leading the people in prayer) isa duty upon the imam while performing
"Umrah is only a desirable act. Thus, itis not right to abandon a duty far the sake of a
desirable act, This is because staying at his mosque to perform the duty he is charged
with is better than performing ‘Unrrah. Some other imams start shortening the time
of prayer and the recitation when they finish reciting the Qur'in. They da this in the
last nights of Ramadan which are the nights of emancipation from the Hellfire. It is
as if these finds consider that what is meant from the Tarawih Prayer and Tathajjuel
(Night Vigil Prayer) is onty finishing the recitation of the Qur'an not spending these
blessed nights in standing for prayer, following the Sunmah of the Prophet (PBUH!) and
seeking to have the merit of these nights. This is sign of theie ignorance, which shows
their heedlessness to-acts of worship, Weask Allah to return them to what is right

4

Sunnah Ratibah: Prayers
Performed along with
Obligatory Prayers

You should know, my dear Muslim brothers, that a sunnah ratibal (a regularly-
observed supererogatory) prayer ought to be performed and it is detestable to
abandon it. Whoever keeps leaving the sunnah rétibah commitsasin and, according

to some Imams, nullifies his uprightness because his leaving such worship implies
carelessness and weakness in his faith

There are ten rak'ahs (units of prayer) (or twelve according to some
scholars) considered as sunnah ratibah prayers:

“ Two rak ‘ahs before the Zuhr (Noon) Prayer (or four rak ‘ahs according,
to some scholars)

+ Two rak‘ahs after the Zuhr (Noon) Prayer

168 Ti: PRAYER

** Two rak‘ahs after the Maghrib (Sunset) Prayer
% Two rak'ahs after the ‘sha’ (Night) Prayer
% Two rak ‘ahs before the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer

‘The proof of these aforementioned sunnah ratibah (regularly-observed
supererogatory) prayers is the hadith teported on the authority of Ibn "Umar
(may Allah be pleased with him) who said:

‎remember ten (supererogatory) rak'ahs from Allah's Messenger‏ ل"
‎(PBUH). (He used to perform) two rak'ahs before the Zuhr (Noon)‏
‎after the Maghrib‏ عله لمر ‎Prayer and two rak ‘ahs afier it, two‏
‎(Sunset) Prayer in his house, and two rak'ahs after the Isha‏
‎(Night) Prayer in his house, and two rak ‘ahs before the Fajr (Dawn)‏
‎Prayer and at that time nobody would enter the house of the Prophet‏
‎(PBUR). Hafgah (the wife of the Prophet) told me that when the‏
‎prayer caller (mueezin) pronounced the prayer call (adhdnt) and‏
‎perform two‏ ما ‎the dawn began to break, the (the Prophet) ssed‏
‎rak'ahs."‏

‎(Related by Al-Bukharf and Muslim)

‎In Sahih Muslim (Muslinds Authentic Book of Hadith),” Xishah (may Allah
be pleased with her) said:
“Before the Zulir (Noon) Prayer, the Prophet (PBUH) used to
‘perform four rak ‘ahs in my house; then he would go out and lead
the people in prayer; then come in and perform two rak' aks,

‎‘This hadith implies that it is more desirable to perform the sunnah ratibah
prayer at home than to petform ‏مذ اذ‎ the mosque, for the sake of some benefits,
such as:

‎+ Keeping away from ostentation and self-conceit and screening acts of
worship from the eyes of people

‎+ Perfection of submissiveness and sincerity (to Allah)

‎+ Maintaining the house, whereptayerisperformed, through remembrance
of Allah and prayer which causes mercy to descend upon the people
living therein, and keeps Satan away. The Prophet (PBUH) says:

‎“Perform some of your (supererogatory) prayers at home, and do not
take your houses as graves.”

‎Sunaiab Rasibalr Peayers Peeformed along with Obligacory 169‏ :ذا عسو

‎The most stressed of the aforementioned sunnah ratibah (regularly
observed supererogatory) prayers are the two rak ‘ahs (units of prayer) befare
the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer, for ‘Aishah (may Allah be pleased with her) says:

‎he Prophet (PBUH) was never more regular and particular in
performing any supererogatory prayer than the two (supererogatory)
vrak‘ahs of the Fajr Prayer.”
(Related by Al-Bukhariand Muslim)

‎The Prophet (PBUH) also said:

‎“The two (supererogatory) ‏صلم عات"‎ of the Fajr Prayer are better
than the world and (all) that it contains.”

‎So, the Prophet (PBUH) used to keep these two rak'ahs before the Fajr
Prayer as well as the Witr Prayer both in residence and on journeys",

‎On journeys, it is not narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) performed any
regularly-observed supererogatory prayers (sunnah ratibah) other than the
two rak"ahs before the Fajr Prayer and the Witr Prayer. When Ibn ‘Umar
(may Allah be pleased with them) was asked about the supererogatory prayer
of the Zuhr Prayer, he said:

‎“Were 1 16 perform supererogatory prayer, 1 would have completed
the obligatory prayer (for during journey, one is not asked to perform
supererogatory prayer and he is to shorten obligatory prayer).”

‎Besides, Ibnul-Qayyim (may Allah have mercy on him) stated:

‎“On journeys, it is a practice of the guiding Sunnah of the Prophet
(PBUH) that he used to perform obligatory prayers anly, Tt is wot
narrated about him (PBUH) that he performed, on his journeys,
any regularly-observed supererogatory prayers other than the two
rak'ahs before the Fajr Prayer and the Witr Prayer.”

‎Itis.an act of the Sunnah to make the two rak'ahs before the Fajr (Dawn)
Prayer light, as *A’ishah (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated:

‎“The Prophet (PBUH) used to make the 1wo rak'ahs before the Fajr
Prayer very light.”

‎Ibis also an act of the Sumiah to recite the Sura of ALKafiriin (the
Disbelievers)" after the Sura of A-Fatihah (the Opening Chapter of the Qurin)
in the first rak ‘ah, and the Sura of Al-Ikhias (Sincerity of Faith)’ in the second.
The Prophet (PBUH) also used to recite the verse, "Say, [O believers], ‘We have

io lls PRAYER,

believed in Allah and what has been revealed to us ..." (Qur'an: Al-Baqarah:
136) in the first rak‘ah and the verse, “Say, 'O People of the Scripture, come to
aword that is equitable between us and you...” (Quran: Alu ‘Imran: 64) in
the second rak‘ah.

Concerning the two supererogatory rak'ahs after the Maghrib (Sunset)
Prayer, itis also an act of the Sunnah to recite the Sura of Al-Kéfiriin after Al-
Fitinh in the first rak'ah, and the Sura of AL-TkhlAgin the second. Al-Bayhaqi,
At-Tirmidhi and other compilers of Hadith related that Tbn Mas’ tid said:

"1 cannot count (the number of times) I heard Allah's Messenger
(PBUH) reciting the Sura of Al-Kafirin and the Sura of ALIKiilas
in the two (supererogatory) rak'ahs after the Maghrib Prayer and
the two (supererogatory) rak ‘ahs before the Fajr Prayer.”

Ifyou miss any of the aforementioned supererogatory prayers (of sunnah
rétibah), it is an act of the Sunnah to make up for it, This also is to be done
with regard to the Witr Prayer, for itis an act of the Sunnah to make up for it
during the day, as the Prophet (PBUH) made up for the two supererogatory
rak ahs before the Fajr Prayer along with the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer when he
slept and could not get up to perform them". Also, it is narrated that when
the Prophet (PBUH) was (so) busy that he missed the two supererogatory
rak’ahs before the Zuhr (Noon) Prayer, he made up for them after the “Asr
(Afternoon) Prayer!" So,a Muslim can make up for the rest of supererogatory
prayers by means of analogical deduction, when missing any of them. The
Praphet (PBUH) said:

“anyone overseeps an misses the Witr or forgets te may perform
it when he wakes up or when lie remembers:

(Related by Abd Dawid and At-Tirmidhi)

‘The Witr Prayer-along with its preceding Shaf" are to be made up for. when
missed, as stated in Sait Muslim (Muslim’s Authentic Book of Hadith),on the
authority of ‘A’ishah (may Aliah be pleased with her) who

“When sleep or pain overpowered the Prophet (PBUH) and he
could not perform the night vigil supererogatory prayer, he used to
perform twelve rak'alts (units of prayer) during the day."

50, Muslim ought to keep the aforementioned sunmah rétibah (regulacly-
observed supererogatary) prayers to follow the excellent pattern of the Prophet
(PBUH) as Allah says:

Chapter 145 Sunnah Ratibals: Prayers Performed alang with Oligavory. Vt

“There has certainly been for you in the Messenger of Allah an
excellent pattern for anyone whose hope is in Allah. and the last
day and [who] remembers Allah often.”

(Qur'an: Al-Ahzab: 21)

Keeping these supereragatory prayers compensates for any fault committed
in the obligatory Prayers, as man is fallible and needs to compensate for his
faults, Hence, Muslim should not neglect this suinal vatibah as it will result
in more rewards prepared by the Lord (to be given to the Muslim on the Day of
Resurrection). Likewise, along with every obligatory act of worship, Allah has
ordained a supererogatory act af the same type to compensate for any faults
committed in the obligatory act of worship, ie, Prayer, Fasting, Zakah and
Hajj have supererogatory acts of worship. No doubt, these (above-mentioned)
ordinancesare favors of Allah upon His servants, Allah has varied His ordained
acts of worship in order to raise in degrees His servants and remove from them
their misdeeds. We invoke Allah to grant us success in all that pleases Him.
Verily, He is Hearing and Responsive to supplications..

Endnotes

1 AL-Bukhaet (1180) [3/75] and Muslim (1695) [3/252],

2 Muslim (1696) [3/253) and Al-Bukhri (1182) (3/76]

3 AL-Bukhari (432) [1/684] and Muslim (1817) [3/308]

4 AL Bukhari (1169) [3/59] and Muslina (1683) (3/248),

5 Muslims (1685) [3/248},

6 This was mentioned by Ibnisl-Qayyim in his book “ZédubMa'
Hereafter)” and this kadith was related by. AleBukhati (1159),

7 ‏نطف‎ Dawid (1223) (2/15).

8 See: “Zaidul-Ma ad (Provisions for the Hereafter)”

9 Al-Bukhari (1171) [3/60] and Muslim (1681) [3/247]

10 Chaptet No, 109 of the Quran.

11 Chapter No. 112 of the Quran.

12 At-Tirmidhi (431) [2/296], Al-Bayhagy (4878) [3/62] and Muslin (1687) [37249]

13 Muslim (1559) [3/189],

14 Al-Bukhari (1233) [3/136] and Muslim (1930) [3/358]

15 Abt Dawid (1431) [2/93], At-Tirmitdht (464) [1/330] and fh Majah (1488) [1/53]

16 Muslin (1736) (37268).

(Provisions for the

5

Duhd (Forenoon) Prayer

You should know, my Muslim brothers, that there are many hadiths pertaining
to the Dua (Forenoon) Prayer. In the Two Sahils, Abii Hurayrah (may Allah be
pleased with him) said:

“My friend (i.e. the Prophet) advised me to do three things and I
shall not leave them until I die (and they are) to fast three days
every month, to perform the Duhé Prayer, and to perform the
Witr before sleeping.”

Also, Abit Sa‘id (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“The Prophet (PBUH) used to perform the Duha Prayer (so regularly)
that we said, ‘He will never give it up’ and sometimes he completely

_gave it up until we said, ‘He will never perform it again:

‘The Duhdé Prayer can be as short as only two rak"ahs (units of prayer) as
the Prophet (PBUH) says, “..the two rak'ahs of the Duka Prayer...” in the
aforementioned hadith on the authority of Aba Hurayrah. Besides, Abt Dawid

174 Ii: PRAYER

related on the authority of Anas (may Allah be pleased with him) thal the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Ifanyone sitsin his place of prayer after finishing the Subh (Morning)
Prayer until he performs the two rak‘ahs of the Duba Prayer, saying
nothing but what is good, his sins will be forgiven even if they are
more than the foam of the sea.”

(Related by Abd Dawid)

‘The Duh Prayer can be as longas eight rak’‘ahs, for Umm Hani (may Allah
be pleased with her) said:

“Ontheday of the Conquest of Mecca, the Prophet (PBUH) performed
eight rak ahs as the Dulta Prayer”

(Related by the Group of Compilers of Hadith)

Imm Muslim also related on the authority of Aishah (may Allah be pleased
with her) that:

“The Prophet (PBUH) used to perform the Du Prayer with four

rak'ahs and sometimes he used to perform as more rak'ahs as
Allah willed.”

‘The time for the Dud Prayer begins when the sun is about a spear’ length
above the horizon and it continues until the sun approaches the: meridian.
It is desirable to delay it until the sun has risen high and become hot, Imam
Muslin relates that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“The prayer of those who are penitent is to be performed when the
young (weavied) camel feels the heat of the sun.”

That is, when it becomes so hot that the young (weaned) camels kneel
dowa because of the heat of the san.

Endnotes

‎and Mustint (1669) [3/241]‏ ]3/73[ )1178( مقط لق لخ 1

‎2 Abmad (476) [2/342] and At-Tirmidhi (1172) [3/24]

‎3 Abt Dawa (1287) [2/43],

‎AL-Bukbhir (1103) [2/746)}; Muslim (763) 2/252 |; Abo Dawhd (1290) (2/44): An-Nasi't‏ ل
‎Majals (644) [1/340]‏ مطل ‎and‏ ]1/137[ )225(

‎5 Muslim (1660) [3/236],

‎6 Muslim (1743) [3/271]

Prostration of Recitation

The prostration of recitation is one of the Prophetic practices and it is thus
called as it relates to the recitation of the Qur'an. It is an act of worship that is
ordained by Allah and His Messenger to be done when reciting the verses of
the Quran or listening to them, as a means of drawing near to Allah, subjecting
oneself to His Majesty and showing submissiveness to Him,

This act of prostration is enacted as an act of the Sunnah (Prophetic
‘Tradition) for both the one who recites and the one who listens to the Qur'an.
Scholars unanimously agree on its legality. Ibn “Umar (may Allah be pleased
with him) said:

“When the Prophet (PBUH) recited a sura of the Quriin that
contains the prostration, he would prostrate and we would do the
same and some of us (because of the heavy rush) could not find
a place for prostration.”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

176 Il: PRAYER

Imam Tbnul-Qayyim, the great scholar (may Allah have mercy on him),
said, "Positions of prosteations are what is reported to us.and what is commanded
Jor us to do” That is, Allah tells us about the prostration of His creatures
generally or at specific situations. So it is enacted, for the one who recites the
Qur'an and the one who listens to it, to act like them (Allah's creatures) when
reciting or listening to the yerses of prostration, and with greater reason the
verses that actually command prostrating.

Aba Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated, as a marfa
(traceable) hadith, that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“When the son ofAAdam (Adami) recitesa verse of prostration and
then falls down in prostration, Satan goes into seclusion weeping
and saying, ‘Woe unto me!’ The son of Adam is commanded
to prostrate and he has prostrated, so Paradise is entitled to
him, and 1 was commanded to prostrate, but I refused, so Lam
doomed to Hell: "“

(Related by Muslim and Ibn Majah)

‘The prosttation of recitation should be performed by both the one
recitingand the onelistening (\o the Qur'an), Whatisstated in the previously
mentioned haditirof Ibn Umar, namely “When the Prophet (PBUH) recited
a sura of the Quran that contains the prostration, he would prostrate and we
would do the same;" proves the legality of the prostration of the one wha
is listening, As for the hearer (i.e. the one who is notattentively listening),
it is not obligatory upon him to perform the prostration of recitation. Al-
Bukhari? related:

“Uthindn (may Allah be pleased with him) passed by a recifer who
recited a verse involving prostration to make ‘Uthman perform
prostration along with him, but ‘Uthman did not perform prostration
and said, “The prostration should be performed by him who listens
to it

This act was reported about other Companions,

‘The suras of the Qur’in that involve verses of prostration are Al-A'nif” (the
Elevations), Ar-Ra‘d (the Thunder)’ An-Nald (the Bees), Al-Isra'(the Night Journey),
Maryam (Mary),’ Al-Hajj (the Pilgrimage),"" Al-Furqdn (the Criterion),”” An-Naml
(ihe Ants),"” As-Sajdah (the Prostration),'' Fussilat (Detailed),'* An-Najm (the Star),"”

Chaptet 16: Proscation of Recitation 7

Al-Inshigag (the Split)" and Al-'Alag (the Clinging Substance)". Concerning the
prostration in the Sura of Sad,” there is disagreement between scholars, whether il
ia prostration of thankfulness or recitation; and Allah knows best.

‘On performing the prostration of recitation, one should pronounce takbir
(saying, “Allhu-Akbay “Allah is the Greatest”), This act is stated according
to the hadith of Ibn "Umar in which he said:

“Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) used to recite the Quran to us and
whenever he recited a verse that contains a prostration, he used ta
say takbir and prostrate, and we also used to prostrate along with
him?"

(Related by Abi Dawad)

One should say in prostration, "Subhina Rabbiyal-A'la” (Glory be ‏ما‎
‎my Lord, the Mast High), the same as one says when prostrating during
performing prayer. If one says, “My face has prostrated before Allah, Who
created and fashioned it, created in it hearing and vision by His Power and
Might. O Allah! Reward me for it (the act of prostration), remove sins from
me by it, reserve it for me, and accept it from me as You did from Your
servant Dawtid (David), it will be acceptable. To perform the prostration
of recitation from the position of standing is better than. performing it
while sitting.

© Muslim, you should know that there are many ways af doing good acts,
so make your best to follow them, and be loyal und faithful in both actions and
words, that Allah may record you among the happy people.

Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhari (1075) [2/718] and Mushit (1295) [3/73].

2 See: ‘Madéirij As-Salikin’ [1/106].

3 Muslim (240) [1/257] and Ibn Majah (1052) [1/549],

4 Al-Bukharf (2/719) and *Abdur-Razziq in his hook ’Al-Musanaf’, © Abdur-Razzhq
related the same action about other companions such as. Unvar, his son, Ib Mas’ Git
and Ibn ° Abbas. See; ‘Al-Musanaf"(3/344) and ‘Sunan Al-Bayhagi’ (2/458),

5 Chapter No, 7of the Quran

6 Chapter No, 13 of the Qur'an.

7 Chapter No, 16 of the Quran

78

8 Chapter No, 17 of the Qur'tn
9 Chapter No. 19 of the ‏معان‎

10 Chapter No. 22 of the Qur'an
11 Chapter No. 25 of the Quy’.
12 Chapter No. 27 of the Quin,
13 Chapter No. 32 of the Qura,
14 Chapter No. 41 of the Quran.
15 Chapter No. 53 of the Qurfan
16 Chapter No. 84 of the Quin,
17 Chapter No. 96 of the Quran.
18 Chapter No. 38 of the Qur'an
19 Aba Dawad (1413) [2/85].

7

Non-Regular Supererogatory
Prayer

The Compilers of the Sunan related that the Prophet (PBUH) was asked

which prayer was most excellent (concerning reward) after the prescribed
ones, He (PBUH) said:

“Performing prayer in the middle of the night?”
‘He (PBUH) also said:

“There is an hour in the night during which no Muslim person asks
Allah for good in this world and the Hereafter but Allah will grant it
to hin; and that applies to every night.”

Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Adhere to (the performance of) the night vigil supererogatory
prayer, for it is the habit of the righteous people before you. Verily,
the night vigil supererogatory prayer is a means of nearness

180 Ul PRAYER

to Allah and the way by which sins are removed and one stops
committing sins.”
(Related by Al-Hakim)
Allah, Exalted be He, praises those who stand for the night vigil super-
erogatory prayer, as He says:

inileed, they were before that doers of good. They useil to
sleep but little of the wight, and in the hours before dawn they
would ask forgiveness...” (Qur’in; Adh-Dhariyat: 16-18)

Praising such righteous servants, Allah, Exalted be Fe, also says:

“Their sides part [i.e, they arise] from [their] beds; they supplicate
their Lordin fear and aspiration, and from what We have provided
them, they spend, And no soul knows what has been hidden for
them of comfort for (the) eyes [i-e. satisfaction] as reward for
what they used to do." (Quran: As-Sajdab: 16-17)

So many are the religious texts that refer to the virtue of the night vigil
supererogatory prayer. The night vigil supererogatory prayer is the most
excellent act of worship among yoluntary prayers. This is because the night
vigil supererogatory prayer is characterized by more secrecy and is closer to
sincerity. Mareoyer, itis tobe performed while people are sleeping, In addition,
it involves the preference of obedience to sleep or taking rest

It is desirable to perform supererogatory prayers at all times, excluding
the forbidden times. The night vigil supererogatory prayer is more preferable
than that performed at the daytime, as mentioned before. The most preferable,
concerning the night vigil supererogatory prayer, is that itis performed at the
third of the night, which is directly alter the middle of the night until the last
sixth of the night. This is stated in Salitlt Muslim (Muslints Authentic Book of
Hadith) asa marfi’ (teaceable) hadith, in which the Prophet (PBUH) says

“The most beloved prayer to Allah is that af Dawid (David). He
used to sleep for (the first) half of the night, perform prayer during
the third of it, and (again) sleep for the sixth of it?"

Dawid used to sleep for the first half of the night to have rest and
then get up at the time when Allah calls saying, “Is there anyone fo ask
‘Me, so that I may grant him what he asks for?” Then Dawid would sleep
for the sixth part of the night to haye rest to be fully active by the Fajr

Chapter 17: Non-lHegular Superemgatory Prayer 01

(Dawn) Prayer. So this is the best time for one to perform the night vigil
supererogatory prayer. However, the whole night is a time for performing,
the night vigil supererogatory prayer, Imam Ahmad (may Allah have merey
on him) said, ‘One may perform the night vigil supererogatory prayer from
he time of sunset to the break of dawn." Accordingly, the supererogatory act
(of prayer) performed between the Maghrib (Sunset) Prayer and the “Isha?
(Night) Prayer is considered among the night vigil supererogatory prayer,

butit is better to delay performing the night vigil supererogatory prayer to
the last part of the night as: mentioned before. Allah, Exalted be He, says,
“Indeed, the hours of the night are more effective for concurrence [of heart
and tongue] and more suitable for words.” (Qui'an: Al-Muzzammil: 6)
Here, the phrase “hours of the night” refers to performing the night vigil
supererogatory prayer after sleeping,

A Muslim person should intend to perform the night vigil supererogatory
prayer and he should (set some time to) get a share of (the reward for)
performing the prayer at night, which he should keep to, even though it is a
little. So when a Muslim gets up (to perform the night vigil supererogatory
prayer), he should use the siwak (footh-stick) and mention Allah saying:

“There is no deity but Allah Alone Who has no partner. To Him
belongs dominion, and to Him belongs (all) praise, and He ts over
all things Ommnipotent. All praise be to Allah, all glory be to Him
and there is no deity but Allah, Allah is the Greatest and there is na
power or might except with Allah.”

He should also say:

“All praise be to Allah, Who gave me life after causing me to die
(sleep) and to Him is the Resurrection, (All) praise be to Allah,
Who restituted my soul back unto me and made my body sound
and permitted me to mention Him.”

optional night prayer with
is narrated by Aba Hurayrah

It is more desirable for the Muslim to begin hi
two light (short) rak“ahs (units of prayer) for
that Allah's Messenger (PBUH) said:

“When any of you stands up at night to perform the night vigil
supererogatory prayer, let him begin his prayer with two short
rak‘ahs.”

(Related by Muslim and other compilers of Hadith)

0 Hs PRAYER

Moreover, one performing the night vigil supererogatory prayer should
pronounce taslin (ie. final salutations in prayer) at the end of eyery two
rak ‘ahs, as the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“The night vigil supererogatory prayer should be performed two
rak'ahs after two.”

(Related by the Group of Compilers of Hadith)

Thus, the night vigil supererogatory prayer is to be performed in two
rak'ahs by reciting iashahhud and pronouncing taslim at the end, as itis «
two-rak ‘ah prayer.

Furthermore, a Muslim should prolong the night vigil supererogatory
prayer when standing, bowing and prostrating. In addition, the night vigil
prayer should be performed at one’s home. Scholars unanimously agree that
supererogatory prayers are better to be performed at home, as the Prophet
(PBUH) used to perform them at home, The Prophet (PBUH) said:

Perform: (supereragatory) prayer at your homes, for the best
prayer of a person is the one which he performs ut home, except the
compulsory (congregational) prayer.”

This is because performing it at home implies true devotion.

‘To perform the supererogatory prayer while standing is better than per-
forming it while sitting with no excuse. ‘The Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Whoever performs prayer sitting gets half the reward of that
who performs prayer while standing”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

However, he who performs the supererogatory prayer while sitting, but
with an excuse, will get reward similar to that of the one who performs it while
standing, The Prophet (PBUH) s:

“When the servant (of Allah) falls ill or travels, then he will get
reward similar to that he gets for good deeds practiced in residence
when in good health.”

‘There is a unanimous agreement on the permissibility of performing
supererogatory prayers in the sitting position though being able to perform
itstanding.

The one performing night vigil supererogatory prayer should end it with
Witras the Prophet (PBUH) used ta end his prayerat night by performing Witr

‘Chapter 17: Non-Regular Supererogatory Prayer 183

prayer’, Moreover, he commanded, in several hadiths, that it (Witr) should be
performed ”.Itis desirable for the one who misses the optional night prayer to.
perform it before noon. This came in the fradith stating:

“Whoever is overpowered by sleeping and misses the (regular)
portion (of prayer or recitation) and he performs it in the period
between the Fajr Prayer and the Zuhr Prayer, it will be recorded for
him as reciting it during night?"

© Muslim brother, do not deprive yourself of (the reward for) the night
vigil supererogatory prayer. You should get a share of it, even though it is
2 little, for yourself that you may keep in order to get the reward of those
who stand (for night vigil prayer) and seek forgiveness (from Allah) before
dawn. That which is little may lead you ta have much (reward) and do
much acts of obedience, for Allah does not allow the reward of the doers of
good to be lost.

Endnotes

| Muslim (2748) (4/296)

2 Muslim (1767) [3/278].

3 Al-Hakim (1157) (1/308).

4 Al-Bukhai (1131) [3/22] and Muslim (2731) [4/287]

5 Al-Bukhari (1145) [3/38] and Muslim (1771) [3/280],

6 Muslim (1804) {3/256}, Ahmad (9155) [2/525] and ‏فطخ‎ Dawdd (1323) [2/55]

7 AL-Bukhari (990) [2/615], Muslim (1745) [3/272], Ahmad (4849) [2/41], Abii Dawod
(1326) [2/55], At-Tirmidht (437) [2/300], An-Nasdii (1693) [2/259] and Tbn Majah
(2319) {2/118}.

8 Al-Bukhari (6113) [10/635] and Muslim (1822) |3/310].

9 Al-Bukhari (1116) [2/756] and Muslim (1712) [3/257].

10 Al-Bukhari (2996) [6/165].

11 As it was related in Mustim (1726) [3/265].

12 As it was related in Al-Bukhari (998) (2/628] and Muslim (1752) [3/274]

13 Muslim (1742) [3/271

Times When Prayer Is Forbidden

We have introduced above some of the rulings on the supererogatory
prayers and now we are going to point out that there are certain times at
which prayer is forbidden as narrated to have been pointed out by the Prophet
(PBUH). However, there are some exceptions concerning this judgment.

There are five times at which performing prayer is forbidden:
1- The first time starts from the second (the factual) time of dawn to
sunrise. The Prophet (PBUH) said:

“When the dawn breaks, no prayer is to be performed except the two
rak*ahs (units of prayer) of the Fajr Prayer (i.e. the supererogatory
rak ‘ahs of the Fajr Prayer).”'

(Related by Ahmad, Aba Dawad, and other compilers of Hadith)

‘Therefore, when the dawn breaks, one should not perform any super-
erogatory prayer except the two rak’alis of the Fajr Pray

186 Ii: PRAYER

2- The second time starts from the time of sunrise until the sun reaches
the height of a spear, in one’ sight, above the horizon.

3- The third time starts from the time when the sun is at its height at
midday until it passes over the meridian. This time is known as the
time when ‘shade stops’ ie. it does not increase nor does it decrease;
until it starts moving toward the west. ‘ Ugbah Ibn ' Amir narrated,

“There are three tines at which Allahts Messenger (PBUH) forbade us
to perform prayer, or bury our dead (and they are) (i) when the sun
begins to rise until it is fully up; (ii) when the sun is at its height at
midday until it passes over the meridian; (iti) and when the sun draws
near to setting until it sets.”

(Related by Imam Muslim)

‎The fourth time starts from the time of the “Agr (Afternoon) Prayer‏ سق
‎until the sun sets, as the Prophet (PBUH) said:‏

‎“No prayer should be performed after the Fajr Prayer until the sun
rises, and no prayer should be performed after the “Asr Prayer until
the sun sets?”

‎(Related by Al-Bukharj and Muslim)

‎5- The fifth time starts from the time when the sun starts setting until
it sets.

‎‘The Muslim person should know that it is permissible for one to make
up for missed prayers at such (forbidden) times. This is based on the
Prophet's hadith:

‎“Ff anyone misses a prayer out of oversleeping or forgetfulness, he
must perform it once he remembers”.

‎(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

‎It is also permissible for one to perform the two rak ahs of lawaf (circum-
ambulating the Ka’bah) at such times, as the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎"Do not prevent anyone from circumambulating this House (i
the Ka'bah) and from performing prayer any moment he desires
bby day or by night!

‎(Related by At-Tirmidhi who deems it a sahih (authentic) hadith)

Chapter 18: Titmes When Prayer Is Forbidden 7

So this is regarded as a permission from the Prophet (PBUH) to perform
circumambulation at all times at which prayer is forbidden. This is because,
circumambulation is permissible at all times, and so are its two rak"ahs,

According to the most acceptable opinion of scholars, it is permissible at
these times fo perform prayer that have special causes, such as Funeral Prayer,
Mosque Greeting Prayer (which is performed on entering the masque) and
Eclipse Prayer. There are legal proofs supporting this permissibility which are
considered specific exceptions to the general rule of forbidding performing
prayer at such times. Thus, forbidding performing prayer at such times means
that it is forbidden to perform prayer with no special reason. Accordingly, it
is not permissible to perform a supererogatory prayer, which has no specific
reason, at such times.

Furthermore, it is permissible to perform the two supererogatory rak hs
(units of prayer) of the Fajr Prayer after performing the Fajr Prayer. It is also
permissible to perform the two supererogatory ‏كبام لمم‎ of the Zuhr Prayer
after performing the 'Asr Prayer, especially when one combines both the Zuhtr
and "Asr Prayers. This is based on the fact that the Prophet (PBUH) made up
for the two supererogatory rak ‘ahs of the Zuhr Prayer after the “Asr Prayer.

Endnotes

1 Alimad (4695) [2/27]. There are hadith related with the same meaning such as Abd
Dawad (1278) [2/40] and At-Tirmidhi (419) [2/278].

2 Muslim (1926) (3/354)

3 Al-Bukhari (586) [2/80] and Muslim (1920) [3/35].

4 Al-Bukhari (597) [2/93] and Muslim (1566) [3/198},

5 Abit Dawid (1894) [2/308], At-Tirmidhi (868) 3/220}, An-Nasd'i (584) [1/308] ‏نص‎
‎{tn Majah (1254) [2/86].

CHAPTER

19

Congregational Prayer

Congregational prayer at the mosque is considered one of the great rituals
of Islam. ‏الى‎ Muslim scholars unanimously agree that performing the Five
(Obligatory) Prayers at the mosque is a confirmed act of obedience and among
the best means of drawing near to Allah. Rather, it is the greatest and most
apparent of the rituals of Islam.

Allah, Exalted be He, ordained that Muslims should gather at certain times.
‘Among these times are times that take place during day and night (ie.24 hours),
namely, the Five (Obligatory) Prayers for which Muslims gather every day and
night five times in order to perform them. Moreover, there is a time in every
week, namely, the Jumu alt (Friday) Prayer, which is greater than the gathering
for the Five (Obligatory) Prayers. Furthermore, there are two other times for
gathering in the year, namely, the gatherings for the prayers of the Two Feasts
(fds), which are greater than that of the Juumu ah Prayer, as all Muslims of the
town are to gather to perform them. In addition, there is a time of gathering
that takes place once a year, namely, the gathering for staying at "Arafah, which
is greater than the gathering for the prayers of the Two Feasts (‘Ids) in view of
the fact that it is ordained for all Muslims all over the world,

190 11: PRAYER

‘These great gatherings in Islari are ordained (by Allah) for the sake and
benefit of Muslims. That is to let Muslims be more interconnected by means
of kindness, benevolence and mutual consideration, Another reason is to
let Muslims love and show tenderness toward each other. In addition, these
gatherings are ordained to let Muslims know and be acquainted with the
conditions of each other, so they would visit the sick, follow the bier, and help
the needy, Itis also to show the power and interconnection amiong Muslims sa
that they can embitter their enemies, ihe polytheists and hypocrites. Moreover,
such gatherings are ordained to eliminate that which might take place among
‘Muslims of hatred, severing of relationships and grudge caused by the devils
from among mankind and the jinn, Hence, Muslims shall ive inan atmosphere
of affection and hearts will gather in righteousness and piety, That is why the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Do not differ (while standing in prayer (i.e. straighten your rows);
otherwise your hearts will differ?”

Among the virtues of the congregational prayer is that il teaches the
ignorant, multiplies the reward and motivates toward doing righteous deeds,
This happens when a Muslim person sees other Muslims practicing good
deeds and as a result, he will follow them. This came in the hiadith rélated by
Al-Bukhari and Muslim in which the Prophet (PBUB) said:

“The prayer in congregation is twenty seven times superior ‏ما‎ Hie
prayer performed by a person alone.”

And in another narration as:
“twenty five times..."

‘The congregational prayer is obligatory upon men whether one isin
fesidence or on a journey and whether in a state of safety or fear, asan individual
duty’, The proof of this came in the Ever-Glorious Book (the Qur'an), the
Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) and the practices of Muslims through centuries,
It is a thing that the Muslim nation used ta practice one generation after
another. And for this reason, mosques are maintained and imdms (leaders in
prayer) and prayer callers (muezzins) are appointed for them. Moreover, there
was a special call ordained for it, namely, “Come to prayer! Come to success!”
Concerning the state of fear, Allah, Exalted be He, says

Chapter 19 Congregational Prayer 19

“And when you [i.e, the commander of an army] are among
them and lead them in prayer, let a group of them stand [in
prayer)...” (Quran: An-Nisi: 102)

This noble verse indicates the obligation of the congregational prayer, abil
is not permissible for Muslims to leave it even in a state of fear. IF it were not
obligatory, then fear would be the most worthy excuse (for abandoning it). ‏ها‎
‎the state of fear, most of the obligatory practices of prayer are abandoned. So.
if tt were not confirmed as an obligatory act, these many practices of prayer
Would not be left out. In other words, many acts are excused and forgiven
when performing prayer in the state of fear for the sake of establishing the
congregational prayer.

Al-Bakhari and Muslim related a hadith on the authority of Ab Hurayrah
(may Allah be pleased with him) that the Prophet (PBUH) sai

“The most difficult prayer for the hypocrites is the Fajr and the
“Isha Prayers and if they knew the reward for these prayers (at
their respective times), they would certainly present themselves (in
the mosques) even if they had ta crawl.”

(The Prophet added):

“Certainly, 1 was about to order the prayer caller (muezzin) to
pronounce the immediate prayer call (iqdmah) and order a man fo
lead the prayer and then take a fire flame to burn ‏لله‎ those who had
not left their houses so far for the prayer, along with their houses.”

The evidence, concerning the obligation of the congregational prayer,
which is stated in the hadith, is based on two aspects. Pirst, the Prophet (PBUH)
described those who did not attend itas hypocrites; however, the one who does
not follow (any) Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) is not regarded as-a hypocrite.
Accordingly, this indicates that those who did not attend the congregational
prayer had lefi an obligation, Second, the Prophet (PBUH) wished to pu
those who abandoned it. That is, punishment is to be established on the one
who leaves an obligation. However, the Prophet (PBUH) did not establish that
Punishment, as there were women and children, wha wete not obligated to
perform congregational prayer, in these houses.

Itis related in Sahih Muslim (Muslim’s Authentic Book of Hadith) that there
came to the Prophet (PBUH) a blind man who said:

192 ‏اا‎ PRAYER,

"0 Messenger of Allah! I have no one to guide me to the mosqui
He, therefore, asked the permissiow of Allah’s Messenger (PBUH)
to perform prayer in his house. He (the Prophet) granted him
permission. Then when the man turned away, he called him and
said, “Do you hear the call to prayer (iv. the adhéin)?" The man
said, “Yes.” He (the Prophet) said, "So, respond to it.”

‘The Prophetcommanded the man, despite what he would face of hardships,
to come to the mosque to attend the congregational prayer and to respond to
the prayer call, This stresses the obligation of the congregational prayer.

For the believers at the carly period of Islam, the obligation of the
congregational prayer was a settled matter. Ibn Mas’ id (may Allab be pleased
with him) said

“Thave seen the time when no one among us (i.e. the Companions)
stayed away from prayer except a hypocrite, whose hypocrisy was
well known. And it could happen that a man walk between two
persons (i.e. with the help of two persons with one on each side)
until he stands in the row (of prayer).”

‘This indicates that there was a kind of resolution (i.e, unanimous
agreement), concerning its obligation, among the Companions of the Mes-
senger (PBUH). They derived their agreement from the acts and practices
of the Prophet (PBUH). It is known that no one should be considered a
hypocrite except the one who leaves something that is obligatory on every
individual Mustim,

Imam Ahmad and other compilers of Hudith related, as marfit hadith:

"Sternness, all sternness, and disbelief and hypocrisy are in hin who
hears the caller to Allah (i.e. prayer caller) calling for prayer and
calling for success but does not respond to hin."

In this regard, there is a haditly that affirms this in which the Prophet
(PBUH) said:
"The Hand of Allah is with the (Muslim) community, so whoever
deviates from it deviates to Hellfire?”

Ibn “Abbas was asked about a man who stands for the night vigil
supererogatory prayer and fasts the day, but does not attend the congregational
prayer He said, “He will be in Hellfire.”

Chapter 19: Congregational Prayer 198

We ask Allah to grant us safety and guidance toward the right path and
enable us to follow it, for He is the Hearing, the Responsive.

What is the ruling on the one who does not observe the congregational
prayer? And how many persons should be present in order to make it (ie. the
congregational prayer) acceptable?

‘Thereare twocasesconcerningtheone whodoesnotobservecongregational
prayer and performs prayer alone. As for the first case, it applies to the excused,
whether because of an illness or fear, and who is not in the habit of leaving
congregational prayer, Such a person is rewarded as similar to the one who
performs prayer in congregation. This is stated in the sahih (authentic) hindith
‘in which the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“When the servant (of Allah) falls ill or travels, then he will get
reward similar to that he gets for good deeds practiced in residence
when in good health?"

Hence, whoever is strictly resolved to perform his prayer in congregation,
but is prevented from doing so owing to @ legal excuse, is to be regarded
as the one who performs it in congregation, and that is due to his good
intention, As for the second case, it applies to the one who does not observe
congregational prayer and who has not a legal excuse, If such a person
performs his prayer alone, his prayer is viewed valid according to the
majority of scholars; however, he loses great and abundant reward, That
is because the prayer in congregation is twenty seven times superior to the
prayer performed by the person alone, Moreover, the person, who does not
observe the congregational prayer, loses the reward given according to the
number of steps he walks to the mosque, Furthermore, such a person does
not only waste great reward, but he also commits a great sin. That is, he
leaves an obligation with no excuse and commits a legally reprehensible act
for which he should be reproved and punished by those in authority in order
to guide him back to the right way,

Every Muslim should know that the place in which prayer is to be
performed is the mosque. That is to make the rituals of Islam manifest. The
act of maintaining mosques was not ordained except for this particular reason
In addition, performing prayer in places other than mosques is regarded as
suspension of their unique role, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Such niches are] in houses (i.e. mosques] which Allah has ordered

194 1; PRAYER

to be raised and that His Name be mentioned [i.e. praised] therein;
exalting Him within them in the morning andthe evenings. [Are] ment
whore neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance
of Allah and performance of prayer and giving of Zakah. They fear
a Day in which the hearts and eyes will [fearfully] turn about”
(Qur'an: An-Niir: 36-37)

Allah, Exalted be He, also says:

“The mosques of Allah are only to be maintained by those who
believe in Allah and the Last Day and establish prayer...”

(Quran: At-Tawbah: 18)

These two verses refer to mosques and those who maintain them, as
the latter are promised the excellent reward. Moreover, these verses involve
disapproval of those who do not attend prayer in mosques. Itis related that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“No (obligatory) prayer of the one who is a neighbor of a mosque is
to be performed except in the mosque (i.e. one should not perform
obligatory prayers but in the mosque).

A same hadith was related by ' Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) with an
addition:

"The neighbor of the masque is the one who hears the caller to prayer!”
(Related by Al-Bayhagi with an authentic chain of transmitters)
Thaul-Qayyim (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“He who looks deeply into the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) will
renlize that performing ptayer in the mosque is an obligation on every
individual Muslin, except for an excuse permitting him ‏ما‎ leave the
congregational prayer. In other words, abandoning the prayer in
the mosque with no excuse is similar to the act of abandoning the
congregational prayer with no excuse. All hadiths and traditions
agree unanimously on this principle.”

Allah threatened those who stop the role of mosques and prevent prayer to
‘be performed therein as He, Exalted be He, says:

“And who are more unjust than those who prevent the Name of
Allah from being mentioned [i,e. praised] in His mosques and

Chaprer 19: Congregational Prayer 195
strive toward their destruction, It is Hot for them to enter them
‘except in fear. For them in this world is disgrace, and they will
have in the Hereafter a great punishment.”

(Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 114)

Similarly, performing prayer outside mosques is regarded asa way of
stopping their role or reducing the numbers of Maslims performing their
pfayer in them. Hence, stich an act is regarded a way of undermining the
importance of prayer in individuals sights. Allah, Exalted be He, says

“[Such niches are] in houses fie. mosques] which Allah has
ordered to be raised and that His Name be mentioned [i.e
praised) therein...” (Quran: An-Nar: 36)

The word “raised” means raising mosques both tangibly and morally; for
all thisis required. However, if necessity calls for performing the congregational
prayer outside the mosque, there will be no harm in doing so, An example for
that are the people who are working in a certain place and that if they perform
prayer in that place of work, it will be more beneficial for the work and bea
way of committing workers to attend and establish the prayer. Such an act will
not cause harm to the mosque because there are people around it, who would
perfarm prayer in it. So there will be no harm in performing prayer at the
place of their work for the sake of these reasons.

The least number that should be present in order to perform a valid
congregational prayers two persons, That is, two persons are the least number
that can form a congregation, Abi Masi narrated, asa ‏"تارم‎ (traceable)
hadith, that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“The congregational prayer is to be performed by two persons or
what is more than that (number)!

(Related by Ibn Majah)
In addition, thege is a hadith stating that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Who can do an act of charity to this man (by performing prayer
with him to let him get the reward for congregational prayer)?”
A man stood and performed the prayer with him, Thereupon,
the Prophet (PBUH) said, “That is a congregation.”

(Related by Ahmad and other compilers of Hadith)

196 Ui: PRAYER,

Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) said to Malik Ibnul-Huwayrith:
“Let the oldest of you lead the prayer!"

Furthermore, unanimous agreement was reported in conformity with such
an opinion,

As for women, it is viewed permissible for them to attend the congrega-
tional prayer in mosques after taking the permission of their husbands. ‘This
is to be done on certain conditions; namely, women must not be perfumed
nor should they show their adornment and they should perform prayer with a
complete cover, Moreover, women are not to mingle with men and they muist
perform prayer while standing behind the rows of men, This permisstbili
comes from the fact that women used to attend congregational prayer in the
lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH)". Moreover, it is an act of the Stinnah (Pro-
phetic Tradition) for women to attend assemblies of knowledge and preaching
while being separated from men. It is also viewed permissible for a woman
to perform congregational prayer with other women, while being separated
from men; whether their leader (in prayer) isa woman ora man, In support of
this view, the Prophet (PBUH) ordered Umm Waraqah to have a prayer caller
(muezzin) and to lead the people of her home in prayer. This hadith is re-
lated by Ahmad and the Compilers of Sunan and this act was done by other
women Companions of the Prophet (PBUH)”. Another reason refers to the
generalization stated in the hadith of the Prophet (PBUH) in which he says:

“The prayer in congregation is twenty seven times superior to the
prayer performed by person alone.”

‎is preferable for the Muslim to perform prayer in the mosque, in which‏ لآ
‎congregational prayer is not to be established except by hiis presence. That is, the‏
‎Muslim will get the reward of maintaining the mosque. Allah, Exalted be He, says:‏

‎“The mosques of Allah are only to be maintained by these who
believe in Allah and the Last Day” (Qur'an: At-Tawbah: 18)

‎‘The next in preference is to perform prayer in a mosque that has a large
congregation, as it involves more reward. The prophet (PBUH) said:

‎“A mants prayer performed along with another is better (in reward)
than his prayer when performed alone, and his prayer with twa
men is better than his prayer with one, and whatever (number) is
more than this will be more pleasing to Allah, Exalted be He."”

‎(Related by Ahmad and Aba Dawitd and deemed sahih (authentic)
by Ibn Hibban)

Chapeer 19: Congregational Prayer sr

indicates that the larger congregation is better, as mercy and tranquility
descend upon the congregation, In addition to this, a large congregation
involves comprehensive supplication as well as the hope for a respons
especially if there are scholars and righteous people among the congregation,
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Within it are men who lave to purify themselves; arut Altalt
ayes those who purify themselves.” (Qur'an: At-Tawbah: 108)

This verse indicates that itis desirable to perform prayer with the righteous
congregation, who keep their purity and perfarm ablution perfectly

Then, it is more preferable to perform prayer at old mosques, as they are
the first mosques where acts and practices of worship and obedience were
performed, before the newly established ones. What is more preferable to that
is performing prayer at distant mosques, rather than the near ones, ‘That is
because the Prophet (PBUH) suid:

“The people who get the best reward for the prayer are those who
are farthest away (from the mosque) and then those who are next
farthest and so on.”

He (PBUH) also said:
“The prayer performed in congregation is twenty five times more
superior (in reward) to the prayer offered alone in one’s house ar in
a business center; for if the one of you performs ablution and does
it perfectly, and then proceeds to the mosque with the sole intention
of performing prayer, then for each step which he takes toward the
mosque, Allah lifis him up a degree in reward and crosses out (ie.
_forgives) one sin until he enters the mosque?”

Further, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“0 Bani Salamah! Keop living in your houses, for your steps (to the
mosque) are recorded” "”.

Some scholars are of the view that to perform prayer in the nearer of two
mosques is worthier, as the near mosque has a right of neighborhood, so the
Muslim is more entitled to perform his prayer in it. In support of this view, it
is reported that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“No (obligatory) prayer of the one who is a neighbor of the mosque
is to be performed except in the mosque (i.e. one should nat perform
obligatory prayers but in the mosque)”

198 i PRAYER

Skipping the near mosque In order to perform prayer in a distant one
may cause a kind oF perplexity among the people living near the mosque:
‘This opinion may be the more acceptable one, as skipping the near mosque
will be regarded as an excuse for deserting it, and this will cause a kind of
embarrassment and mistrust with regard to the indi (leader in prayer) of the
hear mosque.

Rulings on Congregational Prayer

1] ‏وز‎ seen as prohibited that the congregation he led (in prayer) by someone
else other than the assigned imidin of the mosque (ie. the one who leads
people regularly in prayer in this mosque), unless there is an excuse or by his
permission. It is stated in Salih Muslim (Muslim's Authentic Book of Hadith)
and other books of Hadith that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

"No man should lead another in prayer in a place where he (the
latter) has authority without his (the latter’s) permission."

An-Nawawi commented on this hadith saying:

“The owner of the house and the assembly, and the imam are worthy
than others. When doing the opposite, it will be a kind of wronging.
the assigned imam of the mosque and causing Muslims to keep aw
from him, Moreover, such act could cause division among Muslim:

Some scholars are of the view that if the congregation in the mosque is led
by someone else other than its assigned imam and without his permission or
any legal excuse, the prayer of the congregation will not be valid (acceptable).
‘This refers to the seriousness of this issue, so it should be dealt with seriously.
Therefore, Muslims should consider the right of their imam and not to encroach
upon it. Likewise, the inidm of the mosque should respect and consider the
rrights of those led (in prayer) and not to cause embarrassment to them, Hence,
all of them (the leader in prayer and the people led) should consider the others’
right so that affection and intimacy may be realized. So when the imdm is late
and it is the time for prayer, Muslims are to perform their prayer, as done by
Abii Bakr As-Siddiq and “Abdur-Rahman Tbn ‏اسم"‎ (may Allah be pleased
with them both) when the Prophet (PBUH) went to establish peace among
Bandi Amr Tbn * Awfand he was delayed. Thereupon, Aba Bakr (may Allah be
pleased with him) led the prayer”, Likewise, 'Abdur-Ralman Ibn ‘ Awf led the
people in prayer when the Prophet (PBUH) was late in another incident and
the Prophet (PBUH) performed the last rak‘al (unit of prayer) behind him”,
When the Prophet (PBUH) [inished prayer, he said, “You have done well”

Chapter 19: Congregational Prayer ‏ووز‎

Among the rulings concerning the congregational prayer is that itis an act
of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) for the one who has already performed
prayer and then the immediate prayer call (iqamahi) is pronounced while he is
in the mosque, to perform that prayer along with the congregation. Aba Dharr
narrated a hadith on the Prophet (PBUH) stating:

“Perform prayer at its prescribed time, but if the immediate prayer
call ‏كذ‎ pronounced while you are in the masque, then pray, and do
not say ‘I have performed prayer and so I shall not pray! °*

(Related by Imam Muslim)

In this case, the prayer such a person perfarms in the congregation will be
considered a supererogatory prayer. This is stated in the hadith of the Prophet
(PBUH) addressed to two men, in which he commanded them to perform.
prayer again and he said to them:

[will be considered a supererogatory prayer for you.”

‘This is ordained lest people should think that the one who is not performing
prayer in congregation is not among those who establish prayer.

There is also another ruling on the congregational prayer, namely if the
immediate prayer call (iqamah) is established, it will not be permissible for
anyone to start performing a supererogatory prayer; either the confirmed anes
(supererogatory practices) or the Mosque Greeting Prayer (which is performed
on entering the mosque). That is because the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“When the prayer commences, then there is no (valid) prayer but
the obligatory prayer (i.e. one should not perform a supererogatory
prayer when the obligatory prayer starts).””

(Related by Imm Muslim)
71 15 stated in another narration related by Imam Ahmad as:

.No prayer (isto be performed) but that which has begun’

Consequently, any supererogatory prayer, in which the opening takbir
(saying, “Allahu-Akbar” Le, “Allah is the Greatest") has just been pronounced, is
not to be valid as long as the immediate prayer call (iqamah) for the obligatory
prayer, that one aims to perform along with the imém, has been pronounced
just befare.

Imam An-Nawawi (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“The reason behind this is to let the Muslim be devoted to the

200 Hi: PRAYER

obligatory prayer fromits beginning. That is, to startitimmediately
after the imam (leader in prayer), Moreover, to observe the
perfection of the obligatory prayer is worthier than getting busy
with a supererogatory prayer. Another reason is that the Prophet
(PBUH) forbade disagreeing with imams”'. Furthermore, the
Stated virtue of the opening takbir (in prayer) is not to be gained
except when said immediately after the imidna.”™

However, if the immediate prayer call (igémalt) is pronounced while the
person is performing a supererogatory prayer, in which he has already pro
nounced the opening fakbir, he may complete it making it light and not to cut
it short unless he is afraid of missing the congregational prayer. Allah, Exalted
be He, said, “..And do not invalidate your deeds.” (Qur'an: Muhammad: 33)
‘Accordingly, if one is afraid of missing the congregational prayer, one is to cut
short the supererogatory prayer, as the obligatory act is more important.

Endnotes

1 Abit Dawad (664) |1/306], An-Nasa't (810) [1/425] and fbn Majah (976) 1/618),

2 Al-Bukbari (645) [2/171] and Muslim (1475) [3/54],

3 ‏فطل هله‎ (647) [2/171] and! Muslim (1474) [3/154]

4 Individual duty: & religious duty whose obligation extends to every Muslin,

5 Al-Bukhatt (657) [2/184] and Muslim (1480) [3/256]

6 Muslim (1484) [3/157].

7 Muslim (1486) [3/158].

8 Abmad (15564) [3/439]. Al-Haythami graded it asauthentic haditlrin his book ‘Maja’
Az-Zawiid® (The Compilation of Additional Hadiths) |2/4\-42| and Al-Mundhiri in
his book At-Targhits wat-tarhib [1/273]

9 At-Tirmidhi (2172) [4/466] and An-Nasaii (4032) [4/106].

10 Al-Bukhart (2996),

11 Ad-Daraguint (1538) (1/399), Al-Bayhagi (4945) [3/81] and AL-Hakim. A similar
hadith was related by Ad-Daraqutni (1537) |1/399|

12 Al-Bayhagl (4943) [3/1 |

13 Ibn Majah (972) (1/517).

‎Ahmad (11394) [3/57], Abii Dawad (574) (1/274] and At-Tirmidt (220) (1/427),‏ قد

‎15 Al-Bukhari (630) [2/146] and Muslim (1533) (2/179)

‎16 Al-Bukhart (867) [2/450] and Muslim (1457) [3/146]

‎17 Ahmad (27273) [6/453] and Abd Dawa (592) [1/282)

‎18 This was reported about °Aishah and Umm Salamah as it was related by {bn Abi
Shaybah in his book ‘A/-Musarmaf (4952, 4954) [1/430], Ad-Daraqutni (1492, 1493)
[1/388], “Abdar-Razzéq (5086) [3/141] and Al-Bayhagt (5395) [3/147].

‎19 Ahmad (21258) (5/184, Abo. Dawad (554) [1/267] and thn Hibban in his book As-
‏باثرامق.‎ (2056) {5/405}.

Chapter 19: Congregational Prayer wl

20 Al-Bukhari (651) [2/178] and Muslira (1511) [3/170)

21 Al-Baldhaet (477) [1/730] and Muslies (1504) (3/168).

22 Banii Salamh wanted to move their houses near the mosque so the Prophet (PBULN)
said this hadith,

23 Muslim (1518) [3/172]

24 Maslim (1530) [2/177].

25 Al-Bukhdri (684) [2/217] and Muslim (948) (2/365),

26 Muslim (951) (2/367

27 Muslima (1467) [3/151].

28 ‏نطق‎ Dawitd (575) [1/274], At-Tirmidht (219) [1/424] and An-Nastti (857) [1/447]

29 Muslim (1642) [3/228]

30 Ahmad (8597) [2/464].

31 As the hadiths related in Al-Bukhart (722) [2/270] and Musliem (929) [2/354]

32 See:‘Al-Majmi'’ (4/108) and ‘Sharh Sabih Mustior’ [3/228].

CHAPTER

The Latecomer to
Congregational Prayer

The sounder of the two views of scholars regarding the one coming late
for congregational prayer is that he is not to be regarded as having caught up
with the prayer unless he prays at least one rak‘ah (unit of prayer) thereof.
So, if one catches less than one rak'ah in congregation, one is not regarded
as having attended the congregation, but one is allowed to follow the imém
from the time one has entered the prayer and one will get the reward for the
congregational prayer according to one’s intention, Likewise, if one intends
to perform prayer in congregation but finds that the people have finished the
prayer, then one will get a reward like that of those who have performed prayer
in congregation, according to one’s intention, This view agrees with the hadiths
stating that if somebody intends to do a good deed and he cannot do it, then it
will be recorded for him as a reward like that of the one who does it’.

According to the soundest view of scholars, the rak‘ah is counted only
when one catches up with the prayer during the bowing (position). This is

204 M1: PRAYER,

according to the hadith in which the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Ifanyone catches up (the people in prayer when they are) bowing.
he already has got the rak ah”

(Related by Abd Dawid)

This és also stated in a hadith in Sabi. Muslim (Muslin Authentic Book
of Hadith) narrated on the authority of Abdi Bakr wha reached the Prophet
(PBUH) in the mosque while he (the Prophet) was bowing in prayer and he
too bowed befare joining the row. The Prophet (PBUH) did not order him
to perform the rak'ah again’ which proves that it is sufficient for one if one
catches up with the prayer when the congregants are bowing,

Ifa latecomer to congregational prayer reaches the prayer while the imam
isin the bowing position, he must pronounce the opening takbir (in prayer)
while standing, then he should bow with the idm preferably after a second
takbir (saying, “Alldln-Akbar” ie, “Allah is the Greatest"). If the latecomer
pronounces the opening takbir, it will take the place of the fakbir for bowing.
‘This is because the opening takbir must be pronounced while standing erect,
while it is better to pronounce the takbir for bowing after pronouncing the
opening takbir.

If the latecomer to congregational prayer gets the imam in any position
(in prayer), he should follow him. ‘This is stated in the hadith narrated by Aba
Hurayrah and others in which the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“If you come ta prayer while we are prostrating, prostrate yourselves
along with us, but do not consider ita rak"ah (unit of prayer).””

‘When the imum pronounces thesecond taslim (the final Saldnts in prayer),
the latecomer is to stand erect to perform whatever he has missed, yet he is not
to stand before the second taslins pronounced by the imam.

According to the sotindest view of scholars, the beginning of the prayer of
the latecomer to the congregational prayer is the part he catches up with the
imdm,and what he performs after the taslint (of the imm) is the last part of it.
‘This view is according to the liadith related by the majority of the compilers,
in which the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“And complete whatever yoit have missed."

it is known that completing a thing never happens unless it has already
begun. The other narration of the haiti in which the Prophet (PBUH) said,
"\And make up for whatever you have missed"* does not contradict the

‘Chapter 20: The Larecomes ta Congregational Prayer us

narration stating ‘..And complete whatever you have missed.” This is because
making up for (whatever one misses in prayer) means performing it, according
to the Quranic verse in which Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And when the prayer has been conclusle
(Qur'an; Al-Jumu ah: 10)

And His statement:

“And when you have completed your rites...
(Qui
Thereupon, the Prophet's statement *..And make up for whatever you have

missed” can be paraphrased as performing and completing (the prayer); and
Allah knows best.

AI-Bagarah; 200)

If the prayer is publicly-recited, the one led in prayer must listen to the
recitation of the imam and it is not permissible for him to recite during the
recitation of the imdm, either the Sura of Al-Fatiliah or any other sura. This is
‘because Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“So when the Quran is recited, then listen to it and pay attention
that you may receive mercy?” (Quran; ALA’ raf 204)

Imm Ahmad (may Allah have mercy on him) said, “Scholars imanimously
agree that the recitation mentioned in this verse is thal recited during prayer."
If recitation was obligatory on the part of the one led in prayer, he would
not have been ordered (by the Lawgiver)" to abandon such an obligation. to
observe a supererogatory act, namely listening to the recitation of the imam,

Besides, if the one led in prayer concerns himself with reciting, then the
loud recitation of the imam will be useless.

Since saying'Amin (Amen)’after the recitation of the imdrn takes the place of
the recitation, Allah, Exalted be He, said to Masi (Moses) and Hariin (Aaron):

Your supplication has been answered...”
(Qur'an:

This was said while Masi was the one who invoked Allah saying:

(anus: 89)

“Our Lord, indeed You have given Pharaoh and his establishment
splendor and weatth in the worldly lif...”

200 He PRAYER

‘Haran, on his side, said ‘Amin’ which takes the place of the invocation. So,
Allah, Exalted be He, addresses both saying, “..Your supplication has been
answered.” (Qur’an: ‏:سمخلا‎ 89) This proves that the one who says ‘Amin’ after

aan invocation is like that who says the inyocation,

On the other hand, ifthe prayer is secretly-recited or the one led in prayer
does not hear the imim, then he is ta recite Al-Fatihah (the Opening Chapter
of the Que’in). In this way, all the legal proofs (related to that) accord with
each other, ie, the one led in prayer must recite Al-Fatihal in the secretly-
recited prayer but he is not to recite it in the publicly-recited prayer; and
Allah knows best,

One of the important rulings on the congregational prayer is that it is
obligatory on the one led in prayer to follow the imam completely and that
it is prohibited for him to precede the inidm. This is because the one led
in prayer must follow the imam, and the follower is not to precede the one
followed. In this regard, Al-Bukhdri and Muslim related that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

‎he who raises his head before the imam not afraid that Allah‏ 5ل"
‎may transform his head into that of a donkey or his figure (face)‏
‎into that ofa donkey?”‏

‎So the one who precedes the inuim (in prayer) is like the donkey which
does not understand the wisdom behind whatever it does. If one precedes the
imam, one then deserves to be punished. In a sahil (authentic) hadith the
Prophet (PBUH) says:

‎“The imam is appointed to be followedt so do not bow until he bows
and do not prostrate until he prostrates

‎imam Ahmed and Abd Dawad relate that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎"he imam is appointed to be followed; so when he bows, you should
also bow, and do not bow until he bows. Also, when he prostrates,
you should also prostrate and do not prostrate until he ‏"ليم لم يميم‎

‎Companions of the Prophet (PBUH) used not to bow their backs to‏ عذال"
‎prostrate until the Prophet (PBUH) prostrated, then they would do the same"‏
‎When “Umar Ibnul-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) saw a man‏
‎preceding the iinidyn in prayer, he beat him saying:‏

Chapter 20: “the Larecomer to Congregational Prayer 207

"You neither performed the prayer alone nor did you follow your imam.”

Some peaple do not give due attention to this matter; they precede the
imam (in prayer), thus they join thase warned with the severe (Divine) pun-
ishment. Besides, this might cause the invalidity of their prayer. Imam Muslim
relates that the Prophet (PBUH) sai

“Do not precede me: in bowing and prostration and ending of

prayer’
Shaykhul-Islam Ibn Taymiyah says:

“Scholars unaninously agree that itis prohibited to precede the imam
(in prayer). In addition, it ‏كأ‎ not permissible for the worshipper to
bow before his imdm or to raise one’s head (after bowing) before he
raises his head, or 10 prostrate before he prostrates. There are many
well-known hadtths in which the Prophet (PBUH) forbade doing
such an act”

Preceding the imdm: in prayer is a kind of deception done by Satan to
the ones performing payer, so that they might perform it improperly. What
would the person who precedes the imdm get?! He will not end his prayer
until the amdm pronounces taslim (the final Saléms in prayer), Therefore,
Muslims should pay attention to this and should adhere to the rulings on fol-
lowing the imams,

We invoke Allah to make all of us comprehend our religion and to have
insight into its rulings, for He is the Hearing and the Responsive. This is be-
cause if Allah wants to do good ta somebody, He bestows on him the gift of
understanding the religion (ie. Islam).

Endnotes

(There area lot of Hadiths concerning this topic as related by Abs: Dawid (563) (1/57 |
and An-Nasdi (854) [1/446]

2 Al-Bakharl (783) [2/783}..

3 Abd Dawtid (893) [1/387].

4 AL-Bukhari (636) [1/153] and Muslim (1358) [2/100],

5 An-Nasa’ (860) [1/449].

6 The Lawgiver of Shari'ah (Islamic Law) is Allah, Exalted be He: the term can also refer
to the Prophet (PBUH) as he never ordained but what was revealed to him by Allah,

208 UsPRAYER

7 Al-Bulkehar{ (691) [2/236] and Mustim (962) [2/371]

8 Muslim (928) [2/354].

9 Ahmad (7144) [2/229], Aba Dawad (603) [1/286] in the same wording but Al-Bukhart
(688) and Muslim (412) related i in a different wording,

10 Al-Bukhari (690) [2/234] and Mustim (1062) [2/413].

11 Muslim (960) [2/370].

12 See: ‘Majmit'ul-Fati (23/336),

2

Women’s Attendance
in Mosques

Our religion is a perfect one that comprehensively covers our welfare
and interests in this world and in the Hereafter. Islam came with good to all
Muslims, whether male or female as Allah, Exalted be He, says.

“Whoever does righteousness, whether male or female, while he
isa believer - We will surely cause him to live a good life, and We
will surely give them their reward [in the Hereafter] according to
the best of what they used to do.” (Quran: An-Nahl: 97)

Islam takes an interest in women, conferring honor and respect upon
them as long as they abide by its rulings and adorn themselves with its virtues.
One of the things by which Islam honors woman is allowing her to attend
the mosques to witness the congregational prayers and the assemblies for
remembering Allah in order to win reward. However, at the same time the
woman must do this with due decency and precautions that keep her away
from any satanic seduction and preserve her dignity as well

20 Ul: PRAYER

It is detestable to prevent women from going to the mosque if they ask
permission. The Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Do not prevent the female servants of Allah (women) from (goirig
to) the mosques of Allah, but they should go while they are not
perfumed.”

(Related by Ahmad and Abd Dawid)

This is because performing the prescribed prayers in congregation has a
great reward for both men and women; moreover, walking to the mosque has
a great reward.

It is authenticated in the Two Sahihs’ and other books of Hadith that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“If your women ask permission to go to the mosque at night, allow
them.”

The wisdom behind asking their husbands’ permission is that it is among
the rights of men upon their women (wives) to stay at home. Thus, going to
the mosque, in this case, is only permissible, and they are not to abandon
what is obligatory for the sake of what is permissible, When the husband gives
permission to his wife to go to the mosque, he then gives up his right (upon
his wife to stay at home).

The Prophet (PBUH) sai

"Yet their houses (women’s) are better forthiem (to perform prayer
therein).

‘The Prophet (PBUH) means that itis better for women to perform prayer in
their houses to avoid any satanic temptation. The Prophet (PBUH) also said:

“But they should go while they are not perfumed”

This means that women are allowed to go ta the mosque (to perform prayer)
on the condition that they should not be perfumed, lest they might tempt men
with their perfume, thus diverting men’s eyes to them, The intended meaning
here is that perfume is something that tempts men towards women. Joined
to perfume (in prohibition) is what resembles it (with regard to temptation)
like wearing attractive clothes, jewels and adornments, Thereupon, ifa woman
perfumes herself or puts on attractive clothes, then she is prohibited to go to
the mosque and must be forbidden from going out of her home. Itis stated in

(Chapter 21: Women's Attendance in Mosques 2

Sahilt Muslim (Muslim's Authentic Book of Hadith) and other books of Hadith
that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Whoever woman perfumes herself should nol join usin the ‘Isha’
(Night) Prayer!

Besides, ifa woman went out to the mosque (for prayer), she should keep
away from crowded gatherings of mén, Imam Ibnnl-Qayyim (may Allah have
mercy on him) said:

“Those in authority must forbid mingling between men and women
in marketplaces and gatherings of men. The responsibility for this is
upon those in authority, since mingling between men and women
brings about a great affliction. This is according to the hadith in which
the Prophet (PBUH) said, [After me, T have not left any affliction
more harmful to men than women.”

Thnul-Qayyim added:

“Thus, those in authority must forbid women from going out adorned
and beautified (in a seducing way). They must also forbid those
women who are dressed but appear to be naked, such as in transparent
clothes. Those in authority must also forbid women from talking to
men int streets and forbid men as well from doing the same?”

When a woman adheres to the high moral standards of Islam, such as
bashfulness, covering herself, keeping away {tom attractive adornment and
perfume (when going out) and keeping away from mingling with men, it
becomes permissible for her then ‏ما‎ go to the mosque for prayer and attend
gatherings for the remembrance of Allah. However, it is better for her to stay
at home, because the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“.. Yet their houses are better for them (to perform prayer therein)"

Moreover, scholars unanimously agree that itis better for women to perform
prayer in their houses than in the mosque, to keep away from any satanic
seduction, and for purposes of safety and for uprooting any source of evil.

Ifa woman does not adhere to the high moral standards of Islam and does
not avoid whatever (he Messenger (PBUH) forbids of adornment and perfume
when going out, then itis prohibited for her fo go to the mosque, and she must
be prevented from going out by her guardian or those in authority. It is stated
in the Two Salvihs on the authority of 'Sishah (may Allah be pleased with her)
that she said:

TI: PRAYER:

“Had Allahs Messenger (PBUH) witnessed what the women were
doing, he would have forbidden them from going to the mosque as
the women of the Children of Israel had been forbidden.”

‘When a woman goes to the mosque, both the benefit gained behind this,
(for her and for the whole community) and the avoiding of any cause of evil
are to be taken into account (by the Lawgiver). If the cause of evil is greater

than the benefit gained. a woman, in this case, must be prevented from going
to the mosque.

Ifa woman is asked to observe these high moral standards when going out
to the mosque, then itis more worthy for her to be cautious and to keep away
from any cause of temptation when going anywhere other than the mosque.
Nowadays, there are some people calling for the participation of the woman in
jobs, as in the West and those imitating the morals of the West, Those people
are in fact calling for the spread of seductions, leading the woman to her
misery and are depriving her of her dignity. Those people should be stopped
and there should bean end to the views of the Pre-Islamic Period of Ignorance
(the Jahiliyyah) they spread through their tongues or pens. It is sufficient asa
proof for us the women in the West and those who model on them. They have
gone through a lot of calamities and they have painful lives from which their
societies are suffering. Let them be an example for us, for the fortunate person
is the one who takes a lesson from the fate of others.

The only pretext those people offer for their view is that half of the society
(women) would be idle (if prevented from wark). They offer this pretext so
that the woman could be on an equal foot with man in work, forgetting or
pretending to forget that the woman is already doing great job in her home,
Shes doinga great job forhersocietyand only she could doit, sinceit is suitable
for her nature and is in conformity with her natural disposition. She is the
wife with whom the husband finds tranquility. She ts the mother, the one who
bears, breasifeeds, raises children and the one who performs domestic tasks.
If she is to leave her home-to share man his work, then who else will perform
those tasks? Those tasks would not be performed at all, and the society would
lose its other half; so what would the first half (ie. men) do? Thereupon, the
society's edifice would fall down and its pillars would callapse.

We advise those people to come to their senses, and not to be of those
who have exchanged the favor of Allah for disbelief and settled their people in
the home of ruin, We also advise them to be of those advocating constructive
views not destructive ones,

Chapter 21: Women’s ‏متم ممعم‎ Mosques na

© Muslim woman! Adhere to the teachings of your religion. Do not Jet
yourself be deluded by the views advocated by the misleading people, who
‘want to deprive you of the dignity granted to you by Islam, and nothing other
than Islam can grant you this, Almighty Allah says:

“And whoever desires other than Islam as religion - never will it
be accepted from him and he, in the Hereafter, will be among the
losers” (Qur'an: Alut "Imran: 85)

May Allah grant all of us guidance to whatever is good and useful in this
world and in the Hereafter!

Endnotes

1 Ahmad (9625) [2/577] and Ala Dawod (565) [1/271
2 The Two Sahifis: The Two Authentic Books of AL-Bukbdrt and Muslim.
3 Al-Bukbhart (865) [2/448] and Muslina (990) (2/388)

4 Ahmad (5470) [2/103] and Abd Dawéd (567) [1/271].

5 Muslima (997) (2/383).

6 Al-Bukhari (5096) [9/172] and Muslim (6880) [9/57],

7 See; At-Linigul-Hakimalt [p.325]

8 Al-Bukhdt (869) [2/451] and Muslim (998) [2/385],

22

Imamate (in Prayer)

Imamate (in prayer) is an important religious position undertaken by the
Messenger (PBUH) himself and the Rightly-Guided Caliphs after him. Many
hadiths mention the favor of the imamate, such as the hadith in which the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Three persons will be on the hillock of musk on the Day of Resur-
rection: (i) the person who leads the people in prayer and they are
well-pleased with him...”

In another hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) said

“The reward of him (the imam in prayer) is like that of those who
perform prayer behind him.”

‘That is why one of the Companions (may Allah be pleased with them all)
said to the Prophet (PBUH) “Appoint me to lead my people in prayer.” They
have been aware of the reward and merit of the imamate.

Yet, unfortunately, we witness nowadays many of knowledge-seeking
students turning away and abstaining from the imamate, giving it up because

216 I: PRAVER

of nothing but laziness and the weak wish of obtaining goodness. However,
it is Satan only who dénies them the will to undertake imamate. Knowledge-
seeking students instead, should undertake imamate earnestly and vigorously
and should seek the reward of this deed only from Allah, This is because they
are more entitled ‏ما‎ undertake it and undertake other good tasks. The more
‘ne enjoys the qualifications of the imamate, the more it becomes worthy of
him to undertake itthan any other person who is inferior to him with regard
to these qualifications. Rather, the qualified person ought to undertake it if
there is no other person but him worthy of it.

‘The most worthy to lead people in prayer is the one who is most versed in
the Book of Allah (i.e, the Qur'an). The fmm should be aware of the places
of articulation of letters, make no grammatical mistakes and apply the rules
of recitation (of the Qut'an) without artificiality or stay eloquence. Besides,
the imam should have Islamic juristic knowledge of prayer; its requirements,
integral parts, obligations and what nullifies it in consideration of the hadith
in whieh the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“The one who is most versed in the Book of Allah (the Quran)
should lead people in prayer”

‘There arealso many other authentic hadiths reporting that the most worthy
person of leading people in prayer is the most versed in the Glorious Qur'an,
and who, atthe same time, has juristic knowledge of prayer. Thisis because the
most versed one at the time of the Prophet (PBUH) used to be the one having
the greatest réligious knowledge.

Ifpeople are equally versed in their knowledge of the Qur'an, the one with
the greatest religious knowledge should lead the people, since he combines two
merits: the good recitation (of the Quran) and the Islamic juristic knowledge.
‘This is because the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“If people are equal in recitation (of the Quran), then the one with
the greatest knowledge in the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) should.
lead them in prayer

‘This hadith points to the one having the greatest religious knowledge. This
is because the need of those led in prayer for juristic knowledge (of prayer)
is more than their need for the rules of recitation. That is because what is
obligatory in prayer 1s limited as far as recitation is concerned, while there are
many unlimited situations that may take place generally in prayer.

Chaprer-22: Lmamate (in Prayer) 27

ifpeople are equally versed in juristic knowledge and recitation, the earliest
one in Hegira should lead people in prayer. Hegira here means moving from a
place of polytheism to a Muslim one.

If people are equally versed in recitation, juristic knowledge and
Hegira, the oldest one stiould lead the people in prayer, in consideration
of a hadith related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim in which the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“Let the oldest one amongst you lead the prayer."

‘This is because being old while being a Muslim is a merit; also because ald
age makes one closer to submissiveness in prayer and makes one’s invocation
more worthy of being accepted.

‘What proves this sequence of those who should lead people in prayer is the
hadith related by Muslim on the authority of Abti Mas' id AL-Badri, in which
the Prophet (PBUH) says:

“The one who is most versed in Allah's Book (the Quran) should act
as the imam for the people, but if they are equally versed in reciting it,
then the one who has most knowledge regarding the Staal (is to lead
the prayer). If they are equal regarding the Sunual, then the earliest
‘one to immigrate (to Medina) (is to lead the prayer). If they are equal
regarding immigration, then the oldest one (is to lead the prayer)!"

Shaykhul-Islam Ibn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) says:

“The Prophet (PBUH) gives preference in leading people in prayer Wo
those having the greatest knowledge of the Qurin and the Sunnah. If
people are equal in this knowledge, preference shauld be given to those
‘who outstrip the others in doing good deeds. The one who surpasses
otlers in doing good leeds willingly (like the migrant) is given more
preference over one who is distinguished in doing good deeds because
of natural reasons decreed by Allah; namely old age.”

Yet, there are some considerations that are to be put into account and are
given preference aver people attending prayer as far as imamate is concerned,
even if those people are better. These considerations are:

Firstly, the assigned imam (ie. the one who leads people regularly in
prayer): If he is qualified for imarnate, it is not permissible to let another
person lead the people in prayer, even if this person is better, except with the
imém’s permission.

218 Ti: PRAYER

Secondly, the householder: If he is qualified for imamiate (in the prayer
performed at his house), and it is not permissible to let another person be the
imam except with his permission.

Thirdly, the sultan (the ruler; the greatest person in authority) or his
representative: It is impermissible to let another person lead people in prayer
except with his permission; this is in case the ruler is qualified for leading
people in prayer.

What proves the preference of these people aver others is the hadith related
by Abi Dawtid in which the Prophet (PBUH) says:

“No man should lead another in prayer where (the latter) is in his
house, or when he has authority, without his permission?”

‘There is also a hadith in Saltth Muslin (Muslim's Authentic Book of Hadith)
in which the Prophet (PBUH) says:

“No man should lead another in prayer where (the latter) is in his
house, or has authority, without his permission.”

One’s authority here means the place where one has the authority thereof
or in one’s estate.

Al-Khattabi says:
“This lsadith means thar the householder is worthier to lead the
prayer in his house ifhe has the juristic knowledge and the knowledge
of recitation (of the Qur‘én) that qualify him to establish prayer
properly"

Ifthe imam of the mosque is appointed by the ruler or his representative,
or the people (attending prayer) agree upon letting him be the imam, then he
is the worthiest person for leading the prayer, since this is considered a special
authority, Moreover, ifanother person precedes him in leading people in prayer,
people may think ill of that latter person or have an aversion towards him.

Its obvious from what has been demonstrated previously that the honor,
the merit, and the position of imamate in Islam are high. This is because the
imam of prayer is an example to be followed, The imamate is an honorable
degree, since it is ‏ه‎ kind of distinction to do righteous deeds and it helps
obeying Allah and adhering to the Muslim community: Through the imamate,
the mosques of Allah are maintained with acts of obedience. The merit of
imamate is also included in the general meaning stated in the verse, about the
invocation of the servants of the Most Merciful, and in which Allah, Exalted
be He, says:

Chapter 22: ‏ممسمها‎ (in Prayer) 29

“And those who say, ‘Our Lord, grant us from among our wives
and offspring comfort to our eyes and make us a leader [i.e.
example] for the righteous!" (Qur'an: Al-Furgan: 74)

‘The imamate in prayer comes from the imamate in religious affairs,
particularly im case the imim preaches, advises, and reminds people in the
mosque of Allah, He s thas among those inviting people to Allah, as well asthose
who say and do what is good and righteous. Allah says about those people

“And who is better in speech than one who invites to Allah and
does righteousness and says, ‘Indeed, Lam of the Muslims: ”

(Qur'in: Fussilat: 33)

‘Thus, only the deprived persons (of the merits of imamate and its reward)
are the ones who are averse to Undertake it; and there is neither Might nor
Power except with Allah.

Endnotes

1 Ahmad (4800) [2/36] and At-Tittidhy (1991) (4/355)
2 Abumead (16250) [4/29]; Aba Dawid (531) [1/259] and An-Nasd' (671) (1/351).
3 Al-Bulchari related it as a commentary in the book of dhan’ and Muslim (673),
4 Al-Bukharl (628) [2/145] and Muslim (1533) [3/179]

5 See: “Majmit'ul-Fatawe (19/26).

6 Aba Dawad (582) [1/277].

7 Muslim (1532) (3/178).

8 See: Ma ‘alin As-Suoan' in the footnote af Suunan Abii Dawid (1/278-279),

2

Invalid Imamate

Imamate in prayer isa great responsibility that requires some qualifica-
tions in the imdm or at least it is desirable to enjoy them. In addition, the imam
should be free from some qualities preventing him from assuming this position,
or reducing his efficiency to undertake it

It is not permissible to let the defiantly disobedient person lead the prayer.
The defiantly disobedient person is the one who transgresses the right way by
committing one of the major sins, which are less in degree than polytheism.
There are two kinds of defiant disobedience; defiant disobedience in deeds and
in belief. The first kind is defiant disobedience in deeds, such as zind (adultery
or fornication), stealing, drinking intoxicants or the like. The second kind is
defiant disobedience in belief, such as adopting the doctrine of the Rafidah, the
‘Mutazilites (Mu'tazilah)' or the Jahmiyyah’.

It is not permissible to assign a defiantly disobedient person as the imdm
in prayer. This is because what is told by this person is rejected according to
the verse in which Allah says:

22 He PRAYER

"© you who have believed, if there comes to you a disobedient
one with information, investigate...” (Qur'an: Al-Hujurat: 6)

$o, he cannot be entrusted with fulfilling the requirements and rulings
of prayer. and he is thus a bad example, and making him lead the prayer will
result in evil. Moreover, The Prophet (PBUH) says:

"No woman should lead a man in prayer, nor should a Bedouin
lead an immigrant (to Medina), nor should.a wicked man lead a
believer in prayer except when he overpowers him with his authority
so he (the believer) is afraid of his sword and whip (i.e. he is afraid
of his power)’

(Related by Thn Majah)

What proves our view here is the Prophet's statement:

*:..Nor should a wicked man lead a believer in prayer.”

Wickedness here means deviation from the right way.

it is forbidden to perform prayer behind a defiantly disobedient person.
Besides, it is not permissible to make him the imam in prayer when it is
possible to do without him, It is prohibited for those in authority to assign
a defiantly disobedient person as imim, for they are commanded to observe
the legal interests. So, itis not permissible for them to let the people perform
prayer behind a defiantly disobedient person. In addition, scholars disagree as
to the validity of performing prayer behind such a person. So, people should
be guarded against performing prayer behind a defiantly disobedient person,

The imamate of the one unable to bow, prostrate or sit erect is invalid,
except when leading a person similar to him in inability to do such acts in
prayer. So is the case of the imamate of the one unable to perform prayer
standing when there is a person who can perforrn it standing, except when the
former is the assigned idm and is afflicted with an illness whose recovery is
expected to be soon. In this case, it is permissible for people to perform prayer
behind him while sitting. This is according to what * Aishah (may Allah be
pleased with her) said:

“The Prophet (PBUH) performed prayer in his house while sitting
when he was ill and the people performed prayer behind him standing,
sa he made a gesture to them to sit down, When he had finished the
prayer, he said, "The imémn is appointed so that he should be followed,

Chapter 23) Invalid Imamate 223

so bow dawn when he bows down, and rise up when he rises up and
perform prayer sitting when he (the ‏لفسا‎ performs (it) sitting’ ”"

Besides, in the hadith related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of
‘Abt Hurayrah, the Prophet (PBUH) said

“Then perform prayer sitting all together

Imam Muslim also relates this hadith with slightly different wording on the
authority of Anas’, Then, people led in prayer are ‏ما‎ sit when the imdm sits
because the imam should be the one leading the people in prayer.

16 some people perform prayer standing and others perform it sitting
behind an imam who performs it sitting, their prayer will be yalid according
to the soundest view in this regard. In this case, if the imam appoints a person
to lead the people standing, it will be better so as to avoid any disagreement
concerning this case, also because the Prophet (PBUH) appointed Abd Bakr
instead of himself to lead the prayer during the Prophet's last illness’. The
Prophet (PBUH) thus led people in prayer sitting and appointed Abd Bakr to
lead them om his behalf, to show that it is permissible to do both things; and
Allah knows best.

The imamate of the one in a continual state of ritual impurity is invalid,
‘This continual state of ritual impurity includes enuresis, uncontrolled passing
of wind continuously and the like. Yet, itis only permissible for the one afflicted
with such a disease to lead those in the same state as his. However, ifa healthy
person performs prayer behind such an imam, his prayer will be invalid, because
in such a prayer there isa defect which is not to be mended, since he (the imam)
performs prayer while he discharges impure matters, which contradicts one’s
purity, The prayer of such a person is valid only for necessity and his imamate
is to be only with that who is like him, as they are the same concerning the
continual discharge of the impure matter,

Ifone performs prayer behind another one who is ina state of ritual impurity,
or his body, garment or place of prayer is impure, without knowing about this
imar’s impurity or ritual impurity until prayer is finished, this person's payer
will be valid but not the imams. This view is according to the hadith in which
the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Ifthe one ina state of jandbah’ leads the people in prayer, he is to perform
hhis prayer again, while the prayer of those besind him is valid.”

2a U1: PRAYER

Shaykhul-Istim Ibn Taymiyah says:

“This isthe way in which the Righily-Guided Caliphs have performed
prayer, It could happen that they lead people in prayer and when they
knew that they had been junuh after the prayer was finished, they
would perform their prayer again and would not order those led in
prayer fo perform prayer weain, If the imam or those led in prayer
Anew that he was in a state of ritual impurity or that there wns impure
matter present during the prayer, their prayer would be invalid.””

‘The imamate of the illiterate person is invalid, Iliterate here means the
one who does not memorize the Sura of Al-Fatihah (the Opening Chapter
of the Quriin) or memorizes it but recites it improperly, such as making
grammatical mistakes in words, which change their meaning, These mistakes
include, for example, saying, “..upon whom 1 have bestowed favor” instead
of saying, “..upon whont You have bestowed favor...” (Qur'an: Al-Fatihah:
7) They include wrong declensions, This illiterate person may mispronounce
a letter for another because of a lisp. Thus, his imamate is not valid except
when leading illiterate people, since they are equal regarding this defect and
are unable to mend it. However, if the illiterate person is able to mend his
pronunciation in reciting the Qur'in, his prayer will not be valid nor that of
those performing prayer behind him, This is because that person does not
perform an integral part of the prayer though he is able to perform it,

Moreover, it is detestable that one leads people in prayer while most of
them justifiably dislike him, The Justification of this dislike may be due to a
shortcoming in his religiosity. This is because the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“(There are) three persons whose prayer does not rise over their ears
(i.e. Allah does not accept it): (i) the escapee slave until he returns:
(ii) a woman who sleeps while her husband is angry with her: (ii)

and a person who leads people in prayer while they are dissatisfied
with him."

(Related by At-Tirmidhi who deems ita hasan (good) hadith)
Shaykhul-Iskim Tba Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“If people dislike this person leading them in prayer because of
something related 10 his religiosity, such as lying, injustice, ignorance
Df religion or innovating in religion andthe like, while they like another
religious person who is more righteous, trutliful and versed than him,
then the latter should assume the imamate, not the one whom they

Chapeer 23: hnvalid Ta

dislike, This is because the Prophet (PBUH) (also) said, |'(There are)
three persons whose prayer does not rise over their ears (ie. Allalt
does not accept it): (i) a person who leads people in prayer while they
are dissatisfied with him; (ii) a man who comes to the prayer too
late, after it is finished; (iii) and a man who takes into slavery an
emancipated male or female slave: ""

Tbn Taymiyah added:

there is hostility between the imam and those led in prayer,
such as the liostility among the people of different inclinations
and those of different juristic schools, then it is not permissible for
him to lead them. This is because the wisdom behind performing
prayer in congregation is achieving harmony and accord between
Muslims, The Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Do not differ (while stand-
ing in prayer ie. straighten your rows); otherwise your hearts
will differ"

On the other hand, if the imdm is righteous and one of the adherents
of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) but the people still dislike him, his
imamiate is valid and acceptable and the blame is on those people who dislike
him. In any case, there should be accord and harmony between the imam in
prayer and those led behind him. Both should cooperate in righteousness
and piety putting aside any hostility ‏عه‎ hatred caused by desires and evil
ends, Thus, the fim should do the duty that he owes to those led in prayer,
not to cause hardship to them, and have regard for them. On the other
hand, those led in prayer should do the duty they owe to their imam and
respect him.

Finally, the imémt and those led in prayer should tolerate criticism delivered
by any of them toward the other, as long as this criticism does not degrade
one’ piety and sense of honor. All of us have defects; no one is perfect. A poet
once said:

Who is the one, with qualities all satisfactory?
Iris enough honor that one’s defects are countable,

We ask Allah for guidance and success for all people,

226 Hi: PRAYER

Endnotes

1 The Mutazilites (Mu’ tazilah): Ibis an tslamic sect that claims that those who commit
cardinal sins are in a state between faith and disbelief. This belief violates that of the
Adherents of the Sunnaft and Muslim Community

2.The Jahmuyyah: is an Islamicsect that denies some ofthe Attributes of Allah, claiming
that those attributes are ascribed to people and cannot be ascribed to Allah. This belief
violates that of the Adherents of the Sunmah and Muslim Community.

‎Majah (1081) [2/5],‏ عطاق

‎4 Muslim (925) [2/352]

‎5 Al-Bukhart (722) [2/270] and Muslim (929) | 2/354[

‎6 Muslim (920) [2/351] and its origin was related in Al-Bulkhart (805) [2/3571,

‎7 Al-Buikhart (687) [2/224] and Mostim (935) [2/357].

‎8 Janibah: A state of major ritual impurity related to sexual discharge:

‎9 Ad-Daraquini (1352) [1/354] and Al-Bayhagi [2/400]

‎10 See: “Maj ‘sl-Fatawa (20/364-570), (23/352).

‎11 At-Titmidhi (360) [2/193]

‎12 See: ‘Majnu'ul-Patdwa [23/373]

Duties of the 1

The imam in prayer shoulders a great responsibility and if he performs
it properly, his reward will be great. The favor of imamate in prayer is
well-known; the Prophet (PBUH) and the Rightly-Guided Caliphs have
assumed it and have not appointed for it except the best people. The
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Three persons will be on the hillock of musk on the Day of Resur-
rection: (i) the person who leads people in prayer and they are well
pleased with him...”

In another hadith the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“The reward of him (the imam in prayer) is like that of those who
performed prayer behind him.”

It is permissible for the one who knows that he is qualified and fit for the
imamate in prayer to seek it. This is because one of the Companions of the
Prophet (PBUH) once said to him:

‎PRAYER,‏ ا

‎“Appoint me to be the imam of my people in prayer." The Prophet (PBUH)

‎replied, “You are their imam but lead prayer (as light as) the weakest of them
can perforni"

‎‘What proves that one is allowed to seek imamate is what Allah, Bxalted

‎be He, says:

‎“..And make us a leader [i.e. example] for the righteous.”
(Qur'an: Al-Furgan: 74)
‘The one who assumes imamate in prayer should do the following:

‎+ Concern himself with it giving it its due in full as he possibly can, and
for this he will be greatly rewarded,

‎+ He should put into his account the conditions of those led in prayer, be
understanding of theircircumstancesand avoid making thingsdifficult
for them, He should also invite them to perform the congregational
prayer and should not make them disinclined to perform it. This is
according to the hadith in which the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎“if anyone of you leads people in prayer, he should lighten it because
among them are the weak, the old and one busy with his needs. And
if anyone among you performs prayer alorie, then he may prolong (the
prayer) as much as he wishes.”

‎{Related by the Group of Compilers of Hadith on the authority of Aba
Hurayrah)

‎There is also a hadith in the Two Sabihs narrated on the authority of
‘Abii Mas' dd in which the Prophet (PBUH) says:

‎"0 people! Some of you make people dislike good deeds (the congrega-
tional prayer). So whoever among you leads people in prayer should
lighten it because among them are the weak, ihe olel and one busy with
his needs.”

‎Besides, Anas (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

‎“T never performed a light and perfect prayer as I performed behind
the Prophet (PBUH),”

‎Thereupon, our Prophet (PBUH) is our example in this and in
other regards.
Chapter 24: Duties ofthe ‏ارط‎ 239

“Whoever follows the way of the Prophet (PBUH) and leads the people
in prayer performing it as light and perfect as the Prophet's prayer, those.
behind him (in prayer) will not complain, Lightening the payer should
go along with making it perfect in its integral parts, obligatory acts and
acts of the Sunmah (Prophetic Tradition). Yet, lightening (i.e. shortening)
the prayer is a relative matter traced back to what the Prophet (PBUH)
sed 10 do, maintain and order us with, and it should not be related to
the wishes of those lei in prayer.”

Some scholars view that the required lightening of prayer is observing the
least degree of perfection in Glorifying Allah and in the other acts of prayer:
The least degree of perfection in Glorifying Allah in bowing and prostrating
is saying, “Subhdina Rabbiyal-‘Azim” (ie, “Glory be to my Lord, the Most
Great”) and "Subhana Rabbiyal-A’la" (i.e. “Glory be to my Lord, the Most
High”) thrice in succession. If those led in prayer, though limited in number;
preferred that the imidm should prolong the prayer and agreed upon this, then
it would be allowed for the imam to prolong the prayer, That is because the
harm caused when prolonging the prayer and thereby making people shun the
congregational prayer is avoided in this case,

Imam Ibn Dagiqul-'Id said:

“The view of faqihs' maintaining that the imam should not pronounce
tasbit more than thrice, does not contradict what is reported of the
Prophet (PBUH) that he said tasbils more than thrice (in prayer)’.
This is because the Prophet (PBUH) used o prolong prayer fulfilling
his Companions’ wish of gaining more good deeds which does not
make that prayer a prolonged one (in which those who are led
complain)”

Shaykhul-Islam Ibn Taymiyah said:

"Theimam should not exceed what is ordained for him. In most cases,
he should do what the Prophet (PBUH) used to do in most cases and
prolong the prayer or shorten it as befits the situation, which is the
same as the Prophet (PBUH) used to do most of the time."

Imam An-Nawawi said:

“Scholars said that the reported difference of the Prophet (PBUH)
regarding the length of recitation (of the Qur’in during the congrega-
ional prayer) was according fo circumstances. The Prophet (PBUH)

230 Ii: PRAYER

used t6 be aware of the tine at which ihe believers prefer long recita-
ton, and he would act accordingly. He also used to be aware when to
lighten the prayer upon their wish justified by an excuse and the like,
The Prophet (PBUH) al times intended to prolong the congregational
Prayer but on hearing the cries of a child, he would! cut it short (in
case his mother was one of those led in the prayer), us related in the
Salih Books (Authentic Books of Hadith)."

I is detestable to lighten the congregational prayer to the extent that those
led in prayer could not perform the acts of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition),
such as reciting a sura of the Qur'an (along with Al-Fatihah) or pronouncing
tasbih thrice in bowing and prostrating, It is an act of the Sunnah for the
imam (o recite the Qurén with measured recitation and to be deliberate in
pronouncing tasbi and Tashahlud so that those led behind him would be
able to perform the acts of the Sunah related ta tasbih and the like. Itis also
an act of the Sunnah for him to perform bowing and prostrating perfectly, It is
an act of the Sunnah as well for the imam to prolong the first rak'ah (unit of
prayer), as AbO Qatddah narrated:

“The Prophet (PBUH) used to prolong the first rak' al
(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Besides, itis desirable for the émdm to prolong bowing when he feels that
there is someone about to catch up with the rak’ah. The imdm thus helps that
person to join in the rak'ak. This is according to the hadith related by Imam
‘Ahmad and Ab Dawad on the authority of Ibn Abii Awfa describing the form
of the Prophet’ prayer stating:

“He (the Prophet) used to stand in the first rak'ah of the Zuhr
(Noon) Prayer (for a long time) until no footfall could be heard.”

‘This is unless it would become difficult on those led (in prayer) to wait. If
itis difficult for those led in prayer to wait that long, the imam should not wait,
for he should pay more respect to those behind him than those who have not
joined the prayer yet.

‘To conclude, the imént should put into his account the circumstances
of those performing the prayer behind him, He should keep to completing
and perfecting the prayer duly, following in this the guidance of the Prophet
(PBUH), working upon his advice and obeying his orders, in which there is
good for all.

Chapter 24: Duties of the finan ‏اكد‎

Hawever, some imams may not give the imamate its due right and respon-
sibility, for they may remain absent ftom the mosques or come late for the
prayer, which causes difficulty to those led in prayer and gives rise to discord
and diverts the attention of those led in prayer. Thus, such an émdm would
bea bad example (who would be) followed by the lazy and those who do not
shoulder the responsibility duly. Such an imdm should be rebuked, so that
he would perform the tasks of imamate properly without causing those led
in prayer to shun (the congregational prayer) or hinder the function of the
imamate, Besides, he should be dismissed from this position if he does not
come to his senses.

Allah! Grant ts success in doing whatever You like and whatever pleases You!

Endnotes

| Al-Bukhari (703) [2/258}, Muslim (1046) [2/07], Abnvad (10285) [2/643], Abo Dawad
(794) [1/352], At-Tiemidhi (236) [1/461], An-Nasd'i (822) [1/425] and fla Majah with
the same wording of the next ith,

2 Al-Bukhari (702) [2/256] and Muslim (1044) [2/406},

3 Muslim (1061) [2/412].

4 Fagih: A scholar of Islamic Jurisprudence,

5 Tasbiti (in prayer): Saying, “Subldua Rabbiyni-‘Aziny" (ie. “Glory be to my Lord, the
Most Great”) while bowing, and “Subliana Rabbiyal-A "Ia" (ke. “Glory be to my Laird
the Most High’) while prostrating

6 As related in Abd Dawid (888) [1/386] and An-Nasaf (1134) [1/574].

7 Al-Bukhari (759) (2/315] and Mustim (11012) (2/392)

‎Abad (19097) [4/484] and Aba Dawtd (802) [1/354].‏ لا

2

Prayer of Those Having
Legal Excuses

Those with legal excuses are the sick, the traveler, and those who fear
they cannot establish prayer as completely as those without excuses. The
Lawgiver’ has lightened the hardship for the excused Muslims and ordered
them to perform prayer as much as they can. This ruling shows the ease
and relief intended for Muslims in the Shari’ah (Islamic Law), as it always
eliminates hardships. Allah says:

“<,.He has chosen you and has not placed upon you in the religion
any difficulty...” (Quran: Al-Hajj: 78)
Allah, Exalted be He, also says:

“..Allah intends for you ease and does not intend for you har
dship...” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 185)

24 fi: PRAYER

In addition, Allah, Exalted he He, says:

‎does not charge a soul except [with that within] its‏ علتبي"

‎capacity...” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 286)
Further, He says:

‎"Go fear Allak as much as you are able...”

‎(Qur'an: At-Taghabun: 16)
Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) said:
“If Lorder you to do something, then do of it as much as you can.”

‎This is to be added to many other legal texts that indicate the favor of Allah.
upon His servants and how He granted them ease in whatever He ordained for
them. Among the things made easy for Muslims is the prayer of the persons
with excuses of sickness, travel, or fear.

‎First: The Prayer Performed by the Sick

‎Prayer is not to be abandoned under any circumstances, The Muslim
‘patient must perform prayer standing if he can, and it is permissible for him to
lean on astick, or the like, if he needs this since the related fundamental rule
states, “The means to fulfill an obligation are to be considered obligatory." It is
permissible fora Muslim patient (o sit in prayer if he cannot stand due to one
of the following reasons (or the like):

‎+ Ifhe is unable to stand
٠ If it is difficult for him to stand
+ Ifhe fears to increase his illness or delay his recovery by standing up

‎So, the inability ofa Muslim patient ta stand in prayer is not a condition of
the permissibility to sit in prayer. However, ite difficulty is not a legal excuse
to sit in prayer; only real difficulty is considered in this respect. Scholars
unanimously agree that if a Muslim person is unable to stand in obligatory
prayer, itis permissible for ‏مرت‎ to sit. Moreover, there is no need for him to re~
perform his prayer again when he gets well; his reward does not decrease; and
the way he sits is to be according to the way he desires, for the Lawgiver does
not ordain a specific way of sitting (for the patient), so in whatever manner he
sils, itis permissible.

‎Prayer of Those Having Legal Lxcuses 235‏ 251 فووساة

‎Ifa Muslim patient cannot sit in prayer and it causes him a real difficulty
to sit, then it is permissible for him to lie on his side facing the giblah’. It is
desirable for him in this case to lie on his right side. If there is no one to help
him face the qiblah and he cannot face the qiblah himself, then it is permissible
for him to perform prayer facing whatever direction he can face.

‎Ifa Muslim patient cannot lie on his side in prayer, it is permissible for
him to lie on his back, making his legs face the qiblah if possible. If'a Muslim
patient sits in prayer or if he lies on his side or back and cannot prostrate,
then it is sufficient for him to beckon bowing and prostration with his head
‘making his head a bit lower to beckon prostration than in bowing, ‏عا‎ Muslim
patient sits in prayer and can prostrate, itis obligatory for him to prostrate and
itis not sufficient then to beckon prostration with his head.

‎‘The proof of the legal permission detailed previously is the hadith related
by Al-Bukhari and the Compilers of Suman on the authority of “Imran Ibn
Husayn (may Allah be pleased with him) who narrated:

‎“L had hemorrhoids so 1 asked the Prophet (PBUH) how 1 could
perform prayer. He (PBUH) replied, 'Perform prayer while standing
and if you cannot, perform it while sitting and if you cannot do
(even) that, then perform it lying on your side!"

‎An-Nasaii added in his narration that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎‘..And if you cannot, perform prayer lying on your back.”

‎Inaddition, Allah says

‎“Allah does not charge a soul except [with that within) its
capacity...” (Qur'in: Al-Bagarah; 286)

‎Here, we should draw the attention to those Muslims who give
up prayer when they are-sick or when they have had surgical
operations, claiming that they cannot perform the acts of prayer
properly, or they cannot perform ablution, or their clothes are
impure or any other excuses. They commit a big mistake since
a Muslim is not permitted to give up prayer when he cannot
perform some of its conditions, integral parts, or obligations, but
he mast perform prayer as much as he can as Allah says:

‎"So fear Allah as much as you are able.:*

‎(Qur'an: Al-Taghabun: 16)

236 He PRAYER

‘A Muslim patient miay say, “When J get well, Iwill make up for the prayers
1 missed during the days of my illness” This is, legally considered, either
ignorance or negligence in religion for the prayer is to be performed at its due
time as much as one can and it is nol permitted to be delayed until one misses
its due time. Hence, there should be much attention paid to such a matter and,
besides, there should be religious awareness in hospitals, Moreover, hospitals
should recognize the patients’ conditions concerning performing prayer and
other legal obligations that they are in need to know.

‘The aforementioned legal rulings concern whoever hasa legal excuse from
the beginning of prayer until its end. However, there are some cases in which a
‘Muslim may haye-a legal excuse for only a part of his prayer such as:

+ One may start prayer when one is standing and then feels that one
cannot stand anymore while performing it,

+ One may start prayer when one is not able to stand and then feels that
one can stand while performing it.

+ One may start prayer when one is sitting and then feels that one cannot
sit anymore while performing it.

+ One may start prayer when one is lying on one’s side and then one feels
that. one can sit,

In such cases, one must shift to the position that legally suits one's ability
und it is obligatory then to complete one’s prayer in this state. This is because
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“So fear Allah as much as you are able...”
(Qur'an: At-Taghabun: 16)

Thus, one is to shift to the standing posture when one is able, and one is
to shift ta the sitting posture when one is unable to stand, and so on, [fone is
able to stand and sit but cannot bow or prostrate. one is to beckon bowing with
one’s head while standing, and beckon prostration with one’s head while sitting
to make a difference (between bowing and prostration) as much as one can,

A Muslim patient is permitted to perform prayer lying on his back though
he is able to stand if trustworthy Muslim doctor tells him that he cannot
recover except when he performs prayer while lying on his back. This is
hecause the Prophet (PBUH) performed prayer while sitting when the right
side of his body was injured". Also, Umm Salamah (may Allah be pleased with
her) did not prostrate in her prayer when she suffered from ophthalmia’,

Chapter 25: Prayer if Those Having Leyal Excuses

Prayer enjoys a great importance in Islam and a Muslim must establish
prayer whether he is healthy or sick, asa patient is not legally excused to give
up prayer, but rather, it is obligatory upon him to perform it in whatever
condition. So, a Muslim must establish prayer as Allah, Exalted be He, has
ordained, We invoke Allah to guide us to what satisfies Him;

Second: The prayer of riders

A Muslim rider is considered one of the excused as long as he can be hurt
when dismounting his animal, Some cases of possible harm are:

+ When there is mud or itis raining

+ When he cannot remount his animal if he descends
+ When he fears to miss his companions

+ When he fears an enemy or a wild animal

In such cases and the like, it is permissible for a rider to perform prayer
while riding his animal or the like. This came in the hadith narrated on the
authority of ‏“ملا‎ | Tbn Murrah (may Allah be pleased with him) who said:

“The Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions were on a journey
when the time of prayer became due and it rained, AL that time
they were on a pathway, the sky was raining from above them and
itwas wet below. Therefore, Allahis Messenger (PBUH) ordered that
the prayer call (adhan) and the immediate prayer call (iqamak) be
pronounced while he was on his she-camel and then he proceeded
on his she-camel and led them in prayer (only) beckoning (bowing
and prastration) and making the prostration gesture lower than the
one for bowing.”

(Related by Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi)!

It is obligatory for a Muslim who performs prayer while riding his animal
(or what takes the same ruling like a car.,.etc) to face the giblah if possible.
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

And wherever you [believers] are, turn your faces [i,e. your-
selves] toward it [in prayer)...” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 144)

One must also do whatever one is able to perform of bowing, prostrating
and tranquility in prayer as Allah, Exalted be He, says:

234 1 PRAYER,

“So fear Allah as much as you are able...”

(Qur'an; At-Taghabun: 16)

Thus, one is not legally required to do what is beyond one’s capacity, If'a
‘Muslim riding his animal cannot face the giblah, then itis not obligatory upon
him to face it and he is to face any direction in prayer. Likewise, a passenger
on a plane is to perform prayer as much as he can; he may stand, sit, bow,
prostrate or beckon (bowing and prostration) with his head (according to the
situation), but he must face the qiblah for it is possible (to do so).

Third: The Prayer of a Traveler

A traveler is one of the excused persons for it is permissible for him to
shorten the prayer consisting of four rak'ahs (units of prayer) to only two
rak ‘ahs as stated in the Noble Qur'an. the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition), and
the consensus of Muslim scholars, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And when you travel throughout the land, there is no blame
upon you for the shortening of prayer...”
(Qur'an: An-Nisa’: 101)

Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) performed only shortened prayers on. his
journeys . Furthermore, on journeys, shortening the prayeris better than completing
itaccording to the majority of scholars. Itis narrated in the Two Sahths that “Atishah,
(may Allah be pleased with her) said:

“When the prayer wasenjoined (by Allah), it was two rak'ahs (units
of prayer) only (in every prayer) both when in residence or on 3
journey. Then the prayers performed on journey remained the same,
but (the rak'ahs of) the prayer for non-travelers were increased,”*

‘Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“The prayer performed on journeys is of two rak'ahs. This is the
complete prayer without shortening’

‘A Muslim ona journey is to start shortening the prayer as soon as he leaves
his town orcity as Allah permits the shortening af prayer for those who travel
through the land, Before leaving his town, a Muslim is not legally considered,
a traveler through the land (and hence he is not permitted to shorten the
prayer), The Prophet (PBUH) used to shorten the prayer as soon as he left his
hometown, So, ifa person does not travel from the residential land, he is not
considered a traveler.

Chapter 25: Prayer of Thaso Having Legal Excuses 239

A traveler is permitted to shorten the prayer even if he frequently travels,
ag im the case of a mail carrier or a taxi driver who spends most of his time on
the way between towns,

It is permissible for a traveler to combine the Zuhr Prayer and the ‘Asr
(Afternoon) Prayer at the due time of either of them, and, likewise, to combine
the Maghrib (Sunset) Prayer and the "Ishd’ (Night) Prayer at the due time of
either of them. That is because what makes it permissible for the traveler to
shorten prayer makes it permissible for him to combine prayers as well.

However, shortening prayer is attemporary permission valid when there is
a necessity, as in the case when a traveler is in haste on his journey, Mu’ adh
(may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“On the Battle of Tabitk, when the Prophet (PBUH) had gone forth
before the sun passed the meridian, he would deluy the Zuhr Prayer
and combine it with the “Asr Prayet, performing them together. But
‘when he proceeded after the sun had passed the meridian, he would
perform the Zuhr and the “Ast Prayers (at the time of the Zuhr)
and then he would proceed. (He acted similarly for the Maghrib
Prayer.) When the sun had set before he proceeded, he would
delay the Maghrib Prayer and combine it with the ‘Isha’ Prayer;
performing them together. But when he proceeded after sunset, fie
would perform the ‘Isha’ Prayer and the Maghrib Prayer at the
time of the Maghrib Prayer.”

(Related by Abmad and At-Tirmidhi)"

When a traveler stops on his journey, ta take a rest, itis better for him to
perform each prayer shortened at its due time, not to combine prayers. If itis
difficult for a Muslim patient to perform each prayer at its due time, then he is
permitted to combine the Zuhir Prayer and the "Agr Prayer (at the due time of
either of them), and to combine the Maghrib Prayer and the ‘Isha’ Prayer (at
the due time of either of them).

Shaykhul-Islim Ibn Taymiiyah said:

“Allah has ordained shortening of prayer to remove difficulties and
make things easy forthe Muslin nation, So, a Muslim is permitied to
combine prayers when necessary. All hadiths (rélated to this matter)
imply that it is permissible to combine two prayers at the due time

240 Hi: PRAYER:

of either of them itv order to remove any possible hardship caused to
the Prophet’ nation. Thus, itis permissible to combine prayers ifit is
to cause hardship if not done. This proves that it is permissible with
‘greater reason jor a Muslim patient to combine (two) prayers at the
due time of either of them as long as itis difficult for him to perform
each prayer at its due time.”

Ibn Taymiyah also said:

“Patients cau combine the prayer according to the Sunnah for it
is narrated in two hadiths that the Prophet (PBUH) ordered a
mustahddah" to combine the prayer”

By means of analogical deduction with the case of a mustahiddah, the
combining of prayer is permitted for every Mustim who cannot purify for
every prayer, such as those inflicted with enuresis, a continuously bleeding
wound, or a permanent nosebleed. The Prophet (PBUH) said to Hamnah
Bint Jahsh when she asked him about istihiadah' (vaginal bleeding other than
menstruation):

“But ifyou are strong enough to delay the Zuhr Prayer and advance
the ‏عل"‎ prayer, to wash, and then combine the Zuhr and the 'Asr
Prayers; (and) to delay the Maghrib Prayer and advance the ‘Isha
Prayer, to wash, and then combine the two prayers, do so.”

(Related by Ahmad, Abi Dawid, and At-Tirmidhi and deemed
salsjlt (authentic) by the latter)"

It is permissible to combine the Maghrib Prayer and the ‘Isha’ Prayer, in
particular, if there is rain that wets clothes and causes difficulty (for those who
goto the mosque), The Prophet (PBUH) combined the Maghrib Prayer and the

"Isha Prayer in a rainy night," and so did Abd Bakr and ‘Umar afterwards’.

Shaykhul-Islim thn Taymiyah (may Allsh have mercy on him) said:

“According to the soundest view of scholars, it is permissible for a
Muslim to conibine prayers because of mud or strong cold wind in a
dark night, even ifit has stopped raining. This is more incumbent than
performing each prayerat its due time at home. Moreaver, to abandon
combining congregational prayers in mosques to perform prayer at
home is a bid ‘ah (a matter innovated in religion) that contradicts the
Suimah (Prophetic Tradition), ‏أل‎ is an act of the Sunnah to perform
the Five (Obligatory) Prayers in congregation in the mosque, and
this is more due, according to the ununimous agreement of Muslins,

Chapter 25: Prayer of Those Having ‏أحيضا‎ Excuses 0

ihan performing prayers at home. In addition, congregational prayer
combined in the mosque is more duc than performing prayers at home
individually, according to the unanimous agreement of the scholars
who maintain the aforementioned permissibility to combine prayers
(due to bad weather), such as Malik, Ash-Shaji"i, und Alymad.""

Itis better for one permitted to combine prayers to combine themaccording
to what suits his/her situation most. On the Day of *Arafah, it is better (for
the pilgrims) to combine the Zuhr Prayer and the ‘Agr Prayer at the time of
the former,” but in Muzdalifah, it is better (for the pilgrims) to combine the
‘Maghrib Prayer and the ‘Isha’ Prayer at the time of the latter, according to
what the Prophet (PBUH) did (in his Hajj)", On the Day of “Arafah, pilgrims
combine the Zur and the ‘Asr Prayers at the time of the former in order to
continue staying at ‘Arafah Mount (without interruption), but in Muzdalifah,
they combine the Maghrib and the ‘Ishd' Prayers at the time of the latter to
continue moving toward Muzdalifah.

In general, it is an act of the Swanah for pilgrims to combine prayers on
the Day of “Arafah and in Muzdalifah but in circumstances other than that,
it is permissible when necessary. However, when there is no necessity, it is
better fora traveler to perform each prayer at its due time, During the days of
his Hajj, the Prophet (PBUH) combined prayers only on the Day of ‘ Arafah
and in Muzdalifah, but he (PBUH) did not combine prayers in Mind because
he was to stay there. So the Prophet (PBUH) used to combine prayers only
when he was in a hurry ona journey. We invoke Allah to guide us ta useful
knowledge and good deeds.

Fourth: The Fear Prayer

‘The Fear Prayer is ordained for Muslims during every legal fighting stich as
fighting with the disbelievers and the oppressors, as Allah, Exalted be He, says;

‎If you fear that those who disbelieve may disrupt for‏ .يب"
‎attack] you...” (Qur'an: An-Nisi: 101)‏

‎‘Those with whom Muslims are permitted to fight are determined by means
of analogical deduction with this Qur’anic verse, However, the Fear Prayer is
not permissible during prohibited fighting. The proof of the legality of the
Fear Prayer is stated in the Noble Qur'in, the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition),
and the consensus of Muslim scholars. Allah, Exalted be He, says:

‎“And when you [i.e, the commander of an army] are among
them and lead them in prayer, let a group of them stand [in
prayer} with you and let them carry their arms. And when

242 Ti: PRAYER

they have prostrated, let them be [in position] behind you and
have the othet gratip come forward which has not [yet] prayed
and let them pray with you, taking precaution and carrying
their arms...” (Qur'an: An-Nisé’: 102)

Imam Ahmad (may Allah have mercy on him) states, “Five or sit ways
of performing the Fear Prayer are authentically narrated about the Prophet
(PBUH). The Fear Prayer was ordained during the lifetime of the Prophet
(PBUH) and it is still legal to be performed until the end of the time. The
Companions and most of the Muslim scholars unanimously agree on that,
with the exception ofa slight inconsiderable dispute.

‘The Fear Prayer is to ‏عط‎ performed when necessary, both on journey and
in residence, if Muslims fear that the enemy may attack them, as the cause of
its permissibility isthe fighting not the traveling, Tn residence, itis permissible
to shorten only the way of performing the Fear Prayer, not the number of
rak ‘ahs (units of prayer), Yet, on journeys, the Fear Prayer is to be performed
by shortening the number af rak ‘alt, ifthe prayer consists of four rak'ahs, and
by shortening the way of prayer. The Fear Prayer is ordained in two conditions:
The first is when the enemy is of those whom Muslims are permitted to fight,
and the second is when Muslims feat to be attacked while performing prayer.
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

Ifyou fear that those who disbelieve may disrupt for attack]
‘you,

And He says:

“Those who disbelieve wish that you would neglect your
weapons and your bageage so they could come down tipon you
in one [single} attac (Qur'in: An-Nisd: 102)

One way of performing the Fear Prayer is narrated about the Prophet
(PBUH) in the hadith on the authority of Sahl Ibn Aba Hathmab Al-Ansért
(may Allah be pleased with him). Imam Ahmad considers this way (narrated
by Sahl) as the preponderant view for it is similar to the way mentioned in
the Noble Qur’’n. This way of performing the Fear Prayer is distinguished by
carelulness in performing prayer, caution with regard to fighting, and causing
uncomfortableness to the enemy. The Prophet (PBUH) performed the Fear
Prayer in the aforementioned way during the Battle of ‏مونل قراط‎ Ibis to be
performed as Sahl narrated:

Chapter 25: Prayer of Those Having Legal Excuses 143

“One row lined up behind him (PBUH) while another row (lied up)

_facing the enemy, The Prophet (PBUH) led the row that was with
hhim is one rakah (unit of prayer), and he stayed in the standing
posture while that row performed (another rak'alt) by themselves
and went away, lining in the face of the enemy. The other group
came and he (the Prophet) offered his remaining rak’ah with them,
and then, remained sitting until they completed their prayer by
themselves, and he then finished the prayer along with them.”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Muslim related another way of performing the Fear Prayer on the authority
of Jabir (may Allah be pleased with him) who said:

"[ witnessed the Fear Prayer with Allalts Messenger (PBUH). We
drew ourselves up in two rows, while the enemy was between us and
the qiblah, Alalis Messenger (PBUH) pronounced takbir™ and we
all pronounced it. He then bowed and we all bowed. He then raised
his head from bowing and we all raised (our heads). He then went
down in prostration along with the row clase to him, and the rear
row faced the enemy. When Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) completed
the prostration and stood up and the row near to him also did this,
the rear row prostrated themselves: then they stood up. Then the
rear row went to the front anid the front row went to the rear. Then
Allal’s Messenger (PBUH) bowed down and we all bowed. He then
raised his head from bowing and we raised (our heads). He and the
row close to him, which was in the rear (in the first rak'ah), went
down in prostration, whereas the rear row faced the enemy. When
Alla Messenger (PBUH) completed the prostration and stood
up and the row near to him also dial this, the rear row prostrated
themselves. Then Allalis Messenger (PBUH) pronouniced the final
salutations and we all pronounced the salutation,”

A third way of performing the Fear Prayer is narrated on the authority of
Tb “Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) who said:

"The Prophet (PBUH) ed one of the two groups in one rak'ah (unitof
prayer) in the Fear Prayer, performing bowing once and prostration
twice, while the other group faced the enemy. Then the members of
the first group went back and replaced their companions, facing the
enemy, Then they came and the Prophet (PBUH) led them in one

24 IL: PRAYER

rak'alt. Then he pronounced the taslim,” and then the members of
the first group performed one rak’ah and those (i.e. the members of
the second group) performed ane rak'ah.””

(Related by Al-Bukhéri and Muslim)

Ahmad, Abd Dawdd, and An-Nasa't™ relate a fourth way of performing the
Fear Prayer in which the Prophet (PBUH) performed the Fear Prayer leading
each group separately and pronouncing taslim (with every group before he
started prayer with the other one).

A fifth way of performing the Fear Prayer is narrated on the authority of
Jibir (may Allah be pleased with him) who said:

“We went with the Prophet (PBUH) wntil we reached Dhitur-Riga’...”

Jabir continued the narration until he said:

“Then the immediate prayer call (iqamah) was announced and the
Prophet (PBUH) performed two rak’ ahs (of the Fear Prayer) with
one of the two groups, and that batch went back, and he performed
two rak' ahs with the other group. Thus, Allalis Messenger (PBUH)
performed four rak'ahs but the people performed two rak'aks
only:

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

‘The aforementioned ways of performing the Fear Prayer are to be
performed as long as fear does not increase. But when fear increases, through
continuous acts of fighting such as stabbing, beating, attacking and retreating,
‘and it becomes impossible to divide the Muslim soldiers to perform prayer
at its due time mentioned previously, then, Muslims are to perform prayer
as possible as they can, They may perform prayer while standing or riding,
facing the qiblah or not, beckoning bowing and prostration with their heads
as much as they can, They are not permitied to delay prayer as Allah, Exalted
be He, says:

“And if you fear [an enemy, then pray], on foot or riding...”
(Quran; AL-Bagarah: 239)

While performing the Fear Prayer, it is desirable for a Muslim to carry a
weapon to defend himself'as long as such a weapon is not too heavy for him,
as Allah, Exalted be He, says:

Prayer of Those Having Legal Excuses 245

Chapter

And let them carry their arms...” (Qur'an: An-Nisé’: 102)

In addition, the same rulings concerning the aforementioned case of great
fear are ordained for Muslims while escaping from the enemy, torrents or wild
animals, or while chasing the enemy. In such cases, a Muslim is permitted to
perform prayer riding or on foot, to face the qiblah or any other direction, and
to beckon the bowing and prostration with his head,

Ta conclusion, we can get some important lessons from the previously
explained astonishing and accurate arrangement of performing the Fear Prayer:

1. The importance of prayer in Islam, especially the congregational prayer,
for they were not abandoned even in such critical situations.

2. The perfection of the Shari'ah (Islamic Law) is evident as it ordains for
every case what best suits it,

3. No difficulty is intended for the Muslim nation as the Shari'ah is
moderate and valid for all eras and in all places.

We invoke Allah to help us adhere ta His Shari'ah until we die, for He Is
the Hearing and the Responsive.

Endnotes

‎The Lawgiver of Shari alr (Istamic Lav) is Allah, Exalted be He; the term can also refer‏ د
‎to the Prophet (PRUH) as he never ordained but what was revealed to him by Allah.‏

‎2-The yiblah: The direction of prayer, namely towards the Kabah,

‎3 Al-Bulkhiti (1117) [2/758]

‎4 Al-Bukhiri (605) [2/35] and Muslim (920) [2/351]

‎5 Ibn Abi Shaybah (280) |1/243] and Al-Bayhaa (3674) [2/436).

‎6 Ahmad (17503) [4/174] and At-Tirmidhi (411) (2/266)

‎7 Ad-Dariqutni (2275,2276) [2/168] and Al-Bayhagi [3/141].

‎8 Al-Bukhari (350) [1/601] and Muslim (1568) (3/199)

‎Majab (1036) [1/556]‏ مطل ‎An-Nas#i (1419) [2/123] and‏ و

‎10 ‏ذم‎ Dawid (1208) [2/10] and At-Tiemidht (352) [2/438),

‎11 See: Majmt'ul Fatawa (26/64).

‎12. Mustahidate: A woman in a state of itiidal (i.e. a woman having vaginal bleeding
other than menstruation)

‎13 See: Majrnts'ul Fatwa (2472.74)

‎114 Istiluidah: Vaginal bleeding other than menstruation,

‎15 Abmad [6/381,382,439-440] and At-Titmidhi (128) [1/231]

‎16 Al-Bukhari (543) and Muslin (705).

246 II: PRAYER

17 * Abdur-Razzaq in his Musainaf (4440) [2/556],

18 See: Majmit"ul-Fatdv (24/38,29),

19 Muslim (2941) [4/402],

2) AL-Bukbari (1674) [3/660] and Muslim (309) [5/38],

21 AL-Bukhiri (4129) (7/526) and Muslim (1945) 3/366)

22 Takbir: Saying, “Alldhu-Akbar” (ie. Allah is the Greatest).

23 Muslim (1942) [3/364].

24Taslim:Sayingtthe final Salamrsin prayer (saying, “As-saldmut ‘alaykum wa Rabaratullah
i.e. “Peace be upon you, and the mercy of Allah”) when conchading prayer.

25 Al-Bukbari (4133) [7/527] and Muslim (1939) (3/363),

26 Abt Dawod (124) [2/29] and An-Naséti (1552) (2/198).

27 Al-Buktharf (4136) [7/532] and Muslim (1946) [3/367]

|CHAPTER |

26

Jumu ‘ah (Friday) Prayer

The day of this prayer, Friday, is the best day of the week, as the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“Among the most excellent of your days is Friday.”'
In another hadith he (PBUH) said:

“We (Muslims) are the last (to come) but (will be) the first on the
Day of Resurrection though the former nations were given the
Scriptures before us, This (Friday) was their day of celebration
which was made compulsory for them but they differed about it. So

Allah gave us the guidance for it (Friday) and all the other people
{follow us in this respect.”

Imam Muslim recorded that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“It was Friday from which Allah diverted those who were before us.
For the Jews (the day set aside for prayer) was Saturday, and for
the Christians it was Sunday. When Allah sent us (Muslims), He
guided us to Friday (as the day of prayer) for us.”

248 Ms PRAYER,

Allah ordained the meeting of Muslims on Friday to draw their attention
to His great favors upon them, The Friday sermon is ordained to remind
‘Muslims of the favors of Allah and incite them to be grateful (to Him). The
Jumuah (Friday) Prayer is ordained to be performed by midday to give the
‘Muslims (living in the same residential area) the chance to gather in one
mosque. In addition, Allah ordered the believers to attend this meeting, listen
to the sermon, and perform the fumnu ‘ah Prayer as He sa}

“O you who have believed, when [the adhan} is called for the
prayer on the day of Jumu'ah [Friday], then proceed to the
remembrance of Allah and leave trade, That is better for you, if
‘you only knew." (Qur'an: Al-Jumu ‘ah: 9)

Tbnul-Qayyim said:
“Iris of he guidance of the Prophet (PBUH) to honor this day (Friday)
cand to favor it with special acts of worship which ke does not perfar
on other days. Scholars, as well as the followers of Ash-Shafi', differ
on which day is better: Friday or the Day of ‘Arafah? The Prophet
(PBUH) used to recite the Surus of As-Sajdah (the Prostration)' and
Al-Insiin (Man) in the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer on Friday”."”

Ibnul-Qayyim added:

“heard Shaykhul-islam Ibn Tayyniyal saying, "The Prophet (PBUH)
used ‏ها‎ recile these (wo Suras (As-Sajdah and Al-Insén) in the Fajr
Prayer on Friday as they deal with events that happened or will happen
on Friday such as the creation af Adant (Adam), the Resurrection,
and the gathering of servants (to the account in the Hereafter). Thus,
reciting these two Suras every Friday reminds the Muslim nation of
the aforementioned events und consequently cones the prostration of
recitation (in the Sura of As-Sajdahs), So, the prostration of recitation is
not intended in particular here and the one performing prayer should
hot mistakenly recite a prostration-containing verse from whatever
sura in the Quriin (believing that itis an act of the Sunnah (Prophetic
Tradition) for Fridays."
‘There are some special features to be observed on Friday or on the night
preceding it;
Its desirable to confer blessing upon the Prophet (PBUH) frequently. Al-
Bayhagi records that the Prophet (PBUH) says:
“Confer blessings upon me frequently on Friday and the night
preceding it.””""

(Chaprer 26: ‏اناسل‎ (Pray) Peayer ‏اود‎

‘The jumu'ah (Friday) Prayer is one of the most distinguishing acts of
Worship of Friday, as it is of the most stressed obligations of Islam and of the
greatest assemblies of Muslims. The Prophet (PBUH) said that he who leaves
the Junu ‘ah Prayer (continuously) three times on account of slackness, Allah
seals over his heart’,

‘Among the acts of worship to be observed on Friday is bathing to attend
the Friday Prayer, as it isa stressed act of the Sunnah. Some scholars view this
bathing as obligatory, and others maintain that it is obligatory only for one
who needs to remove bad smell from his body.

In addition, itis desirable to apply perfume on Friday, which is better than
applying perfume on the other days of the week.

Moreover, itis desirable to go early to the mosque for the Jumu'ah Prayer
and occupy oneself with performing supererogatory prayers, remembering
Allah, and reciting the Noble Qur'an until the imam (ie., leader in prayer)
comes to deliver the sermon.

It is obligatory to listen to the sermon, and if one does not listen to it
(occupying oneself with anything other than the sermon), then one commits
an evil act, The Prophet (PBUH) says:

“He who commits an evil act will have rio (reward for) Friday."

Speaking is prohibited dung the sermon as it is related in the Musnad
(Ascribed Traditions of Hadith) of Imam Ahmad that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Whoever asks his companion to keep quiet (while the imam is
delivering the sermon) will have no (reward for) Friday."

Furthermore, among the acts of worship to be observed on Friday is
reciting the Sura of Al-Kahf (the Cave)", It is authentically narrated that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“If anyone recites Ihe Sura of Al-Kahf on Friday) a light will shine
from under his feet up to the heaven and it will shine for him on the
Day of Resurrection, and the sins he committed between the two
Fridays will be forgiven.”

(Related by Al-Hakim and Al-Bayhaqi)

There is an hour (a period of time) on Friday during which Allah definitely
responds to supplications. In the Two Sakihs it is recorded on the authority of
‘Abii Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

250 ‏علا‎ PRAYER,

“There is an hour (a period of time) on Friday and if a Muslim gets
it while performing prayer and asks something from Allah, then
Allah will definitely meet his demand."

And he (the Prophet) pointed out the shortness of that time with his hands,

Among the significantactsof worship on Fridays thesermon which isintended
to praise Allsh and glorify Him, declare the testimony of His Oneness and His
Messenger’s message, and to remind His servants (of the affairs of religion).

‘There are so many special acts of worship to be observed on Friday (or
its preceding night) which Ibnul-Qayyim, in his book entitled Zadul-Ma id
(Provisions for the Hereafter), mentioned, making them one hundred and
thirty three, Nevertheless, many Muslims neglect this day giving it no more
attention than any other day, some devote it for sleep and sloth, and others
make it a day of diversion, play and heedlessness, away from remembering
Allah. Consequently, the number of Muslims performing the Fajr Prayer (of
Friday) in congregation in the mosques is noticeably decreasing, There is
neither might nor power except in Allah!

It is desirable for a Muslim to go early to the mosque for the Jumu'alt
Prayer and perform two rak ‘alts (units of prayer) when he enters the mosque
asa prayer of greeting. He is permitted to perform more voluntary prayers if
it is early for the Jumus‘ah Prayer, as the Salaf (early Muslim scholars) used to
‏مو‎ early to the mosque for the Jumnu ‘ali Prayer and perform voluntary prayers
until the imam came to deliver the sermon.

Shaykhul-Islim Ibn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“Ir is more entitled for a Muslim who goes early to the mosque for
the Jumu'ah Prayer to perform voluntary prayers until the imém
comes (to deliver the sermon). It is stated in a sahih (authentic)
hadith that the Prophet (PBUH) said, \..Then he may perform
prayer as much as (Allah has) willed for him...’ Moreover, the
words of the Prophet (PBUH) urge Mustims to perform voluntary
Prayers when they enter the mosque before the sermon on Friday,
without determining a specific Hime (to do that), Its also narrated
that the Companions used to perform voluntary prayers as much
as they could when they entered the mosque before the sermon on
Priday". It could happen (at one of thent perform ten, twelve

‎(Friday) Prayer 251‏ له ‎Jum‏ :26 عمست

‎or eight rakahs (units of prayer), and sometimes more or less
than that, That is why the majority of scholars agree that there
is no specific time or number far the voluntary prayer before the
Jumu'ah Prayer and this voluntary prayer is considered a good
deed, not a sunnah ratibah (a regularly-observed supererogatory
prayer). Thus, according to the soundest view, @ Muslim is not
legally blamed whether or not he performs voluntary prayer before
the Jumue'ah Prayer. However, if ignorant people believe that it is a
sunnah ratibah, then, in this case, giving up this voluntary prayer
will be better”

‎It was mentioned previously that there is no swmah rétibak before the
Jumu ‘ah (Friday) Prayer (but only a voluntary prayer). However, there is a
sunnah rétibah after the Jumu'ah Prayer for it is recorded in Sahih Muslim
(Muslims Authentic Book of Hadith) that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎“When any one of you performs the fumu ‘ah Prayer, he should perform
four (supererogatory rak’ ahs (units of prayer)) afterwards.”

‎It is also recorded in the Two Sais that the Prophet (PBUH) used
to perform two (supererogatory) rak'ahs afte the Jumu'ah Prayer”. To
reconcile the two hadith, it can be said that when the Prophet (PBUH)
performed this supererogatory prayer at home, he made it two rak ‘ahs and
when he (PBUH) performed it in the mosque, he made it four rak “ahs. It is
also permissible for ‏د‎ Muslim to perform six supererogatory rak'ahs after
the Jumu'ah Prayer according to Ibn ‘Umar (may Allah be pleased with
him) who narrated:

‎“When the Prophet (PBUH) performed Jumu'ah Prayer, he used to
proceed to perform two (supererogatory) rak'ahs, and then proceed
to perform four (superevogatory) rak ahs.”

‎‘A Muslim who goes early to the mosque is more entitled to sit in the front
rows. It is not right that a Muslim reserves a place in the mosque by putting a
prayer rug; a stick ora pair of shoes, and then comes later because this behavior
deprives those who come early from this place, Some scholars maintain that
it is permissible for whoever comes early to the mosque to perform prayer
in such a reserved place and to remove anything (put in it for reservation)
because those going early to the mosque are more entitled to perform prayer
in the first row. Besides, such reservation is considered an act of unlawful
seizure of a place.

252 Te PRAVER.

Shaykhul-Islam Ibn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“Before going for the Jumu'ah Prayer, or any other prayer, many
people send sheets (carpets) and the like ta reserve a place in the
mosque, which is forbidden according tw the unanimous agreement
of Muslims; rather it is prohibited. Scholars have two different views
whether the prayer of such people is valid on such a sheet or not, as
they unlawfully seize a place in the mosque by spreading such an
object, depriving others from their right to sit in such a place when
they come early. A Muslin is to go, himself, to the mosque and, hence,
if he sends a sheet (to reserve a place) and comes later he violates
the Shari'ah in two ways. The first is his delay, though he is ordered.
to go early, and the second is his unlawful seizure of the place and
depriving those going early from performing prayer therein and from
completing the rows in succession, one after another. Moreover, such
‏م‎ person commits another mistake when he disturbs the people, who
came before him, while surpassing their rows, passing over their necks
to reach the reserved place."

1) is among the rulings on the Jumu ah (Friday) that a Muslim should
perform two short (light) rak ‘ahs (units of prayer) if he enters the mosque
while the aman is delivering the sermon, The Prophet (PBUH) said:

Fany one of you comes jor the jumu'ah Prayer when the imam
has already come out (to deliver the sermon), (even then) he should
perform: two ‏“مقرم "لسر‎

‘This hadith is recorded by Al-Bukhari and Muslim and in the narration
of Muslim, he (PBUH) added, “.,.and should make them short.’ However,
if he sits before performing the two supererogatory rak "als, he should stand
and perform them, for the Prophet (PBUH) told the man who sat before
performing these two rak''ahs,."Get up and perform two rakahs.””

Itis not permissible fora Muslim to speak while the inant is delivering the
sermon as Allah, Exalted be He, say

“Sa when the Quran is recited, then listen ta it and pay attention
that you may receive mercy.” (Quran: Al-A’ raf 204)

Some exegetes of the Quran maintain that this verse was revealed
concerning the Friday Sermon, and this. sermon is called Qur'an as there
are always Qur'anic verses recited in it, Concerning the other view that this
‘verse was revealed concerning prayer, it can be said that it (Jimmu’ah Prayer)
‘generally includes the sermon. Ahmad relates that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

Chapece 26: Jum ab (Piday) Prayer 253

“if anyone even says (to his companion sitting besides him), ‘Sahin
(ie. shush)™ (while the imam is delivering the sermon), it will be
considered uttering ill speech. And whoever utters ill speech, there
will be no (reward for) Jum 'ah for him.”

In another hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Whoever talks while the imam is delivering the (Friday) sermon
is like a donkey that carries volumes (of books), and whoever asks
him to keep quiet and listen, there will be no (reward for) Friday
for him!”

What is meant in this hadith is that there will be no complete reward
for Friday Prayer for him. Besides, it is tecorded in the Two Sabiihs, on the
authority of Abd Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him), thatthe Prophet
(PBUH)

"if you ask your companion to keep quiet and listen while the imi
is delivering the sermon, then you have uttered an ill speech?”

This ill speech is considered a sin even if the speech is the mere word
“Listen” that is originally considered enjoining what is right, So other words
uttered while the imam is delivering the sermon are more entitled to be
prohibited,

While delivering the sermon, the fmam is permitted to talk to any of the
persons led in prayer and they are permitted to speak to him for any legal
interest. [thappened in many situations that the Prophet (PBUH) talked and
listened to an inquirer”. Also, the Prophet (PBUH) talked and listened to some
Companions for the sake of a legal interest or to teach them religious rulings.
This kind of speaking is permissible, as it does not distract peoples attention
while listening to the sermon.

While listening to the sermon, one is not permitted to give charity
toa beggar, as he (the beggar), in this case, does an impermissible act so
one should not help him to such an act, i.e, speaking while the sermon is
delivered. When the preacher canfers blessing upon the Prophet (PBUH),
it is an act of the Sunnah (Prophetic ‘Iradition) for a Muslim to confer
blessing upon the Prophet (PBUH), but without raising his voice in order
‘not te distract the attention of others. When the preacher invokes Allah, it
isan act of the Sunnah for a Mustim to say ‘Amin (amen), raising neither
his voice nor his hands,

254 U- PRAYER

Shaykhul-Islém Ibn Taymiyah (may Allah haye mercy on him) said:

“While the preacher is delivering the sermon, il 1 detestable or
prohibited by unijorm agreement for a Muslim to raise his voice, and
neither the prayer caller (muezzin) nor anyone else should raise his
voice with conferring blessing upon the Prophet (PBUH) or by doing
anything else”

It is noteworthy that such wrong acts, which Ibn ‘Taymiyah pointed out,
are still committed in some countries. Some examples of such acts are raising
‘one’s voice when conferring blessing upon the Prophet (PBUH), or some
supplications during or hefore the sermon or between the two sermons.
‘Moreover, some preachers may order those present to commit such acts. This
not permitted to

is considered ignorance and innovation in religion whicl
be done.

‘A Muslim must not greet others if he enters the mosque while the imam
is delivering the sermon; rather, he should proceed calmly to any available
place in the rows, perform two short rak"ahs (units of prayer) as mentioned
previously, and sit to listen ‏ما‎ the sermon without shaking hands with those
near him. During the sermon one is not permitted to play with his hand, foot,
beard, clothes and the like, for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Whoever touches pebbles (while the imam is delivering the Friday
sermon paying no attention to the sermon) has made an evil act”

At-Tirmidhi deemed it a s

the Prophet (PBUH) sai

“And whoever makes an evil act, no Friday (ie. na reward for the
Friday Prayer) will be recorded for him.

i (authentic) hadith". Tn another narration,

This is because playing prevents devoutness.

During the sermon, a Muslim should not turn right or left, nor look at the
people (around him) in order not to be distracted from listening to the sermon,
Rather, he should face the preacher (looking at him) as the Companions (may.
Allah be pleased with them all) used to face the Prophet (PBUH) during his
sermon. If one sneezes, one should praise Allah secretly. For the sake of a
legal interest, a Muslim is permitted to talk before or after the sermon, or
during the interval between the two sermons. However, one should not talk.
about worldly matters,

Chapter 26: om’ ab (Friday) Prayer 255

In general, the two sermons of Friday (the sermon of Friday is divided
into two parts) are extremely important in Islam as they contain the
recitation of the Noble Qur'an, some hadiths of the Prophet (PBUH), useful
guidance, good instruction, and remembrance of the days of Allah”. So, the
preacher and listeners must pay attention to the two sermons, The Friday
sermon is not an ordinary speech delivered in clubs, or during celebrations
or usual meetings.

tis worthy mentioning that during the Friday sermon, some listeners raise
their voices, secking refuge with Allah when they hear a warning, or invoking
Allah when they hear some mentioning of the Paradise or of the rewards of
Allah. This act is not permissible and it is included in the acts forbidden to
be done during the sermon, ‘The legal texts indicate that talking during the
Friday sermon rendets good deeds worthless and whoever talks during Friday
sermon will have no reward for the Friday Prayer, and will be like a donkey that
carties volumes (of books). So, one must guard oneself against such forbidden
acts and warn others to guard themselves against them.

Fagihs (may Allah have mercy on them) mention that the Jum ‘ah (Friday)
Prayer is an independent obligation, not a substitute for the Zuhr Prayer.
‘Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“The prayer of the traveler is two rak'ahs (units of prayer), the
Jumu'ah Prayer is two rak‘ahs, the Feast Prayer is two rak'ahs.
These prayers are complete hot shortened according to what your
Prophet (PBUH) said!

The Junu ‘ak Prayer differs from the Zulir Prayerin many ways (concerning
legal rulings) since the former is better and more stressed than the latter, and
more warnings are narrated concerning whoever leaves the Jumu°ah Prayer.
In addition, the Jusnu“ah Prayer has some conditions and specialties which
the Zukr Prayer does not have. It is not sufficient for any Muslim, for wham
the Jummu‘ah Prayer is obligatory; to perform the Zubr Prayer instead of the
Jurmu'ah Prayer, unless the due time of the latter is over; and only then the
Zuhr Prayer becomes a substitute.

The Jumu'ah Prayer is an individual duty for every legally competent, free
and resident male Muslim. Abii Dawid relates, with his chain of transmitters,
on the authority of Tarig Tbn Shihab that the Prophet (PBUH) s

“(Performing) the ‏يله سج[‎ (Friday) Prayer in congregation is obliga-
tory upon every Muslim, with four exceptions; a slave, a woman, a boy,
and a sick person."

250 1, PRAYER

‘The transmitters of this hadith are trustworthy, and it is deemed sakih
(authentic) by many scholars. Ad-Daraqutnt also relates, with his chain of
transmitters, on the authority of Jabir (may Allah be pleased with him) that
the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day must perform the
Jumu ‘ah Prayer in congregation, with four exceptions: a sick person,
a traveler, a boy or a slave.”

Shaykhul-Islam Tbn Taymiyah said:

“The Jurnu ‘ah Prayer is obligatory upon every group of people living
in permanent houses close together, whether such houses are built
with mud, wood, reeds, palm branches, or any other material, as long
as they do not depart from such a place in sumimer or winter. The kind
of material is insignificant to the aforementioned legal obligation.
The original rule concerning this is that they should be permanently
resident and not like nomads who live in tents and move from one
place to another, carrying their houses with them whenever they go
seeking rain,”"

‘The Jumu ‘ah Prayer is not obligatory upon travelers, who are permitted to
shorten prayers as the Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions used to travel for
Hajj or any other purpose and none of them performed the jumu’ah Prayer
during travel. The ‏يمير‎ ‘al Prayer is not obligatory upon whoever goes on a
picnic (and the like) and finds no mosque around and he is to perform the
Zulir Prayer (instead of the jurnu ah Prayer). In addition, the Jumu’ah Prayer
is not obligatory upon women.

Tbnul-Mundhir, as well as other scholars, said:

"Scholars unanimously agree thal the funn ‘ah Prayer is not obligatory’
upon wornen and that if women go to the mosque, listen to Friday
Sermon, and perform the Turmu'ah Prayer, this serves instead’ of
performing the Zuhr Prayer.”

Likewise, a traveler or an ill person is permitted to perform the jurmu alr
Prayer, instead of the Zuhr Prayer, if he is able, for Allah excuses such persons
(from performing the Jurnu alt Prayer) to lighten difficulties for them.

It is not permissible for a Muslim upon whom the juimu‘ah Prayer is
obligatory to travel on Friday alter meridian unless he performs prayer.
Moreover, itis detestable for him to travel, even before meridian, ifhe isnot to
perform the Jumu"ah Prayer on his way.

Chapter 26: ‏لم امسو‎ (Briday) Prayer a7

“There are some legal conditions which make the Jumu'ah Prayer valid:

1. The Jumu’ah Prayer must be performed at its due time which is a
condition for it as the case with other obligatory prayers. ‘Thus, the
Jumu ‘ah Prayer is not valid if performed either before or after its due
time as Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Indeed, prayer has been decreed upon the believers a decree of
specified times.” (Quran: An-Nisa’: 103)

Tris better and more cautious to perform the fumu'ah Prayer
after meridian as it is the time when the Prophet (PBUH) used
to perform this prayer. It is a controversial issue to perform the
Jumat'ah Prayer before meridian. There is no dispute that the end
of the time for the Juri ’ah Prayer is the same as the end of the
time for the Zukr Prayer.

2. Observers of the Jum: ah Prayer must be residents in houses built with
any usual material, not like nomads who live in tents and move with
theirhouses from one place to anotherseekingrain. This is because the
Prophet (PBUH) did not order the Arab tribes living around Medina
to perform the fusnue'ah Prayer.

if a Muslim catches up with one rak’ah (unit of prayer), he can
complete his prayer as he has already caught up with the Jum ‘alt
prayer. Al-Bayhagi records on the authority of Abi Hurayrah (may
Allah be pleased with him) that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Whoever could get one rak'al of the Jumu'ah Prayer (in its proper
time) has got the prayer.”*

‘The origin of this hadith is recorded in the Two Sakis.

‘A Muslim misses the Jurmu ‘ah Prayer if he gets less than one rak'ah
of the funu ‘ah Prayer, ie, iFhe joins the prayer after the imam (i.e.
Jeader in prayer) has risen ftom bowingiin the second rak wh. Then he
is to intend to perform the Zuhr Prayer and perform four rak'ahs as
the Zuhr Prayer after the invn pronounces the final salutation,

3. The two sermons are considered a condition of the Jumu ‘ah Prayer-as
the Prophet (PBUH) used to deliver two sermtions before performing the
Jumnit‘ah Prayer. Tbn "Umar (may Allah be pleased with hirn) said:

258 Ti: PRAYER,

“The Prophet used to deliver two sermons while standing and sit in
between them.”

(Related by Al-Bukharf'and Muslim)

Jn addition, among the conditions that make the two sermons of the
Juri ‘alt valid is that they must contain words of praise of Allah, declaring the
‘Two Testifications of Faith," conferring blessing upon the Prophet (PBUH),
giving advice to fear Allah, as well as good instruction, and the recitation of
the Noble Qur'an (even one verse). Many sermons of preachers nowadays lack
some or most of the aforementioned conditions.

Imam Ibnul-Qayyim (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“Contemplating the sermons of the Prophet (PBUH) and those
of his Companions, one finds such lessons sufficient to make clear
the guidance and the Oneness of Allah. These sermons also explain
the Attributes of the Lord, Exalted be He, and the comprehensive
principles of faith, call to Allah, show Allah’s favors that draw His
servants near fo Him and mention His days (when His punishment
afflicted some of the previous nations) that make His servants fear
His punishment. These sermons call Muslinas to remember Allah andl
thank Him so that He may love them, Also, these sermons mention
the Majesty of Allah, His Attributes and Names to draw His servarits
near ‏هل‎ Hin, and call Muslims 10 obey, thank, and remember Hii
so that He may love them. Thus, those who listen to such sermons
would leave the mosque while they love Allah and Allah loves them.
Years passed andl the light of prophethood faded until the laws and
orders of Allah become like ceremonies that are performed without
fulfilling their objectives. Some recent preachers have considered
their own (invented) ceremonies as if they were acts of the Sunnah
{Prophetic Tradition) that must be observed, and violated the
obligatory objectives of the Shari'ah (Islamic Law). These preachers
adorn the sermons with so much rhyme and rhetoric that cannot
reach the hearts of people and hence they (the sermons) do not fulfill
their objectives"

This is what Tbnul-Qayyim said about the sermons at his time and, of
course, things have gone worse than whal he said, for, nowadays, we find most
ofthe sermons worthless and full of wordiness, Some; ‏عه‎ many, contemporary

Chapter 26: ‏للست سمل‎ (Friday) Prayer 259

preachers regard the sermon as a scholastic composition and improvise
whatever matter that comes to their minds, either related to the topic or not,
making their sermons long and dull. Moreaver, some preachers neglect all (he
legal conditions of the sermon (or at least some of them) and do not adhere
to the legal regularities of the sermon (according to the Suniiah). Thus, they
have so badly affected the standard of the sermons that they (the sermons) no
longer fulfill their effective and useful abjectives.

Some preachers force irrelevant topics into their sermons that may be
difficult for most of those present to understand; they include topics of press,
politics, and current events, which do not (religiously) benefit the worshippers.
© preachers, you must imitate the model sermon of the Prophet (PBUH) as
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“There has certainly been for you in the Messenger of Allah an
excellent pattern...” (Qur'an: Al-Ahzab: 21)

‘You should focus your subjects on the topics of the Noble Qur'an and the
Sunnah that best suit the situation, Your sermon should include the advice to
fear Allah and follow good instruction. You should treat in a brief and clear
way the (spiritual) diseases of your societies. Often recite the Noble Qurn
which grants true life to hearts and light to eyes.

I is not a matter of two mere sermons but, rather, what is really meant is
their expected effects on society as Shaykhul-Islim Ibn Taymiyah said:

“Itisnot enough for preachers to dispraise worldly life and mention death
Conventionally, there must be a specific topic for every sermon.”

“Thus, a sermon can move hearts to good deeds, Moreover, it is not enough
for preachers to dispraise and warn against the worldly life as this is the
technique ofall the deniers of Shar al, Rather, preacher should incite people
to obey Allah, warn them against disobeying Him, call them to Allah, and
remind them of His favors.

Tbn Taymiyah added, “The objective of a sermon is not fulfilled through
detrimental brevity that makes the listeners miss such an objective." When
‘Allah's Messenger (PBUH) delivered a sermon, his eyes would become red, his
voice would rise, and his anger would increase so that he was like one giving a
warning against the enemy and saying:

“The enemy has made a morning attack on you and in the
evening too."

60 Ik PRAYER

The fagihs (may Allah have mercy on them) view thar it is an act of the
Sunnak (Prophetic Tradition) for the preacher to stand on a pulpit while
delivering the Friday Sermon as the Prophet (PBUH) used to do. This is more
effective for instruction as the worshippers can see the preacher clearly while
heis delivering the sermon. An-Nawawi (may Allah have mercy on him) said,
“The preacher's standing on a pulpit is a unanimous act of the Sunnah?"

For the preacher, there are some acts of the Sunnah concerning the Friday
Sermon:

He may greet those present in the mosque when he ascends the pulpit.
Jabir (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“When Allal’s Messenger (PBUH) ascended the pulpit, he used to
give a salutation?"

This hadith is related by Ibn Majah and there are similar narrations of the
same meaning.

‘The preacher may sit on the pulpit until the prayer caller (muezzin) finishes
the prayer call (adhdan). Abt Dawid records on the authority of Tbn "Umar
(may Allah be pleased with him) who sai

“When the Prophet (PBUH) ascended the pulpit, he used ta sit until
the prayer caller finishes (the adan). Then, he (the Prophet) would
stand and deliver the sermon.”

Among the acts of the Surinah to be observed by the preacher is sitting
between the two sermons, for the hadith recorded on the authority of Ibn
"Umar who said:

"The Prophet (PBUH) used to deliver two sermons while standing
and sit in between them.”
(Related by Al-Bukhart and Muslim)

In addition, the preacher can deliver the sermon while standing to follow
the example of the Prophet (PBUH) as Allah, Exalted be He, says, “..And left
you standing...” (Qur'an: Al-Jumu’ ah: 11) and Muslims acted according (0
this Surah

Also, according to (he Surmaly the preacher may lean on a stick or the like.

Moreaver, the preacher should look in front of him as the Prophet
(PBUH) used to do, ‘Turning right or left is regarded as ignoring the other
sideand contradicting the Sunnah, The Prophet (PBUH) used to look in front

Chapter 26: Jum'ah (Priday) Prayer 261

of him while delivering Friday sermon and the worshippers (from among the
Companions) also used to face him. At-Tirmidht related, on the authority of
Ibn Mas’ dd (may Allah be pleased with him), saying:

“When the Prophet (PBUH) stood on the pulpit, we used to face hisn,”

Furthermore, the preacher should make the sermon moderately brief for
fear that the worshippers might become bored. However, he should not make
it too brief to the extent that they might not benefit from it. Imam Muslim
records on the authority of ‘Ammar Tbn Yasir (may Allah be pleased with
him) that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“A maris prolongation of the prayer and shortening of the sermon
tare signs of his understanding (of faith). So prolong the prayer and
shorten the sermon.”

The preacher should raise his voice while delivering the sermon, for the
Prophet (PBUH) used ta raise his voice and his anger increased while delivering
a sermon. This is more effective on the hearts of the listeners,

‘The language of the preacher should be clear, strong and effective, and
phrases should be eloquent.

In addition to this, the preacher should invoke Allah to. amend the religious
and worldly conditions of Muslims. He should also invoke Allah to guide the
Muslim rulerand those in authority and lead them to success, Invoking, Allah
during Friday sermon to lead to success those in authority was well known and
always observed among Muslims, for it is observed by the Adherents of the
Sunnah and Muslim community, However, itis the custom of the innovators
in religion to leave this invocation (for those in authority).

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said, “lf we had a supplication that was certain
ta be accepted, we would say it for the leader of the Muslims" This is because if
the leader of the Muslims is good, this will benefit all Muslims. However, this
act of the Sunnah has so long been neglected that people consider it strange
and think ill of the one who invokes Allah for those in authority.

It is also an act of the Suiwah to pronounce an immediate prayer call
immediately after the second sermon, and then start the prayer without a long
interval,

‘The jumu'ah (Friday) Prayer unanimously consists of two rak ‘ahs (units
of prayer) and the imm must raise his voice while reciting the Noble Qur'an

‎Us PRAVER‏ لع

‎In the first ‏,الم علس‎ it is an act of the Sunnah that the imam recites the
Sura of Al-Jumu‘ah (Friday) after reciting Al-Fétihah, and in the second
rak'ah he may recite the Sura of Al-Mundfiqan (the Hypacrites)" after reciting
Al-Fatihah according ta the hadith Imam Muslim related on the authority
of Aba Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him)". The imdm also may
recite the Sura of AI-A ‘lé (the Most High)” in the first rak'ah and the Sura
of AL-Ghashiyah (the Overwhelming Event)” in the second rak ‘ah. It is also
authentically narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) used to recite the Suras of Al-
Tumu’ah and Al-Mundfigin in the Jumma ah (Feiday) Prayer and sometimes he
(PBUH) recited the Sura of Al-A ‘fa and the Sura of AL-Ghashiyah™

‎‘The indi should not divide one sura of the aforementioned between the
two rak'ahs as this is contrary to the Sunnah. The apparent wisdom behind
raising the voice while reciting the Noble Qur’an in the /umu ah Prayer is that
it is more evident and effective for achieving the desired objectives

‎Endnotes

‎4 Aba: Dawatd (1047) [1/443], An-Nasé't (1373) [3/101], and thy Majah (1085) [2/8].

‎2.Al-Bukhari (876) and Muslim (1975) [3/381]

‎3 Muslim (1979) [3/382].

‎4 Chapter No, 32 of the ‏لماعي‎

‎5 Chapter No, 76 of the Qur'in,

‎6 ML-Bukhasi (891) [2/485] and Muslim (2031) (3/406)

‎7 See: Zadul-Ma'éd (1/91).

‎8 See: Zdul-Ma ‘ad (1/120),

‎9 Al-Bayhagi (5994) [3/353], Ahmad, Aba Dawid, An-Nasf{, and ‏مط‎ Majah

‎10 See: ZéidulsMa “a (1/425).

‎11 Al-Bukhiri (1052) [1/445], At-Tirmidhi (499) [2/373], Ant-Nasdti (1368) [2/97], Tb
Malah (1125) [2/26] and Muslim (1999) [3/391

‎12 Ahmad (719) [1/93], “Abdur-Razzaq in his Muyaninaf (5420) (3/223)

‎13 Abmad (2033) [1/230],

‎14 Chapter No. 18 of the Quen,

‎15 Al-Hiakim (2125) [1/766]. See No, (2126) and No, (8627 and Al-Byhagt (5996) [3/353]

‎16 Al-Bukhart (935) [2/534] and Muslim (1967) (3/378

‎17 Al-Bukhari (883) [2/476]

‎18 See: ‘Abdur-Razziq in his “Musaninaf’ [3/246] and Ibn Aba Shayba (1/469).

‎19 See: Majmiwl-Fatawa (22/189-90),

‎20 Muslim (2033) [3/407].

‎21 Al-Buikhari (1172) [3/65] and Muslim (1695) [3/253],

‎22 See: Majin‘ ul-Fatawa (22/193).

‎23 AL-lukhart (1166) [3/63] and Muslim (2019) [3/401

‎24 Muslim (2021) [3/402].

Chapter 26: ‏الم سمال‎ (Friday) Prayer 163

25 Al-Bukhart (930) [2/523] and Muslim (2015) [3/400],

26 This ruling applies to any talk that may he uttered daring the sermon,

.]1/230( )2033( لهسيل 27

28 Al-Bukhari (934) [2/531] and Maslim (1962) [3/376].

29 Al-Bukhiri (930, 931) and Muslim (875/59)

30 See; Maju ul-Fatdwa (22/469, 470), (24/217, 218.

31 Muslim (1985) [3/385] and At-Titmnidhit (497) [2/371]

32 At-Tirmidhi (508) [2/383],

33 "The days of Allah: They refer here to the favors of Allah and the happenings that
took place in the past.

34 Aba Dawad (1067) [1/449].

35 Ad-Daraqutni (1560) [2/3] and Al-Bayhaqi (5634) [3/261].

36 See: Maja‘ul-Paldwa (24/166, 170).

37 See: Ibnul-Mundhir in Al-ljmnd (70, 21)

34 Al-Bayhaqi (5735) [3/287]; see also Al-Rulkhdri (S80) [2/76] and Muslim (1370) [3/106],

39 Al-Bukhiri (920) {2/920}, Muslim (1991) (3/387), An-Nasa (1415) [2/121) and tbr
Majah (1103) (2/18).

40 The Two Testifications of Faith: Saying, “l testify that (here is no deity but Allah and
that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah”

4 See: 'Zécul-Ma ‘ar! (4/523)

42 Sees" Al-IRhtiyévat’ [pp. 120}

43 See the previous source,

44 Muslim (2002) [3/392]

45 See: AL-Majmia” (4/398

‎tlm Majah (1109) [2/20].‏ مه

‎47 ‏طم‎ Dawid (1092) [1/458].

‎48 Muslim (2009) [3/396].

‎49 Chapter No, 62 of the Quran.

‎450 Chapter No. 63 of the Qur'in,

‎51 Muslim (2023) [3/404],

‎52 Chapter No. 87 of the Qur'an,

‎53 Chapter No. 88 of the Quy’an

‎54 Maslim (2025) [3/405].

27

‘wo Feasts (‘fds) Prayer

The Prayer of the Two Feasts (Ids), namely the Fast-breaking Feast (‘Idul-
Fitr) and the Feast of Sacrifice (‘Idul-Adhd), is ordained by the Noble Qur'an, the
Sunnah and the consensus of Muslim scholars. Polytheists used to observe feasts
at certain times and places. So, when Islam came, it invalidated such acts, In
recompense, Islam ordained the Fast-breaking Feast and the Feast of Sacrifice as
a means of showing thankfulness to Allah, Exalted be He, for the performance
of those two great acts of worship, namely fasting during the month of Ramadan
and performing Hajj to Al-Masjid Al-Haram (the Sacred Mosque).

It is authentically narrated that when the Prophet (PBUH) came to Medina
and there were two days that people used to celebrate, he (PBUH) said:

“Allah has given you instead of them what is better, they are: the
Feast of Sacrifice and the Fast-breaking Feast.”

Hence, it is not permissible to exceed these two feasts by inventing other
feasts, such as birthdays and the like, as this is viewed as exceeding what
is ordained by Allah. Moreover, such acts are viewed as bid‘ah (a matter

266 Uy PRAYER

innovated In religion), contradicting the Prophetic Sunnah and imitating
the disbelievers, Such innovated feasts are not among the practices of Islam,
whether they are called feasts, commemorations, days, weeks, years, ete, rather
they areconsidered among the practices of the people of the Pre-Islamic Period
of Ignorance (the Jahiliyyal) as well as an imitation of the foreign disbelieving
nations and other nations. In this regard, the Prophet (PBUH) s

“Sany one imitates the manners of any people, then he is considered
one of them.”

In addition, he (PBUH) said:

“The best of speech is that of the Book of Allalt, and the best of the
guidance is the guidance given by Muhammad, and the most evil
affairs are those innovated (in religion): and every innovation (in
religion) is an error”

‘We ask Allah to let us see the right as right and guide us to follow it, and
let us see the wrong as wrong and guide us to avoid it. Linguistically, the word
“fd (feast) in Arabic means repeating the act, and that it returns (every year)
with joy and happiness. Moreover, Allah returns it with beneficence and favor
on His servants as-a reward for their performance of the two acts of worship:
Fasting and Haj.

‘The proof of the legality of observing the Feast (’Id) Prayer is stated by
‘Allah, Exalted be He, as He says

“So pray to your Lord and sacrifice [to Him alone].”
(Quran: Al-Kawthar:2)

And He also says:

“He has certainly succeeded who purifies himself and mentions
the Name of his Lord and prays” (Qur'an: ‏نذا لهام‎ 14-15)

The Prophet (PBUH) and his Caliphs used to observe it (Feast Prayer)
regularly, Even women were commanded by the Prophet (PBUH) to attend it.
So it is an act of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) that women attend the Feast
Prayer, but they are neither to be perfumed nor to wear adorned clothes that
attract others’ attention, as the Prophet (PBUH) says:

“They (women) must go while they are not perfumed.”

Inaddition, women should seclude themselves from the places of men. As
for the menstruating women, the Prophet (PBUH) says:

Chapter 27: "Tia Feasts |! ‏لمأ‎ Prayer 267

“The menstruating women should keep away from the place of
prayer”

‘Umm *Atiyyah (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated:

“We were ordered to come out on the Day of Feast and even bring
out the virgin girls from their houses and the menstruating women.
They (menstruating women) would stand behind people and say
takbir (saying, “Alldhu-Akbar” ie. "Allah is the Greatest”) along
with them, and invoke Allah along with them, and hope for the
blessings of that day and for purification from sins.”

In this respect, coming out to perform the Feast Prayer in accordance with
this manner, witnessed by everyone, is considered a means of showing and
declaring the rituals of Islam. That is, these rituals are among the manifest
signs of the religion.

The first Feast Prayer performed by the Prophet (PBUH) was in the second
year after Hijrah (the Prophet's Immigration to Medina). The Prophet (PBUH)
kept observing it until his death, Muslims also kept performing it, generation
after generation, Thus, if it happened that people in any country abandoned
performing Feast Prayer, the ruler should fight them, as it is among the
manifest signs of Islam, similar to the prayer call (adhan).

‘The Feast Prayer should be performed at a spacious place near the town,
as the Prophet (PBUH) used to perform the Prayer of the Two Feasts ('Ids)
at the place located near the entrance of Medina. Tt is narrated by Aba Sa°id
that Allab’s Messenger (PBUH) used to proceed to the place of prayer on the
Day of Fast-breaking and the Day of Sacrifice (as related by Al-Bukhari and
Muslim)". Moreover, it is not reported that he (PBUH) performed the Feast
Prayer at the mosque, except with an excuse. The reason behind performing it
ina place outside the town is to show the strength of Muslims and Islam and to
show and declare the rituals of the religion, Furthermore, this act (performing
the Feast Prayer in a spacious place out of the town) does not involve hardship,
as it does not take place except for two times in the year, unlike the Jumu ‘alr
(Friday) Prayer. However, at Mecca, the Feast Prayer is to be performed at Al-
‘Masjid Al-Harim (the Sacred Mosque).

‘The due (ime of the Feast Prayer is when the sun rises to the length of a
spear above the horizon, as jt is the time at which the Prophet (PBUH) used
to perform it. In addition, its due time extends until the meridian. However,
when Muslims do not know about the time of the Feast until after the sum

268 ‏بلا‎ PRAYER

hhas passed the meridian, they are to make up for it the next morning. That is
because Abi 'Umayr Ibn Anas reported on the authority of some of his uncles
from the Ans@r’ who said:

“The new moon of (the month of) Shawwal was overcast so we
observed fasting. By the end of the day, some people came ta the
Prophet (PBUH) and testified that they had sighted the new moon the
previous day. He (the Prophet), therefore, commanded the people to
break the fast and to go out to their place of prayer in the morning”

(Related by Ahmad, Abd Dawid, and Ad-Daraqutni who deemed
it hasan (good) hadith)’

“This hadith is also viewed as saliih (authentic) hadith by a group of the
memorizets among the scholars of Hadith. Hence, if it were permissible to
perform the Feast Prayer after the meridian, the Prophet (PBUH) would not
delay it to the next morning. Another reason is that the Feast Prayer is to be
performed in public congregation; therefore, there should be enough time to
Jet people get ready for it.

It is considered an act of the Sunnah to perform the Prayer of the Feast of
Sacrifice early and to delay that of the Fast-breaking Feast. With regard to this
issue, Ash-Shafi'i related a mrursal (incompletely transmitted) hadith,’ that the
Prophet (PBUH) sent to "Amr fbn Hazm saying:

“Perform the prayer of the Day of Sacrifice early, delay that of the
Day of Fast-breaking, aytd remind people (to mention Allah).”"

Thats to allow enough time to offer the sacrifice by performing the prayer
of the Day of Sacrifice early; and to allow enough time to give Zakatul-Fitr’
before performing the Prayer of Fast-breaking,

Furthermore, itis regarded as an act af the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition)
to eat some dates before going out to perform the Prayer of Fast-breaking and
not to eat on the Day of Sacrifice until one performs the prayer. In this respect,
Buraydah narrated:

“The Prophet (PBUH) used not to go out (for prayer) on the Day
of Fast-breaking before eating, and he used not to eat on the Day of
Sacrifice before performing (1he Feast) Prayer”

(Related by Ahmad and other compilers of Hadith)
Shaykh Taqiyyud-Din said:

“Allah ordained performing prayet before sacrificing in His
slatement, ‘So pray to your Lord and sacrifice [to Him alone]:

Chapter 27: Two Feasts ( Js) Prayer 169)

(Quran: Al-Rawthar: 2) Allal also ordained giving the charity
before performing prayer on the Day of Fast-breaking in His
statement, ‘He has certainly succeeded who purifies himself ~ and
mentions the Name of his Lord aud prays. (Quran: Al-A’1&: 14-
15) Therefore, it becomes evident that the Sunnah is to give charity
before performing the Prayer of Fast-breaking and to sacrifice after
performing the Prayer on the Day of Sacrifice.”

In addition, itis an act of the Sunnah to go out early in the morning when
proceeding to perform the Feast Prayer, so that one is able to be near the imam
(leader in prayer) and to get the reward of waiting for the Prayer, and so one’s
reward increases, Moreover, itis ant act of the Surinal for the Muslim to attend
the Feast Prayer looking nice and wearing one's best clothes. In support ofthis,
Tabir said:

“The Prophet (PBUH) had a loose outer.
wear on the Two Feasts and on Fridays:

rment, which he used to

(Related in Sahih Ibn Khwzaymah (Ibn Khuzaymah'’s Authentic
Book of Hadith)

Also, Ibn. ‘Umar narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) used to wear his best
clothes on the Two Feasts (as related by Al-Bayhagi” with a good chain of
transmitters).

Residence is a condition for the Feast Prayer, That is, those who intend to
perform it must be settled in normal dwellings, as the case with the Juru ‘alt
(Friday) Prayer; {n other words, the Feast Prayer is not ta be established except
whenever it is valid to establish the Jumu ah Prayer. In support of this, it
happened that the Feast came while the Prophet (PBUH) was performing Hajj
and he did not perform it (the Feast Prayer) neither did his Caliphs.

‘The Feast Prayer is to be performed with two rak' als and to be performed
before delivering the sermon, Ibn Umar (may Allah be pleased with him)
narrated:

"Allah’s Messenger (PBUH), Abit Bakr, ‘Umar and 'Uthmdn used to
perform the prayers of the Two Feasts before delivering the sermon.”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)"

‘The Sunnah tackled this issue elaborately and most men of knowledge are
of that view.

270 Us PRAYER

smidhi said:

AL

“According to the view of the men of knowledge among the Prophet’
Companions and others, the prayers of the Two Feasts are to be
performed before delivering the sermon.”

‘The wisdom behind delaying the delivery of the sermon after performing
the Feast Prayer, unlike that of the ‏الم "مار‎ (which is delivered before the
prayer) is that the funu at Sermon isa condition for the prayer; the condition
is to precede the act which depends on it. This is not the case with the Feast
sermon, as itis an act of the Sunnah,

According to Muslims’ consensus, the Feast Prayer is to be performed in
two rak'ahs. Itis stated in the Two Sahihs and other books of Hadith that Tbn
“Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“The Prophet (PBUH) performed a prayer of two rak’ahs (units of
prayer) om the Day of Fast-breaking and he did not perform prayer
before or after them.”*

In addition, “Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“The Prayer of the Fast-breaking Feast ariel that of the Feast of
Sacrifice are to be performed in two rak'ahs, without shortening
and this is said by the tongue of your Prophet (PBUH); and he has
failed who invents (falsehood).”

(Related by Ahmad and other compilers of Hadith)”

Neither prayer call (adhdn) nor immediate prayer call (iqdmah) is ordained
for the Feast Prayer. Imam Muslim related that Jébir (may Allah be pleased
with him) said:

“I performed the Feast Prayer along with Allah's Messenger
(PBUH) several times and he performed prayer before delivering
the sermon, without pronouncing adhan or iqamah,’

When performing the Feast Prayer, one is to start with announcing takbir'™
in the first rak‘ah after the opening takbiy and invocation, Then, one is to
six lakbirs before seeking reftige with Allah and reciting the Qur'an.
‘The opening takbiris one of the integral parts of prayer that must be established
(ie announced); prayeris not valid except with it. The other takbirs are among
the acts of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition). After the opening takbir, one
is to say the opening invocation at the beginning of prayer, then say the six
additional takbirs and seek refuge with Allah, as seeking refuge with Allah
precedes the recitation, and then one is to recite the Quran.

Chapter 27: Two Feats ‏أمنا)‎ Prayer a

In the second rak ‘ah, one is to say five takbirs, before the recitation, other
than that uttered when moving from the prostration position to the standing
pasition, Imam Ahmad related on the authority of ‘Amr Ibn Shu'ayb, from
his father, from his grandfather (° Abdullah Ibn ' Amt) who narrated:

"The Propliet (PBUH) pronounced takbir in a Feast Prayer twelve
times: seven times in the first rak'ah and five times in the second

20

one’

‘this hadith is related with a good chain of transmitters. Concerning the
number of takbirs, there are other narrations related from the Prophet (PBUH).
Imam Ahmad (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“The Companions of the Prophet (PBUH) disagreed concerning the
mumber of takbirs, All of their views are permissible.”

One is to raise the hand upon pronouncing every takbir, as the Prophet
(PBUH) used to do so”. It is an act of the Sunnah to say between every
two takbirs:

“Allah is truly Great; and praise be to Allah in abundance; and glory
be to Allah in the morning and the evening; and may Allah confer
blessing upon the Prophet Muhammad and upon his household
greatly”

*Ugbah Ibn ‘Amir said that he asked Tbn Mas’ dd about what one should
say after the takbirs of the Feast. Ibn Mas’ dd answered:

“One may praise Allah, extol Him and confer blessings upon the
Prophet (PBUH).”
‘This hadith is related by Al-Bayhaqi with his chain of transmitters on (he
authority of Tbn Mas’ fd, both in wording and action.

Hudhayfah said concerning this fiadith, "What Abd 'Abdur-Ralmén (Ibn
‘Mas’fd) said is true? If one says another invocation, there will be no harm, as
there is no specific invocation to be mentioned.

Tbnul-Qayyim said;

“The Prophet (PBUH) used to keep silent for a little while between
every two takbirs, There is no specific invocation related from him to
be uttered between every two takbirs”

With regard to the aforementioned issue, ifthe person is not certain about
how many takbirs he has uttered in his prayer, he is to depend on what he is

22 I: PRAVER

certain about, namely, the lesser number of takbirs. Moreover, if the person
forgets to pronounce the additional iakbirs and starts reciting the Quran, they
are ta be overlooked, as they are only supererogatory acts and their due time
has been missed, Furthermore, if the one led (in prayer) catches up with the
imam (leader in prayer) after the latter has started the recitation, one is not to
say the additional takbirs. Also, if one gets the fmm while he is in the bowing
position, one is to say the opening takbir and then bow without saying the
additional takbirs.

As mentioned before, the Feast Prayer consists of two ‏عنام امد‎ (units of
prayer), in which the émdnit is to recite the Qur'én aloud. In support of this
View, Ibn “Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“The Prophet (PBUH) used to recite the Qur'an aloud in the prayers
of the Two Feasts and the Prayer for Rain.”

(Related by Ad-Daraqut
Scholars unanimously agree on this opinion. Moreover, it was followed by

‘Muslim generations up till now and compiled by successors from their ancestors,

In the first rak ah, one should recite, after Al-Fatihah (the Opening Chapter of
the Qurfin), the Sura of AL-A "Td (the Most High)". And in the second rak'ah, one
should recite the Sura of AL-Ghiishiyuh (the Overwhelming Event)". Thisis based
oon the hadith narrated by Samurah (may Allah be pleased with him) saying:

“AllahiS Messenger (PBUH) used to recite in the prayers of the Two
Feasts the Sura of AI-A’la and the Sura of Al-Ghashiyah?”

(Related by Imam Ahmad)".

Furthermore, one may recite the Sura of Qéf” in the first rak ‘ah, and
the Sura of Al-Qamar (the Moon)" in the second rak'ah. This came in Sahih
Muslim (Muslim's Authentic Book of Hadith), the Sunan, and other books of
Hadith that the Prophet (PBUH) used to recite the Sura of Qadfand the Sura of
Al-Qamar (in the Feast Prayer)”.

Shaykhul-Ietam Ibn Taymiyah said:

"Whatever one may recite (in the Feast Prayer) is permissible, as
is the case with other recitations in other prayers. However, if one
recites the Sura of Qaf and the Sura of Al-Qamar or any other
sura that came in the Prophetic traditions, it will be better: In great
celebrations, the Prophet (PBUH) used to recite the suras that involve

‘Chapter 27: Twa Feasts )' /ds) Prayer 273.

verses of monotheism, commands of Allah and things He prohibits,
the Beginning of the Creation and the Hereafter. He (PBUH) also
used to recite verses that contain the stories of the previous prophets
with their nations and how Allah punished those who denied them.
In addition to this, he used to recite the verses relating to those who
believed their prophets and how Allah rewarded them with salvation
and a better life.””

When the imam says taslim” (final salutation in prayer), he is to deliver
two successive sermons, separating them by sitting for a while. In this respect,
“Ubaydullah Ibn ‘Ubaydullah Tbn "Utbah related:

‎is among the acts of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) that the‏ ال"
‎imdm delivers two sermons in each of the Two Feasts and that he‏
‎would separate them by sitting for a while:"‏

‎(Related by Imam Ash-Shafi't)"*

‎Ton Majah related on the authority of Jabir that Allah’s Messenger (PBUH)
delivered the sermon while standing, then hesat for a while, and then he stood
(again to complete delivering the sermon)" It is also stated in Sahth Muslim
(Muslims Authentic Book of Hadith) and other books of Hadith that the Prophet
{PBUH) commenced with prayer before delivering the sermon. He then stood.
up leaning on Bilal, and he commanded (them) to fear Allah, and exhorted
(them) to obey Him”. Imam Muslim related a hadith in which it is stated:

‎“After finishing the prayer, the Prophet (PBUH) would stand ji
front of the people and the people would keep sitting in their rows.

‎Moreover, when delivering the sermon on the Day of Fast-breaking, the:
imm should exhort people to give in Zakah pointing out its rulings, amount,
When to give itand the type of things which can be given. Also, at the time of
the Feast of Sacrifice, he should exhort people to offer sacrifices and explain
to them the rulings on the sacrifice”. This is because the Prophet (PBUH)
explained many of the rulings on sacrificial animals in the sermonshe delivered
on the Feast of Sacrifice. Similarly, preachers should focus, in their sermons,
‘on (special) occasions, such as feasts, in order to explain to people the matters
they need to know at the due time of such occasions. This should be after
commanding people to fear Allah, preaching, and reminding them of Allah.
especially in such great gatherings and sublime occasions. Inaddition, sermons
should involve that which may benefit the listener, remind the unmindful
and leach the ignorant, Moreover, women should attend the Feast Prayer,

274 Ul: PRAYER

mentioned before, and a special sermon, embedded in the Feast sermon,
should be directed to them. With regard to this, when the Prophet (PBUH)
found that he could not make women hear his sermon because he was far from
them, he went to them, and advised and ordered them to give charity”, ‘Thus,
‘women should have their share of the topic of the Feast sermon, as they need
this and as this is considered a means of following the Prophet’ tradition.

Among the relevant rulings on the Feast Prayer is that it is viewed detestable
(o pertorm supererogatory prayer before or after it in the place of prayer, until
‘one leaves this place. This is based on the hadith narrated by Tbn Abbas (may
Allah be pleased with him), in which he said:

“The Prophet (PBUH) performed a prayer of two rak'aks (units

of prayer) on the Day of the Fast-breaking and he did not perforti
prayer before or after them."

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Thus, the Feast Prayer has no supererogatory prayer ‏ما‎ be performed
before or after it.

Imam Ahmad said, “The people of Medina do nol performanysupererogatory
prayer, neither before nor after the Feast Prayer” in addition, Az-Zuhri said:

"| knew that none of our scholars mentions that any of the Salaf (early
‘Muslim scholars) of this nation would perform any supererogatory
prayer before or after the Feast Prayer. Ibn Mas'iid and Hludhayfal
used 10 forbid people from performing any prayer before it,”

However, when one returns home, there will be no harm in performing
any prayer there. In support of this view, Ahmad and other compilers of
Hadith related:

“After finishing the Feast Prayer, the Prophet (PBUH) used to
perform two rak'ahs (units of prayer) on returning home."

It is an act of the Sunnah for the one who misses the Feast Prayer or part
of it to make up for it according to its prescribed form and manner, namely to
perform itas two rak ‘ahs with its additional (akbirs, that is because making up
for itis similar to the actual performance. This is based on the generality of the
Prophet's hadith, in which he (PBUH) says:

“Pray whatever you get, and complete whatever you missed.”

For instance, if one misses one mk ah with the idm (leader in prayer),
one's to complete prayer by performing another one, Moreover, if one comes

و2 ‎‘Two Feasts das) Prayer‏ :27 عمست

while the imam is delivering the sermon, one is to sit and listen to itand when
the mm finishes the sermon, one may make up for the prayer, and there will
be no harm whether one makes up for it alone or in congregation.

It is also an act of the Sunnah to utter general takbir, which is not limited
in time. In this takbir, men only are permitted to raise their voice loudly not
women. Therefore, one is to pronounce takbir in the two nights preceding the
days of the Two Feasts as well as on the tenth of Dhul-Hijjah, as Allah, Exalted

be He, says:
“<..TTo complete the period and glorify Allah for that [to] which
He has guided you...” (Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 185)

‘Thus, takbir is to be pronounced loudly in houses, markets, mosques and
anywhere in which the Name of Allah, Exalted be He, cant be pronounced.
Takbir also is to be pronounced loudly when one goes out to the place of
prayer. In this regard, Ad-Daraquini and other compilers of Hadith related that
whenever Ibn “Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) went out to perform
the Feast Prayer on the Day of Fast-breaking and the Day of Sacrifice, he used
to pronounce takbir aloud until he reaches the place of prayer, then he would
pronounce takbir until the imdvn came’. It is recorded in Sahih ALBukhari
(AL-Bukhéri’s Authentic Book of Hadith) that Umm ' Atiyyah sai

“We were commanded to make tlie menstruating women go out to
witness the Feast Prayer...”

And she added:

“They (the menstruating wornen) would stand behind people and
pronounce takbir along with then.”

This stated in another narration by Imam Muslim as:

*., They (the menstruating women) used to pronounce takbir along
with people.”

Hence, it is viewed desirable (o pronounce takbir, as it involves (he
declaration of the Islamic rituals,

Furthermore, the-act of pronouncing Jakbir on the Feast of Fast-breaking is
more stressed upon than in the Feast of Sacrifice, as Allah, Exalted be He, says;

To complete the period and glorify Allah for that [to] which
He has guided yon...” (Quran: Al-Bagarah: 185)

276 Ii: PRAYER,

‘Consequently, takbiris more stressed upon with regard to the Fast-breaking
Feast, as it is enjoined by Allah.

In the Feast of Sacrifice, limited ‘akbir is ordained; namely, the takbir
which is said after every obligatory prayer performed in congregation. In such
an act, the ‏قاس‎ is to face people, after uttering the final salutation in prayer,
and utter fakbir along with them. Ad-Daraqutni, Ibn Abi Shaybah and other
compilers of Hadith related on the authority of Jabir who said:

“When the Prophet (PBUH) performed the Subj (Morning) Prayer
in the morning of ‘Arafah (the ninth of Dhul-Hijjah), he used to

pronounce takbir..

Inthis case, oneis tostart pronouncing the takbirimmediately ater prayers.
As for the non-muhrim™ person, the due time of the limited takbir starts from
the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer on the Day of “Arafah (Mount) until the afternoon
of the last day of the Days of Tashriq (days 111, 12%, 13 of Dhul-Hijjah).
Concerning the multrim, the time of the limited takbir starts from the Zuhr
Prayer on the Day of Sacrifice until the ’Asr (Afternoon) Prayer of the last day
of the Tashriq Days, as before that time a pilgrim should be busy pronouncing
talbiyah In velation to this, Ad-Daraqutni relates from Jabir saying:

“The Prophet (PBUH) used to pronounce takbir immediately
afier finishing obligatory prayers, starting from the Fajr Prayer
on the Day of ‘Arafah until the ‘Asr Prayer on the last day of the
Tashriq Days”

Tn another narration, the words of this hadith are:

“When he (the Prophet) finished Subh Prayer on the Day of “Arafall,
he would face his Companions and say, ‘Stay in your places’ Then
he would say, ‘Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest; there is no
deity but Allah; Allah is the Greatest, Allalis the Greatest, and (all)
praise is due to Allah: ""

In this regard, ALlah, Exalted be He, says, “And remember Allah during
[specific] numbered days...” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 203) The days mentioned
in this verse refer ta the Days of Tashriq,

Imém An-Nawawi commented, "This opinion is the soundest opinion
according to which Muslims act in all countries.”

In addition, Shaykhul-Istam Tbn Taymiyah said:

“The soundest opinion according to the majority of the Salaf und
fagils, from the Prophet's Companions and scholars, is that the

‎Pease (Zak) Prayer‏ سخا :27 عمست

‎ime of takbir is to start fron: dawn of the day of ‘Arafah until the
last day of the Tashriq Days, and that itis to be after each prayer. It
is stated in the Sunan that the Prophet (PBUH) said, [The Day of
“‘Arafah. and the Day of Sacrifice and the Days of Mind (days 11",
12, 139 of Dhul-Hijjah) are our feast, we Muslims, These days are
‘for eating and drinking (what is lawful) as well as the remembrance
of Allah.” " The reason behind starting the limited takbir, for the
nurim from the Zuhr Prayer onthe Day of Sacrifice, is that
pronouncing talbiyah should be stopped when throwing Jamratul-
“Agabah”. The time of Jamratul-'Aqabah stated in the Sunnah
(Prophetic Tradition) is in the forenoon on the Day of Sacrifice.
Therefore, the mubirint will be equal to the mubill (non-mubrim),
so if he throws Jamratul-'Agabah before dawn, hte is not to start
takbir except after performing the Zubr Prayer. This is according to
the most prevailing opinion.”

‎As for the manner according to which takbir is to be performed, one is to
say ‘Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest; there is no deity but Allah; Allah
is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest, and (all) praise is due to Allah.” There
will be no harm in exchanging (elicitation among people, saying, “May Allah
accept good deeds from you and from us. In this regard, Shaykhul-Islam bn
‘Taymiyah said, ‏إل"‎ was related that some of the Companions used to do such an
act. Imam Alimad and others view such an act as legally permissible.” The aim
behind exchanging elicitation is to show affection and delight towards one's
Muslim brothers. Imam Ahmad said, “I do not start giving this felicitation,
but if a person felicitates me, 1 will answer hin.” This is because answering
greetings is a duty; however, starting (elicitation is not an act of the Surah
that a Muslim is commanded to do nor is it a forbidden one. Yet, there is ‏هد‎
‎harm in ahandshake, And Allah, Exalted be He, knows best.

‎Endnotes

‎4 Alumad (11945) [3/103] and An-Nasatt (1585) [2/199],

‎2 Abpnsad (5115) [2/68] and Abit Dawe (4031) [4/204].

‎3 Muislim (2002) [3/392]

‎4 Al-Bukhart (324) [1/548] and Muslim (2051) [3/418]

‎5 Al-Bukkhari (971) [2/594] and Muslim (2053) (3/419),

‎6 Al-Bukhiri (956) [2/578] and Muslim (2050) (3/417.

‎7 ‘The Ansar: The Supporters: the inhabitants of Medina who had accepted Ystam and
supported the Prophet (PBUH) and all the Mudidjirdn (the Emigrants) upon thetr
arrival there

278 I: PRAYER,

8 Aba Dawad (1157) [|/A77}, An-Nasalt (1556) [2/298], fbn Majah (1653) {2/303} and
‘Ad-Déraqutni (2183) [2/149]

8 Mursal (incompletely transmitted) hadith isa hadith whose chain of transmission lacks
Companion transmitter, ie. a hadith that a Successor of the Companions has directly
attributed to the Prophet without mentioning a Companion.

10° Abdur-Razzaq (5651) [3/286]

11 Zakeul-Fitr (Fast-breaking Zakdh); An obligatory charity to be paid by the rich to the
poor. In a juristic view, itis to be paid at any tine throughout Ramadan, whereas itis
most preferable to give it two or three days right before the Fast-breaking Feast ( ‘Idul-
Fitr). A third view maintains that i ‏وذ‎ to be given before going out for performing the
Prayer of the Fast-breaking Feast,

12 Ahmad [5/352], ‏مطل‎ Majah (1756), At-Tirmidh! (542) and Ibn: Khuzaymah (1426)

13 Ibn Khuzaymah (1766) [3/132].

14 Al-Bayhaqi (6143) [3/398],

J Bukhari (963) [2/584) and Muslim (2049) [3/416).

‎and Muslim (2084) [3/420].‏ ]2/584[ )964( خف طلس هلف 16

‎17 Ahmad (257) [1/37]. An-Nasdi (1419) [3/123]/(1565) [3/203) and tbn Majah (1063,
1064) [1/556, 557].

‎18 Muslim (2045) [3/414]. See also Muslim (2048) (3/416).

‎19 Takbir: Saying, “Allahu-Akbar” (ie. Allah is the Greatest).

‎20 Absmad (6688) [2/180], Aba Dawid (1151) (1/475), fbn Majah (1278) [2/102] and
‘Ad-Daraguini (1712) [2/36]

‎21 Al-Bayhagi (3/293),

‎22 Al-Bayhagi (6186) [3/410].

‎23 Ad-Daraquini (1785) [2/54]

‎24 Chapter No. 87 of the Qur’in.

‎25 Chapter No. 88 ofthe Qur‘an,

‎26 Absmad (20093) [5/19], Abd Dawwtd (1125) [1/468] and An-Nes@'t (1421) [3/124). Ahmad
(18343) [4/369]/(18390) [4/376] and thm Maja (1283) {2/404}. Muslim (2025) [3/405]

‎27 Chapter No, 50 ofthe Que’,

‎28 Chapter No, 54 of the Qur'an,

‎29 Muslim (2056) [3/421], Aba Dawad (1154) {1/476}, At-Tirmidhi (533) [43], An-
‘Nasi (1566) [2/204] and Ton Majah (1282) [2/103],

‎30 See: Majmni'ul-Fatdwl (24/205, 219),

‎31 Taslim:Saying the final Saldnnsin prayer saying,"As-saldu ‘alaykum wa Ralynarilléh”
i.e,"Peace be upon you, and the mercy of Atal") when concluding prayer,

‎32 Al-Bayhagi (6213) [3/420].

‎33 Ibn Majah (1289) [2/106], Abd Dawa (1093) [1/458], An-Nasiti (1416) (2/122); see
also Muslim (1993) [3/388], Al-Butkha (920) [2/515] and Muslim (1991) [3/387].

‎34 Muslinn (2045) [3/414].

‎35 Muslim (2050) [3/417]

‎36 Al-Hhukluiri (965, 985) [2/584 680) and Muslim (5049, 5038) (7/117, 112}

‎37 Al-lukhitei (1449) [3/393] and Mustiny (2042) [3/413]

‎38 Al-Bukhaei (964) _

‎39 "Abdr-Razaitq (5606) [3/273],

(Chapter 27: ‘Two Beasts (‘/és) Prayer 2)

‎Majah (1293) [2/108], Abad (3/28, 40] and tb Khwzaymah (1469),‏ مطل زاك

‎41 Ad-Daraquint (1700) [2/34] and Al-Hakim (1147) [1/298].

‎42 Muslim (2052) [3/419].

‎43 Ad-Daraqutni (1719) [2/37] and Al-Eikimy (1152) [1/299]

‎44 Murinr: One ina state of ritual consecration during Hoji or "Unirah.

‎45 Talbiyah: A formula recited by a pilgrim during Hajj or ‘Umrah after assuming the
state of dhrdm a pilgrim says: “Here lam at Your service, © Allah, here 1am at Your
service. Here 1 am at Your service, You have no partner, here 1am at Your service,
Verily, all praise, blessings, and dominion are Yours. You have no partner”

‎46 Ad-Daraqutni (1719) [2/37]

‎Ad-Daraqutad (1721) [2/38].‏ جد

‎48 Abii Dawid (2419) [2/558], At-Tirmidht (772) [3/143] and Muslim ((142),

‎49 Jamnatul-"Ayabate: A small stone-made pillar in a walled place. There are three
“jamrahs situated in Mina. The closest one to Mecca is known as Jamratul-' Aqaba it
is also called the Great Jamrah and the Last Jamra

‎50 Sees" Majnni'ul-Fardwa” (20/364), (24/220),

‎51 See: "Majini'ul-Fatdwa” (24/253)

Eclipse Prayer

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“It is He who made the sun a shining light and the moon a
derived light and determined for it phases - that you may know
the number of years and account [of time]. Allah has not created
this except in truth, He details the signs for a people who know?”

(Quran: Yanus: 5)

Allah, Exalted be He, also says:

“And of His signs are the night and day and the sun and moon.
Do not prostrate to the sun or to the moon, but prostrate to Allah,
Who created them, if it should be Him that you worship.”

(Quran: Fussilat: 37)

‘The Eclipse Prayer isa stressed act of the Sunnah according to the unanimous
agreement of scholars. Its proof is derived from the confirmed act of the Sunnah
of Allah's Messenger (PBUH). Eclipse isa sign amongst the signs of Allah, which
He reveals to warn and alarm His servants, as He, Exalted be He, says:

282 Uy PRAYER,

«And We send not the signs except as a warning”
(Quin; Al-Isra’: 59)

There was an eclipse in the lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH) and so he
hurried to the mosque filled with feat and dragging his garment out of haste,
He led Muslims in prayer and told them that the eclipse is a sign amongst the
signs of Allah by which He warns His servants. He also told them that it might
be the reason for a severe torment that might befall people. Therefore, the
Prophet (PBUH) ordered people to do acts that may eliminate it, That is, to
perform prayer, supplicate, ask for Allah’ forgiveness, give charity, emancipate
(slaves), and other good deeds, so that people may be relieved.

elipses are considered a kind of warning from Allah directed to people
in order to make them turn to Allah in repentance and follow His right path.
In the Pre-Islamic Period of Ignorance (the Jéhifiyyah), people used to believe
that the reason behind eclipses was due to the birth or death ofa great person.
Therefore, the Messenger (PBUH) invalidated such beliefs and showed the
Divine wisdom behind eclipses, Al-Bukhari and Muslim related a hadith
narrated by Abi Mas’ dd Al-Ansiri who said:

"There was an eclipse on the day when Ibrahim, the son of the
Prophet (PBUH), died, and so people said that the sun had eclipsed
due to the death of Ibrahim. Therefore, the Prophet (PBUH) said,
“The sun and the moon are two signs amongst the signs of Allah,
so they do not eclipse because of the death or life of somebody. So,
when you see that, seek refuge with the remembrance of Allah and

perform prayer?

There is another hadith stated in the ‘Iwo Sahihs in which the Prophet
(PBUH) says:

“Invoke Allah and perform prayer until the eclipse clears?”

‘There is also a similar hadith related in Sahih Al-Bukhdri (Al-Bukhdri¥
Authentic Book of Hadith) on the authority of Aba Masa, saying:

“These signs, which Allah sends, do not occur because of the death or

birth of somebody, but by them Allah warns His servants, So when
‘you see anything thereof, resort to remembering Allah, invoking
Him and asking for His forgiveness”

Hence, Allah, Exalted be He, causes eclipses of these two great signs,
namely the sun and moon, to Jet people take warning and know that the sun

Chapter 28: Eclipse Prayet 283

and moon are creatures, just like the other creatures, that may be afflicted
with imperfection and change. Thus, Allah does this to show His servants
His sublime, perfect Might and to confirm that He is the Only One deserving
worship, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And of His signs are the night and day and the sun and moon.
Do not prostrate to the sun or to the noon, but prostrate to Allah,
Who created them, if it should be Him that you worship.”

(Qur'an: Fussilat: 37)

As for the time of the Eclipse Prayer, it sto start from the beginning of the
eclipse until itis clear, as the Prophet (PBUH) says:

“When you see the eclipse, perform prayer.”
(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)*
Itcame in another hadith related by Muslim asi
“When you sce any of this (i. eclipse), perform prayer until it clears."*

The Eclipse Prayer is not to be performed after the eclipse is over, for its
due time has been missed. Also, if the eclipse is aver before people know of it,
they are not to perform the Eclipse Prayer.

According to the soundest opinion of scholars, Eclipse Prayer is to be
performed with two rak‘ahs (units of Prayer), in which one is to recite the
Qur'in aloud. As for the first rak ‘ah, one is to recite Al-Fatifiah (the Opening
Chapter of the Qurian) and another long sura, such as the Sura of Al-Baqarah
(the Cow)” or any other long sura. Then, one isto perform a prolonged bowing,
and raise one’s head and say tasmi"’ and ‏"ليها‎ in the same way one does in
other prayers. After that, one is to recite Al-Fatifiah and another long sura, but
shorter than the first. such as the Sura of Alu 'Imirdn (the Family of “Imran)'
Next, oneis to perform a long bawing, but shorter than the first one, and raise
one’s head and say:

“Allah listens to the one who praises Him, O our Lord! (All) praise is
due to You, many good and blessed praises, (the praise) with which
is filed the heavens and the earth, and with which is filled anything
that You desire after this.”

After saying so, one is to perform two prolonged prostrations and not
to prolong sitting between them. ‘Then, one is to perform the second rak'ah

284 Tl: PRAYER

similar to the first, numely with two prolonged bowings and two prolonged
prostrations. Finally, one is to recite Tashahhud and say taslim".

This is how the Eclipse Prayer is to be performed, according to the way
practiced by Allub’s Messenger (PBUH), and according to what was reported
about him throngh many ways of transmission, Some of these ways of
transmission are included in the ‘Iwo Salihs; for example, ' Nishah (may Allah
be pleased with her) narrated:

“In the lifetime of Allahis Messenger (PBUH), the sun eclipsed and
he went to the mosque ari the people aligned behind him.. He
pronounced iakbir" and prolonged the recitation (of the Quriin)
und then said takbir and performed a prolonged bowing; then he
(lifted his head and) said, ‘Allak listens to the one who praises Him.
He then did not prostrate but stood up and recited a prolonged
recitation, but shorter thay the first one. He again pronounced
takbir, then performed a prolonged bowing, but shorter than the
{first one and then said (after rising from bowing), ‘Allah listens to
the one wha praises Him, O our Lord! (All) praise is due to You!
Then, he prostrated and then he did the same in the second ak’ alk;
thus he completed four bowings and four prostrations. The sun
(eclipse) had cleared before he finished the prayer”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)”

It isan act of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) to perform Eclipse Prayer
in congregation, as done by the Prophet (PBUH), yet it is permissible to
perform it alone, like the case with the other supererogatory prayers. However,
it is preferable to perform it in congregation. Moreover, it is an act of the
Sunnal, for the imam, to preach people after performing the Eclipse Prayer,
and warn them against heedlessness with regard to Allah’ commands, and
against unawareness. The imi should also command them to invoke Allah
frequently and ask for His forgiveness

In the Two Sabilis, ' Xishah (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated:

“The Prophet (PBUH) came to the people, after the sun became
visible again after the eclipse, and delivered a sermon, in which he
praised Allah and extolled Him, Then he said, ‘The sun and the
moott are two signs amongst the signs of Allah; they do not eclipse
‘on the death or birth of anyone, So when you see the eclipse, invoke
Allal, pronounce takbir, perform prayer and give charity

Chapter 28: Eclipse Prayet 285

Wf the prayer is finished before the eclipse is over, one is to resort to
remembering and invoking Allah until it is over, and not to repeat prayer,
However, if the eclipse is clear during prayer, one is to complete it lightly and
not to finish it straight away, as Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And do not invalidate your deeds.”
(Qur'an; Muhammad: 33)

Hence, prayer is to be during the time of eclipse, as the Prophet (PBUH)
says, *..until the eclipse is clear,” and, ‘:.,until the eclipse is over”

Shaykhul-Islam fbn Taymiyah said:

“The time of the eclipse may be long at times, and short at others.
This is according to (the amount of) the part eclipsed of the sun;
the sun may be entirely or partially eclipsed. Thus, if the eclipse
lakes a long time, one is to prolong prayer and recite the Sura of
ALBagarah (the Cow), or any other long sura, in the first ‏هله "عله‎
After performing the second bowing, one is to recite a stira shorter
than the first. There are sahily (authentic) hadiths narrated about
the Prophet (PBUH) in support of what we have already mentioned.
Moreover, the prayer is to be completed lightly when the reason
behind performing it is over (i.e. when the eclipse is over). Sirnilarly,
one is permitted to lighten the prayer when one knows tliat the
eclipse will not take a long time. In addition, if the eclipse begins to
be clear before one commences prayer, one is to commence tt and
make it light. The majority of scholars uniformly agree upon this, for
the Eclipse Prayer is ordained for a specific reason, which is about
to finish, If the eclipse clears entirely before ihe commencement af
prayer one is not to perform it.’

Endnotes

! Ab-Bukhért ()041, (057, 3204) and Muslim (911).
2 AL-Bukhari (1060) [2/705] and Muslim (2119) [2/457]
3 Al-Bukhri (1059) [2/704] and Muslim (912).

4 Al-Bukhari (1043) [2/679] and Muslim (2119) [3/457],
5 Mustim (2099) [3/447]

6 Chapter No. 2 of the Qui’in

286 11 PRAYER

7 asm’: Saying "Sam alll tian bamvitah”
Him,’ when standing following bowing in prayer

8 ‏لأسيل‎ (in prayer): Saying ‏م كه‎ reply to zai
Lord, to You be (all) praise”

‎Chapter No, 3 of the Qur‘in,‏ و

‎10 Taslnr:Saying the final Salamsin prayer (saying, “As-salainu ‘alaykur wa Rahatullali"
iv. “Peace be upon you, aiid the mercy of Allal’) when concluding prayet

‎11 Takbir: Saying, “Allahu-Akbxir” (ie. Allah is the Greatest).

‎12 Al-Bukhari (1046) [2/688] and Mustim (2088) [3/440].

‎13 Al-Bukharé (1044) [2/682] and Muslim (2086) [3/438].

‎14 ‏أذ اسه نزم‎ (1063) [2/706]. Al-Bukhari (1041) [2/678] and Muslim (2111) [3/453]

‎15 See:"Majmnit'ul-Fadwa” [24/260].

‎“Allah listens to the one who praises

‎“Rabbani-walakal-hamd” ie. “Our

Rain Prayer

This prayer is a means of seeking rain from Allah, Exalted be He, during
times of drought. That is, people are naturally disposed to ask help from the
One Who is able to support them; Allah Alone. This prayer was known among
the previous nations. It is regarded also as one of the acts of the prophets (peace
be upon them all), as Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And [recall] when Moses prayed for water for his people...”
(Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 60)

Similarly, the Seal of Prophets, Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) performed
Prayer for Rain for his people many times, and in many ways, In addition,
Muslim scholars unanimously agree on the legality of such an act.

‘The Prayer for Rain is ordained during times of drought and times when rain
fails, which causes harm to people. Then thereisno way out except by supplicating
their Lord and asking Him for water (rain). People may supplicate Allah in
various ways. For instance, people may supplicate Allah in Prayer, whether in
congregation or alone. They may also supplicate Him by invoking Him during

288 Ml: PRAVER

the sermon of the ‏له" سمي[‎ (Friday) Prayer, in which the imam may invoke Allah,
and Muslims say, “Amin (Amen)? Furthermore, it may be by invoking Allah after
performing prayers, or by supplicating Him in seclusions with neither prayer nor
sermon, All such acts are related about the Prophet (PBUH).

‘The Prayer for Rain is regarded as a stressed Sunnah, as “Abdullah ‏مط‎
‎Zayd (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“The Prophet (PBUH) went out to invoke Allah for rain. He faced the
qiblah,' invoking Allah, Then he traversed his cloak and performed
two rak ‘ahs and recited the Quriin aloud in them.”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)”
There dre many hadiths in support of this practice.

‘The Prayer for Rain is similar to that of the Feast concerning its relevant
rulings and the place where it is performed. That is, it is viewed desirable to
perform it in the place where the Feast ("Id) Prayer is performed; outside the
mosque, Moreover, its rulings and practices are the same as those of the Feast
Prayer, namely the number of rak ‘ahs, the loud recitation of the Qur'an, being
performed before delivering the sermon, and the additional takbirs in the first
and second rak' ahs before the recitation of the Qur'an, as illustrated before.

Ibn“ Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“The Prophet (PBUH) performed two rak‘ahs as he does iit the
Feast (Prayer).”

At-Tirmidhi says that this is a hasan (good) and sail (authentic) hadith,
and Al-Hakim and others’ view it as a sali (authentic) hadith, as well. The
one performing the Prayer for Rain is to recite the Sura of Al-A’ld (the Most
High)' in the first rak'ah, and the Sura of Al-Ghashiyah (the Overwhelming
Event)’ in the second one, People are to perform it in a vast spacious place,
away from the place of residence, as the Prophet (PBUH) did not perform it
exceptin the desert. This is because performing it in such a place is a means of
showing much need to Allah, Exalted be He, When the imam wants to proceed
to perform the Prayer for Rain, he should start with reminding people of what
may soften their hearts by mentioning Allah's reward and punishment, They
should also be commanded to turn to Allah in repentance and return rights
to whom they are due, This is because sins are amongst the main reasons that
cause rain and blessings to be withheld, On the other side, repentance and
asking Allah for forgiveness are reasons for Allah's answering of supplication,
Allab, Exalted be He, says:

Chaprer 29: Rain Prayer 209

“And ifonly the people of the cities had believed and feared Allah,
We would have opened [i.e. bestowed] upon them blessings from
the heaves and the earth; but they denied [the messengers], 50
Weseized them for what they were earning.”

(Qur'an: AL-A ‘raf 96)

Furthermore, the imm should command people to give charity to the
poor and needy, as this is regarded as a cause for sending Allah’s mercy. Afier
that, he is to set for them a certain day, at which they are to come out and be
prepared for such an honorable occasion, and according to that which best
suits itas an act of the Sunnah, AL that date, people are to go out to the place of
prayer showing humbleness, submissiveness and neediness of Allah, Exalted
be He, as Ibn “Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“Allah's Messenger (PBUH) went out to perform the Prayer for Rain
showing humility, humbleness, and submissiveness, and supplicat-
ing (Allah).”

(At-Tirmidhi said that this is a hasan, sahth (good, authentic) hadith.)

No Muslim should stay behind (from going out) while able, even boys and
women, whose presence does hot cause temptation, are to go out to perform
it, Then, the finan is to lead people performing two rak‘ahs, as mentioned
before. After doing so, he is to deliver one sermon. However, some scholars
view that the imémn is to deliver two sermons. Both opinions are permissible,
but the soundest opinion is to deliver one sermon, according to the most
preponderant legal proof, In most cases, the Prophet (PBUH) delivered the
sermon after performing the Prayer for Rain, and Muslims acted according
to this. However, it is related that the Prophet (PBUH) delivered the sermon
before performing the prayer”, This is the view of some scholars, but the first
view (delivering the sermon after performing prayer) is more preponderant;
and Allah knows best,

Inthesermon of asking for rain, the imam should ask for Allah's forgiveness
as well as recite the verses that command asking for forgiveness, in abundance,
as this is considered a cause for sending rain. Moreover, the imam should
supplicate Allah, Exalted be He, with much invocation, asking for rain, When
supplicating Allah, the imant should raise his hands, as the Prophet (PBUH)
used to raise his hands when invoking Allah in the Prayer for Rain, so much
that the whiteness of his armpits became visible’. The fmam should also confer

290 Ue PRAYER

blessings upon the Prophet (PBUH), as this is a cause for (Allah) answering
his supplication. He may invoke Allah with the supplication related about
the Prophet (PBUH) in stich situations," as a means of following him: In this
regard, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“There has certainly been for you in the Messenger of Allah an
excellent pattern for anyone whose hope is in Allah and the Last
Day...” (Qur'an: Al-Ahzab: 21)

Its viewed as an act of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) to face the giblah
(direction of prayer) at the end of supplication, and to traverse one’s clothes, as
related in the Two Salis’ thal the Prophet turned his back toward the people and
faced the qiblah asking Allah (for rain), Then he traversed his cloak", The wisdom
behind this - Allah knows best —is that itis like a good omen that the present hard
condition may turn int prosperity and the sending of rain, People should also
follow the incim and traverse their clothes, as Imam Ahmad related, “..the people
followed him (the Prophet) and traversed their clothes." In addition, what is stated
as done by the Prophet (PBUH) is to be done by his nation, unless it is proved that
he alone is particularized with such a thing.

This would be until Allah sends down rain; otherwise, Muslims should
repeat asking for rain, as long as there is a need for that, It is considered an act
of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) that when rain starts to fall, one is to stand
and receive some of it" and say, "O Allah! Let it be a strong fruitful rain" and
say, “The rain is due to the Favor and Mercy of Allah.” However, when rain
falls heavily and there is fear that it might cause harm, one should say as the
Prophet (PBUH) used to say;

“O Allah! (Let the rain be) around us, not on us. O Allah! (Let the
rain be) on the plateaus, on the motintains, on the hills, on the
hillocks, in the valleys, and on the places where trees grow.”
(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Allah knows best,

Endnotes

1 The qiblah: The direction of prayer, namely towards the Ka’ bah,

2 Al-Bukhari (1024) [2/663] and Muslim (2067) [3/427]

3 Abit Dawid (1165) [1/480], At-Turmnidhi (558) [2/4145], An-Nas®it (150) [2/173], Ibn
‘Mijah (1266) [2/94},and Al-Hakina in his "AlsMastadrak” (1220) [1/466].

Chaprer 29: Rain Prayer 29)

4 Chapter No. 87 of the Qur’in,

5 Chapter No. 88 of the Qur'in,

6 Al-Bukhart (1024) [2/663] and. Mustim (2068) [3/428]; see also Al-Bayhagt in lis
"Suman" [3/486].

7 Al-Bukhhari (1031) [2/667] and Muslim (2074) [3/430].

8 Al-Bukhari (1013) [2/646] and Muslim (2075) [3/431],

9 The Two Sabilts: The Twa Authentic Books of Al-Bukhiri and Muslim.

10 Al-Bukhéri (1025) and Muslim (894).
11 Abmad (16417) [4/41]
12 Muslim (2080) [3/435].

14 Al-Bukhari (810) [2/673] and Muslim (228) [1/247].

Death and Burial

Our Shari'ah (Islamic Law), thank Allah, is so perfect and comprehensive
that it covers all man’s affairs related to his life as well as his death, Among
the issues that our Shari'ah covers are the rulings on deathbed and death,
starting from one’ last illness and death, until one’s burial. Our Shari'ah
also covers the rulings on visiting a dying person and instructing him to say,
“There is no deity but Allah? washing the body of the deceased, enshrouding
his body, performing the Funeral Prayer over him, burying him, settling his
debts, carrying out his will, distributing his properties legally, and assuming
guardianship over his young children.

Imam bnul-Qayyim (may Allah have mercy on him) said:
“The Sunnah of the Prophet (PBUH) regarding sick and dying people

isthe most perfect one, which is different from that of all other nations.
The Surah in this regard includes the following:

٠ Showing servitude and submissiveness to Allah, Exalted be He, as
perfectly as possible.

204 11: PRAYER

+ Giving the dying and deceased person the kindest treatment, that
benefits him in his grave and on the day when he is resurrected,
Such a kind treatment includes many acts, such ‏كد‎ visiting the
dying person, instructing him to utter “There is no deity but Allah"
before breathing his last. Kind treatment also includes purifying the
deceased by washing his body and preparing him for meeting Allah,
Exalted be He, in his best form and state, standing in rows while
performing the Funeral Prayer over him, praising Allah and extolling
Him while praying over the deceased, and asking Allah to confer
His blessing upon the Prophet (PBUH) to forgive the deceased, to
have mercy upon him and pardon his sins. Among the acts of the
Sunnah is standing on the side of the deceased person's grave asking
steadfastness for him (when questioned by the Two Angels), visiting
his grave, invoking Allah for him, being good to his family and
relatives, and so on.”

tt is worth mentioning that it is an act of the Sunnah to mention death
frequentlyand prepare oneselfforit through repentanceand contrition, returning
the (unlawfully acquired) rights to their rightful owners, and hastening to do
good deeds lest one dies unexpectedly. The Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Mention the pleasure destroyer (i.e. death) frequently.”

(Related by the Five Compilers of Hadith’ with authentic chains of
transmitters, and deemed sabih (authentic) hadith by Ibn Hibban,
Al-Hakim, and other compilers of Hadith)

Moreover, At-Tirmidht and other compilers of Hadith related on the
authority of Ibn Mas’ tid the following marfid’ (traceable) hadith:

“Allah's Messenger (PBUH) said, ‘Show due bashfulness to Allah?
We (the Companions) said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! We show
bashfulness, thank Allah.’ He (PBUH) said, ‘It is nat that (as you
think). True bashfulness to Allah is to keep the head and what it
contains (i.e, to keep the eyes, ears, tongue, etc., away from sins)
and to keep the abdomen (away from unlawful food) and what is
related to it (ie. to Keep the private parts and the legs, etc., away
from committing what is prohibited), and to remember death and
decay (in grave); and whoever seeks the Hereafter should abandon
the adornments of the workily life. Whoever does so will be the one
showing due bashfulness to Allal'”*

Chuapeer 30! Dead and Busia 295

Firstly: Rulings on Sickness and Dying

When one is afflicted with an illness, one should bear it patiently hoping
for divine reward and should not be impatient or discontented with fate and
Divine Decree, Yet, one is allowed to tell others about one’sillness and its kind,
provided one is satisfied with Allah predestination. Also, complaining of
one illness to Allah and asking Him for recovery does by no means contradict
patience; on the contrary, itis desirable and highly recommended in Islam to
complain (to Allah) and ask Him for recovery. Prophet AyyOb (Job; PBUH),
for example, called to his Lord, as revealed by Allah in the Qur'an, saying

“(ndeed, adversity has touched me, and You are the Most Merciful
of the merciful?” (Qur'in: Al-Anbiya’: 83)

‘Moreover, there is no harm in receiving lawful medical treatment; some
scholars strongly recommend resorting to lawful medication to the degree
that it seems to be obligatory. This is because there are many hiadiths stressing
adopting reasonable means to reach an end and secking medical treatment
when necessary, for this does not contradict one’ reliance on Allah and trust
in Him. It is just like satisfying hunger and thirst by means of food and drink.

Yet; it is not permissible to use prohibited things for medical treatment
according to what is related in Sahih Al-Bukhdri (Al-Bukharis Authentic Book
of Hadith) that Yb Mas’ tid (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“Allah has never made your remedy in what He has prohibited
‘for you."
Besides, Abi Dawad and other compilers of Hadith related the following
marfi’ (traceable) hadith on the authority of Abd Hurayrah:

“The Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Allah has sent down both disease
and cure, and He has appointed a cure for every disease, so treat
‘yourselves medically, but use nothing prohibited. ”

Inaddition, itis stated in Saltth Muslim (Muslim's Authentic Book of Hadith)
that when the Prophet (PBUH) was asked about using an intoxicantas remedy,
he replied, “It is not a remedy; it is a malady.”

Likewise, it is prohibited to use whatever might affect the correctness
of one’s creed, as a remedy, such as wearing amulets containing polytheistic
words, superstitious names, nonsensical writings, and the like. It is also
prohibited to wear beads, strings, earrings, or pendants on one’s arm, upper
arm, or elsewhere, believing that they are means of protection against the evil

296 Us PRAYER

eye and affliction. The idea behind prohibiting such things is that one’s heart
would be attached to them instead of Allah, seeking their aid and protection
-against harm, which is a kind of polytheism or one of its causing factors. The
same prohibition applies to seeking a remedy through resorting to satcerers,
witchdoctors, shamans, clairvoyants, and those employing the jinn, as a
Muslim's creed is more important to him than his health.

Allah, Exalted be He, has appointed lawful means of remedy which are
useful to ones body, mind and creed, the first of which are the Glorious Qur'an,
the legal Qur'anic incantations, and the legal invocations. Ibnul-Qayyim said:

"The best of remedy is performing good deeds, remembering Allah,
supplicating and imploring Him, and turning to Him in repentance,
the effects af which are much greater than medicine. Yet, their effects
depend on how much one returts to Allal: and Allah’s acceptance of
one’ supplication.”

‘There is no harm in receiving medical treatment, at hospitals or elsewhere, at
the hands of qualified doctors who know how to diagnose diseases and treat them.

It is an act of the Surah (Prophetic Tradition) to visit the sick and the
dying, for the Praphet (PBUH), as stated in the Two ‏,كيال لمق‎ stressed that there
are five duties of every Muslim toward his fellow Muslim, among which is
visiting him when sick’, When one visits a sick person, one should ask him

about his health, as the Prophet (PBUH) used to come close to the sick person
he visited and ask him about his health.

One should visit the sick person every two or three days, unless the sick person
wants one to visit him daily. On the other hand, one should not stay long with the
sick person unless itis his will. When visiting the sick person, one should say to
him, "Do not worry it (your illness) is a means of purification (fram your sins),
if Allah wills?" He should also try to make him happy, invoke Allah to cure him,
and recite legal Quranic incantations for him, particularly the Sura of A/-Fatia
(the Opening Chapler ofthe Quin), Une Sura of ALIKhIds (Sincerity of Faith,
and A/-Mw'awwidhatin, ariely the Suras of Al-Falay (Daybreak) and An-Nas
(Mankind)"

It is also an act of the Sumalt for the sick person to bequeath some of his
money to be given in charity. He should also determine in his will how his
money should be divided; the bequests to be fulfilled, the debts to be settled, the
deposits and trusts to be returned to their owners. Even healthy people should
do the same and write their wills beforehand, for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

Chapter 30) Death ane Burial ‏جود‎

“I is not permissible for any Muslim who has something to declare
in testimony to stay for two nights without having his (last) will
‘written and kept ready with him?

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)"

“Two nights” in the above hadith is not meant literally, but it refers to any
short period of time. That is to say, it is impermissible for a Muslim, who has
something to write down in a will, to stay - even for a short period of time
~ without having his will written and kept ready with him, for one does not
know when death may overtake him,

A sick person must think highly of Allah, and be confident of His mercy,
as Allah says in a Quds (Divine) hadith":

“Lam just as My servant thinks of Me, (ie. ‏ل‎ am Able to do for him
what he thinks T can do for him)?"

‘That must be the feeling of every Muslim, especially at death's door, when
he is about to meet his Lord.

tis an act of the Swinah for visitors to make the dying person desirous of
Allah's mercy rather (han being afraid of His punishment, for he may become
desperate, However, when one is healthy, one should be both desirous of Allalis
mercy and afraid of His punishment, Both hope and fear are needed for the
healthy because being just overcome by fear of Allahis punishment makes one
give up hope (in Allah's Mercy). On the other hand, being overwhelmed by
hope in Allah's Mercy, without fearing His punishment, makes one feel secure
from Allah, and thus feel no remorse.

When the dying person is breathing his last, it is an act of the Sunnah to
exhort him to say, “There is no deity but Allah for the Prophet (PBUH) said-

“Exhort the dying among you to say, ‘There is no deity but Allah?”
(Related by Imam Muslim)’

The idea behind that is to make "there is no deity but Allah his last words;
* (traceable) hadith, Mu’adh Ibn Jabal narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“Whoever his last words are ‘there is no deity but Allah’ will enter
paradise"

{tis important to bear in mind that instructing the dying person to say so
should be done gently so as not to annoy or exhaust him while he is breathing
his last,

298 Ue PRAYER

It is also an act of the Sunnah to make the dyi
(direction of prayer), and to recite the Sura of ¥é
(PBUH) said:

“Recite the Sura of Ya Sin over those dying among you."

(Related by Abd Dawéd and Ibn Majah,"" and deemed
{authentic) by Ibn Eibban)

Its worth mentioning that the Qurn is to be recited over the dying, not
the dead, as the latter case is bid ‘ah (a matter innovated in religion) whereas
the former case is an act of the Sunmah, Accordingly, reciting the Qurén at
funerals or graves aver the dead is among the innovated acts in religion that
hhave never been revealed or permitted by Allah. Therefore, Muslims should
stick to the Sunnah of the Prophet (PBUH) and give up such innovated acts
in religion

‎person face the qiblah‏ ع
‎over him, for the Prophet‏

‎Secondly: Rulings on the Deceased

‎‘Once a person dies, it is desirable for the attendant one to close his (the
deceased) eyes, for the Prophet (PBUH) did the same to Aba Salamah when
he died, and said:

‎“When the soul is taken away, the sight follows it. So, do not pray
for anything but good (in the presence of a dying person), for the
angels say ‘Amen’ to what you say.”

‎(Related by Imam Muslim)"

‎Ttisalso an act of the Sunnah to cover the body of the deceased immediately
after his death with a garment, for 'ishah (the Prophet’ wife, may Allah be
pleased with her) narrated:

‎“When the Prophet (PBUH) died, he was covered with a decorated
garment made of linen (or cotton)”

‎(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)”

‎‘Muslims should hasten in preparing the corpse of the deceased for burial
when they are certain about his death, for the Prophet said:

‎“The corpse of a Muslim should not remain withheld among his
family (without being buried)”

‎(Related by Aba Dawod)”

‎Moreover, hastening in burying the deceased is intended ‏ما‎ avoid waiting
until the corpse changes (emitting odor), mam Ahmad Tbn Hanbal said,

Chapter 30: Death and Burial 299

“A sign of honor to the deceased is io hasten his burial.” Yet, there is no harm
in waiting until the coming of the deceased's guardian or anyone else (whose
presence is necessary) provided he is near and there is no fear that the corpse
of the deceased might undergo change,

Besides, itis permissible to announce the death ofa Muslim for the purpose
of gathering people to prepare him for burial, attend his funeral, perform the
Funeral Prayer over him, and pray to Allah for him, Yet, announcing someone’.
death by wailing and lamentation, as well as enumerating his good qualities, isa
misbehavior belonging to the Pre-Islamic Period of Ignorance (the Jahiliyyah);
the same goes for funeral orations and funeral ceremonies.

Itis desirable to hasten in carrying out the dead person's will; Allah, Exalted
be He, has called for carrying out the deceased's will prior to settling his debts,
enjoining people to take an interest in writing wills and carrying them out.

The debts of the deceased should be seitled as fast as possible, whether they
are due to Allah or to peuple. The debts due to Allah include unpaid Zak,
unperformed Hajj, unfulfilled vows of worship, and unfulfilled expiation,
However, those due to people include trusts, ill-gotten things or gains, loans
and borrowed things, arrears, and the like, Such debts are to be settled on
behalf of the deceased, whether stated in his will or not. This is because the
Prophet (PBUH) sai

“The soul of a (dead) believer is suspended to his debt until it (the
debt) is settled.”

(Related by Imam Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi; the latter deems it a
hiasan (good) hadith)”

‘Thus, the deceased person's soul is asked to pay off his debt and is suspended
until the debr is settled, Therefore, the Prophet (PBUH) urges us to hasten in
settling the debt of the deceased; this is when the money left by the deceased is
enough to settle his debts, As for one who does not have enough money to pay
off his debts, and dies while having the intention of settling them, Allah wil}
settle them for him as indicated in many hadith,

Thirdly: Rulings on Washing the Body of the Deceased

Washing the deceased is obligatory for those acquainted with the rulings
and conditions of washing a deceased person and able to perform it. To illus-
trate, when the Prophet (PBUH) was informed of a man who fell down from

RAVER,

300

the back of his camel and broke his deck and died, he (PBUH) said, "..wash
him with water and sidr...”" (Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)" Washing
the deceased is reported to have been recurrently enjoined and observed by
the Prophet (PBUH)". Moreover, the body of the Prophet (PBUH) himself,
the pure and purified Messenger, was washed (when he died),”" what then will
be the case of other Muslims?

ashing the deceased js a collective duty on those acquainted with his
death (and able to perform it). Besides, washing the body of a deceased man
should be performed by a man (and that of a deceased woman by a woman).
In addition, it is better and highly recommended that the washer should be
a trustworthy person who is well-acquainted with the rulings on washing
a deceased person, This is because such a kind of washing is a legal ruling
that has a special way of application and performance, and only those well-
informed about it can perform it in the proper, legal way,

If one determines in one’s will to be washed by a certain person when one
dies, then that person should be given priority in washing one, provided he isa
fair, rustworthy person. This is because Abi Bakr (may Allah be pleased with
him) stated in his will to be washed (after his death) by Asm@ Bint “Umays,
his wife”. Thus, itis permissible for a woman to wash the body of her deceased
husband and for a man, likewise, to wash his deceased wife's body, Anas (may
Allah be pleased with him), for example, determined in his will to be washed
(after his death) by Muhammad Ibn Sitin.

‘The one stated in the dead person's will has the priority to wash him; after
him comes the father, as a father is the worthiest person of washing his son.
‘This is also because of a father’s deep affection, tenderness, and sympathy for
his son. After the deceased's father (regarding priority of washers) comes the
grandfather, as he has the same affection for the deceased, then comes the
closest kin, the closer, and so on. The clasest person outside the family comes
next in this regard, and then come last those unrelated to the deceased. It is
important to point out that such prioritization of washers is ta be applied
if they-are aware of the rulings on such washing and claim it; otherwise,
priority should be given to those acquainted with its rulings over those
unacquainted.

As for females, a body of a deceased female is to be washed by a fentale.
Priority here is also given to the one slated in the will of the deceased woman.
In other words, a woman determined in the will is to be given preference int
washing her over anybody else, provided she is legally qualified for that, then

Chapter 30: Death and Burial 301

comes next the closest female relative to the deceased, then the closer, and so
on and so forth,

In general, a body of a deceased woman is to be washed by a woman, and
that of a man by-a man, in the aforesaid sequence. Still, it is permissible for
a husband to wash the body of his dead wife and vice versa, for Aba Bakr
(may Allah be pleased with him), as mentioned above, stated in his will to be
washed by his wife, In addition, ° Ali tbn Abd Talib (may Allah be pleased with
him) washed the body of Fatimah (his wife)”. The same is also reported ta
have been done by many other Companions”.

Besides, itis permissible for men and women to wash the body of a young
child under seven years, whether male or female, Ibnul-Mundhie said, “All
scholars, at whose hands we have learnt, unanimously agree that itis permissible
for the woman to wash the body of a young boy." This is because nothing of the
young boy's body - who is under seven -is regarded as “awrahr” in his life, so
this should be the case after his death also. To illustrate, the body of Ibrahim,
the baby son of the Prophet (PBUH), was washed by women when he died,
However, it is impermissible for a woman to wash the body of a deceased
seven-year-old boy or upwards, and for aman to wash the body ofa deceased
seven-year-old gir] or upwards.

Itis also impermissible fora Muslim to wash the dead body of a disbeliever,
carry his coffin to the grave, enshroud his body, perform the Funeral Prayer
over him, or attend his Funeral procession, This is because Allah, Exalted be
He, says:

"© you who have believed, do not make allies of a people with
whom Allah has become angry...” (Que'in: Al-Mumtahinah: 13)

The general meaning of the verse indicates that itis prohibited to wash the
body ofa deceased disbeliever, carry his coffin, ot follow his funeral procession
Inaddition, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And do not pray [the Funeral Prayer, 0 Muhantmad,] over any
of them who has died - ever - or stand at his grave. Indeed, they
disbelieved in Allah...” (Quran: At-Tawbah: 84)

Allah also says:

“It is not for the Prophet and those who have believed to ask
Sorgiveness for the polytheists...” (Quran: At-Tawbah; 113)

302 Hi: PRAVER,

‘Thus, it is impermissible for Muslims to bury the bady of a disbeliever, yet
if there is no fellow disbeliever to bury him, a Muslim should throw his body
into a hole so that it causes no harm to others. That was done by the Muslims
to the bodies of the polytheists killed in the Battle of Badr, when they threw
them into the well of Al-Qalib, The same applies to apostates, like one who
abandoned prayer intentionally and one who innovated a bid'ah (a matter
innovated in religion) that leads to disbelief.

That should always be the Muslim's attitude toward a disbeliever, which
indicates denial and hatred. Reporting the story of Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham)
and those who believed with him, Allah reveals:

“.,When they said to their peaple, ‘Indeed, we are disassociated
from you and from whatever you worship other than Allah. We
have denied you, and there has appeared between us and you
animosity and hatred forever until you believe in Allah Alone...'"

(Quran: Al-Mumtahinah: 4)

‎Exalted be He, also says:‏ ,اهلام

‎“You will not find a people who believe in Allah and the Last Day
having affection for those who oppose Allah and His Messenger,
even if they were their fathers or their sons or their brothers or
their kindred...” (Qur'an; Al-Mujadilah: 22)

‎This is because of the enmity existing between faith and disbelief, and because
of that hatred born by the disbelievers toward Allah, His Messengers (peace be
upon them all), and His Religion, Thereupon, it is impermissible for Muslims
{o support the disbelievers, whether alive or dead. We invoke Allah to make our
hearts firm in sticking to the truth, and to guide us to His straight path

‎On the other hand, when washing the body of a deceased Muslim the water
used must be pure and legally permissible, and it is better to be cool. Yet, there
is no harm in using hot water to remove any dirt from the body of the deceased,
or in case of extremely cold weather, Besides, washing the deceased must be
carried out in a sheltered, roofed place so that the deceased cannot be seen by
others (except the washer), such asa house, a tent or the like, if possible.

‎11 15 obligatory to cover the parts between the navel and the knees of the
deceased body before washing, then the whole body is to be uncovered (except
the aforementioned parts). After that, the deceased is to be laid down in a
sloping position on the washing (wonden) bed so that water and whatever
comes out of the deceased's body flows sawn

‘Chapter 30: Death and Bustal 303

‘Washing the body of the deceased must be attended only by the washer
and those assisting him; it is detestable for anyone else to attend the washing,
‘The washer should raise the head of the deceased that the latter becomes in a
semi-sitting position. Then, he passes his hand over the deceased’s abdomen
pressing it gently to allow anything withheld therein (such as excrements)
to come out, While so doing, he should pour much water aver the body to
overflow and remove such excrements coming out (if any). After that, the
‘washer wraps his hand with a coarse piece of cloth and cleans the stool and
urine exits and the anus of the deceased with water.

After that, the washer declares his intention of washing the deceased, says
tasmiyah (saying, “Bismillah” i.e. “In the Name of Allah”), and purifies the
dead person with the ablation performed for prayer. As for rinsing the mouth
and the nose with water, itis sufficient to wipe over the teeth and nostrils with
two wet fingers or pass a wet piece of cloth over them without letting any water
enter the dead person's mouth or nostrils. Then, the washer washes the head
and beard of the deceased with sidr™ or soap. The washer then starts washing
the deceased's body beginning with the right parts; he should first wash the
rright part of his neck, his right hand and shoulder, the right half of his chest,
the right thigh, the right leg, and the right foot. After that, the washer rolls the
deceased body to its left side and washes the right side of his back. Then the
washer rolls him on his right side and washes the left side of his back in the
same Way.

During washing the deceased, the washer is to use sidr ‏عه‎ soap, and it is
desirable to wrap his hand at this time with a piece of cloth. It is obligatory to
wash the deceased at least once, provided his body is thereby well purified, but
it is desirable to wash him thrice. IFthe body of the deceased is still impure, itis
permissible to wash him up till seven times. It is also desirable to use camphor
in the last wash, as it makes the body stiff, iragrant, and cool, Besides, camphor
is 10 be used at the last wash so that its effect remains.

Afterwards, the washer dries the body with a garment or the like, then cuts
the moustache and clips the nails, if long, and removes the hair of the armpits,
bearing in mind to keep all the cut hair and clipped nails to be put with the
deceased in his shroud. As fora deceased woman, her hairs to be braided into
three braids falling down backwards,

Sometimes it is difficult to wash the deceased because water is unavailable
or for fear that his body would be torn apart because of washing, such as the
cases when the deceased is a leper, or one killed by fire, or a woman whose
husband is not present ta wash her, or a man whose wife is not present to

304 Tl: PRAYER

wash him, In such cases, tayammum (performing dry ablution with clean
earth) is to be performed for the deceased, wiping over the deceased's face
and two palms with clean earth, using a piece of cloth or the like to hinder the
washer's direct contact with the deceased's body. However, if itis difficult to
wash only certain parts of the deceased's body, the washer then is to wash what
is available and perform tayammum for those unwashed parts. It is desirable
for the washer to have a titual bathing following washing the deceased, yet it
isnot obligatory to do so.

Fourthly: Rulings on Shrouding

‘After washing and drying the body of the deceased, it is to be put in a
shroud that must cover all his body, tt is desirable to use a white clean shroud,
whether new - which is better + or not, The obligatory size of the shroud is that
which covers the whole body of the deceased,

It is desirable to shroud the deceased man in three shrouds of cloth and
the woman in five pieces of cloth; a loincloth, a vei, a shirt, and two shrouds.
As for deceased children, a boy is to be shrouded in one shroud, yet three
are permissible, and a girl in one shirt and two shrouds, Its also desirable to
subject the shroud to a censer, after being sprinkled with rose water or the like,
so that the scent of incense would remain in the shroud.

The man is to be shrouded by spreading the three shrouds over each other,
and then he isto be brought covered with a garment or the likeas itis obligatory
to be covered, and ta be put lying with his face upwards on the three shrouds.
‘Then a perfumed piece of catton is to be put between the buttocks covering
the anus of the deceased and fastened by tying a piece of cloth, Other similar
perfumed cotton pieces are to be put on the eyes, nostrils, mouth, ears, the
parts of prostration (ie. the forehead and the nose, both hands, both knees,
and the bottom of the toes), under the armpits, the inner parts of the knees,
and on the navel. The washer should also apply some perfume between the
shrouds and to the head,

After that, the washer wraps the left side of the upper shroud (on which
the deceased is lying face up) aver the right side and its right side over his left
side. Then the same is ta be done with the second and the third shrouds; the
superfluous parts of the shrouds should be longer toward the head than the
feet, Then such remaining parts toward the head are to be gathered and put
over his face and those toward his feet over his feet, Afterwards, belts of cloth
are tied around the shrouds so as not to unwrap or loosen in the grave.

Chapter ‏عناة‎ Death and Burial 305

As fora deceased woman, as mentioned aboye, she is to be shrouded in
five pieces of cloth: aloincloth, a shirt, a veil, and two shrouds.

Fifthly: Rulings on the Funeral Prayer

After washing and shrouding the deceased, the Funeral Prayer is to be
performed over hin, Ab@ Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) said, ‘Whoever attends the funeral
procession until he performs the Funeral Prayer for it svill get a rewared
equal to one qirdt, and whoever accompanies it until burial will get ‏م‎
‎reward equal to two ‏لعل فجن‎ It was asked, ‘What are two girats?" He (the
Prophet) replied, (They are) like two huge mountains (of reward)”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)”

Performing the Funeral Prayer aver the deceased is a collective duty: ‏لد‎
‎performed by some of those in the neighborhood of the deceased, the rest of
them will not be accountable for it; itis still an act of the Sunnah (Prophetic
‘Tradition) to be observed by the rest of them. Yet, ifall abandoned it, it will be
asin upon them all,

The conditions of the Funeral Prayer:
L-Intention; one must have the intention of performing it.
2-Facing the giblat
3-Concealing one’s ‘awral when performing it
4-The ritual purity of both the one performing it and the deceased
5-Avoidance of any physical impurity
6-Both the one performing it and the deceased must be Muslims.

7-Attending the funeral procession after offering the Funeral Prayer if
they are in the neighborhood

8-Being legally accountable
The integral parts of the Funeral Prayer:
| Standing upright
2-Saying four takbirs”’
3-Reciting the Sura of Al-Fatihah (the Opening Chapter of the Qurién)

3 1: PRAYER

4-Asking Allah to confer His blessing upon the Prophet (PBUH)

5-Praying for the deceased

6- Performing these integral parts in sequence

7-Ending the prayer with taslim
The acts of the Sunnah observed in the Funeral Prayer:

1-Raising the hands upon saying each rakbir

2-Seeking refuge with Allah (from the accursed Satart) before ret
ALFatihah

3-Invokking Allah for oneself and for all Muslims

ing

4-Being quiet while reciting
5-Having a short pause afier the fourth takbir and before taslim

6-Putting one’ right hand over the left with both on the chest following
each takbir

7-Turning to the right when saying tastim
The Way the Funeral Prayer is Performed

‘The Funeral Prayer is to be performed in the following way: The imam
(the one who leads the congregational prayer), or one performing it alone over
a deceased person, should stand toward the chest of the deceased ifa man and
toward her middle if a woman, As for those led in prayer, they should stand
behind the imam, and it is an act of the Sunnah to stand in three rows. One
begins with saying the opening fakbirand then seeks refuge with Allah (from
Satan) directly following saying takbir- without saying the opening invocation
- then one recites Basmalah™ and the Sura of AI-Pétiiah, After that, one is to
say the second fakbir and ask Allah to confer His blessings upon the Prophet
(PBUEI) just as it is recited in Tashahhud, Then, one is to say the third takbir
and pray Allah for the deceased with the invocations reported to have been
observed by the Prophet (PBUH) in this regard; the following is derived from
such Prophetic invocations:

"10 Allah! Forgive those of us who are living and those of us who are
dead, those of us who are present and those of us who are absent,
our young and our old, and our male ani our female, Verily, You
know our return and our residence and You are over all things

Chapter 30: Death and ‏المشسظ‎ 30

Omnipotent. O Allah! To whomsoever of us You give life, grant him
life as a follower of Islam, and whomsoever of us You cause death,
cause him death as a believer O Allah! Do not withhold from us
the reward (for showing patience upon his death) and do not leave
us to go astray after hint (i.e. after his death)”. O Allah! Forgive
him, have mercy upon him, give him peace, pardon him, receive
him with honor, make his grave spacious and wash him with water,
ice and snow. Cleanse hint from sins and faults as a white garment
is cleansed from impurity. Requite him with an abode that is more
excellent than his abode and with a mate better than his mate,
Admit him to Paradise, and protect him from the torture of the
grave (or ‘ihe torment of the Fire’ according to another narration),”*

and make his grave spacious, and grant him light therein.”

If the deceased is a female, the invocation will be thus, "0 ‏لامالا‎ Forgive
her..”, referring to her in the whole invocation,

On the other hand, if the deceased is a child, the invocation will be as follows;

"0 Allal! Make hin precede his parents (to Paradise) and (let him
be) saved, grant hini (divine reward) and make hin: an accepted
intercessor for them. 0 Allah! Make their scales heavy (with good
deeds) by him, and make their reward greater for (showing patience
for) hima, and join him with the righteous believers, and let him be
in the care of Ibrahim (Prophet Abralian), and protect him with
Your Mercy from the punishment of the Fire...”

Afterwards, those performing the Prayer over the deceased must say takbir
and wait alittle then say one faslim, turning their faces to the right.

As [or the one who misses a part of the Funeral Prayer, he should join the
prayer performing what is left thereof with the congregation led by the imam,
Then, when the imam ends prayer with tastim, one can perform the part one
has missed in the same manner performed in this prayer. However ifone fears
that people may carty the coffin and leave immediately after the (Funeral)
Prayer and thus one misses the Funeral procession, one can just say the missing
takbirs successively, saying nothing in between, then end the prayer with
taslim. On the other hand, if one misses performing the Funeral Prayer over
the deceased before the burial, one can perform it at his grave. As for those
‘who are not present in the town of the deceased and are informed of his death,
they are to perform the Absent Prayer with the intention of performing the
Funeral Prayer over the deceased,

308 ‏با‎ PRAYER

As for a stillborn whose age is four months upward, the Funeral Prayer is
to be performed over it; ifless, there will be no Funeral Prayer aver it,

Sixthly: Funeral Procession and Burial

Itisacollective duty upon Muslims who know about the death ofa Muslim
to carry his coffin to the grave and bury him. Burial is legalized through
both the Qur’in and the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition). Allah, Exalted be
He, says:

“Have We not made the earth a container of the living and the
dead?” (Qur’in: Al-Mursalat: 25-26)

‘Allah, Exalted be He, also says:

"Then He causes his death and provides a grave for him.”
(Qur'an, ' Abasai 21)

Besides, there are numerous ftaditfis concerning burial, stating that it
isan act of devotion and dutifulness signifying honor and concern for the
deceased.

It is an act of the Sunnah to escort the deceased to his grave, as it is stated
in the Two Sahihs, as mentioned above, that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Whoever attends the fimeral procession until he performs the
Funeral Prayer for it will get a reward equal to one qirdt, and
whoever accompanies it until burial will get a reward equal to two
girdts.” When he (PBUH) was asked, "What are two qirdts?” He
replied, “(They are) like two huge mountains (of reward)?”

‘There is another wording according to Al-Bukhari’s narration of this
hadith which goes as follows:

"Whoever escorts the deceased to the grave...”

However, the wording of Imam Muslim is:

“Whoever goes out dccompanying a funeral from its house, offers
prayer for it (i.e. the Funeral Prayer), and then follows it (its
procession) until ihe deceased is buried..."

Thus, the different narrations of the aforesaid hadith indicate that the
Prophet (PBUH) enjoins us to escort the deceased to the grave,

Chapter 30: Death aad Burial 309

Ihis an ‏اعد‎ of the Swmah for those following the funeral procession to
take part in carrying the coffin of the deceased, if possible. There is no harm
in carrying the coffin in a car of on an animal, especially when the graveyard
is distant,

It is also an act of the Sunnah to hurry up with the dead body during the
procession. This is because the Prophet (PBUH) said in a hadith related by Al-
Bukhari and Muslim:

“Hurry up with the dead body for ifitis righteous, you are forward-
ing it to good, and if itis otherwise, then you are putting off an evil
thing which is around your necks;

However, the funeral procession should not be excessively fast; those
carrying the coffin and those following them should be in a state of tranquility
and quietness. They should never raise their voices with recitation ot anything
else, whether it is fahlil," invocations, dhikr." or saying, “May Allah forgive
him (the deceased)” or the like, This is because all such acts are mere bid ‘his
(matters innovated in religion).

Besides, it is prohibited for women to follow the funeral procession, for
Umm "Atiyyah (may Allah be pleased with her) narrated:

“We (women) were forbidden (by the Prophet) to follow funeral
processions.”

At the time of the Prophet (PBUH), women did not go out with funeral
processions, for itis a ceremony restricted to men.

Moreover, itis an act of the Sunnah to deepen the grave and make it wide,
for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Dig graves and make thenv wide and deep."

(At-Tirmidhi commented that itis a hasan sahil (good, authentic)
hadith)"

Itisalso.an-act of the Surah to cover the grave of the woman when putting
her body therein because all her body is regarded as ‘awrah,

Inaddition, itis an act of the Sunnah to say, while putting down the deceased
An his grave:

“(We bury him) in the Name of Allah and according to the religion
(ie. the tradition) of Allah's Messenger (PBUH)”

3 ii: PRAYER

This is because the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“When you put your dead persons in the graves, say, (We bury) in
the Name of Allah and according to the religion (i.e. the tradition)
of Allahis Messenger (PBUH). ”

(Related by the Five Compilers of Hadith excluding An-Na
deemed a hasan (good) hadith by AUTirmidhi)”

The deceased is to be put in his grave on his right side facing the qiblal, for
the Prophet (PBUH) said, referring to the Ka'bah:

“It is your qiblah in your life and after your death.”
(Related by Abd Dawad and other compilers)"

‘After putting the deceased in the grave, a brick, a stone or some earth are
to be put under his head. Besides, he is to be put close to the front wall of his
grave. Also, some earth is to be put behind his back as a support lest he should
fall on his face or be overturned on his back. Afterwards, the hole of the grave
is to be closed with bricks and clay to hold it together, and then earth is to be
piled up on his grave, using no earth other than that round his grave,

‘The top of the grave is to he of a height equal to a palm of the hand, and
to be shaped like ‏م‎ humpback so that flood water, any, would flow down and
does not affect it. On the other hand, some pebbles are to be put on the grave
which should be frequently watered to make earth setile and stick to the ground,
not scatter: As for the idea behind making the grave that high, itis to make it
distinguishable for people, lest they fread on il, Besides, there is ‏مم‎ harm in
putting some large upright bricks on both ends of the grave to make its limits
clearly marked and distinguished, without writing anything on them.

It is desirable )6 stand at the grave of the deceased after burying him to
supplicate Allah and ask His forgiveness for him. This is because once burial
‘was over, the Prophet (PBUH) used to stand at the grave and say:

“Seek forgiveness for your (Muslim) brother and beg steadfastness
(from Allah) for hit, for he is being questioned now?

(Related by Abt Dawid)"

It is a ‏الها قلط‎ to recite the Qur'in at graveyards, for neither the Prophet
(PBUH) nor his honorable Companions were reported to have done so. Such
a bid ‘ah must be avoided; every bid ‘ah is an error

Chapter 30: Death and Burial 30

On the other hand, itis prohibited to build over graves, plaster thems or
\write on them. To illustrate, Jabir fbn ° Abdullah narrated:

“Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) forbade that the graves should be plas-
tered or be used as sitting places (for the people), or a building
should be built over them.”

(Related by Imam Muslim)"
Besides, Jabir narrated:

“The Messenger (PBUH) forbade plastering the graves, writing ont
them, building on them, or treading upon them."

(A marfit’ (traceable) hadith related and deemed saftih (authentic)
by At-Tirmidhi)”

‘The reason for this prohibition is that such acts are means leading ‏نا‎
‎polytheism, as they may make people’s hearts attached to graves, On the other
hand, many ignorant people become so attached to the graves when they see
them in a form of well-decorated structures.

It is also prohibited to light graves (with lamps, or anything of the kind),
The prohibition extends to include establishing mosques over graves and
performing prayer at them or facing them in prayer. Inaddition, itis prohibited
for women to visit graves according to the hadith in which the Prophet said:

"May Allah curse the women who visit the graves, the people who
build mosques over them, and those who establish mosques and
(light) lamps therein.”

(Related by the Compilers of the Sunan)”
Itigalsa stated in a sahih (authentic) jiadith that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

"May Allah curse the Jews and Christians, for they built the places
of worship at the graves of their prophets.

This is also because consecrating graves by means of building structures
over them and the like is the origin of polytheism.

It is prohibited as well to degrade graves through walking on them,
treading upon them with shoes, sitting on them, making them piles of garbage,
or using them as drainage ditches. Aba Huraytah narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

32 Us PRAYER

“It is better that one of you should sit on live coals which would
burn his clothing and come in contact with his skin than that he
should sit oma grave.

{Related by Imam Muslim as a marfii' (traceable) hadith)”

Imam Ibnul-Qayyim (may Allah have mercy on him) sa

“If only we (Muslinas) reflect on the (implications of) We Prophet's
prohibition of sitting on the graves, leaning on them, and treading
upon them, we would comie to know that the Prophet (PBUH)
instructs us to venerate the inhabitants of the graves from their heads
being trodden on with footwear”

Seyenthly: Rulings on Condolence and Visiting Graves

1] san act of the Sunnah to console the bereaved person and advise him to
be patient, and to pray for the deceased, for ‘Amr Ibn Hazm narrated that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“No believer consoles his (bereaved Muslim) brother (by advising him
to show patience) but Allah, Almighty and Ever-Majestic be He, will
dress him from the garments of dignity on the Day of Resurrection."

(Aimarfii (traceable) hadith ‘witha trustworthy chain of transmitters
related by Tbn Majah)"

There ‏عمد‎ also various hadii/is having the same meaning. When consoling a
bereaved one, the wording of condolence is to be: "May Allah make your reward
great, comfort you with a better compensation, and forgive your deceased.”

It is impermissible to have a sitting place for receiving and declaring
condolences, as mistakenly done by some people today. Yet, itis desirable
to prepare some food for the family of the deceased, for the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

"Prepare some food for the family of Jafar, jor it has happened to
them that which accupied them (i.e. the death of Ja°far):”

(Related by Imam Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi; the latter deemed it 3
liasan (good) hadith)”

Some of the family of the deceased nowadays specify a place for people to
gather for offering their condolences, prepare fond for them and hire reciters

Chapter 30: Death atd Burial 313

of the Qur'an, and spend so much on that occasion. Such acts are undoubtedly
prohibited bid ahs (matters innovated in religion), for Imam Ahmad narrated
with a trustworthy chain of transmitters that Jarir Ibn “Abdullah said:

“We (the Companions) used to consider gathering with the family
of the deceased and the preparation of food (by the family of the
dead person) after his burial a kind of (prohibited) wailing.”*

Shaykhul-Iskim Ibn Taymiyah (may Allah haye mercy on him) sai

“Gathering people by the bereaved family, offering them food and
reciting the Qur‘in to grant him (the deceased) the reward ofrecitation,
were never practiced in the:time of the Salaf (early Muslim scholars).
Such acts were deemed detestable by some groups of scholars hecause

of many proofs
At-Turtdshi said:

“As for the funeral ceremonies, they are prohibited as unanimously
agreed upon by scholars; such gatherings on occasions of calarnities
ave legally denied bid'ahs. They have never been reported to have
been previously observed (by the Prophet or his Companions or their
successors). The same applies to those gatherings on the second, third,
fourth and seventh day of the death of the deceased, as well as those
held monthly and yearly: this is a catastrophe. Resides, if the expenses
of such gatherings (i.e. the costs of foods and hiring reciters of the
Qurién) were taken from the inheritance, or one of the heirs is under
guardianship or does not grant permission for such gatherings, all
these gathering will be legally prohibited, and so will be cating from
that food?"

It is desirable for men to visit graves asa means of moral lessons and as an
admonition, and for the purpose of praying for the deceased and asking Allah’
forgiveness for him. The Prophet (PBUH) said

"forbade you (men) to visit the graves, but you may visit thent now!"
(Related by Muslim and At-Tirmidhi)
‘According to At-Tirmidht’s narration, the Prophet (PBUH) added:

“for it (ie. visiting graves) will remind you of the Hereafier.

Yel, itis not desirable to travel so as to visit graves, Generally, visiting graves
‏وأ‎ desirable on three conditions;

314 Uy PRAYER

The visitor must be a man not a woman, for the Prophet (PBUH) said:
“May Allah curse women who visit the graves?

Graves should not be so distant that they require traveling or setting out on
journey to visit them; the Prophet (PBUH) said:

wo

"Do not set out on a journey except for three Mosques...

Visiting graves should be for the purpose of taking moral lessons and
admonition, and for praying to Allah for the deceased. However, if one’s
intention behind visiting graves is seeking their blessings and asking their
inhabitants (the dead) for assistance, relief of suffering and fulfillment of
needs, ones visit then will be a mere polytheistic bid ‘ah.

Shaykhul-Islim Tbn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“Visiting graves is of two kinds; a legal visit and a bid'ah (a matter
innovated in religion). The legal visitis the one intended to invoke Allah
to confer His blessings upon the deceased and to pray to Allah for him,
just lke the Funeral Prayer, provided it does not require setting out for
Tong journeys. As for the visit which is a bid ‘ah, itis the one intended
_for asking the deceased for fulfilling one’s needs, which is considered
major polytheism. It is also the visit intended for invoking Allah for
aneself at such a grave so that the invocation would be granted, or for
using the deceased as a médiium while invoking Allah at the grave,
which are among the abominable bid ahs leading to polytheisyn. Such
acts have nothing to do with the Sunnak (Prophetic Tradition) nor
have they been deemed desirable by any of the Salaf (early Muslim
scholars) of the Muslim nation or the Muslim Imams.""

At any rate, Allah, Exalted be He, knows best. May Alllah’s peace and
blessing be upon our Prophet, Muhammad (PBUH), his household, and his
Companions!

Endnotes

1 See: "Zitdul-Ma'ad" (1/498).

2 At-Tirmidhi (2312) [4/553], An-Nasdi (1823) (2/301), and Ub Majah (42581 (4/495,
Ibn Hibban (2992) [7/259] and Al-Eitkim (7990) [4/65

3 At-Tirmidhi (2463) [4/637].

4 Ibn Bibban (1391) [4/233] afd Al-Bayhagh (19678) [10/8]

5 Aba Dawiid (3874) [4/134]

6 Muslim (5112) [7/152].

‘Chapter 30: Death and Burial ‏كلا‎

7 Al-Bukhari (1240) and Muslim (5615) (7/367

8 Al-Bukhiir (7470) [13/546]

9 Chapter No, 112 of the Qur'an.

W Chapter No. 113 of the Quran,

M1 Chapter No. 114 of the Quran, ‏عا‎ the last Chapter of the Qur‘én,

12 Al-Bukhari (2738) [5/436] and Muslim (4183) [6/77]

15 Quast (Divine) hadith: Divine Words, other than the Glorious Quin, revealed ta
the Prophet (PBUH) from Allah, Unlike the Qur'an, the words of the Qudsi (Divine)
hadith are neither used for worship nor deemed mizaculous.

14 Al-Bukhari (7405) [13/469] and Muslim (6887) [9/63].

15 Muslim (2120, 2122) [3/458, 459}.

16 Aba Dawid (3116) (3/318).

17 Chapter No. 36 of the Qur'an.

18 Abt Dawad (3121) [3/320], ‏هذا‎ Majah (1448) [2/195], and ‏مطل‎ Hibban (3002) 17/269):

19 Muslim (2127) [3/461].

20 AL-Bukhari (5814) [10/340] and Musliny (2180) (4/13),

21 Abn Dawn (3159) [3/333].

22. Ahmad (9642) [2/440], At-Tirmidhi (1079) (5/389) and fbn Majah (2413) [3/145]

23 Sidr: The extract of the lote tree leaves,

24 AL-Bukhari (1265) [3/174] and Muslim (2883) [4/365]

25 Al-Bokhari [3/161] and Muslim [4/5]

26 Abti Dawéd (31-41) [3/328] and Tbn Majah (1464) (2/202

27 Al-Bayhagi (6663) [3/557]. ' Abdlut-Razzaq in his“ Musummtaf” (6117) (3/408] and tkn
‘Abi Shaybah (10969) [2/455].

2H AL-Bayhagl (6660) {3/556}, ' Abdhr-Razzaq (6122) [3/410] and Ad-Daraqutnt (1833) [2/56]

29 Al-Bayhag! (6662) [3/556].

30 See; "AL-md' (pp. 50) and “A/-Awsat" [5/338]. Ibn Aba Shaybah (10988) [2/457].

31 "awake The private patts or parts of the body which are illegal to expose to others; a
‘male’ awral is from the navel to the knees whereas in another view itis said to be the
external organs of sex and excretion, As fora female" awraf. it inclides all her body in
ome view whereas in another itis al her body with the exception of her face and hands.

32 Sidr= The extract of the lote tree leaves.

33 Al-Bukhiri (1325) [3/250] and Muslim (2186) [4/16].

‎Takbir: Saying, “Alléhu-Akbar” (ie. Allah is the Greatest).‏ مق

‎35 Taslint:Saying the final Salémsin prayer (saying,“As-saldimr‘alaykium yu Rabmnatulldh®
i.e, “Peace be upon you, and the mercy of Allah”) when concluding prayer.

‎36 Basnralah: Saying, “Bismillahir-Rahmdsir-Rahin" ie. “In the Name of Allah the
Entitely Merciful, the Especially Merciful”

‎37 Aba Dawiid (3201) [3/350], At-Tirmidlit (1025) [3/343] and Ibn Majah (1498) [2/218),

‎38 Muslins (2229) [4/34].

‎39 Muslim (2127) [3/461].

‎40 Ibn Abit Shaybah (29829) (6/107) and “Abdur-Razzaq (6588) [3/529]

‎41 Al-Bulchirl (1325) and Muslim (945).

‎42 Muslin (2192) [4/19]

‎43 Al-Bukhari (1315) |3/233] and Muslim (2183) [4/15].

316 LL PRAYER

44 Talill- Saying, “La Haha ial (ie. There is no deity but Allah).

45 ‏“انلام‎ lavocations implying remembrance of and mentioning Alla

46.AJ-Bukhari (313) 1/536] and Musi (2164) [4/5]

17 Abt Daw (3216) [3/386] and (3215) [3/355], and At-Tirmidhi (1717) (4/213)

48 Ahmad (5370) [2/70], Abo: Dawtid (3213) [3/355}, At-Tirmidhi (116) [3/364], and
Ibn Majah (1550) [2/241],

49 Abit Dawhd (2875) [3/199]

50 Abia Dawtid (3221) [3/357],

51 Muslim (2242) (4/41,

52 AL-Tirmidhi (1053) [3/368] and An-Nasi (2026) [2/391]. Tb Majah (1562, 1563)
12/247, 248},

53 Ahmad (2030) [1/20], Abd Dawid (3236) [3/362], At-Tirovidht (320) [2/136] and
‘An-Nas@' (2042) [2/400]. _

‎Al-Rukhari (435) (1/688) and Musinn (1187) [3/16),‏ 4د

‎Muslim (2245) [4/41].‏ 5د

‎56 thn Majah (1601) [2/268

‎57 Almac (1750) [1/253], Abd Dawid (3132) [3/325], At-Tirmidht (999) (3/3231, Ton
Majah (1610) [2/274]

‎58 Alumrad (6902) [2/270] andl (inn Majah (1612) [2/275].

‎‘Majomi'l-Fatdwwa” (24/316).

‎60 See:"Al-Hawddith wa Al-Bida'" (pp. 175).

‎61 Muslims (2257) [4/50], At-Tiemidhi (1055) [3/370}. See also Abd Dawn (3698) [4/65

‎62 They are the Sacted Mosque, the Prophet's Mosque and Al-Aqsa Mosque.

‎63 AL-Bukhart (1189) [3/82] and Musliny (3370) [5/169]

‎64 See: "Majnii'l-Faraira” [241326] and [26/148]

Zakéh: Legality and Virtue

Dear Muslim brothers, a Muslim must know the details of the rulings on
Zakélh, its conditions, those required to pay it, those for whom it is to be paid,
and the properties from which it is to be paid. This is because Zakah is one of
the pillars of Islam and its great basis as clearly indicated by the Noble Quran
and the Sunmah (Prophetic Tradition). Allah, Exalted be He, has joined it with
performing Prayer in His Book in eighty-two pos which signifies its
great status and the perfection of the connection between it and prayer and the
firmness of the relation between them, The trustworthy person of that nation
who was the first Caliph after Allah's Messenger (PBUH), Aba Bakr As-Sidiq
{may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“By Allah! 1 will fight those who differentiate between Prayer and
Zakah.”

0 WW: ZAKAH

Allah, Exalted be He, says:
“And establish prayer and give Zakah.,.”
(Quran: Al-Bagarah: 43)
Allah, Exalted be He, also says

“But if they should repent, establish prayer, and give Zakith,
let them [go] on their way..." (Qur'an: At Tawbah: 5)

Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) says:

“Islam is based on (the following) five (principles): (i) to testify that
there is no deity but Allah and that Mulammad is the Messenger
of Allali; (ii) to perform the (compulsory congregational) Prayers
dutifully and perfectly; (iii) to pay Zakah...”

Muslim scholars have unanimously agreed that Zaka/i is an obligatory act
and that it is the third pillar of Islam, and he who denies this is considered a
disbeliever, and whoever refrains from giving it is to be fought.

Zakah was enjoined in the second year of Hijralt of the Prophet (PBUH)
(Immigration to Medina). Allahis Messenger (PBUH) sent Zakah collectors to
receive it, in order to deliyer it to those who deserve it. The same was done by
the Rightly-Guided Caliphs and Muslims after the Prophet (PBUH).

Paying Zakdht is an act of benevolence toward the people, a means of
purifying the property from defilement, a protection against destruction, and
worship of the Lord, Exalted be He. Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Take, [0 Muhammad], from their wealth a charity by which
you purify them aud cause them increase, and invoke [Allaki’s
blessings] upon them, Indeed, your invocations are reassurance
for them. And Allah is Hearing and Knowing."

(Qui At-Tawbah: 103)

Hence, it purifies the souls from stinginess and avarice, and it is also a trial
to the rich person since he approaches Allah by giving some of his property
that he likes.

Allah has enjoined Zakah on the property that can provide sustenance to
othersand which multiplies and incurs much profit (i.e that which spontaneously
multiplies as cattle and harvest, and which multiplies by investment and
management like gold, silver and trading commodities). Moreover, Allah has

Chaprer Is Zikihi Legality andl Virrwe an

ordained the amount of Zakah according to the effort exerted in the property
from which itis paid, so He enjoined one-fifth on ‏متنا‎ (buried wealth), However,
Allah enjoined one-tenth to be paid as Zakah on the property which needs more
effort such as the land watered without exerting too much effort. Moreover, in
properties that need much effort, one-twentieth (5%) is to be given as Zakah. In
addition, for what involves much effort and difficulty, as in money and trading
commodities, one-fortieth (2,5%) is to be paid.

‘Allah has called Zakah by that name, as this word, in Arabic, means
purifying the soul and the money. It is not a fine ot a tax that reduces the
property and harms its owner. Contrarily, it makes the property grow more.
Allahis Messenger (PBUH) said:

“The wealth does not decrease out of giving in charity.”

‘Zakdh, according to Shari’ah (Islamic Law), is ‏ف‎ rightful obligation on
a special property of a particular group of people to be paid at a particular
time. The time when Zakéi is to be paid is:

+ When a complete year passes with regard to cattle, money, and trading
commodities

+ When grains become hard and the signs indicating ripeness appear,
with regard to fruits

+ With regard to honey, Zaki is to be paid when it reaches the amount
liable for Zakah

+ The mining of minerals upon which Zakah is to be paid, with regard to
minerals

+ Concerning Zakiitul-Fitr (Fast-breaking Zakdh). it isto be paid after the
sun sets of the vigil of the Fast-breaking Feast ( ‘Idul-Fitr) but before
performing the Feast Prayer®

A Muslim must give Zakéh if he/she meets five conditions:

Being a free person: Zakith is not imposed on a slave, because he
possesses no property, and what is in his hand belongs (o his masters therefore,
his master is the one who must pay his Zakah.

Being a Muslim: The second condition is that the owner of the property
must be a Muslim, as Zakdh is not imposed on a disbeliever. A disbelieving
person is not asked to pay it, because itis an act of approaching Allah as well as

32 TM: ZAKAH

an act of showing obedience, and the disheliever is not amongst those people
close and obedient to Allah. It also needs intention, which is impossible to
arise from a disbeliever.

Whether it is to be imposed on the disbeliever or not and whether he is.
to be punished particularly in the Hereafter for not paying it or not, i is still
a controversial issue among scholars. Furthermore, in the hadith narrated by
Mu’ adh (may Allah be pleased with him) in which the Prophet (PBUH) said
to him:

“c.diwite the people to testify that there is no deity but Allah and 1
am the Messenger of Allah.”

‘Then the Prophet (PBUH) added after he had mentioned performing
Prayer:
If they obey you to do so, then tell them that Allah has made it

obligatory for thera to pay Zakih from their property and itis ta be
(aken from the wealtfyy among them and given to the poor”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)"

‘Thus, the Prophet (PBUH) made the conversion to Islam a prerequisite for
the obligation of Zakah,

Having the nisdb": The third condition is the possession of the nisab;
thus, no Zakdh is due upon what is less than the niséib. It does not make any
difference whether the possessor of the nisi is old or young, sane or insane,
as the legal proofs pertaining to this are general, ie, there is no specification
mentioned in this regard.

Being an established owner of the property: The fourth condition
is that the ownership of the property must be settled, so that none lays claim
to it. Thereupon, no Zakdh is due upon a property whose ownership is not
established, such as the debt of a mukatab, since the mukétab still has the right
snot to fulfill the agreement,

The elapse of a full lunar year on the property: The fifth condition
is that a year must lapse on the property, owing to the hadith of Xishah (may.
‘Allah be pleased with her) saying:

"No ‏ما خخ افلم‎ be taken from a property until a year passes on it”

(Related by Tbn Majah, and At-Tirmidhi has related its meaning
as well)’,

Chapter 1: Zakiths Legaltty and Virtue 333

This is concerning what does not isstie from the land as grains and fruits,
However, as for what is produced from the land, Zakdis is entailed upon it
whenever it exists. Thus, the lapse of a year is irrelevant for it, whereas the
completion of a year remains stipulated with regard to money, cattle and
trading commodities, as a kind of leniency toward the owner in order that the
property can grow.

As for the offspring of cattle liable to Zakdh and the profit gained in trade,
the lapse of the year is to be counted with regard to the original capital. Thus,
itis not necessary that a complete year passes on the offspring of cattle or'the
profit if their original capital has reached the nisab. IFit has not, the year is to
be estimated from the time they complete the nisab,

‘As for the creditor of an insolvent person, the creditor is to pay the due
Zakih of the debt when he receives it in case the debt has remained for a whole
year with the indebted, This is according to the soundest opinion wf scholars.
However, when being the creditor of a rich solvent person, the creditor is to
pay Zakah due upon this property each year

Moreover, no Zakih is due upon any property set for possession or usage
such as one’s dwelling house, clothes, the furniture, the vehicles and the animals
prepared for riding and usage. As for what is set for rent as vehicles, stores and
houses, no Zakah is due upon its original capital but Zakah is due upon the
rent paid for such a property if it reaches the nistb alone or by adding it to
another estate and a complete year lapses.

As for the one upon whom Zak@h is obligatory and he dies before paying
it, it must be paid from his inheritance and is not annulled by his death. This
is because Allah's Messenger (PBUH) says

'. Allah’ debts have more right to be paid.”
(Related by Al-Bukhari, Muslim and other compilers of Hadith)’

The inheritor or others are to pay it from the inheritance of the deceased
because it is a due right and it is not annulled by death, Furthermore, it is a
debt obligatory upon the deceased and he must be absolved from it,

324 ‏بالا‎ ZAKAH
Endnotes

 Al-Bukhri (1399) [3/331] and Musi (124) 1/50}

2 Al-Bukhari (8) [1/69] and Muslim (311) [1/128}

3 Alumad (17954) [4/231] and AL-Titimidh (2330) [4/562], See also Muslim (6535) [9/357],
Abunad (7205) [2/236], (8986) {2/387] and At-Tirmidhi (2034) (4/376),

4 Lis permissible to give Zakatul-Fifr(Fast-breaking Zakah) any time during the month
of Ramad:

5 Al-Bukhari (1395) [3/330] and Muslim (121) [1/146}

6 Nisa: The minimum amount upon which Zakdh is ‏عمل‎

7 Mukatab: A slave who has concluded a conteact with his/her master to pay him a
certain ransom for his/her freedom

‎Tn Majah (1792) |2/373] and At-Tirmidhi (630,631) [3/25,26].‏ قا

‎9 Al-Dukhari (1953) [4/245] and Muslim (2688) [4/266]. See also Al-Bubhatt (7

Zakéh: Grazing Animals
and Livestock

Among the properties upon which Allah has imposed Zakah, are the
grazing animals and livestock, namely camels, cows and sheep. Moreover, it is
foremostamong the properties dictating the payment of Zakah. Many recurrent
sahils (authentic) hadiths of the Prophet (PBUH) indicate paying Zakah with
respect to the grazing animals and livestock. His messages concerning it as
well as the messages of his caliphs are well-known and famous in illustrating
its enjoined rules. The Prophet (PBUH) also sent the collectors of Zakah to
collect it from the Arab tribes around Medina and other places all along the
stretch of the Muslim lands.

Thus, Zakah is obligatory in case of camels, cows and sheep on two conditions:

The first condition: They must be used for producing milk and for
reproduction, not for toil, because in the former case their benefits multiply

326 Uk: 2aKAH

and they thrive by growing big and giving offspring, so they can provide
sustenance to others.

The second condition: They must be grazing livestock (ie. feed on
herbage in a field or on pastureland), on account of the hadith af Allah's
Messenger (PBUH) in which he says:

‘Concerning the (grazing) livestock, a two- year-old she-camel is to
be paid (as Zakah) on every forty camels.”

(Related by Ahmad, Abi Dawid and An-Nasii)’

‘Thus, the livestock must be grazing, as no Zakah is due upon animals that
are fed with fodder bought for them or picked from herbage or another place;
hat is in case they are fed throughout the year or most of it.

First: Zakéh Due on Camels

Ithese conditions are fulfilled, a sheep is to be given as Zakah for every
five camels, two sheep in case they are ten camels, three in case they are fifteen
camels and four in case they are twenty camels, as indicated by the Sunnah
(Prophetic Tradition) and the consensus of Muslim scholars,

In case the number of the camels reaches twenty-five camels, a one-year-
old she-camel is to be given as Zakah, ‏هآ‎ this age, its mother most probably
becomes pregnant; nevertheless, the mother’s pregnancy is not a condition. If
there is not a one-year-old she-camel, a two-year-old male camel may serve
instead of it This is based on the hadith narrated by Anas on the authority of
‘Aba Bakr (may Allah be pleased with him) in which he says:

" .. If there is not a she-camel in its second year, so.a two-year-old
hhe-camel (is to be paid as Zakih).”

(Related by Aba Dawad)"

If the number of camels reaches thirty-six, a two-year-old she-camel (the
offspring of a milch she-camel) is to be given as Zakah. This is based on the
hadith narrated by Anas on the authority of Aba Bakr concerning Zakdh, in
which he says:

“lf the number of the camels is from thirty-six to forty-five, one
two-year-old she-camel is to be paid”

‘This is indicated by the consensus of Muslin scholars. The two-year-old
she-camel is the offspring of a milch she-camel and it is named so because its
mother most probably has delivered its baby and has become a milch camel.
Still, itis not a condition that its mother be a milch camel but itis a prevalent
definition for it.

Chapter 2: Zakihy Griving Animalsand Liverock. 307

Ifthe camels reach forty-six, a three-year-old she-camel is to be given as
Zakih. By attaining such age, it becomes mature enough to be fertilized by the
male, to carry loads and to be ridden.

If the camels reach sixty-one, a four-year-old she-camel is to be given as
Zakéh. When the camel reaches this age, its teeth begin to fall. This is due to
what is related in Sahih ALBukhéri (Al-Bukhdris Authentic Book of Hadith)
from the hadith of Allah's Messenger (PBUH) which reads:

“ff the camels are from sixty-one to seventy-five, one she-camel in
its fifth year is to be given (as Zakah).”"

Moreover, Muslim scholars have unanimously agreed upon that.

If the number of camels reaches seventy-six, two she-camels of two-year:
old (the offspring of a milch she-camel) are to be given as Zakah, ‘This is based
on the saltih (authentic) hadith in which Allah's Messenger (PBUH) says:

“lf the number is from seventy-six to ninety (camels), wo she-
camels in their third year are to be given (as Zakal).

If the camels reach ninety-one, two three-year-old she-camels are to be
paid as Zakah. This comes from the sahih (authentic) laadith which says:

“df they are from ninety-one to one hundred and twenty (camels),
two she-camels in their fourth year are to be given (as Zakah).”

Inaddition, Muslim scholars have unanimously agreed upon that,

if the number of camels surpasses one hundred and twenty, three two-
‘year-old she-camels (the offspring of a milch she-camel) are to be given as
Zakah. This is based on the hadith the Prophet (PBUH) wrote concerning
Zakah, and which says:

“lf they are over one-hundred and-twenty (camels), for every forty
«two-year-old she-camel is ‏ما‎ be paid: or for every fifty camels a
three-year-old she-camel is to be given (as Zakah)”

Second: Zakah Due on Cows

As for cows, Zakah isto be paid according to legal texts and the consensus
of Muslim scholars. It is related in the Two Sahihs that Jabir narrated;

“Theard Allahis Messenger (PBUH) saying, ‘No owner of camels, ot
cattle or sheep and goats, who does not pay the due Zakah but these
(camels, cattle, sheep and goats) will come on the Day of Resurrection

328 UN: ZAKAH

having more flesh and will gore him with their horns and trample on
him with their hooves’

‘Moreover, Mu'adh (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“When the Prophet (PBUH) sett me to Yemen, he ordered me lo
take a one-year-old male or a female calf or every thirty cows, and
(also to take) a two year-old cow for every forty.”

(Related by Ahmad and At‘Tirmidthi)’

So, if the number of the cows reaches thirty, a male or female one-year-old
calf is to be given as Zakas. Nothing is due in what is less than thirty cows,
according to the hadith narrated by Mu’ adh (may Allah be pleased with him)
who said

“When Allah’ Messenger (PBUH) sent me to Yemen (to collect

Zaki), he ordered me not to take anything (as Zakah) for cows
ustil they reach thirty (in meniber).”

If the number of caws reaches forty, a two-year-old cow is to be given as
Zakih, This is also according to the hadith narrated by Mu’adh (may Allah be
pleased with him) who said,

“The Prophet (PBUH) sent me to Yemen (to collect Zakah) and
ordered me to take a one-year-old male or a female calf for every
thirty cows, and (also to take) a two-year-old cow for every forty.”

(Related by the Five Compilers of Hadith and deemed
(authentic) by Thn Hibban and Al-Hakim)’

IF the number of cows surpasses forty, a one-year-old calfis to be given as
‏العامة‎ for every thirty cows, or a two-year-old cow for every forty.

Third: Zakah Due on Sheep

Giving Zakah from sheep is obligatory according to the Surmah (Prophetic
{radition) and the consensus of Muslin scholars. In the Two Sahihs, Anas
narrated that Abd Bakr (may Allah be pleased with him) wrote to him saying:

“These are the orders for Zakah which Allal’s Messenger (PBUH)
had made obligatory for Muslims, and which Allah had ordered
His Messenger to observe..."

Chapter 2: Zakéhe Grazing ‏نمه علمساما‎ Livesock 324

He added:

*..As regards Zakah for the (flock of) sheep, if they are between
forty and one hundred and twenty sheep, one sheep is to be given
(as Zakah).”

If the number of sheep reaches forty (whether they are sheep or goats),
‘one sheep (or goat) is to be given as Zakah. It must be a six-month old sheep
in case of sheep, or one-year-old goat in case of goats. Thisis uccording to the
hadith narrated by Suwayd Ibn Ghaflah who said:

“The collector of Zakah sent by Allahis Messenger (PBUH) came
ta us and said, ‘We are ordered (by the Prophet) to take from what
completed six months of age of sheep: and to take what completed
one year old of goats."

‘No Zakdlt is to be taken from sheep if the number is less than forty. This ls
based on the hadith of Aba Bakr (may Allah be pleased with him), related in
Sahil Al-Bukhari (AL-Bukharis Authentic Book of Hadith), which says:

“I somebody Has got less than forty sheep, no Zakh is required, but
ifthe owner wants to give anything in charity, ke can”
1 ‏غطا‎ number of sheep reaches one hundred and twenty one, two sheep are
to be given as Zakih, based on the hadith of Abd Bakr (may Allaly be pleased
with him) that has been mentioned before, which says:

°..lf the (number of) sheep is over one hundred and twenty, two
sheep are due (as Zakah).”
If their number reaches two hundred and one, then three sheep are to be

given as Zakah. This is also based on the hadith of Abii Bakr (may Allah be
pleased with him), which says:

“If they are aver two hundred, three sheep are due.”

After that number of sheep, the due number to be given as Zakah in sheep
is fixed. Thus, one sheep is to be given as Zakah for every hundred sheep. So,
lor every four hundred sheep, four sheep are to be given as Zakah; for every
five hundred sheep, five sheep are to be given as Zakah; for every six hundred
sheep, six sheep are to be given as Zakih and so forth. Tl is stated in the book
of Zakah, which AbG Bakr (may Allah be pleased with him) acted according
fo until he died and so did “Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) until he
died, that:

330, (Wh: ZAKAM

"As regards the (flock of) sheep, for every forty sheep up to one
Iuundred and twenty, one sheep is due (as Zakah). If the (number
of) sheep is over that up to two hundred, two sheep are due. But if
they are over two hundred by only one sheep, three sheep are due
up to three hundred. If they surpass three hundred, na Zakéh is to
be paid until they reach four hundred), If the number of sheep is
cover that (four hundred), then one sheep is to be given as Zakah for
every hundred sheep.”

(Related by the Five Compilers of Hadith except An-Nasa't)'"

Furthermore, an old sheep is not to be accepted as Zakiih, nor a defective
one which is not fit asa sacrificial animal except if all the sheep are the same,
Moreover, the pregnant one is not to be accepted, nor the one that suckles its
baby, nor the one fitting to be fertilized by the male because in most cases it
becomes pregnant. This is based on the hadith of Abd Bakr (may Allah be
pleased with him) related in Sahil: AI-Bukhdri (Al-Bukhdris Authentic Book of
Hadith), which says:

“..Neither an old nor a defective animal nor a male-goat is to be
taken as Zakah except if the collector of Zakah wishes (to take it)?”

‘Moreover, Allah, the Exalted, says:

“,,And do not aim toward the defective therefrom, spending

[fom that)...” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah; 267)
Furthermore, Allah's Messenger (PBUH) said:

‘...But ont should give animals of medium quality, for Allah does not

demand from you the best of your animals, nor does He command
you to give the animals of worst quality”

‘The best animal, which is the most precious to its owner, is not ta be taken
‏عق‎ Zakah, Also, the animal that eats much, which is either fat and is prepared
for eating, or the one marked by gluttony and graws fat because of it, is not to
be taken as Zakah. Allah's Messenger (PBUH) said to Mu’adh Ibn Jabal (may
Allah be pleased with him) when he sent him to Yemen:

‘Avoid taking the best of their properties.”
(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

In charities, what is to be taken is the property of medium quality as stated
by the Prophet (PBUH);

Chapter ‏عد‎ Zak Grazing Animals ancl Livesock 31

"...But one should give animals of medium quality."

Thus, a sick artimal is to be taken from among a ‏طفونه‎ '* that is all sick,
because Zakah is ordained to provide sustenance to others, and obliging
one to give a sound one out of the sick group is unfair to the one giving
Zakéh, In addition, a youngster is to be taken from among a nisdb that is
all young, especially from the sheep. Yet, if the proprietor desires to give
better than that enjoined upon him, it will certainly be better and greater
in reward for him,

Ifthe property isa mixture of grown-up and young, sound and defective,
or male and female animals, a sound grown-up female is to be taken based
on estimating the value of the superior and inferior divisions of the property.
Firstly, the superior part of the property is to he estimated to know what
should be taken as Zakah and the same is to be done with regard to the
inferior part. After that, the due Zakdl is to be taken justly on an average
basis from among the whole property. The same ‏كذ‎ to be applied with respect
to the other types of sound and defective, or male and female sheep. So, if
the value of Zakah that is to be given is twenty sheep, in case the whole nisab
‏كز‎ of grown-up sound sheep; and its value is ten in case the nisab is of young
sick sheep, then the given Zakah is to be one half of thatand one half of that.
‘Thus, fifteen sheep are to be given as Zakah.

Among the objects of research in Zakih of grazing livestock are the rules
of partnership; when the sum of the mixed livestock is shared between two
persons or more. Such partnership is of two types:

‘The first type: The mixed partnership in which the property is common
and shared between the owners and the property of one of them is not
distinguished from the other’. In this case, one of them may own half
the livestock, its quarter or the like

The second type: The determinate partnership; where each one has a
known, distinguished share, yet their properties are adjacent. Each
of the two kinds of partnerships influences Zakali positively or by
deduction, augments it or lessens it.

Partnership with its two types renders the two-shared properties as
‘one, but with conditions:

‘The first condition: The suin equals the nisab. I'itis less than the nisib,
nothing is to be taken from it, The sum must equal the nisab, even if
what each of the owners possesses is less than the nisab,

3 ‏:اذا‎ ZAKAH

The second condition: The two partners ate from the people upon
whom Zakah is rightfully enjoined, Ifone of them is not from amongst
those people (a disheliever for example), then the partnership will be
irrelevant and each share will he subject to its own rules,

The third condition: ‘The two properties share the same shelter or
lodging, and share the same yard where they are gathered to go to the
pasturage. Moreover, they must share the same place of milking, I
one of the partners milks his livestock in a place and the other milks
his own in another place, then the partnership will be irrelevant with
regard lo Zakah, In addition, the two-shared properties must share
the same male animal which fertilizes them all, Also, both properties
must graze in the same pasturage. If the pasturage differs and one
partner's share grazes in a place other than the place where his partner
herds his own livestock, then the partnership will be irrelevant with
regard to Zaki,

IF these conditions are fulfilled, the two-shared properties are deemed as
one. This is based on the hadith of the Prophet (PBUH) in which he said:

“Neither the property of different people may be taken together nor
the joint property may be split for fear of (giving more, or receiving
less) Zakih.”

(Related by At-Tirmidthi, Abti Dawéd, and fbn Majah, and deemed
a hasan (good) hadith by At-Tirmidthi)

Ifa person owns one sheep while the other owns thirty-nine, or ifforty men
‘own forty sheep, a sheep for each, and they remain partners for a whole year
with the fulfillment of the aforementioned conditions, then only one sheep is,
due-as Zakah for their joint property, In the first case, the owner of the sheep
is to give one-fortieth (2.5%) of the sheep as Zakith, and the rest (97.5%) are to
be given by the owner of the thirty-nine sheep. In the second case, each of the
forty men is to give 2.5% of the sheep as Zakah. Also, if three men possess one
hundred and twenty sheep, where each of them owns forty, all of them are to
give one sheep as Zakah, one third each,

As partnership ‘influences the amount of Zakih the way explained
previously, division also may influence the amount of Zakdh, according to
the opinion of Imam Ahmad. Thus, if the grazing livestock of a person is
separated, where every part is removed from the other a distance that entails
shortening prayer, then each part is to be subjected to its own rulings and it

Chapter 2: Zaki: Grazing Animals and Livesock 333

will be unrelated to the other part of the property. If one part is equal ta the
nisdb, Zakéh is to be given from it. Fit is less than the nisab, nothing is to be
given as Zakah, Thus, no part is to be joined to the other, as stated by Imam
Ahmad. However, the majority of Muslim scholars are of the opinion that
division does not influence the property of a single person. One part is to be
added to the other in judgment, even if divided, This is the soundest opinion;
and Allah knows best.

Endnotes

1 Almad (19901) (5/2) (19921) [5/4J, Abd Dati (1575) [2/159] and An-Nasii (2443) [3/17]

2 Aba Dawad (1567) [2/146] and Al-Bukhiari (1448) [3/393].

3 Al-Bukchart (1454) (3/399).

4 AL-Bukhard (1454) [3/399].

5 Al-Bukhatf (1454) [3/399],

6 Muslim (2293) [4/72]. Al-Bukhari (1402) [3/338] and Muslim (287) (4/67),

7 At-Tirmidht (622) [3/20] and An-Nas4i (2449) [2/26].

8 At-Tirmidhi (622) [3/20] and An-Nastt (2449) [2/26].

‎Abit Dawid (1576) [2/160], AtTirmidhi (622) [3/20], An-Nasdj (2450) [2/26] and.tbn‏ و
‎‘Majah (1803) [2/382].‏

‎{0 Abii Dawid (1581) [2/163]. See also “Nasbur-Rayah” (2/354-355),

‎11 Aba Dawiid (1568) [2/154], At-Tirmidhi (620) [3/17] and ‏مطل‎ Majah (1805) [2/383]
See also An-Nasd'i (2446) [3/20] and Al-Bukharl (1454) [3/399],

‎12 AL-Bukhart (1455) [3/404].

‎13 Abt Dawad (1582) [2/164].

‎Nigab:‘The minimum amount upon which Zakah is due.‏ 4ل

‎15 Abii Dawid (1580) [2/162], An-Nasé'l (2456) (2/30), thn Majah (1801) (2/381) and
At-Tirmidhi (620) [3/17]. See also Al-Bukhari (1450) [3/395].

Zakah: Grains, Fruits, Honey,
Minerals and Rikaz

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“O you who have believed, spend from the good things which
you have earned and from that which We have produced for you
‘from the earth...” (Quran: Al-Bagarah: 267)

Zakih can be called spending (expenditure), as Allah, the Exalted, says:
“And those who hoard gold and silver and spend it not in the
Way of Allah - give them tidings of a painful punishment?

(Quran: At-Tawbah: 34)

‘The verse means that they do not give its due Zakah.

“The Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) has mentioned elaborately the command
to give Zakah on grains and fruits, and clarified its due amount. The Muslims

336 Ul: ZAKAH

have also unanimously agreed upon the dueness of giving it from wheat, barley,
dates, and raisins, Thus, Zakdh is to be given from all grains such as wheat,
barley, rice, millet and the rest of cereals. The Prophet (PBUH) said:

“No Zakah is due oi less than five wasqs' of grains or dates.”*
‘The Prophet (PBUH) also sai

“On a land irrigated by rainwater or by natural water channels or
if the land is wet due to a nearby water spring, one-tenth is to be
given (as Zakah).”

(Related by Al-Bukhari)*

Zakah is to be given from fruits such as dates, raisins, and their like from
amongst all the things that can be weighed and stored. Zakalt is only taken
from what reaches the nisdb. This is based on the marfa' (traceable) hadith
narrated by Abd Sa’id Al-Khudri (may Allah be pleased with him) saying that
the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“No Zakalt is to be paid on (a quantity) less than five wasqs.”
(Related by the Group of Compilers of Hadith)’

Itisstipulated in Zakdh given from grainsand fruits that the owner must
possess the nisab at the due time of giving Zakah, which is the appearance
of signs indicating ripeness of fruits, and the hardening of grains in plants.
Thus, there are two conditions which make Zakih obligatory to be given
from fruits and grains. First, the amount should reach the nisab according
to what 1s mentioned above. Second, the one giving Zakah possesses the
nisdb at the due time of giving Zakah, Therefore, if a person possesses the
ib later, he is not to give Zakah for it, as in the case of buying it, or
gaining it as wages in return of harvesting it, or having picked it up from
the leftover harvest.

‘The amount that is to be given as Zak@h of grains and fruits differs
according to the method of irrigation:

In case the land is irrigated without effort, but from floods and running
water, or in case of trees and plants that suck water through their roots, tenth
of the yield is to be given as Zakdh. This is according to the hadith related
in Sahih Muslim (Muslin’s Authentic Book of Hadith) on the authority of Yon.
“Umar who narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎Zakih: Grains, Fruits; Honey, Minerals and Rika 337‏ +3 عزوو

‎“Ona land irrigated by rainwater or by natural water channels or
if the land is wet due to. nearby spring, one-tenth is to be given
(as Zakah)”

‎Moreover, Imm Muslim relates on the authority of Jabir that the Prophet
(PBUH) says:

‎“One-tenth is payable (as Zakih) on the land irrigated by rivers,
or rain.”

‎In case of what is irrigated by exerting effort to bring water from wells
or other sources, one-twentieth (5%) is to be given as Zakah. This is based
on what the Prophet (PBUH) said in the hadith narrated by Ibn “Umar (may
Allah be pleased with him):

‎And on the land irrigated by the well, one-twentieth (5%) is to
bbe paid (as Zakah an the yicld of the land)"

‎(Related by Al-Bukhari)

‎Watering by the help of camels entails giving one-twentieth, as Imam
‘Muslim related on the authority of Jabir (may Allah be pleased with him) that
the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎"And a one-twentieth is to be paid (as Zakah) on what is irrigated
by camels”

‎‘The due time of giving Zakdh on grains is when they become ripeand hard,
and with regard to fruits, the due time is when they show signs of ripeness. Yet,
ifthe owner sells it afterwards, Zakdh will still be due upon him, not upon the
buyer. In addition, the grains are to be given as Zakah after sifting; that is, they
must be cleaned from hay and straw.

‎The fruits given as Zakdh should be dried because the Prophet
(PBUH) commanded estimating the grapes (for collecting Zakah) when
dried into raisins,’ thus Zakah for grapes is to be paid in raisins. ‘The
same is to be applied with regard to Zakah due upon dates, as itis to be
given in dried dates.

‎Zakdh is to given from honey if it is obtained from one’s own possession
or from uncultivated lands, like the tops of mountains as long as the honey
obtained reaches the nisab, The nisaly of honey is thirty ‏"ها فو‎ Thus, itis 65160
grams. The amount to be given as Zak4h in honey isa tenth of the yield.

338 Uk: ZAKAH

Zakih is ‏فا‎ be given (tom minerals, according to the Quranic verse in
which Allah, Exalted be He, says:

Spend from the good things, which you have earned, and
_from that which We have produced for you from the earth...”

(Qur'an; Al-Bagarah: 267)

A mine is place from where precious stones aré extracted. It is « profit
from the earth, thus it entails giving Zakah just as grains and fruits. If the
mineral is gold or silver, the due amount of Zakai is one-fortieth (2.5%), when
it reaches the nisdb or exceeds it. Regarding other minerals as kohl, arsenic,
sulfur, salt and petroleum, 2.5% of their value is to be given as Zakdh, if the
value reaches the nisab or exceeds it (after being) evaluated in gold or silver.

Zakih is also to be given from rikaz (buried wealth), which is the buried
wealth of the disbelievers from the Pre-Islamic Period of Ignorance (the
Jikiliyyah). It is named rikaz because it is deeply hidden under the ground,
as the word rikaz, in Arabic, indicates firmly implanting something into the
ground, Fifth of its amount is to be given as Zakih whether it is a small or a
large amount, as the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“One-fifth of the ri
(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)"

Tt could be known that rikaz belongs to the disbelievers by having their
signs on it like the names of their kings, crosses or any other sign that indicates
being of non-Muslim origins. So, after the fifth of itis given as 2014/1, the rest
16 to go to the one who has found it. However, ifthe buried wealth carries any
sign indicating the ownership of Muslims, or it carries no sign at all, then it is
to be judged by the same rulings on a finding.

Whatis taken as Zakdh from the rikdz (buried wealth) is to be spent in the
interest of Muslims as in the case of the war booty.

‎to be given to the Public Treasury”‏ وا

‎According ta the aforementioned, itis clear that Zakdh of what is produced
from the earth comprises several kinds:

‎+ Grains and fruits

‎+ Minerals with its different kinds

‎+ Honey (which is formed in mountain beehives)
+ Rikaz

Chaprer 3: Zekith: Grains, Fruits, Honey, Minerals and ‏جسن‎ 339

All these kinds fall under what Allah, Exalted be He, says:

«Spend from the good things which you have earned and from
that which We have produced for you from the earth...”

(Qur'in: Al-Bagarah: 267)
And the verse:

“And give its due [Zakah] on the day of its harvest...”
(Qur'an: Al-An’am: 141)

Zakéh is only obligatory on what is weighed and stored of grains and
fruits. As for what is not weighed and stored, it does not entail giving Zakah,
like walnut, apple, peach, quince, and pomegranate, The same applies to the
rest of vegetables and legumes, like radish, garlic, onion, carrot, watermelon,
cucumber, eggplants and the like, This is based on the marfit’ (traceable)
hadith of "Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) who narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“No Zakah is due on vegetables."
(Related by Ad-Daraqutni)*
Moreover, Allah's Messenger (PBUH) said:
“No Zaki is to be patd on (a quantity) less than five wasys.”

Thus, measuring. is considered in what entails giving Zakah, which
indicates that Zakah is not to be given from what is neither measured nor
stored. In addition, the fact that the Prophet (PBUH) and his Caliphs used
not to collect Zakah forsuch kinds of plants, though they were cultivated near
them, serves as evidence that Zakah is not to be taken from these plants. ‘has
means that abstaining from taking Zakdl from such plants is the followed
Sunnah. Imam Abmad said:

“What resembles cucumber, onion, and basils (in being not measured
tor stored) does not entail giving Zakah, except when it is sold and
ten a year lapses on its price”

M0 Mi: ZAKAH
Endnotes

1 Wasi A standard measure that equals 130320 geams.

2 Muslin (2261) [4/55], See dso AT-Bukharl (1459) [3/406},

3 AL-Bukhari (1483) (3/437).

4 Ab-Bulkhart (1405) [3/342), Muslim (2260) [4/52], Aba Dawid (/558) [2/142], ‏عام‎
‎‘Virmidhi (625) (3/22), An-Nasali (2444) [2/18] and Tbn Majah (1793) [2/374],

5 Muslim (2269) [4/57).

8 Aba Dawid (1603) [2/175]. At-Tiemidhi (643) [3/36], AnyNasa’i (2617) (3/115) and
Thn Majah (1819) [2/390]

A standard measure that equals 2172 grams.

8 Al-Bakhari (6912) [12/317] and Muslim (444) [6/222|

‎Ad-Daraqutni (1890) [2/81] and At-Tirmidhi (637) [3/30].‏ ف

Zakéh: Gold and Silver

The rulings on Zakah of gold and silver are also applied with regard to
What is derived from them such as money, jewels, ingots and the like,

er is the Qur‘n, the
xalted be He, says:

‘The proof of the legality of Zakah on gold and si
Sunnah, and the consensus of Muslim scholars. Allah,

“.. Those who hoard gold and silver and spend it not in the Way
of Allah - give them tidings of a painful punishment ...”

(Qur'an: At-Tawbah: 34)

In this Noble Quranic verse there is a hard warning of painful torture to
those who refrain from giving Zakah due on gold and silver.

In the Two Sakihs, itis related that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Ifany owner of gold or silver does not pay what is due on him, when
the Day of Resurrection comes, it (the gold or the silver) will be turned
into plates of fire for him (and he will be punished with them)."

22 ill: ‏امامت‎

All Muslim scholars have unanimously agreed that what is meant by
“hoarding” in the Noble Qur'an and the hadith is things piled up together whether
buried on the face of the earth or not. ‘These things entail giving Zakah but it
‘was not given, If the due Zaki is paid, then itis not considered hoarding,

Zakéh is to be given in gold when it reaches twenty mithgals’. Thus, the
nisab of gold is 85 grams. With regard to silver, the nisab of silver is 200 dirhams
which equals 595 grams of silver,’ whether these dirhams are coined or not.
The due amount of Zakah in gold and silver is one-fortieth (2.5%).. This is
‘based on the marfit’ (traceable) hadith of Ibn “Umar and ‘Aishah (may Allah
be pleased with them) who said:

“The Prophet (PBUH) used to take halfa dinar’ as Zakah from the
property that reached twenty dinars and upward,”

(Related by Ibn Majah)”

In addition, Anas (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“One-fortieth (i.e. 2.5%) is to be taken from pure silver (as Zakah),”
(Related by Al-Bukhari)"”

What is Permitted for Men to Wear of Gold and Silver

Men are allowed to wear a silver ring, as the Prophet (PBUH) used to wear
asilver ring, and this is related by Al-Bukhaet and Muslim’. However, men are
prohibited from wearing golden rings, as the Prophet (PBUH) prohibited men
from adorning themselves with gold”. The Prophet (PBUH) expressed a hard
warning to the one who does it, by saying:

“The one of you takes live coal from the Hellfire and puts if on
his hand.”

Yet, men are allowed to wear gold when necessary, like using gold asan
artificial nose of in orthodontics. This is because the nose of " Arfajah Ibn
As‘ad (may Allah be pleased with him) was cut on the Battle of Al-Kulab
(a battle that (ook place in the Pre-Tslamic Period of Ignorance). So, he
used a nose made of silver, bul it caused a stench, so the Prophet (PBUH)
ordered him to get a gold nose, (Related by Abi’ Dawid and Al-Hakim
who deemed it sahih, i, authentic)”

Chapter 4: Zakéli Gold and Silver 343

What is Permitted for Women to Wear of Gold and Silver

Women are allowed to wear gold and silver in whatever way they are
accustomed to, as the Lawgiver permitted adomment to them absolutely, The
Prophet (PBUH) said

“Gold and silk are made lawful to the fernales of my nation while
made unlawful to the males.”

(Related by Ahmad, Abii Dawdid, At-Tirmidthi and An-Nas@)"’

This hadith indicates that it is permissible for women to adorn themselves
with gold and silver, Moreover, Muslim scholars have unanimously agreed
upon this.

‘No Zakah is to be given from the golden and silver jewelry of women if used.
for ornaments or lending, This is according to what the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“No Zakah is due on jewels used for ornament.’

(Related by At-Tabardni, on the authority of Jabir, with a weak chain
of transmitters)

However, what supports this hadith is the fact that it was adopted and
Mustims have acted according to it, and was also adopted by a group of the
Prophet's Companions, among whom were: Anas, Jabir, ‘Aishah, and Asma!
(Xishahs sister) (may Allah be pleased with them all), Imam Abmad said,

This opinion ts adopted by five from amongst the Companions of the Prophet
(PBUH).’" Moreover, using gold for adornment is not an act of investment
but a lawful act that resembles wearing a suit, having servants, and possessing
houses for dwelling.

Ifthe jewelry is set to be used for the purposes of renting, spending (in case
of need), possessing, saving, or is meant for any purposes other than those
of using and lending, then it is subject to the original ruling of giving Zakah
and Zakdh is to be observed in it. This is because gold and silver entail giving
Zakdh. Zakth is not due on them only when they are used for ornaments and
lending. Other than that, the original suim is subject to paying the due Zakah
when it reaches the misah" separately, or by adding it to another part of the
property, In case the jewelry does not reach the nisab, and it is not possible to
add it to another property, then it does not entail giving Zakah exept when it
is set for trading; in this case, its value is subject to paying Zakith.

344 ‏بللا‎ ZAKAH

The Ruling on Plating Walls and Other Stuff with Gold or
Silver and Using Utensils Made of Any of Them

It is prohibited ‏ما‎ plate a ceiling or a wall with sliver or gold, or to plate
a vehicle or its keys with them, All this is prohibited for a Muslim. Itis also
prohibited to plate a pen or an inkwell with gold or sliver, because all this is
considered signs of extravagance and vanity. Moreover, it is prohibited ‏ما‎ use
utensils made of gold or silver, or to plate utensils with them. The Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“He who drinks in a vessel of gold or silver is only filling his abdomen
‘with Hellfire.”

In addition, there is a hard warning to those men who wear golden rings,
but regretfully, some Muslim men wear golden rings, paying no heed ta the
warning, or are ignorant of it. Such men should repent to Allsh for wearing
golden adornments, and be content with wearing the sliver ring, which Allah
has permitted, for doing what is lawful suffices instead of doing what is
prohibited. Allah, Exalted be He, says

*s..And whoever fears Allah - He will make for him a way out
- and will provide for him from where he does not expect. And
whoever relies upon Allah - then He is sufficient for him. Indeed,
Allah will accomplish His purpose, Allah has already set for
everything a [decreed] extent.” (Qur'in: At-Talig: 2-3)

We ask Allah to grant us all guidance fo His Religion, adherence to His
Divine Lay, and sincerity in worship.

Endnotes

1 Muslim (2287) [4/67]: see also Al-Rukhart (1402) [3/338].
2 Mithgal: A standard measiure that equals 4.25 grants

3 4 dirham of silver equals 2.975 grams of silver,

4 Dinar: An old Arab coin that equals 2.975 grams of gold,
5 Ibn Majah (1791) [2/373]

6 Al-Bokhart (1454) [3/399]

7 Al-Bukhar’ (65) [1/208] and Mustim (5447) [7/295)

8 AL-Bukhar’ (5863) [10/388],

9 Muslim (2090)

Chapter 4: ‏لفاس‎ Gold and Silver Ma

110 Aba Dawid (4232) (4/279), At-Tiemitdhi (1774) [4/240] and An-Nasali (5176) [4/543]-

[1 Aba Dawad (4057) [4/214], An-Nasa't (5159) (4/540) and ‏دخا‎ Majah (3595) [4/157]
See also An-Nasd'i (5163) [4/540] and At-Tirmidhi (1720) [4/217].

12 Ad-Daraqutnt (1937) [2/92]; see also "Nasbur-Rayaht” (2/374-375]

13 Abdur-Razziq in his “Musannaf’ [4/81-86], bn AbO Shaybah in his “Musca”
[2/383-384] and Al-Bayhagi in his "Suman" [4/232-234)

14 Nisa: The minimum amount upon which Zakalris due.

Zakéh: Trade Goods

‘Trade goods refer to anything allocated for trading purposes with the aim
of making profit. Zakah on trade goods is obligatory according to the Qur’an,
the Sunniah and consensus. Allah says:

“Take, [O Muhammad], from their wealth a charity by which
you purify them and cause them increase...”

(Qur'an: At-Tawbah: 103)
Allah, Exalted be He, also says:

“And those within whose wealth is a known right.
tioner and the deprived...” (Qur'an: Al-Ma’ rij: 24-25)

‘The major part of trade goods constitutes the majority of assets (or
property), and that is why they are implied, with greater reason, in the general
meanings of the verses related thereof.

2 1

Moreover, it is related by Abd Dawid un the authority of Samurah
who said:

“The Prophet (PBUH) used tw order us ta pay Zakah on what we
prepare for trade."

In general, because trade goods are growing money, they entail paying
Zakih, just as grazing livestock.

Furthermore, there is more than one narration onthe consensus of Muslim
scholars on the obligation of paying Zakah by any Muslim who possesses trade
goods for a whole lunar year.

In this regard, Shaykhul-Islim Ibn Taymiyah said

“The Four limduns, together with the entire body of Muslim scholars
except few individual scholars, unanimously agree that it is
obligatory to give Zakah on trade goods. ‘This ruling applies to any
merchant, whether resident or traveling, a monopolist merchant
(the one who buys trade goods at times of price fall and sells them
when prices are high) or a shopkeeper. It also applies to any type
of goods such as clothes (brand new or second-hand); food (c.g
grains, fruit, and any edible matter): utensils such as pottery and
the like; or any types of animals including horses, mules, donkeys,
sheep, etc. Generally, while merchandise represents the majority of
people’ non-observable properties, cattle represent the majority of
their observable properties.”

However, Zakih on trade goods becomes obligatory only under the following
four conditions:

First: The owner has acquired this property by doing some act such as
transactions, gifting, bequeathing, renting, or other means of acquisition.

Second: The owner intends to use trade goods for trade and profit. Since
the correctness and rewards of deeds depend upon intentions, so
trade, like any other act, is to be associated by an intention.

‘Third: The value of trade goods must reach the nisdb evaluated in gold
or silver.

Fourth: A junar year must lapse upon the nisab, for the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“No Zakah is due upon property until one year has passed,”

Chaprer 5: Zakah: ‏علس"‎ Goods M9

However, if the owner buys trade goods against a monetary currency equal
to the nigdb or buys them for other trade goods equal to the nisab, the year af
the goods possession is to be counted with regard to the property he bought
the trade goods with,

The Estimation of Zakah on Trade Goods

Zaki on trade goods is tobe appraised at the completion of the lunar year
(When the value of one’s trade goods amounts to the ttisdb) by either gold or
sityer. When appraising the value of the nisdb, it should be appraised according
to the value that will be more useful to the poor. Then, fortieth (2.5%) of the
value is to be paid, ircespective of any amount of money that has been used
for buying trade goods; however, what is to be taken in consideration is the
value of trade goods at the completion of the year. This is to observe justice
regarding both the merchant and the recipients of Zakah.

‘A Muslim is to pursue accuracy and scrutiny while reckoning the payable
amount of Zakah, simulating in the process the way a miser would reckon with
his partner. Thus, all types of trade goods owned by ‏د‎ Muslim must be valued
in a just way. A shopkeeper, for instance, is to estimate the value of all kinds
oF goods he has such as canned foods and the like. Similarly, an automobile or
spare-parts seller is to value all his objects. An owner of real estate who has put
his property up for sale should likewise value this property and pay Zakah due
onit. However, any property set for renting, such as buildings and automobiles,
does not entail giving Zakah. Rather, Zakalis due on the revenue if it amounts
to the ‏فقوتم‎ when a complete lunar year passes on it

Furthermore, houses and automobiles intended for personal usage (i.e.
living and transport, respectively) do not entail Zakah, fn the same way, house
furniture as well as store furnishings and tools of the merchant, such as cubits,
measures, scales, perfume vessels and suchlike things, do not entail giving
Zakéh, as they are not intended for trade.

A Muslim ought to give Zakith wholeheartedly, seeking thereby the Diyine
reward, A Muslim should also realize that Zakah will bring him gain in this
world and in the Hereafter, and he should not regard what he gives as Zakalt
asa loss by any way, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And among the Bedouins aresome who consider what they spend
as a loss and await for your turns of misfortune. Upon them will
be a misfortune of evil. And Allah is Hearing and Knowing, But
‘among the Bedouins are same who believe in Allah and the Last

350 Uk ZakAN

Day and consider what they spend as means of nearness to Allah
and of [obtaining] invocations of the Messenger, Unquestionably,
it is a means of nearness for them. Allah will admit them to His
mercy. Indeed, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful?”

(Quran: At-Tawbah: 98-99)

Each of the two parties mentioned in the aforementioned Quranic verse
gives Zakih, Yet, they are treated differently by Allah, according to the intention
of each group. The first group includes those who give Zakéh considering ita
lossand taking ita screen to hide theirill will toward Muslims. They wait for an
occasion when Muslims are stricken by misfortunes to take revenge on them.
However, upon them will be a misfortune of evil, and they have been deprived
of Allah’s reward and have lost the money they have given as Zakah, On the
other hand, those believers who give Zakdh to draw near to Allah indeed will
receive a far much valuable reward from Allah in compensation for their good
intentions of giving Zakdh. In this respect, Allah says:

“,.Unquestionably, itis a means of nearness for them. Allah will
‘admit thent to His mercy...” (Qur'an: At-Tawbah: 99)

All Muslims thus onght to fear Allah and reflect on such sublime meanings
as those indicated by the following Qur’anic verse:

nd Toan Allah a goodly loan. And whatever good you put
forward for yourselves you will find it with Allah. Itis better and
greater in reward. And seek forgiveness of Allah, Indeed, Allah is
Forgiving and Merciful.” (Qur'an: Al-Muzzammil: 20)

Endnotes

1 Abd Dawiid (1562) [2/1451
2 See: “Maja” ul-Fatawa” (25/15,45),

Zakdatul-Fitr
(Fast-Breaking Zakdah)

Zakétul-Fitr is an obligatory charity to be paid by the end of Ramadan.
Hence, the term is a causative one, as Fir (breaking the fast) is the cause for
Zakah to be given. Zakatul-Fitr is obligatory according to the Qur'an, the
Sunnah and the consensus of Muslim scholars,

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“He has certainly succeeded who purifies himself...”
(Quran:

1-A*Ta: 14)

Some of the scholars of the Salaf (early Muslim scholars) view that the word
‘purifies’ in this verse refers to giving Zakatul-Fitr: Moreover, the obligation of
giving Zakdtul-Fitr is to be understood from the general meaning of the divine
command: “..and give Zakah...” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 43) Furthermore,

352 ‏ناا‎ 24K

there are many hadiths and narrations stating, the obligation of Zakdtul-
Fitr. There is a hadith related in the Two Sabihs' and other books of Hadith
stating:

“Allaits Messenger (PBUH) enjoined Zakatul-Fitr to be paid with
one si” of dates or one sa of barley on every Muslim, free or slave,
male or female, young or ol

In addition, many Muslim scholars have confirmed the unanimous
agreement on the obligation of Zakiitul-Fitr.

‘As for the wisdom lying behind the obligation of Zakdtul-Fitr, it purifies the
Muslim who has performed fasting from any traces of ill speech or obscenity;
it provides sustenance for the poor; and it acts as an expression of gratitude to
Allah for enabling the Muslim to complete the fast of Ramadan.

Zakatul-Fitris obligatory upon every Muslim, male or female, old or young,
slave or free, according to the above-mentioned narration on the authority of
Ibn ‘Umar stating:

“Allah's Messenger (PBUH) enjoined Zakatul-Fitr to be paid on
every Muslim, free or slave, male or female, young or old.”

‘The previously mentioned narration demonstrates that the quantity of
Zakéh is to be one sd’, As for its quality, it is to be taken from the ordinary
food of the area where Zakalis given, be this food wheat, barley, dates, raisins,
cheese, or whatever is considered the ordinary food of the area, such as rice
and cor, which may differ {rom one region to another,

Concerning the time of paying Zakdtul-Fifr, the Prophet (PBUH) ordered
the people to give it before going to the Feast Prayer’ andit is more desirable to be
given within the time extending between the sunset of the Feast ('Jd) Vigil and the
Feast Prayer. However, itis permissible to give Zakatul-Fitr one or two days before
the Feast Prayer’, Imam Al-Bukhart (may Allah have mercy on him) has related
on the authority of ‏مدا‎ " Umar that the Companions of the Prophet (PBUH) used
to give Zakatul-Fitr one or two days before the Beast (‘Id) Prayer, which indicates
that the Companions have unanimously agreed upon this. Yet, the most desirable
time to give Zakatul-Fitr is on the Day of the Feast (Id), before the Feast Prayer,
However, if the Feast Prayer is performed before one gives Zakatul-Fitr, one is
still required to make up for it after the Feast Prayer. This is based on the hadith
‘narrated by Ibn ‘Abbas that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“If anyorie pays it (Zakatul-Fitr) before the Feast Prayer, it will he
‘accepted as Zakah; and if anyone pays it after prayer, it will be
considered a charity like other charities.”

Chapter 6° ‏جو ةاعلسغاسة‎ (Fast-breaking Zakib) 353

Hence, the Muslim who postpones giving Zakatul-Fitr has committed
sin for violating the Prophet's order.

A Muslim is to give Zakatul-Fitr on behalf of himself as well as on behalf
of every person he supports including wives and relatives. This is what can
be understood from the general meaning of the hadith in which the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“Give Zakatul-Fitr on behalf of whomever you support.”

Itis even desirable to give Zakitul-Fitr on behalf of the fetus, as done by
‘Uthman Ibn ' Affin (may Allah be pleased with him)’.

Furthermore, if the person who is being supported by another one gives
Zakétul-Fitr for himself without the permission ofhis sustainer, thisissufficient
for his part, since one is to give It in the first place and one’s sustainer is not
originally responsible for it. On the other hand, if someone gives Zakétul-
Fitr on behalf of another person whom he does not support, this becomes
sufficient for that person's part when it is with his permission; otherwise, it
becomes insufficient. In addition, if there is.a person who sustains another, it
ig permissible for the former to give Zakatul-Fitr on behalf of the latter along,
with his own Zakatul-Fitr in the place where he lives, even if the latter lives in
another place.

Concerning the type of food that is to be given as Zakatul-Fitr, Thnul-
Qayyim, after referring to the five types of food included in the above-
mentioned hadith (namely, wheat, barley, dates, raisins and cheese), said:

These (the five food types) used to be the staple foods in Medina.
Thus, people living in a village or city where staple food differs from
the above, are to pay one sd of their own staple food (as Zakatul-
Thus, if their staple food is something other than grain, such
as milk, meat or fish, they are to give Zakatul-Fitr thereof, whatever
it may be, This is the opinion of the majority of scholars which is
regarded as the correct one in this regard, and there should be no
other contrary opinions to be followed, This is because Zakatul-Fitr
is legally ordained to support the needy on the Day of the Feast with
the same staple food of the people in the same place where they live
Therefore, it is sufficient for the Muslim to give the needy flour as
Zakétul-Fitr though it is not one of the five types of food mentioned

354 UW: ZAKAM

in the hadith of the Prophet (PBUH) in this regard. Though bread
and cooked food can be useful for the needy and cost them little to
prepare for eating, grains are likely to he more useful to the needy
Since grains can last for a longer time,””

With regard to the aforementioned issue, Shaykhul-Islam Ibn
‘Taymiyah said:

“A Muslim isto give Zakanul-Figr from the staple food of his area
such as rice and the like, even if he is able to give it from the kinds of
food stated in the aforementioned hadith. This opinion is reported t0
be one of the opinions adopted by Imam Alimad, and itis the opinion
adopted by the majority of scholars, and itis the soundest view in this
regard, This is because the original juristic ruling of giving charities
és ‏ول‎ support the poor?”

Itis not sufficient fora Muslim to give money (that equals the value of the
legally prescribed amount of staple food) as Zakatul-Fitr, for thisis considered
contradictory to the Summah, Moreover, it is not narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) or any of his Companions gave Zakitul-Fitr in the form of money
instead of the staple food,

Imam Ahmad said, "A Muslim is not to pay the poor money instead of the
prescribed amount of the staple food for Zakatul-Fitr? ‏لآ‎ was said to him, “'Umar
Thn ‘Abdul-‘Aziz used to accept money for Zakatul-Fite” He (Imam Ahmad)
replied, “How could they adhere to the sayings of so and so and ignore the hadiths
of the Prophet (PBUH) stated in this regard?!" ‏مسلط‎ "Umar said, ‘Allah’ Messenger
(PBUH) enjoined Zakatul-Fitr to be paid with one sa...”

Zakétul-Fifr must be given at its due time to the due recipient entitled to
receive Zakah or to his representative, If the giver finds neither the recipient
nor his agent, he must give if to another recipiént at the due time of Zakdtul-
Fitr. Concerning this issue, many a Muslim makes a mistake when entrusting
Zakétul-Fitr with someone not appointed by the due recipient of Zakah, for
this is not considered a legal way of giving Zakitul-Fitr. So, Muslims must pay.
attention to this matter,

Chapter 6: Zalsinul-Figr (Fast-breaking Zaki) 355

Endnotes

1 The Wo Sabits:"the Two Authentic Books of Al-Bukharl and Mastin:
2 Al-Bukhari (1503) (3/463] and Muslim (2275) [4/60].

3 Al-Bukhri (1509) [3/472].

4 Al-Bukharf (1511) [3/473].

5 Abit Dawid (1609) [2/179] and fbn Majah (1827) [2/395]

6 Ad-Daraguitni (2089) [2/123] and Al-Bayhaqi (7685) [4/272),

7 Ton ‏طم‎ Shaybah (10737) [2/432] and ' Abdur-Razzaq in his Musannaf 13/319)
standard measure that equals 2172 grams.

im AL Muwagai fat (2/21] and [3/23].

LO_Majr"ul-Fatdve (10/410), (25/68]-and (22/326,

Giving Zakah

One of the most important rulings on Zakaht is to know its legal channels
in order to give it to those entitled to receive it and also to absolve the giver
from any further responsibility, A Muslim must hasten to give Zakah as soon
asit is due on his property, for Allah, Exalted be He, says, “..and give Zakah...”
(Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 43) This is a general order which indicates hastening
to act accordingly. It is narrated on the authority of ‘Aishah (may Allah be
pleased with her) that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Zakih is never mixed with a property but ruins it (i.e. if Zakah is
not paid at its due time)?”

Moreover, the need of the poor necessitates a quick giving of Zakah, as any
delay harms them. Also, if the people upon whom ‏تلقام‎ is obligatory delay
giving it, they may be subjected to some afflictions such as bankruptcy and
death, and thus Zakah will remain as an unfulfilled duty on their liability. So,
hastening to give Zakah keeps.a Muslim away from miserliness, fulfills his legal

358 MN: ZAKAM

duty, and pleases Allah, Exalted be He. For the aforementioned objectives, a
‘Muslim must hasten to give Zakdh due upon him and avoid delaying it except
for a legal necessity, such as when the Muslim delays giving Zakah in order
to give it to someone wha is.more entitled ‏ما‎ receive it, or he does not have
eniough money, oF the like.

Ttis obligatory upon the guardian to give Zakéh due on the property of a
child or a mad person, according to the general meanings of the aforemen-
tioned proofs, as it is considered a legal duty that can be fulfilled through ‏ه‎
‎representative.

It is impermissible to give Zakéh without intention as the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“Deeds (their correctness and rewards) depend upon intentions..."
And giving Zakah is a legal deed.

Tt is recommended for the owner of a property to distribute the due
amounts of his Zakéh himself, in order to be sure that it reaches its legally
entitled recipients. However, it is permissible for him to appoint someone to
distribute it on his behalf. Ifthe Imam (the ruler) of Muslims asks for Zakah
or sends his messenger to collect it, he is to give Zakah to that collector, It is
desirable for the giver and the recipient of Zakdh to invoke Allah (while giving
or receiving accordingly). The giver should invoke Allah saying:

"0 Allah, make ita profit and do not make ita loss.”

The collector should invoke Allah for the giver sayings

“May Allah reward you for what you havegiven, bless your remaining
property and make it a means of purification for you!"
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Take, [0 Muhammad], from their wealth a charity by which
‘you purify them and cause them increase, and invoke [Allah's
blessings] upon them...” (Qur'an: At-Tawbah: 103)

This verse indicates invoking Allah for those who give Zakah. “Abdullah
Ibn Abt Awfa (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“When some people brought their Zakah to Allah’ Messenger (PBUH),
he used to say, 0 Allah! Confer Your Blessings upon then!"

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Chapter 7: Giving ‏الطب‎ 359

I the recipient of Zakdh is in bad need and he is one of those who usually
take Zakah, the giver should give it to him without pointing out that it is of
Zakih, in order not to embarrass him, However, if the one receiving Zakah is
in bad need and he is not of those who usually take Zakak, the giver should
give it to him, pointing out to him that it is of Zakah. It is recommended for
the giver of Zakah to distribute it to the poor people of the same town or
village where the property is. Yet, itis permissible to transfer Zakah to another
place fora legal interest, such as when the giver has some poor relatives living
in another place, or when the poor people living in another place are in need
of Zakah more than those in the same place where the property is. This is
because the charities used to be transferred to the Prophet (PBUH) in Medina,
and he used to distribute them among the poor of the Muhdjirfin (Immigrants
to Medina) and the Ansar (the Supporters of the Prophet in Medina).

A Muslim ruler must send the collectors af Zakah a little before the due
time of Zakdh to take Zakah due on the observable property such as the
animals of grazing livestock, crops and fruits, as did by the Prophet (PBUH)
and the Rightly-Guided Caliphs, and the Muslims after them. Since some
people do not give Zakah unless they are asked to and others are ignorant of
the obligation of Zakah upon them, sending the collectors of Zakih avoids
such a danger, lightens difficulties for Muslims, and helps them fulfill their
legal obligations.

Itis obligatory upon every Muslim (on whom Zakah is due) to give Zakdh
at its due time without hesitation or delay, It is permissible to give Zakah two
years or less before its due time, for the Prophet (PBUH) asked Al-"Abbas
(the Prophet's paternal uncle) fo give Zakals due upon him for two years in
advance, as related by Ahmiad and Aba Dawad’. So, itis permissible for those,
upon whom Zakah is due, to give it in advance before its due time, whether it
is due on cattle, grains, gold and silver, or trade goods when the giver has the
nist, However, it is recommended not to give Zakah in advance in order to
avoid the dispute among scholars (over the permissibility of this act).

Endnotes

1 Al-Bayhagé (7666) [4/268).
2 AlsBukhari (1497) [3/455] and Minslim (2499) [4/183].
3 Aba Dawad (1624), At-Tirmidhi (677) [3/63] and ‏مطل‎ Majah (1795) [2/376].

Entitled Recipients of Zakah

‘A Muslim should know that it is not sufficient to give Zakah except to the
categories appointed by Allah in the Noble Qur'an. Allah, Exalted be He says:

“Zakah expenditures are only for the poor and for the needy and
{for those employed to collect [Zakéh] and for bringing hearts
together [for Islam] and for freeing captives [or slaves] and for
those in debt and for the Cause of Allah and for the [stranded]
traveler-an obligation [imposed] by Allah. And Allah is Knowing
and Wise? (Quran: At-Tawbah: 60)

‘Thus, the people mentioned in this noble verse are those Allah appointed
to be entitled to receive Zakah, and Muslim scholars have unanimously agreed
that it is impermissible for Muslims to give Zakah to any other people.

Abd Dawad and other compilers of Hadith related on the authority of
Ziyad Ibnul-Harith that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

362 Ll: Zadar

“Allah, Exalted be He, did not take the judgment of a prophet or
any other person concerning Zakh but He judged according to
it and divided it (Zakah) into eight kinds (of people who deserve

In addition, the Prophet (PBUH) said to the one who asked him in the
previous hadith:
“If you are (one) of these kinds (that deserve receiving Zakah). I will
give you your right?”
When some hypocrites criticized the Prophet (PBUH) concerning the
distribution of Zakah, Allah, Exalted be He, illustrated that He was the One

Who distributed Zakéh and pointed out the rulings thereof, and that He did
not appoint anyone to distribute them instead’,

Shaykhul-Islim fbn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

‎is obligatory to give Zakdk to all the eight categories of people‏ 1ل"
‎(illustrated in the Noble Quriin); otherwise, it is to be given to the‏
‎available categories and transferred to wherever they live’. Zakah‏
‎‘must not be given to whoever does nat use it to obey Allah, for Allah‏
‎ordains Zakah for the believers entitled to it, such as the poor and‏
‎the debtors, to help them obey Him, and for those Muslims-who help‏
‎the believers. Of those entitled to Zakah, whoever does not perform‏
‎prayer must not be given anything until he repents and performs‏
‎prayer at its due times.”‏

‎It is impermissible to spend Zakah in channels of spending other than
those appointed by Allah, such as charitable projects like building mosques or
schools, as Allah, says:

‎“Zakah expenditures are only for the poor and for the needy...”
(Qur'an; At-Tawbah: 60)

‎‘The verse indicates that Zakah is not to be spent in any channel other than
those mentioned in the verse, as il must be given to these eight categories in
particular. Allah has specified these eight categories entitled to receive Zakah
in order to inform Muslims that Zakih is not to be given to other than them,
These eight categories fall under two groups: the needy Muslims and those
who support Islam when receiving Zakiih. Allah, Exalted be He, says:

Chapyer 8 Entitled Recipients wf Zakih 363

“Zakdh expenditures are only for the poor and for the needy and
‘for those employed to callect [Zakéh] and for bringing hearts
together [for Islam] anid for freeing captives [or staves] and for
those in debt and for the Cause of Allah and for the [stranded]
traveler-an obligation [imposed] by Allah. And Allah isKnowing
and Wise.” (Qur'an: AL-Tawbah: 60)

In this noble verse, Allah mentions all the categories of people entitled to
take Zak@h, and illustrates that Zakdh is not to be given to other than them,
‘These categories are eight.

The first category is the poor who need Zakah more than the needy,
as Allah mentions them first, and He starts with the most important
categories respectively, The poor are those wha do not have what is
enough for their living and are not able to earn their living, or those
who have only some of their needs to maintain life. So, they are to {ake
from Zakah what suffices all their needs when they have nothing ar
‘what satisfies the rest of their needs if they have only some of what
satisfies these needs over a whole year.

‘The second category is the needy who are in better condition than the poor,
The needy are those who have most or half their needs, So, they are to be
given of Zakah the rest of their heeds to suifice them for a whole year.

The third category involves those employed to collect Zakah. Those
people collect Zakah from ils givers, keep it and then distribute it
among those entitled to take il, according to the orders of the Muslims’
ruler. They are to be given from Zakih in return for the effort they
exert, except when those in authority already give them salaries from
the Public Treasury of Muslims in return for their work, as is the case
nowadays. The government gives salaries to the workers employed to
collect Zakth, and thus itis prohibited for them to take from Zakaltany
more, since they are already paid for their work from another source,

The fourth category is those given Zakah to bring their hearts together
for Islam. Those people fall under two subcategories: disbelievers and
Muslims. The disbeliever is to be given from Zakah ithe is expected to
embrace Islam, in order to make him more willing to embrace Islam. A
disbeliever may also be given from Zakdh in order to withhold his evil
from Muslims, The Muslim can be given from Zekah to strengthen
his faith or to make his peer of the non-Muslims embrace Islam, of
for any other sound and lawful reasons that benefit the Muslims. Such

361 II: ‏قورت‎

people are ‏فا‎ be given only when necessary, for ‘Unsar Tbnul-Khattab,
“Uthman Ibn ’ Affin, and ‘Alf tbn Abii Talib (may Allah be pleased
with them all) stopped giving those people Zakah, when there was no
necessity to give them’.

‘The fifth category involves the slaves indebted to get their freedom
and who cannot pay their debts. In this ease, such a slave is to be
given what makes him able to pay his debt in order to have freedom,
Itis permissible for the Muslim to buy a slave with the money of his
Zakah and emancipate him, and it is also permissible for him to pay
the ransom of a Muslim captive from the money he has assigned for
Zakith, for such an act leads to emancipating Muslim captives.

‘The sixth category involves those in debt, and they fall under two
subcategories. The first subcategory is the person who has fallen into
debts for the sake of others in order to amend matters of difference
among people. For example, when two tribes or villages provoke the
hostility of one another because of bloodshed or ayer properties, a
person can mediate to reconcile them by taking into his liability the
compensation due upon some of them in order to end the dispute.
Such an act is a good deed, so it is legal to pay his debt from Zakih
for fear that this compensation may cause damage to his property.
In addition, helping such a person may encourage others to follow

s good example in ending the disputes and uprooting corruption.

‘Moreover, the Lawgiver permits the person indebted for such a reason

toask for the help from athers in order to fulfill his noble objective. It

is related in Sahih Muslin (Muslim's Authentic Book af Hadith) on the
authority of Qabisah that he said to the Prophet (PBUH):

“Thave taken tipon myself'a compensation to settle the dispute between
some people and the Prophet (PBUH) said to me, ‘Wait until we receive

Zakah, so that we order to give you from it!

The second subcategory of those in debt is the person who becomes
indebted for his own sake. For example, a person may want to ransom
himself from the disbelievers or become indebted and cannot pay it
back. In such cases, he is to be given from Zakdh to pay back his debts,
as Allah, says, “\,,And for those in debt...” (Qur'an: At-Tawbah: 60)

‘The seventh category is that spent in the Cause of Allab such as that
given to warriors who volunteer in fighting for the Cause of Allah
and they do not take salaries from the Public Treasury of Muslims.

(Chapter 8: Enrisled Reeipienes of Zakéh 65

Generally, the phrase “he Cause of Allah" refers ta the war against the
enemies of Muslims, as Allalt, Exalted be He, says:

“Indeed, Allah loves those who fight in His Cause
(Qur'an: As-Saff; 4)

And He also says:
“Fight in the Way of Alla..." (Qur’An: Al-Baqarab; 190)

The eighth category is the stranded traveler. He is a traveler who loses
or runs out of his provisions and becomes stranded before completing
his journey. The stranded traveler is given from Zakahi what enables
hhim to reach his homeland, If he is on his way to a place, he is to be
given what enables him to reach this destination and then to return
home. The guest is considered a stranded traveler according to the
opinion of Ibn “Abbas and others. If some of the money of Zakah given.
to the stranded traveler, the fighter in the Cause of Allah, the debtor,
or the slave indebted to have his freedom, remains after fulfilling the
aim he has taken the money for, then this remaining property must be
given back, This is because each of them does not absolutely possess
what is given to him from Zakah. Rather, his temporary possession is
conditional on his need, Thus, when the reason making him entitled
to take Zakalt is over, he does not deserve taking Zakah any more,

One should know that itis permissible to spend the whole amount of Zakah
on only one of the aforementioned eight categories of the entitled recipients of
Zakéh for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“But if you conceal them and give them to the poor, itis better
{for you...” (Qur’in; Al Bagarah: 271)
Another proof is the hadith narrated on the authority of Mu‘ adh Ibn Jabal

(may Allah be pleased with him). The Prophet (PBUH) sent him to Yemen
and said to him:

“..Tell them that Alla has mace it obligatory for them ta pay
Zakéh front their property and it is to be taken from the wealthy
among them and given to the poor.”

(Related by Al-Bulehari and Musliin)

In the previously mentioned verse and hadith, only one of the eight
categories of people entitled to take Zakah is mentioned, which indicates that

366 Ill: ZAKAM

it is permissible to give the whole amount of Zakdh to only one of the eight
categories

It is sufficient for the giver of Zakah to give it ‏ما‎ only one person entitled
to take it, for the Prophet (PBUH) ordered Band (the family of Zurayq to give
Zakéh due upon them to Salamah ‏مطل‎ Sakhr, according to the hadith related
by Imam Ahmad’ Moreover, the Prophet (PBUH) said to Qabtsal;

“Wait until we receive Zakah, so that we order to give you from it?”

‘These two hadiths indicate the permissibility of giving one’s Zakdh to only
‘one of the eight categories entitled to take it,

Moreover, it is permissible for the giver of Zakah to give it to his close
relatives who are entitled to take it as long as they are not among those whom he
is legally required to maintain, With regard to this, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Giving charity to the poor is to be recorded as a charily (in reward)
and giving it to one’s kinship is to be recarded as two (rewards): a
charity and an act of taittaining the ties of kinship?”

(Related by the Five Compilers of Hadith and deemed a hasan (good)
hadith by At-Tirmidhi)

Furthermore, itis impermissible for the giver of Zakah to give it to Band
Hashim (the tribe of the Prophet (PBUH)) including the family of Al-" Abbas,
the family of “Ali, the family of Ja’ far; the family of “Aqil, the family Al-Harith
Ibn 'Abdul-Muttalib, and the family of Abii Lahab. This is because the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“Charity must not be given to the family of Muhammad: for itis
only (like) people’ impurities (as it is a means of purifying people’
wealth and sins)"

(Related by Imam Muslim)

In addition, it is impermissible for the giver of Zakah to give it to a poor
‘woman martied to a rich man who maintains her, nor to a poor man who has
a rich relative maintaining him, as each of the two is in no need of Zakih due
to the one who maintains her or him respectively, Also, itis impermissible for
the giver of Zakih to give it to his relatives if they are among those whom he
is legally required to maintain, However, the giver of Zakah is permitted to
give from it to whomever he Volunteers to maintain, It is related in Salih Al-
Bukhart (ALBukhari’s Authentic Book of Hadith) that the wife of Abdullah Tbn
Mas” Gd asked the Prophet (PBUH) whether it is permissible to give her Zakat

Chaprer 8: Encidled Recipients of Zakth 367

to the children of her brother, as they were orphans whom she maintained, The
Prophet (PBUH) said to her, “Yes, (give them)."”' However, it is impermissible
for the giver of Zakéh to give it to his parents and his agnate ancestors or
descendants (children and grandchildren), It is impermissible also for the
giver of Zakah to give it to his wife, for he is to maintain her and she is not
entitled to take Zakah.

The Muslim must make sure he gives his Zakdh to those legally entitled
to take it. If he is deceived and gives his Zakah to whomever is not entitled to
it, and then he discovers the truth, what he has given is legally not sufficient
for him; thus, he must give the same amount to someone entitled to Zakah.
Nevertheless, if he does not discover the truth, his giving Zakah to those not
entitled fo it is legally sufficient for him. This fs because two men came to the
Prophet (PBUH) asking to take from Zakah, so he looked at them and saw that
they were strong. Thereupon, he said to them:

“Ifyou wish, I shall give you from it (i.e. Zakah), but it is not to
be given to a rich person nor to one who is strong and able to earn
a living?”

Endnotes

1 Abo Dawid (1630) [2/192].

2 Aba Dawid.

3 See Al-Hafiz As-Siyiti in bis “Lubab An-Nugall fi Asbab An-Nuzal”

4 See Al-Ikhtivérd” (p-154).

5 See Al-IRhtiyatrat” (p.154).

6 AL-Bayhagi (13189) [7/32], see “Nasbur-Rayah [2/394-395]

7 Muslim (2401) [4/134).

8 Abad (16373) [4/37] and Abd Dawod (2213) [2/458- 460].

9 Abt Dawid (2355), At-Tirmidhi (657) [3/46], An-Nasilf (2581) [3/96], Tony Majab)
(1844) [2/44] and Al-Hakim (1477) |1/563]

10 Maslim (2478) (4/176),

11 ‏م16‎ Majab (1835) [2/399],

12 Abi Dawod (1633) [2/195] and An-Nasd (2597) (3/104),

Desirable Charity

Besides the obligatory Zakah, there is a desirable charity valid to be given
any time due to the general invitation to give charities as Allah urges Muslims
in many verses of His Noble Qur'an. Describing the manners of righteous
people, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“,.And give wealth, in spite of love for it, to relatives, orphans,
the needy, the traveler, those who ask [for help], and for freeing s
laves...” (Qur'an: AL-Bagarah: 177)

He also says:

“..But if you give [from your right as] charity, then it is better
for you, if you only knew.” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 280)

Moreover, He says:

“Who isit that would loan Allah a goodly toan so He may multiply
it for him many times over?” (Quran: Al-Bagarah: 245)

370 Uk: ZAKAM

Furthermore, the Prophet (PBUH) said)

“(Giving) charity appeases the Wrath of the Lord and averts an evil
death”

(Related by At-Tirmidhi who deems it hasan)
Iris also related in the Two Sahtihs that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Allah will give shade to seven on the Day when there will be no
shade but His...”

‘The Prophet (PBUH) mentioned from these seven kinds of people

“...@ person who gives to charity so secretly that his left hand does
hot know what his right hanid has given (i.e. nobody knows what he
has given in charity).”

‘There are so many hadiths narrated in this respect.

It is recommended to give charity secretly, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

But if you conceal them and give them to the poor, itis better
for you...” (Qur'an; Al-Bagarah: 271)

That is because this makes the giver far from ostentation, unless giving
charity in public exhorts people to fallow his good example, The giver of charity
must be willing to give, and he must not consider his donations as a favor to
whomever needs them, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“O you who have believed, do not invalidate your charities with
reminders [of it] o injury...” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 264)

In addition, it is recommended for the Muslim to give charities when he is
healthy. The Prophet (PBUH) was asked:

“Which charity begets the greatest reward?” He (PBUH) replied,
“The charity which you give while you are healthy, niggardly and
afraid of poverty and wishing to become wealthy”

Moreover, itis recommended for the Muslim to give charities in the Two
Sacred Mosques, for Allah, the Exalted, orders Muslims to give charities there
as He says:

“,.50 eat of them and feed the miserable and poor.”
(Qur'an: Al-Hajj: 28)

Chapter 9: Desirable ‏توفسك‎ v7

isalso highly recommended to givecharities during the month of Ramadan,
‏مطل عد‎ “Abbas said:

“Allah Messenger (PBUH) was the most generous of all the people and
Ihe used to reach the peak in generosity in the month of Ramadén when
Fibril (Gabriel) met him. fibyil used to meet hinrevery night of Ramadan
(to teach him the Quriin), Allah's Messenger (PBUH) was the most
‘generous person, even mare generous than the strong uncontrollable
wind (in readiness and haste to do charitable deeds).””

It is better for the Muslim to give charities at the times when one needs
them as Allah, the Exalted, says;

“Or feeding on a day of severe hunger, an orphan of near
relationship, or a needy person in miser

(Quran: Al-Balad: 14-16)

It is recommended for the Muslim to give charities to his relatives and
neighbors rather than other people, for Allah enjoined upon the Muslim to do
goodness to his relatives: He showed in many noble verses that one’s relatives
have rights upon one. Allah, Exalted be He, sayst

“{,.And give the relative his right...” (Qur'an: Al-Ist
‘The Prophet (PBUH) said:

26)

“Giving charity to the poor isto be recorded as a charity (in reward)
and giving it lo one’ kinship is to be recorded as two (rewards):
a charity and an act of maintaining the ties of kinship”

(Related by the Five Compilers of Hadith and other compilers)

In the Two Sahihs, the same hadith is related with a slightly different
wording as:

‎Two rewards: A reward for maintaining the ties of kinship and‏ .. ؟
‎a reward for giving charity.”‏

‎‘The Muslim should know that there are legal rights due on the property
of a Muslim other than Zakah. Examples of such rights are supporting the
relatives, keeping good relations with friends, giving the needy, granting a
delay to the insolvent debtor, and lending those in need, for Allah, Exalted be
He, says:

‎“And from their properties was [given] the right of the [needy]
petitioner and the deprived.” (Qur'an: Adh-Dhariyat: 19)

‎ZAKAH‏ بللا د

‎It is obligatory to feed the hungry, entertain the guest, clothe those who
have nothing to clothe themselves, and give drink to the thirsty people.
Moreover, Imam Malik (may Allah have mercy on him) maintains that it is
obligatory upon the Muslims to ransom the Muslim captives even if this costs
them all their properties.

‎‘When a Muslim gets money in the presence of the poor or the needy, it
is desirable for him to give charities to them from this money, for Allah, the
Exalted, says:

‎“..And give its due [Zakah] on the day of its harvest...”
(Quran: Al-An’am: 141)

‎And:

‎“And when [other] relativesand orphansand theneedy are present
at the [time of] division, then provide for them [something] out
of it fie. the estate] and speak to them words of appropriate
kindness.” (Qur'an: An-Nisi: 8)

‎Giving charities is one of the numerous merits of Islam, for itis the religion
of consolation, mercy, cooperation, and brotherhood for the Sake of Allah.
‘What a beautiful religion Islam is! How wise the Shari'ah (Islamic Law) is! We
ask Allah to grant us discernment in our religion, and help us adhere to His
Shari ‘aly for He is Hearing and Responsive (to stupplications)..

‎Endnotes

‎| At-Tirmidhi (663) [3/521

‎2 Al-Bukkhari (660) [2/186] and Muslim (2377) [4/122
3 Al-Rakhari (1419) [3/359] and Muslim (2379) [4/124)
4.Al-Tukhari (6/1902) ‏41/ا]‎ | and Musliny (2308),

‎5 AL-Bukhdri (1466) [3/4133] and Mustim (2315) [4/87)

Fasting Ramadan: Obligation
and Timing

Fasting the month of Ramadan is one of the Five Pillars of Islam and is
taken for granted to be one of the obligations ordained by Allah. The obligation
of fasting Ramadan is proved in the Qur’an, the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition)
and the consensus of Muslim scholars. Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“O you who have believed, decreed upon you is fasting as it was
decreed upon those before you...” (Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 183)

Allah, Exalted be He, then says:

“The month of Ramadan [is that] in which was revealed the
Quran, a guidance for the people and clear proofs of guidance
and criterion. So whoever sights [the new moon of] the month,
let him fast it...” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 185)

376 IV: FASTING

‘Thus, fasting Ramadan is “decreed,” ie. enjoined by Allah upon Muslims.
The obligation of fasting Ramadan is also illustrated in the imperative form
of the verse, “.. So whoever sights [the new moon of] the month, let him fast
it...”, which is a clear Divine command.

As for the proofs stated in the Sunnal, the Prophet (PBUH) said, “Islam
is based on five (pillars)...", mentioning “fasting the month of Ramadan” as
one of them. In addition, there are numerous well-known hadiths stating the
obligation of fasting Ramadan and enumerating its virtues. Furthermore,
Muslim scholars uniformly agree on its obligation, maintaining that whoever
denies it is considered a disbeliever,

The Divine wisdom behind the decree of fasting is that it involves
purification of the human soul fram immorality and vice, for fasting blocks
theevil ways of Satan, as Satan circulates in one’s body just like the circulation
of blood. Whenever one eats or drinks, one’s soul becomes vulnerable to
succumb to one’ desires, its will weakens, and one becomes more reluctant
toward worship, which will not be the case when one is in a state of fasting.
Moreover, fasting induces the renunciation of worldly pleasures and personal
desires and draws a Muslims attention to the Hereafter. Furthermore,
fasting makes one sympathize with the poor and the needy and feel their
suffering due to the hardship of the hunger and thirst one experiences
during fasting,

According to Shari'ah (Islamic law), fasting means abstaining from
certain acts, such as eating, drinking, having sexual intercourse (with one’s
spouse), committing immoralities, and all the other acts a fasting person is
prohibited to do as stated in the Shari'ah, which will be elaborated on later,
Allah willing.

‘The prescribed time for daily fasting begins from daybreak, namely the
manifest whiteness in the horizon, and endé at the time of sunset. Allah, Exalted.
be He, says

'0 now, have relations with them [i.e. your wives] and seek
that which Allah has decreed for you [i.e. offspring]. And eat
and drink until the white thread of dawn becomes distinct to you
from the black thread [of night}. Then complete the fast until the
night [i.e. sunset]..” (Qur'in: Al-Bagarah: 187)

The phrase “the white thread of dawn becomes distinct to you from the
black thread [of night)...” shows that fasting begins when the whiteness of the
day (daybreak) becomes distinct from the blackness of the night,

Chapter 1: Fasting Ramadin: Obligation and Tieing 7

‘The obligatory time of fasting the month of Ramadan begins when the
beginning of the month is known: There are three ways by which one can
know about it:

Seeing the new moon of the month, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

‎So whoever sights [the new moon of] the month, let him‏ ...ب
‎fast it...” (Quran: Al-Bagarah: 185)‏

‎In addition, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎“Start fasting on seeing it (i.e, the new moon of Ramadan)”

‎‘Thus, whoever sees the new moon of the month of Ramadan by himself is
obliged to fast it.

‎Being informed of the appearance af the new moon of the month by a just,
trustworthy, legally accountable person, To illustrate, Ibn "Unvar (may Allah
be pleased with him) narrated:

‎“The people were looking for the new moon (of Ramadan). When
L informed Allahis Messenger (PBUH) that 1 had sighted it, he
(PBUH) observed fasting and conimanded the people to fast.”

‎(Related by Aba Dawad and other compilers of Hadith, and deemed
a sahih (authentic) hadith by Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim)

‎‘The completion of the month of Sha“ ban (the month preceding Ramadan)
as thirty days, This way is to be applied when the new moon is invisible on
the thirtieth night of ‏سقط "فاك‎ though there is nothing to block vision such as
clouds, rain, or the like, In this regard, the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎“THe (lunar) manth (can be) twenty-nine nights (i.e. days), so do
not fast until you see the new moon and do not break fasting until
you see it. And if the sky is overcast, then you have to estimate the
period (i.e, to complete Sha "ban as thirty days)!”

‎This is confirmed by the hadith narrated by Aba Hurayrah in which the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎“.. And if the sky is overcast (and you cannot see the new moon).
complete Sha "bin as thirty days?”

‎Fasting the month of Ramadan is obligatory upon every legally accountable
Muslim, So, disbeliever is not obligated to observe fasting, and if he does, it
will not be accepted from him, However, ifa disbeliever repents and converts

37 IV EASTING

to Islam during the month of Ramadan, he is to fast the rest of the month
without being obliged to make up for the days he has missed as a disbeliever,
Moreover, fasting Ramadan is not obligatory upon children, yet it is valid if
observed by a discriminating child and it will be regarded as a supererogatory
act (of worship) for him/her. Furthermore, fasting Ramadan is not obligatory
upon the insane, and if'a person observes it while being in the state of insanity,
it will be void due to the lack of intention. In addition, fasting Ramadan at
its prescribed time is neither obligatory upon one afflicted with an illness
preventing him ftom observing it nor upon the one on a journey, Both are
to make up for it when the legal excuse, illness or traveling, is over, for Allah,
Exalted be He, says:

“..So whoever amoug you is ill or on a journey [during them]
- then an equal number of days [are to be made up]...”

(Qur'an: Al-Bagarah; 184)

The obligation of fasting is directed to both residents and travelers,
healthy and ill people, ritually pure or impure people (such as menstruating
‘women and women in postanatal bleeding period), and those in a state of
unconsciousness; all of them are accountable for the obligation of fasting,
‘They are commanded to observe it so as to be aware that itis obligatory upon
them and that it has to be'observed whether at its due time or later in the
case of a legal excuse. It is obligatory upon some of them to perform it at its
prescribed time, namely healthy and resident people, excluding menstruating
women and women in a state of postnatal bleeding, Others are only obliged
to make up for it later, namely menstruating women and women in a state of
postnatal bleeding, and those who are too ill to observe it a its due time and
can observe it later. However, there are some who may choose either, whether
to observe itat its prescribed time of later, such as travelers and ill people who
can observe fasting with difficulty but without causing them harm.

As for one who breaks fasting during Ramadan due to a legal excuse and
then the excuse is over - such as a traveler who returns back, a menstruating
‘woman ora woman in a state of postnatal bleeding who becomes ritually pure,
a disbeliever who converts to Islam, an insane person who regains sanity, and
a child who reaches puberty’ they are to observe fasting for the rest of the day
(if the excuse is over in the daytime) and to make up far that day afterwards,
Similarly, if people are informed in the daytime (or after daybreak) that the
month of Ramadan has already begun, they are to observe fasting for the rest
ofthe day and then to make up for that day later after Ramadan.

Chapter 1; Fasting Ramadin: Obligation and Timing 379
Endnotes

1 Al-Bukhari (1909) and Muslim (1081/19).

2 Abit Dawid (2342) [2/524], Ibn Hibban (3447) (8/231), Al-Hakim (1541) [1/585] and
‘Ad-Daraqutni (2127)[3/137]

3 Al-Bukhari (1907) [4/153] and Muslim (2499).

4 Al-Bukhatri (1909) [4/154] and Muslim (2516) [4/193],

Beginning and End of
a Fasting Day

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“thas been made permissible for you the night preceding fasting
to go to your wives [for sexual relations]. They are clothing for
you and you are clothing for them. Allah knows that you used to
deceive yourselves, so He accepted your repentance and forgave
you. So now, have relations with them and seck that which
Allah has decreed for you [i.e. offspring]. And eat and drink
until the white thread of dawn becomes distinct to you from the
black thread [of night]. Then complete the fast until the night
[i.e. sunset]... (Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 187)

In this connection, Imam Ibn Kathir (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“This is a legal permission granted by Allah, Exalted be He, to the

3 LV: FASTING

‘Muslimssoasta relievethem from the restrictions they were burdened
with at the beginning of Islam. To illustrate, at the early stage of
Islam, when the fasting day was over and Muslims broke their fast,
a Muslint was allowed to enjoy eating, drinking, and having sexual
intercourse with his wife only until the time of the ‘Isha’ (Night)
Prayer was due, or until he slept before that time. At that time, ‏و ]ا‎
‘Muslim slept after fast breaking or performed the ‘Isha’ Prayer, he
was prohibited to eat, drink, or have sexual intercourse until the just
breaking of the following day. Thus, the Muslims experienced great
difficulty in fasting until the aforementioned verse was revealed.
The revelation of this verse caused them great happiness, as they
were permitted by Allah to eat, drink, and have sexual intercourse
at any time of the night until daybreak; until the white thread of
dawn became distinct. from the black thread of night.”"

The aforesaid verse states the prescribed time for daily fasting; it begins
from daybreak until sunset. The permissibility of eating and drinking until
dawn indicates the desirability of having salir (pre-dawn meal) during
Ramadan, It is stated in the Two Sahih that Anas (may Allah be pleased with
him) narrated that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Take saltar (pre-dawn meal) for there isa blessing in salu

There ate also many traditions indicating the desirability of having salir
even if by drinking some water, It is desirable to delay Sahétr and to have it
shortly before dawn. In this regard, if a man gets up shortly before dawn
and finds out that he is in a state of jandbah (ie. major ritual impurity), or a
menstruating woman finds that her menses is over, they are to start having
salir and observe fasting, delaying ritual bathing until dawn breaks, As for
those who are used to having their ‏شيلم‎ (pre-dawn meal) too early, because
they stay up late at night and then have salir and sleep somie hours before
dawn, they are committing many mistakes:

First: They would start fasting before its due time,

Second: They would not observe the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer in congregation,
disobeying Allah by abandoning the obligatory congregational prayer.

Third: They may delay performing the Fajr Prayer after its prescribed
time and perform it after sunrise, which is regarded as a grave sin and
an enormous transgression; Allah, Exalted be He, says:

Chapter 2: Beginning and End ofa Fasting Day 383

*So woe to those who pray - [bul] who are heedless of their prayer.”
(Quran: Al-Ma' dn: 4-5)

A Muslim must have the intention of observing the obligatory fasting
from the night of the day before. However, if'a Muslim intends fasting
before he sleeps, then he wakes up after daybreak, he is to continue
fasting from the moment he wakes up, and it will be valid and complete,
Allah willing,

Ttis desirable to hasten fast breaking if sunset is verified whether by sight,
being informed by a trustworthy person, or by hearing the prayer call, or
anything of the kind. Sahl fbn Sa’ ‏ل‎ (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated
that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“The people will remain on the right path as long as they hasten
breaking of the fast.”
‘The Prophet (PBUH) also said in a Qudst (Divine) hadith, quoting the
Words of his Lord, Almighty and Ever-Majestic be He:

“The most beloved of My servants to Me are those who hasten to
break fasting (as soon as they are sure of the sunset)."”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

It is an act of the Sunnah to break one’ fast with eating some ripe dates.
If the fasting person does not find any, one may eat dry dates, and if one does
not find any, one may break one’ fasting with some water, Anas (may Allah be
pleased with him) narrated:

“Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) used to break his fast before
performing the (Sunset) Prayer with some ripe dates; but if
there were no fresh dates, he would eat a few dry dates, and
if there were no dry dates, he would take some mouthfuls
of water.”

(Related by Imam Ahmad, ‏نطف‎ Dawad, and At-Tirmidhi)

fthere are not any ripe or dry dates or water, the fasting person may break
his fast with whatever is available of food and beverage.

There is a very important issue to highlight here; some Muslims
break their fast and keep over dining tables until they finish having the

384 1V: FASTING:

fast breaking meal, missing performing the Maghrib (Sunset) Prayer in
congregation at the mosque. They thus commit a grave sin, for they
abandon performing an obligatory prayer in congregation, miss a great
reward, and expose themselves to Divine punishment. A Muslim should
rather break his fast first, then head for the mosque to perform the
Maghrib Prayer in congregation, and then he may have his fast breaking
meal when he comes back.

It is desirable for the fasting person when breaking his fast to invoke
Allah supplicating Him for whatever he likes. The Prophet (PBUH) said:

"Verily, a fasting person has an invocation when breaking his fast
that is not rejected (by Allah),””

Among the invocations narrated to have been observed by the Prophet
(PBUH) upon fast breaking is:

“O Allah! For You I have fasted, and with Your provision I have
broken my fast.””

Moreayer, whenever he (PBUH) broke his fast he used to say:

“Thirst has gone, the arteries have become moist, and the reward
has become certain, if Allah wills."

In fact, a Muslim should know about the rulings related to fasting and fast
breaking in terms of both the correct time and manner of performance, so as
to observe itin the proper, legal way thatagrees with the Sunnah of the Prophet
(PBUH), In this way - by following in the Prophet's footsteps when observing
fasting - one’s fasting is likely to be valid and one’s good deeds during fasting
are likely to be accepted if Allah wills; this is a very important issue. Allah,
Bxalted be He, says:

“There has certainly been for you in the Messenger of Allah
an excellent pattern for anyone whose hope is in Allah and
the last day and [who] remembers Allah often?

(Quran: Al-Ahzab: 21)

Chapter 2: Beginning and End ofa Fasting Day 385.

Endnotes

1 See Ibn Kathirin his book on Tafsir (1/288—290),
2 Al-Bukhari (1923) [4/178] and Muslim ( 2544) [4/406].

3 Al-Bukhéri (1957) [4/253] and Muslim (2549) [4/208],

4 AtTirmidhi (699) [3/83]

5 Ahmad (12612) [3/164], Abo Dawid (2356) [2/531] and At-Tirmidhi (695) [3/79],
6 Tn Majah (1753) [2/350].

7 Aba Dawid (2358) [2/531]

8 Abt Dawid (2357) [2/531]

Things Nullifying Fasting

‘There are things which nullify fasting that a Muslim should know so as to

avoid and beware of, for they invalidate fasting and make it void. Among these
things are:

1- Having Sexual Intercourse

Ifa fasting person has sexual intercourse with his wife, his fasting will
be nullified, and he will be obliged to make up for that day, on which he
had such a sexual intercourse. Moreover, one is not only obliged to make
up for such a day, but also to expiate for it. The expiation for such an act is
emancipating a slave,’ and if one does not find a slave to emancipate, one
is to fast for two months consecutively, and the one unable to fast them due
to a legal excuse should then feed sixty poor persons with half a s4° of the
country’s staple food for each.

388 IVE FASTING

2- Ejaculation

Ejaculation nullifies fasting when it results from kissing, touching, mastur-
bating, or lustful gazing. ‏ترم لآ‎ of such cases occurs, fasting is nullified, yet one
is just obliged to make up for it without expiation, for expiation of nullified
fasting is restricted to having sexual intercourse. However, ifa sleeping person
has had a wet dream, there will be no blame on him and his fasting remains
valid, for a wet dream happens involuntarily: Still, one in this case is to per-
form ritual bathing to purily oneself from the state jandbah (i.e, major ritual
impurity related (o sexual discharge).

3- Deliberate Eating or Drinking

Allah, Exalted be He, says:

‘And eat and drink until the white thread of dawn becomes
distinct to you from the black thread [of night]. Then complete the

fast until the night [i. (Quran: Al-Bagarah: 187)

As for a fasting person who forgeifully eats ar drinks, the validity of his
fasting is by no means affected. The Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Whoever eats or drinks something forgetfilly while he is fasting,
should complete his fast, for what he has eaten or drunk has been
given to hint by Allah.”

Among the things nullifying fasting is when water or the like gets into
one’ body (the throat and then the abdomen) through the nostrils, which, in
Arabic, is generally referred to as snuff, Moreover, having nutrition through the
veins, blood transfusion, and the like, are among the things nullifying fasting,
as they provide the body with nutriment, In addition, nutrient injection of a
fasting person nullifies his fasting, as itis considered a substitute for food, As
for the non-nutrient injections, they have ‏ما‎ be avoided as well during fasting
to preserve its validity; the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Avoid that which makes you doubt and adhere to that which does
not make you doubt.”

So, one should delay such injections until the night (i.e. after fast breaking).

4- Getting out Blood from the Body

Getting out blood of ones body deliberately during fasting, as in cupping,
phlebotomy, blood transfusion (to savea patient), nullifies ones fasting. However,

‘Chapter 4: Things Nullifylng Easting 389

the coming out of » little blood, such as a sample for a blood test, does not
alfect the validity of one’s fasting, Similarly, the inyoluntary coming out of
blood, such as that resulting from nosebleed, ‏د‎ wound, or pulling outa tooth,
does not affect fasting

5- Vomiting

Intentional disgorging of what is in one’s stomach, such as vomited foods
and drinks, through the mouth nullifies one's fasting. Yet, if one vomits
unintentionally, this does not affect one’ fasting, for the Prophet (PBUH) sai

“If anyone cannot help vomiting, he does not have to make up for
(that day of fasting), and whoever intentionally vomits, should
make up for il!

A fasting person should avoid using eyeliners, eye drops, or the like, to
preserve the validity of his/her fasting. Furthermore, a fasting person should
not exceedingly rinse out one’s mouth and nose with water (during ablution
for example), as water may enter one’ throat. The Prophet (PBUH) said:

"Take water into your nostrils well (during ablution) except when
you are fasting”

‘As for using the siwak (tooth-stick), it does not affect the validity of one's
fasting. Rather, using the siwak is desirable and advisable, whether one ‏كل‎
‎fasting or not, at the beginning and end of the day, according to the soundest
opinion in this regard. In addition, if dust or a fly enters the mouth of a fasting
person, it does not affect the validity of his fasting,

‘There are certain matters that a fasting person should avoid, such as lying,
backbiting, and insulting, and if anyone insults him, his reply should be, "T
um in ‏م‎ state of fasting).” Unfortunately, there are some people for whom
abstaining from food and beverage is much easier than refraining from the
evil words and deeds they are accustomed to. That was why one of the Salaf
(early Muslim scholars) said, “The easiest part of fasting is abstaining from food
and drink”

So, 2 fasting person should fear Allah and realize HisMight and Magnificence
at all times and in all circumstances, preserving his fasting and avoiding the
things that nullify it, so as to ensure its validity and acceptability: Furthermore,
a fasting person should keep on remembering Allah, reciting the Qur'an, and
performing as many supererogatory acts of worship as possible. The Salaf, for
example, used ‏ما‎ keep to mosques while fasting so as to preserve their fasting
and avoid backbiting, as they used to say, In addition, the Prophet (PBUH) said

‎{Vs FASTING‏ لل

‎“Whoever does not give up evil speech and rélated deeds, Allah is in
no need of his leaving his food and drink (i.e. Allah will not accept
his fasting)?"

‎This is because seeking Allah's pleasure and drawing near to Him
through abstaining from lawful desires (during fasting) must be preceded
by general abstaining from unlawful ones, such as lying, oppression, and
aggression against people's lives, properties, and honor. It was narrated
on the authority of Aba Hurayrah, asa marfid' (traceable) Hadith, that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎“The fasting person is in q state of worship as long as he does not
backbite or hurt a Muslim.”

‎‘Moreover, it was narrated on the authority of Anas that the Prophet
(PBUR) said:

‎“He does not observe fasting who continues eating the flesh of people
(through backbiting them).""

‎Ina word, since a fasting person abstains from things unlawful only dur-
ing fasting, he should, with greater reason, abstain from the things which are
unlawyftl at all times, so as to be among the true observers of fasting.

‎Endnotes

‎| That used to be applied at the time of slavery,

‎2 Al-Bukhdri (6669) [11/669] arid Muslim (2709) |4/277].

‎3 Alona (1723) [1/200], At-Tirmidlii (2523) 4/668], An-Nasdli (5727) (4/732] and Al
‘akin (2216) [2/13], (7128) [4/99],

‎4 Aba Dawid (2380) [2/539], AL-Tirmidht (719) [3/98] and Ibn Majah (676) (2/3151

‎5 Abd Dawad (142) [1/75], At-Titmidhht (787) 13/155], An-NasAlt (B7) [1/70] and Tbn
‘Majah (407) (1/246),

‎6 Al-Bukhari (1903) [4/150].

‎7 Ad-Daylami in “Musnad Al-Firdaws" Ton ‏تفخ"‎ in “AL-Kiomi
Shaybah (8889) [2/273]

‎8 Ibn Aba Shaybah (8890) [2/273],

‎11/302), and ‏عطا‎ Aba,

Making up for Missed Days
of Ramadan

One may break one’ fasting during the month of Ramadan due to a legal
excuse, and may do so for an illegal excuse such as having sexual intercourse
during fasting or the like. In both cases, itis obligatory for one to make up for
the missed day(s) of fasting, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“,.then an equal number of days [are to be made up]...”
(Quran: Al-Bagarah: 184)
It is desirable for one to hasten to make up for the missed fasting days
of Ramadan so as not to be accountable for it. It is also desirable to make up

for the missed days of fasting consecutively, just as the actual days are fasted
consecutively.

Moreover, it is permissible for one to delay making up for fasting, as its
compensation time is flexible. In other words, every obligation that does not

392 IV: FASTING

demand a specific time is permitted to be delayed but with the intention of
making up for it. In addition, it is permissible to make up for it separately, ie.
to make up for the fast on separate days, not successive ones.

On the other hand, if it is the month of Sha’ban of the following year,
and there are unperformed fasting days of the previous Ramadan - provided
the remaining days of Sha'ban are only enough for making up for those
unperformed fasting days of Ramadan - one in this case has to make up for
them successively. One is to make up for fasting consecutively, due to the
limited time one has. However, it is impermissible to delay making up for
fasting until after the following Ramadan without a legal excuse, as *A'shah
(may Allah be pleased with her) said:

“It could happen that I miss some days of Ramadan (because of a
legal excuse), but could not make up for them except in the month of
Sha ‘ban to observe the duties of Allahis Messenger (as a husband."

(Related by Al-Bulchari and Muslim)

‘This signifies that the time of making up for the unperformed fasting days
of Ramadan is extensive until the remaining days of Sha’ bin are only enough
(o make up for them, Therefore, itis obligatory for one to make up for them
before the following Ramadan begins.

Ifone delays making up for the missed fasting days of Ramadan until the
following Ramadan begins, ome is to observe fasting of the present Ramadan
and to make up for the missed days afterwards. As for a person who has
delayed making up for such unperformed fasting due to a legal excuse that
prevented him from doing so, he does not have to do anything except making
up forit (ie. there is no expiation for it). Yet, ifa person has delayed making up
for fasting for no legal excuse, he is to make up for the missed days in addition
to the feeding of a poor person for each day he had missed, with a quantity of
half sa" of food in expiation for each day.

As for a person who dies before making up for the unperformed fasting
days of Ramadan and before the beginning of the following Ramadan,
there will be no blame on him, as his death occurred during the period of
permissibility to delay making up for the non-performance of whatever fasting
days of Ramadan. Likewise, he who hasa legal excuse, such as being ill or ona
journey, so that he could not make up for the missed fasting days of Ramadan,
and dies after the beginning of the following Ramadan, there will be nothing

‘Chapter ‏ومقامانا._:4‎ up for Missed Days of Raman 393

on him. But, ifthe person delays making up for the missed fasting days for no
Tegal excuse then dies, there must be expiation for those days to be fulfilled
from his inheritance, namely feeding (on his behalf) a poor person for each
fasting day he had missed

Regarding one who dies before performing due expiatory fasting, such as
expiatory fasting for zihar” or far not sacrificing a sacrificial animal during
performing Hajj (Pilgrimage) as tamattu’,” there must be a feeding of a poor
person for each day of unperformed fasting. It is impermissible as. well to
make up for those unperformed fasting days by proxy. In this respect, feeding
the poor must be from the inheritance left by the deceased, as it is considered
a fast that cannot be performed on behalf of others during their lifetime, and.
so the same ruling is to be applied after their death, according to the majority
of scholars.

As regards a person who dies without observing expiatory fasting for not
fulfilling a vow, his kin may perform that expiatory fast on his behalf, It is
stated in the Two Sahihs that:

“A woman came to the Prophet (PBUH) and said, ‘My mother has
died and there is a fast for not fulfilling a vow due from her; should
Lfast on her behalf?’ He, (PBUH), said, ‘Yes. "*

Thnul-Qayyim (may Allah have mercy ‏مه‎ him) said:

“Fasting for not fulfilling a vow is to be performed on behalf of the
dead, but not for the original obligation (of fasting). This is the opinion
of mdm Ahmad and others, and the opinion stated in the narrations
on the authority of Ibn “Abbas and ‘Aishah, Besides, this view is
supported by means of legal proof and analogical deduction. This
is because the vow is not an obligation according to the principles af
Shari'ah (Islamic Law), but it was man who obligated it on himself
‏مد‎ it became like a debt on man, as the Prophet (PBUH) said, As
_for the obligatory fasting, it is one of the Five Pillars of Islar, so
in no way can it be made up on others’ bekalf, as is the case with
performing prayers and pronouncing the Two Testifications of Faith,
The wisdom behind their being obligatory is showing the obedience of
the observer himself to Allah, as well as his observatice of the duties of
worship enjoined by Allah, for which man was created. Accondingly,
these ordained acts of worship, as well as the Prescribed Prayers, are
not to be performed by anyone on another’ behalf”

398 1V: FASTING

Tn addition, Shayktiul-fslim Tbn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on
him) said:

“For the fasting of breaking-a vow due from a person who has died,
«4 poor person is to be fed for each day in expiation. This opinion is
also maintained by Imam Ahmad, Ishitg, and others, It is also the
opinion based on legal estimation and traditions; the unfulfilled
vow is in one’ liability just like a debt, so it is to be fulfilled ever
after one’s death (by ones successors). Concerning the fasting of the
month of Ramaddn, Allah does not miake it obligatory on those
unable fo perform it, but He commands them to make up for it
by feeding a poor person in expiation, Accordingly, making up for
fasting is obligatory upon the one who can perform it, not the one
who cannot. Hence, no one is required to make up for it on the
behalf of another. As regards expiatory fasting for breaking a vow
and the like, it is indisputable that these can be made up for by
someone on anothers behalf according to the sahih (authentic)
hadiths stated in this regard.”

Endnotes

1 Al-Bakhari (1950) [4/240] and Muslim (2682) [4/ 263],

2 Zihar is the saying of a husband to his wife, when he wants fo abstain from having
sex with her, “(Sexually.) you are to me like the back of my mother” ie. unlawful to
‘approach sexually, That was a type of divorce practiced by Arabs in the Pre-Islamic
Period of Ignorance (the fahiliyyah),

3: Tamatiu’: It means that ‏د‎ pilgrim assumes ihrdin (state of ritual consecration) for
performing, ‘Umrah during the months of Hajj, and then, after performing “Unaral, a
pilgrim assumes ‏تسيلا‎ for performing Haj} in the same season.

4 Al-Bukhart (1953) [4/245] and Muslim (2691) (4/266),

Breaking the Fast: Illness
or Old Age

Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He, has decreed the obligation of fasting
of Ramadan on Muslims. Itis to be performed when there is no legal excuse.
Yet, unperformed fasting days of Ramadan are to be made up for on other
days with regard to those having legal excuses. There is a third type here,
namely those who can neither perform fasting nor make up for it, such as
those advanced in years and those who are hopelessly sick. With regard to
such persons, Allah relieves them from fasting, enjoining them to feed a poor
person for each unperformed fasting day instead; they are to provide halfa sd°
of food for each day. Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Allah does not charge a soul except [with that within] its
capacity...” (Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 286)

396 1M: FASTING

Allah also says:

*,,And upon those who are able [to fast, but with hardship] - ‏ه‎
‎ransom (as substitute] of feeding a poor person [each day]...”

(Quran: Al-Bagarah: 184)

Inhis interpretation of the above-mentioned verse, Ibn ' Abbas (may Allah
be pleased with him)

“The verse refers to those old men anid women who are too old to
fasts they should feed one poor person for each unperformed day of
“fasting (instead of fasting).”

(Related by Al-Bukhisi)

As for hopelessly sick people, the ruling will be the same as that applied
in the case of aged people, ie. they are to (eed one poor person for each
unperformed day of fasting,

Among those who break their fasting due to a legal excuse are travelers,
sick people whose recovery is expected, pregnant or breast-feeding women
whose fasting might harm them or their babies, and menstruating women or
women in a state of postnatal bleeding, It is obligatory for people in all the
aforesaid cases to make up for the unperformed fasting days. That is to say,
they are to observe fasting on other days equal to the number of days they have
broken their fasting on. Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“., And whoever is ill or on a journey -then an equal number of
other days..." (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 185)

Onthe other hand, breaking the fast isan actof the Sunnah foran extremely
sick person for whom fasting may cause harm, ora traveler covering a distance
that necessitates shortening prayer. Allah, Exalted be He, says:

4... And whoever is ill or on a journey - then an equal number of
other days...” (Qur'an; Al-Bagarah: 185)

Namely; let him break his fast and make up for the days he did not fast
later, Allah, Exalted be He, ulso says:

":.. Allah intends for you ease and does not intend for you
hardship...” (Qur'an; Al-Bagarah: 185)

In addition, whenever the Prophet (PBUH) was given the choice of one of
two matters, he would choos¢ the easier of the two (as long as it was not asin)’,

Chaprer': Breiking the Fast: ‏عهمااا‎ oF Old Age 397

He, (PBUH), also says, as stated in the Two Sakths:

“It is not righteousness to fast on a journey:

Consequently, if the one on a journey or the one wha is ill observes fasting
\with difficulty, their fasting will be valid, yet detestable.

As for menstruating women or women in a state of postnatal bleeding,
they ate prohibited to perform fasting, and if they do, it is deemed invalid,
Pregnant and breast-feeding women, however, have to make up For the fasting
days they have missed on other days. Likewise, women who break their fast
due to fear for their children, are to feed a poor person for each unperformed
day of fasting.

In this connection, Tbmul-Qayyim (may Allah haye mercy on him) said:

“Thn ‘Abbas and some other Companions have given a fatwa’ concerning

breaking the fast by pregnant aud breast-feeding women who fear harm

{for their children, They said, "They may break their fasting and feed a

‘poor person in expiation for each fasting day they’ miss, ie. resorting ta

_feeding as expiation for fasting’ ”*

In other words, feeding a poor person is explation when a woman breaks

her fast in either case, yet she is obliged to make up for nat performing the fast
afterwards.

In fact, breaking the fast is deemed obligatory for one who needs it to
rescue someone in danger, such as a drowning person or the like.

Thnul-Qayyim also said:

“Thereare four reasons for breaking the fast travel, illness, menstruation,
and fearing the harm that fasting may cause itt certain cases, such as
the case with pregnant and breast-feeding women; the same applies to
breaking the fast to save a drowning person.”

A Muslim should make his intention to observe obligatory fasting from
the previous night, such as the fasting of Ramadan, expiatory fasting, and the
fasting for breaking a vow. Intention here means that one should determine to
perform the month of Ramadan or to make up for unperformed days of fasting,
Also, through intention one decides whether to perform an expiatory fasting,
oF fast because of breaking a vow. This is because the Prophet's hadith states:

“Indeed, (the correctness arid rewards of) deeds depend upon
intentions, and every person does get (the reward of) what he
has intended.”

398 IV: FASTING

14 is also reported on the authority of \Aishah, as a murfit' (traceable)
hadith, that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“When one does not intend fasting before dawn, his fasting is ‏"لمن‎

Thus, the Muslim must make the intention of performing the oblig-
atory fasting from the night until before dawn. So, whoever intends
fasting in the daytime, such as the one who gets up in the morning,
abstains from eating and drinking, and intends fasting, his fasting is
insufficient and unacceptable unless it is a supererogatory fasting, not
an obligatory one.

Obligatory fasting must be intended beforehand, not during the daytime;
the whole daytime is included in the time of fasting and intention cannot refer
to something in the past, On the other hand, itis permissible for a Muslim to
intend performing supererogatory fasting in the daytime, for ' Xishah (may
Allah be pleased with her), narrated:

“One day the Prophet (PBUH) came to me and said, ‘Do you have
anything (to be eaten)?" I replied, ‘No! Thereupon, he (PBUH) said,
“Then I will observe fasting (today): "*

(Related by the Group of Compilers of Hadith except Al-Bukhari)

This shows that he (PBUH) was not fasting then, as he asked for food,
but intended fasting when he found nothing to eat. Thus, the aforesaid
hadith involves a proof of the permissibility of delaying the intention of
fasting, only in the case of supererogatory fasting. However, there is a
condition’on the validity of the supererogatory fasting intended during
the daytime; none of the things nullifying fasting should have occurred
before the moment of intending that supererogatory fasting, such as eating,
drinking, and the like, In ather words, if one has done any of such things
that nullify fasting belore intending supererogatory fasting during the
daytime, one’ fasting is indisputably inv:

Endnotes

1١ Al-Bukhart (4505) [8/225].
2. Al-Rukhari (3560) [6/692] and Muslitn (5999) |8/82),
3 Al-Rukhiiri (1946) [4/233] and Muslin (2607) |4/233),

Chapcer 5: Breaking the Fast Illness of Old Age 399

4 Fatwa: A legal opinion issued by muti [& Muslin scholar specialized in issuing legal
rulings] in response to a layman's question on a point of the Islamic Law.

5 See "Zadul-Ma dd” [2/29].

5 See the footnote of Ar-Rawd Al-Murbi” {3/379-380),

7 An-Nasit (2340) [2/512] and (2330) (2/509), Abo Dawad (2454) [2/571], AtTirmidht
(729) [3/108}, and fbn Miajah (1700) [2/325].

& Muslim (2708) [4/276], Abii Dawid (2455) ]2/572|, At-Tirmidhi (732) [3/111], An
Nass (2324) [2/506], and Tn Majah (1701) [2/325],

The Obligation of Hajj
(Pilgrimage)

Hajj (Pilgrimage) is considered one of the pillars and major acts of Islam;
Allah, Exalted be Hl, says:

‎And [due] to Allah from the people is a pilgrimage to the‏ .ب"
‎House - for whoever is able to find thereto a way. But whoever‏
‎disbelieves [i,e. refuses] - then indeed, Allah is free from need of‏
‎the worlds? (Qur'an: Alu “Imran: 97)‏

‎That is to say, Allah has made an obligation on Muslims to perform Hajj
to Mecca, as indicated in the word “due” in the aforesaid verse. In the same
verse, Almighty Allah refers to those who abandon this act of worship as
disbelievers, saying:

‎“.,But whoever disbelieves [i.e. refuses] - then indeed, Allah is
free from need of the worlds?” (Quran: Alu ‘Imran: 97)

40a ViHaly

All this confirms that Hajj is an obligatory act of worship and whoever
does not believe in it is uniformly agreed to be a disbelieyer.

Allah, Exalted be He, commanded His Intimate, Prophet Ibrahim
(Abraham), saying:
‘\,.And proclaim to the people the Hajj [pilgrimage]...
(Qur'an: Al-Hajj

Moreover, “Ali Ibn Aba Talib (may Allah be pleased wit
that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

"Whoever has the provision and the riding animal (or the means)
that can carry him to the House of Allah (i.e. the Ka’bak) and he
does not perform Hajj, then it does no matter if he dies as.a Jew or
6 Christian.”

27)

him) narrated

(A marfit” (traceable) hadith related by At-Tirmidhtand othercompilers
of Hadith, and deemed sahif (authentic) also by At-Tirmidhi)

‘The Prophet (PBUH) also said:

“Islam is based on five (pillars): (i) testifying that there is no deity
but Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah; (ii)
performing the (compulsory congregational) prayers dutifully and
perfectly; (ii) paying Zakahs; (iv) observing fasting during the month
of Ramadan; (v) performing Haji (ie. Pilgrimage) for those who can
afford it.”

The phrase “who can afford it” implies a condition on whom performing
Hajj is obligatory; that one must have enough provisions and means of
Transportation to travel to Mecca and return back to one’s folks.

‘The reason why Allah decreed Haj is shown in the following verse:

“That they may witness [i.e. attend] benefits for themselves and
mention the Name of Alla on known fie. specific] days over
what He has provided for then of [sacrificial] animals...”

(Qur'an: Al-Hajj: 28)

Allah continues:

"Then let them end their untidiness and fulfill their vows and
perform tawaf * around the Ancient House.”

(Quran: Al-Hajj: 29)

(Chapter 1: The Obligation of Hajj (Pilgtimage) 405

In other words, the people are the beneficiaries fram Haj, not Allah,
because Allah is free from need of the worlds. (Qur'an: Alu ‘Imran: 97) Allah
is by no meansin need of the pilgrims, unlike the pilgrims who are in need of
the Lord to glorify and worship. It is the people who need Allah, so they come
to visit His House seeking His-aid to satisfy their needs,

The obligation of Hajj is decreed as the last pillar of Islam, after prayer,
Zakih, and fasting. This is because prayer, the basic pillar of religion, is
performed five times a day, so it has to be the first pillar of Islam. Zakdh has
to come next, as it is always combined with prayer in many Quranic verses.
larly, fasting follows them, as it is regularly observed, but once a year. On
the other hand, Hajj was prescribed in Islam in the ninth year ‏تكلم‎ (ie. after
the Prophet’s Hijrah (Immigration to Medina) according to the majority of
scholars, We should also know that the Prophet (PBUH) performed Hajj only
once in his lifetime and it is called the Farewell Hajj which was in the tenth
year A.H.,,’ but he (PBUH) performed ' Umrah (Lesser Pilgrimage) four times!
in his lifetime.

‘The main purpose of Hajj and “Umrak is to worship Allah in the places he
commanded us to worship Him therein. Allah's Messenger (PBUH) said:

“Pebble throwing and performing sa'y (i.e. going between As-Safa
and Al-Marwah) are made (ie. decreed) for mentioning Allah.”

Hajj (Pilgrimage) is uniformly agreed upon by Mustim scholars as an
obligatory act of worship, and one of the pillars of Islam. It is prescribed for
all Muslims; they are to perform Hajj once in their lifetime provided they can
afford it, and it is a collective duty on all Muslims at a set time every year
On the other hand, any performance of Hajj other than the obligatory one is
considered a voluntary act of worship.

Concerning ‘Umrah, many scholars regard it as a religious duty, for when
the Prophet (PBUH) was asked if women had to participate in jihad (Fighting
in the Cause of Allah), he (PBUH) replied:

“Yes, there is a jihdd prescribed for them in which there is no
‘fighting, namely Hajj and Umrah.”
Accordingly, if ‘Umrah is authenticated to be a religious duty for women,

then the more it is so for men. To illustrate, once a man said to the Prophet
(PBUH), “My father is an old man who can neither perform Hajj nor ‘Umrah

‎Vitaly‏ قلا

‎or even travel” Upon that, the Prophet (PBUH) said to him:
“Perform Hajj and “Umrah on behalf of your father”

‎(Related by the Five Compilers of Hadith and deemed sahih (authentic)
by Al-Tirmidhi)

‎According to the above, itis obligatory for a Muslim to perform Hajf and
‘Umrah once in a lifetime; the Prophet (PBUH) sai

‎“Perform Hajj only once, and whoever performs it more than that;
it isa voluntary act for him.”

‎In Sahili Muslim (Muslims Authentic Book of Hadith), itis narrated on the
authority of Abo Hlurayrah that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎"0 people! Allalt has made Hajj obligatory for you, so perform Haji"
Upon that, a man asked, “(ls it to be performed) every year?” The
Prophet (PBUH) answered, “If were to say ‘Yes! it would become
obligatory (for you to perform it every year) and you would not be
able to do it”

‎A Muslim, male or female, must perform the obligatory Hajj as soon as
one is able to, and whoever defers it without a legal excuse is deemed sinful,
for the Prophet (PBUH) saic!

‎“Make haste to (perform the obligation of) Hajj, for the one of you
does not know what might afflict him.”

‎(Related by Imam Ahmad)

‎‘Thereare five conditions that must ‏غم‎ fulfilled as prerequisites of performing
Hajj: to be a Muslim, to be sane, to have reached puberty, to be free (not a
slave), and to be able to perform it. Those who meet these prerequisites are
obliged to perform Hajj immediately.

‎Performing Hajjand “Umrah fora little boy is accepted as a supererogatory
act of worship, as indicated in the hadith narrated by Ibn ' Abbas:

‎“A woman lifted up u boy to (show hin to) the Prophet and said,
‘Would this (child) be credited with performing Hajj?’ He (PBUH)
replied, "Yes, and you will have a reward: *"'

‎(Related by Imam Muslim)

‘Chapter 1: The Obligation of Haj (Pilgrimage) 407

Scholars uniformly agree that if a boy performs Hajj before reaching
puberty, itis still obligatory for him to do it once again when he isan adult and
has the ability to do it, That is to say, Hajj, which is performed in childhood,
does not spare a person the obligatory Hajj when reaching puberty, and s0 is
the case of ‘Umrah.

Asfora child under the age of discretion, his guardian can assume ilirdm (a
state of ritual consecration during Hajj or ‘Umrah) and declare the intention
to perform Hajj on his behalf. The guardian should stop the child from doing
whatever acts which are forbidden during Hajj and should perform tawaf
(circumambulsting the Ka'bah) and say (going between As-Safa and Al-
‘Marwah) on behalf of the child while carrying him. The guardian is also to
accompany the child to Mount ' Arafah, Muzdalifah, and Mina, throwing the
pebbles on his behalf.

However, if the child reaches the age of discretion, he can assume
jhrém and declare the intention to perform Hajj after seeking the
permission of his guardian, The child is to perform whatever rites of
Hajj he can do, and his guardian performs whatever the child is unable
to do on his behalf, such as throwing the pebbles or the like, If the child
is unable to walk, his guardian can carry him performing tawéf, sa''y, etc,
Still, the child must perform whatever he can perform himself, whether
or not (he is) at the age of discretion, and it is impermissible to perform
any of the rites of Hajj on his behalf as long as the child is able to perform
it himself. Also, he should avoid whatever acts forbidden to be dane by
adults during Hajj.

‘The one capable of performing Haj is that who can afford it both physically
and financially, Le. the one able to endure the journey and have enough money
to go and return. One hasalso to be able to supply ones children and whomever
one financially supports, leaving them enough money tintil one feturns. In
addition, one has to settle all one’s debts and fulfill all one’s financial duties
before heading for Hajj, provided the journey to Hajj is safe for the pilgrim's
life and possessions,

So, ifa person can afford Hajj financially but not physically, such as being
disabled by old age or an incurable chronic disease, on¢ in this case may assign
someone to perform Hajj on his behalf, Ibn “Abbas (may Allah be pleased
with him) narrated:

108 \: HAI]

“A woman from (the tribe of) Khath’am said, '0 Messenger of
Allah! The obligation of Hajj enjoined by Allah has become due
on my father and he is old and weak, and he cannot sit firm on the
mount (fo travel); ray I perform Hajj on his behalf?’ The Prophet
(PBUH) replied, “Yes, you may?

The person who performs Hajj on behalf of another must have performed
Haj on his own behalf first, according to the following hadith reported by hn
‘Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him):

“The Prophet (PBUH) heard a man saying talbiyah in this way,
‘Here Iam at Your service © Allah, on behalf of Shubrumah’
He (the Prophet) asked, ‘Have you performed Hajj on your own
behalf?" The man suid, ‘No? The Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Perform
Hajj on your own behalf first, then perform it on behalf of

Shubrumah:

(Related through a good chain of transmitters and is deemed sahiht
(authentic) by Al-Bayhaqi)

The one who performs Hajj on behalf of another should be given enough
money to cover the costs of the joumey back and forth, However, he should
by no means get fees in return for this service, and should never use it as-a
means of earning money. He who performs Hajj on behalf of another should
be doing this with the intention of helping a Muslim brother or sister and also
visiting the House of Allah (the Ka’bah) and the sacred precincts. Thus, one’s
performance of Hajj on behalf of another should be intended for the Sake of
Allah, not for any worldly purpose. On the other hand, if Hajj is performed in
this way in return for money, then il will be invalid.

Endnotes

1 At-Tirmidht (811) [3/176)

2 Tawaf: Circumambulating the Ka'bah,

fri (4404) (8/134] and Muslim (3025) [4/460], See also Muslim (2941) (4/404)

(1778) [3/757] and Muslim (3023) [4/459].

5 Aba Dawéd (1888) [2/307] and At-Tirmidht (902) [3/246].

6 Ahmad (25198) [6/166], An-Nasdi (2627) [3/121] and [bn Majah (2901) [3/413]. See
also Al-Bukhari (152) [3/480]

‎The Obligation of Haj (Pilgrimage) 409‏ :1 ومست

‎130) |3/269|, An-Nasa'i (2620) [3/117], and

‎7 Abii Dawiid (1810) [2/276], AUTinmi
Ibn Majab (2906) [3/415].

‎8 Abé Dawad (1721) [2/237], An-Nasaii (2619) [3/17] and Ibn Majsh (2886) [3/406],

‎9 Muslim (3244) [5/105]

‎10 Abmad (2869) [1/314-315],

‎11 Muslim (1336).

‎12 ALBukhari (1513) [3/476] and Muslim (3258) (5/101

‎13 Abd Dawod (1811) [2/276] and Ibn Majah (2903) (3/414),

Women’s Hajj and Rulings on
Performing It on Someone’s Behalf

Hajj is prescribed for every Muslim, male or female, yet there are some
additional conditions for Hajj that are obligatory for women. A woman must
be accompanied by a mahram' during Haj. It is impermissible in religion for

awoman to travel for Hajj or anything else without a mahram, for the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

‘A woman should not travel except with a mahram, and no man
may visit her except in the presence of a mabram.

(Related by Imam Ahmad with an authentic chain of transmitters)
Itis also narrated in the Two Sahihs that a man said to the Prophet (PBUH):

“O Messenger of Allah! My wife is proceeding for Hajj and I have
enlisted in the army for such-and-such a battle.” Thereupon, the
Prophet (PBUH) said to him, “Go, and perform Hajj with your wife”

Al2 Vv: ‏الاق‎
‎Moreover, it is stated in the Sahih Books (Authentic Books of Hadith) and
other books of Hadith that the Prophet (PBUH) sai

“IL is impermissible for a woman ta travel for one day and night
except with a makram.”

All the aforesaid hadiths state that it is prohibited for a woman to travel
without a mabram, whether she is traveling for Hajj or anything else, so as to
avoid corruption or seduction on her part or others when she is abroad alone.

Imam Ahmad (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

‘A mahram is a prerequisite. Thus, it is not obligatory for a woman
whe has no mahram to perform Haj, or ta make someone perform
it on her behalf”

The makram of a woman should be her husband of any’ person
unmarriageable to her forever, either by kinship such as a brother, a father, an
uuncle, and a nephew, or by being unmatriageable to her fora legal reason such
asa foster brother, or by affinity, such as a stepfather or a stepson, To illustrate,
it is narrated in Salith Muslin (Muslims Authentic Book of Hadith) that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“It is not lawful for a woman believing in Allah to undertake
a journey extending over three days or more unless she is in the
company of her father, her son, her husband, her brother, or any
other mahram."

‘A woman must cover the expenses of her mahram during the journey of
Hajj. Therefore, a woman is not obliged to perform Hajj until she has enough
money to cover her own and her maliranr’s expenses to and fro.

Tfawoman findsa makram yet she delays performing Hajj, out of negligence,
until she loses him while she still possesses the financial capability, she has to
wait until she finds another makramn. However, if she has lost hope in finding
another mahiram, she is ‏ها‎ find someone (o perform Hajj on het behalf.

If someone is obliged to perform Hajj but he died before doing it, an
amount of money, enough to cover the Hajj expenses, should be taken out
of the capital of his inherifance and given to someone ‏فا‎ perform it on his
behalf, Al-Bukhari related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas (may Allah be
pleased with him) that:

“A woman said to the Prophet, ‘O Messenger of Allah! My mother
had vowed to perform Hajj but she ded before performing it. May

Chapter 2: Women's Haji and Rulings on Performing Iron Someone's ay

Tperform Hajj on her behalf?’ He replied, “Yes, perform Hajj on her
behalf. Had there been a debt on your mother, would you have paid
it or not? (If yes) so pay Allah’ debt as He has more right to fulfill
His debt (i.e, the obligation of Hajj). **

‘The aforesaid hadith proves that anyone who dies before performing the
obligation of Haj, then his son or guardian should do it on his behalf or they
should find someone to do it on his behalf, provided that the expenses of the
‘Hajj journey is taken fiom his inheritance. Moreover, the guardian should also
pay the debts of the dead person; scholars uniformly agree that the debt of a
man should be taken out of his money, and so should be any other financial
obligations (such as the expenses of performing Hajj for him and the like).

According to another hadith, the Prophet (PBUH) enjoined a woman
Whose sister vowed to perform Hajj and died before fulfilling it, to perform
‘Hajj on her behalf”, Similarly, it was related in the Sunan of Ad-Daraqutni that
he (PBUH) enjoineda man whose father died before performing the obligation
of Hajj, to perform it on behalf of his father’, That is to say, there is not much
legal difference between the obligation of a legislative origin and that which
one vows upon himself; both have to be fulfilled, whether it is enjoined by the
deceased in his/her will to perform it on his/her behalf or not,

When someone performs Hajj on behalf of another, the latter becomes
‏مم‎ longer obliged to perform it, It is as if he has performed it himself. In
this case, the one performing Hajj for another is called a “deputy pilgrim?”
Upon performing Hajj on behalf of another, a deputy pilgrim should have
the intention of performing Hajj on that person's behalf, and he is to chant
talbiyah also on his behalf; itis sufficient to make the intention to perform
the rites of Hajj on someone's behalf without mentioning his name. However,
if the deputy pilgrim forgets the name of the person on behalf of wham he is
performing Hajj, he can declare the intention and recite talbiyhah on behalf
of the one who has given him money to perform Hajj on his behalf, without
mentioning his name.

It is recommended for a Muslim to perform Hajj an behalf of his parents
whether they are dead or alive but lacking the ability to do it; a Muslim is
to perform it on his mother’s behalf first, as the mother is worthier of ones
dutifulness.

44 Vs BALL

Endnotes

1 Mahiram: A woman's husband or any unmattiageable kin of hers.
1862) and (1086, 1087), and Muslim (1341) and (1338).
3006) [6/172] and Muslirn (3259) [5/113]

4 Al-Bakhéri (1088) [2/730] and Muslim (3255) [5/111],

5 Muslim (3257) {5/112}.

6 Al-Bukhari (1852) [4/84].

7 AL-Bukhari (6699) [11/711]

8 Ad-Daraqutnt (2586) [2/229,

Virtues of Hajj and Its
Preparations

Hajj has a magnificent virtue and a great reward. At-Tirmidhi narrated a
(traceable) hadith, which he deemed sahih (authentic), on the authority
of “Abdullah Tbn Mas’ tid stating that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Perform Hajj and ‘Umrah (Lesser Pilgrimage) making them follow
each other, for they remove poverty and sins as a blacksmith’s bellows
removes impurities from iron, gold, and silver. And an accepted
performance of Hajj gets no reward less than Paradise.”"

Moreover, it was narrated in Salih Al-Bukhart (Al-Bukhdrts Authentic Book
of Hadith) that‘ Kishah (the Prophet’ wife) asked the Prophet (PBUH) saying:

“We see that jihad” is the best of (good) deeds, so should we not (as
women) participate in jihad?” He (PBUH) replied, “The best and the
most superior jihad for women is the accepted performance of Hajj.”

الاق ا قلة

Risimportantto point out thatan accepted pertarmance of Hajj is that which
is perfectly performed and not tarnished with ill deeds. It is also maintained
that an accepted Hajj is that which is worthy of being accepted by Allah,

Whenever one intends to perform Hajj. one should repent ofall one’s sins,
and free oneself from being unjust to others, by returning rights to those to
whom they are due. One should also return all trusts, loans and debts in one’s
possession to their owners before setting out for Hajj, Moreover, one should
ask the forgiveness of those whom one has wronged, and should also write
one's will before departure. In case one could not settle such obligations before
traveling for Hajj, one should authorize someone to do them on one’s bebalE.
One, as well, should secure one’ children and those one supports with enough
money until one’ return, Furthermore, one must make sure that the money
one uses for the expenses of Hajj is lawfully obtained, and should also take
enough provisions and money for the trip, so that one might not need the
assistance of anyone there, provided that one’s provisions be lawfully obtained:
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“O you who have believed, spend from the good things which you
have earned...” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 267)

Inaddition to theabove, a pilgrim should try to find a pious companion to
morally support him during the journey and while performing the rites of Hajj,
a righteous mate to guide him when he is wrong and to remind him when he
forgets. On the other hand, a pilgrim should renew his intention, determining
that his performance of Hajjis only for the Sake of Allah. A pilgrim should also
treat people with kindness and good manners, avoid quarreling or annoying
others, and safeguard his tongue against insult, backbiting, and whatever does
not please Allah and His Messenger.

Endnotes

1 At-Tirmidht (809) [3/175], An-Nasali (2630) [9/122], and Ibn Majah (2887) [3/407]
and (2888) [3/407].

2 hdd: Fighting in the Cause of Alta,

3 Al-Bukhart (1861) [4/93),

Migats' of Hajj

There are certain times for Hajj, and certain sites for entering the state
of ihram.

‘The Fixed Times of Hajj

‘The times specified for Hajj are mentioned by Allah, Exalted be He, when
He says:

“Hajj is [during] well-known months, so whoever has made Hajj
obligatory upon himself therein [by entering the state of ihram],
there is [to be for him] no sexual relations and no disobedience
and no disputing during Hajj...” (Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 197)
‘These months are: Shawwal, Dhdl-Qa’ dah, and the first ten days of Dhal-
Hijah. Therefore, anyone who enters the state of ihram in these months with
the intention to perform Hajj must avoid offensive words and deeds which
contradict the purity of that act of worship, and should also be preoccupied
with good deeds and abide by piety.

الاق :7 قلة

The Sites for Entering the State of Ihram

They are the specific places which a pilgrim must not exceed and head
for Mecca without entering the state of ihram (a state of ritual consecration
during Hajj or "Umrah), declaring his intention to perform Hajj. These places
were pointed out by the Prophet (PBUH) as mentioned in the narration of
* Abdullah Ibn “Abbis who said:

“Allalts Messenger (PBUH) specified Dhul-Hulayfah (as a site for
ihram) for the people of Medina, Al-Jubfah for the people of Ash-
Sham," Qarnul-Mandzil for the people of Najd, and Yalamlam for
the people of Yemen, saying, ‘They are (sites for iliram) for those
people and for any other people coming through them (i.e. those
sites) with the interion of performing Hajj and ‘Umrah (Lesser
Pilgrimage). And whoever is living within these boundaries can
assume ihram from the place he starts from, and the people of-
Mecca can assume ihram from Mecca:

Moreover, Imam Muslim related on the authority of Jabir that the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

‎The muhall' of the people of frag is Dhétu-'Tra.””‏ ...؟

‎The idea behind setting such migats for Hajj is as follows: ‘The House of
Allah (the Ka'bah), being so glorified and honored by Allah, is fortified by
Allah through Mecca and protected by the Sanctuary of Mecca which, in turn,
is glorified by those migdts beyond which one cannot pass without being in
the state of ihraim as a sign of honor and glorification to the House of Allah.

‎‘The farthest of these sites for entering ihrams is Dhul-Hulayfah, which
is specified for the people of Medina; the distance between this place and
Mecca is about a ten-day journey (on camels or the like). As for the people
of Ash-Shim, Egypt and Morocco, the site for ilivam is Al-jubfah, which is
near Rabigh; this place is about three-night journey far from Mecca, and
some say iis even further. Yalamlam, which is two-night journey far from
Mecca, is the site for iran for those coming from Yemen. The site for hrm
(a state of ritual consecration during Hajj or ‘Unerah) for the people of Najd
is Qarnul-Manazil - now known as As-Sayl - which is two-night journey far
from Mecca. As regards the people of Iraq and those of the East, the site for
iri is Dhatu~’Irq, which is two-night journey far from Mecca. These are the
sites for entering ira for the people of the aforesaid places and those passing
through them with the intention of performing Hajj or ‘Umrah, Regarding,

‎Migits of Lay, ay‏ اكمس

‎those who dwell in places that are nearer to Mecca than the aforementioned
places, they assume hrm for Hajj or ‘Umrah from their places. As mentioned
above, the residents of Mecca, however, enter ihram for Hajj from their own
residence, i, from places at Mecca itself, they do not have to get out of Mecca
to assume jhrdm from there. However, when it comes to ‘Ummah, they have to
et out of Mecca to the nearest precincts wherefrom they can assume ira

‎‘As for those who do not pass by any of the aforesaid sites of iliram on their
way to perform Hajj, they have to assume ifirim once they know they are at
the nearest place opposite to any of these sites. Al-Bukhari related that ' Umar
Tbnul-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) said to the people of Iraq:

‎“Make your site for ihram a place situated opposite to it (7.e. opposite
to Qarnul-Mandzil, the place of ilritm for the people of Najd) on
your usual way”

‎Similarly, those who travel by plane should assume ikirdm once they know
that they are parallel to any of the sites for ihrdm during the flight. However,
they should be prepared before getting on board the plane by ritual bathing
and cleaning. Aftecwards, whenever the plane reaches a place that is parallel to
any of the aforesaid sites for ilirdmn, they should declare the intention of ilrdm
and chant talbiyah in the plane. Itis impermissible for one to delay shrémn until
the plane lands in the airport of Jeddah as some pilgrims mistakenly do, as
both Jeddah and Bahrah are not sites for ilivm except for their own people or
anyone who intends to perform Hajj or ‘Unirah while being there, Otherwise,
it is impermissible to assume ihrdm from Jeddah, as it will be regarded as
negligence of one of the rites of Hajj, namely assuming ilirdm from one of
its decreed sites, and one in this case will be obliged to slaughter a sacrificial
animal in expiation.

‎Here isa common mistake made by many people and it has to be pointed
out; some people mistakenly believe that they have to take a ritual bath before
assuming ihrim, arguing that this is not possible while being in a plane and
‏مع‎ on, Therefore, its important to point out that ilninr means declaring the
intention to perform the rites of Hajj or ‘Umrah, avoiding the acts prohibited
to be done while being in a state of ira as much as possible. As for washing,
wearing perfumes, and the like, they are acts of the Sunnah which a Mustim can
do before getting on board the plane, and assuming ilrram without observing
them is permissible. So, a plane passenger can make the intention to assume
ihrdm and recite talbiyah while being in his/her seat once the plane is over any
of the known sites for thran or just before it. This is known by asking the pilots

20 V: HAI)

or'the hostesses of the plane, or trying to find it out independently through
investigation and estimation. Thus, one would have done one’s utmost in this
regard, However, if one does not care, it will be considered an inexcusable
negligence and indifference regarding one of the prerequisites of Hajj and
'Unirak, namely ihiréra, which may invalidate them.

As for those who pass by their site of tram without asstiming it, they have
to return to that site and assume ihram, for itis a manageable obligation that
should never be neglected. So, if one does not go back and assume ‏فيز‎ from
the right site -as some mistakenly do from Jeddah and the like - one in this case
will be obliged to slaughter a sacrificial animal in expiation, ie. to slaughter a
sheep or to get one-seventh of a camel or ane-seventh of a cow and divide it
among the residents of the Sanctuary of Mecca, provided one (the pilgrim who
sacrifices) should eat nothing from it,

In.a nutshell, Muslims should take an interest in their religious matters so
as to perform all acts of worship properly and perfectly as legally enjoined,
Among these religious matters is the ihrdm for Hajj and “Umrah; it has to be
assumed ftom the sites for ilrin specified by the Prophet (PBUH). Therefore,
a Muslim should be aware of these sites and never pass them without being in
a state of thrim,

Endnotes

1 Migats of Haj: The fixed tines of ‏ززع‎ and the sles for entering the state of ihren.
2 Ash-Shim: The Levant; the region covering Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, and Palestine.
3 Al-Bukhési (1524) [3/484] and Muslim (2796) (4/324),

4 Muhall: The site for entering the stale of ira:

5 Muslim (2802)14/326}.

6 Al-Bukhari (1831) (3/490),

How to 345511111 1

Thriim (a state of ritual consecration during Hajj or Umrah) is the first of
the rites of Hajj, and it means the intention to start the rites. It is called ilardm
(which is derived from the Arabic word “harém,” ie forbidden or prohibited)
because a pilgrim by assuming ihram prohibits himself from all the acts that
have been permissible before being in this state, such as sexual intercourse,
wearing perfume, clipping one’ fingernails, having one’s hair cut, or wearing
certain kinds of clothes. To illustrate, Shaykhul-Iskim Ibn Taymiyah (may
Allah have mercy on him) said:

“A man is not considered in a state of itm once he intends, with his
heart, to perform Hajj, for the intention is already in his heart since he
has left his hometown (heading for Mecca). So, there must be specific
words or deeds through which he becomes in a state of ihram.”’

Before assuming ihrdm, it is desirable to get prepared for such a state by
some deeds prior to this great act of worship:

422 VBA

First: It is desirable to have a hath - washing the whole body ~ before ihrdm,
for the Prophet (PBUH) used to do so before assuming ihrém’. This is
-also because bathing is a better and more comprehensive way of cleaning
and ridding oneself of any undesired smell. Moreover, having a bath
upon assuming ilivint is also required for a woman in a state of postnatal
bleeding or menstruation, for the Prophet (PBUH) commanded Asma Bint
“Umays, who was in a state of confinement, ta take a bath before assuming
idm, as related by imam Muslim’. He (PBUH) also commanded ' Aishah
(his wife) ta do the same though she was in her menstrual period", The
purpose of this is to clean the body, remove undesired smells and remove
the impurity of menstruation or confinement.

Second: Before assuming ihram, it is desirable to clean oneself perfectly
‘well, removing the hair which is legally enjoined to be removed, such as
trimming the moustache, shaving the hair of the armpits, and shaving
the pubic hair. One should do this before assuming ilirdm because it
will not be allowed when being in a state of thrin, Yet, removing such
kinds of hair is not one of the prerequisites for iardm. In other words,
if one does not need to trim or shave any of them, one is not obliged
to do so; itis permissible to do so if needed.

‘Third: ‏غ1‎ is desirable for a pilgrim to perfume oneself using whatever
is-available, such as musk, incense, rose-water, aloes, or the like, for

ishah (may Allah be pleased with her) reported:

“T used to scent Allalts Messenger (PBUH) whenever he wanted (0
assume ihirdm and (also) on finishing ikram before circumambutating
the House of Allah (i.e. before tawéf),””

Shaykchul-Iskim Ibn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“If a pilgrim: wants to wear some perfume before assuming iliram it
will be fine. Yet, doing so is not obligatory, for the Prophet (PBUH) did
50 but he did not enjoin the people to do the same."

Fourth: Itis desirable for male pilgrimsbefore ihrdmto take offall tailored
or sewn clothes and wear something unstitched; the Prophet (PBUH)
used to take off his tailored or sewn clothes and wear something
unstitched - after taking a bath - to assume ihriim . So, a pilgrim should
weara white, clean unstitched loincloth wrapped round the lower part
of the body, wrapping another sheet of white, clean, unstitched cloth.
round the upper part. Yet, itis permissible to replace the white color

Chapter 5: How so Assume Zaniin ex

with any other color provided it is traditionally befitting men. The idea
behind this is to withdraw oneself from luxury and to have the feeling
ofa submissive servant of Allah through wearing such humble clothing,
Moreover, such clothing always reminds one of being ina state of ihrim,
and thus one keeps alert and avoids committing the acts prohibited
during ‏.فيل‎ The clothing of ihriim reminds one of death, the shroud
of dead people, and the Day of Resurrection, and so on and so forth. In
addition, taking off sewn clothes before intending to assume ihrdm is
an act of the Sunnah, but it is obligatory after assuming ihrdm. So, if
pilgrim intends assuming dram while still wearing his ordinary sewn
clothes, his dram is considered valid, but he is then obliged to take such
clothes off and put on the clothes of ihr.

By fulfilling the aforesaid prerequisites, a pilgrim is thus prepared to be in
a state of ihriim, but such acts themselves are not called ihram-as many people
mistakenly believe; ilirim means the intention of starting performing the rites
of Hajj or “Umrah, Accordingly, a pilgrim is not considered in a state of ‏اميل‎
‎once he takes off his sewn clothes and wears the aforementioned clothing of
ihrdm without having the intention of starting performing the rites of Hajj or
“Umrah. This is because the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Indeed, (the correctness and rewards of) deeds depend upon
intentions...”

‘As for praying before assuming iliram, the more valid opinion is that there
is not a special kind of prayer to he offered before hrm. However, if the time
of ihrém coincides with an obligatory prayer, then a pilgrim is to perform
the obligatory prayer first then assume iltrdm. To illustrate, it was narrated
that the Prophet (PBUH) assumed irdm immediately following performing
{an obligatory) ‏."عردم‎ Mofeover, Anas reported that the Prophet (PBUH)
performed the Zuhr (Noon) Prayer then rode his mount beast,’ and when
he came to the hill of Al-Bayda’ he raised his voice with talbyiah. The great
‘Muslim scholar Ibnul-Qayyim (may Allah have mercy on him), said:

“It was never reported that the Prophet (PBUH) specified performing
two rak' ahs (units of prayer) for assuming ihram; what was reported
is that he performed the obligatory Zuhr (Noon) Prayer before ‏"يز‎

Itis important here to draw the attention of pilgrims to a very important
matter; many pilgrims mistakenly believe that they have to assume ihram from
the mosque in the site for ihrdm for them, Asa result, many pilgrims, males and
females, hurry to such mosques, overcrowding them, to start assuming ihrdm

44 1: HAI

from there. They may also change their clothes there and wear the clothing of
igri, while in fact all such issues are, by all means, baseless, Rather, Muslims
are just required to assume ihm from the proper site for ihrim for them, not
specifically from the mosques therein, They can assume ihrdon anywhere in
such sites, and there is no specific place in a certain site from which a pilgrim is
obliged to assume ilirim., That isto say, pilgrims can assume ihrdnt wherever is
appropriate for them in their site for iam, and this makes it easier for them and
their fellows. Thisalso spares pilgrims being exposed before one another or being
jammed in certain places. We would like to point out that those mosques in the
sites for ihrdm were not there during the lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH), and
that they were not built for the purpose of assuming ilrdm, However, they were
built for the inhabitants of and around such places to perform prayer therein,

‘This is very important to bear in mind, and may Allah grant us all success,

rim is free lo choose either the three kinds of urd, namely famatti',
ifrad, and gird

Tamattu’: It means that a pilgrim assumes irdm for performing ‘Umrah
during the months of Hajj, and then, after performing ‘Umirah, a pilgrim
assumes ihrdm for performing Hajj in the same season.

17,864: it means that a pilgrim assumes ihram for performing Hajj only,
Keeping in the state of rans until he finishes performing the rites of Haji,

Qirdn: It means that pilgrim assumes ihram for performing both ' Umrah
and Hajj together, or to assume ihram for 'Umrak then, before starting the lawaf
(circumambulating the Ka'bah) for ‘Unraly a pilgrim intends performing
both "Umrah and Hajj either from the migat or before the fawaf of "Uma. In
this case, a pilgrim is to perform both tawaf and sa'y (going between As-Safa
and Al-Marwah) for both.

Itis important to point out that a pilgrim who intends tamaitu® or ‏قسن‎
‎1s obliged to slaughter a sacrificial animal if he is not a resident of Mecca, We
should also know that the best of the aforesaid three ways of isrdm is tamattu’
for various legal proofs

Once a pilgrim assumes ilirim in any of the aforesaid three ways, he is to
chant talbiyah, saying:

“Here Tam at Your service, O Allah, here Lam at Yourservice, Here Lam
at Your service, You have no partner, here Lam at Your service. Verlly,
all praise, blessings, and dominion are Yours. You have no pariner*

A pilgrim should raise his voice with talbiyah, saying it repeatedly,

كه

Chapter 5: Hav Assume nam

Endnotes

1 See: Maja 'ul-Fatawva [26/22, 108]
2 AtTirmidhi (830) [3/192]

3 Muslim (2900) [4/371] and (2941) ]4/404[

4 Muslim (2929) [4/392].

5 Al-Bukhart (1539) [3/499] and Muslim (2818) [4/3371

6 See: Majnit'ul-Fatdwa [26/107]

7 At-Tirmidhi (830) [3/193].

8 At-Tirmidhi (819) [3/182] and An-Nasd{i (2783) (3/176).
9 Aba Dawid (1774) [2/258] and An-Nasait (2661) [3/136]
10 See: Zadul-Ma’éd,

Acts Prohibited during Ihram

There are specific forbidden acts that a pilgrim should avoid while being in
a state of iirdm (a state of ritual consecration during Hajj or ‘Umrah). These
prohibited acts are nine:

First: It is prohibited during iharm to cut, shave, pluck out, or remove any kind
of hair from one’s body without a legal excuse, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“.. And do not shave your heads until the sacrificial animal has

reached its place of slaughter...” (Quran: Al-Baqarah: 196)

As shown in the verse, Allah prohibits pilgrims to shave their heads while
being ina state of hrm, and this in turn applies to all kinds of hair in the body.
This is because removing any kind of hair from the body implies luxury and
elegance, which contradict the spirit of the state of idm, in which a pilgrim
is supposed to be unkempt and dusty. It is permissible, however, to remove
any unusual hair that is abnormally around the eye or on the eyelid without

428 Vi BAL)

any expiation, This is because it is not a normal place for hair ta grow, and by
removing if one spares oneself harm or pain.

Second: A muhrim' is prohibited to clip ones fingernails or toenails without
any legal excuse. Yet, if a nail is broken and one has to clip it or to remove it
with part ofits skin, itis permissible for one to do so without any expiation for
that. This is because it is removed as a consequence of being broken; as for the
skin, itis related to the nail and thus the same ruling is applicable. In addition,
itis permissible to remove the hair of the head if it causes any harm such as lice
or headache, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

4..And whoever among you is ill or has an ailment of the head
[making shaving necessary must offer] a ransom of fasting [three
days] or charity or sacrifice..." (Qur'an; Al-Bagarah: 196)

Also, Ka'b Ibn‘ Ujrah reported:

“There was an ailment in my head and I was carried to the Prophet
(PBUH) while lice were scattering over my face. Upon that, the
Prophet (PBUH) said to me, ‘I have never imagined that your
ailment has reached such an extent as I see! Can you afford a sheep?
T replied, ‘No? Thereupon, the following verse was revealed: ‘..And
whoever among you is ill or has an ailment of the head [making
shaving necessary must offer] a ransom of fasting [three days] or
charity or sacrifice...’ (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 196) Then the Prophet
(PBUH) said to me, ‘Fast for three days, or feed six needy people,
or slaughter a sheep (in expiation for shaving the hair of the head
despite ilsrdna)?”*

The permissibility here is because the ailment is caused by lice, not by
the hair itself,

Moreover, it is permissible for the muhrim to wash his hair with sidr
(the extractof the lote tree leaves) and the like, for it s narrated in the Two
Sahih’ that the Prophet (PBUH) once washed his head while being in a
state of ram, moving his hands forward and backward through his head’,
Shaykhul-Iskim Taqiyyud-Din Ibn Taymiyah (may Allah have merey on
him) said:

“Scholars unanimously agree that it is permissible for a mulirin to
take a bath to purify front jausbah (a major ritual impurity: in case
of having a wet dream during iam) or for any other reason.

Chapter 6 Acts Prohibited during ‏«قسلا‎ 9

‘Third: A male muhrim is prohibited to cover his head, as the Prophet (PBUH)
prohibited wearing a turban, hood, or anything of the kind while being in a
state of ram. In this regard, the great Muslim scholar Ibnul-Qayyim (may
Allah have mercy on him) said:

“There is consensus that everything that touches the head with the
purpose of covering it, such asa turban, a cap, a hat, or anything
else, is prohibited (during ilrram).”

Thisis applicable to all sorts of head covers, be it something usual such asa
turban or unusual such asa paper, mud, henna, ora headband. A midhrim can
seek the shelter of a tent, a tree, of a house, for it was narrated that a tent was
pitched for the Prophet (PBUH) to take shelter therein while being in a state
of firm’. On the other hand, it is permissible fora muhrim to use an umbrella
for shading, only when necessary. Likewise, it is permissible for a muhirim to
ridea car with a roof or carry his baggage above his head, provided not for the
purpose of covering the head.

Fourth: It is also prohibited fora male muhrim to wear sewn clothes to cover
all or parts of the body, such as a shirt, a turban, or a pair of trousers. Similarly,
it is prohibited for male mubyim to wear anything made exactly to fit a
certain part of the body; such as shoes, gloves, or socks. It is narrated in the
‘Two Sabihs that when the Prophet (PBUH) was asked what a rmuhrim should
wear, he (PBUH) replied:

“A muhrim should not wear a shirt, ora turban, or a hooded cloak,
or a pair of trousers, or a cloth touched with ‘wars’ (a yellow good-
smelled plant used for dyeing) or with saffron, nor (should he wear)
kchuffs (leather socks or shoes)"

Shaykhul-Istim fbn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“The Prophet (PBUH) prohibited muhrims to wear shirts, hooded
cloaks, trousers, khuffs, or turbans. He (PBUH) also forbade them
to cover the head of a male rubrim in case he died, and ordered the
man who assumed ira while wearing a jubbah to take it off. So,
wearing anything similar to a jubbah (on the pretext that it is mot a
jubbah) is regarded as a dishonest interpretation of what the Prophet
(PBUH) forbade A muhrira is also prohibited to wear something
similar to a shirt, be it with or without sleeves, or new or torn, The
same prohibition applies to wearing a jubbah or a cloak in whose
sleeves one passes one’ hands..."

430 Vs HAI}

Ibn Taymiyah then continued:

"\.. This is the juristic meaning of not wearing Sewn’ clothing while
being in a state of ihram; sewn clothing is any garment nade to fit a
certain part of the body. Therefore, a mulirim is not to wear anything
similar to trousers, such as shorts and the like!

However, ifa mudtrim does not find a suitable pair of slippers, he may wear
kn (leather socks or shoes), and if he does not find a suitable loincloth, he
may wear a pair of trousers until he finds a suitable one, Once the muhrim
finds a proper loincloth, he must take off the trousers and wear it, as the
Prophet (PBUH) gave permission for male mulirims oyer Mount ° Arafat to
‘wear trousers if they do not find a loincloth’,

As for a female mishrim, she may wear whatever clothes she likes while
being ina state of shrdm, for she must be covered well. Still, she is not allowed
to wear a burqu’” (i.e..a veil covering the face and has two holes for the eyes to
permit vision), So, a female mudyrim is not to wear a burqu’, but she is to cover
her face with other things such as a Khimar (a shawl-like cloth covering the
head and shoulders) anda gown, Moreover, female muhrim should not wear
gloves to cover her hands, for the Prophet (PBUH) said in the hadith related
by Al-Bukhari and other compilers of Hadith:

‘A female imulrim must not wear a nigib (a face-covering veil),
nor must she wear gloves.”

In this connection, Imam Ibnul-Qayyim (may Allah have mercy on him) said

“The Prophet's prohibition (for female pilgrims) of covering their faces
or wearing gloves indicates thal a womans face is treated as a mans
body, not head. A male mutrim is not to cover his bady with sewn
clothes made specifically for certain parts of the body. Similarly, a
_female muhrim is not to cover her face with a specific face-cover such
‘asa nigh (a face-covering veil) ora burqu’. However she should cover
herself with a veil (which shows only her face) and a gown according
to the more valid of the two juristic opinions in this regard.”

The gloves are specifically made for the hands ‏ما‎ protect them fram cold.

A female multrim is primarily obliged to hide her face from the eyes of
mien, and this is not through weating a hurqic’. ‘To illustrate, “Xishah (may
Allah be pleased with her) narrated:

“Men would pass by us when we accompanied Allak’s Messenger
(PBUH) while we were in the state of ihram (a state of ritual conse-

Chaprer 6: Acts Prohibited during Jbviim at

cration during Hajj or “Umrah. When they came by us, every one of
us would let down her gown over her face, and when they had passed
on, we would uncover our faces

(Related by Imim Ahmad, Ab Dawid, and other compilers of Hadith)

‘There is no harm if the face-cover of a female pilgrim touches her face, as
she is just forbidden from wearing a burqu' or a nigab, not from covering her
face with something else. Shaykhul-Islam bh Taymiyah said:

‘A female pilgrim should not bother keeping her face-cover separate

from her face either with a small piece of wood, or with her hand,
‘or with anything else; the Prophet (PBUH) made the liand and
the face of a woman equal in this case (i.e. they are permitted to
be uncovered), and both of thein should be regarded as the male
pilgrims body, not his head. Moreover, the wives of the Prophet
(PBUH) used to cover their faces without having to keep the cover
away from their faces.”

Ibn Taymiyah also said, “It is permissible for her (i.e. a fersale pilgrim) to
cover her face with any face-cover that touches the face, provided it is neither a
nigdb nor a burqu'?"

Fifth: It is prohibited for a mulirim to wear perfume— whether on the body or
the clothing of itrém - or even to use it in food or beverage, for the Prophet
(PBUH) said to a man in a state of ihram to take off his cloak and to wash
away the traces of perfume from his body’. Likewise, he (PBUH) said to the

people about the muhrim who fell down from his mount and broke his neck
(and died):

“Da not apply any perfume to him.?"

‘The idea behind the prohibition of wearing perfume during ilirém is to
detach oneself from luxury and worldly ornaments and pleasures, and to draw
one’s attention to the Hereafter, It is also impermissible for a pilgrim to smell
perfumes on purpose or rub the body with a perfumed substance.

Sixth: A mubrim is also prohibited to kill game animals, as Allah, Exalted be
He, says:

“O you who have believed, do not kill game while you are in the
state of iiram...” (Quran: AL-Ma‘idah: 95)

That is, do not kill game animals while being in a state of ihriim to perform
Hajj or ‘Umrah. Allab, Exalted be He, also says:

452 Vi HAI)

But forbidden to you is game from the land as long as you are
in the state of ihram..." (Qur'an: AL-Matidah: 96)

‘That is to say, those in a state of iliram are forbidden to hunt or kill game
animals, or help in hunting or slaughtering them. Likewise, itis prohibited for
4 mulrim to eat a game animal which he hunted, which was hunted for him,
or which he helped in hunting, as it will be regarded as a dead animal in this
case, which is unlawful to eat. Still, itis not prohibited fora mulirim to eat fish
or animals from the sea, whether he hunts it or anyone else does it for him, as
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Lawful to you is game from the sea and its food...”
(Qur'an: Al-Miidah: 96)

On the other hand, it is permissible for a muhrim to slaughter a domestic
animal such as chicken, sheep, and cattle, as they are not game animals, A
‘mulerim is also permitted to kill wild inedible animals, such as lions and tigers,
for such creatures threaten people’ lives.

Generally, if mubrim has to do any of the acts prohibited during ihrdin
for a legal excuse, he/she is permitted to do it, provided he/she is to slaughter
a sacrificial animal in expiation, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

‘And whoever among you is ill or has an ailment of the head
[making shaving necessary must offer] a ransom of fasting [three
days] or charity or sacrifice...” ‏د‎ Al-Baqarah: 196)

Seventh: A mulirim is prohibited to marry (while being in a state of idm) or
arrange the marriage of another by guardianship, as Trim Muslim related on
the authority of ‘Lithman Ibn ' Affin that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“A mubrim must neither marry himself, nor arrange the marriage
of another one.””

Eighth: A niukrim is prohibited (o have sexual intercourse, for Allah, Exalted
be He, says:

“..So whoever has made Hajj abligatory upon himself therein
[by entering the state of ihm], there is [to be for hint] no sexual
relations...” (Quran: Al-Bagarah: 197)

According to Tbn *Abbis, it refers to the activity of engaging in sexual
intercourse". To clarify, ifa man in a state of iirdm (i.e. a muhrim) has sexual
intercourse with his wife before the first release from ifyrdm, it will invalidate

Chapter 6+ Acts Prohibited during fram 433

his Hajj. Yet, itis obligatory for him to continue performing the rest of the rites
of Hajj, for Allah, Exalted be He, says;

“And complete the Hajj and ‘Umrah for Allah...
(Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 196)

Still, it is obligatory for such 1 person to re-perform Hajj the following
year, and to slaughter a camel or a cow. On the other hand, if a muri has
sexual intercourse with his wife after the first release of ihrain, his Hajj is still
considered valid, provided that he slanghters a sheep in expiation.

Ninth: A mubrim is prohibited to touch his wife (or any woman) lustfully
(such as kissing or the like), as these are among the acts that lead to sexual
intercourse. Therefore, the mulriin must avoid sexual intercourse, lewdness,
and dispute, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“... So whoever has made Hajj obligatory upon himself therein
{by enttering the state of ihram), theres [to be for him] no sexual
relations and no disobedience and no disputing during Hajj...”

(Qur'an; Al-Baqarah: 197)

‘The verse refers to the actual sexual intercourse and any related matter
that might lead to it, such as kissing, touching, winking, or talking about sex.
“Disobedience” in the aforesaid verse means committing sins, which is a grave
act to do while being in a state of ilirdm, whereas a Muslim is supposed to be
ina state of devotion and supplication. As for “disputing” which is prohibited
for a mubtrim, it refers to arguing about matters that do not concern one,
quarrelling with one’s pilgcim mates, insulting others, etc. However, it is
permissible fora mubirim to argue for the sake of showing the right, enjoining
good, or forbidding evil, for argument is a divine command in such cases;
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

And argue with them in a way that is best...”
(Qura

n-Nahl: 125)

It is an act of the Summah: (Prophetic Tradition) for the muhrim to talk less,
except in matters of benefit. It is narrated in the Two Sahih, on the authority
of Abdi Hurayrah, that the Prophet (PBUH) said;

“He who believes in Allah and the Last Day should either say
something good or keep silent.”

ax 6: HAI}

‘He (PBUH) also said inn marfit’ (tracewble) hadith:

“A sign of one’ good observance of Islam is leaving alone what does
not concern him

It is also recommended for a mmuhrim to be preoccupied with chanting
talbiyah, praising Allah, reciting the Qur'an, enjoining what is good, forbidding
what is evil, and not wasting his time in what is useless. A muhrim should also

incere intention, seeking Allah's great rewards,
is about to performa great act of worship and visit great sacred
precincts and shrines,

‘Then, if a mulirim reaches Mecca with the intention of tamattu’, he is to
begin with performing the "Umrah rites as follows:

A mulerim begins with performing tawéf (i.e. circumambulating the Ka’ bah)
seven times.

Afterwards, he is to offer two rak ahs (units of prayer) which are recom-
mended to be performed at the Standing Place of Ibrahim (Abraham) if possible.
Otherwise, the muri can perform them elsewhere in the mosque.

Then, the murin’ is to head for As-Safa to perform ‏برذ مد‎ (going between
As-Safa and Al-Marwah) seven times, starting from As-Safa and ending at
‘Al-Marwahy the way from the one of them to the other is considered one time
and the way back is another. During sa"), a pilgrim is recommended to be
preoccupied with supplicating and invoking Allah, Glorified be He.

After finishing the seventh round of say, a male pilgrim must shave all his
head, and a female pilgrim should cut a small part (equivalent to a fingertip)
of the hair of the head,

In this way, a pilgrim will have accomplished the ‘Umrah rites, so he exits
the state of ijiram and, thus, is allowed to do all lawful acts that have been
prohibited while being in a state of ihram such as lawful sexual intercourse,
‘wearing perfume, wearing sewn clothes, clipping the fingernails, trimming the
moustache, and plucking out the hair of the armpits if necessary. A pilgrim
remains in this condition until the Day of Tarwiyah (the eighth day of the
month of Dhul-Hijjah), then he declares the intention of performing Hajj, as
will be pointed out in detail later, Allah willing,

As for those mubrims who reach Mecca with the intention of performing
ginan or ifrdd, they start with performing the Arrival Tawaf, following it with
the sa'y for Hajj (instead of performing it later) if they like. Then, they should
keep in the state of irdin until the Day of Sacrifice, as will be explained later,
Allah witlng,

Chapeer 6: Acts Prohibited during lnm 435

Endnotes

ne in a state of ritual consecration during Haj oF ‘Umrah

2 Al-Bulkhael (1816) [4/22] and Muslim (2875) [4/360],

3 The Two Saks: The Two Authentic Books of Al-Bukhiri and Mustim-

4 Al-Bukhari (1840) [4/72] and Muslim (2881) [4/363].

5 Muslim (2941) [4/441].

6 Al-Bukhar (1542) (3/505] and Muslini (2783) [4/313]

7 Khnuff: Leather socks or shoes or their like.

8 See: Majmt'ul-Fatdwa (26/110 -111

‎Al-Bukhari (1841) [4/75] and Muslim (2786) (4/316)‏ و

‎10 Al-Bukhari (1838) (4/68]

‎11 "Tahdhib As-Sunan” [2/350 -352].

‎42. Ahmad (23903) [6/30], Aba Dawiid (1833) [2/285] and bn Majah (2935) 13/428),
13 See: Majmii"ul-Fatawd [26/112}.

‎14"AL-tkhtiyardt Al-Fighiyyah” |p. 174).

‎15 Al-Bukhai (1789) [3/774] and Muslim (2790) [4/317]

‎16 AL-Bukhat¥ (1265) [3/174] and Muslim (2884) [4/365] and (2889) (4/368).

‎17 Muslim (3432) [5/196].

‎18 Ibn Abd Shaybah (13224) [3/173] and (13236) (3/174) and Al-Hkim (3153) [2/342].
‏قل‎ Al-Bakhari (6018) [10/547] and Muslim (172) [1/209].

‎20 Ahmad (1737) [1/201], At-Tirmidhi (2322) [4/552], and tn Majah (3976) (4/344),

Rites of Tarwiyah and
‘Arafah Days

Upon reaching the site for ihm (a state of ritual consecration during Haj
or ‘Umrah), a pilgrim declares his intention to perform one of three types of
Hajj (Pilgrimage):

Afréid: It means that a pilgrim enters the state of ihrém with the intention
of performing Hajj only, keeping in the state of hrm until he stones Jamratul-
“Agabah on the Day of the Feast of Sacrifice ( Idul-Adhd; on the tenth of Dhul-
Hijah). Then, a pilgrim shaves his head, and performs the Ifadah (Going-
forth) Tawéf along with say (going between As-Safa and Al-Marwah) in case
he has not performed it (ie. sa'y) following the Arrival Tawaf,

Qirdin: It means that a pilgrim assumes ihrdm for performing both * Umrah
(Lesser Pilgrimage) and Hajj (Pilgrimage) together. The rites of performing
girdn are the same as those of performing ifrad, except that a pilgrim is obliged
to slaughter a sacrificial animal in the former case.

438 ‏الا‎ HA

Tamattu: ILmeans that a pilgrim assumes ilirdm for performing *Untrah
only, keeping in such state of ihrdm until he finishes the rites of ‘Umrah, such
as fawéf, say, and shortening or shaving the hair. Afier that, a pilgrim may get
out of the state of fyrdzm until he assumes another ihnim for performing Hajj.

The best of the three forms is tamattu’. It is desirable for a pilgrim
performing ifrdd or qinin and has not got a sacrificial animal to change his
intention and perform famattu’ instead, carrying out all its rites,

It is also desirable for the one performing tamatty’ (even if it has been
ifrad or qirdn that converted to tamattu), as well as the residents of Mecca and
the surrounding places, to assume ‏تيلا‎ for Hajj on the Day of Tarwiyah (the
eighth day of Dhul-Hijjah). This is because Jabir (may Allah be pleased with
him) narrated, in his description of the Prophet's performance of Hajj:

"All the pilgrims dissolved the state of ihram except the Prophet
(PBUH) and whoever had a sacrificial animal with him, When it
was the Day of Tarwiyah, they proceeded to Mind and assumed
ibrdim for Haji?”

A pilgrim performing famattu’ may assume ihrram from the place where he
stays, whether in Mecca, Min3, or any place outside Mecca, but he should not
perform fawaf after assuming ind for Haj (as it has been already performed
during “Umraiij. Shaykhol-islim Ibn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on
hhim) said:

“On the Day of Tarwiyah, a pilgrim performing tamatiu’ assumes
thram for Hajj and does the same as he did when he has assumed
ihrdm for ‘Umrah front the migat. The right opinion is that such a
pilgrim can assume ihram from Mecca or |
the Prophets Companions. used to assume Hi
place enjoined for them by the Prophet (PBUH), namely Al-Batha’
(in Mecca). Thus, it is an act of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) for
a pilgrim to assume iritm (for Hajj) from the place where he stays,
Likewise, the people of Mecca can assume ‏تفيل‎ from Mecca, as the
Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘And whoever is living within these boundaries
can assume ihriim from his home, and the people of Mecca can assume
iran from Mecca?”

Sbnul-Qayyim (may Allah have mercy upon him) sald:

“When it was ‘Thursday forenoon, the Prophet (PBUH) and his
‘Companions proceeded to Mina, and those who previously terminated

GChaprer 7+ Rites of Farwiyih and “Arafah Days 439

their iram declared their intention ofa new ibrdm for Hajj, Vet, they
did not do this in the mosque, but they assumed ihram while Mecca
was behind them.”"

Once a pilgrim assumes ifira for Haji, he should then preoccupy himself
with chanting talbiyah and continually repeat it every now and then, raising
his voice with it until he stones Jammratul- Aqabah on the Day of the Feast of
Sacrifice (on the tenth of Dhul-Hijjah). Those pilgrims who have assumed
their ilram from Mecca on the Day of Tarwiyah should head for Mina; the
optimum time for moving is after the sun has reached its meridian. Then,
they perform the Zuhr (Noon) Prayer there, at Mind, camping there until they
perform the rest of the Five Daily Prayers including the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer of
the following day (the ninth of Dhul Hijjah). Jabir (may Allah be pleased with
him) narrated:

“..The Prophet (PBUH) rode his mount (heading for Mind) and
performed there the Zuhr, the ‘Asr (Afternoon), the Maghrib
(Sunset), the ‘Isha’ (Night), and the Fajr (Dawn) Prayers. Then, he
(PBUH) stayed there for a while until the sun rose.”

Itis worth mentioning that spending that time in Mina (from the noon
of the Day of Tarwiyah until the dawn of the fallowing day) and performing
those five prayers there is an act of the Sunnah, notan obligatory one. Likewise,
assuming ihr on the Day of Tarwiyah is considered an act of the Sumah. 80,
itis permissible for a pilgrim to assume ram before or after that day.

On the ninth of Dhul-Hijjah and after sunrise, a pilgrim proceeds to
' Arafah; the whole area of ' Arafah is a standing place except for the valley
called Bata ‘Uranah”. Thus, it is sufficient for a pilgrim to stand anywhere on
that day within the boundaries of “Arafah, excluding the place pointed out by
the Prophet (PBUH), namely Batn ‘Uranah. The boundaries of " Arafah are
clearly distinguished by means of signs, so standing anywhere within these
boundaries will be regarded as standing at ° Arafah. Still, a pilgrim has to pay
attention ‏ما‎ these signs in order not to stand outside“ Arafah

When the sun passes its metidian, a pilgrim performs the ‏عابم‎ (Noon)
and the ‘Asr (Afternoon) Prayers, shortening and combining them at the due
time of the Zuhr Prayer (i.e. performing each as two rak’ahs instead of four)
‘with one prayer call (adhdn) and two immediate prayer calls (iqamahs). We
should know that a pilgrim shortens every four-rak'ah prayer (i.e. performs
it as twa rak'ahs) at * Arafah, Muzdalifah, and Mind, However, at ’ Arafah and
‘Muzdalifah the prayers are to be shortened and combined whereas they are

440. VAI]

only shortened at Mina, i.e, performing each prayer at its due time for there is
no need for combining them at Mina.

After a pilgrim performs the Zuhr and the “Agr Prayers, shortening and
combining them (for he is at ‘Arafah), he should spend the rest of the day
remembering, invoking, glorifying, and praising Allah, seeking His forgiveness,
and so on and so forth. This is to be done while a pilgrim is sticking to his
place at ‘Arafah. In other words. a pilgrim does not have to go to the Mount
of Ar-Rahmah, or to watch it, or eyen to face it, while performing such
supplications; standing anywhere at ' Arafah while facing the direction of the
Ka’ bah is sufficient.

A pilgrim should spare no effort supplicating Allah and turning to Him
in repentance on such a glorious day, whether he is walking, sitting, riding,
standing, or even lying down, He should also choose the mast comprehensive
supplications that were reported to have been observed by the Prophet (PBUH),
for he (PBUH) said

“The best supplication is the one on the Day of ‘Arafal, and the
best thing which Land the prophets before me have sail is: "There
is no deity but Allah Alone, Who has no partner. To Him belongs
dominion, and to Him belongs (all) praise, and He is over all things
Omnipotent? "“

A pilgrim keeps supplicating Allah at “Arafah until sunset. It is imper-
missible to leave before sunset, and if a pilgrim does, he must go back soon
before sunset, to witness it there. However, ifa pilgrim leaves ‘Arafah before
sunset and does not go back, he is then obliged to slaughter a sheep of Hajj
(or to get one seventh of a camel or « cow) and divide it among the poor
residents of the Sanctuary of Mecca in expiation for missing an obligatory
ritual of Haj.

‘The Day of *Arafah starts from the noon of the ninth of Dhul-Hi
until the dawn.of the tenth of Dhul-Hijjah (the Day of the Feast of Sacrifice)
according to the sound opinion in this regard. As for a pilgrim who is present
at ‘Arafah at daytime, he is obliged to stay there until sunset as we previously
said. But if someone arrives at ° Arafah at night, itis sufficient for him to stay
there for any length of time, even if for only one moment, as the Prophet
(PBUH) said:

“If anyone gets (i.e. stays at) “Arafah before the dawn (of the tenth
of Dhul-Etijah) breaks,

Chapter 7: Rites of Tirwiyah and °Arafali Days 57

Staying at ‘Arafah is one of the obligatory fundamental rituals of Haj,
and it is the most important and the greatest one as well, for the Prophet
(PBUH) saic

of Haji.

As forthe place of staying at 'Arafah, a pilgrim may stand anywhere within

the boundaries of *Arafah, and this ritual is deemed invalid if one stands
outside them

‘May Allah guide us all fo the deeds and words He likes and pleases. Ver
He is the Heating and the Responsive,

‘Arafah (i.e, stayingat ‘Arafah is the most important rittcal

Endnotes

1 Muslim (2941) [4/402].

2 Al-Bukhart (1526) [3/488] and Muslint (2795) (4/321

3 See: "Majeni"ul-Fatawa" (26/129.

4 See: "Zadul-Ma ‘aa [2/233},

5 Tn Majah (3012) [3/466] and Muslim (2943) |4/422]

6 At-Tiemidhi (3594) [5/572]

7 Abit Dawid (1949) [2/332], At-Tiemidhi (889) 13/237), An-Nasdt (3016) [3/282], and
Ibn Majah (3015) (3/468).

8 The Five Compilers of Hadith

Acts on Muzdalifah and Mina

‘When the sun sets on the Day of “Arafah (the ninth of Dhul-Hijjah), pilgrims
leave *Arafah setting out for Muzdalifah calmly and tranquilly, for Jabir (may
Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“He (the Prophet) kept standing there (at ‘Arafah) until sunset,
when the yellow light had somewhat gone, and the disc of the sun
had disappeared. He (PBUH) then mounted Usimah beltind him,
and pulled the reins of Al-Qaswa’ (the name of his she-camel) so
forcefully that its head touched the saddle (in order to keep it under
full control), and he (PBUH) pointed to the people with his right
hand saying, ‘O people! Be moderate (in speed)! Be moderate!" ”

‘Thus, pilgrims must be in a state of tranquility and serenity while leaving
Arafah and heading for Muzdalifah, avoiding jostling against their fellow
pilgrims, pushing them, or disturbing them with their cars. A pilgrim should
also have mercy on the walking weak and old people at such a crowd. It is

‎Ys HAI‏ فقة

‎desirable for pilgrims to keep asking Allah’s forgiveness while departing from
“Arafah (heading for Muzdalifah), for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

‎“Then depart from the place from where [all] the people depart
and ask forgiveness of Allah. Indeed, Allah is Forgiving and Me
reiful?” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 199)

‎Linguistically, the word “musdalifah” (i.e, close) is an adjective derived
from the Arabic word “izdildf” which means closeness, and Muzdalifah is
so-called because when leaving “Arafah, the pilgrims become closer to ‏اذ‎
‎Muzdalifah is also referred to as Jam’ (ie. gathering), as pilgrims gather
there, It is called Al-Mash’ ar Al-Haram (the Sacred Landmark) as well. In
his volume entitled Al-Mughni' (the Sufficient), Ibn Qudamah, an eminent
Hanbali scholar said, “Mucdalifah has three names; Muzdalifak (i.e. close),
Jam’ (ie. gathering), and Al-Mash ‘ar Al-Hardim (ie, the Sacred Landmark).”

‎A pilgrim should keep on remembering Allah all through his way from
‘Arafah to Muzdalifah, supplicating Him devoutly, for a pilgrim at that stage
is still shifting from one ritual to the other. Upon arriving at Muzdalifah, a
pilgrim is to perform the Maghrib (Sunset) and the ‘Isha’ (Night) Prayers,
shortening the ‘Is/:d’ to two rak’ahs and combining them with one prayer call
and two immediate prayer calls (ane for each) before encamping. To illustrate,
Jabir (may Allah be pleased with him), in his description of the Prophet’s
performance of Hajj, narrated:

‎“When he (PBUH) reached Mucdalifah, he performed the Maghrib

‎(Sunset) and the “Isha’ (Night) Prayers, with one prayer call (adhan)
and two immediate prayer calls (iqamahs) (i.e. one for each)”

‎A pilgrim then encamps at Muzdalifah and offers the Fajr Prayer at its due
time, for Jabir narrated:

‎“..Allahs Messenger (PBUH) then lay down until dawn and offered
the Fajr Prayer with one prayer call and one immediate prayer call
When the morning light was clear.”

‎itis worth mentioning that a pilgrim may stay anywhere at Muzdalifah, as
the whole area between the two bottlenecks of “Arafah and to Batn Muhassir*
(excluding the valley of Batn Muhassir itself) is called Al-Mash’ ar Al-Haram
(the Sacred Landmark), as the Prophet (PBUH) said:

‎"All Muzialifah isa standing place, but be away from Batn Mulyassin’

Chapter 8 Acts ain Mualalifals andl Mind 445

It is an act of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition) to spend the night at
Muzdalifah and offer the Fajr Prayer at its due time. After that, while standing
at Murdalifah, a pilgrim keeps on supplicating Allah until the daylight spreads.
Then, before suntise, a pilgrim proceeds to Mina, As regards feeble pilgrims,
such as old people, women, children and the like, as well as those who take
care of them, they are allowed to head for Mind after midnight or when the
moon disappears, instead of waiting at Muzdalifah until dawn. However,
healthy pilgrims who do not have any weak people with them should not
leave Muzdalifah before offering the Fajr Prayer, and they should stay until
the daylight spreads.

Spending the night at Muzdalifah is one of the duties of Haj. A pilgrim
who enters Muzdalifah before midnight must not leave befare dawn, As for a
pilgrim who arrives there after midnight, it is sufficient for him to spend any
length of time there, Stil, it is much better in the latter case to stay until dawn,
offering the Fajr (Dawn) Prayer and following it with supplicating Allah. tba
Qudamah stated in his book entitled ‘Al-Mughni" (she Sufficient):

There is no harm on the one who arrives at Muzdalifah in the
second half of the night, and the previous ruling related 10 arriving at
the first half of the night (which obligates staying at Muzdalifah until
dawn) will not be applicable to hima?

It is permissible for those pilgrims who have legal excuses, such as sick
people who need to be hospitalized and those helping them, as well as shepherds
and water providers, not to spend the night at Muzdalifah, as the Prophet
(PBUH) gave permission to shepherds not to spend the night at Muzdalifah
‘According to the above, spending the night at Muzdalifah is obligatory for all
pilgrims who enter Muzdalifah before midnight, because the Prophet (PBUH)
spent the night there, and we should follow his Surah, as he (PBUH) said:

“Learn your rituals from me (by seeing me performing them)."

So, leaving Muzdalifah (and heading for Mina) after midnightis permi
only for those who have legal excuses, as indicated in hadiths,

‘Afterwards, a pilgrim heads for Mina shortly before sunrise (of the tenth
of Dhul-Hijjah, i.e. the Day of Sacrifice), as ' Umar fbnul-Khattab (may Allah
be pleased with him) said:

“The polytheists did not use to depart (from Jam’, i.e. Muzdalifah)
until the sun had risen, and they used to say, ‘Let the sun shine on

003 Vi HAN

you, O Thabir (a mountain in Mecca which overlooks Muzdalifah),
50 as to let us depart! Therefore, the Prophet (PBUH) contradicted
them and departed (from Muzdalifah) before sunrise.”

Pilgrims should leave in a state of tranquility and calmness, but when
they pass through the valley called Batn Muhassir, they should go faster. It is
preferable for a pilgrim to pick up the pebbles, with which he intends to do
the ritual of stoning, while he is on his way to Mina. Still, it is permissible for a
pilgrim to pick them up from Muedalifal, Mina or elsewhere, as ‏مطل‎ “Abbas,
{may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“In the morning of the Day of Al-’Aqabah (the day of throwing
the pebbles at Jamratul-'Aqabah), Allak’s Messenger (PBUH) said
to me, ‘Pick up pebbles for me I picked up seven pebbles for him
«as large as beans. He (PBUH) then started shaking them while
saying, ‘You should throw pebbles as large as these ones? Then,
the Prophet (PBUH) said, "0 people! Beware of excessiveness in
religion, for those (nations) before you were ruimed because of
excessiveness in religion! """

‘Thus, pebbles should be as large as beans, ie, slightly bigger than chickpeas.
Itshould be noted that it is insufficient ‏ما‎ use anything other than small pebbles.
or fo use stones for this purpose, for the Prophet (PBUH) used small pebbles
(as large as beans) for stoning. So, we have to follow in the Prophet's footsteps,
ashe (PBUH) said:

"Leartt your rituals from me (by seeing me performing them)?

Upon reaching Mina, which is between the valley called Batn Mubassir
and Jamratul-'Aqabah, pilgrims are to head for Jammratul-' Agabah (the nearest
Jamralt to Mecca which is called the Great Jamrah) and stone it with seven
consecutive pebbles. The time for stoning is after sunrise, and extends until
sunset. Each pebble should be thrown into the throwing place (the fenced area
surrounding the pillar), whether it settles there or not after falling inside, A
pilgrim should point at the fence while throwing the pebbles, not at the pillar
itself, for it is not built to be stoned, but to help as a sign showing the throwing
place. So, itis insufficient if pilgrim throws a pebble at the pillar and then it
falls outside the fenced area,

Itis permissible for the weak pilgrimsand those who have valid excuses to
throw the pebbles at famratul-'Aqabah after midnight. It is also permissible

‘Chapter 8: Acts on Muzalifily and Mina 447

for healthy pilgrims to delay stoning until midnight, yet it is not desirable
for them.

itis an act of the Sunnah to start throwing pebbles at Jamratul-’Agabah
as soon as a pilgrim arrives at Mina and before doing anything else, for itis
regarded as.a sign of greeting to Mina. On the other hand, it is desirable for a
pilgrim to utter takbir" upon throwing each pebble, saying:

"0 Allah! Make it an accepted Hi
_for our sins.”

of ours that serves as a pardon

Itisimportant to point outthata pilgrim should by no means throw pebbles
at any jamah other than Jamiratul- ‘Agabah on the Day of Sacrifice (the tenth.
of Dhul-Hijjah), as this ritual is restricted to Jamratul-' Agabah on that day.

After stoning famiratul- Aqabah, its preferable for a pilgrim who performs
Hajj as tantattu’ of iran to slaughter the obligatory sacrificial animal. Such
a pilgrim has to buy a sacrificial animal to slaughter and distribute its meat
among the poor, keeping a share for himself to eat from.

Afterwards, a pilgrim shaves his head or cuts his hair short, yet shaving is
better, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

4... With your heads shaved and [hair] shorten
(Qur'an: Al-Fath: 27)

‘Moreover, Ibn ‘Umar narrated:

“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) got his head shaved during the
Farewell Hajj”

The Prophet (PBUH) invoked Allah three times to be merciful to those
who have their head shaved, and invoked Him only once to be merciful to
those who got their hair cut short” If a pilgrim chooses to shorten his hair,
then he must shorten all his hair-and not only some of it, for Allah, Exalted be
He, says:

“,. With your heads shayed and [hair] shortened...
(Qur’n: Al-Fath: 27)
The aforementioned verse indicates that shaving or cutting should be

applied to the whole head, not only some or certain parts of t. As for a female
pilgrim, she should only shorten her hair by cutting a small part equivalent to

448 Ni HAJ}
a fingertip of each hair braid (or of the tips of her hair). This is because it was
narrated by Ibn ‘ Abbas that the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Shaving (the hair) is not a duty laid on (pilgrim) women; only
clipping their hair is incumbent on them.”

(Related by Aba Dawid, A{-Tabarani and Ad-Daraqutni)

Another reason is that shaying a woman's head is in fact a sort of disfigure-
ment for her. Itis worth mentioning that if female pilgrim does not have her
hair braided, she may gather it and clip a part equivalent to a fingertip.

Itisalso an act of the Sunnah for a pilgrim who shaves or cuts his hair short
to clip his fingernails, shorten his mustache, shave his pubic hair and pluck out
the hair of the armpits. However, itis forbidden fora pilgrim (or any Muslim)
to shave his beard or cut it short," as the Prophet (PBUH) enjoined growing,
the beard and forbade shaving it off or cutting it short, and Muslims should
obey the Prophet's commands and avoid what he forbade, especially pilgrims,
who are undergoing such a glorious act of worship. In the case of a bald man
who has little or no hair at.all, itis desirable to pass a razor over his head as if
he is shaving his head, for the Prophet (PBUH) sai

“If Lcommand you to do something, then do (of) it as much as
you can.”

After stoning fanratul-’Agabak and shaving or cutting the hair short, a
pilgrim becomes in a state of semi-consecration, namely the first (partial)
release of ihram, That is to say, pilgrim at this stage is partially released from
the state of ihram, and everything becomes lawful for him, such as wearing
sewn clothes, wearing perfume, etc., except for having sexual intercourse with
his wife. To illustrate, “Aishah (the Prophet's wife, may Allah be pleased with
her) said:

“When one of you throws pebbles at Jamratul-‘Agabah, everything
becomes lawful for him except women (i.e. sexual intercourse)” ”

She also said:

“Tapplied perfume consisting of musk to Allah's Messenger (PBUH)
once before he assumed ilydm, and once on the Day of Sacrifice
before circumambulating the House (i.e, the Ka‘bah).””

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

(Chapter 8: Acts ‏مه‎ Murdalifah and Mint 449

A pilgrim reaches this first (partial) release of ihndm after fulfilling two of
the following three rituals:

+ Throwing the pebbles at Jamratul-"Aqabah
+ Having the hair shaved or shortened

+ Performing iffidah (Going-forth) Tawaf{ollowed by sn’y (goingbetween
‘As-Saff and Al-Marwah) for those obliged to perform sa'y

However, thesecond (complete) release of hramisachievedafter performing
all the aforesaid three rituals; when a pilgrim fulfils them, everything that was
unlawful due to.ifrdm becomes lawful for him, even sexual intercourse.

‘After throwing the pebblesat famratul-"Agabah, slaughtering the sacrificial
animal, and shaving or shortening the hair, a pilgrim then proceeds to Mecca
to perform fiddah (Going-forth) Tawaf, After that, a pilgrim performs sa'y if
heis performing Hajj as tamattu’, oras qirdn or ifrid but he has not performed
it following the Arrival Tawéf. Yet, if pilgrim is performing Hajj as qiran or
ifrad and has already performed sa'y following the Arrival Tawaf, then he
does not have to perform another sa‘y after [faidah Tawa.

These four rituals are to be performed in the following order, if possible:
stoning Jamratul-'Agabah, slaughtering the sacrificial animal, shaving or
shortening the hair, and performing the Ifidah Tawaf followed by sa’y:
Performing these rituals in this order is an act of the Sunnah, so there is no sin
on a pilgrim if he has to perform them in a way other than the aforesaid order.
This is because on the Farewell Hajj (the Prophet's one and only Pilgrimage)

Whenever a pilgrim violated that order of rituals and told him, he (PBUH)
replied, “Do it aid there is no harm (sin)."" However, sticking to this order is
better, for the Prophet (PBUH) performed them in that way

As for fawéf (circumambulating the Ka’bah), a pilgrim has to start it
from the Black Stone, standing aligned with it, and kissing it if possible, or
touching it with his right hand. If this is unavailable due to the huge throng of
pilgrims, it is sufficient for a pilgrim just to wave to the Black Stone instead,
without pushing others or thronging to reach it. From the Black Stone as a
starting point, a pilgrim begins the first round of fawdf (circumambulation)
counterclockwise, keeping the Ka' bah on his left and occupying himself with
supplications, the remembrance of Allah, and the recitation of the Qur'an,

Upon reaching the Yamani (the Yemeni) Corner, "a pilgrim should touch it
if possible, but not kiss it, and recite (when being between the Yamani Corner
and the Black Stone):

a50 Vi Al)

“Our Lord, give us in this world [that which is] good and in the
Hereafter (that which is] good and protect us from the punish-
ment of the Fire.” (Qur'an: Al-Bagarah: 201)

By reaching the Black Stone again, a pilgrim will have completed one full
round of fawaf. Then, a pilgrim approaches and kisses the Black Stone or
at least waves to it, and starts the second round, and so on, until he finishes
seven rounds.

Thereare thirteen prerequisites for the validity of tawaf{circumambulation)
as follows:

1- Being a Muslim

2: Being sane

3- Having the intention of performing tawaf

4- Concealing one’s ‘awrah™

5- Being in a state of (ritual and physical) purity

6- Completing seven rounds of circumambulation

7- Circumambulating counterclockwise, keeping the Ka‘ bah on one’ left

8- Circumambulating the whole Ka’ bah. avoiding passing through Hijr
Ismail (Ishmael’s Precinct) ” or ascending it and walking on its crest

9- Circumambulating on foot, if possible

10- Observing succession while performing the seven rounds of tawdf,
uunless thereis a call for a prayer or there is a Funeral Prayer to perform.
In such cases, a pilgrim is to interrupt his (awéf and offer the prayer,
then he resumes tawéf from where he has stopped and completes the
remaining rounds,

11- Circumambulating within the borders of Al-Masjid Al-Harim (the
Sacred Mosque)

12- Beginning each round of tawéfat the Black Stone
13- Ending the round at the Black Stone as well

After performing the ifidah (Going-forth) Tawaf, it is a confirmed act
of the Sunvai for a pilgrim ta offer two rak'ahs (units of prayer); they are
recommended to be performed at the Standing Place of Ibrahim (Abraham)
if possible. Otherwise, a pilgrim may perform them elsewhere in the Sacred

Chapter &: Acts ‏مه‎ Mudlalifal and Mina ‏اكه‎

Mosque or Al-Haram (the Sanctuary). It is an act of the Sunnah to recite the
Sura of Al-Kafirtin (the Disbelievers)"’ in the first rak'ah, and the Sura of Al-
Ikhidg (Sincerity of Faith)” in the second, and each to be recited following
Al-Fatihah (the Opening Chapter of the Qurlin). Afterwards, a pilgrim heads
towards As-Safil to perform sa'y (going between As-Saffi and Al-Marwah).
‘When a pilgrim first reaches As-Saft he ascends it, says, “Allahu-Akbar” ‏عن‎
‎Allah is the Greatest) thrice, and then says:

“There is no deity but Allah Alone Who has no partner. To Him
belongs dominion, and to Him belongs (all) praise; He gives life
and causes death, and He is the Ever-Living Who never dies: in His
Hand is (all) good, and He is over all things Omnipotent."

After that, a pilgrim descends the hill of As-Safa and heads for Al-Marwah
starting the first round, While so doing, a pilgrim is to walk at a normal pace
but to jog when being between the two green marked posts, and then a pilgrim
continues walking normally towards the hill of Al-Marwah. When a pilgrim
reaches Al-Marwah, he ascends it and repeats what he has said on As-Sala; by
so doing, the first round is completed. Then, he descends Al-Marwah heading
for As-Safé, ensuring walking where walking is designated and jogging where
jogging is designated, The pilgrim continues this procedure until he completes
seven rounds ending at Al-Marwah; going from As-Safa ‏ما‎ Al-Marwah is a
round and returning is another.

Whileperformingsa'y (goingbetween As-Saffiand Al-Marwah) itis desirable
for a pilgrim to be occupied with making supplications, reciting the Qur'an, and
‘mentioning and remembering Allah, There is no particular supplication to be
made during sa'y, so one may make any supplication he likes.

As for the conditions of the validity of sa'y, they are as follows:
1- Having the intention of performing sa'y

2- Completing seven full rounds beginning from As-Safi and ending at
Al-Marwah

3+ Having performed tawaf before say

452 10: HAL]
Endnotes

5/83]

اوقل 1

2 Muslim.

3 Muslim.

4 Bain Mabassir: A valley between Muzdalifah and Mina.

5 Aba Dawid (1907) [2/318], An-Nasét (3045) [3/292] and Jn Majab (3048) |3/443|

6 AbMuglnt 15/286

7 Aba Dawid (1975) [2/3441], AU-Titmidhi (956) [3/289], An-Nasti (3069) [3/301], and
Ton Majah (3037) [3/479],

8 Muslim (3124) [5/49] and An-Nas#i (3062) (3/298).

9 Al-Bukhii (1684) (3/671 and Ibn Mijab (3022) [3/472]

‎An-Nas@' (3057) [3/296] and (bn Majah (3029) [3/476].‏ هل

‎11 Takbir: Saying, “Alahu-Akhar™ (ie. Allah isthe Greatest).

‎12 Al-Bukhiei (4410) [8/137] and Muslim (3138) (5/57)

‎13 Al-Bukhart (1727) [3/708] and Muslim (3132) [5/55],

‎14 Abdi Dawad (1984) [2/344], Ad-Daraquint (2640) [2/239], and Ad-Dirimi (1882) {1/493}

‎15.Al-Bukhari (5892) (10/428) and Muslim (601) [2/942].

‎16 Sa’id Ibn Mangiir in his "As-Sunran’, Abd) Dawa (1978) [2/342], and Ad-Datragutni
(2660) [2/243]

‎17 AbBukhari (1539) [3/499] and Muslim (2833) [4/340].

‎18 Al-Bukhae (83) [1/237] and Muslim (3143) [5/59],

‎19 Muslim (3139) [5/57].

‎20 The Yamnani (the Yemeni) Comer: The southern comer of the Ka’ bal that faces Yemen.

‎21 Awral: The private parts or parts of the body which are illegal to expose to others; a
‘male’ ‘avrah is from the navel to the knees, whereasin another view itis said to be the
external organs of sex and excretion, As fora females “awrah, it inchudes all her body in.
‘ne view whereas it another its all her body with the exception of her face and hands.

‎22 Lif ‏لذ" قمعا‎ (Ishmael’s Precinct); The semi-circular short wall located a few meters
east of the Ka’ bah and consi

‎23 Chapter No, 109 of the Que’

‎24 Chapter'No. 112 of the Quein,

Days of Tashriq’
and Farewell Tawaf

After the completion of the Ifadah (Going-Forth) Tawf, itis obligatory for
a pilgrim to return to Mind on the Feast Day’ and to spend the night there, as
Ibn “Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“Allah's Messenger (PBUH) did not grant anyone (of the pilgrims)
permission to spend the night at Mecca (during the nights of Mind)
except for Al- "Abbas, as he used to provide water for the pilgrims
(to drink).””

Thus, a pilgrim is to spend the night of that day at Mina, remaining there
for three nights if he is not in a hurry. Otherwise, if a pilgrim is in a hurry,
he may stay there only for two nights: the eleventh and the twelfth of Dhul-
Hijjah. At that time, a pilgrim is to shorten all the prayers without combining
them; each prayer is to be performed at its due time.

454 Vi HAT

‘A pilgrim has to throw pebbles at each of the three Janerahs of Mind on
each of the Days of Tashrig. Throwing pebbles is to be performed when the
sun declines (i.e. at noon), as Jabir (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated:

“Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) threw pebbles on the Day of Sacrifice
at mid-morning, and after that (it. on the eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth of Dhul-Hijjah) (he used ‏ما‎ throw pebbles) when the sun
had declined."

(Related by the Group of Compilers of Hadith)
Moreover, fbn “Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) said:

“We used to wait until the sun declined and then we would throw
the pebbles.”

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Abt Dawid)

‘This shows that the Prophet and his Companions used to observe the
appropriate time for throwing pebbles, so pilgrims should follow in the
Prophet's footsteps, as he (PBUH) said:

“Learn your rituals from me (by seeing me performing them).”

Thits, the appropriate time for throwing pebbles on the three Days of
Tashrig (the cleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth of Dhul-Hijjah) is after the sun
declines; it is insufficient to throw the pebbles before that time; rather, we
should follow the example of the Prophet (PBUH) who said:

“Learn your rituals from me (by seeing me performing them).”

Allacts of worship must be performed at the time specified by the Prophet
(PBUH) in his Sunnah, For example, prayer has specific times at which itis to
be performed; otherwise, it is impermissible. Likewise, throwing the pebbles
‘has to be performed at the times specified by the Prophet (PBUH).

‘The great Muslim scholar, Imam Ibnul-Qayyim (may Allah have mercy
on him), in his description of the Prophet's (PBUH) way of throwing pebbles
as stated in the honorable Sunnah, said:

“The Prophet (PBUH) returned to Mind after performing the Ifidakt
‘Tawaf, and spent the night there. in the morning, he (PBUH) waited
until the sun declined and then he took his camel, without riding
it, and headed for the First Jamrah which is next to the Mosque of
AL-Khay, and began to stone it, He (PBUH) stoned it with seven
consecutive pebbles, saying, “Allahu-AKbar” (i.e. Allah is the Greatest)

Chapter 9: Days of Tasbrig and Farewell Tiwif 455

upon throwing each pebble, After that, he (PBUH) approached it
(the First Janirah) until he became so near, and then he faced the
agiblak, raised his hands and kept supplicating Allah for quite a long
lime approximately equivalent to the time taken to recite the Sura
of Al-Bagarah (the Cow)’. Afterwards, he (PBUH) moved towards
the Middle Jamrah and stoned it in the same way, Then, he moved
lefiwards near the valley, faced the qiblah, raised his hands, staying
at the bottom of the valley and standing so that the House (ie. the
Ka bah) was on his left and Mind on his right, and stoned the Last
Jamrah (Jamratul-"Aqabah) with seven pebbles as well...””.

Thnul-Qayyim continued:

"\..After he (PBUH) had finished stoning (the Last Jamrah; Jamratul-
‘Agabah), he hurried back without stopping there fo supplicate, Ib
was said that he did not stop there because of the huge throng of
pilgrims. Tt was also said, and this is the most valid opinion, that
the Prophet (PBUH) used to stop to make supplication during the
act of worship itself (as he did at the First Jamrah and the Middle
Jamrah). So, when he finished stoning the Last Janerah (Jarratul-
‘Agabah), he thus finished performing the act of worship, namely
throwing the pebbles (so he did not stop there to. supplicate Allah),
bearing in mind that making supplication during an act of worship is
better than doing after finishing it. This is just like the case of making
supplications during prayers, the Prophet (PBUH) used to make
supplications during prayer itself, nat after finishing it."

‘Thus, throwing the pebbles has to be performed in the following order: A
pilgrim should start with the First Jamra which is the nearest to Mina and
Al-Khayf Mosque, then the one that follows it namely the Middle Jamrah,
and finally the Last Jantrah (Jamratul- 'Aqabah, which is also called ‘the Great
Jamrak'), the last of the three Jamrais nearest ‏ما‎ Mecca. A pilgrim should
throw seven consecutive pebbles at each Jamrah, raising his hands upon each
throw and saying, "Allaha-Akbar" (ie. Allah is the Greatest), In addition, each
pebble should be thrown into the throwing place (the fenced area surrounding
the pillar) whether it settles or not after falling inside; it is insufficient if a
pebble falls outside it, and another pebble has to be thrawn in compensation

As for pilgrims who cannot throw the pebbles themselves due to sickness
or old age, as well as pregnant women and those women who might be harmed
by the throng of pilgrims, it is permissible for them fo ask someone else to

الاق :1 456

throw the pebbles on their behalf. The one who performs stoning on behalf
of another can throw the pebbles for himself and for the other pilgrim at the
same place. In other words, he is not obligated to stone all jamarhs firstly for
himself then return to the First Jamra to start stoning on behalf of the other
pilgrim, as this will be very difficult and exhausting due to the huge throngs;
and Allah Knows best. If the one performing stoning by proxy is performing
the obligation of Haj for the first time, then, at each Jamirah, he has to throw.
his own pebbles before throwing those of the ather pilgrim,

Having finished stoning on the twelfth of Dhul-Hijjah, a pilgrim is free
either to return to Mecca before sunset or to spend the night (of the twelfth of
Dhul-Hijjah) in Mina, and throw pebbles at the three Jamrahs on the following
day, the thirteenth, after the sun declines {at noon). Yet, the latter choice is
beiter, as Allah, Exalted be He, says:

Then whoever hastens [his departure] in two days - there is
no sin upon him; and whoever delays [until the third] - there is
no sin upon him - for him who fears Allah...”

(Qur'in: Al-Baqarah: 203)
On the twelfth of Dhul-Hijjah, if the sun sets while a pilgrim is still in

Mina, then he must spend the night there and do the pebble throwing on the
following day, as Almighty Allah says, as mentioned above:

‘.,. Then whoever hastens [his departure) in two days - there is
xno sin-upon him...” (Qur'an: Al-Baqarah: 203)

“Day” here means “daytime” and does not mean “night”

Ifa female pilgrim has menstruated or has @ postpartum period after or
before assuming ihm, she remains in her ihrém, She can perform all the
rites of Hajj as other pilgrims do, such as standing ‏له‎ " Arafah, spending the
night at Muzdalifah, throwing the pebbles, and spending the nights at Mina,
Still, itis impermissible for her in such cases to perform tawaf or ‏بر" مد‎ unless
she purifies herself from the state of major ritual impurity, However, ifshe has
menstruated after performing tawaf, itis permissible for her to perform sa’y,
as ritual purity is nota prerequisite far sa'y.

Ifa pilgrim desires to return to his home country or elsewhere after
finishing all the rites of Hajj and prepared for traveling, just before leaving
Mecca he has to perform the Farewell Tawaf so as to be the last thing done
in Mecca. Again, a menstruating pilgrim is exempted from performing the

Chapter 9: Days of Tashriq and Farewell ‏ؤس‎ 457

Farewell Tawaf, so she can travel without doing it, as Tbn ’ Abbas (may Allah
be pleased with him) narrated:
“The people (ie. pilgrims) were commanded (by the Prophet) to
perform the Farewell Tawéf around the House (the Ka bah) as the
last thing to do before leaving (Mecca), yet menstruating women
were exemptec

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Healso narrated that when the Prophet (PBUH) saw the pilgrims departing
from Mecca, he (PBUH) said to them:

"None amongst you should depart until he performs the Farewell
‘Tawaf around the House (i.e. the Ka’hah) as the last thing to do (at
Mecca)"

(Related by Imams Ahmad, Muslim, Abd Dawad, and Tbn Majah)
‘Moreover, Ibn.‘ Abbas narrated:

“The Prophet (PBUH) gave permission to menstruating women
to depart from (Mecca) without performing the Farewell Tawaf
around the House (i.e. the Ka'bah) provided that they have already
performed the Ifadah (Going-forth) Tawéf.""

(Related by Imam Ahmad)

Furthermore, ' Aishah (the Prophet's wife. may Allah be pleased with
her) narrated:

“Saflyyah Bint Huyayy menstruated after performing the Ifadah
‘Tawéf; so 1 made a mention of her menses to Allah’s Messenger
(PBUH), whereupon he remarked, ‘Well, then she will detain us’
Isaid, 0 Messenger of Allah, she has performed the Iftdah Tawaf
and circumambulated the House, and it was after that when she
‘menstruated: Thereupon, he (PBUH) said, ‘(If so), then she may
depart:

(Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

458 Ve HAIL
Endnotes

{The Days of At-Tashrig: The wleventh, the twelfih, and the thirteenth of Dhul-Hijah,
ice the three days following the Day of Sacrifice.

2 The Day of Sacrifice (’Idul-Adhi); the tenth of Dhul-ijjah).

3 Ibn Majah (3069) [3/492].

4 Muslim (3128) [5/52], Abd Dawéd (1971) [2/340], At-Tirmidhi (894) [3/241], An-
asd (3063) [3/298], and tn Majah (3/305) [3/485],

5 Al-Bukhart (1746) [3/731] and Abt Dawoa (1972) (2/3401

6 The second Chapter of the Qur'in.

7 See: "Zadul-Ma “ad [2/285].

8 See: "Zidul-Ma’éa” [2/286]

9 Al-Bukhari (1755) [3/738] and Muslim (3207) (5/84),

10 Abad (1936) [1/223], Muslim (3206) [5/84], Abt Dawid (2002) [2/349], and ber
‘Majah (3070) [3/493].

11 Abmad (3505) [1/369].

12. Al-Bukhir (1762) [3/740] and Mustim (3209) [5/85]

0

Sacrificial Animals (Hady
and Udhiyah)

Hady refers to a legally edible animal (such as a camel, a cow or a sheep)
brought to the Sacred Mosque, slaughtered there, and sacrificed for the Sake
of Allah, Glorified and Exalted be He.

Udhiyah refers to a legally edible animal slaughtered and sacrificed on the
Day of Sacrifice or the Days of Tashriq for the sake of attaining the closeness
and the pleasure of Allah.

There is an agreement among Muslim scholars on the prescription of
offering a sacrificial animal for the Sake of Allah. For instance, Imam Tbnul-
Qayyim said:

“Offering a sacrificial animal for the Sake of Allah, the Creator, is

regarded as a sacrifice for one’s own self as one self tends to fall into
ruin by sinning. Allah, Exalted be He, says, ‘.. And for all religion

460, VHA)

We have appointed a rite [of sacrifice] that they may tention the
‘Name of Allah over what He has provided for them of [sacrificial]
animals... (Qur’n: Al-Hajj: 34) Moreover, the slaughtering of
sacrificial animals and the shedding of their blood while mentioning
the Name of Allah over them are legislated in all religions.”

The best sacrifictal animal to offeris a camel, then a cow, then a sheep. Itis
better if camel or a cow is offered by an individual, as it will be a sign of one’s
generosity, and it will also be more beneficial for the poor due to the amount
of meat they have. On the other hand, the best animal to sacrifice is the fattest,
then the most expensive, as Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“4. And whoever honors the symbols [ie. rites] of Allah- indeed,
it is from the piety of hearts.” (Qur'an: Al-Hajjé 32)

Itis insufficient to offer a sacrificial animal before it reaches the prescribed
age for being slaughtered, which is six months fora sheep, five years for a camel,
wo years for a cow, and one year for agoat.

A ewe is good enough to be offered as hady on behalf of one man, and as
udhiyah on behalfof one man and his household. A camel or a cow is sufficient
as hady or udhiyah on behalf of seven people according to the hadith narrated
by Jabir that states:

‘Allah’ Messenger (PBUH) commanded us to become seven partners
(in the sacrifice) of a camel orn cow”

Aba Ayyb (may Allah be pleased with him) also narrated:

“In the lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH), u person used to sacrifice
a ewe on behalf of himself and his household; and they would eat
(from it) and feed (others).”*

(Related by Ibn Majah and At-Tirmidhi who deemed it sahth)

Yet, it is important to point out that it is better to slaughter a single ewe
than ta have seven persons share in slaughtering a camel or a cow,

It isa condition that a sacrificial animal, whether hady or wdhiyah, must be
free from all physical defects. Thus, itis insufficient to offer a skinny or a sick
animal as sacrifice. Likewise, it is insufficient to sacrifice a blind animal, a one-
eyed animal, or a lame animal that can hardly walk. A mad animal, a toothless
one, or a very old one with very small or dry udders, are not acceptable as.
sacrifice as well, the same goes for an animal which is obyiously sick, for

Chapter 10: Sacrificial Anlunals (Hady and loyal) io

Al-Barf! Ibn ' Azib (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet
(PBUH) sai

“Four (types of animals) are impermissible to be offered as
sacrifice: a one-eyed animal which has obviously lost the sight
of one eye, a sick animal which is obviously sick, a lame animal
which obviously limps, and an animal with a broken leg and
io marrow”

(Related by Abit Dawad and An-Nasa'i)

According to the most valid opinion, the optimum time for slaughtering
a sacrificial animal, whether it is udhiyah or hady offered by one performing
Hajj as tammatu’, is during the period from after the Feast (‘Id) Prayer
until the last of the Days of Tashrig. It is preferable for one to eat from the
sacrificial animal one offers as udhiyah, or hady in case of performing Hajj
‏كد‎ tamimatu'' or qirdni its meat is divided as follows: one third for the owner,
one third to be given as gifts, and one third to be given in charity, as Allah,
Exalted be He, say

So eat of them aid feed the miserable and poor.”
(Qur'an: Al-Hajj: 28)

‘As for a pilgrim who is offering expiatory hady (in expiation for missing
any of the essential rituals of Hajj or for committing something forbidden
while in a state of tram), he must not eat any of it at all. If one wants to offer
a sacrificial animal, one should by no means cut any of one’s hair or trim any
of one’s nails from the first day of Dhul-Hijjah until one offers the sacrificial
animal, for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“When itis the beginning of Dhul-Hijjah and anyone of you intends
to offer a sacrificial animal, he should not get any of his hair cut or
nails trimmed until he offers it"

(Related by Imam Muslim)

In case one does (i.e. one has trimmed one’s hair or nails), one must seek
the forgiveness of Allah, yet one is not obliged to offer anything in expiation
in this case,

462. V: HALT

Endnotes

1 Muslim (3173) [5/71].

2 At-Tirmidhi (1509) [4/91] and ‏مطا‎ Majah (3147) [3/541].

3 Aba Dawad (2802) (3/161, At-Tivmidhs (1501) [4/85}, An-Nasilt (4381) (4/244), and.
tb Majah (3144) [3/539).

4 Mustim (5089) {7/139},

‘Aqiqah (Sacrificial Animal
for the Newborn)

“Agigah is one of the duties of a father toward his newborn child. It is the
slaughtering of a sacrificial animal as a sign of gratefulness to Allah, Glorified
and Exalted be He, for granting one a child, Offering ‘agiqah is considered a
confirmed act of the Sunnah (Prophetic Tradition), as the Prophet (PBUH)
offered sacrificial animals as ‘agiqah when his grandsons Al-Hasan and Al-
Husayn were born, as related by Abt Dawad and other compilers of Hadith’
Also, the Prophet's honorable Companions and their followers used to offer
sacrificial animals as ‘agiqah for their newborn children,

Some scholars are of the view that ‘agiqah is obligatory, for Al-Hasan
narrated on the authority of Samurah that Allah's Messenger (PBUH) said:

“Every (newborn) boy is pawned by the ‘agiqah offered for him.”

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, in explaining this hadith, said, “Pawned here
‘means that (if he dies as a baby) he can intercede with Allah in favor of his parents

64 V: HAI]

who offered ‘agigah on the occasion of his birth." Imam Ibnul-Qayyim said,
“A child grows up good-natured and well-mannered if ‘agiqah is offered on the
accasion of his/her birth?”

According to the most valid opinion in this connection, ‘agiqah is a
confirmed act of the Suniah. Moreover, sacrificing an animal as ‘agigah
is much better than giving its value in charity.

‘Agiqah isa sign of the parents’ gratitude to Allah for blessing them
with a newborn baby. It is also a means of drawing oneself near to
Almighty Allah, being charitable to the poor, and spiritually ransoming
the newborn child.

‘Two equal ewes, with nearly thesameageand shape, are to be sacrificed
as ‘agiqah for a newborn boy, whereas one ewe is to be sacrificed for a
newborn girl. Umm Kors Al-Ka'biyyah narrated that she had heard the
Prophet (PBUH) saying:

“Tivo equal ewes are to be sacrificed for the (newborn) boy and one
ewe is to be sacrificed for a (rtewborn) girl.”

(Related by Imam Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi who deemed it sabilt
(authentic) according to a hadith narrated by ‘Aishah)

The difference in the number of the sacrificial animals offered as ‘agiqah
for males and females is due to the fact that a male’ portion of inheritance
in Islam is equal to that of two females. Moreover, the happiness of a father
whom Allah grants a boy is usually much greater than the case of being
granted a gitk this is why ‘agigah, which is offered as a sign of gratitude to
Allah, is double in case of a newborn boy.

Regarding the time of offering “agiqah, it is preferable to be on the
seventh day after the child’s birth. However, it is permissible to offer it
before or after that day, It is also more preferable to name the child on
that day, as it is stated in the Suman and other books of Hadith that the
Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Sacrifice is made for him (the newborn baby) on the seventh day
and he is to be named as well (on that day),”"

It is permissible, however, to name the child on the day of his/her birth,
for some scholars maintain that this is more preponderant than naming the
child on the seventh day of his/her birth,

Chapter 11: “Agigad (Sacrificial Animal for the Newborn) 465

On the other hand, it isan act of the Simmah to give the child a good name,
for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“(On the Day of Resurrection,) you will be called by your names
and by your father’s names, so give yourselves good names.””

(Related by Abt: Dawad)

‘The Prophet (PBUH) liked good names,’ and forbade giving children names
suggesting worshipping other than Allah,’ such as calling a child “Abdul
Ka'bah” (servant of the Ka’bah), ““Abdun-Nabt” (servant of the Prophet),
““ Abdul-Masih’ (servant of Jesus), “Abdu *Ali” (Servant of "All, or“ Abdual-
Husayn’” (servant of Al-Husayn). In this regard, Imam Tbn Hazm (may Allah
have mercy on him) said:

fuslim scholars agree on the prohibition of giving children names
indicating servitude to other than Allah, such as ‘Abd “Umar, 'Abdul-
Ka’bah, and the like. However, there is no unanimous agreement on
the prohibition of referring to or mentioning the people who alrendy
have these names, such as, “Abdul-Muttalib; ‘Bani “Abdud-Dar!
and “Abdu-Shams; but not to name after them."

Moreover, it is detestable to give a child an inappropriate name that
suggests a bad quality, such as “Al-'Asi" (the disobedient), “Kulayb” (dogey).
“Hanzalah” (colocynth), “Murrah” (bitter), and “Hazan (sadness or difficulty),
‘The Prophet (PBUH) hated bad names of persons or places,’ and he (PBUH)
also pointed out;

“The dearest of your names to Allah are "'Abdullah’ (servant of
Allah) and" Abdter-Rahmén’ (servant of the Entively Mereiful).”"”

(Related by Imam Muslim and other compilers of Hadith)

‘Thus, parents should choose good names for their children and avoid
giving them prohibited or odious names; this is one of parents duties towards
their children.

Back to the issue of ‘agiqah, the sacrificial animal offered is just like that
offered as udhiyah with regard to age and characteristics; the animal chasen to
be sacrificed as ‘agigah should be at the prescribed age for being slaughtered,
be free trom any physical defects or sickness, and be of proper health and
fleshiness, It is also desirable for one to eat from the meat of the sacrificial
animal one offers as “agigah; its meat is to be divided into three parts: one
third for the owner, one third ta be given as gifts and one third to be given in

466 V: HAY)

charity, just like udhiyah, Unlike udhiyal, it is insufficient for people to share
in buying an animal and sacrifice it as ‘agiqah. They cannot, for example,
share in one camel or one cow and sacrifice it like the éase with udhiyah, This
is because ‘agiqah is sacrificed for a soul, so it cannot be shared. Moreover,
neither the Prophet (PBUH) norhis Companions were reported to have shared
in the sacrificial animals offered as ‘agigah.

It is the duty of parents to bring up their children on moral values
and noble manners so as to grow up as virtuous men and women; an
Arab poet said:

‘The infant seems to grow up
In the way he was brought up.

‘When the children grow up: it is so difficult to change their characters
or natures. Many individuals are corrupt because of the way they were
brought up and the lack of moral guidance in their childhood, Therefore,
children should be kept away from bad gatherings and corrupt associates.
Home should bea righteous, religious atmosphere for a child, for itis the
first school in a child’s life, Thus, parents should spare their homes all
means of corruption and viciousness, especially today, when the means
of corruption are prevalent everywhere and fill up homes, except for
those safeguarded by Allah’s mercy. So, parents should beware of such
corruptive means, and bring up their children on worshipping and
obeying Allah, honoring their religion, appreciating the Quran and
loving it; these are the true means of achieving felicity in both this world
and the Hereafter.

In short, parents or guardians should represent good ideals for their chil
dren through their good manners, morals, habits, and ethics. May Allah guide
is all to what He likes and pleases,

Endnotes

1 Aba Dawad (2841) [3/177], An-Nasdl (4230) [4/186], and At-Tirmidhi (1523) [4/99].

2 Abt Dawid (2837) [3/175], At-Tirmidhi (1526) [4/101], An-Nasd't (4231) [4/186], and
Tn Majah (3165) [3/55]

3 Ahmad (23910) [6/31], Abs Dawhd (2895) [3/174], AU-Tirmidht (1517) [4/96], An-
‘Nasi (4227) [4/185], andl ton Majah (3162) [3/549].

Chapter 11: “Agigah (Sacrificial Animal for the Newborn) 467

4 The Five Compilers of Hadith,

5 Ahmad (21589) [5/139], Abd Dawnd (4948) [5/149], and Ibn Hibban (no, 1944)

5 See: 'Zitdul-Ma dd” [2/336]

7 Note that the prefix ““Abd” in Arabic means "servant of” For example, the name
‘Abdullah’ means “servant of Allah; and so on.

‎See the footnote of "Ar-Rawd Al-Murbi” [4/246].‏ لا

‎9 See; "Zitdul-Ma ad" [2/337] and At-Tirmidhi (2844) [5/134]

‎10 Muslim (5552) (5/132], Abd Dawad (4949) [5/149), At-Tirmidhi (2838) (5/132), and
bn Maiah (3728) [4/216]

Jihad (Fighting in the
Cause of Allah)

Allah has ordained jihad (fighting in the Cause of Allah) in order to render
His Word the highest, His Religion the victorious, His enemies the defeated,
and to test the faith of His true servants. Allah, Exalted be He, says:

"... That [is the command]. And if Allah had willed, He could
have taken vengeance upon them [Himself], but [He ordered
armed struggle] to test some of you by means of others. And
those who are killed in the Cause of Allah - never will He waste
their deeds, He will guide them and amend their condition - and
admit them to Paradise, which He has made known to them?

(Qur'an: Muhammad: 4-6)

In Islam, jihad enjoysa great importance, asit is the highest level in religion
and one of the best acts of worship to the extent that some scholars consider

472 Viz HAD

jihad the sixth pillar of Islam. Jihad is ordained according to the Qur'an, the
Surah (Prophetic Tradition) and consensns (of Muslim scholars). Allah,
Exalted be He, says:

“Fighting has been enjoined upon you,
(Quran: Al-Baqarah: 216)

‘The Prophet (PBUH) also fought in the Cause of Allah and used to enjoin
jihad’; he (PBUH) said:

“Whoever dies without fighting in the Cause of Allah, nor does he
express any desire (or determination) for it, would de with a char-
acteristic of hypocrisy.”

Linguistically, jiidd means fighting the enemy vigorously and jurispru-
dentially. It involves fighting the disbelievers and it also includes much more
activities showing striving in the Cause of Allah, not only mere fighting.
Thnul-Qayyim said:

“Yihad is a task which is to be fulfilled by means of heart, tongue,
money, or hard. Every Muslin must strive in the Cause of Allah
through any of these means.”

Jihad, in addition, includes striving for the purification of the soul through
self-control, striving against Satan and against dissolute, disobedient, and
straying people, So, self-restraint is a sort of jih@d that a Muslim cam achieve
through seeking religious knowledge, acting in accordance with the knowledge
he learns, and then teaching such knowledge to others. One can strive against
Satan, as another type of jifidd, through keeping away from the doubtful matters
portrayed by Satan and resisting satanic wicked desires. As for striving against
the disbelievers, it can be by means of hand (fighting), money, tongue, and
‘heart. A Muslim must also strive against the defiantly disobedient, dissolute,
and straying people, as much as he can, forbidding their wrongdoing either
by his hand first, then his tongue if he cannot, and finally with his heart if the
otler means are impossible; it depends.

Jihad, in fact, is a collective duty which if sufficiently fulfilled by some
‘Muslims, the rest will not be accountable for itas an obligation, and it becomes
atact of the Sunnah for them. Jihad is the best voluntary act of worship which
hhas great virtues and rewards. There are so many verses in the Noble Qur‘tn,
as well as many Hadiths, enjoining jihad and urging all Muslims to undertake
it, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“{ndeed, Allah has purchased from the believers their lives and
their properties [in exchange] for that they will have Paradise,

Chapcer I: ‏شا‎ (Fighting in the Cause of Allah) 173

They fight in the Cause of Allah, so they kill and are killed.
[It is] a true promise [binding] upon Him in the Torah and
the Gospel and the Qur’an. And wha is truer to his covenant
than Allah? So rejoice in your transaction which you have
contracted, And it is that which és the great attainment.”

(Qur'an? At-Tawbah: 111)
Fora Muslim, there are certain cases in which jihdd is an individual duty,

1) When a Muslim is present at the battlefield, itis obligatory for him to
fight and he is prohibited to leave the battle and flee,

2) When enemies attack a Muslim country

In the aforesaid two cases, a Muslim fights back his enemies as
a means of self-defense only, not a conquest. If Muslims abstain
from fighting in these twa cases, the disbelievers will take their land
defiling their sanctities,

3) When a Muslim is needed to help his fellow Muslims fight their
enemies.

4) When a Muslim is called by the ruler (or the one in authority) to fight
in the Cause of Allah, for the Prophet (PBUH) said:

“Whenever you are called for fighting in the Cause of Allah, you should
go immediately.”

Also, Allah, Exalted be He, says:

.. When you encounter a company [from the enemy forces],
stand firm..?” (Qur’in: Al-Anfal: 45)

Moreover, Allah says:

“. What is [the matter] with you that when you are told to go
forth in the Cause of Allah, you adhere heavily to the earth? ...”

(Quran: AtTawbah: 38)
Shaykhul-Islim Ibn Taymiyah (may Allah have mercy on him) said:

“Jihad can be either by the hand or the heart, or by calling Muslims
to jihad through sound arguinent, eloquence, demanstration, or by
helping to prepare others for fighting: it is obligatory for a Muslim to
strive in the Cause of Allah as much as he can, On the other hand,

474 VEJIHAD

ifa Muslim is unable to join his fellows in the battlefield for a legal
excuse, he has then, being at home, to support and take care of the
families and properties of the Muslim fighters.”

It is obligatory for the Muslim ruler (or the one in authority) to check
the army before setting out for fighting to exclude whatever does not fit the
battlefield, be it related to men or equipment. For example, the ruler (or the one
in authority) has to exclude whoever discourages Muslims to fight, disheartening
and dispiriting them. He should also exclude those fearful and fainthearted men
who might dissuade the other fighters, and those who report the news of the
Muslim army to the enemies, or cause dissention among the Muslim fighters.
‘The Muslim ruler should also appoint a commander who can lead the army
in.accordance with the Islamic principles and policies. It is obligatory for the
Muslim army to obey their commander in what is right, ta give him sincere
advice, and to be patient with him, for Allah, Exalted be He, says

“O you who have believed, obey Allah and obey the Messenger
and those in authority among you...” (Quen; An-Nist’: 59)

Jihad has been ordained in Islam for some noble objectives:

+ To.rid people of the worship of faghiits (false objects of worship) and
idols, and to lead them to worship Allah, Alone, associating no partner
with Him, for He is the One Who has created them, and gives them
provisions. Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And fight them untit there is no fitnah and [until] the religion
[i.e. worship], all of it, isfor Allah...” (Qur'an: Al-Anfak: 39)

+ To eliminate injustice and give rights to their rightful owners, for Allah,
Exalted be He, says:

“Permission [to fight] has been given to those who arebeingfought,
because they were wronged. And indced, Allah is competent to
give them victory. [They are] those who have been evicted from
their homes without right - only because they say, ‘Our Lord is
Allah... * (Qur'an: Al-Hajj: 39-40)

+ To humiliate the disbelievers, take revenge on them, and weaken their
power, for Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“Fight them; Allak will punish them by your hands and will
disgrace them and give you victory over them and satisfy the
breasts Live, desires] ofa believing people, And remove the fury

Chapter ‏ارات بل‎ (Fighting in the Cause of Allah) 75

in their [i.e. the betievers'] hearts. And Allah turns in forgiveness
to whom He wills; and Allah is Knowing and Wise,”

(Qur'an: At-Tawbah: 14-15)

Fighting the enemies must be preceded by calling them to Islam, The
Prophet (PBUH) used to call the eriemies ta Islam, if they did not know about
it, before fighting them’. He (PBUH) also sent messages to kings calling them
to Islam” and used to advise the commanders of the Muslim army to call the
disbelievers to Islam before fighting them, and not to fight whomever would
accept Islam. This is because the main objective of fighting in Islam is to elimi-
nate disbelief and polytheism, and to help people enter the Religion of Allah
(Islam). Thus, if this noble objective is fulfilled without fighting, Muslims are
not allowed to fight others;" and Allah knows best:

Jihad has so many tulings mentioned in detail in yolumes on Shari'ah
(Islamic Law) among which are the following:

+ If Muslim's parents (or one of them) are free Muslims, a Muslim is not
permitted to volunteer to fight in the Cause of Allah unless they permit
hhim to, To illustrate, when a man, whose parents were alive, wanted to
join the Muslim army in jihad, the Prophet (PBUH) said to him:

“_. Then go and exert yourselfin their service (i.e. his parents).””

This is because filial piety is an individual duty in Islam whereas jihad
isa collective duty, and an individual duty is considered worthier of
fulfillment than a collective one,

+ The ruler (or the one in authority) must appoint the commanders of the
army and he is permitted to give anyone he selects from the spoils if
this serves the cause of jifid. Then, he is to divide the rest of the booty
amongall the soldiers.

« Itis impermissible to kill a child, a woman, a monk, an old man, a. man
infected with a chronic disease, ora blind man, as long as they do not
fight against Muslims nor incite others ta do so. When captured, those
people become slaves to Muslims; the Prophet (PBUH) used to have
such people as slaves when he captured them”,

+ Muslims are permitted to take the spoils of battles including all the
money and property taken forcefully through fighting the non-
Muslim enemies, as well as any ransom (taken from them). Spoils are
to be divided among whoever witnessed the battle, whether they have

ai Vi JIHAD

fought oF not, for they are considered supporters of all the Muslim
fighters as they have been ready to fight at anytime. Such people are
legally considered like fighters, as ‘Umar Ibnul-Khattéb (may Allah be
pleased with him) said:

"Spoils are for those who witnessed the battle’

1 how the booty should be divided, theruler (orthe onein authority)
to dedicate one-fifth of the booty to Allah and His Messenger
(PBUH), ‏عا‎ to be allocated to the relatives of the Messenger (PBUH),
the orphans, the poor, the needy, and the wayfarers, Then the ruler is
to divide the remaining four-fifths among the Muslim fighters; one
share among the infantry and the remaining three shares among the
cavalry; each cavalry soldier receives a share for himselfand two more
shares for having a horse. It was related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim
that when Allah's Messenger (PBUH) divided the booty of the Battle
of Khaybar, he granted each cavalry soldier three shares; two for his
horse and one for himself“

» The spoils of war can be divided by the representative of the ruler on
the latter's behalf.

« Itis prohibited to embezzlea part of the war booty before its distribution;
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“It is not [attributable] to any prophet that he would act
unfaithfully [in regard to war booty], And whoever betrays
[taking unlawfully] will come with what he took on the Day of
Resurrection...” (Qur'an: Alu ‘Imran: 161)

+ It is obligatory for the ruler (or the one in authority) to mete out
discretionary punishment to whoever embezzles part of the war booty
before its distribution as a means of deterrence to him and his likes.

+ Ifthe spoils are estates, the ruler has the right to choose whether to divide
them among the fighters or to declare them wagfs (legal endowments)
for the benefit of all Muslims, getting a regular khardj (land tax) from
their new Muslim owners.

+ The property left by the disbelievers when terrified by Muslims, the
property of an heitless person, and a fifth of one-fifth of the whole
booty (the share of Allah's Messenger) are considered fay’ (spoils
gained without fighting or war) allocated for the benefit of Muslims.

Chaprer ‏جا‎ ili (Fighting tn the Cause of Allah) 477

« If is permissible for the ruler to agree (o a truce with the disbeliev
stop fighting fora specific period if this serves the interests of Muslims,
and only when it is permissible to delay jihad due to the weakness
of Muslims, The Prophet (PBUH) agreed to a peace treaty with the
disbelievers (of Mecca) at Al-Hudaybiyah Peace Treaty," and made a
peace treaty with the Jews in Medina, However, it is impermissible for
the ruler to agree to a truce with the disbelievers when Muslims are
strong and able to fight.

+lfthe ruler fears that the disbelievers may breach the truce, heis permitted
to terminate the truce, provided that he informs them thereof before
fighting, Allah, Exalted be He. sa

“ff you [have reason to] fear from a people betrayal, throw [their
treaty] back to them, [putting you] on equal terms, Indeed, Allah
does nat like traitors.” (Qur'an: AL-Anfil: 58)

‘Thus, Allah commanded the Prophet (PBUH) to inform the disbeliev-
ers of his termination of the truce.

« It is permissible for the ruler to agree to a covenant of protection
with the People of the Scripture (i.e. the Christians and the Jews)
and the Magi, granting them freedom of religion, provided that
they give the jizyah" and adhere to the Islamic laws, Allah, Exalted
be He, says:

“Fight those who do not believe in Allah or in the Last Day and
who do not consider unlawful what Allah and His Messenger
have made unlawful and who do not adapt the religion of truth
[ie. Islam] from those who were given the Scripture - [fight]
until they give the jizyah willingly while they are humbled.”

(Qur'an: At“Tawbah: 29)

The money taken from the Dhimmis' once a year as jicyal while
they are humbled, is to allow them to stay in an Islamic state (without
fighting them).

«"The jizyalris not to be taken from a child, a woman, or an insane person,

nor isitto be taken froma man infected with a chronic disease, a blind
man, an old man, ora needy who cannot afford it.

+ So long as the Ditimmis give the jizyah, it is obligatory for the ruler
to accept it, not to fight them, and to defend them against attackers.
‘Allah, Exalted be He, says:

Vis HAD

"... Until they give the jizvah..." (Qur'an: At-Tawbah: 29)

Thus, Allah has made their payment of izyah a reason for not fighting
them, The Prophet (PBUH) also said:

“Ask them for jizyah and if they agree, then accept it from them and
stop fighting them."

Allah knows best.

« Ttis permissible for the ruler to grant a disbelieving individual protec-
tion even from Muslims as long as he causes no harm to Muslims, for
Allah, Exalted be He, says:

“And if any one of the polytheists sceks your protection, then
grant hint protection so that he may hear the words of Allah [i.e,
the Qur'én]. Then deliver him to his place of safety...”

(Quran: At-Tawbah: 6)

It is also permissible for « ruler to grant protection ‏فا‎ all or some
disbelievers since he has authority over all people living in the Iskamic
country under his rule, This authority is not given to anyone of the
Muslim subjects except with the permission of the ruler himself
However, itis permissible fora Muslim governor ofa district to grant
protection to disbelievers living in a neighboring district,

Endnotes

1 See: Ahmad (12186) (3/124), Abo ‏شونا‎ (2504) [3/18], An-Nasa'i (3192) [3/358], and

dim (2472) [2/81].

ALE

2 Muslim (4908) [7/58].

3 See: "Zadul-Ma “a” [3/64]

4 Al-Bukhari (1834) [4/61] and Muslim (3289) (5/127)

5 See: AL-Ikhtiydrat |447|,

6 See Ibn Abi Shaybah (33057) [6/480

7 See Muslim (4585) [6/329].

8 See Muslim (4497) [6/265].

9 Al-Bukhari (3004) [6/169], Musliny (6451) [8/320], and At-Tirmidht (1675) [4/191].
10 Al-Bukhaci (2307) [4/609],

11 Abdur-Razzaq in his "Mugannaf” (9689) |5/302], AL-Bayhiagi (17954) [9/86] and

(9/86—87),and A)-Bukhari ]6/270[

Chapter ‏ل‎ jihad (Fighting in the Cause of Allah) 479

12 Al-Bulkhart (2863) [6/83] and Muslint (4561) {6/304}

13 Al-Bukhart (2698) [5/373] and Muslim (4605) [6/348],

14 Jigyah AAribute or a tax required of non-Muslims living in an Islamic state exempting,
them from military service and entitling them to the protection of the Islamic state.
Concurtently, Zakk is not taken from them, being an obligation only upon Muslims,

15 Dhimmi: A non-Muslim living in and uniler the protection of an Islamic state,

16 Muslim.

APPENDICES
GLOSSARY

NOTE: For easier search for the terms beginning with “Al.” “Ar-” “Ad-” “As.” ete, omit
them, as they are in Arabic, equivalents to the article “the”. For example, a term like
Ax-Safa will be found under letter “S"; and AI-Wasilah under letter “W",

A

The Ansar The Medinian Helpers; the inhabitants of Medina who hadaccepted
Islam and supported the Prophet (PBUH) and all the Muhjirdn
(the Emigrants) upon their arrival at he Medina.

Ayatul-Kurst Verse No. 255 of the Sura of Al-Bagarah (the Cow); Chapter No, 2

(the Verse of the of the Qur'an,

Throne)

‘Awrah ‘Awralt refers to the private parts or parts of the body which are
illegal (a expose to others; ‏ه‎ males “awval is from the navel to the

knees whereas in another view itis said to be the external organs of
sexand excretion. As for a female's ‘awrah, it includes all het body
‘ny one view whereas in another itis all her body with the exception
ofher face and hands.

B

Basmalah Saying, “Bismillahir-Rahménir-Rabio” ‏ها" .عبط‎ the Name of Alla,
the Entirely Merciful, the Especially Merciful”

Bala Mahassir A valley between Muzdalifah and Mina

Bid'ah A matter innovated in religion,

Burg

A veil covering the face and has two holes for the eyes lo permit vision,

Cc

Collective duty A religious duty which if sufficiently fulfilled by some Muslims, the
rest will not be accountable for it as an obligation, and it becomes,
an act of the Surtnah for them.

D
‘The Day of ‘The ninth day of Dhul-Hijjah.
"Arafah
The Day of “The eighth day of Dhul-Eijah.
Tarwiyah
The Daysof The eleventh, the twelfth, and the thirtéenth of Dhal-Hijials ie.
Tashriq the three days following the Day of Sacrifice,

Dhikr Tnvoeations implying cerembrance and mentioning of ‏امالك‎
484

‎non-Muslim living in and under the protection of Musfin state.‏ عع قر
‎‘An old Arab coin that equals 2.975 grants of gold.‏
‎grams of silver,‏ 975

‎A dirham of siver equal

‎F

‎A scholar of Islamic Jurisprudence.
AA legal opinion issued by a muti [a Muslim scholar specialized in

‎issuing legal rulings] in response ‏ذا‎ a question on a point of the

‎Islamic Law.
They are Imims Ahmad, Aba Dawad, AU'Tirmidhi, An-Nasdi,

‎and This Majah
‘They are Imamas Abd Hanifah, lnm Malik, ImAm Ash-Shafi', and
Amant Abr,

‎G
‎They are Al-Bukhari, Muslim, Ahmad, Abd Dawid, At-Tirmidhi
An-Nasi' and Ton Majah,

‎Iisa ftadith whose chain of transmission is linked to the narration
of an authority with weak exactitude, and the hadith is free from
eccentricity or blemish.

‎‘The Prophet’ Immigration to Medina,

‎‘The semi-circular short wall located a few meters east of the
Ka’ bah and considered part of it.

‎I
‎Itimeans that pilgrim assumes ihr for performing Hajj only, keeping,
in the state of iri until he finishes performing the rites of Hay
A religious duty whose abligation extends to every Muslim,
‘The imdneis the oné who leads the congregational prayer.

‎Shaving the pubic hair,

‎Vaginal bleeding other than menstruation.

‎Cleaning one’ stool and urine exits alter defecation or urination
‘with stones or what mvay substitute for thems.

‎Cleaning one’ stool and urine exits after defecation or turination
with water,

‎Glossary
‎Dhineni
‎Dinar
‎Dirham (of silver)

‎Fagih
‎Fatwa

‎‘The Five Com-
pilers of Hadith
‘The Four

‎Imams

‎The Group of
Compilers of
Hadith

‎Hasan (good)
hadith
Hijrah
Hijetsma'il

‎(shmael’s
‎Precinet)

‎rad

‎Individttal duty
Imam (in prayer)
Istihdlid
Istibaidah

‎Istijmndr

‎Bsn?

A Summary of Islamic Jurisprudence

{Nisan Islamic sect that denies some of the Attributes of Allah claiming
‏ارلا‎ those attributes are ascribed to people and cannot he ascribed to
Allah, ‘This belief violates that of the Adherents of the Sunnah ancl

Maslin Community,

AA state of major ritual impurity related to sexual discharge

Ikisa small stone-made pilarina walled place: There are three jamralls

situated at Mind. The closest ane to Mecca is known as Jamul:
‘Aqaba; iis also called the Great Jamal and the Last Jamra

Fighting in the Cause of Allah

A tribute or a tax required from non-Muslims living in an Islamic
stale exempting them from military service and entitling them
to the protection of the Islamic state, Concurrently, Zaki is not
taken from them, being an obligation only upon Muslims.

K

A shawl-ike cloth covering the head and shoulders worn by Muslim
women,
Leather socks oF shoes ar their likes,

L

"The Lawgiver of Shui ah (i.e. Islamic Law) is Allah, Exalted be
He; the term can also refer to the Prophet (PBUH) as he never
ordained bat what was revealed to him by Allah.

M

A woman's husband or any unmarriageable kin of hers,

Ibis whatever word, deed, approval or attribute, traced direttly
back to the Prophet (PBUH) with a connected or disconnected
chain of transmission,

A standard measure that equals 4.25 grams.

‘The fixed times for Haj. It also refers to the sites for entering the
state of ilirams
A standard measure that equals 543 grams.

The site for entering the state of ihrant

‘The one in a state of ritual consecration for Hajj (Pilgrimage) or

Umrah (Lesser Pilgrimage).
A slave who has concluded a contract with his/her master to pay

‘him a certain ransom for his/her freedom

485

‘The Jahmiyyah

Jandbah

Tamratul-
*Agabah

Jihad
Jizyah

Khimar

Khuffs

The Lawgiver

Mahram

Marfa"
(traceable)
hadith
Mithgal
Migats of Hajj

Mudit
Muhalt

Mubrim

Mukatab

446

Wika hadith whose chain of transmission leks a Companion trans~
miller, i.e. a fudith that a Successor of the Companions has directly,
attributed to the Prophet without mentioning a Companion,

A woman in a state of istihddak (ie. a woman having vaginel
bleeding other than menstruation).

Its an Islamic sect that claims that those who comimit majorsins
are in a state between belief and disbelief: This belief violates that
of the Adherents of the Sunnah and Mustim Community.

Tt is a hadith reported by large number of narrators whose
agreement upon telling a le is inconceivable (this condition must
be met in the entire chain from the beginning to the end),

N

‘The minimam amount upon which Zakah is due.

‘A tace-covering veil worn by Mustim women.

0

‘Opening prayer with saying, “Allai-Akbar” (ue. Allahis the Greatest)

‘The ditection of prayer, namely towards the Ka’ bab,

‘It means that a pilgrim assumes ira for performing both "Umrah
and Haj together, or toassume thrant for‘ Uniral then, before starting
the fawaf for *Unnah, a pilgrim intends performing both *Uinralt
and Hajj either from the mnigdt or before the tawaf ‏"كه‎ Umralt inthis
case, a pilgrim is to perform both fawéfand sa‘ for both,

Divine Words, other than the Glorious Quran, tevedled to the
Prophet (PBUH) from Allah. Unlike the Qur’n, the wording of
the Qudsi (Divine) hadith are neither used for worship nor deemed
miraculous.

A Shiite grou) that refused the caliphates of Abd Bakr As-Siddiq
‘and Unie Ibnul-Khattab and waged accusations against them
and against many of the Prophet's Companions as well

‘A standard measure that equals 2172 grams.
Itis a hadith whose chatn of transmission has been transmitted by

truly pious persons who have been known for their uprightnessand
exactitude: such a fieditl is Free from eccentricity and blemish.

Glossary

‘Mursal (incom-
pletely trans-
mitted) hadith

‘Mustahiédah

The Mutazilites
(Mu'tazilah)

‘Mutawétir (con-
tinuously recur-
rent) hadith

(Nisab (in Zak,
Nigab
The opening

takbir (in prayer)

‘The gibtan
Qirdin

Qudsi (Divine)
hadith

‘The Rafidah

Sa’
‏لتنامع‎ (authentic)
hadith

‘A Surmmary of Islami Jurisprudence

IL generally refers to any prayer consisting of an even number of
rok ls, and it particularly refers to the even number of rak ahs
performed before the final ‏وله لم‎ of the Witr Prayer,

‘The Levant; the region covering Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, and Palestine.

‘The extract of the lote tree leaves.

‘The Sunan refers to compilations of the Prophetic Hadits classified
according to the Islamic jurisprucential themes; the main four
compilers of the Sunay are Aba Dawéd, Tbn Majah, At-Tirmidi
and An-Nasit

T

The Night Vigil Prayer,
Saying, "La Haha illallah” (Le. Theres no deity but Allah),

Saying, “Al-kaindu-lillah" (i.e. Praise be to Allah.

Saying as a reply to tasmi', “Rabbamra-welakalshamd" ie. "Our
Lord, to You be (All) praise”
Saying, “Allalut-Akbar” (i.e, Allah is the Greatest),

A formula recited by a pilgrim during Hajjor ‘ Umrakafter assuming
the state of iro ‏د‎ pilgrim says, “Here 1 am at Your service, O
Allah, here Tam at Your service. Hete lam at Your service, You have:
‏مم‎ partner, here Iam at Your service. Verily, all praise, blessings,
and dominion are Yours. You have no partner

Iteans thata pilgrim assumes iiramt (state of ritual consecration)
for performing ‘Ummah during the months of Hajj, and then, after
performing “Unirah,a pilgrim assumes ihram for performing Haj
in the same season,

Saying,"“Amin” (ie, “Amen") after the recitation of Al-Fétihuah (the
‘Opening Sura of the Qur'én) in prayer.

‘Supererogatory prayer performed after the: ‘Isha’ (Night) Prayer
during the month of Ramadan,

Saying, “Subluin-Allah" (ie. Glory be to Allah),

Saying, "Subhvina Rabbiyal- Azim” (i.e, “Glory be to my Lord, the
Most Great") while bowing, and “Subkiana Rabbiyal-A I
“Glory be ta my Lord, the Most High’) while prostrating.

487
“The Shaf

Ash-Sham
Sidr
The Sunan

Tahajjud
‏الال‎
‎Tahmid

Tahinid (in

prayer)
Takbir

Talbiyah

Tamattu’

Ta'min (in
prayer)

Tarawih Prayer

Tashi

Tasbile (in
prayer)

488

Reciting: "(All) compliments, prayers and good things are due
to Allah; peace be upon you, © Prophet, and the Mercy of Allah
and His blessings (be upon you), Peace be upon us and upon the

pious servants of Allah. ] testify that there is no deity (worthy
of Worship) but Allah, Alone, with no partner, and I testify that
Mahammuad is His servant and His Messenger. O Allah! Confer
‘Your blessings upon Muhammad and the family of Muhammad
as You conferred Your blessings upon fbrahim (Abraham)
and the family of tbrahim. Verily, You are Praiseworthy and
Honorable. And bless Muhammad and the family of Mubammad
as You blessed Ibrahim and the family of Ibrahim. Verily, You are
Praiseworthy and Honorable”

Saying the final Saldms in prayer (saying, “As-salamu ‘«laykum
wa Relimatullah” Le; “Peace be upon you, and the mercy of Allah)
when concluding prayer.

Saying “Sami ‘allah liman hamnidah ie, “Allah listens to the one
who praises Hin,” when standing following bowing in prayer
Saying “Bismiltah” (ie. In the Name of Allah

Citcumambulating the Ka’ ba,

Performingdey ablation with clean earth (when water is anavallable
or one cannot use it).

‘The Two Authentic Books of Al-Bukhitei and Muslim,

Saying, "| \estify thar there is no deity but Allah and that Mubam=
‏لمهم‎ Is the Messenger of Allah.”

WwW

Itis the greatest and the most superior degree in Paradise reserved
{or only one of ‏مالف‎ servants, and Prophet Mubammad (PBUH)
hopes to be that one, So, he (PBUH) asks everyone of his nation to
pray to Aah following each prayer call (adhan) to grant him that
place, Al-Wasilal

A supererogatory prayer consisting of an odd number of rak‘ahs
(one, three, five, seven, nine, eleven or thirteen) anditis performed

any time between the Isha" (Night) and the Fajr (Dawn) Prayers.
Astandard measure that equals 130320 grams,

Glossary

Tashahhud

Tastim

Tasmi

Tasmiyah

Tawaf
Tayamnum

‘The Two Sahilis

‘The Two
‘Testifications of
Faith

Al-Wasilah

‘The Witr Prayer

Wasq

A Summntarysof slami¢ Jurisprudence

Y

‘The southern corner of the Ka'bat that faces Yemen.

Z

Zakah ‏مد ها‎ annual expenditure for the benefit of the Muslim
community. primarily to help the poor: It is required from those:
Maslims who have excess wealth. Paying ‏باق لمك‎ is one of the five
main pillars of Islami (for miore elaboration, refer to the chaplee

on Zakah),
‘An obligatory chacity to be paid by the rich to the poor. ina juristie
‏:ين‎ itis 10 be paid at any time throughout Ramadan, whereas

it is tinst preferable to give it two or three days right before the
Fast-breaking Feast (‘Tdid-Fitr). A third view maintains that it is
to be given belore going out for performing the Prayer ofthe Fast
breaking Feast

21007 is the Saying of a husband to his wife, when he wants to
abstain from having sex with her, “(Sexually,) you are to me like
the back of my mother” ie, unlawful to approach sexually: That
‏د كدير‎ type of divorce practiced by Arabs in the Pre-Islamic Period
of Ignorance (the Jailiyyah)

449

‘The Yamani

(the Yemeni)
Comer

Zakih

Zakétul-Fitr
(Fast-breaking
Zakah)

ihar

NAME INDEX

Al-Bazzar., 7

177176 قط لست دلق
,135 ,116 ,115 ,109 ,106 ,79 ,77
,176 ,175 ,169 ,168 ,164 ,141 ,136
,223 ,217 ,206 ,191 ,190 ,186 ,182
,260 ,258 ,252 ,244 ,243 ,235 ,230
,284 ,283 ,282 ,274,275 ,269 ,267
,305 ,300 ,298 ,297 ,295 ,290 ,288
,330 ,329 ,327 ,323 ,322 ,309 ,308
,365 ,358 ,352 ,342 ,338 ,337 ,336
,412,415 ,398 ,396 ,392 ,383 ,366
476 ,457 ,454 ,448 ,430 ,419

Al-Hifiz. 2,229

‎010١‏ تلفق لخ
377 ,342 ,328 ,294 ,288 ,249

‎‘Al- Hasan... 48, 463

‎‘Al Hasan and Al-Husayn..
Al-Hudaybiyah.

‎405,
‎407, 424, 434, 437, 449, 451

‎Al-Mash’ ar Al-Hardm.

‎AL-Masjid Al-Haram.
265, 267, 450

‎AL-Migdad. 27
Al-Mughirah Ibn Shu’bah......150,
Al-Mughni. 444, 445

‎Al-Munafiqan (the Hypocrites),,262
Ai-Walhan.... Ad

‎10, 60,
132, 302, 307, 404, 434, 450

‏460 ,151
,204 ,198
,319 ,301 ,300 ,269 ,240 ,ا
330 ,329 ,328 ,326

‎Aba Dawad... 23, 38,
43,51, 54, 61, 62,79, 81, 89, 102,
103, 104, 140, 151, 159, 170, 174,
177, 185, 196, 204, 206, 210, 218,
230, 240, 244, 255, 260, 268, 295,
298, 310, 326, 332, 342, 343, 348,
359, 361, 377, 383, 431, 448,454,
457, 461, 463, 465

‎Aba Dharr.,

‎‘Abit Hurayrah., 27, 29,
55, 78, 173, 176, 181, 191, 204,
223, 228, 250, 253, 257, 262, 295,
305, 311,377, 390, 406, 433

‎Mas’ tid Al-Ansai‏ نطق

‎Al-Bayhagi. 170,194,
248, 249, 257, 269, 271, 408

452

Dbul-Hijjah, 275,276,
277,434, 437, 438, 439, 440, 443,
445, 447, 453, 454, 456, 461

55
Fatimah Bint ‏نطف‎ Hubaysh
76,79
He
‘Hamnah Bint Jash.........80, 240
Hanzalah. 465

Harin... 105, 206
Hazan,

Hudhayfah 127,274
‘Tbn ' Abbis.. 78, 140, 141,

192, 270, 274, 288, 289, 352,
365, 371, 393, 396, 397, 406,
407, 408, 412, 418, 432, 446,
448, 453, 457
Ton’ Abdul-Barr, +20, 101
Tbn* Umar. 29,168,
169, 175, 176, 177, 243, 251,258,
260, 269, 272, 275, 336, 337, 342,
352, 354, 377, 447,454
Ibn Aba Awfa.
Tbn Abi Shaybah,
Tbn Hajar.
Tbn Hibban.
196, 294,
Ibn Hinbayrabh. son
Ibn Khuzaymah.

Ibn Majah.
51, 81, 103, 104, 136, 140, 151,
176, 195, 222, 260, 273, 298, 312,
322, 332, 342, 457, 460

230, 358
276

298, 328, 37

Name Indes

Anas. 16,174,
223, 228, 268, 300, 326, 328, 342,
343, 382, 383, 390, 423

Anas Ibn Malik. 16
An-Nasili..... 20, 62,
79, 106, 151, 152, 235, 244, 310,

10, 343, 461

16, 48, 198, 260
168, 359

‘Ash-Shafi'd
155, 241, 248, 268, 273
As-Safi.

405,407,

AIR

As-Sayl

aero Uy
61, 72, 80, 81, 89, 100, 101, 103,
14, 106, 108, 140, 146, 151, 170,
186, 224, 237, 239, 240, 254, 261,
270, 288, 289, 294, 299, 309, 310,

311,312, 313, 322, 366, 370, 383,
4004, 406, 415, 460, 464
ALTUPNGSHE. scien SLT

Ax-Zuhri..

Bani "Abdud-Dar.
Band Amr Ibn ' Aw!
Band Salamah.

A Summary of Istumic Jurisproidenee

276,311, 327, 337, 343, 418, 439,
443, 444, 454, 460

بلطف
‎Jeddah‏
‎Jahmiyyal‏

Ka‘b Ibn ‘Ujrah....

Ka'bah., 21,64,
76, 102, 108, 121, 135, 186, 310,
404,407, 408, 418,424, 434, 440,
448, 449, 450, 455, 457, 465

Kulayb...

465

Malik...
196, 241, 372

‘Malik Ibnul-Huwayrith, 196

Mecca. 139,140,
174, 267, 403, 404, 418, 419,420,
421, 424,434, 438, 439, 440, 446,
449, 453, 455, 456, 457, 476

Mina. 41,277.
407, 438, 439, 440, 443, 445,
4446, 447, 453, 45a, 455, 456

Mount of Ar-Rahimah....

Mw’ adh...
322, 328, 330, 365

78, 103.

440
1.239, 297,

Muzdalifah.. 41,407,
439, 443, 444, 445, 446, 456

493

bn Mas’ id. 123, 144,
170, 192, 261, 271, 274, 294,
295, 366, 415

445 44.................... قحم ققمع ‎Yon‏

Ibn Taymiyal 11,71,
77, 78, 80, 106, 110, 155, 207,
217, 224, 229,239, 240, 248, 250,
252, 254, 256, 259, 272, 276,277,
285,313, 314, 348, 354, 362, 394,
421, 422, 429, 431, 438, 473

Tonul-Mubarak. 48

Ibnul-Mundhit 48,54,
256, 301

Thnul-Qayyim.. 107,136,

169, 176, 194, 211, 248, 250, 258,
271, 293,26, 312, 353, 393,397,
423, 429, 430, 438, 454, 455, 459,
464, 472

Tonus-Sakan...

ImamAhmadibnblanbal..
298, 463

Imam An-Nawawi.sonewn27s 199,
229, 276

Imam Ibn Dagiqul-'id..

Imam Ibn Hazm,

nam Ibn Kathir,

Imm Muslim...
60, 79, 90, 99, 114, 122, 144, 160,
174,186, 199, 207, 223, 247, 261,
262, 270, 273, 275, 297, 298, 308,
311,312, 337, 366, 406, 418, 122,
432, 461, 465

lehig

51
261,

394

fair... 50, 160,
243, 244, 256, 260, 269, 270,273,

Name Index 494

72, 348, 463
Sheikh Muhammad Ibn *Abdul-

Naj

150

275, 309

49

Sahih 275,282,
295, 327, 329, 330, 366, 415

152, 168, 170, 180, 192, 198, 204,
211,218, 251, 272, 273,295, 336,
364, 406, 412

Sahl Ibn Aba Hathmah Al-Ansari

‘ZAdul-Ma’ ad,

103, 151, 161, 236, 298, 366

SUBJECT INDEX

Number in 195
Obligation uf 190-192
Ruling on One Who Does Not

Observe 193-195
Virtues of 190
Women and 196

Days of Tashriq and Farewell
Towaf 453
Farewell Tawit 457
Rulings on Menstruation and

Postnatal Bleeding 456
Shortening Prayers 483

Spending the Nightat Mina 453

Throwing Pebbles 454
Death and Burial 293
Condolence and Visiting Graves
312-314

Deceased 298.299
Funeral Prayer 305-308
Funeral Procession and. Burial
308-312

Shrouding. 304-305

Sickness and Dying 295-298
Sunnah Regarding Sick and Dying
People 293-294
‘Washing the Body of the Deceased
299-304

Dhikr (Remembrance of Allah)
Following Prayer 149

Following Different Acts of Worship
149

*Aqiqah (Sacrificial Animal for
the Newborn) 463

Conditions of 465

Confirmed act of the Sunnah 464

Naming the child 464
‘Time of offering 464
Acts on Mazdalifah and Mina 443
Heading for Mina ‏كيه‎
‎Leaving.’ Arafah 443
Performing ‏ملفا‎ 449
Performing say 451
Shaving or cutting hair ‏جه‎
‎Spending the night at Muzdalifan
44

‘Sate of semi-consecration (i. first.
ppartial release of trim) 448

‘The obligatory of sacrificial animal 447
‘The ritual of stoning a6
‘The second (complete) release of

449 قزل

Breaking the Fast: Ulness or Old
Age 395
Hopelessly sick people 396

Intention of observing obligatory
fasting from the previous night

397
‘Legal excuse 396-397
Congregational Prayer 189
Latecomers and 203-207,

Legality of ‏وير‎
‘A Summary of Isarnie Jurisprudence

Maerying 432
Removing hair 427

‘Touching women Tustfully 433

Wearing perfume 431
Wearing sewn clothes 429
How to Assume 42
Desirable Deeds 421-423
trad 424-437
Qin 424-437
Tamattur 4245438
Imamate (in Prayer) 213
Duties of ‏مشا‎ 27
Conditions of Those Led in Prayer
228-231

Giving ttltsDuein Fall 238
Jmamate a5

‘Those Unworthy of 221-235

Those Worthy of 246-219
Virtue of 25
Jihad (Fighting in the Cause of
Allah) a
Noble Objectives oF 474
Prescription of 471
Rulings on 475
‘What ts Obligated on the Mustim
Ruler? 474
‘What is Obligatory for the Muslim
‘Army? 474

Juinu ‘alt (Eriday) Prayer 247

Friday Sermon 259-261

496

Following Sunnsls in Remember-

ing Allah 150
‘Supplications to Be Said Following
Prayer 153-154
‏قراط‎ (Forenoon) Prayer 173
Legality of 73
Namber of Rak’ ahs 174
Time of 17a
Eclipse Prayer 2a
Due Time of 283
Legality of 281-283

Way of Perfotming 283-285
Etiquette of Heading for Mosque

13
Legalized Standards of Behavior

Prior to Prayer 3
Standing inthe FirstRow 5
Straightening Rows 116

Waiting for Prayer in Mosque 115
Fasting Ramadan: Obligation

and Timing 375
Divine Wisdom 376
Moonsighting a7
Obligation 378

Thram ‏ك0‎

‘Acts Prohibited during 427

Clipping fingernails) (oenatls 428
Covering head 429
Having sexual intercourse 432

Killing game animals 431

497

Purpose of 405

Virtues of Hojj and its Preparations
45

Accepted Performance af Haji
46

Prayer 87
Conditions of 7

‘Avoiding Impurity 105-108

Concealing Awrah 101-105
Facing Qiblah 108-109
Intention 109-111
Specified Times 97-101
Detestable Acts 135
Detestable Acts ‘during, Prayer
135-138

Integral Parts, Obligatory Prac-
tices and Acts of the Sunnah
ng

Bight Obligatory Acts 124-125
Fourteen integral Parts. 120-123
Tegal Excuses 233
Kear Prayer 241-245
Prayer of/Traveler 238-241
Prayer of Riders 237-238
Prayer Performed by the Sick 234-237
Mannet of Prayer 129
Prophet’ 129
Obligation afthe Five Prayers 87
‘Abandoning Performing Prayer 90

Delaying Performing Prayers 90

Subject Index

Legal Conditions of 257-259
Manner of Performing 261-262
Rulings on jurnu'al 252-256
Special’ Acts of Worship to Be

Observed on 250-251
Special Features to, Be Observed
om Friday 248-250
Wisdom Behind 248
‘Making up for Missed Days of
Ramadan 391
Breaking Fast Due toa Legal Excuse
391

Dying before Making up for 392
Dying before Performing Due

Expiatory Fasting 393
Dying without. Observing

Expiatory Fasting for Not
Fulfiling ‏د‎ Vow 393

‘Migats of Haj 417

Fixed Times of Hajj ‏جيه‎
‎Sites for Entering the State of ‏امفقيلا‎
‎418
‎Non-regular Supererogatory
Prayer 179
Desirability of 180
Legality of Performing 179
‘Night Vigil 180
Hajj (Pilgrimage) 403
‏لصيل"‎ 405
Obligation of 405

Performing Hajj bya Boy 406

Performing Hajj on Behalf of
Another 408

tes oF 406

Prerequi

A Suntnary of ‏عنههانا‎ Jurispnidence

Day of” Avafah 440
Proceeding to"Arafah ‏ونه‎
‎Shortening Every Four-Rak'ah

Prayer 439

Sacrificial Animals (Hady and
Udhiyah) 459
Conditions of 460

Optimum Time for Slaugbtering 461

Prescription of Offering 459
‘The Best Sacrificial Animal to Offer

460
Sunnah Rétibah: Prayers Per-
formed along with Obligatory
Prayers 167
Desirability nf Performing — 168
Making up for Missed 170
Proof of 168
Rak"ahs Considered as 167
‘Tardwih Prayer 163
Desirability of 163
Number of Rak'ahs 164
Things Nullifying Fasting 387
Meeding, 388

Deliberate Eating or Drinking 388
Bjaculation na

Having Sexual Intercourse 387

Vomiting 389
‘Times When Prayer is Forbidden
185

Five Times 185-186

Making up at Forbidden Times 186

98

What Does Prayer Mean? 87

Prayer Call (Adhan) and Imme-
diate Prayer Call (Iqdmah)

93
Immediate Prayer Call Forrnila
96

Prayer Call Forrmala 94.95
Prescription of 93
The Basic Characteristic of a
Prayer Caller 94
‘The Great Virtues of 94

‘What a Muslim Has to Do upon
Hearing the Prayer Call? 95-6

Prostration of Forgetfulness

143
Cases of 144-146
Legality of 13

Prostration of Recitation 175
Legality of 5
Pronouncing Takbirbefore 177
Suras of Que'in 176

‘Those Who Should Perform 176

Rain Prayer 287
Due Time of 287-288
Legality of 287
Rullings on 288

Sermon of Asking for Rain 289-290
Rites of Tarwiyah and \Arafah

Days 437
Asstiming Irion for Hajj on the

Day of Terwiyeh 438
Chanting Talbiyalt 439

4

Time of Yoo

Ways of 160-161

‘Women’s Attendance in Mosques
209

‘Adhering to High Moral Standards
210-213
Detestabillty of Preventing Women
from Going to Mosque 210
Women’s Hajj and Rulings on
Performing It on Someone’s

Behalf au
Malai 412
Dying belore Doing a

Perforrning fai on Behalf of Parents
413

Subject Index

‘Two Feasts ("ids) Prayer 265
Acts of Sunnaly Regarding 268-270

Delivering the Sermon 273-274

Due Time 267-268
Legality of 165
Proof of 266
Rulings on 274-277

Voluntary Prayer 157
‘Non-Regular 158
Regular 158

Witr Prayer 159

Kegality of 139

QUR’ANIC VERSE INDEX

PR
5
234,235,395

141
213
403,405
98

476

372
65:
11,12,21,28
474
238,241,242
191,242,245
88,90,97,149,257

11,20,35,37,54,
59464, 65,66
94
431
432

339,372
a9

103
102
102
105
101
289
205,252

10,12,70

141,170
108,237

98

369

375
378,391,396
,150,233,275
37,396
376,381,388
365
427.428.432.433
,417,432,433
جمد

150

450
256,276
42
56,61,76
98.99,137
24

369

370
220,335,338,
339,416
365,370
369

Sura 21: Al-Anbiya’

21:83., 295
Sura 22: Al-Hajj
22:27. 404
370,440
404
460
460
474
121,122
233
104
24:36,37, 96,194
Sura 25: Al-Furgin
2548 10
25:74 219,228
‘Sura 30: Ar-Ram
30;17,18, 88
Siira 32: As-Sajdah
180
-Ahzib
133,155,171,259,
290384
149
104
: 104
‏قل قاين‎
7 5
ussilat
219
281
fuhammad
471
200,285
48:27 447

48:28. 2

474
473
477

320
478
475
14

ATT ATR

335,341
473

361,363
301
350
350

88,320,347

27,197

473
301

281
205
206

88

109

209
433

371
282
98,99

lon

89
a

Quranic Verse Index

1431
Sura 1
16:16.
16:97,
16:125,
Sura 17: Al-Isra?
17:26,

19:59,60....
Sura 20; Taha
OHA irene

20:114.

A Summary ‏أن‎ Islamic Jurispeudenge

‘Sura 65: At-Talag

65:1. 7
344
247
I-Mazzammil
181
8 142,350
Sura 74; Al-Muddaththir
Tad. 69,105
Sura 77: Al-Mursalat
7:25.26. 308
Sura 80: "Abasa
80:21 308
Sura 87: ‏لخدلل‎
‎351
‎266,269
‎371

108:2... 266

222
111

180
371

51:16,18.

98
20

5
302

100

302
301

365
Sura 62: Al-furni’ah

94,248
150,205
260

Sura 64; At-Taghibun
64:16. — 42465,67,90,109,
234,235,236,238

503

16
16

17

20
21

21

21

22

HADITH INDEX

Hadith
“If Allah wants to do good for a perso
“Men of knowledge are the inheritors of prophets:

"The key to prayer is purification”.

"Do not drink in gold or silver vessels nor eat in similar
bowls.
“He who drinks in silver vesels is only filing his abdomen
with Hellfire:
e cup of Allah’ Messenger (PBUH) got broken
“Tanning is the purifying means for hides”.

“No one shauld touch the Book of the Qui
pure”
“Allah does riot accept a prayer without purification..."..
“Allah does not accept the prayer of anyone of you if he
passes win 5
“Tawa is (considered) a prayer.
“Nothing prevented him (i.e. the Prophet, PBUH) from
(reciting) the Quran
“He (PBUH) used to recite the Quin for us unless he was
ia state of jandbah

“The Prophet (PBUH) used to mention Allah inal his
conditions.”

"Tao not deem the mosque lawful fora menstruating wornan..

"] saw some of the Companions staying at the mosque
while being in a state of jandbah
“Menstruating women should keep away from the place
of performing prayer
“Tn the Name of Allah, I seek refuge with Allah from all
offensive and wicked things...
“Tseck Your forgiveness. Praise be to Allah, Who removed
harm from me.
“One should wash one’ penis and then perform ablution!

i uanless they are

14

15
16

18

19
sue

27,105
7
27

29,30
29
29
30

37
37

38
39

42,67

43
43

43

49
50
51

54

‘Madich Index

"Purify yourselves from urini
“The Qur'an becomes dubious to us.
“We use water after using stones,”
“Siwak (tooth-stick) is a way of purifying the mouth and
satisfying the Lord.
“Five (practices) are ofthe natural disposition: circumcisio
“Cut the nioustaches short and leave the beard (as it is)"
“But for my fear that it would be hard for my follower:
“washed his hands (during ablution) until he reached the
upper arms...
“The ears are treated as part of the head.

“This is an ablution without which Allah does not accept
any prayer.
“No one keeps being ina state of ablution except the believer:
“IfTcommand you to do something, then do (of) it as much
as you can.”
“Testify that there is no deity but Allak, Alone, with no
partner...
“Go back and perform ablution wel
“Woe ta the heels (if not washed during ablution) from the
Fire!”

“The prayer of any of you is not complete until he performs
nblution perfectly.
“Why are you wasting all this water?
“There is a demon of ablution called Al-Walhdi
“Leave them as I had put then: after performing ablution.”
“We are commanded (by the pos) to wipe over
the khuffs
“He who is not purified by wiping over the turban

“They killed hint; may Allah kill them...

"Perform ablution and then (you can) offer prayer, for it
(due only to) a vein
“Allah will not accept the prayer of anyone of you if hi
passes urine.

"One should not leave prayer (to re-perform ablution).
unless one hears sound.
“Yfany one of you feelsany flatulence (while being in a state
of ablution),

2
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

29
30

31
32

33

34
35

36
37
38
39
40
4
42
43
44
45

46

A Supsmary of ‏عتدداما‎ Jurisprudence

7

79

79

7
80
8

al
a9
a9

a9
90

95
97
98
99
99

“When anyone sits amidst four parts (of the woman,
“50, When your menstruation period begins
“There is jandbah wider every single hair

“Verily, Allah is Modest and He likes modesty and veiling...
“And its clean earth has been made (by Allah) as a
purifying means for ‏الا‎
‎“When a dog licks a utensil belonging to anyone of you.
“*. The child urinated on the garment of the Prophet (PBUH).
“It (ie. a cat) is mot impure; itis one of tho:
“Purification is half of fait
"Give up prayer when your menstrual period begins.
“When we menstruated during the life of Allah’
Messenger (PBUH).
“ou dan do verything with yout wives drag menstruation]
except...
“We never considered yellowish discharge as a thing of imp
ortance....
“Remainaway (fromprayer)equal(tothelengthoftime)that
‘your menstrual
“This (i.e. istihadah) ts from a blood vein, not (usual)
menstruation.
“When the menstruation blood comes, itis black blood
that can be recognized.
“This (ie. istibadah) isa strike (ie. harm) caused by Satan.
“She should give up prayer during her menstrual period...
"1 advice you to use cotton; stuff the place (the vagina)
with i
"Whoever misses a prayer out of oversleeping or forgetfulness.
“Does this one have to perform Hajj (Pilgrimage)...
“Command your children to perform prayer when they
become seven years old.
“Verily, between man and between polytheisna and disbelief is.
"0 Allah, Lord of this perfect call and of this established
prayer
"Prayer has specified times stipulated by Allah.
“Performing prayers at their specified times.”
“The time of the Zulr (Noon) Prayer.
“Ina very hot weather, delay the Zuhr Prayer

47
48
49
50
51

52
53
54
55
56
57

58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
7
68

69
70

71
72
73
274

508

99
101

101,104

102

103

103

103
103

104

106

106,107

108

110

113

114
114

14
114

114

115
iis

‘Hadith Index

‘When night falls from this side and the day vanishes from
that side and the sten sets.
“If anyone forgets a prayer or misses it because of sleeping.
“Allah does notacceptthe prayerofawomanwhohasreached
puberty unless.
‘Conceal your ‘awrah (private parts) except from your wife
and from.

“Do not unveil your thigh, and do not look at the thigh of
the living or the dead:

“Cover your thigh for a man’ thigh isa part of his “awrah
(private parts)”
"A woman is (regarded as) “awrah (ie. she has 10 be
concealed just like ” ‏سس ممه "لهرت‎
"Can a woman perform prayer while wearing
“Men woitld pass by us when we accompanied the Messenger
(PBUH)... 4
“The whole earth isa masjid (a place for prayer) except
bathrooms and graveyards,
"Do not face graves in prayer and do not sit on them”...
“There is qiblah (direction of prayer) between the east and
the west.
“Deeds (i,
intention:
"f the iqamah is declared - (in another narration,
‘you hear the iqamah,

«When one of you is preparing for prayer, he isin fact
engaged in prayer!
“fa person performs ablution and does it perfectly
‏06ب"‎ Alla! Forgive my sis and let the doors of Your Mercy
be open for me.”
"and let the daors of Your Favor be opened for me"
“Ifanyone of you enters a mosque, he should perform two
rak"ahs before sittin,
"When anyone of you is in the mosque, he should not
interlace (Iris fingers).

“If the people knew the reward for pronouncing the aadhan
(prayer call).

their correctness and rewards) depend upon

“The best rows for men are the first rows:

75

76
7

78

79

80

81

82
83

84

85
86

87

88

89

90
91

92
93

94

95

96

A Summary of Islamic Jurisprudence

115
115

116
116
116
120,122,
123,129
120

121
121

121
122
122
123
123
123
124
125
125,131
126
126
130

130
130

“Let those of you who are sedate and prudent be near me
(ie. be in the first row).
“And the best rows for women are the last ones’
“Straighten your rows, for the straightening of a row is part
of the perfection of prayer”
“Straighten your rows or else Allah will alter your faces.”
“Straighten your rows and stand close to one another
“Perform prayer in the way you see me performing
prayer.” 5
“Perform prayer while standing: if you carta
"Then face the qiblah (direction of prayer towards the
Kabah) and say takbir!
‘And takbir is the beginning of prayer
“No prayer is (accepted) from whoever does not recite
Al-Fatihah (in it)
The state in which a servant is nearest ta his Lord is while
prostrating himself”
"When he (the Prophet) raised his head after prastration
“Before Tashahhud was decreed, we used to recite instead...”
"0 Allah! Confer Your blessings upon Muliantmad...
“And its conclusion is taslina.”.
‘When the imém says, ‘Allah listens ‏ها‎ the one who praises
Him.
“Ormy Lord, forgive me;
“(All) compliments, prayers and good things are due to Allal
“(Our Lord, to You be (all) praise) with which are filled the
heavens and the earth...
"O Alllah! I seek refuge with You from the torture of the
Fire.
“Glory be to You, O Allah, and to You be all praise, and
Blessed is Your Name.
“Iseek refuge with Allah from Satan, the expelled (from the
mercy of Allah). 2
“Our Lord, to You be (all) the praise. 4
"OAllah! Forgive me, have mercy on me, set me right, guide
1, and sustain me”...
. OAllah! Confer Your blessings upon Mubammadand the
Jamily of Muharamna .

509

57

98
99

100
101
102

103
104

105 *

106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
17
118

119
120

121

Hadith Index 54

122 "60 Allah! [seek Your forgiveness (thrice 132
123. “Itis what Satan steals from the prayer of any one of you! 135
124 “What is wrong with those people who look toward the sky

during prayer? 135
125 “They should stop (looking toward the sky during prayer) or

els 136
126. “When you raise your head after prostration, da not squat

asa dog squat 136
127. “Perform the prostration properly 136

128 “No prayer should be performed when the food is present, 137
129 “When anyone of you performs prayer, he should not let

anyone pass in front of him 139
130 “When any one of you performs prayer, he should have (or

place) a concrete object. 140
131 “The Prophet (PBUH) performed prayer in an open space

without. 140
132 “Kill the two black things during prayer: the snake and the

scorpion.” 140
133 “Ifsome problem arises during prayer, then the men should

say, “Subhidn-Allah”.. 141
134 “When any one of you forgets (Le. errs inattentively during

prayer)... 144
135 “When one facet) adds or omits something in ones

prayer... 14a
136. “When anyone of you is in doubt whether he has performed

one or two rak’ahs. 146
137 "0 Allah, You are the Perféction and You are the One Who

grants perfection. 150

138 “Allah! None can withhold what You grant, and none can 151,135
grant what You withhold...

181

139 “There is neither might nor power except in Allah 151
140 “Whoever says ten times immediately after finis

Fajr (Dawn) Prayer 151

141 "© my Lord, protect me from the Fire’ 151

142. “and He is aver all things Omnipotent: 152

143 “Ianyone extols Allah after every prayer thirty-three times... 152
144 “Whoever recites éyatul-Kursi.nothing will be between him

and... 153

A Summary of Islamic Jurisprudence

159

160

160

160
160

161
161

164

164

164

168

168
168

169

169

“Whoever recites dyatul-Kursi.will be in Allah’ covenant of
protection.
“Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) commanded me to recite ALM
u'awwidhatan.
"0 Allah, You are the Perfection and You are the One Who
grants perfection until
“There is neither might nor power except in Allah.
“O my Lord, protect me from the Hellfire.
“Keep on the right course and (know that) you will not be
able to do all good act
“Whoever does not perform the Witr Prayer does not belong
tous”.
"Allah's Messenger (PBUH) performed the Witr Prayer at
different nights.
"ifanyoneof you is afraid that he may not be able 10 get wp
at the end of the night.
“allal’s Messenger (PBUH) used to perform eleven rak'ahs
at night...
uttering taslim the end of every two rak'ahs.
“Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) used to perform the Witr with
Jive or seven rak’alt....
"0 Allah! Guide me among those You have guide

“but the fear that it (ie, the prayer) might be enjoined on

you.
“Whoever stands (performing prayer) with the fam until
he finishes prayer.
"Whoever performs prayer during the nights of Ramadan
faithfully.
"T remember ten (supererogatory) rak'ahs from Allals
‘Messenger (PBUH)...

"Before the Zuhr (Noon) Prayer, the Prophet used to
perform four rak’ahs.
"Perform some of your (supererogatory) prayers at homte..;
“The two (supererogatory) rak’ahs of the Fajr Prayer are
better than.
“The Prophet (PBUH) used to make the two rak ahs before
the Fajr.

146
147
148
149
150
151
152

153

154

155 *

156

157
158

159

160

161

162

163
164

165

170
170
170

173
173
7

(75

176
176

17

17
177
179
179

180
180

181

i8i
182
182
182
182,193

Hadich Index

"| cannot count (the number uf limes) 1 heard Allalis
‘Messenger (PBUH) recitin
“If anyone oversleeps and misses the Witr or forgets
“When sleep or pain overpowered the Propltet (PBUH).....
“My friend (i.e. the Prophet) advised me to da three
things.
“The Prophet (PBUH) used to perform the Dulha Prayer,
“<..the two rak‘ahs of the Duha Prayer..
“Ifanyone sits in his place of prayer after finishing the Sub
(Morning) Prayer...
‘the Prophet (PBUH) performed eight rak'ahs as the
Dubé Prayei
“The Prophet (PBUH) used to perform the Duh Prayer
with four rak’ ahs.
“The prayer of those who are penitent...
“When the Prophet (PBUH) recited a sura of the Quran
that contains the prostration.
“When the son of adam (Adami) recites a verse of
prostration,..
"but “Utmdn did not perform prostratfon ard said.
‏كاملل"‎ Messenger (PBUH) used to recite the Quran ta
us.
“Subhdna Rabbiyal-A°la" (Glory be to my Lord, the Mast
High).
“My face has prostrated before Alla
“Performing prayer in the middle of the night.
“There is an hour in the night during which
“Adhere to (the performance of) the night vigil super-
eFOgALOrY ‏...لهام‎
‎“The mast beloved prayer to Allah is that of Dawid (David).
“All praise be to Allah, Who gave me life after causing me
to die (sleep).
“When any of you stands up at night to perform the night
Vigil supererogatory praye
“The night vigil supererogatory prayer should bi
"... Perform (supereragatory) prayer at your homes.
“Whoever performs prayer silting gets kul the reward.
“When the servant (of Allah) falls ill or travels..

166

167
168
169

170
171
172

173

175
176

17

178
179

180

igi
182
183
184

185
186

i87

188
189
190
191

‘A Summary of llamic Jurisprudence

183
185
186

186

186

186
190
190
191
191

192
i92

492
192
193

194,197

194

195
195
196

190,196
196
197

191,197
197
198
199
199

“Whoever is overpowered by sleeping.
“When the dawn breaks.
“There are three times at which
“No prayer should be performed after the Fajr Prayer until
the sun rises.
“If anyone misses @ prayer out of oversleeping or

“Do not prevent anyone from circumantbulating this
Hous
"Da not differ (while standing in prayer.
“Do not differ (while standing in prayer.
“The most difficult prayer for the hypocrites is the Faj
“Certainly, I was about to order the prayer.
"0 Messenger of Allah! I have no one to guide me to the
mosque... ne

“Thave seen the time when rio one among us.
“Sternness, ‏للم‎ sternness, and disbelief and hypocrisy are in
him who.
“The Hand of Allah is with the (Muslim) commumity.
“He will be in Hellfire:

"No (obligatory) prayer ofthe one who is a neighbor of
@ mosque...
“The neighbor of the mosques the one who hears the caller

to prayer”.
“The congregational prayer is to be performed by two
persons or.

“Who can do an act of charity to this man.
“Let the oldest of you lead the prayer”
“The prayer in congregation is twenty seven times
superior to...
“A man’s prayer performed along with another is better.
“The people who get the best reward for the prayer are.
“The prayer performed in congregation is twenty five times
more superior..
"0 Bani Salamah! Keep living in your houses,
“No man should lead another in prayer in a place wher.
“Perform prayer at its prescribed time ‏سد‎
‎“Ik will be considered a supererogatory prayer for you...

forgetfulness

313

192
193
194
195

196

197

198
199
200
201
202

203
204

205
206
207

208

209

210
211
212

213
214
215

216
217
218
219

Hadith Index 514

220. “When the prayer commences, i99
221 ‘..No prayer (is to be performed) but that which has begun’ 199,
222 “If anyone catches up (the people in prayer when they are)

bowing... 204
223. “If you come to prayer while we are prostrating. 208
224 “..And complete whatever you have missed. 204,205,
225. “..And make up for whatever you have missed’ 204,205
226 “Is he who raises his head before the imam. 206
227 "The imém is appointed to be foltawe 206
228 “You neither performed the prayer alone nor did you follow

‘your imam” 206
229. “Do not precede me in bowing and prostration and ending

of prayer”. 207
230, “Do not prevent the female servants of Allah (women). 210
231 “If your women ask permission to go to the mosque at night,

allow the 20
232 “..Yet their houses (women’s) are better for them (to

perform prayer therein). 210
233. “\..But they should go while they are not perfumed”. 210
234 “Whoever woman perfumes herself. 2
235. “Aflerme, Ihave not left any affliction more harmful to men

than women... aut
236. “...Yot their houses are better for them (to perform prayer

therein). au
237 "Had Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) witnessed what the women

were doing.. 212
238. “Three persons will be on the hillock of musk on the Day of

Resurrection... 215,227

239. “The reward of him (the imam in prayer 215,227

240. “Appoint me to lead my people in prayer’ 215,228
241 “The one who is most versed in the Book of Allah, 216
242 “If people are equal in recitation (of the Qurian). 216
243. “Let the oldest one amongst you lead the prayer’ 217
344 "16 one who is most versed in Allalts Book (the Qurtin)

should act as the imam for the people. 217

245. "Noman should lead another in prayer where the latter) is
int his how:

A Suurnasty of Islamic jurisprudence

225

228
228

228
230

230

234

235
235

237
238
238

239
240

243

243

244

“No woman should lead aman in prayer, nor should a Bed-
ouin lead an immigrant.
*_.Nor should a wicked man lead a believer in pray‘
“The Prophet (PBUH) performed prayer in his house while
Sitting.

“.. Then perform prayer sitting all together:
“if the one in a state of jandbah[3] leads the people in
prayer

“(There are) three persons whose prayer does not rise over
their ears...
“(There are) three persons whose prayer does not rise over
their ears.
“If anyone of you leads people in prayer he should
lighten it.
“O people! Some of you make people dislike good deeds.
“Inever performed a light and perfect prayer as I performed
behind the Prophet.
“The Prophet (PBUH) used to prolong the first rak'ah
‘He (the Prophet) used to stand in the first rak'ah of the
Zur

“If T order you to do something. then do of it as much as

‘you can.
"1 had hemorrhoids so I asked the Prophet (PBUH) how I
could perform prayer...
“And if you cannot, perform prayer lying on your back.”
then he proceeded on his she-camel and ied them in
prayer.. :

“When the prayer was enjoined (by Allaly).
“The prayer performed on journeys is of two rak ahs.
“On the Battle of Tabak, when the Prophet (PBUH) had
gone forth
“But if you are strong enough to delay the Zubr Praye...
“The Prophet (PBUH) led the row that was with him in one
rak’ ah (unit of prayer).
“I witnessed the Fear Prayer with Allal’s Messenger
(PBUH).
“The Prophet (PBUH) led one of the two groups in one
rak’ ah in the Fear Prayer...

515

247
248

249
250

251

252

254
255

256
257

258

و25

260
261

262
263
264

265
266

267

268.

244

24
247

247

247

248

249
249
249
250

250
251
251
252
252
252

253

253
253
254
254
255

255
256

257
258,260

‘Hadich Index

“We went with the Prophet (PBUH) until we reached
Dhétur-Riga’
“Then the immediate prayer call (igamah) was announced
and..
“Among the most excellent of your days is Friday’
“We (Muslints) are the last (to come) but (will be) the seh
the Day of Resurrection.
“Ie was Friday from which Allah diverted those who were
before us,
“Confer blessings upon me frequently on Friday and the
night preceding it”
“He who commits an evil act ‘will have no (reward for)
Friday’,
“Whoever asks his companion to keep quiet.
“If anyone recites the Sura of Al-Kahf on Friday
“There is an hour (a period of time) on Friday,
“Then he may perform prayer as much as (Allah has)
willed for hin
"Wien any one of you performs the Junnu'ah Prayer
“When the Prophet (PBUH) performed Jumu'ah Prayer,
“Ifany one of you comes for the Jumu ‘ah Prayer.
“\.and should make them shot
“Get up and perform two rak ‘ahs.
“Ifanyone even says (to his campanion sitting besides him),
‘Sahin (i.e. shush)..
1 ‏الال وا‎ tg ay) :
mon.
“Yf you ask your companion to keep quiet and listen
“Whoever touches pebbles.
“And whoever makes an evil act, no 2 lay.
the prayer of the traveler is two rak'‘al
“(Per forming) the Juni ak (Friday) Prayerin congregation
is obligatory.
“Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day must perform
the Jumu'ah...
“Whoever could get one rak ‘ah of the Jumu'ah Prayer
“The Prophet used to deliver two sermons while standin

269

270

271
272

273

275

276
277
278
279

230
281
282
283
284
285

286
287

288
289

290 *

291

293
204

A Suintnary of Islamic Jurisprudence

269
270,274

270
270
271
271
271
272

272

273

“The enemy has made a morning attack on you and in the
evening too.”
“When Allah’ Messenger (PBUH) ascended the pulpit.
“When the Prophet (PBUH) ascended the pulpit, he used to
sit until the prayer.
“When the Prophet (PBUH) stood on the pulpit, we used to
face him.
‘A man’s prolongation of the prayer and shortening of the
sermon,
"Allah has given you instead of them what is better,
“Iany one imitates the manners of any people.
“The best of speech is that of the Book of Allah...
“They (women) must go while they are not perfumed
“The menstruating women should keep away from the
place of prayer”.
“We were ordered to come out on the Day of Feast.,.nucm
“The new moon of (ihe month of) Shawwal was overcast.
"Perform the prayer of the Day of Sacrifice early...
“The Prophet (PBUH) used not to go out (for prayer) on
the Day of Fast-breakin,
“The Prophet (PBUH) had a loose outer garinent.
“Allah's Messenger (PBUH), Abii Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Uthmian
used to.
“The Prophet (PBUH) performed a prayer of two rak'ahs.
“The Prayer of the Fast-breaking Feast and that of the Feast
of Sacrifice are...
“Tperformed the Feast Prayer along with Allah’s Messenger
(PBUH)..
“The Prophet (PBUH) pronounced takbir in a Feast Prayer
twelve times.
“Allah is truly Grea
“One may praise Allal
“The Prophet (PBUH) used ta recite the Qur’an aloud.
“Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) used ‏ما‎ recite in the prayers of
the Two Feasts.
“It is among the acts of (he Surah (Prophetic Tradition)
that.

300
301
302
303
304

305
306
307
308

309
310

311
312

314

315
316
317
318

319

Hadith Index 518

320 “After finishing the prayer, the Prophet (PBUH) would

stand in front of the people and. 273
321 “After finishing the Feast Prayer, the Prophet (PBUH) used

to. ee 2
322 “Pray whatever you get, and complete whatever you

missed.” 274
323. “Wewere commanded to make the menstruating women go

out to. 275
324“, They (the menstruating women) would stand behind

people... 275
325 “.. They (the menstruating women) used to pronounce

takbir along with people. 275
326 “When the Prophet (PBUH) performed the Subh Prayer in

the morning of ‘Arafah. 276
327 “The Prophet (PBUH) used to pronounce takbir

immediately after. 276
328, “When he (the Prophet finished Subh Prayer on the Day of

‘Arajah. 276
329 “The Day of ‘Arafah, and the Day of Sacrifice and the Days

of Mind. 27
330. “Allah is the Greatest. 27
331 “There was an eclipse on the day when Ibrahim, the son of

the Prophet (PBUH), died, 292
332 "Invoke Allah and perform prayer until the eclipse clears 282

333. “These signs, which Allah sends, do not occur because of... 282

334 “When you see the eclipse, perform prayer”, 283
335. “When you see any of this (ie. eclipse), perform prayer

until it clears 283
336. ‘Allah listens to the one who praises Hin... 283
337 “In the lifetime of Allah’s Messenger (PBUH), the sun

eclipsed... 284
338. “The Prophet (PBUH) came to. the people, after the sun

became visible again. 284
339 “...until the eclipse is clear; 285
340. “until the eclipse is aver: 285
341 “The Prophet (PBUH) went out to invoke Allah for rain. 288
342 “The Prophet (PBUH) performed two rak‘alis as. 288

0

289

290
290
290
290
293
294

294
295

295
295
296
297
297
297
297
297
298
298
298
298

299
300

305,308,

306
307
307
308

308
309

Allalts Messenger (PBUH) went out to perform the Prayer
for Rain.
“the people followed him (the Prophet) and traversed
their clothes."
"0 Allah! Let it be a strong fr
“The rain is due to the Favor and Mercy of Allah,”
“O Allah! (Let the rain be) around us.
“There is no deity but Allah,’
“Mention the pleasure destroyer (i.
“Allahis Messenger (PBUH) said, Show due bashfalness to
Allah.
“Allah has never made your remedy in what.
“The Prophet (PBUH) said, ‘Allah has sent down both
disease and cure.
‏كذ ع"‎ nota remedy; it is a malady’
“Do not worry, it (your illness) is a means of ‘pur ficatio
“Iris not permissible for any Muslim who has something to,
“Tari just as My servant thinks of Me.
“There is no deity but Allah;
“Exhort the dying among you to say.
“Whoever his last words are..
“Recite the Sura of Ya Sin over those dying among you,
“When the soul is taken away, the sight follows it.
“When the Prophet (PBUH) died, he was covered with
“The corpse of a Muslim should not remain withheld.
“The soul of a (dead) believer is suspended to his debt
until it
wash him with water and sidr(9}
“Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) said, ‘Whoever attends the
funeral procession...
“O Allah! Forgive those of us who are living and those of us
who are dead...
“O Allah! Forgive her,
"0 Allah! Make him precede his parents (to Paradise)...
“Whoever escorts the deceased to the grave...”.
“Whoever goes out accompanying a funeral from its
house...
“Hurry up with the dead body for if

itis righteous

519

343

344

345,
346
347
348
349
350

351
352

353
354
355
356
387
358
359
360
361
362
363
364

365
366

367
368
369
370
371

372

Hadith ‏لها‎ 520

373 “We (women) were forbidden (by the Prophet) to follow

funeral processions”. 309
374 "Dig graves and make them wide and deep 309
375. “(We bury hint) in the Name of Allah and according to the

religion... 309
376. “When you put your dead persons in the graves, say. 310
377 “It is your qiblah in your life and after your death”. 310
378 “Seek forgiveness for your (Muslim) brother and beg steadf

astness 310
379. “Allah's Messenger (PBUH) forbade that the graves should

be plastered o) ail

380 “The Messenger (PBUH) forbude plastering the graves. 311

381 “May Allah curse the women who visit the graves. 3
382 “May Allah curse the Jews and Christians, for. au
383. “It is better that one of you should sit on live coals which
would... 312
384 "No believer consoles his (hereaved Muslim) brother. 312
385. “May Allah make your reward great... 312
386 “Prepare some food for the family of Jafar. 312
387 “We (the Companions) used to consider gathering with.... 313,
388 “I forbade you (men) to visit the graves, but you may visit
313
389 313
390 “May Allah curse women who visit the graves 314
391 “Do ‏زمار‎ set out on a journey except for three Mosques. 214
392 “By Allah! I will fight those who differentiate between
Prayer and Zal 319
393 “Islam is based on (the following) five (principles). 320
394 “The wealth does not decrease out of giving in charity’ 321
395. “:..Invite the people to testify that there is no deity but Allah 322
396“... If they obey you to do so... 322
397 "No Zakah isto be taken from a property until a year passes
anit. 322
398 “\_Allahis debts have more right to be paid’ 323
399° "Concerning the (grazing) livestox 326
400“. Ifthere is not a she-camel in its second year, 326
401 “lf the number of the camels is from thirty-six to fort
fiv 1 326

A Summary of Islamic Jurisprudence

327
327
327
327

327
328

328
328
329
329
329
329
329
330

330
330)
330
331
332
336
336

336

337
337

337

338
339

Uf the camels are from sixty-one to seventy-five
If the number is from seventy-six to ninety.,
Uf they are from ninety-one to one hundred and twen
‘lf they are over one-hundred and-twenty (camels
“I heard Allahis Messenger (PBUH) saying, ‘No owner of
camel.
“When the Prophet (PBUH) sent me to Yemen.
“When Allalts Messenger (PBUH) sent me to Yemen (to
collect Zakah) 4
“These are the orders for Zakah which
As regards Zakah for the (flack of) sheep...
“..We are ordered (by the Prophet) to take from what.
“If somebody has got less than forty sheep...
“Ifthe (number of) sheep is over one hundred ancl twent
“df they are over two hundred, three sheep are due’.
‘As regards the (flock of) sheep, for every forty sheep up to.
“Neither an old nor a defective animal nora male-goat is
to be taken as... rr
But one should give animals of medium quality
<..Avoid taking the best of their properties...
“But one should give animals of medium quality”.
“Neither the property of different people may be taken
together nor
“No Zakah is due on less than five wasqs{11] of grains or
dates"
“On a land irrigated by rainwater or by natural water
channels 0
“Na ‏تافام‎ is to be paid on (a quantity) less than five
wasqs.”.
“One-tenth is payable (as Zakdlt) on the land irrigated by
rivers, or rain’.
‘t. And on the land irrigated by the well
*,.And a one-twentieth is to be paid (as Zakah) on what is
irrigated by camels.”
“One-fifth of the rikaz is ‏ما‎ he given to the Public

“No Zakdh is due on vegetables”.

402
403
404
405
406

407
408

409
410
411
42
413
44
415
416

417
418
419
420
421
422
423,

424

adit Index 522.

429. “No Zakah is to be paidl on (a quantily) less than five wasqs

[12] 339

430. “Yfany owner of gold or silver does not pay what is due on h
im. 341

431. “The Prophet (PBUH) used to take half a dinar as Zakah
from 342

432 “One fortieth (ie. 2.5%) is to be taken from pure silver (as
Zakah).” 342

433. “The one of you seems anscious to lift live coal rea the
Helifire and. 342

434 “Gold and silk are made fe tothe females of my nation
i 343
435 343
436 344

437 “The Prophet (PBUH) used to order us to pay Zakah on
‘what we prepare for trade 348

438 “No Zakdh is due upon property until one year has
passed.” 348

439. “Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) enjoined Zakatul-Fitr to be paid
with one sé’ of dates or. 382

‎‘Allah’ Messenger (PBUH) enjoined Zakatul-Fitr to be‏ .مد
‎paid on every Muslira.. << 382‏
‎“Ifanyone pays it (Zakétul-Fitr) before the Feast Prayer. 352‏ 441
‎“Give Zakatul-Fitr on behalf of whomever you support.” 353‏ 442
‎“Zakah is never mixed with a property but ruins it. 357‏ 443

‎444 “Deeds (their correctness and rewards) depend upon
intentions...”. 358

‎445. “O Allah, make it 4 profit and do not make it a loss 358
446. “May Allah reward you for what you have given. 358
447 "When some people brought their Zakah to Allah’

‎Messenger (PBUH)... 358
448 “Allah, Exalted be He, did not take the judgment of

‎a prophet of... 362
449. “If you are (one) of these kinds (that deserve receiving

‎Zakah). 362
450 “t have taken upon myself a compensation to settle the

‎dispute between. 364

A Summary of Islamic Jurispridence

365

366
36371
366
366
367

370
370
370
370
371
371
376
376
37
377

377
377

382

383

383
383

384

384
384

388

“Tell them that Allah has made it obligatory for them to
pay Zakah from..
“Wait until we receive Zakih, so that we onder to give you
from
“Giving charity to the poor is to be recorded as a charity.
“Charity must not be given to the family. of Muir
“Yes, (give them).”
“If you wish, Ishall give you from it (i. Zakah),
“(Giving) charity appeases the Wrath of the Lord and
averts an evil death.”..
“Alla wil give shade to seven om the Day when there will
be no shade but His..."
‏هب"‎ person who gives to charity so secretly.
“Which charity begets the greatest reward?
“Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) was the most generous of all the
peopl.
iwo rewards: A reward for maintaining the tes of kinship

an
“slam is based on five (pillars)
“fasting the month of Ramadan’.

“Start fasting on seeing it.

“The people were looking for the new moon (of Raman).
“The (lunar) month (can be) twenty-nine nights (ie. days)...

‘.. And if the sky is overcast...

“Take sahiir ‏معط ا‎ meal) for there is a blessing in

sahit
“The people will remain on the right path as long as they
hasten breaking of the fast.
"The most beloved of My servants to Me are those who
hasten to break fastin 7
“Allahis Messenger (PBUH) used to break his fast befor...

“Verily, a fasting person has an invocation when breaking
huis fast that is not rejected.

“O Allah! For You 1 have fasted, and with Your provision 1

have broken my fast
“Thirst has gone, the arteries have become moist, and.
“Whoever eats or drinks something forgetfully while he is

fasting, should.

523

451

452

453
454
455
456
457

458

459
460
461

462

463
464
465
466
467
468
469

470

471

472
473

474

475
476

Hadith fries 524

477. “Avoid that which makes you doubt ard adhere to that. 388
478. “Ifanyone cannot help vomiting. 389
479 “Take water into your nostrils wel 389
480. “Tam ina state of fasting)”: 389
481 “Whoever does not give up evil speech and related deeds, 390
482. “The fasting person is in a state of worship as long as he. 390
483. “He does not observe fasting who continues eating. 390
484 “It could happen that I miss some days of Ramadan, 392
485 ‘A woman came (o the Prophet (PBUH) and said, ‘My

imother has died and. 393
486 "The verse refers to those old men and women who are 100

old to fast... 396

487 “It is not righteousness to fast on a journey: 397
488 “Indeed, (the correctness and rewards of) deeds depend

upon intention: 397
489 “When one does not intend fasting before dawn, his fasting

is invalic 398
490. ““.. Thereupon, he (PBUH) said, ‘Then I will observe fasting

(today)? 398
491. “Whoever has the provision and the riding animal (or the

means) that can carry him 404
492. “Islam is based on five (pillars). 404
493. "..( going between As-Safa and Al-Marwah) are made for

mentioning Allah”. 405
494 "Yes, there is a jihitd prescribed for thers in which there is

no fightin, 405
495. “Perform Hajj and ‘Umrah on behalf of your father! 406
496 "Perform Hajj only once, and whoever performs it more

than that. 406
497 "© people! Allah as made Hajj obligatory for you, so

perform Hajj. 406
498 “Make haste to (perform the obligation of) Hi 406
499. “A woman lifted up a boy to (show him to) the Prophet and

sai 406
500 ‘A woman from (the tribe of) Khath am sai 407
501 "he Prophet (PBUH) heard a man saying talbiyah in this

way. 408
502. "A woman should not travel except with a makram. au

585 A Summary of Islamic Jurispeudenes

503 “O.Messenger of Allah! My wife is proceeding for Hajj and..... 411
504. “Itis impermissible for a woman to travel for one day and

night except with. 412
505. “Iris not lawfulfora woman believing in Allah to undertake

a journey... 412
506 “A woman said fo the Prophet, “My mother had vowed to

perform Hajj but. 412
507 “Perform Hajj and ‘Umrah (Lesser Pilgrimage) making

them follow each othe 415,
508 “We see that jihad[14] is the best of (good) deeds, so. 415
509 “Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) specified Dhul-Hulayfah (as a

site for ileram) for. 418
510. “.. The muhail[16] of the people of ‏وهم‎ is Dhatu- ‘Inq’ 418
511 “Make your site for ilrdm a place situated opposite ‏ا‎ 419
512 "fused to scent Allahs Messenger (PBUH) whenever he

wanted to assume ihirdm. 422
513 “Indeed, (the correctness and rewards of) devils depend

upon intentions...” 423
514 Here Tam at Yourservice, © Allah, | ‏يضة اعم‎ at Your service... 4
515 “There wasan ailment in my head and 1 was carried to the

Prophet (PBUH). 428
516 ‘A mukrim should not wear a shirt, or 429
517 ‘A female multrim must not wear a niga. 430
318 "Men would pass by us when we accompanied Allah's

Messenger (PBUH). 430
519 “Do not apply any perfume to him. 431
520 ‘A mubrim must neither marry himself, nor arrange the

marriage of another one’ 432
521. “He who believes in Allah and the Last Day should either

say something good or. 433
522. “A sign of one’ good observance of Islam is. 434
523“. All the pilgrims dissolved the state of ihram except the

Prophet (PBUH).. ... 438
524 And whoever is living within these boundaries can assume

ihrdm from his home... 438
525 ‘,. The Prophet (PBUH) rode his motent (heading for Mind)

and performed there... 439

526 “The best supplication is the one an the Day of “Arafah.... 0

526

440

441

443
aad

Aad

ada

445,
446

447

447
448

448,
448

448
451

453

454

454
445,446,454

457

457

457

Hadith Index

“If anyone gets (i, stays at) ‘Arafah before the dawn (of
the tenth of Dhul-Hijah) breaks.
“Hajj is “Arafah.
“He (the Prophet) kept standing there (at ‘Arafah) until
sunset. 1
“,.When he (PBUH) reached Mucdalifah....
<..Allah’s Messenger (PBUH) then lay down tentil
and offered.
“All Muzdalifah isa standing place, but be away from Bath
Muhassir”
“The polytheists did not use to depart (from Jam
Muedalifah) uni
“In the morning of the Day of Al-'Aqabal
*0 Allah! Make it an accepted Haj of ours that serves as a
pardon for our sins”.
“The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) got his head shaved
during the Earewell Haj
“Shaving (the hair) is not a duty laid on (pilgrim) women...
“If [command you to do something, then do (of) it as much
as you can."
“When one of you throws pebbles at Jamratul- 'Agabah..,.
"1 applied perfume consisting of musk to Allahts Messenger
(PBUH) once.
“There is no deity but Allah Alone Who has no partner...
“Allah's Messenger (PBUH) did not grant anyone (of the
pilgrims) permission ‏ها‎
‎"Allah Messenger (PBUH) threw pebbles on the Day of
Sacrifice at mid-morning...
“We sed to wait until the sum declined and then we would
throw the pebbles.
“Learn your rituals rom me (by seeing me performing them)"
“The people (i.e. pilgrims) were commanded to perform
the Farewell Tawi.
“None amongst you should depart until he performs the
Farewell Tawéf.
"The Prophet (PBUH) gave permission to menstruating
women to.

527

528
529

530
531

532

533

534
535

536

537
538

539
540

Sal
542

544

545
546

547

508

A Summary of Islamic Jurisprudence

457

460

461
461
463
464
464
465
465
472
473
475

476
478

“Safiyynh Bint Huyayy menstruated after picks the
Wadah Tawa, so
“Allakts Messenger (PBUH) commanded us to become seven
partners (i
“Ma the lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH), a person used to
sacrifice a ewe
“Four (types of animals) are impermissible to be offered as
sacrifice
“When it isthe beginning of Dhul-Hlijah and anyone of
‘you intends t0 offer.
“Every (newborn) boy is pawned by the ‘aqigah offered for
him”
“Two equal ewes are to be sacrificed for the (newborn) bay
and ane ewe is to...
“Sacrifice is made for him (the newborn baby) on the
seventh day.
“(On the Day of Resurrection,) you will be called by your
ames an
“The dearest of your names to Allah are “Abdullah
“Whoever dies without fighting in the Cause of Allah.
“Whenever you are called for fighting in the Cause of Allah.
‏ب"‎ Then go and exert yourself in their service (i.e, his
parents).
“Spoils are for those who witnessed the battle”.
“Ask them for jizyah and if they agree, the

TRANSLITERATION SYSTEM

faith/fatwa

Kill/Ka‘bah

man/marwah

Noahinasta

لقان العمل

zakah/zakatul

Adam/siwak
Dawid
hadith/anaft
await/ ‘awrah

ayman

q | Quran

لماو |_|

pea an
Symbol | Example

ko
1

en! “isha

& | baa/Bitat
4 | tap/tasmiyah
th | think/thagif

j | Jewdjandbah

kh | Al-Bukharé
4 | dayldiyah

dh | Dhut-Bijah

sh | show/ isha’

s | ar
d_| fader
+ | tomar
z fair
5 rak’ah

gh | magirit

{Arabic
|. Character |

