THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO

ABU HAMID AL-GHAZALI’S JURISTIC DOCTRINE
IN AL-MUSTASFA MIN ‘ILM AL-USUL WITH A TRANSLATION OF
VOLUME ONE OF AL-MUSTASFA MIN ‘ILM AL-USUL
VOLUME ONE

A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED TO
THE FACULTY OF THE DIVISION OF THE HUMANITIES
IN CANDIDACY FOR THE DEGREE OF
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY

DEPARTMENT OF NEAR EASTERN LANGUAGES

AND CIVILIZATIONS

BY
AHMAD ZAKI MANSUR HAMMAD

CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MARCH 1987
PREFACE

First, gratitude to the Lawgiver is very much in place here,.
then to the Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him

who not only conveyed the Shari‘a but lived it and remains as its
model.

Next, this gratitude compels me to appreciate the efforts of
many who delivered this message to me, sharpened my
understanding of its significations, and who over the years
smoothed the way for the production of this work. In breaking
with tradition, however, I wish not to give mention to their names

here out of fear of neglecting any of them. To each, jazaka Allahu

khayran,

The following is the transliteration scheme I followed in the

dissertation, both in the introduction and translation. However, in
place of the commonly used diacritical point under the letters c:

‎and &, I used, due to computer limitations, underlining‏ ,ط رض ,ص

‎for the latin equivalents:

‎es
1

a, i, and a.

& th
‏اح‎ 1
t kh
‏د‎ 0
5 dh
9 1
3 2
ur COS
‏اش‎ sh
‏هم ص‎
vw da
‏اط‎ 1
‏اظ‎ 2
fa ‘
é ah
‏ف‎ f
J
J
J l
‏م‎ m
Q n
3 h
‏و‎ w
‏ى‎

For the long vowels the circumflex accent is used:
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
PREFACE. ... 0.0... ‏ا‎ eee e cece eeceee 11

PART I. ABU HAMID AL-GHAZALI’S JURISTIC DOCTRINE IN
AL-MUSTASFA MIN ‘ILM AL-USOL

INTRODUCTION .......0.0 000... c cece eee ece eee. 2
Chapter
I, AL-AHKAM (THE SHARI‘A RULES)............ 11
Il. THE QUR’AN: THE FIRST SHARI‘A SOURCE...... 50
III]. THE SUNNA: THE SECOND SHARI‘A SOURCE..... 59
IV. LIMA‘ (CONSENSUS): 05
THE THIRD SHARI‘A SOURCE..... 93
V. ISTISHAB AND REASON: 0
THE FOURTH SHARI‘A SOURCE... 124
VI. NASKH (ABROGATION) .....................-. 130
VII. MODERN STUDIES OF THE AUTHENTICITY
OF GHAZALI’S WORK............. 151
VII. GHAZALI’S LEGAL 7/0115 158
IX. USULT LITERATURE FROM
AL-SHAFI‘I TO GHAZALI ........ 179
‏.ا‎ THE SEMINAL USULT WORKS .................. 214

XI. GHAZALI’S MUSTASFA ..............-......... 249

iv
TABLE OF CONTENTS — CONTINUED

XII]. CONCLUSION .... 20.0... ec cece cece eee, 296

VOLUME II

PART 2. TRANSLATION OF VOLUME ONE OF AL-MUSTASFA
MIN ‘ILM AL-USOL

I. INVOCATION. ........ 0.0. 0c cece cece cece. 300
Il. PREFACE ................ ‏ا‎ 302
Il. EXORDIUM ‏ا‎ 307
QUIB

I. THE FRUITS: THE SHART‘A RULES............. 324

THE FIRST ASPECT:
THE ESSENCE OF THE RULES...... 325

THE SECOND ASPECT:

THE CATEGORIES OF THE RULES... 351

THE THIRD ASPECT:
THE CONSTIUTENTS OF THE RULES. 401
THE FOURTH ASPECT: SABAB................... 430
Il. THE SOURCES OF THE RULES.............. be caee 450

THE FIRST OF THE PRINCIPLE SOURCES:
THE BOOK OF ALLAH ...................6... 451

THE BOOK OF ABROGATION................. . 475
vi

541

662

740

761

TABLE OF CONTENTS — CONTINUED

VOLUME III

THE SECOND OF THE PRINCIPLE SOURCES
THE SUNNA OF ALLAH’S MESSENGER ......

THE THIRD PRINCIPLE OF THE SOURCES
LIMA‘ (CONSENSUS).....................

THE FOURTH OF THE PRINCIPLE SOURCES
RATIONAL PROOF AND ISTISHAB .......

BIBLIOGRAPHY .. 0.0.0.0... cc cece cece cence
PART 1. ABU HAMID AL-GHAZALI’S JURISTIC DOCTRINE IN
AL-MUSTASFA MIN ‘ILM AL-USUL
INTRODUCTION

In studying the great contributors to Islamic civilization, one
observes that most are distinguished by their mastery of one or |
two disciplines that earn them fame or credibility within their
specialties. Malik, Abi Hanifa, al-Shafi‘i, and Ibn Hanbal are not
mentioned but their impact on jurisprudence comes to mind. Al-
Kindi and al-Farabi are remembered for their engagement with and
contributions to philosophy and its issues. The mention of
Sibawayh and al-Jahiz evokes thoughts of grammar and literature.
The names Bukhari and Muslim are Synonymous with hadith. Al-
Ash‘ari and Maturidi are associated with kalam, and the name
Nizam al-Mulk brings to mind a memorable political career.

But it is a different case with the mention of ‘The Proof of
Islam,’ Abad Hamid Muhammad al-Ghazali (d. 505/1111). He is a
composite of great personalities, a master of various disciplines.
Regarding philosophy, he ranks among the most influential Muslim
thinkers, changing the course of history in that field in the Muslim
world and possibly beyond. Concerning tasawwuf, he is one of its
most prominent inspirers, though no formal order ever carried his
name. Nevertheless, his efforts brought about the great conciliation
of sitfism and orthodox Islam. His studies in kaldm are important

and original. In the field of Law, he has been described by some as
the “consummate imdm of the fugaha’.”' His writings on the origins
and the details of Islamic jurisprudence have shaped works in
these fields until today. Indeed, one finds hardly a book on usiil
written after Ghazali that does not rely upon him, quote him
extensively, or engage him in debate—especially with reference to
his book al-Mustasfa.

Yet it is astonishing that Ghazali the philosopher, the ‏رقع‎ the
theologian, and the reviver has so fixed the attention of modern
researchers, East and West, as to eclipse what must be
acknowledged as his life’s central endeavor, the breathing of the.
spirit of Islam into the corpus of the jeligion’s jurisprudence and
the coherent and cogent formulation of its jurisitc doctrine.

In this sense, he is, shall we. say, less fortunate than many a
lesser legist whose contributions to Islamic Law pale in comparison
to the great Ghazali’s but whose efforts have nonetheless found
fame and caught the eye of modern-day scholars. For example,
Ghazali’s rival Ibn Rushd has received more academic analysis as a
jurist than he. A. Laiméche’s study and translation into French of
the Book of Marriage in Ibn Rushd’s Biddyat al-Mujtahid wa
Nihayat al-Muqtasid is more than what Ghazali the jurist has

received at the hands of contemporary scholarship.”

Iraj al-Din ‘Abd al-Wahhab b. ‘Ali b. ‘Abd al-Kafi al-Subki,
Labaqgat al-Shafi'iyya al-Kubré, 10 vols. ed. Mahmid al-Tanahi and

‘Abd al-Fattah al-Hilw (Cairo: ‘Is4 al-Babi al-Halabi Press, 1964),
6:216.

With the exception of Kita@b Biddyat al-Mujtahid wa Nihdyat
al-Mugtasid Ibn Rushd is not known to have composed any other
significant legal work. 1 have pointed out that Ibn Rushd has

Modern studies of and references to Ghazali’s writings in
Islamic Law, particularly with respect to al-Mustasfa, have been
secondary at best and of no real size or scope. For example, the
paper that our Shaykh Muhammad Aba Zahra has presented on
Ghazali the fagih at the festival of the nine-hundredth year
commemoration of Ghazali’s birth is, while valuable, of modest
length and limited breadth, as is Muhammad Hasan Hiti’s
introduction to Ghazali’s al-Mankhil min Ta‘ligat al-Usiil, Hamad
al-Kubaysi’s preface to Shifa’ al-Ghalil fi Bayan al-Shabah wa al-
Mukhil wa Masdlik al-Ta‘lil, ‘Ali Muhi al-Din al-Daghi’s introduction
to the first volume of al-Wasit fi al-Madhhab, and ‘Abd al-Wahhab
Ibrahim Aba Sulayman’s brief account in his book al-Fikr al-Usiilt.
All impose the primary considerations of the matter at hand in the
larger context of their presentations.

Even more of a cursory treatment of Ghazali’s juristic works
occurs in the European languages. Henri Laoust’s La Politique de
Ghazdli, merely outlines Ghazali’s discourse on the Shari‘a sources.
Contact with his legal doctrine is even more incidental in Hava
Lazarus’ Studies in al-Ghazéli, where she devotes a chapter to his
terminology of kaladm and figh. Similar limitations affect the

articles of Wael al-Hallaq on ijtihdd and the principles of Islamic

abridged Ghazili’s al-Mustasfa; see Chapter XI in this introduction.
In any case, it is no exaggeration to say that the Andulusian
philosopher, despite his prominence in Muslim history, cannot

compare as a faqih by any measure with Ghazali in terms of works
in the field of Law.

jurisprudence, and that of Bernard Weiss on the theory of tawdtur
according to Ghazali.

More recent works, like Robert Brunschvig’s “Pour ou contre
la logique Grecque chez les Theologiens-juristes de l’Islam: Ibn
Hazm, Al-Ghazili, Ibn Taimiyya,” and Iysa Ade Bello’s dissertation
Ijma‘ and Ta'wil in the Conflict Between al-Ghazéli and Ibn Rushd
also do not intend to broadly examine Ghazali’s legal work and its
influence on Islamic jurisprudence. Like the studies on Ghazali in
the Muslim world, then, those of the West tend to be short and do
not bring into focus his jurisitc contribution.

This dissertation provides for the first time an explicit
presentation of Ghazali’s juristic doctrine as expressed in the last
and most important of his works of Law, al-Mustasfa min ‘ilm al-
Usil, making available in English a principal text on the sources of .
Islamic jurisprudence. The study includes two major parts: The
first inquires into Ghazili’s jurisitc thought, then places it in the
context of the usili literature preceding him and traces its legacy in
the science of the principles; the second part is a translation of
volume one of al-Mustasfa, specifically the book’s Exordium and
the first two of the four Qutbs (Poles), where Ghazali chose to
subsume virtually all of the essential discussions of usil.

This study is divided into eleven chapters, the first six of
which intend to unfold Ghaz4li’s conception of Islamic Law, where
the notion of man as mukallaf (a responsible creature) lies at its
heart. The laving of obligation is the trust that man has accepted
from his Lord. It entails the adherence of all human acts to the

rules of His Law (the Shari‘a). Man, therefore, is not only
accountable to God in the afterlife for his acts, upon which he shall
be judged and duly punished or rewarded, but he is answerable to
the Shari‘a in the temporal world.

For the rules to be valid, they must stem from the divine
source, God. This is a point that Ghazali would have ‘all’ engrave on
their hearts. Its significance in his view of man and Law cannot be
exaggerated. Indeed, none has legislative authority but that it is
granted by the Almighty—the Prophet, the ruler, the father, etc.
Here Ghazali draws the line with the Mu‘tazilites, arguing that
reason independent of revelation is incapable of originating Shari‘a
rules. Rather, it endows man with the means to recognize their
single source, God, and to acknowledge the truth of His Messenger,
through whom the Shdri‘a is manifested.

Ghazali’s central notion of divine obligation upon man is
moreover universal, embracing with its authority everyone,
Muslim and non-Muslim. But while the Shari‘a obligations are
inclusive of non-Muslims, they bear responsibility only before God
in the Hereafter, for accepting Islam is required for the temporal
imposition of all the Shari‘a’s obligations upon them.

In essence, the Shari‘a rules bid the performance of ‘this’ act
or the abandonment of ‘that,’ classifying them as obligatory (wdjib),
desirable (manditb), allowed (mubah), reprehensible (makrih), or
forbidden (hardmj. Acts are further qualified as being valid
(sahih), or invalid (batil). Their performance, abstention, validity
or invalidity are raised by specific signs or causes or conditions.

Ghazali states explicitly that the Shari‘a’s bidding ‘to do’ or

‘not to do’ comes solely through the channel of revelation,
specifically through prophetic revelation in two forms, the Qur’an
and the Prophet’s canonical traditions (Sunna). In addition, the
Consensus (/jmd‘) of the entire community provides a third avenue
for deriving legislation, authenticated by revelation, unlike the
classical Muslim jurists, who restrict ‏“قرزا‎ to the scholar-jurists.
Ghazali requires that Consensus occur in regard to matters of
religion where there is no text to indicate a given rule,

Further breaking with classical thought on the principles of
Law, he does not recognize analogical reasoning (qiyds) as a source
of Law, declaring the fourth and final principle of legislation to be
Istishab al-H4dl, which comes down to this: When a novel Situation
arises where there is no text specifying its status, man remains free
to act or not to act, as the case may be, based on what Ghazali
terms al-baré’a al-asliyya, the original state of freedom from
obligation before the revelation of the Shari‘a.

In addition, Ghazali contends that the Lawgiver has the right
and the power to obliterate any Shari‘a rule; this elimination is not
a change of God’s mind (bad@’); rather, it is abrogation originated
from His wisdom. Ghazali’s placement of the discussion on
abrogation immediately after his discourse on the Qur’an—yet
another break with classical usii—is not followed in this study.
Rather, it is treated in Chapter Six of the inquiry into the Sharf‘a
sources, as it seems to apply to all of them.

The next chapter scans the modern scholarship on the
problem of the authenticity of Ghazali’s works, since a great many
books have been falsely attributed to him. This aims primarily to

show the authenticity of his legal writings—especially al-Mustasfa,
which, in any case, has never been doubted—and is followed by a
review of Ghazali’s books of Law.

The two subsequent chapters provide an historical context to
in which to view al-Mustasfé (and to some degree its author). The
first gives an overview of the development of usiil in the three
centuries between al-Shafi‘i and Ghazali, in addition to a valuable.
and farely comprehensive list of the works of ustil composed in
that span.

The second surveys the four premier books in the field from
the classical era—aside from al-Mustasfé—and highlights the
differences in method between the two prominent approaches to
deriving the principles of Law, known as the Mutakallimiin and the
Fuqahd’ approaches. Also, Abi Zayd al-Dabbisi, the fourth-century
Hanafite jurist from Transoxiana, is introduced at some len,.n here,
as well as his great book Taqwim ‏اشعلا‎ al-Figh wa _tahdid Adillat
al-Shar‘. On the one hand, he represents the Fuqgahda’ approach to
ustl; on the other, Ghazali states that he wrote his lengthy
discourse on qiyds in Shifa’ al-Ghalil to critique this Hanafite
master jurist, who also, incidentally, deserves to be studied and
revived.

Finally, I commit one chapter to the unique and unparalleled
organization of al-Mustasfad, for Ghazali designed his book to mirror
what he believed to be the natural structure of Law: The Shari'a
rules, being the fruit of Law, require, of course, a source of fruition
and processes of cultivation to be used by the harvester, the
independent practitioner of jurisprudence (mujtahid). Ghazali

commences with his analysis by partitioning the discipline as
\o

reflected in his book into four Qutbs (Poles), a division that evokes
Strong sentiments of sufism, which Ghazali most certainly realized.
The first Qutb is of the sources, the second of their rules, the third
of language and rational principles, where he discusses qiydas, and
the fourth is of the scholar-jurist.

These Quthbs are preceded by an exordium that defines and .
assesses Islamic jurisprudence and its principles both
independently and in relation to other sciences. Here Ghazali lays
down his philosophy for the introduction of the subject of Law. He
also provides a section on issues of logic, stating that it is not
requisite for the study of Islamic jurisprudence; rather it is a
primer to all sciences.

This chapter also does the brushwork on Ghazili’s style in al-
Mustasfd, as well as a mention of notable commentaries on and
abridgements of the book. In so doing, it touches upon the
prominent Hanbalite jurist Muwaffaq al-Din b. Quddma’s extensive
and often literal reliance on al-Mustasfa in his book Rawdat al-
Nazir wa Junnat al-Mundzir. Finally, the evolution of Ghazili’s
juridical thinking in the nearly twenty-five years between the
writing of al-Mankhil and al-Mustasfa@ is offered by comparing
excerpts on (ijtihdd) from each of the books. In the process,
Ghazali’s views on the qualifications of the independent jurist
(mujtahid) are delineated.

The study concludes with an observation on Ghazali the
Muslim jurist who sought to illuminate the inseparability of life’s

transactions and man’s worship, the outcome of which is al-
10

Mustasfa’ min ‘Ilm al-Usiil, whose first two Qutbs in translation

follow in Part Two of this dissertation.
CHAPTER I

Al-AHKAM (THE SHARI‘A RULES)

Ghazili’s approach to usiil al-figh is based on the premise
that in essence this science is knowledge of how to extract ahkam

(rules) from the Shart‘a sources.!

As for the science of figh, it
concerns itself particularly with the Shar?‘a rules themselves which
have been established in order to qualify the acts of the locus of
obligation, man. Accordingly, Ghazali views it as imperative for
any discourse on usitl to focus on three essential elements: The
ahkdm,; the adilla (sources); and the means by which rules are
extracted from these sources, which ultimately includes
examination of the qualifications of the extractor, namely the

mujtahid. The substance of al-Mustagfad, then, both in the Exordium

and in the four gutbs (poles), revolves around these three

- constituents.

HUKM (THE SHART‘A ADDRESS)

Linguistically ‘hukm’ is the verbal noun of ‘hakama’, which

signifies “withholding, restraint, prevention; and judgement,

‘Aba Hamid al-Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 2 vols. (Buliq, Egypt:
Amiriyya Press, 1322-24/1905-7), 1:7.

11

12

jurisdiction, rule, dominion, authority, or governing.” The
technical meaning, however, varies according to its usages in the
terminologies of philosophy, Arabic grammar, ‏,أشي‎ and figh.

Ghazali defines ‘hukm’ as the Shari‘a address (khitab al-Shar')
in relation to the acts of the loci of obligation, the address being
God’s revelation to His Messenger. It is divided into two categories:
Revelation for recitation (wahi matluww), that is, the Qur’an; and
revelation not for recitation (wahi ghayr matluww), namely the
Sunna.3

Another technical ‏قاشع‎ application uses ‘hukm’ to signify the
fundamental rules inherent in the Shari‘a address, expressing the
intent of the Lawgiver, where the commands of the Shari‘a
necessitate obligations and its bans mandate prohibitions. In other
words, the general principles of the rules (ahkdm) result in the
obligation, prohibition, recommendation, reprehension, or
allowance of acts; or establish their rectitude and invalidity.
Categorizing the performance of acts as either timely or belated is
another nuance of the term ‘ahkdm’ in ustli usage.

Ghazali further distinguishes between rules that qualify acts

as obligated, prohibited, and so on, and rules that express the

2For the linguistic meaning of ‘hukm’ see Jamal al-Din b.
Muhammad Manzin, Lisds: al-‘Arab, 15 vols. (Beirut: Dar Sadir,
n.d.), 12:140-145; Ibrahim Mustafa et al., al-Mu‘jam al-Wasit, 2
vols. (Tehran: Maktabat al-‘Ilmiyya, n.d.), 1:189-190; and Edward
Lane, An Arabic-English Lexicon, 8 parts (Beirut: Librairie du
Liban, 1980), 2:616-18.

3Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:129.

13

conditions posited by the Shari'a indicating their obligatoriness or
prohibition, such as reaching puberty, which is a condition
obligating a person to perform or refrain from certain acts. In later
ustlt works, these distinct types of rules were assigned terms
according to their function, al-hukm al-taklifi (the qualifying
address) and al-hukm al-wad'i (the positing address). In fighi
terminology, ‘hukm’ is the rule that a mujtahid arrives at based on
the Shari‘a sources and in accordance with their general principles
concerning an act of the loci of obligation.

Ghazali insisits that Aukm, be it in the ustli or the fighi sense,
must be related to the acts of the loci of obligation. So, the Shari‘a
Texts concerning God or His attributes, affairs of preceding nations,
events in the time of the Prophet, or description of the Day of
Judgement are not considered Shari‘a rules per se, for they neither
qualify the acts of the loci of obligation nor reveal their
requirements.* Ghazali also makes a fine but significant point
concerning the Shari‘a rules not actually being directed at the
physical aspects of creatures or substances; that is, for example, the
hands or tongue of a person, or, say, alcohol. Rather, rules qualify
acts relating to or emanating from the physical being of czeatures,
like stealing, eating carrion or the flesh of swine, backbiting,
consuming alcohol, and so on. For example, rules obliging the

maintenance of health or cleanliness are related to the acts through

4Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:55.

SGhaziii, al-Mustagfa, 1:7.

14

which these tasks are performed, not to the body itself. Similarly,
rules pertaining to contracts, rites of worship, and avoidance of
prohibitions are likewise related to creatures’ acts.

To further clarify this, he notes that the Sharf‘a address
expressed in the following verse does not indicate the prohibition

of the mentioned beasts’ corpses, but the act of eating them:

Forbidden to you are carrion, blood, the flesh of swine, what
is invoked to other than God, that which is killed by
Strangulation or violent blow or fall or gore, or from that
which has been devoured by beasts of prey, except for that

which you have sacrificed duly.©
And this is the case with the verse below as well:

Forbidden to you are your mothers and daughters, your
sisters, your aunts, paternal and maternal, your brother’s
daughters, your sister’s daughters, your mothers who have
given you suckle, your suckling sisters, your wives’
mothers.”

So, the forbidding of mothers, sisters, and the rest is not directed at
their physical beings per sce, but at marrying them and its
implications.

Ghazali furthers the discussion by saying that acts coming
under the categories of the Shari'a rules must meet certain

requirements. First, their performance must be possible; so that

6Qur’ an, 5:3.

7Qur’ an, 4:23.

bidding the performance of two Opposite acts Simultaneously or
“denaturing a species” is impossible.® Second, they must be
attainable by the locus of obligation. For instance, it is not possible
to ask Zayd to fulfill a contract exclusively binding on ‘Amr. Third,
they must be distinguished from other acts in the mind of the
commanded individual and be known as an address from God.
Finally, their nature must be in conformity with obedience to God,
as is the case with most of the rites of worship. For one cannot be
commanded by the Shari‘a to perform an act which demands

disobedience to God, such as worshipping other than Him.

AL-HAKIM (THE RULER)

Ghazali’s definition of ‘hukm' as the Shari‘a address, whose
actual source is none other than God, reflects the classical Islamic
view of Law. He does, though, focus on the term address and
qualifies the status of an addresser—be he an angel, a Prophet, a
mujtahid, or a faqih—maintaining that one who pronounces a rule
may be considered a ruler: for each of them in reality conveys the
Shari‘a rule. However, the critical distinction is that only the
Addresser, God, is capable of ‘originating’ rules and revealing them.
Therefore, says Ghazaili, only He is deserving of absolute obedience,
for His is the creation and the command.

Based on this, neither an angel, nor a prophet, nor a common

man—be he ruler or master—has actual sovereignty, nor are they

capable of originating rules. If obedience to them is warranted, it

8Ghazili, al-Mustasfa, 1:86.

16

is so only on the basis of God obliging it.?

Stressing that originating obligations and prohibitions is an
activity that only God is capable of secures order and guards
against universal chaos. For if the ability to originate rules was
attainable by His creation, then it is conceivable that the obliging of
a thing by some which others have prohibited and the inverse
would prevail, leaving no standard and creating disorder.!° By
adhering to this view, Ghazali establishes the justification for any
Muslim to reject legislation commanding or prohibiting anything
unless it comes from God or is based on His Sharf‘a. Furthermore,
one has the right to demand proof of the command based on
revealed authority (sam‘) from those who declare prohibitions or
obligations.

After establishing this, Ghazali finds himself compelled to
discuss the place of reason (‘aql) in relation to revelation and,

therefore, devotes an elaborate discussion to this.

REASON AND REVELATION

Ghazali’s five qualifications of man’s acts are an attempt to
set measurable criteria by which to identify and categorize the
Shari'a rules expressed by the Qur’an, the Sunna, and the Jjma‘. He
concedes, however, that all human acts in all times and places are
not specified by the Shari'a. So he must account for reason’s role in

his scheme as well. He supposes a state of pre-revelation before
°Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:83.

0Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:83.

17

the coming of the Shari‘a, or after for those unaware of it. This
raises two important questions: (1) Is God the sole imposer of
obligation, or does reason share in this? (2) Are human acts liable
to Shari‘a judgments in the state of pre-revelation?

Reason and the nature of human acts form the core of the
dispute between the Ash‘arite Ghazali and the Mu‘tazilites.
Ghazali’s position in al-Mustasféa—consistent with his other
theological and usili works available to us—is that reason cannot
create rules for man’s acts, and any Sharf‘a context that scemingly
implies otherwise is figurative. Reason identifies the character that
the Shari‘a imparts to human acts in forming rules, but is not a
source of their origination. Moreover, these characters are not
essential ones that render them inherently good or evil.

Ghazali repudiates the Mu‘tazilites—particularly of
Baghdad—who, allegedly under the influence of Greek philosophy,
hold that reason not only recognizes good and evil but determines
them since they are essential characters of acts. Accordingly, pre-
revelation acts are obligatory, prohibited, or allowed by virtue of
reason. Rather, he insists, it is the Shari‘a that classifies acts. What
is good is so because Shari‘a bade or allowed it. And what is evil is
such because Shari‘a forbade it. And the degree of an act’s
goodness or badness is determined by the Strength of the Shari‘a’s
bidding or prohibition.

Thus, Ghazali rejects the Mu‘tazilite notion of intrinsic
goodness or badness in human acts, as well as reason’s share as an

originating source for commands and prohibitions. An obligatory
18

act is so because of the extrinsic character of revealed
‘obligatoriness,’ and such is the case with the other classifications.

Al-Mustasfad examines this issue in relative detail owing to its
central importance to the Shari‘a rules. It summarizes the
Mu'‘tazilite positions on the pronouncement of good and evil (tahsin
and taqbih) and their classification of acts in the absence of
revelation, paving the way for Ghazali’s response.

He starts by defining the terms ‘husn’ (good ) and ‘qubh’
(evil) in order to confine the disagreement. Good and evil, he says,
are used technically in three applications, two cof which are related
to an act’s doer and one that pertains to the Shari‘a command itself.

The first is the popular usage, which is relative, restricting
good and evil to the objectives of the doer. All acts that conform
with one’s objectives are good and are termed ‘hasan.’ Acts that
thwart one’s interests are evil and therefore called ‘qabih.’ When,
for example, a king is killed, says Ghazali, it is deemed ‘good’ by his
enemies and ‘evil’ by his supporters.

Second, these terms are applied to all acts that one is
permitted or expected to do. If you have the right to do it, then it
is good. If you do not, then it is evil. Therefore, all acts of God are
good for He is capable of doing them. Allowed acts (mubdah) are
likewise good because one is able to do them.

In the third usage, the term ‘hasan’ applies exclusively to
what the Shari‘a declares good. Thus, any commanded act is good,
be it obligatory or recommended. But this application pronounces
neither good nor evil upon the mubdh act because the Shari‘a is

indifferent in regard to it.
Ghazali’s approach in defining terminology first enables him
to marshal his definitions in order to refute the Mu‘tazilite doctrine
of the essentiality of good and bad acts (necessarily known by
reason and subject to the consensus of all rational human beings).
He dramatizes his view using the act of lying. Suppose the case of a
prophet being pursued by an assassin. The would-be killer asks |
someone of the prophet’s whereabouts. But the person lies in order
to mislead the assassin and protect the prophet. Ghazali argues
that this lying is hasan because of the good derived from it, the
saving of the prophet’s life. Indeed, he says, it is more than good.
It is obligatory upon the person who knows the prophet’s
whereabouts. In fact, he sins and disobeys if he does not lie.

Thus, evil is not an intrinsic character of lying per se.
Otherwise, it could not have changed from evil to good and would
not have been praiseworthy on the part of its doer. Therefore,
reason declares an act good or evil in relation to the agent and the
circumstance of the act. Ghazali concludes his treatise by analyzing
the roots of error in the pronouncement of good and evil. He
reduces them to four: (1) Confusion in the use of terminology; (2)
subjective assessment of acts based on personal aims; (3) faulty
generalization in characterizing Ausn and qubh in disregard of
exceptions to the rule; and (4) reason’s erroneous imagination
caused by association. One may, for instance, show aversion to a
multi-colored rope that resembles a harmful snake.

After formulating the sources of error, Ghazali defines key
terminology that express their causes, which he again employs as

the balance in which to weigh his opponents’ arguments. He
20

couches his position in one case among those contentions of the
Mu‘tazilites that hold that all acts before the coming of the Shari‘a
are allowed (mubdéh). He says that one might tolerate this
argument provided they mean by the term ‘ibdha’ acts which the
doer is free to perform or neglect. But this, he notes, is a misuse of
terminology. He refutes their definition of ‘ibdha’ and restates his
position that issuing the Shari‘a rules is exclusively within the
domain of the divine address. And since there is no address before
revelation, there is no ibdha.

A second position attributed to others of the Mu‘tazilites,
namely that acts in the pre-revelation state are analogous to the
manipulation of another’s property and are therefore forbidden, is
refuted by his second and fourth definitions, which contend that
this is neither rationally acceptable nor reported in the Shari‘a.!!

Finally, he repudiates those Mu‘tazilites who advocate the
suspension of judgement in the absence of Shari‘a, saying that if
they mean by this that there are no rules until the Shari‘a comes,
this can be tolerated. But if suspension connotes the stoppage of
action until it arrives, this is wrong.

Yet Ghazali’s skillful argumentation seems more to mirror
legal affiliations and doctrinal difference of opinion than offer a

practical, substantive alternative to the Mu‘tazilite position that

Reason has legislative capacity. For when Ghazali accepts the

'lThis is inconsistent with the popular Mu'‘tazilite notion that
acts are either ‘good’ or ‘bad.’ for more information on the various
views and positions, sec Zuhdi Jar Allah, al-Mu‘tazila, 2nd ed.
(Beirut: Al-‘Ahliyya Publications, 1974), pp. 51-156.

21

principle of /stishab, he acknowledges that the Sharf‘a does not
qualify all human acts or specify either reward or punishment for
them before revelation. Thus, these acts remain in the status of the
original state of freedom from accountability, and Reason, by way
of ijtihdd, rules upon them. However, he has repeated that the role
of the former is as identifier—not as originator—of Shari‘a rules. He
then proceeds with his discourse on Shari‘a rules, their divisions

and requirements.

AL-MAHKUM ‘ALAYHI (THE LOCUS OF OBLIGATION)

The subject of rule is the locus of obligation, at whose acts the
Shari‘a rules are directed, qualifying them as either obligatory,
recommended, permissible, reprehensible, or prohibited. Apparent
in his discourse, Ghazali refers to two fundamental conditions that
one must fulfill to be eligible for taklif: Ability (qudra);'? and
capacity (ahliyya).'3

Ability, in Ghazali’s mind, rests on one’s potential to
understand a command or prohibition posited by a Shari‘a address.
He holds tenaciously to the view that implicit in every Shari‘a
command is the command to understand the responsibility. It is
impossible, as he sees it, to demand understanding from someone
or something not capable of it. For ‘intending’ to comply with a
command is necessary, and one cannot intend anything unless he

comprehends it. So, inanimate objects and animals, for example,
2Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:83.

3Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:84.

are not under obligation.!4

As for capacity, it is reason, the instrument of discernment,
that is of central import, for it is the determinant of eligibility for
and liability to obligation. Ghazali notes that since the locus of
obligation is a living human equipped with reason, an entity
imperceptible by our senses, the Shari‘a accepts as manifest
indications of sound reason the signs of maturity, namely coming of
age and normal development.!>

0532811 distinguishes between man’s ability to be charged
with Shari‘a obligations—which earns a person, whether young, old,
male, or female, certain rights and rewards—and the Shari‘a
obligations which render him liable in this world and in the
Hereafter for performing or neglecting commands.

_ The first capacity is ahliyyat al-wujib, being eligible for
taklif. Its essential requirement is being a living human. The
second capacity is described as ahliyyat al-add’, the capacity to
perform, which requires from one maturity, sanity, freedom, and
the like.!®

Delving into greater detail concerning ahliyyat al-add’, Ghazali
refers to the impossibility of obliging the minor, the forgetful, the

intoxicated, the insane, and the nonexistent,!? all of which share a
'4Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:83.
'SGhazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:84.

'Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:84.

"Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:85.

23

common trait— lack of reason. He explains that it is not possible for
the Shari‘a address to lay obligation upon a minor because of his
underdeveloped faculty; nor the intoxicated Owing to his temporary
loss of reason through intoxication; nor the insane for his insanity;
nor the forgetful for his inability to retain the address in mind.
Ghazali’s opponent’s, however, argue that since the Qur’an has
specifically addressed the intoxicated person—“Oh believers draw

not near to prayer when you are intoxicated until you know what

you are saying,”! 8

—one, therefore, may be commanded without
understanding the command. Ghazali responds that the command
expressed in this verse may be interpreted in two ways.

First, this was revealed before the prohibition of alcohol.
Consequently, the prohibition is not directed at prayer, rather it is
directed at drinking excessively immediately before the time of
prayer. Ghazali cites in support of this interpretation an Arabic
saying, “Draw not near the night prayer when your stomachs are
full,” meaning do not eat in excess so that it becomes burdensome
to pray.!?

Second, the address is directed at those near intoxication but

still capable of comprehending the address.2° But this reply is

weak because the verse is addressed to the entire ummah, not to

'80ur’an, 4:43 .
9Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:85.

0Ghazili, al-Mustasfa, 1:84,

the intoxicated in particular. Even if we suppose the latter, it is
certain that the verse would be related to them upon returning to
sobriety. In any case, the address was later abrogated by the
blanket prohibition of drinking alcohol.

Ghazali further states that an intoxicated person is
responsible for his acts during his intoxication. So if he pronounces
divorce or offends someone, he is liable. As for the minor,
necessary expenditures, penalties, zakdt, and other such things are
indeed obligations to be fulfilled, but by his guardian. The
intoxicated person, on the other hand, since he generated the acts,
must be liable for ‏.معط‎

Regarding the Ash‘arite position that it is possible to lay an
obligation upon a person who does not yet exist, Ghazali defends its
possibility by saying that since the laying of obligation is known by
God, it is possible for it to precede the existence of someone. The
obligation is binding when he comes into being and is capable of
understanding the Shari'a address.22 He gives the example of a
dying father whose wife has a child in womb. The father
commands that his children spend his wealth in a prescribed
manner. It is linguistically and customarily possible to Say that he
has entrusted all of his children to carry out his will, including the
unborn, provided that he is born and is later capable of

understanding the command.

2\Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:84.

22Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:85.

AL-MAHKUM FIHI (THE SUBJECT TO RULE, THE ACTS)

Since the essence of taklif is the acts which the loci of
obligation are either obligated or prohibited to perform, they are,
then, that to which the Shari‘a address is directed. This is perhaps
why Ghazali stipulates that a charged obligation be openly or at
least potentially knowable, meaning that charging to perform the
Shari‘a acts should be promulgated and not concealed in the mind
of the Lawgiver or His Messenger. Also the locus of obligation must
have the capacity to perform; that is, to possess reason enough to
comprehend the intent of the Lawgiver and to understand the act
required of him, either directly or through those who know. For
example, the abundance of manifest signs in the physical world
(nature) and the proofs existing in the Qur’an are sufficient for any
rational person to recognize the existence of God and that He is the
source of obligation, according to Ghazali. Therefore, such a person
cannot use ignorance as an excuse for justifying noncompliance.

Ghazali states that along with knowing the prescribed act, one
must know that this act’s command has been issued from the
source of obligation, the only authority capable of originating
commands, God. This reflects Ghazili’s zeal to demonstrate the
validity and authenticity of the sources of Islamic Law—the Qur’ in,
the Sunna, Ijma‘, and al-Istishab wa dalil al- ‘aql.

In sum, every rule wherein it is possible to understand and —
know its source as legitimately from the Shari'a, the loci of
obligation are obliged to fulfill, whether they know it directly or

through those who have knowledge of the Shari‘a.
26

Concerning the nature of the acts that fall under taklif,
Ghazali requires that they be within the capability of the locus of
obligation. He argues that “charging the impossible is

impossible,”~>

and rejects the idea of obliging an impossible act on
the grounds that it is incomprehensible to the locus of obligation.
He contends that a thing, before materializing, has an existence in.
the mind, and it is only sought after when it comes into being or is
conceived in the mind.24 He does not hide his disagreement on this
issue with Abd al-Hasan al-Ash‘ari, the patriarch of many of

Ghazali’s views. On the contrary, he criticizes those of his Positions

that imply the possibility of obliging an impossible act.

Al-Ash‘ari’s Position and Ghazdli’s Reply

Ash‘ari’s theological position concerning human acts
approximates that of the Predeterminists, holding that all human
acts are created by God.2> That is, man is essentially impotent, for
God creates in man the necessary power to perform an act exactly
at the time of its being and not before it in some potential form.
Based on this understanding, it is possible for God, in Ash‘ari’s

view, to command a locus of obligation to perform the acts obliged

23Ghazili, al-Mustasfa, 1:90.
4Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:88.

25 Ash‘ari here twists an interpretation of the verse, “And
Allah has created you and that which you do.” Qur’an, 37:96.

27

exclusively upon another and to require him to perform impossible
acts, for He creates his acts for him. |

Ghazali provides rational and Shari‘a arguments against the
three Textual references that Ash‘ari cites in support of his
position, which are as follows:

First, Ash‘ari cites the verse, “Our Lord, do not burden us
beyond what we have the strength to bear . 8 from “Sorat al-
Baqara,” claiming that if it were not possible to oblige an impossible
act, God would not, then, have instructed His creatures to supplicate
Him to remove from them that which is impossible to bear.

Secondly, since God has informed His Messenger that his
opponent, Aba Jahl, will not accept his message—and it is
impossible for the knowledge of God to be contradicted—then the
Prophet’s invitation to Abi Jahl to believe in his message is
equivalent to obliging Abd Jahl with an impossibility. Thus,
obliging the impossible is demonstrated, especially when one
considers that Abi Jahl is charged to believe in what is revealed to
the Prophet—including the fact that Aba Jah! will not believe in
him.

The third point is that the objections raised against obliging
an impossible act are a result of there being no Shari‘a Text that
either indicates this or its rational inconceivability. Ash‘ari quotes
some verses of the Qur’an in support of his argument that imply

the charging of an impossible act, such as His Statement, “Be stone

26Our’an, 2:285.

28

or iron”? claiming that although this is impossible, He still
commands it. Therefore, Ash‘ari holds, it is rationally conceivable
for a master to require his servant to manage his concerns in two
different cities simultaneously. Furthermore, there is no
contradiction nor corruption in this; nor is it against popular
wisdom, for all the acts of God are consistent and contain no
corruption. All that He does is good.

Be that as it may, Ghazali says explicitly that Ash‘ari’s
argument using the verse in “Sérat al-Bagara” is weak ‘because the
verse is not bidding man to ask God to remove what is impossible;
but rather to ask Him not to lay an obligation too burdensome and
difficult. Any other interpretation, Ghaziali says, is simply wrong,
for this verse neither explicitly nor implicitly indicates other than
this.

In the case of Abi Jahl, Ghazali says that there was no
rational possibility preventing his accepting Islam—particularly
when God has demonstrated both universal and Qur’anic proofs
Supporting the truth of Muhammad’s messengership. Abd Jahl’s
course of disbelief is therefore a result of choice based on jealousy
and obstinacy, not a consequence of God having determined it for
him.

Finally, Ghazali rejects the charging of an impossible
obligation regardless of whether or not it conflicts with popular

wisdom on the grounds that the essence of laying obligation is

bidding, which, in turn, necessarily requires something to be

27Qur’an, 17:50.

29

fulfilled. For commanding the performance of an act must be
understood by the locus of obligation. To illustrate his point,
Ghazali opines that it is entirely possible to command a person to
move— “Taharrak!” —because movement is understood by him. But
it is impossible to command him, using Ghazali’s words,

with “Tamarrak!” 78__an absolutely meaningless word. Ghazali cites
other examples to further his argument, saying that it is not
rationally conceivable to require trees to sew, or to demand
blackness to come from whiteness; nor is it possible to demand
changing blackness into motion or a tree into a stallion.??

Another impossible obligation, according to Ghazali, is
commanding the simultaneous performance of two mutually
contradictory tasks. So his opponents project the scenario of a
person who is in the field of a usurped farm, and who is at once
prohibited by the Shari‘a from Staying in usurped land but also
forbidden to move because motion would cause damage to the
crops, which do not belong to him.

Hypothetically speaking, he is essentially commanded to
move and not to move at the same time. Ghazali dubs this kind of
argument sophistry and states that a jurist in a case like this can
only rule that the person leave, “to minimize harm.”2° For

remaining in his position is more harmful than the alternative of
8Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1-86-87.

9Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:88.

Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:89.

30

motion; and that which causes the least amount of damage, then, is

not only the preponderating obligation but obedience to the

31

Shari'a. Furthering his position he cites the verse, “God charges

no soul save to its capacity,”>* as proof that God, the Source of

obligation, withholds the obliging of the impossible.

Classification of the Shari‘a Rules

Ghazali introduces the concept of obligation (wujiib) by listing

its various definitions held by jurists. For example, wdjib has been

defined as follows:
1. That which is qualified as obligatory.

2. That which one is rewarded for performing and punished
for neglecting.

دنا

That which one must not determine to neglect.

>

That whose abandonment is considered disobedience.

To Ghazili, all of these definitions are deficient because they
identify wdajib cither by its effect or by one of its conditions. Thus
he takes a more holistic approach in defining wajib by relating it to
the other categories of the Shari‘a rules which also qualify the acts
of the loci of obligation, introducing a comprehensive sense of

wujib within this structure.

"Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:89.

320ur'an, 2:286.

31

He notes that as a term ‘wajib’ is technically and
linguistically used in various ways. Linguistically, ‘wajib’ can mean
to fall to the ground. He cites the verse, “When their flanks fall
down [wajabat] [to the ground],”>> and he also cites the Arabic
expression, “The sun set [wajabat al-shams},*4 In theology ‘wdjib’
is used to describe the necessary existence of God (wajib al-wujtid).
This is in contradistinction to the impossible or the absurd.

According to the faqihs and the usitlis, ‘wajib’ describes those
acts which the Shari‘a declares obligatory—regardless of their being
contingent, known, and such—in light of the nature of the Shari‘a
biddings. Therefore, if the bidding is binding, the desired act is
obligatory, and if it is not, the act is recommended (mandiib). But
if the Shari'a bidding makes doing or not doing optional, it is
allowed (mubdh). On the other hand, if the Shari‘a bidding
demands that the locus of obligation forgo an act, it is prohibited
(haradm). But if the prohibition is not binding, then it is
reprehensible (makrith).

It is evident, then, that Ghazali in defining cbligaiory does not
. isolate it from the family of the five Sharf‘a rules. Rather, he
discusses its concept in light of the nature of the Shari‘a bidding.
Therefore, to him wajib (obligatory) or ijab (obliging) is the Shari‘a

command which bids doing. He also says that indicative of the

33Qur’an, 22:36,

34 Among of the linguistic meanings of wajib are necessary,

requisite, binding, obligatory. Lane, An Arabic-English Lexicon,
8:2921-2923.

32

Shari‘a commands’ binding nature—in both obligations and
prohibitions—is the consequence of reward for compliance and
punishment for disobedience.

Furthermore, the performance of w4jib results in reward in
the Hereafter and its abandonment is a cause of punishment.
However, causality here, according to him, is as medicine is to
healing or striking is to pain. Yet it is not absolute causality
because the effect may not show in all cases. It is possible, for
example, that a person preoccupied with something not perceive
pain or injury when afflicted, as in the case of a person in the midst
of a fierce battle.

Claiming that this is analogous to performing an obligation or
abandoning it, he manifests his sii inclinations, weaving them into
the fabric of his legal theory. He states that God, by His divine
grace, may penetrate the inner being of a person and recognize
laudable and praiseworthy characters that necessitate discharging
his punishment for neglecting an obligation. Yet this does not

exempt the violation from causing punishment on the Day of

Judgement.?>

According to Ghazili, ‘wdjib’ is synonymous with ‘hatm’
(necessary), ‘ldzim’ (must), ‘fard’ (mandatory), and ‘maktib’ (to be
written).°° He refers to the Hanafite scholars who distinguish wajib

from fard (like Aba Zayd al-Dabbasi), fard being an obligation

SGhazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:28.

Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:66.

33

firmly established on a conclusive proof—decisive in its meaning
and the authenticity of its transmission. Wédjib, according to them,
is that which has been based on conjecture and not transmitted by
an overwhelming, unbroken chain of transmitters. While Ghazali
concedes that they may use these terms, he does so on the
condition that their definitions are made clear.’

Ghazali defines ‘haradm,’the prohibited, as wajib’s antithesis
in the family of the five Shari‘a rules. It is, therefore, that about
which the Shari‘a declares, “Abandon it!” or “Do not do ‏8ن‎ Haram
may also be called ‘mahziir’ or ‘ma‘siya.’ 39

‘Mubéh,’ the allowed, is that wherein the Lawgiver grants
option with reference to an act’s performance or abandonment,
neither praising nor denouncing its doer or abandoner.4° Contrary
to the Mu‘tazilites, Ghazali regards mubdh as one of the set of five
Shari‘a categories, and a de facto condition of those acts which the
Shari'a did not declare prohibited or obligatory.

‘Mandiib,’ the recommended, is that whose performance is
better than neglecting, but one is not blamcworthy for neglecting it.
In other words, it is that part of the Shari‘a commands which are

nonbinding.

Ghazal, al-Mustasfa, 1:28, 1:66.
38Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:55, 1:66.
Ghazili, al-Mustasfa, 1:28.

0Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:66.

34

‘Makrah,’ the reprehensible, Ghazili says, has been used in
various ways by the fugahd’. He cites Shafi‘ using the term
‘makruh’ as prohibition. It is also used with reference to that
whose abandonment the Shari‘a prefers to its performance,
although no punishment is prescribed for the latter. It may also
mean performance of some act in place of another that is more
proper. Finally, it can also refer to all questionable acts. However,
Ghazali clarifies, this last usage could be confused with the ijtihad
of qualified authorities—for some consider ylihdd to be makrith.

But he opposes this.

Special Classifications of Wajib

In detailing a more complete analysis of the Shari‘a rules,
022311 classifies them according to particular aspects, for instance
the time within which they are to be performed. Concerning wajib,
for example, Ghazali divides it according to (a) the specificity of the
obliged act; (b) whether it is a collective or individual obligation; (c)
time restraints in fulfilling the obligation, which includes timely
and belated performed acts; and (d) the quantity or extent of
prescribed acts required to fulfill an obligation.

As for the first, prescribed obligations may give a person
options between a number of acts or specify only one act to fulfill
the command. These are called, respectively, ‘wajib mukhayyar’
(obligation with options) and ‘wajib mu‘ayyan’ (specific

obligation).*! Obligations such as prayers, fasting, and fulfilling

4 Ghazili calls ‘mukhayyar,’ ‘mubham.’ Al-Mustasfa, 1:67.

contracts are considered wdjib mu‘ayyan, for they, in particular,
must be performed. No other acts can serve as their substitutes.
Contrary to the Mu'tazilites, who object to this classification, Ghazali
claims that there is not only rational proof for this, but Shari‘a
proof as well, simply because the obligations specified in the
Shari‘a fall under one of these two categories.

There remain, then, obligations which have options (wajib
mukhayyar)., For example, in atoning for the breaking of an oath,
one has the option to fast three days, to free a slave, or to feed ten
indigent persons.42 Also, the community has the option to choose
the head of the Muslim state from among several eligibles. For the
selection itself is an obligation, but not of a particular person.43

With respect to who falls under obligation, Ghazali classifies
w4jib into either wajib ‏أ "قراط‎ (collective obligation) or wajib ‘ayni
(individual obligation).*4 Collective obligations are those which an
individual or a group can perform on behalf of the community,
discharging the rest from responsibility. For example, securing a
viable system of defense is an obligation binding on the community
at large. But if a part of the community acquires the necessary
knowledge—including science and technology—and implements it,
the community would be discharged from the obligation.

Otherwise all are responsible.
42 Our’ an, 5:89.
43Ghazali, al-Mustasfd, 1:67.

“4Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:68.

36

As for wajib- ‘ayni, these are the obligations required from
every individual who meets the conditions of taklif.

Obligations are also divisible according to the time allocated
to perform them. There are two time-specific kinds: Restricted
obligations (wdjib mudayyaq) and obligations with latitude (wajib
muwassa‘), Restricted obligations are those for which the Shari‘a .
has prescribed a single, specific time or duration that
accommodates the performance of the obligation. Fasting is a clear
example. Not only is the month of Ramaddn specified, but the time
between dawn and sunset, as well. Accordingly, fasting in any
other month is invalid performance of the obligation (unless with
excuse allowed by Shari‘a). Also, fasting in any other time of the
day is obviously invalid as well. Likewise, fasting two months for
the atonement of zihdr (pronouncing one’s wife to be prohibited for
him, like the back of his mother) must be done consecutively.

Obligations with latitude (wajib muwassa‘) are those whose
prescribed times can accommodate the performance of the
obligations—any moment within the time range—along with other
acts. Such is the case with paying zakdt upon reaching minimum
requirement; it can be paid any time during the following one year
period. Although the performance of these obligations may be
delayed until toward the end of the prescribed time, performing
the obligation becomes necessary in the last possible portion of the

prescribed time where the obligation, and nothing else, can be

accommodated.*>

4SGhazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:69-70.

37

Regarding the performance of the obligation with respect to
its time, Ghazali classifies them as ada’ (timely performance), qada’
(belated performance or restitution), and i‘dda (repeated
performance). An obligated act performed properly in its time is
considered add’. But if it is performed after the expiration of the
Shari‘a prescribed time—restricted or with latitude—it is called
qad@’. Also, if one performs it improperly in its time and then
repeats it properly while still within its prescribed time, it is called
i‘dda.

The application of the term ‘add’ ‘in relation to the word
‘qada’’ has four conditions:

The first is a situation where the locus of obligation
deliberately or forgetfully neglects performing an obligatory act in
its prescribed time, but he must perform the act*®—this is
considered gadd’ proper.

The second is a case where there is a valid obstacle, such as
menstruation preventing a woman from fasting; she must fast
additional days after the expiration of the menstruation, which is
considered 92644" but only figuratively. (In fact, Ghazali considers
it regular performance).

The third is a situation where one is validly discharged from
an obligation but decides to perform it, as in the case of a traveller
in Ramadan, who is not obligated to fast but still does so. Here

Ghazali cites the Zahirites who hold that fasting during his journey

‎person is discharged from punishment for being heedless,‏ م46
‎forgetful, or sleeping through the time.‏

38

is invalid because God said, “. . . A number of other days... ,”
where he is commanded to fast“other days.” On the other hand,
Karkhi, a Hanafite, agrees with the Zahirites that one is commanded
with “other days,” but contends that if he decides to comply with
the command and fast during the journey it is permissible for him.
Ghazali argues that both opinions are corrupt and invalid, and
regards the traveller’s fasting as a legitimate performance of a
duty. However, he considers it qadd@’ in the figurative sense only,
saying that the verse mentions the “other days” only to grant
latitude.

The fourth is the case of a sick person. If his sickness is
bearable, his situation is identical to that of the traveller. But if his
sickness is life-threatening and he still decides to fast, Ghazali
regards his action as a valid performance of an obligation. Yet if he
dies, he will be punished in the Hereafter, not for fasting, but for
disobeying another command to preserve his health and life.47
Others, however, do not consider his act ada’ because he has gone
against the exemption of not fasting.

Obligations, with reference to the quantity or extent of
prescribed acts required to fulfill them, are also divided into fixed
obligations (wdjib muhaddad) and unfixed obligations (wdajib ghayr
muhaddad). Fixed obligations are, for example, rites of worship,
payment of loans and debts, whose fulfillments are nonnegotiable

and fixed either by the Shari‘a or by contractual agreement (loans,

‎And caste not yourselves by your own hands into‏ الك

‎destruction...” Qur'an, 2:195,

39

contributions, etc.). In fact, a person who unilaterally commits
himself to contribute a fixed amount of money is obliged to fulfill
his commitment to the letter.

Spending for the cause of God, enjoining what is right and
forbidding what is wrong, helping the poor, and the like are
obligations whose fulfillments differ from person to person in
accordance with circumstance and abilities, unless the zmmah

reaches consensus on fixing one or another of them.*®

The Hanafites’ Classification of the Ahkadm

The Hanafites add two categories of Shari‘a rules to Ghazali’s
five: fard (binding duty) and makrith tahriman (prohibitive
reprehension), which they determine in accordance with the
certainty of a said rule’s transmission. Shari‘a obligations reported
by way of tawdtur are called either fard or hardm, depending, of
course, upon their instruction. Those based on solitary report are
termed wajib (obligatory) or makrith tahriman. So, wajib is less
certain than fard, and makrith tahriman is subordinate to haram,
Thus, the Shari‘a rules that bid man ‘to do,’ according to the
Hanafites, are fard and wdjib. Those that forbid him, in order of
potency, are hardm, makrith tahriman, and makriih. And, as with
Ghazali, both the ‘do’ and the ‘do not do’ converge on the mubdah
(the indifferent). Thus, the Hanafites Classify the rules of the

Shari‘a into seven categories.

48Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:70.

40

Interestingly, however, al-Shatibi Says that shortly after
0522311 these five, or seven, categories of Shari‘a rules were
reduced to three under the influence of tasawwuf: The
commanded, the prohibited, and the allowed. For violating the
commanded, be it obligatory or recommended, is fundamentally
violation against the Commander. And since violating God’s
command is out of Islamic character, a servant must not commit
any of this against his Lord. It therefore became obligatory to

repent against any violation, minor or major.*?

Ghazali’s Five Categories in Relation to one Another

It is impossible, in Ghazali’s view, for the Shari‘a to declare
one and the same act wajib and hardm, obedience and
disobedience. But relative to independent Circumstances, it is
Possible for an act’s rule to change. For example, murdering an
innocent person is absolutely forbidden. But executing the

murderer is necessarily obligatory. Therefore, a Shari‘a rule upon

one act may vary in relation to other factors. Ghazili’s says that it

is “possible for an act having two differing aspects, even though it
is one in itself, to be sought after through one of the aspects and
reprehensible by the other.’2 Furthermore, the difference in the
aspects of an act is equivalent to the difference in the act itself.

An obligatory act, by definition, is distinguished from an

49 Aba Ishaq al-Shatibi, al-Muwdfiqdt, 4 vols. ed. ‘Abd Allah
Diriz (Beirut: Dar al-Ma'‘rifa, n.d.), 3:148.

Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:77.

41

allowable (mubdéh) act. Therefore, when the obligatoriness of an
act is abrogated, it does not necessarily become allowable.>!
Rather, it reverts to its pre-obligation status, the character that
defined it prior to its becoming obligatory.

Reprehensible acts, like the forbidden, are antithetical to
obligation. Thus, a reprehensible act is never included under a
command ‘to do.’ It is necessarily expressed in a way that
explicitly or implicitly indicates ‘should not do.’

Commanding an act does not necessarily mean the prohibition
of its opposite, according to Ghazali. That is, the imperative mood
neither includes nor necessarily implies the prohibition of its
opposite. Similarly, a command to do the opposite of a prohibition
cannot be inferred; nor should it be construed to mean that the

performance of something else is required.>~

Taklif and Conformity to the Sharf‘a

Shari‘a rules may be either intended in themselves per se, or
required as stipulations for the fulfillment of other rules. However,
the laying down of obligation by requiring ‘this’ or ‘that’ act is not
conditional upon the existence of contingent rules. True, the
rectitude and validity of a said act’s performance requires the
fulfilling of its conditions. But it is the laying of obligation to
perform a single, central act that corresponds to the Sharf‘a proof,

while accountability is independently established for each
“'Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:73-74.

>2Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:81.

42

contingent act.

For example, Ghazali says, the Shari‘a obliges man to fulfill
the five pillars of Islam: Declaration of faith, prayer, fasting, zakdt,
and pilgrimage. Nevertheless, declaration of faith is a necessary
condition for the correct and valid performance of the other four
pillars. Furthermore, the Shari‘a requires the on-going acceptance
of each for one to remain Muslim. Therefore, conformity with
them—each to each and all in all—is a necessary condition of taklif.

AS a universal state in Ghazali’s legal doctrine, taklif charges
Muslims and non-Muslims alike. For “unbelievers are addressed
by the details of the Shari‘a as well, he Says. But he adds that
unbelievers are not ‘expected’ to perform these obligations, since
even if they do, their fulfillment is invalid and meaningless without
their formal submission to Islam. Nevertheless, the divine
obligation is addressed to all people, Muslims and non-Muslims.

In this he takes issue with the Hanafites, who posit that
obliging non-Muslims with the details of Shari‘a is rationally
inconceivable because of their disbelief°> In support of their view,
they argue that one who converts to Islam is not obliged to
perform restitution for having not fulfilled the Shari‘a obligations
prior to his acceptace of Islam. Thus, he was not obligated to
perform them to begin with. For had he been addressed by the
details of the Sharif‘a as an unbeliever, it would necessary follow
that he be obliged to ‘make up’ for them after his submission.

Moreover, none, including Ghazali himself (or since), have held such

33Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:92.

restitution as required.

Ghazili’s response is centered upon the interrogation the
unbelievers shall face at the hands of the believers in the Hereafter
about the reason for their punishment and their own answer to the
effect that they were not among those who fulfilled the Shari‘a

obligations.>4

. . . dn Gardens they will question concerning the sinners,
“What thrusted you into Saqar?” ... “We were not of those
who prayed, and we fed not the needy, and we plunged
along with the plungers, and we cried lies to the Day of
Doom, till the Certain came to us.”

It appears from his argument that Ghazali is recalling the
duality of legal responsibility in Islam. On one hand, a person is
responsible before the Shari‘a in this world; and on the other, he is
responsible before the Court of God on the Day of Judgement. Only
in the sense that they are accountable on the Day of Judgement is
Ghazéli’s claim that the disbelievers are addressed by the Shari‘a’s
details acceptable. Otherwise, in requiring the imposition of Shari‘a
rule upon nonMuslims he would be contradicting not only himself,

but the basic principles of the Sharf‘a.

4The Hanafites have a reasonable answer to this, which can
be summarized as follows: The disbelievers answer is figurative
indicating that the original cause for punishment is that they did
not accept Islam in the first place, therefore they did not pray and
did not perform the Shari‘a details. Yet Ghazali does not like this
answer. See the full debate in al-Mustasfa, 1:92.

44

Sabab and the Shari‘a Rules

Although revelation itself has been completed, Ghazali
reminds that certain Shari‘a rules are effected by the recurrence of
evident manifestations. Whenever these signs appear, it becomes
necessary to perform or refrain from one or more acts, in
accordance with the five ahkdm. This sign is termed ‘sabab’
(cause). In ritual performance for example, when the sun sets,
prayer is obligated; when a year passes, zakdt is due; when
Ramada4n’s crescent is sighted, fasting is incumbent. Regarding
transactions, the marriage contract effects the mutual rights and
marital obligations of a man and woman; the divorce contract
abrogates them, setting new guidelines; death is a cause for
inheritance; the contract of sale causes ownership.”>

The real cause for these obligations is the Shari‘a address
issuing from God. But the technical sabab is the apparent sign with
which revelation has conjoined the performance of specific acts.

‘Sahih’ (valid), ‘bdétil’ and ‘fasid’ (invalid) are terms used to
describe the validity of performing a Shari‘a act. The valid act, in
Ghazili’s scheme, is one that corresponds to the Shari‘a rule,
regardless of whether it is performed in restitution (gad@’) or on
time. The bdégil act, which is synonomous with the fasid act, is one
that does not fulfill the Shari‘a's requirements.

However, the principle approach of the Hanafite jurists, or the

fuqahd’ as they are called, defines valid performance as onc that

SGhazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:93.

45

discharges responsibility, removing the need for restitution-© The
dispute between the two views is reflected in the sphere of ritual
performance in the following case. If a person prays thinking that
he is ritually pure, Ghazali and the so-called mutakallim jurists
regard his prayer as valid; for prayer itself has been adequately
performed. But if he later remembers that he was not ritually
pure, then restitution is established by a different command.
Based upon the Hanafite definition, however, the same prayer is
invalid because it does not discharge the person from his obligation
to pray, since he did not fulfill all the prescribed Shari‘a
requirements.

Concerning business transactions, a valid contract (al-‘aqd al-
muthmir), according to Ghaziali, is one that is effected and stipulates
the fulfillment of all agreements.>” Hence, a contract that is not
effected is invalid. Yet the Hanafites distinguish the invalid
contract (batil) from the irregular (fasid). For the latter is
essentially a valid Shari‘a contract that includes a violation or a
Stipulation that is in disregard of the Shari‘a, such as a sales
contract that includes a usury clause. In principle, the agreement
is lawful but the inclusion of the usury stipulation impairs it.

This example illustrates a fundamental difference between
the approaches of the mutakallimin and the fugahd’. A contract of

sale stipulating usury is flatly rejected as invalid by the

56Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:94.

7Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:95.

46

mutakallimin, Ghazali included. The Hanafites on the other hand
contend that what is invalid here is the Stipulation of usury. But
the rest of the contract may be valid.

These distinctions are technicalities, as Ghazali notes.
However, they help one to properly understand the application of
these terms in the legal writings of both schools.

In sum, Ghazili’s legal doctrine with respect to the Shari‘a
rules establishes that they (a) originate from God and are
manifested through revelation in the Shari‘a address; (b) adhere to
the acts of the loci of obligation as he detailed their conditions; (c)
are classified into five categories with reference to the bidding of
the Shari‘a ‘to do’ or ‘not to do’; and (d) are divisible into
subcategories according to their prescribed time, requirements of
performance, and validity. Before introducing 02231158
on the Shari‘a sources it is important to point out his concept of the

Shari‘a address—especially regarding the way of its transmission

from God to man.

MANIFESTATION OF THE SHARI‘A ADDRESS

Only through the divine address does man become aware of
his obligations. According to Ghazali, the address is revealed as
follows: an angel or a prophet receives it directly from God; a
prophet or wali hears it from an angel; or the people hear it from

58

their prophet. However, Ghazili, although accepting that a wal?

may hear it from an angel, does not consider a wali a source

8Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:337,

47

through which the Shari‘a is derived—a right exclusively reserved
for a prophet.”

In supporting his argument, he acknowledges that both
angels and humans as created beings hear and see through the
faculties of audition and sight. This, however, implies that the
divine address necessarily originates from God in a mode similar to
the established conventions of communication, namely words,
sounds, gestures, signs, etc., which, in Ghazali’s view, seemingly
contradict the attributes of God. Therefore, he affirms that the
speech of God does not come in the form of signs or sounds, nor is it
patterned on an established linguistic norm. Rather, God is able to
create within man or angel—without the intermediacy of sounds,
letters, or signs—necessary knowledge of three things: (a)
recognition of the source of the speech, the Addressor; (b)
knowledge that what is being experienced is His speech; and (c)
comprehending what has been imparted, which may be a
command, prohibition, etc., or information.

Ghazili’s intimacy with theological and philosophical issues
compelled him to discuss the likely objections to his positions.
Among them is that a prophet or an angel can only hear the divine
address through his created faculty, which requires that the divine
address, in essence, be created similarly to the speech of creatures.

Ghazali argues that creatures need the medium of language to

convey what is in their minds, and that God alone is capable of

>°This shows Ghazali’s saff inclinations.

48

creating necessary knowledge in the minds of His creatures without
an intermediary. Ghazali, in illustrating the difficulties of
comprehending this, employs his fond approach of providing
analogies, citing the inability of a person born blind to comprehend
color.

So, he states that when a prophet receives revelation via an,
angel, it may be through actual words and sounds, conveying the
meaning of the speech of God. Yet, these devices are the originated
acts of the angel, not the actual words of God. However, they are in
the figurative sense considered the speech of God, for one may say,
“I have heard the poetry of al-Mutanabbi,” without being his
contemporary nor ever having met him. Yet the statement
necessarily indicates that he has heard it from someone else.

As for the community hearing the message from their
prophet, it is similar to the prophet receiving it from an angel.
They understand his address through the language to which they
are accustomed. The expressions are either explicit in conveying
the revealed meaning or are liable to various interpretations. Their
signification, therefore, is indicated through the evidence of the
language itself or through rational proof.

Ghazili, in a legal work like al-Mustasfd, was not only pressed
to explain the manner through which the divine address arrives,
but his treatment also reflects the theological discussions
preponderating in his time and the intense debate concerning the

attributes of God between the various theological trends that

Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:101 and 1:339,

49

emerged in the formative centuries of the sciences. Thus, he
brought remotely related discussions of theology into the sphere of
the principles of jurisprudence—the very practice he criticized in
the Exordium to al-Mustasfé, i.e. theologians, grammarians, and

legists stretching the details of their particular disciplines in the

treatment of usiil.6!

61 Ghazaili, al-Mustasfad, 1:9-10. In his own words:

“But this is exceeding the limits of this science and mixing it
with theology. The theologians from among the usitlis have
elaborated [excessively] in this regard, mainly because
theology overwhelmed their natures. The love of their
profession compelled them to mix it with this art, just as the
love of the language and [its] grammar forced some jurists to
mix parts of grammar with ‏القع‎ Thus, they mention about the
meanings of prepositions and inflections certain things which
specially pertain to the science of grammar, just as the love for
fiqh has led a group of legists from Transoxania, namely Aba
Zayd [al-Dabbisi], wi 44a‘, and his followers, to mix many
questions about the details of figh with its principles.

Although they brought this by way of examples to illustrate

how a principle leads to certain detailed legal points, they did
50 in excess, ”

CHAPTER II

THE QUR’AN
THE FIRST SHARI‘A SOURCE

0522311 does not allow for acceptance of the popular
classification of the Shari‘a sources without Stressing the unicity of
their divine origin, which has been manifested and communicated
to us through the utterances of the Prophet by way of the Qur’an
and his canonical statements. Aside from the fact that its formal
definition occurred after its conveyance by the Prophet, Ghaziali
reminds that analysis is an instrument of human understanding;
thus, the distinction between the Qur’4n—the speech of God (kaldm
Allaéh)—and the teachings of the Prophet, and the separation of
these two from the consensus (ijma*) of the Community, the ijtihdd
(original thinking) of the mujtahids, and so on is only a formal one.
He is, nevertheless, adamant that every student of these ‘sources’
bear in mind the unicity of their divine origin.

Ghazali, like all Muslims, holds that the Qur’an is the speech
of God (kalaém Allah). Yer from this simple definition—more
precisely from the word ‘kaldm’—evolved the elaborate science
of‘ilm al-kaldm in Islam’s formative era. Literally hundreds of
Muslim scholars before and after Ghazali delved deep, and often

with great controversy, into theological speculation, resulting in the

50
51

development of theological affiliations that influenced most of the
Muslim sciences.

While 022311 argues convincingly in al-Mustagsfa for the
purification of the science of ‏أشي‎ al-fiqgh from the elements of
other sciences, he himself seems to bow to the pressures of the
question-raising of kaldm, introducing his discussion of the very |
first Shari‘a source through the door of theology. Indeed, he
begins with linguistic analysis of the term ‘kalam’, itself. It is
applicable to the utterances of any language conveying meanings
inherent in the mind, he says, adding that it is difficult to discern
the literal meanings from the figurative.

He posits also that the speech of God is one indivisible
attribute, but despite its unicity includes all meanings of speech,
just as knowledge is one yet includes all known objects and facts.
In addition, the speech of God is different than human speech. For
no human can express meanings inherent in his mind by means
other than sounds, signs, or gestures. But God is capable of
imparting His knowledge in His creatures immediately. In
emphasizing this, Ghazali takes issue against the Mu‘tazilites’ claim
that the Qur’in is created. Thus, it is clear that the substance of
these discussions is not directly related to jurisprudence.

Be that as it may, Ghazali’s definition of the Qur’an as “that
which has been transmitted to us through tawdtur' between the

lan elaborate discussion on tawdtur will follow in this

introduction in the chapter on Sunna. See also Ghazali, al-Mustasfa,
1:132-140.

52

two covers of the Mushaf [Codex] based on the seven well-known

recitations”

is founded on two aspects: The recording of the Qur’an
in writing; and its verbal transmission through tawdtur.

Concerning the Mushaf, he only recognizes what the
Companions have agreed to record before the inclusion of
diacritical marks or partitioning. As for the verbal transmission, he
does not accept other than the seven established recitations. They
have been transmitted through tawdtur, according to Ghazali, and
are consistent with the accepted written Mushaf. Hence, he rejects
copies attributed to individuals, such as b. Mas‘id, and sects or
groups, like the Shi‘ites. Verbal reports not transmitted through
tawdtur are also to be rejected, for tawdtur is the main criterion
decisively securing an authentic link of the Qur’an to the Prophet
and, therefore, to God.

It is interesting that Ghazali did not include inimitability
(mu‘jiz) in his definition of the Qur’an as others have? This is so

for three reasons: First, he views the function of inimitability as

asserting the truth of the Prophet, not defining the Qur'an; second,

*Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:101.

3Compare Ghazali’s position with that of Sayf al-Din al-Amidi,
in al-Ihkam fi Usiil al-Ahkdm, 4 vols. (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub ‏اح‎
‎‘Ilmiyya, 1980), 1:211, where he follows Ghazali’s position. See also
al-Subki, Jam‘ al-Jawdadma‘ (which is published with Hashiyat al-
Bannani), 1:223. Most of the modern authors of ust include
inimitability in their definition. See Husayn Hamid Hassan, Usiil al-
Figh (Cairo: Dar al-Nahda al-‘Arabiyya, 1970), p. 260; Muhammad
Hasan Hitd, al-Wajiz fi ‏اشعلا‎ al-Tashri‘ al-Islami (Beirut: Ma’assasa
al-Risala, 1983), ‏.م‎ 99; and Aba al-‘Inin Badran, ‏افع نا‎ al-Fiqh al-
Islami, (n.p.: Mu’assasa Shabab al-Jami‘a, 1984), p. 67.

53

the Qur’an itself challenges Arabs to produce a verse similar to its
verses, which implies that part of a verse, a half or a third, may not
be inimitable; third, it is conceivable rationally that words from
other than the Qur’an may be inimitable. Therefore, the Qur’an is
by nature inimitable; but inimitability cannot define it.

0122311, however, becomes distracted not only by discussions
of kalam; he finds irresistible certain relatively minor fiqhi
controversies pertaining to the Qur’dn that he primarily against
with the Hanafites. Abi Hanifa, for example, requires three
consecutive days of fasting for the atonement of breaking an oath,
relying on the authority of b. Mas‘id’s recitation, “Then fast three
days ‘consecutively.’ . . ‏بهذا‎ Although this recitation is not
mutaw4tir, it can be considered a valid solitary report, according to
Abi Hanifa. Ghazali, however, rejects this on the ground that if b.
Mas‘id’s report was actually of the Qur’an, it would have been
obligatory for the Prophet to promulgate it to the Community at
large and for the Community to transmit it through tawdtur. It
would not have been permissible for the Prophet to disclose it
confidentially to one person, be he b. Mas‘id or anyone else. But
since the community did not transmit it, we know conclusively that

“The verse in the Qur’an, 2:196, does not include the word

consecutive, although in this report attributed to Ibn Mas‘ad it is
added. For references to the hadith, see A. J. Wensinck,
Concordance et Indices de la Tradition Musulmane, 7 vols. (Leiden:
E. J. Brill, 1936-1969), 1:263. However, this addition is attributed
to Ubayy b. Ka‘b in Malik b. Anas, al-Muwatta’ 2 vols. ed.
Muhammad ‘Abd al-Baqi (n.p.: Dar al-Turath al-‘Arabi, n.d.), 5.
This report is 2150 attributed to Ubayy in Abi al-Qasim Mahmiad
Zamakhshari, Kashshdaf (Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifa, n.d.), 1:345.

34

either 5. Mas‘id is mistaken or that it is his opinion and should be
treated as such, not as part of the Qur'an.

Another issue that Ghazali raises is that of basmala, “In the
name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate” (p14 ‏الى حمى‎ wt puss).
Al-Shafi‘i holds that since reciting “Surat al-Fatiha” in prayer is
obligatory and basmala is a verse of it, then whosoever does not .
recite it during prayer is not fulfilling his obligation. Thus, his
prayer is invalid. But Abi Hanifa considers basmala to be a verse
only of “Surat al-Naml” and not necessarily a verse of ‘Surat al-
Fatiha.” Accordingly, he maintains that even without reciting
basmala, the prayer is valid.

Though basmala is more properly a matter of fighi detail not
essentially related to the sources of Islamic jurisprudence, Ghazili
devotes to it nearly one third of his treatment of the Qur’an. In
defending al-Shafi‘i’s opinion against the Hanfites and al-Baqillani,
the Malikite,—who holds al-Shafi'l to have erred in insisting that
basmala is necessarily the first verse of every sttra—Ghazali
responds that the obligatoriness of reciting it in prayer is based on
a hadith requirement to include it in recitation, not on the

argument that it is part of the Qur’an.®
°Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:10),

Aba Ja‘far Muhammad b. Jarir al-[abari has treated this
issue at greater length in his commentary on the Qur’an, Jami‘ al-

Baydn ‘an Ta'wil ' ‏برق‎ al-Qur‘an, 3d ed. (Cairo: al-Halabi Press, 1968),
1:50-54.

55

THE LANGUAGE OF THE QUR’AN

Ghazali maintains that awareness of Arabic’s linguistic
applications and its various ways of conveying meanings is
essential for acceptable comprehension of the Texts.’ One can infer
from his remarks on the language of the Qur’an, as well as the
Sunna, that he distinguishes between linguistic usage relative to a
word’s original meaning, clarity, and inclusiveness. He seems, for
instance, to first locate a term between extremes of literal and
figurative meaning, placing it according to the degree of its
metonymical and explicit usages. He may then consider it in light
of the clarity with which it imparts its meanings, be it evident,
decisive, precise, ambiguous, etc. There remains then the term’s
Scope or exclusivity of meaning—that is, its relative generality or
particularity. And as such analyses imply, he objects to those who

deny the existence of figurative usage in Qur’an.®

THE ARABICITY OF THE QUR’AN

Jurists examining Islamic legal sources, Ghazali included, treat

the question of the Arabic nature of the Qur’an for the obvious
"This especially denotes the Qur’an and Sunna.

8By the end of the second century Aba ‘Ubayda Ma‘mar b. al-
Muthanna (d. 210 H.) wrote Majdz al-Qur'dn and this work was
considered as rational interpretation of the Qur’an (tafsir bi al-ra’y)
for which he was severely criticized, first by his contemporaries,
such as al-Farra’, al-Asma‘iy, and al-Zajjaj. Yet Majdz al-Qur'dn
remained a prominent source over the centuries, which Fuat Sezgin
edited as his doctoral thesis and published as Abi ‘Ubayda Ibn al-
Muthanna ai-Taymiy, Majdz al-Qur’dn, 2 vols. ed. Fuat Sezgin (Cairo:
Muhammad Sami Amin al-Khanji, n.d).

56

reason that understanding the language of the Shari‘a address, of
which the Qur’an is clearly the prime element, is prerequisite for
investigation. Nevertheless, the Book itself provides the motive, for
it is consciously an “Arabic Qur’an.”? This apparently compelled the
jurists to address this issue since it involves the premier Shari‘a
source, the Book.

While it may well be more properly a subject of linguistics
than of Islamic jurisprudence, Aba Bakr al-Baqillini’s claim that
the Qur‘an is purely Arabic, void of foreign words, and his
correlation of this with its inimitability (i‘jaz), coupled with
Ghazali’s open criticism of him in Mustasfa as extreme, may more
precisely reflect a fighi dispute regarding the translation of the
Qur’an and an early Hanafite position permitting its recitation in
Farsi during the daily prayers. !©

In the midst of his preoccupation with the nature of' the
Address of the Qur’an, the recorded Qur’ar, and its transmission
through tawdétur—in his tendency to bogg down in the details of

kaladm and figh— Ghazili neglected to discuss a more evident
9 0 .
Qur’an, 12:2.

107 ater Hanafite sources have said that Aba Hanifa
renounced this position. For more details, see Aba Bakr b. Mas‘ad
al-Kasani, Kitab Badda’i' al-Sand'i‘ fi Tartib al-Shard’ i‘, 7 vols. (Beirut:
Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi, 1982), 1:112; lon Amir al-Hajj, al-Tagrir wa
al-Tahbir, 3 vols. (Cairo: Amiri Press, 1316-1318 H.), 2:4;
Muhammad Mustafa Shalabi, ‏اشعلا‎ al-Figh al-Islami (Beirut: Dar al-
Nahda al-‘Arabiyya, 1978), 1:76; and Wahba al-Zahili, al-Figh al-
Islami wa Adillatu, 2nd ed. 8 vols. (Damascus: Dar al-Fikr, 1985),
1:655.

57

juristic side of the Qur’an: 15 relatively few verses that explicitly

enact law and the implications of this.
However, he concludes his chapter on the Qur’an with a brief

discourse on what one should know about its language and method

11

in indicating rules. Based on the verse, “The Book, wherein there

are perspicuous verses—they are the essence of the Book—and
others which are allegorical... "12 he suggests that the words
perspicuous and allegorical, since no Text explains them explicitly,
should be understood in light of what linguists acknowledge as
their literal meanings. Simply, the perspicuous means either (a)
verses that are explicit without ambiguity or (b) ordered in a way
that yields certain meanings, be they evident or inferential,
provided that contrariety does not occur. Ghazali notes that the

perspicuous, then, is opposite to obscurity, not allegory.

! ! ‏عوط‎ a more concise account of the structure, Spirit,
legislation, and major themes of the Qur’an, see Fazlur Rahman's
chapter on the Qur’4n in /slam, pp. 30-42; the Encyclopaedia of
Islam, new ed. “Qur’an,” s.v. J. D. Pearson; and Muhammad ‘Abd
Allah Diraz’s dissertation on La Morale du Koran, translated into
Arabic as Dustiir al-Akhldq fi al-Qur’dn, 4th ed. trans. ‘Abd al-
Sabir Shahin (Beirut: Mu’assasat al-Risila, 1982). Among the
clasical works are Badr al-Din al-Zarakshi, Burhan ff ‘Uliim al-
Qur'an, 3d ed. 4 vols. ed. Muhammad Abia Fadl Ibrahim (n.p.: Dar
al-Fikr, 1980); and Jalal al-Din al-Siyati, al-Itgan fi ‘Ulim al-Qur’ dn,
4 vols. ed. Muhammad Aba Fadl Ibrahim, (Cairo: Dar al-Turath,
—n.d.). On the vocabulary of the Qur’an see al-Raghib al-Agafahani,
Mu'jam Mufradét alfaz al-Qur'dn, ed. Nadim Mar‘ashii (Beirut: Dar
al-Kitaéb al-‘Arabi, n.d.); and Majd al-Din Muhammad b. Ya‘qib al-
Fayrizabadi, Basd’ir Dhawé al-Tamyiz fi Lat@’ if al-Kitdb al-'Aziz, 8
vols. ed. Muhammad ‘Ali al-Najjar (Beirut: Maktaba al-‘IImiyya,
n.d.).

l20ur'an, 3:7.

58

The allegorical verses, therefore, contain ambiguity in word
or concept. For example, the word ‘lams’ may mean touching or
sexual intercourse. Or the apparent meaning of one of God’s
attributes may be misconstrued to correspond with a human

characteristic.
CHAPTER III

THE SUNNA
THE SECOND SHARI‘A SOURCE

From the emergence of the Islamic sciences in the third
century until relative stability in their formation in Ghazali’s time,
the technical meaning of ‘Sunna’ varied among mutakallims,
muhaddiths, fagihs, and usiilis. Though we find common elements
in their respective views of Sunna, it should be noted that their
emphases differed. The focus of the mutakallins was on adherence
to the larger community (ahl-al-Sunna) and its dogma. Thus
whoever seceded became heretic (ahl-al-bid‘a). The efforts of the
muhaddiths were directed to recording and authenticating the
Prophetic traditions. And the faqihs concerned themselves with
acts identified as Sunna, that is, recommended as opposed to
obligatory.

The usili treatment of the term ‘Sunna,’ however, came
somewhat later, after the development of these sciences and the
detailing of their issues. Consequently, usiil considered their
usages. The major usili preoccupation with Sunna is its validity as
a Shari‘a source and its place among the other sources. Its
principle treatment of Sunna includes all that has emanated from

the Prophet, aside from the Qur’an, be it statement, deed, or tacit

59
60

approval of a canonical nature; that is, all that expresses taklif
(charging with obligation).

Ghazili’s approach to Sunna in al-Mustasfa does not, in
general, depart from that of the classical one. He is, however,
distinguished from many of his predecessors and successors in his
organization, reasoning, and utilization of logic and philosophy in .
presentation—particularly with reference to the type of knowledge
imparted from specific transmissions. What is indeed interesting is
that the jurist Ghazali, who details the fine points of Sunna in
meticulous fashion—be it in al-Mustasfa or in his earlier usitili work,
al-Mankhiil—neglects the application of these principles on the
reports which he cites in others of his works, to the degree that he
has earned the dubious distinction of being weak in reference to
hadith.

In any case, Ghazali bases his arguments for the validity of
Sunna as a Shari‘a source on the Qur’an in four ways:

First, God has commanded believers to obey the Prophet in
numerous verses: “Whatever the Messenger gives you, take; and
whatever he forbids you, give over.”' Also, “Obey God and the
Messenger.”* Moreover, obeying him is regarded as part of
obedience to God: “Whosoever obeys the Messenger thereby obeys

God.”> The Qur'an further declares that the Prophet is the proper
‘Qur'an, 59:7.
2 0 .
Qur’in, 3:32.

3Qur’ in, 4:80.

61

source for resolving dispute: “Jf you should quarrel on anything,
refer it to God and the Messenger.” In fact, the Book declares that
rejecting the rule of the Prophet equals departure from faith: “By
your Lord, they will not believe until they make you the judge
regarding the disagreements between them.”>

Second, the Qur'an testifies that the Prophet does not “speak
out of caprice.”® Thus what he utters other than the Qur’an is, as
Ghazali calls it, revelation not for recitation (wahy ghayr matluww).
Thus, what issues from him is a valid Shari‘a source.

Third, the Qur’dn includes general commands which require
detail for their implementation. In the area of worship, there is,
for example, the command, “Perform the prayer!” (Agimi al-sald);
in the areas of inheritance, marriage, and punishment, their details,
says Ghazali, “came first in principle. Then the Prophet gradually
elaborated who should inherit and who should not, whose marriage
is lawful and whose is not, what is valid to sell and what is not.’”
The Prophet has fulfilled this in compliance with the instruction of
the Qur’an: “We have sent down to you [O Muhammad] the

remembrance that you may make it clear to mankind.’®

Ansa a,

Qur’an, 4:59.

5 0 1

Qur’an, 4:65.

6 18 .

Qur’an, 53:3.

7Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:372-373.

8 Qur'an, 16:44.

62

Accordingly, if the elucidation of the Prophet, which is his Sunna,
was not a valid Shari‘a source, then implementing the Qur’anic
commands would not have been possible.

Fourth, ijmd‘ (consensus) indicates the validity of the Sunna as
a Shari'a source.” This is reflected in the conduct of the entire
ummah, beginning with the Companions. Both during the Prophet’s
lifetime and after his death, they obeyed him and did not
differentiate between commands he attributed to the Qur’an and
others he himself issued.

This being the case, the Sunna must be a valid and obliging
Shari‘a source. This is evident from those who witnessed the
Prophet and heard his hadith from among his Companions. As for
the succeeding generations, transmission is the only channel to
establish the Sunna. Ghazali recognizes that the transmission of
reports varies in authenticity depending on the number of
transmitters, their integrity, the links between reporters, and the
like.

This perhaps is what required him to discuss the details of (a)
reports and the channels by which they have reached us; (b) the
concept of tawatur plus the nature of the knowledge it imparts,
solitary reports and the conjectural knowledge they impart, and
the necessity of fulfilling obligations on their bases and relying on

them with regard to cases of common necessity; !9 and (c) the

°Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:100.
l0Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:171.

63

qualifications of reporters and the distinction between relating a

report and testifying in court or endorsing a reporter.

DEFINITION AND TYPES OF REPORTS

The second source from which the Shari‘a rules are derived is
the Sunna of the Prophet. Since the Companions were the only
ones to have had direct contact with him, the biddings of his Sunna
would not be known by any of the succeeding generations—and
therefore not followed—were it not for its transmission. For this
reason Ghazali pays special attention to the channels by which the
Sunna of the Prophet has been transmitted, ranking them according
to their strength in indicating the Shari‘a rules.

Unlike the muhaddith (traditionist) whose treatment of
mutawa4tir and solitary (add) reports focuses on their number of
transmitters and precision of wording, Ghazili, the jurist-
philosopher, places the question of transmitting reports (akhbdr)
within the larger context of his theory of knowledge. He inquires
into the definition of reports, their avenues of transmission, and
what sort of knowledge they impart to the mind, basing their
acceptance or rejection on the degree of knowledge they yield. For
example, does a particular report impart sure knowledge, or does it
remain in the sphere of conjecture? What are the criteria that
govern this?

Ghazali delves into these questions providing a guide with
which an inquirer into the Shari‘a sources—especially Sunna—can
sort out the body of transmitted reports attributed to the

Messenger and know the authentic from the questionable or the
64

fabricated. He further examines contradictory sound reports
relative to one another in order to distinguish them in application.

Technically, a report (Khabar) is that which a person
voluntarily expresses. If it remains a meaning inherent in the
mind, it is not a report. Thus, what the sleeping or the coerced
verbalize is not a report, for neither person freely intends to
disclose what is in his mind. Also, Ghazali refutes the definition of
reports as statements in which truth anu falsehood may enter by
pointing out that this is contradictory.!! Instead, he defines them
as statements in which truth or falsehood may enter. Some reports
are necessarily true and must be accepted. Others can only be false
and must be rejected.

Reports impenetrable by falsehood and so necessarily
accepted are presented here in the sequence that Ghazali uses in

al-Mustasfa, apparently with reference to their relative Strength.

1. The speech of God is not at all liable to falsehood, for it is
impossible for Him to lie. Based on this, Ghazali insists
that it is necessary to believe in and assent to any report
that has been conclusively established as coming from God.

2. The reports of the Messenger, since his truthfulness has
been established by God and demonstrated by miracle, are
true. Indeed, according to Ghazili, it is absurd that Allah
should support liars with demonstrated miracles. Its
supposition implies God’s impotency and thus he would be
unable to support His messengers with miracles. It is

''This definition has been generally accepted in usitli
references — especially by the Mu‘tazilites. See Aba al-Husayn al-
Basgri, al-Mu‘tamad fi Usil al-Fiqgh, 2 vols. ed. Muhammad
Hamidullah (Damascus: Institu Fransais Damas, 1965), 2:542-546.

65

evident that inability is impossible on the part of the
Omnipotent.

This category of reports also includes canonical matters
that have been mentioned or practiced in the presence of
the Messenger, provided that he was attentive to them
and did not disapprove them, thus assenting silently.

3. Reports of the entire ummah are to be accepted, for based
on the statement of the truthful Messenger, the wmmah is
immune from error.

4. Reports which conform to the statements of Allah, the
Messenger, and the ummah must be accepted as true.

5. Reports conveyed before a large number? of people who
do not reject their recounting—though ordinarily they
would be compelled to do so were they false—are to be
accepted. Their silence proves the reports’ validity.
Ghazali further states that many reports were, in fact,
related and approved in this fashion; that is, before a large
number of Companions who did not object to them.
Moreover, he asserts that this is tantamount to accepting
the reports of the Companions, for they would have
objected against those relating false reports to them.

13

6. Mutaw4tir’” reports must be regarded as true.

There are also reports, says Ghazili, which are outright
impossible to regard as true and so must be rejected.
1. Reports that contradict mutawdtir texts, decisively explicit

Shari‘a statements—from either the Qur’an or Sunna—or
contradict ‏“امل‎ are rejected because they imply charging

121 should be noted that Ghazili did not indicate a specific

number. A discussion will follow concerning the required number
for tawdtur.

134 definition of tawdtur and mutawatir reports will follow.

66

God, His Messenger, and the entire community with lying,
which is impossible.

2. Reports denied by a large number of people who (a) state
that they have witnessed the reported event and do not
concur with what is alleged and (b) with whom collusion is
in the nature of the case impossible are rejected.

3. Reports that are necessarily rejected by reason, the senses,
mutawatir reports, and so on are not accepted, such as
reports indicating the coexistence of contradictions or that

the Day of Resurrection has already taken place, and the
like.

4. Reports that are neglected by a vast majority who
ordinarily would be expected to promulgate them widely
due to their nature, and the abundant impetus to relate
them, are rejected. For instance, if the Messenger were to
have reported the coming of a prophet after him; or that it
is obligatory to fast the month of Shaww4dl in addition to
Ramadan; or that he specified the person succeeding him
in the imamate. Such reports, were they true, would have
immense impetus for transmission. However, the silence
of the Companions, the Successors, and those after them
about reporting such things proves their fabrication and
necessarily calls for charging the individuals relating them
with lying.

There are reports which do not fall within these two
classifications, being neither overtly true nor false, thus
remaining inconclusive. Judgement must be suspended
concerning these reports, according to Ghazali. So one
cannot act based on them.

After qualifying reports broadly according to their source and
nature and their conformity with reason and the consensus of the
ummah, he discusses how reports in general have come to be
known. Essentially, he classifies them according to their
transmission into two major categories, tawdtur and ahdd, the first

of which he treats at great length.
67

Tawatur Reports

The very basis of the Shari‘a depends on acquiring knowledge
of what actually issued from the Prophet. Since the Companions
were the only ones who have directly heard and witnessed the
utterances and actions of the Prophet, our knowledge of what he |
said, therefore, hangs entirely on the intermediacy of reporters, not
on empirical knowledge. However, Ghazali maintains that a
fawatur transmission (unlike an ahdd solitary report) is capable of
yielding a knowledge equivalent to the knowledge imparted by
direct experience, thus refuting the Sumaniyya'4 who hold that the
only way to acquire knowledge is through direct perception. He
devotes considerable attention to establishing tawdtur as one of the
universal sources of necessary knowledge. This is particularly
important in usd! when considering that Sunna is a source of
Shari‘a rules.

In any case, literally, ‘tawdtur’ signifies the ceaseless
recurrence of something.!> It is said, “Tawdtarat al-khayl,” “The

horses came (continuously) one after another”; and “Tawdtarat al-

1441-Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:132.

'SFor the linguistic meaning, see Lane, An Arabic-English
Lexicon, 8:2917-19; and Ibrahim Mustafa et al., al-Mu‘jam al-Wasit,
2:1020-21. For the technical meaning, see Subhi al-Salih, ‘Uliim al-
Hadith wa Mustalahu, 146-151; ‘Ali b. Ahmad ‏بط‎ Hazm, /hkam fi
Usil al-Ahkdm, 8 vols. (in two) ed. Ahmad Muhammad Shakir
(Cairo: Maktaba al-Khanji,1926-1928), 1:104-137; and Aba Hamid
Ghazali, al-Mankhiil min Ta‘ligdt al-Usil, ed. Muhammad H. Hité
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, n.d), p. 235-244.

68

kutub”; “The books came one after another.” Therefore, a

mutawatir report is one whose narration is told from one to

another without stopping.

As for the technical usage of the usiilis and the muhaddiths, it
is a report transmitted by an unbroken chain of an overwhelming
number of reporters where it is rationally and in the nature of the
Case impossible for them to collaborate on lying and fabricating.

Accordingly, Ghazali requires that for a report to be
considered mutawdtir and so necessarily accepted, it must meet
each of four conditions, thus conforming to the technical

requirements of tawdtur.

1. The report must be based on certainty, not conjecture or
opinion. To illustrate this, Ghazali gives an example of the
residents of Baghdad—who certainly constitute the number
for tawdtur—reporting seeing a person who they suspect is
Zayd. This cannot be regarded as tawdtur because they
are not certain of his identity. So the report is doubtful.

2. The reporter must base his statement on something
perceptible, for tawdtur does not apply concerning rational
Positions, opinions, or other matters which cannot be
perceived. Such is the case when a group of people report
on the temporal origination of the world. For it is
impossible for them to perceive it, let alone witness it. So
this cannot be regarded as a mutdwatir report.

3. All of these requirements must be met at every stage of
the transmission from one generation to the next—from the
first to the last. Some reports, for example, may begin by
one or a few persons. They may relate it to many other
people who repeat this to the next generation and so on.
Eventually the number for tawdtur is constituted and the
report is relayed. This is not tawdtur.

This requirement in particular is removed from the
witnessed event and is more relevant to the transfer and
69

reception of the report, while the others ensure that the
happening is witnessed. Yet this specification sees to the
fulfillment of the other requirements. !®

4. The event or statement must be reported by a large
number people sufficient enough to render it impossible
for them to have collaborated to lie.

Ghazali discusses at relatively great length the concept of
‘adad (the number constituting taw4tur). But since there is neither
Shari'a nor rational proof specifying what the minimum number
required for tawdtur is, Ghazali concludes that the number cannot
be calculated; for it is impossible to perceive the exact moment
wherein sure knowledge accrues while counting the number of
reports heard. Thus he classifies the number of reporters by the
nonrational measures of ‘kdmil’ (sufficient) , thus imparting certain
knowledge, ‘ndqis’ (insufficient) , which does not yield certain
knowledge, or ‘z@’id ‘ala al-kdmil’ (super-sufficient). The criterion
for sufficiency, therefore, is attainment of necessary knowledge in
the minds of those receiving the reports.

Moreover, he holds this to be an irreversible process. In
other words, one cannot begin with the anticipated necessary
knowledge and use a tawdtur number of reporters to measure it.
Rather, the sufficiency of the number is determined by the effect of
the reports on the minds of the recipients. This is why Ghazili,

contrary to al-Baqillani, includes circumstantial evidence as a

'6Rernard Weiss calls this the ‘super-condition’ for this
reason. Bernard Weiss, “Knowledge of the Past: The Theory of
Taw@tur according to Ghazali,” Studia Islamica 61 (1985): 90.

70

Supporting factor to the reports which fall short of yielding certain
knowledge.

To illustrate this, Ghazali gives the example of a report
related by a number of people, short of tawdtur, concerning the
death of a person. The reports alone do not impart certain
knowledge. But if circumstantial evidence is taken into account
with the reports, certainty can be reached. For instance, if the
deceased person’s father, known to be a distinguished, senior
member of the community, is seen coming out of his house,
bareheaded and bare foot, in torn clothes, confused, all the while
slapping himself in the face, certain knowledge may accrue. For
these bits of circumstantial evidence Supplement the insufficiency
of the number of reporters. Ghazali contends that experience is an
evident indication of this.

Ghazali extends his view regarding the impact of
circumstantial evidence on knowledge saying that certain
knowledge may accrue by the report of even a single person if
sufficient circumstantial evidence is available.!7 He poses the
example of the Messenger, as well as the other prophets. Each is
just one person; but supported with miracles and other
demonstrative evidences from Allah, this is sufficient enough to

impart necessary knowledge of their truthfulness and reports.

7 Ghazili, however, ridicules the opinions of al-Ka‘bi, a
Mu'tazilite, who held that it is possible for the report of one person
without circumstantial evidence to yield certain knowledge.

71

Evidences accompanying reports, then, do not only
compensate for the insufficiency of the number of reporters, but
also show how a report evolves from being suspect to being
plausible to yielding necessary knowledge, just as the light of dawn
gradually intensifies until its brilliance makes one certain of
daylight.

Ghazali assails those fagihs, muhaddiths, and uguli’s who
specify a minimum number necessary for tawdtur based on
incidental Shari‘a texts. Some hold the number to be forty, based
on the required number of worshippers for the Friday prayer.
Others claim seventy, based on the size of the group that Misa
selected to meet God with him in order for them to convey what
was to be revealed. Still others put the number at three-hundred
and ten, based on the number of Companions who fought in the
Battle of Badr.

Ghazali also rejects claims that the number for tawdtur must
reach an ‘uncountable’ number or one that cannot be contained in a
city. He states that this is false by the nature of the case, for the
Companions used to reside in Medina and their number was
confined. Yet their reports are certainly mutawéatir.

In addition, he argues against those who hold that the
reporters of tawdtur must not be blood relatives or of the same
country, and must be pious believers. Even the unrighteous, such
as the Kiarajites and the Murji‘ites, says Ghazali, may be included
in the number of tawdtur. In fact, their agreement with the
reporters of tawatur adds strength to the reports because they

would not agree unless it is true. He continues that one accepts
72

mutawatir reports even from non-Muslims, provided that they
meet the stated requirements for tawdtur.'8

Nor did the claim of the Shi‘ites that the infallible imam must
be included among the transmitters of any report escape Ghazili’s
refutation. He argues that this position leads to an array of
absurdities. For example, the infallible imdam’s instruction, based |
on their stipulation, would not oblige anyone other than those who
directly heard it from him. For his followers’ statements cannot be
qualified as mutawdtir and therefore cannot be binding because he
is not included among them and none of the reporters are infallible.
Moreover, the death of a person or the occurrence of a great event
cannot be qualified as a mutawdtir report—regardless of the
abundance of reporters—for the infallible imam is neither present
nor has he witnessed it. In Ghazali’s words, this is hallucination.

Ghazali holds that the Prophet has been charged with the
obligation to convey and promulgate the religion. He passed this
charge to the ummah, who conveyed and promulgated the Shari‘a
Texts and their fundamental rules. Ghazali contends, however, that
while this has been fulfilled through tawdtur, its detailed
elaboration was in varying instances left to solitary reports, which
he argues cannot be viewed as impossible or faulty with reference
to validating the transmission of the Shari‘a. He classifies these

areas of promulgation into four categories: The Qur’an; the five

'8Ghazali wants to guard here against the alleged tawdtur
among Christians and others, when, for example, they reported that
Jesus was crucified. Ghazalt, al-Mustasfa, 1:134.

73

pillars of Islam; the principles of nonessential transactions; and the
details of the latter principle.

It is known, he says, that there was great concern to
promulgate the Qur’an widely, making it the foremost of mutawéatir
texts.

Regarding the well-known five pillars of Islam, these too
were widely conveyed by the Prophet, as Ghazali puts it, to the
elite and common people alike. Hence, they are also mutawdtir.

The principles of nonessential transactions are those which
common people need not necessarily master, such as sales,
marriage, divorce, manumission and freedom regarding slaves in
general, and possession of properties. However, scholars have
learned of them through tawdtur and through reports given before
large crowds who did not object to the information passed. Thus,
those who do not know are obliged to accept the knowledge of the
scholars, who do.

Finally, there are the details of these principles of the Shari‘a,
of which some have been promulgated via tawdtur while others
have come down through solitary reports. Specifically, this is
knowledge of practices that, for example, void worship or nullify
contracts or ablution, or are concerned with the division of
inheritance shares, requirements for testimonies, etc. But Ghazali
points out that even those details transmitted by valid solitary
reports cannot be rejected. Furthermore, they may be relied upon
with reference to the rules of common necessities.

In any case, Ghazali is firm in his stand that the promulgation

of religious obligation has been fulfilled by both the Prophet and
74

the preceding generations to emphasize that the community is
obliged to uphold the Shari‘a on the bases of both mutawétir and

valid solitary reports.

41:24 (Solitary) Reports

The controversy concerning the validity of solitary reports
began long before al-Shafi‘i’s time; nevertheless, he was the first to
record a developed, systematic defense with reference to validating
Shari'a rules by their transmission. Numerous muhaddiths and
usulis have adopted his view. Al-Shafi‘i’s impact upon 01323115 is
clear in his discussion and illustration of this issue.!? Yet Ghazali
distinguishes himself by not concealing the extreme differences of
opinion among the muhaddiths. Among them are a sizable number
of Zahirites*® who not only accept solitary reports but hold that it is
necessary to honor them and act on their bases. However, others
among them, along with the Mu‘tazilites, claim that it is rationally
impossible for Shari‘a obligations to be laid by a solitary report
which has been transmitted by an individual or individuals in such
a way that the loci of obligation have no way of verifying the
authenticity of the reports and the fact that the Messenger has

commanded believers through them.

'%Compare Ghazali’s al-Mustasfa, (1:148-149), with
Muhammad Idris al-Shafi‘i’s Risdla, ed. Ahmad M. Shakir (Cairo: Dar
al-Turath, 1979), pp. 401-419.

208 Hazm discusses solitary reports at great length in al-
Ihkdm, 1:119-130.

75

Ghazali, however, takes a middle position between these two
groups, stating that solitary reports are valid in establishing the
Shari‘a rules and that man is required to act upon them, provided
they are authentic and meet the required conditions for both the
reporters and the reports. He bases his opinion on the consensus of
the Companions to accept and act upon solitary reports, and also on
the numerous mutaw4tir reports citing the practice of the Prophet
in accepting solitary reports.

For instance, on the question of the Magians, says Ghazili,
‘Umar once said, “I do not know what to do regarding them, and I
beseech anyone who heard something regarding them to report it
to us.” Then ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Awf said, “I bear witness that I
heard the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him,
say ‘Treat the Magians as you treat the People of the Book.’ ” ‘Umar
then collected jizya from them and recognized the status of their
religion.

Also, he cites an example involving ‘Uthman, when he
decided on the case concerning the housing of a widow based on
the report of Fara‘a b. Malik, after he sent a message to her and
asked her about this.

He notes as well the famous instance of the people of Quba’?!
changing their gibla in mid-prayer based on a solitary report. One
person came to them from the Prophet and informed them that the

2! According to Shihab al-Din YAqat al-Hamawi, Kitab Mu‘jam
al-Bulddn, 5 vols. (Beirut: Dar al-Sadir and Dar Beirut, 1957), 4:301-

303, Quba was originally the name of a well near Medina, which
later became the name of a nearby village.

76

qibla had been changed from Jerusalem. So on the basis of his
report they turned toward the Ka‘ba. _

However, Ghazili’s opponents dismissed his illustrations and
challenged his claim that the Prophet honored solitary reports and
that the Companions by consensus accepted them. They support
their repudiation by noting the Prophet’s reluctance to accept the
report of Dhi al-Yadayn, who, after performing noon prayer behind
the Prophet, informed him that he had prayed two instead of four
rak‘as. Rather, the Prophet sought confirmation from Aba Bakr,
‘Umar, and other participants. As for claiming consensus among
the Companions, they give example of many who rejected solitary
reports, such as ‘Umar, for instance, who insisted that Aba Masa al-
Ash‘ari retrieve a supporting source for the hadith the latter
quoted to ‘Umar—“Any among you who seeks permission three
times and hears no answer should leave”—in defense of his leaving
the Caliph’s door after receiving no response to his three requests
to enter. Also, ‘A’isha repudiated ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar’s narration of
the tradition that a dead person is punished for the wailing of
family members after his death.22

Ghazali responds that objections based on these examples are
isolated cases which do not void the principle of relying on solitary
reports, such as has come down to us through many reports as the
practice of both the Messenger and his Companions. He suggests
that a mujtahid who rejects one or another abrogated verse is no

more disregarding the Qur’an as a Shari‘a source than the isolated

22Ghazili, al-Mustasfa, 1:153.

77

instances above nullify the principle of accepting solitary reports.
Rather, the mujtahid is merely not accepting one verse which is
abrogated. Ghazali discusses at length the example of Dhi al-
Yadayn’s report, arguing that the Prophet’s rejection of it was likely
instructive in order to set the precedent that reports originating
before a large number of people should be related by more than .
one person.7? Again, ‘Umar’s hesitation to accept Aba Masa al-
Ash‘ari’s report had an illustrative motive as well. He was
particularly cautious so as to discourage people from abusing the
attribution of reports to the Prophet. In any case, ‘Umar did not
require tawdtur and was satisfied with a second Companion
verifying the report.24 Finally, ‘A’isha’s objection to ‘Abd Allah b.
‘Umar’s hadith concerning wailing over the dead was not a rejection

of a solitary report; rather, in her view it contradicted Qur’an,

which is mutawd@tir .

REQUIREMENTS FOR TRANSMITTERS
Essentially, Ghazali requires the transmitters of hadith to be
mature, trustworthy Muslims. He, of course, elaborates on these

attributes of eligible reporters at some length in al-Mustasfa.?>

23Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:153.
4Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:154.

2580 the sake of comparison, it may be useful to see the
muhaddiths’ qualifications for a transmitter. See Muhammad Abt
Shahbah, al-Wasit ff ‘Ulim wa Mustalah al-Hadith.

78

Perhaps the foremost requirement that Ghazali stipulates for
those transmitting the Shari‘a reports obliging Muslims to act or
refrain from acting is that the reporter him or herself must be
Muslim. A non-Muslim is suspect, according to Ghazili, and cannot
be trusted to transmit Shari‘a reports, for he may interject some of
his false beliefs or fabricate reports and attribute them to the
Prophet so as to lead Muslims astray. He goes on to say that even a
fasiq’s (unrighteous person’s) testimony and report is not accepted
in general. They are rejected, for their acceptance is a way of
honoring him, where his statements become in a sense binding
upon Muslims. This being the case, unbelief is graver and severer
than fisq (unrighteousness). Thus, it is not befitting in the
“administration of affairs,” according to Ghazali, to recognize as a
binding expression in religion the report of a person who does not
believe in that faith’s honor.?®

A reporter’s being Muslim is not in itself sufficient; rather a
transmitter of hadith, which ultimately renders responsible the loci
of obligation, must also have reached the’ age of taklif, i.e., puberty,
for trust cannot accrue through the statements of minors. Ghazili
Says in support of this that a child has an inadequate fear of God
which may not prevent him from lying. However, he says, it is
legitimate for a minor who has heard reports and traditions in the
age of discernment to relate them after reaching maturity. Ghazali
points out that this was the practice among the Companions, for

they accepted the reports of several others—like ‘Abd Allah b.

6Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:156-7.

79

‘Abbas, ‘Abd Allah b. Zubayr, and Nu‘man b. Bashir—who were
quite young during the lifetime of the Prophet. They did not
distinguish between hearing hadith before or after puberty. Thus
only conveyance is stipulated by legal age for the transmission of
hadith.

However, Ghazali contends that the testimony or report of .
minors against one another may be considered equal to
circumstantial evidence, provided it takes place immediately after
the disputed event and before they disperse so that none might
influence their statements.27

A narrator of hadith must also be known for his integrity and
high standard of character. Hence, if a reporter is unacknowledged
or unknown, his Shari‘a reports cannot be accepted. Ghazali takes
issue with the Hanafites who consider it sufficient with reference to
trustworthiness (‘addla) to declare one’s Islam and not be
associated with unrighteousness. He notes the bases of their
position that, first, such was the practice of the Messenger, who
accepted the report of a bedouin he did not know concerning the
sighting of Ramaddn’s crescent. Second, the Companions accepted
the statements of bedouins and women whom they did not require
to be well-known nor recognized as trustworthy. Third, such is the
common practice of Muslims in general in every generation,
accepting even the testimony of a non-Muslim immediately after

conversion to Islam without investigating the individual’s

trustworthiness. In addition, one accepts the reports of merchants

27Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:156.

80

or butchers when they report on the lawfulness of meat and other
commodities, so long as they are not known to be unrightcous.

Ghazali rejects these arguments explaining that the issue is
the transmission of the Prophet’s hadith in order that the loci of
obligation will abide by them. Accordingly, it is essential to know
the trustworthiness of the reporter. He adds that if one inquires
into the practice of the Messenger himself, it is found that he
selected as envoys and ambassadors to convey his message those
who were known for their trustworthiness and integrity.
He further asserts that the Hanafites’ claim that the Prophet
accepted the report of an unacknowledged bedouin is wrong, for he
may have known of his trustworthiness through revelation or
perhaps the Companions who knew the bedouin endorsed his
integrity. Nor did the Companions accept the reports of everyone,
says Ghazali. They accepted only the reports of women known to
them, such as the Prophet’s wives; or they accepted the reports of
the members of known tribes. Otherwise, they rejected
unacknowledged reporters. He supports his position with the case
of ‘Umar, who rejected the report of Fatima b. Qays, and the action
of ‘Ali in rejecting the report of al-Ashja‘7.28

Regarding the status of a convert, Ghazali maintains that his
Shari'a report or testimony before the court must not be honored

before a sufficient period passes, whereupon his trustworthiness is

*8Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:154.

81

established and people come to feel secure that he his indeed a

truthful person.””

Besides these qualifications, Ghaz4li insists that a reporter
necessarily have the capacity to comprehend and retain what he
hears from the Prophet or other transmitters so that he is able to
convey it precisely. The credibility of a reporter, he contends, is .
voided if he is known to be of weak mind, heedless, forgetful, or
earns notoriety as an unsound transmitter. Simply put, a
transmitter must be able to comprehend, retain, and convey
reports accurately.°°

Finally, upon fulfillment of these conditions, Ghazali accepts
and holds as acceptable the transmission of Shari‘a reports through
a single reporter, as long as the reporter is an adult Muslim who is
known to be trustworthy in reporting, precise in recording, and
accurate in retaining. He opposes those of the Mu‘tazilites, like al-
Jubba’i, who disregard Shari‘a reports transmitted through one
channel and require for valid laying of obligation that a hadith be
reported from the Prophet by at least two Companions who each
relate it to two Successors who in turn relate it to two of their
successors and so on.

Aside from al-Jubba’i, others require four witnesses to have
heard the Prophet for the transmission of reports. The basis for

this is the normal Shari'a prescription of two male witnesses for

2°Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:159.

Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:156.

82

testimony, or one male and two females, but four witnesses in the
case of fornication. Ghazali, however, replies that originally a
report of one transmitter is sufficient, regardless of the Shari‘a
report; one qualified transmitter is enough to oblige the believers.
Yet the Shari‘a has simply stated all the exceptions to this general

rule. Thus, drawing analogy from the exceptions is not

permissible.>!

TERMINOLOGY OF TRANSMISSION

Ghazali’s view of Sunna as a valid Shari‘a source obliging the
loci of obligation ‘to do’ or ‘not to do’ led him, like the muhaddithiin
before him, to survey the phraseology by which the Companions
narrated the reports they heard directly or indirectly from the
Messenger. What follows is a concise account of this terminology of
the Companions in the order of reliability in which Ghazali
introduced them.

The best and the strongest of these terms is when a
Companion says, “Haddathani .. . »’ “The [Messenger of Allah]
‘related’ to me”; or “Akhbarani ...,” The (Messenger of Allah]
‘informed’ me”; or “Sami‘tu .. . ,” “I ‘heard’ the (Messenger of Allah
saying]” such and such.32

Next is when the Companion says, “Qdla... ,” “The [Messenger
of Allah] ‘stated’ ’; or “Akibara .. . ,' “The [Messenger of Allah]

‘informed’ ”; or “Haddatha ... ,” “The (Messenger of Allah) ‘related.’
31Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:155.

32Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:129,

83

” This implies, in Ghazali’s view, that the Companion evidently
heard it from the Prophet. However, he does not rule out the
possibility that the Companion heard it from a peer.>>

Third, the expressions, “Amara Rasiil Allah,” “The Messenger
of Allah ‘commanded,’ ” such and such, and “Nahd Rasiil Allah,”
“The Messenger of Allah has ‘forbidden,’ such and such,” are liable
to various interpretations, according to Ghazali: (a) The Companion
may not have personally heard it; (b) he may suppose as a
command or prohibition what is not; (c) the imperative mood may
suggest the entire community, a special segment, or a particular
person. Yet Ghazali does not consider these possibilities as
pertinent justification for rejecting this transmission, unless there
are other bits of circumstantial evidence that prove one possibility
correct. But being rationally possible alone is insufficient to reject
a report of this kind.

The fourth level is when a Companion says, “Umirnd bi... ,”

“We have been ‘ordered’ to do” such and such, or “Nuhind ‘an ... ,”
“We have been ‘prohibited’ from” such and such.4 In addition to
the preceding possible interpretations, here the source of command
may be other than the Prophet himself, perhaps one of the Caliphs
or governors. Ghazali argues, however, that when a Companion

says that something is lawful or unlawful, it is expected that he

3Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:129.

4Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:131.

84

realizes that he is relating or establishing a Shari‘a source—and they
were known to be cautious in this regard.

Finally, when a Companion says, “We used to do such and
such a thing in the time of the Messenger,” it implies that this

practice of the Companions was, in fact, approved by the Prophet.

REPORTS FROM THE UNTRUSTWORTHY

Political dispute in the early Islamic period resulted in the
emergence of sectarian parties, like the Kharajites and the Shi‘ites.
Even within the primary body of Muslims there were trends in
practice and in thought, like those of the Mu'tazilites and the
Ash‘arites, the Sifis and the philosophers, and others. Among
these were individuals who participated in the fabrication and
transmission of false hadith. The muhaddiths, and after them the
usilis, had the arduous task of setting criteria for hadith criticism,
and ultimately for acceptance and rejection—particularly with
regard to individuals affiliated with one or another faction. Thus
emerged specialized terms like fasiq (unrighteous individual), sahib
al-bid‘ad (adherent to heretical innovation), ah! al-bid‘é (the
heretics) as descriptions of those known for party affiliation.

Reaction to such reporters varied with the usilis. According
to Ghazali, the dispute is reduced to personal view regarding the
effect of attributing, say, fisq or bid‘'d to a transmitter’s report or
testimony. Some, like al-Qadi al-Baqillani, hold that fisq voids a
person’s transmitting capacity (ahliyya) altogether, rendering him

ineligible to report or testify on religious matters. Consequently, he
85

rejected entirely their reports and testimonies.2> The Hanafites
hold that fisg is only an indication that a transmitter is suspected
of collusion. But if there is circumstantial evidence establishing his
truthfulness, his reports may be accepted.2° Indeed, Ghazali, like
al-Shafi‘i, is also of this opinion—which explains the latter’s position
regarding a number of Shi‘ite groups and their testimonies, such as
the Khattabiya. For he claims circumstantial evidence to conclude

that they used to lie in support of their party members.>’

CONDITIONS FOR A TRANSMITTED TEXT

Ghazali lays six conditions upon the texts of hadiths
themselves with regard to their transmission:

First, the tradition, “May Allah make prosperous he who
heard my speech, retained it, and then delivered it as he has heard
it...” 38 implies this instruction to transmitters, especially of
solitary reports: Convey the Prophet’s statements in their entirety
so that essential parts that effect the meaning and execution of the

instruction of the hadith are not omitted and so neglected.?? For

example, the hadith said to have been related by ‘Ubidah b. al-
33Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:160.
36Ghazili, al-Mustasfa, 1:160.
37Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:160.

38Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:169.

39Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:168.

56

Samit, who “. . . heard the Messenger of Allah forbidding the sale of
gold for gold, silver for silver . . . ,” cannot be related but in its
entirety, which includes, “. . . except with an equal part for an equal
part and from hand to hand,” meaning that things should be
exchanged measure for measure and at the same time.

Second, a transmission of a solitary report must not come in
contradiction of stronger reports; that is, sounder transmitted texts,
like the Qur’an or the mutawatir hadith. Ghazalt again notes the
case of ‘A’isha upon her hearing ‘Abd Allah b.‘Umar’s report
regarding the forbidding of wailing for the dead. He relies on her
teply in addressing those who heard his report as, “By Allah! you
transmit to me from an irreproachable source. Yet hearing may be
mistaken. Qur’an is sufficient for you.’40

_ The transmission of a hadith’'s meaning is forbidden for a
person who is ignorant of its style, implications, and interpretation.
Ghazali, commenting on transmission via paraphrase, cites a
dispute concerning a scholar who has high comprehension of Arabic
and understands its meanings, agreeing with his imam, al-Shafi‘i,
and numerous fagihs that this is permissible. He supports this with
both the Messenger’s practice of sending ambassadors to convey
his messages and the entire community’s customary practice of
preaching Islam to non-Arabs by way of translation, which can be

done only by meaning. Thus, says Ghazali, it should be permissible

40She refers to the verse of the Qur’an, 53:38. For a detailed
discussion of the report, see Salah al-Din Idlibi, Manhaj Naqd al-
Matn ‘ind ‘Ulamd’ al-Hadith (Beirut: Dar al-Afaq al-Jadida, 1983),
pp. 113-116.

87

to transmit the language and the meaning of a hadith by those
eligible and able.

Fourth, Ghazali requires that the transmission of hadith be
connected from the Prophet through each generation’s transmitters,
adhering to al-Shafi‘i’s insistence on the continuity of isndd, to the
degree that the latter refused to rely on mursal (disconnected)
reports. Ghazali, however, makes an exception regarding hadiths
that have been reported by either a Companion or a senior
Successor, without explicitly stating that the Companion heard it
directly from the Messenger or that the Successor mention by
name the Companion who heard it from the Messenger. So long as
there are indications by way of their statements or their
acknowledged practice that they, respectively, have heard it from
the Messenger or a Companion who heard it from the Messenger,
this kind of report is reliable.4!

Fifth, Ghazali stipulates that for a canonical report to be
reliable it must not be contradicted by the practice of the reporter.
He illustrates this by a case where ‘A’isha had reported the hadith,
“Any girl who marries without permission of her guardian, her

marriage is invalid.”4? But she approved the marriage of her niece,

4! Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:171.

42The Hanafites do not require a woman to seek the
permission of her guardian for marriage. For more details, see
Jamal al-Din Abi Muhammd ‘Abd Allah b. Yasuf al-Hanafi Zayla‘i,
Nasb al-Rdyyah li Ahadith al-Hiddya, 4 vols. 2d ed. (n.p.: Maktabat
al-Islamiyya, 1973), 3:188; Ibn al-Humim, Sharh Fath al-Qadir
(Beirut: Dar Sadir, n.d.), 2:394; and Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami, 7:191-
192,

58

Hafsa bint ‏مقسوؤزدظ-أد-لطة'‎ to al-Mundhir b. al-Zubayr in her
brother’s absence. Upon his return her brother ‘Abd al-Rahman
became angry but later reconciled and approved of ‘A’isha’s

action.*>

Sixth, a solitary report may not transmit something that by
its nature would compel many to promulgate it, such as the
assassination of a governor in the market place before a great
number of people; or a noticeable earthquake; or a strange
happening preventing a community from praying the Friday
prayer. He bases his opinion on the general, ordinary practice of
people to transmit similar reports.

Furthermore, he does not allow for single transmitters to
relate reports concerning general necessities facing the community,
except on the condition that a transmitter reports something which
is customarily possible to believe. He takes issue with the Hanafite

scholars, such as al-Karkhi, who approve of solitary reports in this

context.44

43 interestingly, Ghazali in his fighi treatment contradicted
this position and stated that a woman cannot marry without the
permission of her guardian, in contradistinction to Aba Hanifa. See
the abridgement of Ghazli’s al-Wasit by Al-Qadi Baydawi, 2:728,
al-Ghayya al-Quswa. This abridgement, however, has some
modifications.

44Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:171.

89

TRANSMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR WRITTEN MATERIALS

Before writing was popularized by the availability of paper,
verbal reporting was the principal means of transmitting traditions.
But by Ghazili’s time, writing became equally, if not more,
fundamental in transmitting reports and hadith collections.
Consequently, new discussion arose with reference to the validity,
of transmission in the new forms spawned by writing. Ghazali lists
these forms in a hierarchy of five categories according to their
soundness.

The strongest form is when a muhaddith reads to the
transmitter with the intention that he shall transmit the hadith
from him. This empowers the transmitter to say, “Haddathani,” “He
related to me”; “Akhbarani,” “He informed me”; “Sami‘tu fuldnan
yaqul ...,” “I heard so and so say. . vAS

Second, the transmitter reads before his Shaykh (source
muhaddith) while the shaykh remains silent in approval.4® He may
State, says Ghazali, only, “Haddathani fulanun qiré’atan ‘alayhi,” “So
and so has related to me by way of reading before him.” Under no
circumstances is this transmitter allowed to say “Haddathani,” “He
has told me,” without qualifying it by explaining the way he has
taken the report, namely by reading before him.

The third form is the muhaddith's recognition of his student’s

trustworthiness in conveying hadith, saying, “Ajaztu laka riwdyat

45Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:165.

46Ghazali disagrees with some of the Zahirites who reject this
form of transmission. Al-Mustasfé, 1:165.

90

ma sami‘tuhu min al-akhbér,” “I have permitted you to transmit
what I have heard from [the corpus of] hadith.” In this case, the

transmitter is forbidden from saying “Akhbarani,” “He has ‘told’

me.” Rather, he must say that he has told me by way of permission
(ijdza).

Fourth, Ghazali repudiates the muhaddiths’ method of
mundwala transmission; that is, the handing over of a manuscript
of hadith by the shaykh to the reporter in order to transmit the
materials therein. He holds that handing over a manuscript of
hadith is a formality with no obvious benefit or consequence.

Fifth, Ghazali disallows the transmission of hadith from a
written copy attributed to a muhaddith through recognition of his
handwriting. For the concept of transmission, according to him, is
relaying what a reporter has heard.

Finally, Ghazali contends that in the event that a Shaykh
conveys a tradition to a trustworthy transmitter, but later forgets
that he has done so, it is permissible to act on its basis, provided
that the shaykh does not openly deny the hadith. If, however,

denial occurs, one should suspend judgement on accepting it.47

TESTIMONY VERSUS TRANSMISSION

There is a strong similarity between the kind of testimony
that a court rules upon and the transmission of a hadith which lays
obligation upon believers. Thus, many usiilis ground the

requirements of transmission in the discussion of testimony

“7Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:167.

91

(shahada). Their mutual stipulations for their respective relators
are belief, maturity, trustworthiness, and accuracy, whether of a
report or an event.

However, the conditions binding upon witnesses and not
reporters include freedom, masculinity, and sight. Also, a specific
number of witnesses may be required and the question of
animosity or incrimination has relevance. For example, the
transmission of a hadith is valid from (a) a father on the authority
of his son, or a son on the authority of his father, (b) a blind person
who has adequate hearing and comprehension, and (c) a
trustworthy woman. But their testimony may well be rejected by a
judge.48

There is general agreement that when something confirms
the invalidation of the credibility or the trustworthiness of a
reporter or witness, their reports or testimonies are rejected.
Dispute, however, occurs with reference to the form of impugnment
and whether deeming one no longer credible is sufficient for
rejection or whether details of the cause must be cited.

Abi Bakr al-Baqillani holds that stating the cause for
discrediting is not necessary. For the specialists, who know the
status of the transmitters, do not need this, and non-specialists will
not benefit from it. Others require the specification of the cause for

jarh (impugnment) only, not ta‘dil (attestation).

48Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:155.

92

Ghazali reduces the issue to the status of the endorser
(muzakki) himself. If he is one of the imams commonly recognized
as authorities in this field, he need not detail the cause. But if he is
an ordinary, trustworthy person whose expertise is not known, he
must specify the reason for jarh, for he may mistake a non-
discrediting quality as a discrediting one. If opinions on an
individual’s credibility differ, then Ghazali gives preference to jarh,
regardless of the number who endorse the person.

The strongest form of attestation about a transmitter or an
eyewitness, according to Ghazali, is the open statement of a
specialist in the field that he is thiqa (trustworthy), ‘adil (credible),
or rid@ (satisfactory).

Next comes the narration of a hadith by a known specialist
on the authority of the transmitter under consideration, on the
condition that the specialist knows from the person’s circumstances
that he has not reported the hadith, save from trustworthy sources..

Finally, when a judge rules based on the testimony of an
eyewitness, or a muhaddith known in the field of al-jarh wa ta‘dil
acts based on a report of a transmitter, this is considered
endorsement (tazkiyya) for the eyewitness and the reporter,
respectively; however, it is not as strong as the openly stated

endorsement.
CHAPTER IV

IJMA‘ (CONSENSUS)
THE THIRD SHARI‘A SOURCE

With the death of the Prophet, revelation ceased. But for the
forming ummah it was ever necessary to confront issues not
explicitly ruled on by the Qur’an or the Sunna. The principle of
ijma‘ in its broadest sense (and in a different way, ijtihda)! gave
Muslims a new source from which to formulate the many details
arising in the spheres of law, politics, and theology, and in
problems of peace and war. Yet it is ironic that ijmd‘ itself and its
application never received consensus.

Indeed, Ghazali’s legal doctrine in al-Mustasfa—despite its
essential similarity to al-Shafi‘i’s positions in the Risdla—gives vivid
account of the juridical debate that ijmd‘ sparked in the three
centuries between them. Its demonstration and refutation,
definition and constituents, enactors and occurrence, validity and
rank all became points of contention for the ‘ulamd’. This chapter
discusses the concept of ijmd‘ in the context of this dispute as

Ghazali introduces it in al-Mustasfa.

lRaziur Rahman in his treatment of the structure of Islamic

law gives an insightful perspective on the principle of ijmd‘. Islam,
pp. 72-79.

93

94

LJMA' IN LANGUAGE

Ijma‘ is an ambiguous term that is used as a synonym for (a)

‘izma@‘,’ resolution and determination to execute, and (b) ‘ittifaq,’
agreement. When a group of people agree on something it is said,
“Ajma‘it” ; “They have consensus.” Thus Ghazali contends that based

on its linguistic signification it is acceptable to apply the term ‘

ijma‘ * to the consensus of non-Muslims or that of Muslims in

nonreligious affairs.

The general linguistic nuance agreement is also present in the
technical definition of ijmdé‘, where it is a particular ‘agreement’ of
the community of Muhammad on a matter of religion. But
specifically who must reach agreement in order to effect ijma* is
not as easy a matter to define. Even Ghazili’s definition of ijmd‘ in
al-Mankhil, where as a young scholar he summarized al-Burhdn of
his teacher, al-Juwayni, differs from his definition in al-Mustasfa,
written at the pinnacle of intellectual maturity. The latter
definition reflects his comprehensiveness, for he requires ijmd‘ to
rise from the consensus of the entire ummah, while the former
asks for only the agreement of ahl-al-halli wa al-‘aqd (the people
of influence).? Moreover, while he grants that those enacting ijmd‘
must meet specific requirements, he holds that the entire nmmah

is charged with the obligation to adhere not only to the Shari'a

*Ghazili, al-Mustasfa, 1:173.

3Literally “the people of loosening and binding.”

95

texts but to the decisive proofs resulting from ijmd‘ as well, and
thus are liable to punishment if they deviate from them.4
Evidently, he infers this from his position that ijma‘ is the umnmah’s
collective responsibility.

Yet the mere occurrence of ijma‘ does not in itself lend it
legitimacy as a valid Shari‘a source. Ghazali himself grants that
ijma* cannot be considered a valid proof on its own authority. For
this reason he seeks to establish the authority of ijmd‘ with both
Shari‘a texts and rational proofs.

Although he cites verses of the Qur’dn in support of ijmd‘, he
concedes that no text from the Book explicitly indicates its validity.
There is apparent but not conclusive evidence. Rather, decisive
proof, he contends, comes from select hadiths—none of which,
however, has been transmitted through tawdétur—which
characterize the ummah as ‘error free’ when in unanimous
agreement. Nevertheless, together he holds these hadiths to yield
sure knowledge, even as he claims that bits of circumstantial
evidence along with non-mutawdtir reports may impart certain
knowledge.

Ghazali’s reliance on the Quran and the Sunna, and the
objections to his conclusions that he cites which also purport to be
based on them, gives a feel for the legal tension surrounding this
‘source in his time, a tension that even 01323115 consummate skill

could not ease. Yet dispute about ijmd‘ continued to arise in

4Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:153.

96

subsequent writings on ‏”لضعم‎ In any case, his summary of this
dialogue in al-Mustasfé—particularly the use, interpretation, and
reinterpretation of these special texts from the Qur’an and the
Sunna—maps out succinctly the boundaries of the major legal views

of the validity of ijmd‘.

THE VALIDITY OF LMA‘

The following verses of the Qur’an are those that Ghazali lists

as having been cited by scholars seeking to establish valid proof for

ima‘:

* Thus We have appointed you a middle community that you
might be witnesses upon the people and that the

Messenger might be witness upon you.®

* You are the best community ever brought forth for people,
bidding good and forbidding evil and you believe in Allah.’

٠ Of those We created are a community who guide by the
truth and by it act with justice.®

٠ And hold fast to Allah's bond, together, and do not scatter.”

See Muhammad b. ‘Ali Shawkani’s skepticism about ijmd‘ in
his book Irshdd al-Fuhil ild Tahqiq al-Haqq min ‘Iim al-Usiil (Cairo:
Mustafa Halabi Press, 1356 H.), pp. 78-79.

6Qur’ an, 2:143.
7 0 .
Qur’an, 3:110.
8 0 .
Qur’an, 7:181.

°Qur’an, 3:103.

٠ And in whatsoever you differ, its judgment belongs to
Allah.'°

٠ If you dispute in anything, refer it to Allah and the
Messenger. 11

٠ And whosoever opposes the Messenger after guidance has
become clear to him and takes a path other than the path
of the believers, We shall turn him over to what he has
turned to and We shall roast him in Gehenna—an evil

homecoming! 12.13

100ur’ an, 42:10.

11 ‏م‎ .
Qur’an, 4:59.

120ur’ an, 4:115.

13 aba Bakr al-Jassas (d. 370 H.) a Hanafite jurist adds the
following verses in justifying ijma‘: 1. “Did you suppose you
should be left in peace, and God knows not as yet those of you who
have struggled, and taken not — apart from God and His Messenger
and the believers — any intimate? God is aware of what you do”
(Qur’an, 9:16). 2. “And follow the way of he who turns to Me”
(Qur’an,31:15). According to al-Jassas, the first verse gives the

friendship of the Prophet and that of the believers an equal degree.

Thus he infers that opposing the believers is as serious as opposing
the Prophet, and departure from their way is equivalent to the
rejection of truth. In the second verse, the Qur’an asks, in the view
of al-Jassas, to follow a single person from the Muslim community
who is devoted to God. But one cannot definitely know such a
person. Thus he must be part of the entire Muslim community.
Therefore, the agreement of the community includes the opinion of
such a person ordered by God to be followed. The consensus of the
believers is therefore a decision from God.

The weakness of al-Jassis’ argument is perhaps the reason
why al-Ghazali did not cite this verse in his argument for the
authority of ijmd‘. For further information on al-Jassis’ position
see Ahmad Hassan, The Doctrine of Ijmd‘ in Islam: A Study of the

This last passage is, in his opinion, the most indicative of ijma‘
of all the verses, for it obliges adherence to the collective path of
the believers’. Still it does not expressly justify the validity of
ijma‘. Since the Prophet did not specifically explain other than
what the verse indicates, one must accept it as is, and it reveals
only that God threatens a person who opposes the Prophet rather
than aiding, obeying, and defending him. But in order not to
oppose the Prophet, one must adhere to “the believers’ way”;
namely supporting, protecting, and submitting to the Prophet by
fulfilling his commands and abstaining from what he has
prohibited. !4

More so than he does on the Qur’dn’s verses, Ghazali erects
the authority of ijma‘ on the foundation of Sunna, the cornerstone
of which is the Prophet’s declaration that “my community will not
agree On error, nor will it stray.” This text is stronger and more
explicit in indicating the authority and validity of ijmd‘ than the
‘adherence to the path of believers’ verse. But he realizes that this
hadith, along with its like traditions, is not transmitted by way of
tawatur, as is the Qur’an.

He argues that numerous traditions to this effect have been
reported from the Prophet with different wordings; but all agree on

the immunity of the community from error. Moreover, they are

Juridical Principle of Consensus (Islamabad: Islamic Research
Institute, 1978), p.41.

M4Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:175

09

reported on the authority of the ‘notable and most reliable
Companions,” such as ‘Umar, b. Mas‘id, Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri, Anas b.
Malik, b. ‘Umar, Abi al-Husayn, Hudhayfa b. al-Yam4n, and others.
In addition, these reports are accepted by both those who
acknowledge the validity of ijmda‘ and those who oppose it.'5

The following are the statements attributed to the Prophet: |
٠ My community shall not agree on a mistake. !®

٠ My community will not be unanimous on error.

Allah will not let my community come together on an error.

I have asked Allah, the Exalted, that He not bring together

the whole of my community on an error. And He granted
it.

Whosoever is pleased by making the wide space of Paradise
his abode, he must keep to the community. For their

supplication shields them from others.!?

Satan accompanies the loner. He is remoter from two.

Allah’s hand is with the community, and Allah gives no
attention to the divergence from one who splits [from the
community].

ISGhazaili, al-Mustasfda, 1:176

16The hadith is found in Sunnan b. Majah, 2:1303, no. 3950;
the Mustadrak of al-Hakim al-Naysabari, 1:115-116;.and b. Hajar
al-Haytami’s Majma‘ al-Zawdid, 5:217-219.

' This translation is based on ‘Izz al-Din Ibn Athir, al-Nahdya
fi Gharib al-Hadith wa al-Athar, 5 vols. ed. M. Tanahi (Riyad:
Maktaba Islami, n.d.), 1:461 and 2:122.

100

٠ One group shall always remain predominating over truth,
unharmed by whosoever disagrees with them.

٠ The disagreement of whosoever differs with them shall not
harm them, except for the hardship that confronts them.

Whosoever secedes from the community or separates even.

the span of a hand, he has doffed the noose of Islam from
his neck.

Whosoever separates from the community and dies, his
death is in ignorance.

But the Zahirite b. Hazm (d. 456/1064) presented a challenge
to Ghazali. He claimed that both the generations of the Companions
and the Successors passed without record of them quoting these
hadiths specifically as evidence for the validity of ijma‘, which
actually took place, in b. Hazm’s view, later in the second century
with the emergence of legal personal opinion (ra’y).18

Others besides b. Hazm have raised the issue of these hadiths
not being mutawdatir, concluding that they impart only conjecture
and not certain knowledge. Therefore, a decisive principle, such as
ijma‘, cannot be established based on conjecture.

Ghazali, apparently applying Aristotelian logic, refutes this in
two ways:

First, he argues that the sum of the Prophet’s statements
exalting the position of the Muslim wmmah and informing of its
infallibility indeed impart necessary knowledge. Although

individually the reports do not meet the requirements of tawdtur,

‎Hazm, al-Ihkam, 4:185.‏ و15ة!

101

he likens them to one’s necessary knowledge of ‘Ali’s bravery,
Hatim’s generosity, al-Shafi‘i’s brilliance, and the eloquence of al-
Hajjaj. We necessarily know them even though the individual
reports about these matters are not mutawdtir. For one may object
to an individual report, but not to the total body of reports to this
effect. The same principle applies to the reports on ijma‘. In
composite they constitute tawdtur and therefore yield certain
knowledge.

Secondly, even if one disclaims necessary knowledge based
on these hadiths, it can be inferred in two ways: (a) It is known
that these reports were widespread among the Companions and
their successors, who relied on them to justify ijma@‘ as a Shari‘a
source, until the time of al-Nazzam, whom Ghazali chastises as
“meager of stature and dignity”;!? (b) it is impossible in the normal
course of affairs for a living community generation after generation
to concede something that is vaseless in the face of great motive to
reject it given the diversity of human dispositions and their
disparate ambitions and points of view with respect to accepting
something or rejecting it. Moreover, in view of the fact that those
Citing these reports did so to establish the validity of a decisive
source—-one which has interpretive, indeed, abrogative authority
over the Book of Allah and the mutawdtir Sunna—it is by the
nature of the case impossible for them to accept this without

relying on sure reports. This in itself proves that the reports in

'9Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:177.

102

toto (1) impart certain knowledge and (2) have a common

denominator that is mutawdtir—the community’s infallibility.

Opposition to the Validity of lima‘

Those who did not acknowledge the indications of these
verses and prophetic traditions as legitimizing ijmd‘ had three
approaches in rejecting them: Repudiating Ghazili’s arguments;

interpreting the texts differently; and countering with other verses

and traditions.

Ghazali quotes the repudiators as raising four objections:

First, they contend, it is likely that someone may have
transmitted contrary traditions which have not reached us.

Second, they charge Ghazali with circular reasoning in his
support of ijma‘, claiming that essentially he bases his proof for
ijma* on specific hadiths and then seeks to prove the authenticity of
those hadiths by ‏.“بز‎ They grant that the soundness of these
reports have been agreed upon. But they do not concede that this
agreement is necessarily correct, and hold this to be the real point
of contention.

Third, they question Ghazali’s assumption that these hadiths
are certainly the bases upon which those who established ijmda‘
relied. The proof for the validity of ijmd' may have been
established by reports that did not reach us. One is obligated only
by that which has been transmitted through tawdtur and not by

speculative transmission.
103

Fourth, they challenge Ghazali to explain why the Companions
never saw fit to tell the Successors explicitly how the rectitude of
these hadiths is established, leaving the hadiths in doubt. Since
such explicit transmission is not the case, the validity of ijma@‘ based
on these hadiths cannot be forced.

022811 presents the common practice of the early
generations with the force of discursive reasoning to answer these
objections. In refuting the repudiators’ first argument, namely the
possibility of the existence of contrary untransmitted reports, he
claims ‘dda, i.e., the very nature of the case makes it impossible for
such hadiths to be ‘lost’ For any opposition or deviation from these
texts would necessarily have been well known. Since such
opposition has not been mentioned, it therefore did not exist. For if
the relatively obscure report of dispute between the Companions
regarding compensation for harming a fetus did not suffer neglect,
it is rationally impossible that their dispute concerning a Shari‘a
source would.2?

In response to their second objection, he clarifies that citing
reports in support of ijmd‘ is different than applying ijmd‘ in
support of reports. For ijmd‘ is used only to endorse the rectitude
of reports. Moreover, he adds, it is impossible, again in the normal
course of events, for succeeding generations to keep silent about an
unsound report. Its acceptance is, then, evidence of the reports’

rectitude. And if it is sound, it is a proof for, in this case, the

validity of ijmd‘.

0Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:176.

104

Ghazali dismisses their third contention as pure conjecture,
Saying that what in fact has been recorded is that the Companions
relied on the reports he mentions to discourage disintegration of
the community.

Ghazali replies to their final objection—that the Companions
never explicitly informed the Successors of these reports’
rectitude— purporting that the Companions’ awareness of the
infallibility of the ummah is not exclusively based on reports, but
on a “totality of circumstantial evidences, other [Shari‘a] indications

و5

and the reiteration of words and reasons” not explicitly expressed

21

in the hadiths. These evidences were sufficient for the

Successors, who clearly understood that an uncertain report cannot
be the basis for establishing a primary principle. Moreover, the
Successors in particular, as well as those after them, naturally

relied upon reports together with circumstantial evidence.22

After answering the repudiators, Ghazali summarizes the
basic positions of the second group, who interpret the hadiths
differently than he does and so reject their proof. They offer three
alternative understandings of the hadith, “My community shall not
agree on error,” focusing essentially on the words ‘ daidl, ' (error)

and ‘ummah’ (community).

First, they say, error in this context means that the

*\Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:177.

2Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:176-177.

105

community is immune from infidelity and innovation based on
contrived interpretation or doubt. As for other reports where the
term mistake )' khata’ *) replaces error, it is not a mutawdtir
transmission. And if it were correct, it too then signifies disbelief.

Second, they contend that while the hadith may in fact mean
infallibility from error, this does not necessarily imply every error.
Rather, it may mean immunity from error concerning, say, the
ummah’s witnessing upon the other communities in the Hereafter.
Or it may mean not conspiring to oppose mutawatir texts or
demonstrated rational proofs.

Third, the word community expresses the whole, which
includes all those who believe in the Messenger from the time of
his prophethood until the Day of Judgement. The community in
this sense will not agree on error; however, one or more
generations may do so.

Ghazali responds to these three interpretations in order.

First, error does not linguistically correspond to disbelief. It
means astray. He quotes the Qur’an as saying, “Did He not find you
[O Muhammad] ‘astray’ and guide you?”?3 And Moses said, “/Jndeed
I did it then, being one of those that “stray.” nad

Thus, the hadith can only mean the protection of the entire
ummah from what individual Muslims have not been protected

from, that is committing mistake or negligence. For the whole

23Qur'an, 93:7.

24 Our’an, 26:20.

106

ummah because of its virtuousness takes the place of the
Messenger after his death. Therefore, it must be infallible with
reference to religious affairs. As for the non-religious affairs of the
world, infallibility is not necessarily attributed to it.25

Second, interpreting this hadith to mean the infallibility from
some errors—not all—strips the community of the distinction that
infallibility carries. For avoiding some errors and not all is a
property which Muslims and non-Muslims alike possess. It
suggests no particular excellence for the Muslim community. And
if error is possible with regard to some affairs, it is then logically
possible with all affairs—which is impossible here; for God has
obliged following the path of the community and has denounced
those who oppose it.

Lastly, the use of the word community in this sense does not
intend to include either minors or the insane—let alone the dead
nor the as yet uncreated or unborn. For it is not possible to
anticipate their meetings, contributions, and differences. What is
meant by the hadith is simply the consensus of those who are
living in every generation and able to agree and disagree, whereas
their consensus may be breached or opposed in this world. For
according to their use of community, consensus and disagreement

are conceivable only on the Day of Judgement.

25Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:178.

107

The third group who oppose Ghazili’s proof for the authority
of ijmd‘ counter argue based on verses and hadiths that forbid

apostasy, disbelief, and involvement in falsehood:

٠ “And that you say concerning Allah what you do not
know.” 26

°“Whosoever turns from among you from his religion and
dies disbelieving . . . he will die an infidel.”27

٠ “And consume not your goods from among yourselves in
vanity.” 28

They imply that these verses prove that everyone in the
community is vulnerable to these forbidden acts, adding that there
are many reports regarding the errant behavior of the community
prior to the Last Hour. Therefore, it is possible for the community
to err.

Ghazali, however, points out that nothing in these verses
implies prohibiting the community from agreeing unanimously on
error. Rather, they are aimed at prohibiting individuals from
committing the mentioned violations. Furthermore, prohibiting
error and disbelief does not: necessarily mean error and disbelief
must occur. The verses simply warn against the consequences of
the said violations. He illustrates this with two verses directed to

the Messenger,“/f you were to commit shirk, all your deeds would
26Qur’an, 7:33.
27Qur’4n, 2:217.

28Qur’dn, 2:188.

108

come to naught29; and “Do not be of the ignorant ones . . . 30
arguing that they were revealed after the Messenger was granted
immunity from disbelief—and it is inconceivable to imagine him
committing shirk,

Even in the most dire situations conceivable where some of
these prohibitions may be committed, Ghazali says only a minority
may actually commit them. As for the other reports indicating the
occurrence of numerous violations, they do not claim error on the
part of the entire ummah, for there are hadiths emphasizing the
existence of a group from among the community ever adhering to
the truth.?!

Finally, refutation, interpretation, and counter argument
against these validating Texts were not the only opposition to ijmd‘.
Indeed, al-Nazzam redefined ijmda‘ altogether to void its legal

implications. He reduced it to “every statement whose proof is

evident.”>2

Ghazali rejects this interpretation as contrary to the
norm of language. He states that al-Nazzim adopted this
interpretation as a pretext for his rejection of ijmd‘, for he was
aware of the prohibition against denying ijma*,

Regardless of whether Ghazali’s assumption is correct, al-

Nazzam focused on evidence rather than number, though they were
29Qur’an, 39:65.
30Qur’an, 6:35.
Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:179.

32Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:173.

109

the entire ummah, In this he reflects the general Mu‘tazilite

attitude prevalent in the writings of al-Qadi ‘Abd al-Jabbar and his
student Aba al-Husayn al-Bagri.??

Establishing Ijma‘ on Rational Proof

Ghazali, like his mentor al-Juwdyni, defends the validity of
ijma* on the basis of the practice of the Companions; that is, when
they decided upon an issue, they did so only on the basis of the
Shari'a, This practice has been transmitted via tawdtur. Also, it is
impossible, in the nature of the case, that any of them would be
heedless of a decision that was not founded on the Shari‘a, or that
they would remain silent if such a decision occurred. It is also
inconceivable that they were capable of falling into error
collectively or that they would conspire to lie, since their numbers
exceed the number of tawdtur. Ghazali admits that there are
weaknesses in this argument, for the ijmd‘ of the Companions does
not necessarily mean that it must be followed. And the
obligatoriness of compliance, requires a proof other than ijmd‘.

He has recourse, however, to the verse of the Qur’an
concerning ‘adhering to the way of the believers,’ Stating that

whosoever opposes the consensus of the ummah is denounced; one

must follow “the way of the believers.”

3The Encyclopaedia of Islam, new ed., s.v. “Idjma‘,” by M.
Bernand.

110

One expects Ghazali, given the breadth of his knowledge and
the diversity of his learning, to prove the validity of ijmda' by
rational argument, demonstrating that this principle is necessary to
sustain the integration of the community and facilitate its Sharf‘a
aims. His contemporary al-Pazdawi in his proof for the authority of
ijma" argues that a fallible ummah in one generation implies that |
following generations are deprived of knowing the complete Shari‘a
as revealed—which contradicts both the Shari‘a’s universality and
eternity. Thus, ijmd‘ is a necessary principle for maintaining the
continuity of the Shari‘a itself.

Perhaps Ghazali did not argue convincingly for the rational
necessity of ijmd', even though it is a primary source, because it
never formally materialized as an institution for the ummah to
enforce. This may explain why Ghazali confines himself to a search
for legal precedents where ijmd‘ was utilized by the ummah as a
legitimate Shari'a source—especially by the Companions and the
Successors.

But he is not unique in this approach. This is the method of
almost all who treated ijmd‘ in usil beginning with al-Shafi‘i and
continuing through the classical period. For there was always
controversy about what constitutes ijmd‘, its conditions, and legal

status. In the literature, these issues can be broken down into

several areas of question:

٠ Who are its enactors? If the entire ummah, then are the
masses included?
111

٠ If it be only the learned specialists, may an ‏أأشعه‎ ora fagih
not well versed in the details of the Shari‘a or usiil,
respectively, participate? Are the theologian and the
grammarian of no acquired skill in extracting Shari‘a rules
considered among the enactors of ijmd‘?

٠ Can ijma‘ be constituted without a mujtahid who is known
to be an heretical innovator but is not charged with
infidelity?

٠ Is the consensus of other than the Companions valid? 15

the consensus of other than the four rightly-guided Caliphs
also valid?

٠ Is the agreement of the qualified enactors of ijmd‘
irreversibly final? Does the agreement of the majority
constitute ijmd, despite the objection of the rest of the
community?

٠ Is ijma‘ limited to the community of Medina, Mecca, Basra,
or Kifa, or the communities of Mecca and Medina together
or Kifa and Basra?

٠ Are those who constitute ijmd‘ required to reach the
number of tawdtur?

In addressing these issues, Ghazili holds that ijmda‘ is, by definition,
the consensus of the entire ummah on religious matters. However,
he was not without disputants. Sayf al-Din al-Amidi later criticized
this position and refuted Ghazili’s definition on several grounds.

To begin with, he contends that the term ‘ummah' is
ambiguous and may include all Muslims until the Day of
Judgement, rendering consensus in any practicable -sense
impossible. But if for the sake of argument ijmd‘ could be reached
by a generation and if there were no people of influence, then,

Amidi says, Ghazali’s definition implies that the consensus of the
simple masses would be valid. Moreover, Ghazali’s stipulation that
the agreement should be in regard to religious matters excludes the
consensus of the ummah on, for instance, rational issues.

However, upon closer examination of Ghazali’s notion of ijma‘,
Amidi’s objections appear baseless, for Ghazali, in his definition
takes care to qualify the term ‘ummah,’ stating explicitly that it is
divided into three categories: (a) Those whose presence is decisive
for constituting ijmda‘, namely ahl-al-hall wa al ‘aqd (the people of
influence, the mujtahids for instance); (b) those excluded
necessarily because of rational deficiency, such as minors, the
insane, and those in womb; (c) those who fall between these two
groups, that is, the masses and nonspecialists

Ghazali continues to say that what issues from the Shari‘a is
divided into that which is common knowledge—for both the
common people and the people of influence, such as the
obligatoriness of the five daily prayers, zakét, and hajj—and that
which only specialists know, that is, the details of these obligations.
However, the ummah’s masses unanimously agree to follow the
mujtahids, according to Ghazali. Therefore, they are the ultimate
legitimating factor in the latters’ ijma'.

Ghazali poses the example of an army that empowers a group
to negotiate a peace treaty with an enemy force. If peace is
reached, it is said, “The army has signed a peace treaty.”>4 So it is
with the unanimous agreement of the mujtahids. The community

en masse assents, thus constituting ijma‘.

4Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:181.

113

Yet, he amends, the objection of the masses that are not
based on Sharf‘a proofs must not be taken into account on two
grounds: That the common folk do not have the instrument of
ijtihdd (nuqsan al-dlah), and so are categorized with minors and the
insane; and that the Companions have unanimously agreed not to
consider the dispute of the masses. Further, he argues, it is not .
conceivable on the part of the masses who are of sound reason and
judgement to oppose any ijma* based on ignorance—especially since
the Qur’4n commands them to refer to the people of knowledge,
that is, the mujtahids.?>

As for the second question, Ghazali does not agree with the
Position of those jurists who restrict the participants of ijmd‘ to the
founders of the major legal schools, namely al-Shafi‘i, Malik, Abd
Hanifa, and others, or their able and prominent followers. In
addition, he defends the right of the scholars of usitl to be included
in the community of ijmda‘, noting the Companions’ practice of
including in ijmé‘ some who were not known to have mastered the
details of figh, such as ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Amf, Aba ‘Ubayda b. al-
Jarrah, Sa‘id b. ‘Amr b. Nufayl, and others. Indeed, he adds, more
than one of these figures were nominated for the Caliphate. Thus,
while he also assents to the participation in ijmd‘ of the
distinguished faqih, he holds the usiili as more deserving.

Surprisingly, despite his initial defense of ‘ilm al-kaldm as the

crowning religious science,>° he relegates the mutakallim, as well
35Qur’an, 21:7.

36Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:5-7.

114

as the grammarian, to the general masses as far as the constituting

of ijma‘ is concerned. So they are excluded from his community of

consensus.>”

The third question—whether the mujtahid who is an
innovator (mubtadi‘) must be among the enactors of ijmd‘—arose as
a natural result of the emergence of factionalism in the Muslim
community in the early Islamic period. Ghazali holds that since
ijm@*‘ is not valid unless mujtahids agree unanimously, even those
to whom fisq or bid‘a is attributed must be counted, provided that
the charges do not amount to kufr (disbelief). In treating what was
surely a sensitive issue in his time, Ghazali adds that simply
charging one with kufr is not sufficient; rather, kufr must be
manifest in the accused’s statements and behavior, and
corroborated by strongly incriminating circumstantial evidence.

Accordingly, he provides criteria for pronouncing infidelity
upon a mujtahid. For example, if a mujtahid adheres to a belief
that necessarily prevents him from acknowledging either the
Creator or religion, he is justifiably charged with kufr.38 And such
is the case were it established that he denies the Creator, rejects
prophethood, or indulges in what the Shari‘a prohibits and thereby

commits kufr, such as prostrating to an idol, worshipping fire,

37Ghazili, al-Mustasfa, 1:182.

38This may be explained best if we give the example of a
Muslim that declares acceptance to communism. In Ghazali’s view
such a belief is enough to prove his kufr.

115

rejecting a sira of the Qur’an, holding that fornication is lawful, etc.
But if none of this is true, ijma‘ cannot be constituted without his
agreement.

Now, the Zahirites have confined ijmd‘ to the Companions
because of that generations’ excellence. Not only were they the
Sahadba of the Prophet, but they witnessed the coming of revelation;
so their consensus would not be based on other than the Shari ‘a, as
opposed to succeeding generations who might concur purely on
opinion. B. Hazm defends this notion with fervor in his book al-
Ihkam fi Usiil al-Ahkam >?

Ghazali, of course, acknowledges the excellence of the
Companions as mentioned by the Prophet and in the Qur’an, but
does not agree that this justifies restricting ijmda‘ only to them. In
fact, he argues that this leads to absurdities. For if ijma* is a source
based on excellence, and excellence is invested in Companionship,
then the consensus of the Muhajirin (Emigrants) would nullify that
of the Ansdr, (the Helpers, or people of Medina). And the
consensus of the Muhdjiriin would be overruled by the consensus
of the ten among them whom the Prophet gave tidings of their
entrance into Paradise, for they were accorded special status. Yet
the agreement of the ten would be challenged by the four Caliphs,

who were the most prominent of the ten. And even the four

‎Hazm, al-Ihkdm, 4:128-235. His particular treatment‏ م31
‎on the subject of the Companions is on pages 4:146-152. See also‏
‎his book Mardtib al-ljma‘ (published with Naqd Mardib al-ljma‘ by‏

‎Ibn Taymiyya), 2nd ed. (Beirut: Dar al-Afaq al-Jadida, 1980), pp.
14-19,

116

Caliphs would be challenged by the statements of Aba Bakr and
‘Umar because of their accorded excellence. Consequently, holding
ijma‘ valid on the primacy of companionship is not valid.

Further, Ghazali refutes the confining of ijmd@‘ to the four
caliphs.*° Nor is restricting ijma‘ to the Successors together with
the Companions sufficient. Rather, the ijmda‘ of every generation is
valid.

Also, among the proponents of ijmd‘ are those who claim that
it is constituted by the majority of the community—especially when
their number reaches tawd@tur. Ghazali, however, contends that the
rectitude and the validity of the opinion of the majority certainty
cannot be considered that of the whole ummah, and infallibility can
only be established for the entire community.

The Ma§likites confine ijmd‘ not to a specific generation or
number of participants but to a geographic location, namely
Medina. They use as proofs for this position the Prophet’s hadiths
Praising its inhabitants and the fact that he himself received
revelation and enacted and enforced the Sharf‘a with his
Companions there.

Ghazali does not dispute Medina’s excellence and prestige, nor
the hadiths praising its community; but he objects against limiting
ijma‘ to a place. First, never were all the learned Muslims present
in Medina at one particular time either before or after the hijra,
For a number were sent to other places or simply journeying. And

Since their agreement is required to constitute ijma', this is proof

“0Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:185-187.

117

that the ijmd‘ of those of Medina alone is not sufficient. This of
course goes for any other geographical restrictions or their
combinations.

Finally, Ghazali dismisses the requirement that the number of
the people of ijma‘ after the generation of the Companions reach
the number of tawdtur. Based on his definition of ijma‘, he holds -
that it is the opinion of the people of influence which is agreed
upon by the general Muslim masses—and this in every generation
reaches the number of tawdtur. He cites for proof the Prophet’s

saying that a “group of my community will continue holding to the

truth.”4!

THE CONSTITUTING OF LJMA‘

Ghazali states that ijmd‘ is constituted when the opinions of
the community on a legal matter concur at a particular time,
provided that the opinion is an explicit fatwa uttered by the people
of influence and not challenged by any of them. Therefore, silence
cannot be construed as ijmd‘. Moreover, the expiration of the
generation constituting an ijmda‘ (or the period necessary for one
generation) is not required before an ijmd‘ is constituted. In
addition, ijmd‘ can be based on ijtihdd or qiyas and does not
require an explicit Text.

But while Ghazali disputes tacit consensus (ijma‘ al-sukiiti ) in

al-Mustasfa, he himself upheld its validity in al-Mankhial if it met

41Ghazaili, al-Mustasfd, 1:187.

02

two conditions: (a) That the people of ijmd‘ keep silent about a

question which is not definite, but is proved definite in their
presence though many other factors refute it; (b) That their silence
passes without dissent about the point in question.

He goes on to say that if the enactors of ijma@‘ gather in an -
assembly and one of them presents his opinion while the others
keep silent, this signifies that they simply avoided criticism on that
point and does pot constitute ijmd‘; for the question is of a

eas
SpscSiative nature. On occassion judges and jurists may not be
publicly criticized as a matter of etiquette or deference for some
other reason (which appears to reflect the political volatility of
GhaziAli’s time).43 Yet no one may claim ijmd‘.

But in al-Mustasfa Ghazali’s opinion is less tolerant. He flatly
rejects tacit consensus, saying that it is neither ijma@‘ nor has it any
binding authority.44 He contends that the legal position of a jurist
is known by his verbal expression which is not liable to
uncertainty, while silence is irresolute. He gives seven reasons

why one opposed to ijmd‘ may be silent but disapproving:

“2Ghazali, al-Mankhal, p. 319.

“SGhazali, al-Mankhal, ‏.م‎ 319; and Hasan, The Doctrine of
Ijma‘ in Islam, p. 117. —

44While Ghazali makes a provision that it mzy be permissible
only if circumstantial evidence indicates approval, one is hard

pressed to think of such occasion since his argument accounts for
no such valid circumstance.

1. There may be some imperceptible restraint preventing
one from expressing his opinion. The context of his anger
coupled with his silence may indicate his position.

2. One may hold the opinion of another scholar as plausible
in view of the latter’s ijtihdd; though he may differ from
him, taking his position as being in error.

3. A person may take every mujtahid’s ijtihdd as correct; or
think that responding verbally to a question is a collective
rather than an individual duty. So he accepts the opinion
of another scholar as correct although it may contradict his
own interpretation.

4. Amujtahid’s silence may actually be expressing his
rejection of an opinion, not his approval, and he awaits the
Proper occasion to express it. Or there may be an
impediment keeping him from immediately pronouncing
his opinion, and he awaits its elimination in the mean time.
So one may die before finally revealing his objection, or be
engaged in some other work which distracts him from the
point in question.

5. One may be particularly apprehensive in pronouncirig his
opinion out of fear or in avoidance of disgrace. B. ‘Abbas
accounts for his silence over ‘aw/ (increase in inheritance)
by saying that he was afraid of ‘Umar during his lifetime
as he was an awe-inspiring man.

6. A mujtahid may be in the process of considering the
matter during his silence. His contemplation may be
prolonged.

7. He may suppose the rejection of others, regarding it as a
pronouncement on his behalf. But he may be wrong in his

presumption.*>

45Ghazali’s analysis of the motives that may have kept one
mujtahid silent were not purely hypothetical. They mirrored the
religio-political conditions of the Muslim society.

120

He quotes endorsers of tacit consensus as countering that (a)
had there been rejection of its status, it would have surfaced and
been widely known. In view of the absence of this, its acceptance
is implied; and (b) there is decisive proof that the Successors did
not renounce difficult questions that the Companions approved
silently—-which suggests that they honored tacit consensus.

In general, Ghazali’s position is that rulings based on tacit
consensus are arbitrary, while the infallibility of ijmda‘ is, in fact,
established by unanimous agreement, not by arbitrary opinion.
With reference to the first argument, the same thing can be said
about agreement. That is, whatever prevents disagreement from
emerging may prevent agreement as well. This refutes the opinion
of al-Jubba’i who stipulates that there be a lapse of time for tacit
consensus to be considered valid. (It may also be noted that the
restraint may continue till the end of the generation.)

Secondly, this ijma‘ of the Successors has never been formally
accepted. Rather, disagreement about it has all along been
disputed among scholars. The astute ones, Ghazali charges, are well
aware that silence is doubtful and that the opinion of a segment of

the community does not constitute validity.4°

Besides refuting tacit consensus, Ghazali also disparages the
notion that the generation of an ijmd‘ must pass before consensus is

effected. IJjmd‘, he Says, is immediately constituted when the

“SGhazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:192; and Hasan, The Doctrine of
Ijma‘ in Islam, p. 114-115.

121

people of ijtihdd unanimously agree on a particular position. His
refutation rests on Texts establishing ijmd‘, the locus of ijma'’s
authority, and the practice of the first two generations of Muslims.

First, the Shari'a texts justifying ijmd‘ include no condition for
the passing of a generation or the death of the people who
constituted it.

Second, authority lies in the agreement itself, be it in a legal
or religious matter, and not in their death or in the expiration of
the generation. Indeed, any consenter to the ijm@‘ who changes his
opinion after the consensus has been achieved is, in fact, opposing
the ijma' and his altered opinion cannot invalidate its constitution.

Third, the practice of the Successors reveals that they not
only relied on the consensus of the Companions but cited it as a
proof during the lifetimes of some of them who lived long, such as
Anas b. Malik and others. Therefore, had the passing of a

generation been required, they would not have permitted this.47

Finally, concerning whether ijma‘ need be based on an
explicit text, Ghazali cites the opinion of legists who require that a
fatwa be certain and not conjectural if it is to be valid for
consensus. Therefore, they do not accept an ijmd‘ that is based on
ijtihad. For ijtihdd may hit or miss the truth, be correct or
incorrect. And it is not allowed in their view that the wmmah agree
on anything that is liable to error. Also, they argue that an ijma‘

constituted on an issue where a mujtahid is allowed to agree or

“"Ghazali, al-Mustasf4, 1:191-192.

122

disagree is invalid. For any ijmd‘ on an issue subject to ijtihdd is in
violation of the ijmda‘ that invests anyone capable with the right to
exercise ijtihdd, though it be in opposition to another’s. Simply, a
mujtahid cannot be prevented from ijtihdd.

Ghazali replies once again that the infallibility of the ummah
takes the place of the infallibility of the Messenger. Fearing error
with reference to ijtihdd is correct, but only with individuals or a
part of the community. However, when the totality of the
community unanimously agrees on a legal opinion, their consensus
is error free. Thus, requiring that the issue upon which ijmd‘ is
constituted be decisive is itself an arbitrary opinion. Therefore, he
concludes, ijmd‘ may be constituted based on ijtihad, and cites the

practice of the Companions and the Successors in support of this

opinion.

THE STATUS OF IJMA‘
Ghazali states clearly that when ijmda‘ is constituted it must be
followed, and opposing it is prohibited. This entails certain

implications about the principle’s status, since it immunizes the

ummah from falsehood.48

If the community, then, unanimously agrees that the correct
positions with regard to a particular question can only be two, a
third response is not permissible; for this would be in violation of
ijma‘.

If the Companions have two positions with regard to a legal

48Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:198.

question, but their Successors agree upon one of them, this does not
justify neglecting the other position. One may act on its basis.*”

In the transmission of ijmd‘, one cannot rely on a solitary
report, for ijma‘ exerts authority over issues in the Qur’4n and the
mutawatir Sunna. Hence, it is not proper to allow an ijmd‘ that has
been transmitted by solitary report to overrule mutawdatir and
decisive Texts.

Finally, common factors discerned between diverse or

contrary opinions cannot be regarded as consensus. For there must

be formal, explicit agreement on a question to constitute ijma‘.

4°Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:205.

CHAPTER V

ISTISHAB AND REASON
THE FOURTH SHARI‘A SOURCE

Criticism of personal legal opinion (figh al-ra’y) and giyds by
the muhaddiths, the Zihirites, and some Mu‘tazilites in the
centuries preceding Ghazali caused him to reexamine the nature of
qiyds. Having found neither text nor rational proof to justify it as
the ‘Fourth Source,’ he consigns it to an operation guiding the
process of ijtihdd, i.e., a method for the mujtahid to arrive at Shari‘a
rules,!

On the one hand, the Ash‘arite position—which of course
Ghazali had adopted—held that ‘aq! (reason) has no power to
originate Shari‘a rules or recognize them save by way of revelation.
On the other hand, the Mu‘tazilite dogma exalted reason, declaring

it able not only to discern the inherent good or evil of acts and

! Aba Ishaq al-Shirazi, a prominent Shafi‘ite who died 6 H.,
cited in Kitab al-Luma‘ fi Usiil al-Figh (Cairo: Muhammad ‘Ali Sabib
wa Awlad, n.d.), pp. 56-57, the disputes of al-Nazz4m, some of the
Mu'tazilites from among the people of Baghdad, and others
concerning the validity of giyds as a source. Ghazali agrees with
him in al-Mankhil, where he cites the attack of many against
rational giyds and Shari‘a qiyds. See Ghazali, al-Mankhil, p. 331;
and ‘Ali b. Ahmad b. Hazm, Kitéb Mulakhkhas [btal al-Qiyds wa al-

Ra’y, ed. Sa‘id al-Afghani (Damascus: University of Damascus Press,
1960).

124

15

objects, but also to legislate their obligation, prohibition, or
permissibility. These considerations likely influenced Ghazali’s
view of reason and its function in the context of the other Shari‘a
sources.

He posits in the opening of his discourse on the Shart‘a
sources that ‘aq/ cannot independently establish Sharf‘a rules.
Thus, calling it a Shari‘a source can be tolerated only in the
figurative sense—and this after the coming of revelation and the

laying down of Law.”

Yet reason, he says, has a crucial role in
proving that the Shari‘a rules did not obligate man before the
arrival of revelation. This is the original and universal rule that
Ghazali defends and contends one must act in accordance with,
even in the presence of revelation and the Shari‘a in areas where it
either has not specified a rule or taken a position.

Ghazali explains that originally man is unobliged. Only when
a messenger comes telling him that God has obliged him with, say,
five daily prayers, does he become obligated. But in this case a
sixth prayer or a seventh remains unobligated—not because the
prophet has indicated such, but because reason has proved its
original state of negation, that man originally is not obliged before
the laying of Shari‘a obligation through revelation. Indeed the
bidding of the messenger is restricted to the obligatoriness of the
five daily prayers.

In other words, revelation establishes Sharf‘a rules. Reason

proves their negation in the spheres where the Shari‘a has not

*Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:100.

126

confirmed or established them. This original negation of obligation
(taklif) continues by the principle of istishab.> This, Ghazali
suggests, is the Fourth Principle and one of the three valid
meanings of istishdb.

Another of its meanings is that a general Sharf‘a command
blankets all that comes under it until the Shari‘a brings specifying
rules which except certain acts. Otherwise, the text continues in
effect until a Shari‘a address is established to change or suspend its
ruling.

Ghazali exemplifies a Shari‘a rule’s perpetuation by the
obligation of fasting Ramaddn and the annual paying of zakét. One
needs no new Shari‘a rule to fast the Ramadan of the following
year, or to pay the new year’s zakaét. Rather, the original rule is

perpetually operative by way of istishab whenever Ramadan ora

new year arrives.

The fugqahd’ have disputed, however, with regard to one who
negates a Shari'a rule claiming his decision to be based on istishdb,
namely the continuation of the original state of freedom or non-
obligation. Some of the fugahd’ require such a person to furnish

proof for his negation. Others do not require it.

3Linguistically, the root meaning of istishab is to associate,
accompany, consort. Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, 4:1652. It
connotes association between a past occurence and present status.
Technically, the fuqahd’ differ about its meaning, but in general it
expresses the perpetual validity of a rule until that rule is proven
changed or qualified.

Ghazali basis his reply to this question on the nature of the
knowledge of the supposed negating rule. In other words, if it is
necessary knowledge accepted by everyone without any
opposition, Ghazali does not stipulate that proof be given since
what is known necessarily and accepted is its own proof. This is
founded on rational grounds. For example, he says, human beings
necessarily know that they do not live in the midst of the ocean’s
whirl or seated upon a bird’s wing.

If, however, the claim to istishdb concerns matters of
speculative knowledge, anyone negating the rule must provide
proof. A person, for instance, who denies the origination of the

world, the existence of the Creator, or the prohibition of fornication,

must demonstrate his assertion.*

In accepting these three forms of istishéb Ghazali is true to
his conviction that the right to legislate belongs exclusively to God.
Therefore, if a mujtahid exerts himself to arrive at a ruling, but
finds no Shari‘a proof, the act or subject of his search remains in
the status of the original state of freedom (al-bara’a al-asliyya). So
it does not fall under any of the five Shari‘a categories.»

Similarly, established Shari‘a rules remain until they are

abrogated by another Shari‘a address. The function of reason here
“Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:234,

5Ghazali distinguishes between the acts that the Shari‘a holds
as mubdakh [permissible] and others that the Shari‘a has not specified
as permissible. He says that the latter remain in the original state

of nonobligation, i.e., permissible, not due to an explicit Text, but
based upon their original status.

128

facilitates for the mujtahid the search for the existence or
nonexistence of Shari‘a rules that change an act’s original state of
freedom. Likewise, reason enables the mujtahid to recognize the
nonexistence of Shari‘a rules that might have changed an act’s
original state of nonobligation. This seems to imply that istishab is
the last source by which a mujtahid ascertains knowledge of a
Shari‘a rule in regard to which there is no specification in the
preceding three sources, namely, the Qur’an, the Sunna, and ijma'.®
Yet Ghazali’s estimation of al-istishadb wa dalil al-‘aql to be
the ‘fourth Shari'a source’ also appears only tolerable in the
figurative sense. For istishdb, like qiyds, is an activity of the
mujtahid which does not originate Shari‘a rules. Instead, it proves
the continuity and reinforcement of their already existing status.
And it can be said, perhaps, that it circumscribes them as well,

preventing either their expansion or restriction.

© Among the forms of istishab that Ghazali rejects is istishab
al-ijma* in the domain of dispute. Concerning a mutayyammim
who sees water during prayer, Ghazali cites the position that he
should continue the prayer, for consensus is claimed to have been
constituted on the rectitude of his prayer and its continuance.
Therefore, the presence of water is just like the occurrence of the
blowing of the winds, the coming of the dawn, and other natural
events. He holds, however, that this is corrupt, for ijma‘ has been
constituted on the rectitude of continuing prayer after performing
tayammum only in the absence of water. As for the case of the
incidental availability of water, there is dispute and one is not
permitted to cite as proof the fact that ijmd‘ has been contsituted

on the validation of such a disputed question; for it is not proof.
Al-Mustasfa, 1:223.

It may be for this reason that several Hanafite scholars, like
al-Dabbisi, acknowledge istishdb to be a valid Shari‘a principle
insofar as it negates taklif in the absence of Shari‘a rule, but not in
establishing it. In other words, istishdb is a proof that indicates the
continuity of what exists until a contrary rule is established. If, for
instance, one’s marriage is recognized, the matriage contract
continues to be valid until its nullification is decisively brought
forth. Or, if, for example, a person performs tayammum in the
absence of water, but then water is brought to him during his
prayer, he should continue his prayer; for ijmd‘ has been
constituted on the rectitude of his prayer and its continuation, but

not on the breaking of such a prayer upon the availability of water.
CHAPTER VI

NASKH (ABROGATION)

The Shari‘a, having been revealed by the All-Knowing, the
All-Wise, raises an important juridical and theological question: Is
it possible to abrogate its divine rules?

According to Ghazali, some fugahd’—including a substantial
number of Mu‘tazilites—do not think it befitting for the Omniscient
to ‘change His mind’ and abrogate what He previously commanded
or prohibited. This, they contend, contradicts divine perfection and
leads to Shari‘a contrarieties. Consequently, they reject outright
the concept of naskh'; that is, the notion that the Shari‘a rules are
abrogatable. They claim that what Ghazali and the classical Muslim
jurists call ‘naskh’ is actually specification of or time requirements
for previously Jaid rules. But it is not elimination.

Ghazali, however, says that any rule established by a Shari‘a

address can be removed by another such address coming after it.

1Ghazali Says that the linguistic meaning of naskh is to
remove or eliminate. It may also mean to annul, supersede,
obliterate, abolish, efface, or cancel. See Manzir, Lisdn al-‘Arab,
3:61; al-[ahir Ahmad al-Zawi, Tartib al-Qdmiis, 2nd ed. 4 vols.
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, n.d.), 4:362; Lane, An Arabic-English Lexicon,
8:2788; and Muhammad Murtada al-Husayni Zahidi, Taj al-‘Ariis,
10 vols. (Cairo: Khayriyya Press, 1306 H.), 2:282.

130

131

Not only is this rationally possible, he argues, but it has actually
occurred in the Shari‘a, leading to neither absurdity nor
contradiction. Thus, he clearly states in his definition that naskh
differs from both badd’ (change of mind) and takhsis
(specification). In fact, naskh is an essential device of the Shari'a
for removing irreconcilable contradictions in the Texts.

Ghazali’s argument for the occurrence of naskh in the Shari‘a
is based on ijmd‘, stating that the entire ummah has unanimously
agreed that the “Shari‘a of Muhammad, peace be upon him, has
abrogated all of the shari‘as of those [prophets] before him.” He
adds that naskh was accepted among the Companions and their
Successors well before the time of those who deny it. So, this is a
Shari‘a proof against them, according to Ghazali, for he holds its
disputants to be in opposition to ijmda‘ in rejecting its existence.

Besides ijmd‘, Ghazali quotes the Qur’an in support of its
legitimacy, not only as part of the Shari‘a of Muhammad, but also
the shari‘as of the prophets before him:

٠ It was for the evil doings of Jews that We have forbidden
them certain good things that were permitted to them . . 2

* And when We substitute a verse in place of another
verse—and Allah knows very well what He sends

down—they say you are a forger. Rather, most of them
have no knowledge.

Qur'an, 4:160.

3Qur’an, 16:101.

132

* And whatever verse We abrogate or cause to be
forgotten,We bring one better or its like . . 4

Moreover, he says that the Qur’4n itself indicates many Shari‘a
rules that have been abrogated, such as the change of the gibla
from Bayt al-Maqdis in Jerusalem to the Ka‘ba in Mecca, or the
abrogation of the widow’s waiting period (‘idda) before remarriage

from one year to four months and ten days.

ABROGATION AND SPECIFICATION

Ghazali explains that mistaking specification for abrogation
stems from the fact that both alter the effected rule’s original
meaning. However, they are not synonyms linguistically or in the

vocabulary of the fugaha’. He lists five distinctions between them:

1. While abrogation cannot take place except on the basis of
a Shari‘a address, specification may occur based on reason
or circumstantial evidence.

2. It is ‘required’ that the abrogating Shari'a address follow
the abrogated rule after a delay, while the specifying
address may be conjoined to or arrive at the same time as
the specified one.

3. If the Shari‘a command or prohibition is directed toward a
Single act, it is possible to abrogate it. But it is not possible
to specify a Shari‘a command that includes only one act.
To illustrate this, the command to change the direction of
the gibla from Bayt al-Maqdis to the Ka‘ba is a change of a
Shari‘a rule which falls under abrogation, not specification;
for had it been specification, then the command would be

4Qur’an, 2:106.

Sal-Mustasfa, 1:110-111,

133

to pray in the direction of a specific part of Bayt al-
Maqdis. But since it was changed entirely to the direction

of the Ka‘ba, it is abrogation, for it eliminates the previous
command.

4. Abrogation eliminates the implications of the abrogated
command as well as what was bidden or prohibited, while
specification maintains the implications of the specified
Shari‘a rule that fall outside the domain of the
specification.

5. Abrogating the Qur’4n and the mutawdtir Sunna is not
allowed except by similar mutawdtir texts, i.e. either the
Qur’an or Sunna, while it is possible to specify a mutawatir

text on the basis of qiydas, solitary reports, and other valid
evidences.

In addition, Ghazali implies another distinction between the two
addresses (which was elaborated by al-Shawkani after him). While
it is possible to abrogate a preceding Shari‘a of a past prophet by

the Shari‘a of a following prophet, it is not possible to specify one
Shari‘a by another.°

ABROGATION AND THE SHARI‘A ADDRESS |

By defining naskh as the elimination of one Shari'a rule by
another coming after it, Ghazali necessarily locates the right of

abrogation as solely with the Lawgiver and restricts it to the

®See al-Shawkani, Irshdd al-Fultl, ‏.م‎ 143. Al-Amidi, in al-
Ihka@m, 3:282, added that specification applies to reports as well as
rules, while abrogation applies to the Shari‘a rules. Also,
abrogation applies to the general and particular commands or
Prohibitions of the Shari‘a while specifications applies only to the
general ones. See also Nadia al-‘Umari, al-Naskh fi Darasat al-
Usiiliyyin (Beirut: Mu’assasa al-Risala, 1980), p. 555.

134

lifetime of the Messenger, since the Shari‘a was revealed through
him alone. Thus, the unicity of the divine source of the Shari‘a
necessitates harmony between decisive texts, be they from the
Qur’an or the mutaw4étir Sunna, according to Ghaziili,’ who provides
an excellent discourse on the coherence of the Shari‘a texts and the
absence of true contradiction.® Simply, if contradiction is
conclusively established between two texts, then one of the two has
been abrogated. For abrogation is the sole mechanism for
eliminating any conclusive contradiction that renders impossible
the enforcement of the rules established by the separate texts.
Although in actuality it is impossible for all the Sharf‘a rules
to be abrogated, in principle naskh may apply to any textual rule
So long as its conditions are met. In this he takes issue with the
Mu‘tazilites who bar abrogation of any rule whose act is inherently
good or evil. Their position, he argues, implies restricting God in
prohibition and command. And since obligation issues by His will,
it is His right to abrogate any rule that He bade man perform.
God’s abrogation, then, is necessarily expressed by way of
explicit Shari'a text indicating the elimination of whatever
obligation upon responsible beings to fulfill an earlier command.
Hence, eliminating obligation vis 4 vis other than an explicit Shari‘a
address is not abrogation. Death, for example, eliminates obligation

from the deceased. Yet it is not abrogation.
'Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 2:392.

"This has been cited by al-Zarkashi, in al-Burhdn ft ‘Ulam al-
Qur’dn, 2:46-48.

135

One of the more controversial positions that results from the
expansion of Ghazali’s definition is that it is allowable for the
Shari‘a rules either of the Qur’an or the Sunna to abrogate the
other, since both are revealed.? in other words, Shari‘a rules
indicated by the Qur’4n may be abrogated by those of the Sunna
and vice versa. Not only is this rationally justified, he says, but no
text proves otherwise.

To underscore that his view is indeed in conformity with the

Qur’an and the Sunna, Ghazali first introduces verses claimed by his

opponents to prove that the Sunna cannot abrogate the Book and

then refutes their proofs by reinterpretating the Texts. The first of

them:

And when Our signs are recited to them, clear Signs, those
who look not to encounter Us say, ‘Bring a Qur’an other than
this or change it.’ Say, ‘It is not for me to change it of my
own accord. I follow only what is revealed to me'®

they hold to demonstrate that the Prophet cannot ‘change’ the

Qur’an, implying that his Sunna therefore cannot abrogate the Book.

They infer from the second verse:

And for whatever verse We abrogate or cause to be forgotten,
We bring a better or the like of it. Know that God is powerful
over everything!

See Ghazili’s definition of revelation with respect to Sunna
in our chapter on Sunna above.

Qur'an, 10:15.

Ouran, 2:106.

136

that no one but God is capable of revealing an equivalent or ‘better’
verse. And since the Sunna is neither better than the Qur’an nor its
like, it cannot abrogate the Book. |

With reference to the first verse, Ghazali explains that the
Messenger does not alter the Qur’an of his own accord. Rather, it is
based on what God revealed to him. Simply, the Sunna too is
revelation, but not in the form of the Qur’an,!2 Thus, in the final
analysis, it is not the Prophet who abrogates; it is God. And nothing
prevents Him from abrogating His revelation manifested in the
Qur’an by His inspiration brought down in the Sunna.

Similarly, the second verse does not make it conditional for
the abrogation of the Qur’an to be solely by the Qur’an, but through
any revelation God brings. He names what he holds to be
precedents in defense of this, such as the peace treaty between the
Prophet and the Meccans that bound him to extradite women

converts to Islam seeking refuge in Medina. This was abrogated by

the verse:

O believers, when believing women come to you as emigrants,
test them. God knows very well their belief. Then if you
know them to be believers, return them not to the

unbelievers.'3

I2Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:125.

13Qur’an, 60:10.

137

As for the Sunna abrogating the Qur’an, Ghazali—lacking any

unanimously agreed upon cases—cites:

Prescribed for you, when any of you is approached by death
. and he leaves behind some goods, is to make testament in

favor of his parents and kinsmen honorably, an obligation on
the God fearing.'4

He holds that this verse is abrogated by the Prophet’s statement,
“There is no bequest for an inheritor.”!>

However, a closer examination of the various texts of this
hadith shows that (a) in one version it concludes with, “Indeed God
has given all eligible persons [of inheritance) their rights.” Thus,
there is no bequest for an heir because what he or she is to receive
has been already determined by the Qur’an. So based on the
hadith, it is forbidden for a legal heir to receive additional wealth;
and (b) that the abrogating address is none other than the verses of
inheritance. For the Prophet, in stating that “indeed God has given
all eligible persons [of inheritance] their rights,” is calling attention
not to his own statement but to these verses as abrogating the text,
“Prescribed for you . . . is to make testament in favor of his parents
and kinsmen. . . .”

In sum, closer examination reveals that the Prophet is

indicating that it is the Qur’dn that has ultimately abrogated the

14 Our’an, 2:180.

13 See Wensinck, Concordance; 7:187.

138

Qur’an.'® Moreover, the hadith—which is not cited in full in the
first place—is not mutawdtir; and Ghazali himself holds that it is not
possible for a Shari‘a rule expressed by a mutawalir text to be
abrogated by a non-mutawatir address.'’ The remaining cases that
Ghazali notes as illustrating the possibility of the Sunna abrogating
the Book are not convincing and may be interpreted, perhaps more
appropriately, in ways other than indicating abrogation.

Indeed, al-Shafi‘i’s position that the Sunna cannot abrogate
the Qur’an is more plausible and worthier of acceptance, /8 He
concludes in his usiili work al-Risdla, that “God has made it clear to
them that what He has abrogated from the Book, He has done so by

the Book alone. The Sunna cannot abrogate the Book. It only
19

follows it.
THE ABROGATION OF SUNNA

Ghazali holds that a Shari‘a rule based on a solitary report can
be abrogated by either a similar solitary report or a mutawédtir one.
But a Shari‘a rule established by mutawdtir Sunna can be

abrogated only by an equivalent mutawdtir text. For mutawatir

1821 Pazdawi hints at this subtle point. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-
Bukhari, Kashf al-Asrar ‘ald Usitl al-Pazdawi, 4 vols. ed. Ahmad
Ramiz (n.p.: Hasan Hilmi al-Rayzawi, 1307 A.H.), 3:898.

"Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:126.
'8Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:124; and Mankhiil, p. 293.

'al-Shafi'l, al-Risdla, p. 106.

139

Sunna ceased being abrogatable by solitary report with the sealing
of revelation upon the death of the Prophet. Although Ghaziali
concedes that the Prophet sent abrogating rules with a few
Companions to various places in Arabia—far less than what would
constitute tawdtur—he does not infer from this that it is possible for
a solitary report to abrogate mutawdtir Sunna. He argues instead
that this practice was permissible only in the time of the Prophet,
since he was capable of resolving any misrepresentations or
inaccuracies on the part of reporters, for revelation was available
to him. “But this is impossible after his death,” he contends, “based
on the proof of the Companions’ ijmd‘ that the Qur’an and the
explicit mutawdtir reports cannot be eliminated on the basis of
solitary reports”~9 Furthermore, the mere statement of a
Companion that “such and such rule was abrogated” is not valid
unless he explicitily states that he has actually heard the Prophet
say so. Hence, the Companion’s statement is goverened by the
criteria for classifying Prophetic traditions. Thus, if it is a solitary
report, it can only abrogate its like.?!

However, Ghazali opines that ijmd‘ itself is not capable of
abrogating Shari‘a rules as it was not a Shari‘a source during the

lifetime of the Messenger, when revelation was descending. For

0Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:126.

*IGhazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:128.

140

only through revelation can an abrogating Shari‘a address be

known.22

As for qiyds, it is essentially based on the personal opinion of
a mujtahid, and concjectural opinion cannot serve as the basis for
the abrogation of a conclusive mutawdtir Text.

In addition, since only the Sharif‘a rules are subject to
abrogation, naskh does not apply to textual statements about the
past or the future (akhbdr); nor to texts of tidings or admonition
(al-wa‘d wa al-wa‘id), rational judgements; nor to the original state
of freedom, before the coming of Shari‘a. For in the latter instance,
substituting the original state of freedom with Shari‘a obligation is

not ‘elimination’ of a previous Shari‘a rule. By definition, then, it is

not abrogation.7°

THE ABROGATING AND THE ABROGATED ADDRESS

Given that naskh removes irreconcilable contradicitions in the
Shari‘a texts, Ghazali does not rely on reason alone to distinguish
the abrogating rule from the one it abrogated. For the basic
premise is that when two texts are “mutually contradictory, the
abrogating one is the later.” Based on this, Ghazali sets criteria for
determinining their sequence. Examination of the transmissions,

the content of the text itself, and the ijmd‘ of the community are

*2Ghazili, al-Mustasfa, 1:126.

23 For more information, check our treatment on istishdb in

this Introduction and Ghazali’s discussion in al-Mustasfa, 1:217-
245.

141

the only means by which one is able to determine the prior rule
from its abrogating counterpart. Consequently, it is not valid to
draw analogy from a third text to establish which of two
contradicting addresses is the abrogating one.

If, for instance, a Companion transmits a hadith and dies even
before another who transmits the contradicting hadith receives it
from the Prophet, we know necessarily that the latter reported the
abrogating rule. Or, when a transmitter specifies the date in which
he has heard the Prophet, saying, for example, “I heard the Prophet
in the Year of the Trench” while another says, “. . . in the year of
the conquest of Mecca,” then we know that the text stated in the
conquest of Mecca is the abrogating one.

Also, the Shari‘a address itself may indicate the abrogation, as
in the Prophet’s saying, “I had previously prohibited you from
storing the meat of sacrificial animals; now store them;” or, “I had
forbidden the visiting of graves; now visit them.” In such cases, the
abrogation and the timing of the commands are self-evident.

The ijmda‘ of the scholars is also a valid source for establishing
the sequence of texts, thus identifying the abrogating one. Again,
however, this is the extent of its use in naskh, according to Ghazaili.

Following his criteria for distinguishing an abrogating text
from an abrogated one, he mentions six standards Stipulated by
other jurists, which he claims to be invalid. For, according to him,
they do not establish the timing of the Shari‘a address.

The first is when a Companion states, “Such and such rule was

laid upon us. Then it was abrogated.” Ghazili argues that this may
142

have been stated on the basis of his personal opinion (ijtihdd) and,
therefore, it is not conclusive. |

The second is determining the sequence of abrogation based
on the present order in the Qur’an, namely that a verse in the ninth
sira abrogates what is in the sixth. This is not at all acceptable
since the siras and verses are not placed in the chronology of
revelation. In fact, often what was revealed in the later periods
appears in the beginning of the Book.

The third method is that the abrogating reporter be one of
the younger Companions. But it is possible that the younger
reporter is transmitting from one whose Companionship is more
senior. Moreover, the senior Companions occasionally transmited
from the younger ones and vice versa.

The fourth is that if the transmitter became a Muslim in the
year of the conquest of Mecca, but does not say when reporting, “I
heard it in the year of conquest,” then it is the abrogating address.
Ghazali replies that he may have heard this while he was an
unbeliever and transmitted the report after accepting Islam. Or, he
may have heard it from someone who had been a Muslim long
before him.

The fifth is taking into account a report of a person whose
Companionship was known to have been severed, so that it may be
assumed that his report antedates the report of someone whose
Companionship continued. Ghazali opines that although this may
be assumed, it does not necessarily follow that his report decisively

came after the one whose Companionship was severed.
143

The sixth is that if one of the two reports is in accordance
with the judgement of Reason and the original state of freedom,
then it is the prior address. But this is not necessarily so. For
example, the Messenger said, “Ablution is not required after eating
that which contacts fire.’ This does not necessarily precede the
obligatoriness of making ablution after eating what has contacted.
fire. It is equally possible that this cause for ablution had been
obligatory but was then abrogated.

Ghazili’s definition also requires that the Shari‘a address
expressing abrogation come after a period has lapsed from the
revelation of the rule it abrogates. So it is inconceivable for
abrogation to be valid (a) before the advent of a subsequent
address, (b) as one of two simultaneous addresses, or (c) conjoined
with another address. Moreover, both the abrogating and the
abrogated addresses, according to Ghazali, must be in contradiction

such that obeying both of them leads to absurdity in every

situation.24

In harmony with his view that abrogation applies to any
Shari'a rule, Ghazali contends that it is possible to abrogate a
Shari‘a obligation even before it is possible to comply with it. For
he holds that the elimination of the previous rule occurs at the
moment the abrogating address is revealed. This, of course, raises
a number of problems for Ghazali to address. One notices, however,
his superfluous preoccupation with questions of kaldm in his

detailed treatment of these issues and in the elaborate argument

24Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:12.

144

he wages against the Mu‘tazilites. Although he acknowledges these
issues aS more properly belonging to kaldm,”> he nevertheless
proceeds with a tedious answer to a simple question as far as usil
is concerned, bogging down in numerous rational and traditional
proofs.”° The following example, for instance, is a single argument
extracted from one of two clarifications subsumed under two
questions that Ghazali answers in the second aspect of his position
on the possiblity of abrogating a Shari'a rule prior to the

obligation’s due time of compliance:

Thus, the decisive proof that it is possible in revealed
authority is the story of Abraham, ‏وعليه السلام‎ namely, the

abrogation of [the command to] sacrifice his son before {his}
performance [of the act], and the statement of Allah, ‏رتعالى‎ “We
ransomed him [Isma‘il] with a great sacrifice” [Qur’an,
37:107}. So he was commanded with one act and did not
neglect hastening and submitting [to obey]; then it was
abrogated. This is difficult for the Mu'‘tazilites to
comprehend, to the extent that they arbitrarily interpret it
and are divided into different groups.

They sought to resolve this in five ways. The first of

which is [holding] that this was a dream [of Abraham], not a
command.

25Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:114.

261 may be useful to bring an exerpt of 01223115 argument
for the permissibility of abrogating a Shari‘a rule before the time to
comply with it arrives. He cites the Qur’anic story of Abraham and
Isma‘il in al-Mustagfa, 1:115-116. I choose to bring it here, in spite
of its relative lengthiness, also to show a typical Ghazali Shari‘a
argument whose style is repeated often in al-Mustasfa.

145

The second is that he was commanded; but it was
intended to oblige him with [only} the determination to
perform the act in order to test his heart for patience in
determination. Thus slaughtering was not commanded per
se.

The third is that the command was not abrogated, but
Allah, ys, changed [Isma‘il’s] neck into copper or iron so that
it was not cut. Thus, the obligation was terminated because
of the impossibility [to fulfill it). |

The fourth concerns disputing what has been
commanded, which was to throw him down on his forehead,
passing the knife without actual slaughtering.

The fifth is rejecting abrogation and Saying that he
slaughtered him ebediently, then it [his neck] was rejoined
and healed. Those who hold this interpretation agree that
Isma‘il was not slaughtered. But they differ with regard to
Abraham being the slaughterer. Some have said that he was
the slaughterer for he did cut [him], while the son was not
slaughtered because of the healing. Others have said that
being a slaughterer without a slaughtered subject is
impossible.

All of this is abusive and artificial.

As for the first, namely that it was a dream, the dreams
of prophets are part of prophethood. And they came to know
the commands of Allah, yt.3, through them. Indeed, the
prophecy of various prophets was solely through dreams.
What indicates his comprehension of his command is the
Statement of his son, “Do as you have been commanded”
(Qur'an, 37:102]. If he [Abraham] had not been so
commanded, he [Isma‘il] would be a liar. Also, intending to
slaughter and to throw {his son] down on [his] face is not
possible on the basis of an unfounded dream. Furthermore,
He has called it “a manifest trial” [Qur’an, 37:106]. And what
trial is there in a dream? And what is the sense of sacrifice?

As for the second, namely that he [Abraham] was
commanded to test his determination, this is impossible
146

because He who knows the unseen is not in need of testing.
Also, since testing occurs only through obligation, then if
obligation does not exist, testing does not occur. Moreover,
their statement, “Determination is the obligation,” is absurd
because determination [to obey] what is not obligatory is not
mandatory [in itself], for it follows the [rule] of the
determined object; and determination is not obligatory as
long as one does not believe in the obligatoriness of the
determined object.

Even if the determined object was not mandatory,
Abraham, ‏السلام‎ cele, would have been more deserving to know
this than the Mu‘tazilites. Why should it not be so when he
[Abraham], said, “ ...J saw in a dream that I shall Sacrifice
you.” And so his son said to him, “Do as you have been
commanded,” meaning slaughtering. Also, His saying, las,
/1:116/ “ . . . He threw him down on his face,” is surrendering
to the action of slaughtering, not to determination.

As for the third, namely that laying down and nothing
more than it is what is commanded, this is absurd. For this
cannot be called sacrificing, nor is it an affliction. And it does
not need sacrifice after obedience

As for the fourth—denial of abrogation and that he
[Abraham] had obeyed, but his [Isma‘il’s] neck turned to iron,
thus it was beyond [his] ability, terminating the
obligation—this is incorrect according to their principles. For
commanding what is conditional is not established according
to them. Rather, since Allah, jta3, knew that He will turn his
[Isma‘il’s] neck into iron, He would not, therefore, be
commanding that which He knows to be impossible and will
not need ransom. Thus, it would not be an affliction on his
part.

As for the fifth, namely that he did [sacrifice Isma‘il],
but it healed, this is absurd because how could ransom be
needed after the healing? And if this were true, this would
have been known and become one of His manifest Signs. Yet
147

this has never been reported. Rather, it is just an invention
on the part of the Mu‘tazilites.

Approach aside, however, Ghazali’s acceptance of the
instantaneousness of abrogation ultimately raises controversy
about the binding effect of the abrogating address upon those who
are unaware of it. He takes a middle position between jurists who
hold that abrogation is binding upon everyone, without exception,
and others who say that it is not binding until it reaches the locus
of obligation. As for whomsoever the abrogating address did not
reach, they remain obliged by the prior address, according to
Ghazali—even though the new command is in effect. Although this
implies a time lag between the actual abrogation and one’s
awareness of it, Ghazali is hesitant to require such persons to
perform qad4’ [restitution] for missing performance of the new

obligation between the time it was revealed and the time it

reached them.2”

GHAZALI VERSUS AL-SHAFI‘I ON SUBSTITUTION (BADAL)
Al-Shafi‘i’s discussion on naskh in his Risdla places him
among those who require that the abrogation of a rule be
substituted by another rule. “Obligation,” he says, “can never be
abrogated without establishing in its place another obligation, just
as the directing of prayer toward Jerusalem has been abrogated,

establishing in its place the Ka‘ba.” Every abrogated Text, he

27Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:120-121.

148

concludes, or rule of the Sunna of His Messenger is like this.2°

Ghazali differs with this opinion, siding with a substantial
number of other jurists—including the Mu'‘tazilite, Aba al-Husayn
al-Basri7?—who require no substitution. He contends that this is
rationally possible and that no desirable human benfit shall be
voided. Even if there were a supposed benefit, the best interest
would be in its abrogation. Moreover, substitution is not required
of abrogation by any Shari‘a Text.

Human welfare and Shari‘a requirements aside, he cites the
Qur’an as proof for his position: “Are you apprehensive before
your [private] counsel [with the Prophet] to advance freewill
offerings? Then do not do so. And perform the prayer, and pay
the alms. ..”°9 This indicates that the giving of charity as

requirement before having private audience with the Prophet was

abrogated without any substitute.>!

Also, Ghazali holds that if the Shari‘a abrogates one rule by
another, the abrogating rule may be less, equally, or more
burdening than its predecessor. Thus, he is opposed to those

claiming that such an abrogating rule must be less burdensome
28a1-Shafi'l, Risdla, pp. 109-110,
29 aba al-Husayn al-Bagri, al-Mu‘tamad, 2:1415-1416.

300ur’an, 58:13.

3! The abrogated verse he refers to is the preceding one,
Qur’an, 58:12: “O believers, when you have private counsel with
the Messenger, before your counsel advance a freewill offering;
that is better for you and purer... .”

149

(akhaff) because God is merciful to His servants, and so He does not
abrogate a rule except by what is easier than it. Their proof is the

verse, “God desires for you ease and does not desire for you

hardship.”>?

Ghazali counters that had this thinking been true, God would
have laid no obligation at all on His servants; for certainly this is
easier still! Nor would it be wise on His part to test man with
sickness and difficulty. He goes on to explain the absurdities of
adhering to this opinion, saying that were this true, the verse “We
will not abrogate a verse without bringing its better or equal”?
would not be possible, as substituting an abrogated verse with its
equal contradicts this postion. ‘Better,’ Ghazali concludes, refers to
an obligation that provides greater reward for its doer and is more
pleasing to God—not necessarily that which is easier for man.

He also brings examples of such abrogation from the Qur’an in
support of his position. God first ordered the Companions to refrain
from battling the unbelievers. Next, he allowed them to fight.
Finally, he obliged them to stand even twenty against two hundred
of their enemies.24 This, he argues, certainly graduates from easier
to more severe. Also, in the prohibition against drinking alcohol,

God first described it as being of little benefit and more harm. He
32Qur’an, 2:185.
33Qur’an, 2:106.

34 Qur'an, 8:65. “. . . If there be twenty of you, patient men,
they will overcome two hundred; if there be a hundred of you, they
will overcome a thousand unbeleivers. .. .”

150

then prevented prayer for the intoxicated. Ultimately, He

prohibited drinking outright. Here again this grades from ease to

severity.35

CONCLUSION

It is apparent that Ghazali is overwhelmed by the notion that
since the Lawgiver has the exclusive and unencroachable right to
legislate, He has equal right to eliminate and abrogate.
Consequently, he overstates the case for abrogation. His entire
orientation is excessively argumentative, aimed at refuting
opposing opinions instead of focusing on the principle of naskh and
surveying the relevant texts so as to reflect their bearing on other
Shari‘a sources.

Now, after articulating and analyzing Ghazali’s views on the
Shari‘a rules, their sources, and the governing principles of their
abrogation, the question of the authenticity concerning Ghazili’s
works, particularly his legal ones, cannot be overlooked.

This is followed by an account of the ustili literature between
al-Shafi‘i and Ghazali and the emergence of the main approaches
within the field of usiil, including a review of its most salient
works. The study concludes with an examination of the

organization and style of al-Mustasfa and its impact.

SGhazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:120

CHAPTER VII

MODERN STUDIES OF THE AUTHENTICITY
OF GHAZALIY’S WORKS

Literally hundreds of books, booklets, and epistles were
falsely attributed to Ghazali after his death. This phenomenon was
likely a result of two motivations. First, unknowns often found it
irresistible to borrow on the prestige of a great figure in order to
advance their ideas. Second, certain scholars sought to mask their
identities in order to publish controversial opinions, perhaps more
easily digested from the pen of a famous scholar. Hence, a near-
legendary personality like Ghazali was bound to bear the abuse of
an immense collection of forgeries.

Naturally, Muslim scholars were aware of this counterfeiting,
for classical sources, beginning with his contemporary and

colleague ‘Abd al-Ghafir al-Farisi (451-529 H.),!-2 made mention of

le Abd al-Ghafir al-Farisi’s account of Ghazali is found in al-
Subki, Zabaqdt al-Shafi'iyya, 6:191-289. Also, see Dhahabi, Siyar
A‘lam al-Nubald'’, 19:322-346.

2-Abd al-Karim al-‘Uthman, Sirat al-Ghazali wa Aqwal al-
Mutaqaddimin fihi(Damascus: Dar al-Fikr, n.d.), collected
biographical information from the classical works and compiled
them chronologically.

151

152

Ghazali’s works, particularly the more prominent books. There are
also scattered instances in the literature of one or another scholar
endorsing or denouncing the authenticity of certain works
appearing in his name.

However, the first modern systematic and critical evaluation
of Ghazali’s works began in the latter half of the nineteenth century
with R. Gosche’s “Uber Ghazzalis Leben und Werke” (1858).3 He
discusses forty of Ghazali’s books using the life of Ghazali as the
acid test for their authenticity.

In 1899, D. B. MacDonald published “The Life of al-Ghazzali,
with Especial Reference to His Religious Experiences and Opinions.”4
Seventeen years later, Ignaz Goldziher published his book,
Streitschrift des Gazdli gegen die Batinijja-Sekte> Goldziher’s book
included nearly a third of Ghazili’s Fad@’ ih al-Batiniyya and an
elaborate introduction that delved into the issue of authenticity

regarding some of Ghazali’s works.

3This was published in Philologische und Historische

Abhandlungen der Kéniglichen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu
Berlin, 1858, pp. 239-311.

4 Journal of the American Oriental Society 20 (1899): 71-132.
MacDonald’s article is useful, but, according to Montgomery Watt, it
needs to be supplemented. Encyclopaedia of Islam, new ed., s. v.
“Ghazali,” by Montgomery Watt.

First published in 1916. Later it was reprinted in Leiden: E.
J. Brill, 1956.

153

W. H. T. Gairdner wrote in 1914 “Al-Ghazili’s Mishkét al-
Anwar and the Ghazili-Problem,”® and later translated Mishkat
with an introduction.’ Also, according to Watt and Kojiro
Nakamura, Gairdner wrote An Account of Ghazdli’s life and Works
(Madras 1919).8 Richard Gottheil, four years later, wrote his article
“A supposed work of al-Ghazali.”?

A more serious attempt to organize and classify 115
books came in the form of Louis Massignon’s 1929 work, Recueil de
Textes inedits Concernant I’Histore de la mystique en Pays d'Islam,
reunis, classes, annotes et publies. He divides Ghazali’s life into
four periods between 478 H. and the year of his death, 505 H.,

listing the works which Ghazali produced in each period.

Massignon, however, does not provide much detail, especially with

regard to the forgeries. !°

®Der Islam 5 (1914): 121-53 .

741-61102241 s Mishkat al-Anwar (“The Niche for Lights”): A
Translation with Introduction. (London: Royal Asiatic Society,
1924; reprint ed., Lahore: Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, 1952).

8 Encyclopaedia of Islam, new ‏.لع‎ s. v. “Ghazali,” by

Montgomery Watt; and Kojiro Nakamura, “A Bibliography on Imam
al-Ghazali,” Orient 13 (1977): 124.

9 Journal of the American Oriental Society 43 (1923): 85-91.
He is referring to the work al-Farg bayn al-S4élih wa Ghayr al-S4élih.
For more on the controversy of this work, see also Badawi,
Mw'allafat al-Ghazdli, p. 306.

101 ouis Massignon, Recueil de Textes inedits Concernant
l'Histore de la mystique en Pays d’lslam (Paris: Paul Geuthner,
1929), p. 93.

154

In 1924, Maurice Bouyges wrote Essai de Chronologie des
Ouevres de al-Ghazdli (Algazel). For unknown reasons Bouyges
never published this work and it remained in his possession until
his death in 1951. Later, Michel Allard edited and published the
manuscript in 1959.1! According to Watt, it is one of the more
comprehensive works on the chronology and classification of .
Ghazali’s books. Bouyges provided a fairly comprehensive list of
Ghazali’s works, investigating their chronology, identifying and
commenting on the authenticity of each. Like Massignon, he
divided Ghazili’s life into periods, but made five such classifications
between 465 H. and Ghazili’s death. In his nine appendices he
discussed the works attributed to Ghazali, arriving at a total of 383.
Allard added a number of manuscripts which Brockelmann listed,
upping that total to 404. He further refined the issue of
authenticity by grading the attributed works as certain, doubtful,
or false.

In 1934, Miguel Asin Palacios wrote La Espiritualidad de
Algazel y su Sentido Cristiano. In the fourth volume of his study,
Asin Palacios listed Ghazali’s works and stated which he thought
were authentic or forged.!* In 1943, Carl Brockelmann’s second

edition of Geschichte der Arahischen Litteratur provided

11 Bouyges’ work contains full references to the main.
biographical sources; see Essai de Chronologie des Ouevres de al-
Ghazali (Algazel) (Beirut: Imprimerie Catholique, 1959), pp. 1-6.

121.4 Espiritualidad, 4 vols. (Madrid, 1934-41), 4:385-90,

155

remarkable information concerning Ghazali’s works.!3 And in
1944, Margaret Smith published al-Ghazdli the Mystic, which
included a large biographical section on his works.!4

Montgomery Watt, in 1949, wrote “A Forgery in al-Ghazili’s
Mishkét?”'> But it is his 1952 article, “The Authenticity of the
Works Attributed to al-Ghazali,” which is considered a pioneering
attempt at establishing criteria to measure the authenticity of the
many works attributed to Ghazali.!© He chose to test them against
a number of Ghazili’s major themes—such as prophethood being
above and beyond reason and his views in defense of the
Sunna—and for the logical schemes of organization which have
become Ghazili’s hallmark. Admitting that these criteria were not
entirely conclusive, he proceeded to classify Ghazali’s life into four
major periods, listing in each books Ghazili is believed to have
written,

Building on Watt’s criteria, George Hourani wrote “The
Chronology of Ghazali’s Writings” in 1959.17 He provided a

chronological list of Ghazali’s works mentioning their dates in

Geschichte (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1943), pp. 535-546. See also
the Supplement bande (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1937), pp. 744-756.

l4published in London: Luzac, 1944.
'S tournal of the Royal Asiatic Society (1949): 5-22.
16 Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (1952): 24-45

"7 Journal of the American Oriental Society 79 (1959): 225-
233.

156

relation to one another. Hourani did well to stress as a test for
authenticity Ghazali’s referral to his own works in his writings.
Hourani published a revised version of this article ‏مز‎ 8

In 1961, ‘Abd al-Karim al-‘Uthman wrote Sirat al-Ghazéli wa
Aqwal al-Mutagaddimin fthi. He wrote Ghazili’s life and collected
information from the classical sources related to Ghazali’s
biography. At the end of his book ‘Uthman lists his works.

Also in 1961.came ‘Abd al-Rahm4n al-Badawi’s book,
Mw allafat al-Ghazali,'° where he attempted to exhaust all available
references concerned with Ghazali’s works and give references to
their manuscripts in libraries throughout the world. He

commented briefly on their contents and mentioned each work’s

20

various editions. Badawi also classified Ghazali’s works based on

their authenticity. He developed seven general categories.

According to him, 72 known works are genuinely Ghazali’s; 22 are
subject to doubt; between 96 and 127 books, mainly dealing with
black magic, were said to be most likely forged; and between 303

and 352 he lists as portions of Ghazali’s works that have been

1864 Revised Chronology of Ghazali’s Writings,” Journal of the
American Oriental Society 104 (1984): 289-302.

19The 2nd ed. was published (Kuwait: Wakalat al-Matbu ‘at,
1977.)

0B adawi did not make references to al-Mankhiil or Shifa’ al-
Ghalil in their published forms. However, Badawi’s work deserves
attention. Hourani’s article also did not mention their published
forms. Even his updated 1984 article suffered the same lapse.

157

circulated either as separate books or under different titles. In the
fifth category, he provides a list of 225-273 books which were
definitely forged. The sixth category lists those whose have
unknown status, while in the final category he catalogues a number
of manuscripts that are attributed to Ghazali, providing the reader
with an alphabetical list of all of Ghazali’s works. Overall, Badawi’s
work is useful and remarkable, but is in need of updating.

In 1974 ‘Abd al-Amir al-A‘sam wrote al-Ghazdli the
Philosopher which included a list and summary of Ghazili’s works,
promising that he would soon provide an exhaustive catalogue of
Ghazali’s writings. A‘sam has been working for the past twenty
years on what he claims will be a complete bibliographic study,
utilizing both classical and modern references. The result of his
study is eagerly awaited.

Having consulted the modern references with regard to

Ghazali’s legal works—both on usul and figh—an account of these

books is in order.
CHAPTER VIII

GHAZALI’S LEGAL WORKS

1. Al-Ta‘liga fi Furi‘ al-Madhhab. This exposition on the
details of Shafi‘ite figh seems to have been Ghazili’s first legal
work. It is said that as a young man he travelled to Jurjan to study
with a presumably renowned fagih, Aba Nasr al-Isma‘ili.! Ghazali’s
writings and notes from his sessions with Isma‘fli apparently
spawned al-Ta‘liqa. But this is problematic. For the story quoted
in the literature has it that on the way back to Tis, Ghazali’s
Caravan was accosted by bandits, who confiscated, among other
things, the young scholar’s notes. He pleaded with the chief bandit
to at least return his notebooks, from which he had planned to
write al-Ta‘liga, explaining that they contained books that he had
travelled to hear, write, and learn. The chief mocked him saying,
“How can you claim to have known its knowledge, while if we take
it from you, you remain without knowledge?” Nevertheless, al-
Ta‘liga was returned to Ghazali, who later said, “For three years
thereafter, I memorized all that I had in al-Ta‘liqa.”

But if this report is true, it means that al-Ta‘liqa is not a

single, independent work, for he states Clearly, “It contains books
'Subki, Labagdt al-Shafi‘iyya, 4:103.

158

159

he travelled to hear, write, and learn.” Furthermore, it says that
Ghazali wrote al-Ta‘liga from the sessions with al-Isma‘ili—whose

identity is to some degree dubious. Still, most references include

al-Ta‘liga as Ghazali’s first legal work.

2. AleMankhal min Ta‘liqat al-Usal.2 While most
scholars, like Subki, place the writing of Ghazali’s Mankhil during
the lifetime of his mentor, Imam al-Haramayn al-Juwayni (d.
478/1085),° some have attributed the work to Ghazali’s students
after his seclusion and writing of Ihyd’ ‘Ulam al-Din, Kimiya’ al-
Sa‘ada, and Jawdhir al-Qur'dn. Murtada Zabidi, in his commentary
on /hyd’, writes that in the introduction to Mustasfa_ Ghazali

mentions al-Mankhiil after these works saying,”

Then divine guidance directed me to teach, and from my
presentations and discussions in ‘ilm ‏أشي‎ al-figh, some
students wrote a unique work which is different than al-
Tahdhib al-Ustil. When they completed it and submitted it to

me {for review], I did not disappoint them. They called it al-
Mankhil.

Zabidi’s reference to al-Mustasfa is odd. Either he had a copy

of al-Mustasfé in which this was written in its introduction—which

2Hourani, in his article, “A Revised Chronology of Ghazili’s
Writing,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 104 (1984): 291
gives the title as al-Mankhil fi Usiil al-Fiqh. However, unaware of
its publication, he still has it existing only in its manuscript form.

9

3Subki, Tabaqdt al-Shdfi'iyya, 6:225.

4See ‘Uthman, Sirat al-Ghazdli, p. 193.

160

is most unlikely—or he wrote it from memory and inaccurately
quoted al-Mustasfa; for both published editions and at least one
manuscript are clearly different from what Zabidi has cited. For

Ghazali says in the introduction of al-Mustasfa:

Be that as it may, in the prime of my youth, this
knowledge, which specially brings benefits of religion
and worldly affairs, and the reward of the Hereafter
and this life, consequently demanded from me that I
devote to it quite a stretch from that respite of life and
that I dedicate to it from the breathing space in life a
measure. Hence, I wrote many books concerning the
details of figh [Law] and its principles.

Subsequently, I devoted myself to the knowledge of
the path of the afterlife and the hidden secrets of the
religion. I wrote extensive books concerning it, such as
Thyda’ ‘Uliim al-din: and concise [works], such as,
Jawahir al-Qur'dn; and also intermediate [works], such
as, Kimiyd’ al-Sa‘dda.

But Allah’s determination, dixz, impelled me to
return to teaching and benefiting students, a group of
whom, who had acquired the science of figh, proposed
to me that I should write a book on usiil al-figh
[Principles of Law), wherein I proceed meticulously
combining compilation and investigation, taking a
middle road between insufficiency and boredom,
composing it in a manner appealing to
understanding—not as Tahdhib al-Usiil, for it is too
exhausting and lengthy, but more than al-Mankhiil,
which tends to be too brief and concise. So I
responded to their request, seeking Allih’s help and
combined herein both compilation and investigation
for understanding the meanings because one cannot

dispense with the other.>

SGhazili, al-Mustasfa, 1:4,

161

Therefore, Subki’s opinion concerning al-Mankhiil is more
reliable and sustainable than Zabidi’s. This is further supported by
Ghazali’s statement at the end of al-Mankhal, “I have followed
what Imam al-Haramayn, may Allah have mercy on him, wrote
without much alteration, addition, or omission.”® Moreover, Ghazali
himself made reference to al-Mankhal in more than one of his

works.”

However, Carl Brockelmann opines that it is possible that one
of Ghazali’s students compiled the book based on the lessons that
Ghazali presented. But he does not provide any evidence. It is
possible that Brockelmann based his observation on b. Hajar al-
Haytami’s (d. 973/1565) discussion in al-Khayraét al-Hisén fi

Mandéqib al-Nu'man,® which states:

Some of the fanatics who were not blessed with divine
guidance brought me a book attributed to Imam Ghazili
which contains extreme prejudice and obscene mockery of
Imam al-Muslimin and the first of the mujtahid imams,
namely Abd Hanifah, may Allah have mercy upon him... .

A man brought this [book] assuming that Ghazali is the
same as al-Ilmam Muhammad, the Proof of Islam, while he is
not the same person; for we find in his book /hyd’ praise for
Abi Hanifa, where he wrote his biography in an honorable
manner. . . . The copy that I saw of this book states on the
cover that it is compiled by Mahmiad al-Ghazali. And this
Ghazali is not the Proof of Islam. So I wrote on the margin of

6Ed. Muhammad H. Hitd (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, n.d.), p. 504.

7Ghazali, Shifa’ al-Ghalil (Baghdad: Irshad Press, 1971), pp.
8,16, and 267; and al-Mustasfa, 1:4.

8 (Cairo: Maymaniyya Press, 1311 H), p. 4.

162

that book, ‘This is a Mu‘tazilite. His name is Mahmid al-
Ghazali, and he is not the Proof of Islam.’

Although b. Hajar does not explicitly mention the name of al-
Mankhil, it is the only book where Ghazali towards the
end—following his teacher, Juwayni—attacked Abia Hanifa, accusing
him of not knowing Arabic, hadith, or even fiqh.2 (But he also
defends Abi Hanifa and criticizes Malik for excessive application of
masglaha and giving preference to the practice of the Medinite
community.)!0 Yet all of this takes place in a few lines. He further
accuses Abi Hanifa of turning the Shari‘a upside down, upsetting
its structure.!! In addition, according to Ibn Abi al-Wafa’ al-
Qurashi,!2 there is a Hanafite answer to Ghazali’s criticism of Abia
Hanifa in al-Mankhil by Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Sattar b.
Muhammad al-‘Imadi al-Kardari of Bukhara (d. 642/1244),!3

Al-Mankhil has been published, for the second time, by

Muhammad Hassan Hita in 1980, with a brief introduction.!4
°Ghazali, al-Mankhal, ‏مم‎
‎OGhazali, al-Mankhil, p. 500.

11 Ghazali continues his assault on Abi Hanifa in al-Mankhiil
until p. 504.

12 4)-Jawéhir al-Mudiyya fi Tabagat al-Hanafiyya (Cairo: ‘Isa
al-Babi al-Halabi, n.d.), 2:82-83.

I3There is a manuscript reference to Kadiri’s answer to
Ghazali available in Princeton, Garrett collection vol 2, 039, written
in1002/1593. Badawi, Mu’ allafat al-Ghazdli, p.16.

14 Damascus: Dar al-Fikr Press.)

163

According to Badawi, there are at least nine different manuscripts
in Egypt, Turkey, Iran, and India.!> Hitd published the book based
on three Egyptian manuscripts.

In al-Mankhil, Ghazali follows Juwayni in defending the
Shafi‘ite school and explaining its excellence over others. If it is
true that he finished al-Mankhiil in the lifetime of his teacher, one
can conclude that he wrote it before he was 28, since Juwayni died
in 478 H.!6

It seems, however, that the tension between the Shafi‘ites
and the Hanafites caused some of the Hanafites to complain to the
Seljuk ruler, Sunger, stating that Ghazali attacked Aba Hanifa and

his fighki school. Ghazali himself refers to this incident. He says:!7

When I responded to the invitation to teach in Naysabir and
Students from all over the world came, envy erupted in the
hearts of some people. One of them went to the king of Islam
and took with him a book that I wrote when I was young,
wherein they had forged statements against Aba Hanifa. But

a group of righteous people explained the situation to the
Seljuki sultan and no harm was done to me.

Ghazali’s statement as expressed inthe Fadd’il does not at all

suggest that the part against Abi Hanifa at the end of al-Mankhiil

'SBadawi, Mu’allafat al-Ghazdli, p. 9.
'©Subki, Labagdt al-Shdfi'iyya, 5:165-222.

7 Nar al-Din ‘Ali, ed., Fadd’il al-Andm min Ras@’ il Hujjat al-
Islam, p. 45.

14

is forged, as ‘Ali Muhi al-Din Daghi claims.!8 Ghazéli merely states
that they added more words of their own. What supports the fact
that the attack against Aba Hanifa in al-Mankhil is genuine is that

the same materials are found in his teacher’s book, al-Burhén.'9

3. Al-Basit fi al-Furt‘ al-Madhhab. Al-Basit, Ghazli’s .
third legal work, relies considerably on Juwayni’s great Nihdyat al-
Matlab fi Dirdyat al-Madhhab 0 of which a manuscript is available
in Egypt.7! Al-Basit, judging from Ghazali’s description in his
introduction to al-Wasit (which is an abridgement of the former), is
an extensive treatise on Shafi‘ite law which also gives reference to

the positions of the other major schools. Ghazali mentions al-Basit

'®See the introduction to al-Ghazali, al-Wasit ft al-Madhhab,
2. vols. ed. Muhi al-Din Daghi (Cairo: Dar al-I‘tisim, 1983), 1:161.

'? Aba al-Ma‘ali ‘Abd al-Malik al-Juwayni, al-Burhén fi Usiil
al-Fiqh, 2 vols. ed. ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Dib (Qatar: University of Qatar,
1980), 2:1363-1366.

205. Khallikan, in Wafaydt al-A ‘yan, 3:354, describes al-
Matlab as a legal work without parallel in the history of Islam. See
also al-Dhahabi, Siyar A‘ldm al-Nubald’, 18:475, (Bouyges goes so
far to say that it is a summary of al-Matlab. Essai de Chronologie,
p. 12.)

21 Badawi, Mu’allafat al-Ghazdli, p.16.

*2Ghazali, Jawahir al-Qur'dn, ed. Mubi al-Din Sabri al-Kurdi
(Cairo: Kurdistan Press, 1911), p. 27.

165

in Jawéhir al-Qur’ an2* Daghi, in his introduction to al-Wasit,

quotes Ghazali as saying of al-Basit: 23

My book al-Basit fi al-Madhhab, despite being organized well
having abundant of beneficial fighi information, unpolluted
by irrelevant issues and wordiness, and contains the essential
fiqhi issues, providing purely what is important and what is
completely investigated, requires a high degree of
determination and focused concentration to attain the
knowledge [it imparts], which is rarely found. Due to the
[prevailing] laxity and negligence that has overcome minds
and hearts, I have conceded to the standards of students, . . .
which may be boring. Yet I have extended it beyond too
brief a presentation, which might be confusing.

,

There are at least four manuscripts of al-Basit available in
Spain, Turkey, and Egypt, making this elaborate work on Shafi‘ite

fiqh prime for someone to bring out.24

4. Al-Wasit. This work is highly regarded among the
Shafi‘ites despite it being only half the size of al-Basit and is, in
fact, its summary. According to Ghazali, however, al-Basit contains

only seventy-percent of the substance of al-Wasit.25 Hence it is

22Ghazall, Jawahir al-Qur’ an, ed. Muhi al-Din Sabri al-Kurdi
(Cairo: Kurdistan Press, 1911), p. 27.

*3Ghazali, al-Wasit, 1:205-206 and 1:295.
“Badawi, Mu’ allafat al-Ghazali, p. 16.

25The first volume covers the “Book of Ritual Purity” and has
six chapters.

166

free from the peripheral issues of fiqh, and has a different scheme

of organization,7®

Ghazali appears to have completed writing it before his
departure from Baghdad, according to al-Subki, who heard an
instructor in Damascus saying, “Al-Ghazali says .. . v2] which
indicates that the text had gained widespread fame in Ghazili’s
lifetime.

A number of commentaries sprang from al-Wasit, including
al-Muhit fi Sharh al-Wasit, written by Muhammad b. Yahya b. al-
Naysabiri (d. 548/1153), a student of Ghazali’s. He placed his
manuscript in the Salahiyya school near the Mosque of al-Shafi‘i in

Egypt.78
al-Ghaz4éli, by Ahmad b. Muhammad b. al-Rif‘a (d. 710/1310), was

Another commentary, al-Matlab al-‘Ali fi Sharh al-Wasit

never completed. But twenty-six large volumes of the work are
completed. Also there is al-Bahr al-Muhit fi Sharh al-Wasit by
Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Qaymili (d. 727/1327). Qaymili
abridged his own work and called it Jawdhir al-Bahr. A summary
of this abridgement, Jawdhir al-Jawdéhir, has been completed by
Siraj al-Din ‘Umar b. Muhammad al-YamAni (d. 878/1473),2°

According to Haji Khalifa, other commentators on al-Wasit
26Ghazali, al-Wasit, 1:296.
7Tabagat al-Shafi'iyya, 6:199.

28 Subki, Tabaqat al-Shdafi'iyya, 9:30; and Ghaziali, al-Wasit,
1:252.

9Subki, Tabaqdt al-Shafi'iyya, 9:30.

167

include Aba al-Futih, As‘ad 5. Mahmid al-‘Ijli (d. 600/1203), Zahir
al-Din Ja‘far b. Yahya al-Tarmanti (d. 682/1283), Muhammad b.
‘Abd al-Hakim, ‘Izz al-Din ‘Umar b. Ahmad al-Mudliji (d.
710/1310), and ‘Umar 5. Ahmad al-Nasa’i (d. 716/1316).2°

Some other works that have been written critically,
commenting on the views Ghazali posits in al-Wasit, are as follows:
Idah al-Aghdlit al-Mawjida fi al-Wasit by Ibrahim b. ‘Abd Allah
al-Hamadani (d. 642/1244);3! Sharh Mushkil al-Wasit by ‘Uthman
b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. al-Salah (d. 643/1245);32 and Sharh Mushkil
al-Wasit by Aba al-‘Ala’ Hamza b. Yasuf (d. ‏3ه‎

In addition, many Shafi‘ite scholars have abridged al-Wasit,
perhaps the best known of which is al-Ghdyat al-Quswda fi Dirdyat
al-Fatwa by Nasir al-Din ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar al-Baydawi (d.
685/1286).34 Other abridgements were written by Nur al-Din

30K halifa, Kashf al-Zuniin, 2:2007-2009.

3'The book is still in manuscript form in Egypt, Dar al-Kutb,
number 282 of the Shfafi‘ite figh. Ghazali, al-Wasit, 1:253; and
Badawi, Mu’allafat al-Ghazéli, p. 20.

327 he book is still in manuscript form in Egypt.

33The book is still in manuscript form in Turkey and Egypt.
Ghazali, al-Wasit, 1:254; and Badawi, Mu'allafat al-Ghazali, p. 20.

34This work was published in two vols. 1982 by Dar al-Islah
and edited by ‘Ali M. Daghi.

168

Ibrahim al-Asnawi (d. 721/1321(,35 Ibrahim b. ‘Abd al-Rahman al-

‘Umayri, °° and Badr al-Din Muhammad al-Yamani.>”

There are eight known manuscripts of al-Wasit available in

India, Spain, Turkey, Egypt, and Syria.38 They do not constitute the

entire work.

5. Al-Wajiz. Here Ghazali himself summarizes al-Wasit.°?
The book is of course a primary text for Shafi‘ites, reflecting

Ghazali’s tendency to bring into discussion the opinions of other

40

schools. Unlike his methods in al-Wasit and al-Basit, he uses

symbols to refer to the names of Shafi‘ite scholars and the imams

of other schools, such as ‘C’ for Aba Hanifa, ‘¢’ for Malik, ‘3’ for al-

*5Ghazali, al-Wasit, 1:255; and Khalifa, Kashf al-Zunin,
2:2007.

36The book is in Turkey. Badawi, Mu’ allafat al-Ghazali, p. 21;
and Ghazali, al-Wasit, p. 256.

37156 book is also in Turkey. See Badawi, Mu'allafét al-
Ghazali, p.21; Ghaziili, al-Wasit, 1:256.

*8Badawi, Mu'allafat al-Ghazéli, pp. 19-24.

*°Ghazali makes mention of al-Wajiz in his Jawdhir, p. 27.
Bouyges, in Essai de Chronologie, pp. 12 and 49, chronologically
places al-Wajiz between Ihyd’ and Jawdhir based on a note on one
Cairo manuscript giving the date 495/1101. Hourani and Badawi,

however, reject this, mainly because of the mention of al-Wajiz in
both /hyd’ and Jawdhir itself.

401+ has been printed in two volumes in 1317 H. by Mu’ayyad
Press in Cairo.

169

Muzani, and ‘’’ for a dubious or unlikely opinion of the Shafi‘ite »

school.

The book has been well received in Shifi‘ite circles. One of

the most prominent ShAfi‘ites after Ghazili, ‘Abd al-Karim Rafi‘i (d.

623/1226), has written a commentary on al-Wajiz called Fath al-
‘Aziz Sharh al-Wajiz. Rafi‘i, himself, abridged this commentary,
calling it Mukhtasar Fath al-‘Aziz4} Also, Zabidi, in his book, Ithaf
al-Sdda al-Muttagin bi Sharh Ihydé’ ‘Ulim al-Din, says that
numerous scholars have worked on al-Wajiz. He claims that more
than seventy commentaries were written on it.47

This work also has been abridged by a number of scholars,
such as ‘Umar b. ‘Ali b. al-Mulaqqan’s (d. 808/1401) Khuldsat al-
Badr al-Munir fi Takhrij al-Ahddith wa al-Athar al-Waqi‘a fi al-
Sharh al-Kabir; b. Hajar al-‘Asqilani’s (d. 852/1449) al-Talkhis al-
Kabir;*? and al-Nawawi’s (d. 676/1177) Rawdat al-Télibin4 Also,
according to Badawi, more than eight commentaries have been

written on al-Wajiz and its abridgements.*>

4) According to Badawi it remains in Dar al-Kutb, Egypt. One
volume is also in India. For details concerning the manuscripts,
consult Badawi, Mu’allafat al-Ghazdli, p. 27.

427 abidi, Ithaf al-Sdda, 1:43.
43This was printed in Delhi in 1307 H.
44This was also printed in 1307 H. in Delhi.

45 Badawi, Mu'allafat al-Ghazali, p. 28.

170

6. Al-Mukhtagar fi al-Figh al-Shdafit. Ghazali has
referred to this book in Jhyd’ and Jawéhir al-Qur’dn, and stated
that it is the shortest of his fighi works. A manuscript of it is

located in Turkey.*6

7. Ma’Gkhidh al-Khilaf. This is not a fiqhi book per se, for
it does not deal with the details of Shafi'ite figh. Rather it is
concerned with the etiquette and protocol of fighi debates. He
states in Mi‘ydr al-‘Ilm, “Since the determination of people in our
time is directed more toward figh than the other sciences—in fact,

is confined to it—I am compelled to compose a book on the rules of

247

debate. This motivation drove him to write, most probably,

respectively, Ma’dkhidh al-Khilaf, Lubab al-Nazar, Tahsin al-
Ma’ akhidh, and al-Mabddi’ wa al-Ghayat 48 as well.

“SGhazali, /hya’ ‘Ulim al-Din, 4 vols. (Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifa,
n.d.), 1:35; and Ghazali, Jawdéhir, p. 22. Hourani and Badawi give it
with the title of Khuldsat al-Mukhtasar wa Naqawat al-Mu‘tasar.
See Badawi, Mu'allafat al-Ghazdili, ‏.م‎ 31; and Ghazili, al-Wasit,
p.207.

“7Ghazali, Mi‘yar al-‘Ilm (Cairo: n.p.,1927), p. 27.

“®These works are listed in Badawi, Mu'allafat al-Ghazdli, pp.
33-36. Badawi claims that al-Mabddi’ wa al-Ghaydt is concerned
with usil al-figh and not the rules of conduct for debates.
However none of the past four books is found. So one cannot

decisively determine its contents. See also Daghi’s introduction to
Ghazili, Wasit, p. 209.

171

8. Shifa’ al-Ghalil fi Baydén al-Shabah wa al-Mukhil
wa Masélik al-Ta‘lil. This is Ghazali’s first original work on usil
al-figh.4° Shifa‘ has an introduction and five essential parts. In the
introduction Ghazali defines qiyds, ‘illa, and daldla, and
differentiates between them.

Part One discusses the causes of the Sharf‘a rules and the
validity of extending those rules whenever similar causes or
circumstances arise, which is based on the Book, the Sunna, and
Tjma'.

Ghazali examines maglaha in relation to ‘illa in Part Two and
discusses cases where two causes may exist for one rule. He
illustrates this discourse, as well as the entire book, with many
fiqhi examples, unlike al-Mustasfa.°°

In the third part he takes up the Shari‘a rule which is the
basis for giyaés, explaining what is within and outside its domain.
Here he takes issue with Abi Zayd al-Dabbisi, the great Hanafite
scholar from Transoxiana.

In Part Four, Ghazali focuses on the Sharf‘a rule, which is the

basis of qiydas, and its conditions. In the fifth part, far‘ (derived

49The book has been edited by Hamad al-Kubaysi as part of
his Ph.D. dissertation at al-Azhar in the Faculty of Shari‘a, June
8,1969. However, Hourani, unaware of al-Kubaysi’s work, reports
that the book is still in manuscript form. Hourani gives the title as
Shifa’ al-Ghalil fi al-Qiydés wa al-Ta‘lil.

50Check al-Kubaysi’s references to Ghazali’s discussions of
fiqh in Shifa’ al-Ghalil, ed. Hamad al-Kabaysi (Baghdad: Mataba‘at
al-Irshad, 1390/1971), pp. 710-720. Ghazali refers to Shifa’ in al-
Mustasfa, p. 2:290, 2:299, and 2:342.

172

tule) is examined, and is its conditions and its relationship to the
ground Aukm (rule).

We find Ghazali in Shifa’, as in al-Mustasfa, using the stylistic
techniques of debate and relying heavily on logical proofs. He
poses issues, stating the positions of his disputants, usually
introduced by the phrase “If it is said,” and then unveils his
response with “We shall say.” He did not, however, speak about the
validity and the place of giyds in figh as he did in al-Mustasfad and
more briefly in al-Mankhil. He wrote Shifa’, as he openly states in
the beginning of the book, as a response to the Hanafite jurists
from Transoxiana. Moreover, Ghazili comments in the text that
Students using the books of Abi Zayd al-Dabbisi to argue
concerning giyds was the primary reason why he wrote this
book.>! In fact, al-Dabbisi is mentioned extensively by Ghazali in
Shifa’ 52

Ghazali is also said to have a collection of fatawa.>3 According
to b. al-‘Imad al-Hanbali,°4 who listed Ghazali’s works, the book
includes one hundred and ninety questions, which are not arranged

in any particular order. In any case, this does not seem unlikely.

'Ghazali, Shifa’ al-Ghalil, p. 9.

>We find mention of Dabbisi in Shifa‘ al-Ghalil on pp. 9, 14,
142, 146, 177, 178, 179, 181, 183, 310, 317, 322, 333, 379, 414,
460, 465, 510, 513, 584, 604, 650, 652, and 695.

*3subki, Labaqdt al-Shéfi'iyya, 4:116.

34155 al-‘Imad, Shadhardt al-Dhahab, 4:12.

173

Ibn Khaldiin notes in his Térikh that Yasuf b. Tashifin of Spain was
unhappy with the response of local Muslim governors and sought a
fatwa to remove them from power.>> He wrote to the scholars of
Iraq and he received an answer from Ghazali among other
prominent legists.

It should be noted here ihat Maurice Bouyges stresses that.
Ghazali’s Fata@wda came before 482 H., expressing disagreement with
Goldziher’s position that the Fatéwd appeared in Ghazali’s later
years of teaching in the Nizamiyya school of Baghdad, just before
488 H. According to b. Khaldin, Yisuf Tashifin moved to Spain in
the year 486 H. Therefore, one is inclined to agree with Goldziher’s
assumption rather than Bouyges’. In any case, there exists one
manuscript of this work in Damascus.

Ibn Khallikan, while treating the biography of Ghazali’s
colleague, al-Kiya al-Harrasi, cites an important fatwa from
Ghazali’s Fatdw4 that illustrates Ghazali’s position against Shi‘ism.>®
The ruling concerns a person who openly cursed Yazid b. Mu‘awiya,
as to whether Yazid should be deemed fasigq
(unrighteous)—rendering it permissible for one to curse him—or
whether Yazid did not intend to kill Husayn, making it preferable
to ask God’s mercy for him. Ghazali’s answer reflects the classical
Sunni position. He states, in short, that it is not allowed at all to

curse a Muslim, and whoever does so will be himself cursed. The

35ibn Khaldin, Térikh, 6:187.

56Ibn Khallikan, Wafaydt al-A'ydan, 1:13.

174

fatw@’'s significance for our purposes is that it helps in determining
the falsity of various works attributed to Ghazali that have a Shi‘t

spirit, such as Sharh Jannat al-Asmé’, which is forged in the name
of Ghazali.>”

9. Ghdyat al-Ghawr fi Dirdyat al-Dawr. This is a small
fatwa that Ghazali wrote concerning a special form of divorce,
known as the “vicious circle.” It is also known as Ghawr al-Dawr
ft l-Mas'ala al-Surijiyya, and Brockelmann calls it Bayan Ghdyat ‏-أه‎
‎Ghawr fi Masa’ il al-Dawr, saying that Ghazali wrote it in 484 H. In
summary, a man tells his wife, ‘When I tell you that you are
divorced, [it is as if] divorced has been pronounced three times.”
The required three pronouncements occur simultaneously when
the one is uttered. Therefore, one is contingent upon the other,
whence the name, ‘vicious circle.’ Ghazali in his later years

reversed an earlier position, and ruled that such divorce is valid.®

10. Tahdhib al-Ughl. This is Ghazali’s second ustli work.?

Judging from a comment in his introduction to al-Mustasfa, it is an

elaborate effort which Ghazali intended it to be exhaustive:©°

°"Badawi, Mu’ allafét al-Ghazdli, pp. 377-381.
*8Badawi, Mu’allafat al-Ghazdli, pp 50-52 and pp. 207-209.
Badawi, Mu'allafat al-Ghazdli, p. 218.

S°Ghazali, Mustasfa, 1:4.

175

But Allah’s determination, gtx, impelled me to return to
teaching and benefitting students, a group of whom, who had
acquired the science of figh, propsed to me that I should
write a book on usii! al-figh, where | proceed to meticulously
combine compilation and investigation, taking a middle road
between insufficiency and being boring, composing it in a
manner that appeals to the understanding—not as in Tahdhib
al-Usiil [Refining the Principles], for it is too exhausting and.
lengthy, but more than al-Mankhil [The Sifted from the
Science of the Principles}, which tends to be too brief and
concise. So I responded to their request, seeking Allah’s help,
joining herein both organization and precision to facilitate

comprehension of its meanings, for one cannot dispense with
the other.

Bouyges, however, hesitated to attribute a book by this name to
Ghazaili.

11. Kitéb Hagigqat al-Qawlayn. Ghazili’s third usiili

contribution is a defense of Shafi‘i’s methodology.°!

12. Kitab Asds al-Qiyds. This usal? work of Ghazali is also
mentioned in al-Mustasfdé, but in the context of addressing the

issue of applying qiyds to language.°”

13. Kitab 1 al-Qur’an. This is another usili work

which Ghazali mentions in al-Mustasfa during his discourse

6! Brockelmann, Geschichte, supplement 1:754. See also
Badawi, Mu'allafat al-Ghazdli, pp. 212-213.

82Ghazali, Mustasfa, 1:38 and 2:238 and 325.

176

concerning whether basmala is part of the Qur’an or not.63 The

book, however, has not been found.

14.Ihyaé’ ‘Ulam al-Din. Although Ihyd’ is not considered a
purely legal work, nonetheless, it is patterned on the order of a
book of figh and conversant with a fair number of issues normally
associated with Islamic Law, especially matters of human conduct.
Moreover, the terminology of the fugahd’ and something of their

approach is apparent in the work.°4

Indeed, one wishing to
reformulate Ghazali’s theory of the secrets of the Shari‘a would do

well to begin with his /hyd’.

15. Al-Mustasfa min ‘Iim al-Ugsal. This, of course, is
Ghazali’s last legal work, which he finished writing on the 6th of
Muharram, 503 H.® No one—either in the classical period or in the
modern era—has ever doubted that Ghazali authored al-Mustasfa’,
the subject of this study, with its first two Quitbs 6

Al-Mustasfa was first printed in 1324/1907 by the Amiri

Press of Bulag, Egypt, edited by Muhammad al-Bilbaysi al-Husayni.

®3Ghazali, Mustasf4, 1:67.

64 tava Lazarus-Yafeh, Studies in al-Ghazzdéli, (Jerusalem: The
Magnes Press, The Hebrew University, 1975), pp. 377-381.

655. Khallikan, Wafaydt al-A‘ydn, 3:354; Subki, Tabaqat al-
Shafi‘iyya, 4:116; and Ibn al-‘Imad, Shadhardt al-Dhahab, 4:13.

6Concerning its manuscripts, see Badawi, Mu’allafat al-
Ghazdali, pp. 216-218.

177

The first edition was sponsored by Faraj Allah Zaki al-Kurdi who
announced only that the published book is based on rare
manuscripts without specifying any of them.°” In any case, this
edition is in two volumes and includes in print, along with al-
Mustasfa, another work, ‘Abd al-‘Ali Muhammad b. Nizam al-Din
al-Ansari’s Fawdtih al-Rahamiit, which is a commentary on
Musallam al-Thubit fi ‏اشعلا‎ al-Figh by Shaykh Muhib al-Din b. ‘Abd
al-Shakar. Al-Mustasfé is printed on the top part of the pages,
with the other work on the bottom. Based on this edition, which is
the best one, the Tujariyya Press, in 1356/1937, reprinted al-
Mustasfa, as 2 volumes bound into one. In 1971, under the
assignment of the Jindi Book Store of Cairo, Shaykh Muhammad
Mustafa Abi al-‘Il4, known as Hamid, supervised another printed
edition of the book. This edition, however, has numerous printing
errors. The Amiri edition has been reprinted by Maktabat al-
Muthanna in Baghdad, in 1970, and by Dar SAdir in Beirut, n.d.
Both reprints are in two volumes.

There are no less than fifteen manuscripts of al-Mustasfa
located in Turkey, Egypt, Germany, and Iraq.°8

As for this translation, I have relied on the Amiri edition plus

a microfilm copy of a manuscript from al-Fatih in Turkey acquired

67; Suspect that they used Dar al-Kutub’s manuscripts.

SRadawi, Mu’allafat al-Ghazdli, p. 217. 1am presently
collecting copies of the manuscripts with the hope that along with a

complete English translation a new Arabic edition may be
produced.

178

by the Institute of Arab Manuscripts in Cairo. (For more on al-

Mustasfa, see the section dealing with its organization and content

in this introduction).©?

®° Concerning its manuscripts, see Badawi, Mu'allafat al-
012617, pp. 216-218.

CHAPTER IX

USULI LITERATURE
FROM AL-SHAFI‘I TO GHAZALI

In the first two Islamic centuries, dispute between the Hijazi
school of the muhaddiths and the Kiafan proponents of ra‘y
continued to be characterized by details of fiqh without serious
examination of the legal principles from which these views sprang. |

Al-Shafi‘i ushered in this new phase of legal inquiry with his
historic Risdla, and broadened the scope of the discussion to include
Sunna as an essential legal source independent of the Qur’an in

Ikhtilaf al-Hadith, where he laid down criteria for the verification

Schools of figh are classified by specialists according to the
regions where they flourished. Some, however, trace the ra’y
school of Iraq to the Hijaz, claiming that the Kafan legists’ roots are
grounded in the persons of ‘Umar b. al-Khattab and ‘Ali b. Abi
Talib. Through b. Mas‘id, his students, and their successors,
emerged the great Aba Hanifa. Indeed, they argue that during Abi
Hanifa’s lifetime Malik, in Medina, endorsed al-maglaha al-mursala,
which is based on ra’y. Furthermore, Hijazi legists like Rabi‘a (d.
136/753) and Hasan (known as Rabifa al-Ra’y and Hasan al-Ra’y),
also were, obviously, proponents of ra’y. Still, it is acceptable to
classify these schools by region, and some scholars hold that it is
preferable for the sake of accuracy. See Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:406;
and Muhammad al-Hijwi, al-Fikr al-Samt ft Tarikh al-Fiqh al-Islami
(Medina: al-Maktabat al ‘IImiyya, 1977), 1:310.

179

180

of the Prophetic traditions.”

Also, in his book /btdl al-Istihsdn
(The Refutation of Juristic Preference) he reaffirmed the absolute
relationship between naskh and the life of the Prophet, concluding
that wahi (revelation) provided the only possibility for abrogation.
Thus, he castigated the Hanafites for advocating the on-going
validity of naskh—which he deemed more an instrument of a
jurist’s ‘personal preference’ than an indicator of the Sharf‘a’s
abrogation.

Yet even al-Shafi‘i treated the subject of usitl with extensive
illustrations of the details of figh, although his style remained
straightforward and clean of the philosophical terminology found in
later writings.

By the end of the third century, however, the legal school
bearing his name had evolved away from his simple methods,
lacing the study of the principles of figh with the terminology of
logic and obscuring it with the arguments of kaldm. (Ironically, al-
Shafi‘i’s style of utilizing case illustrations found expression in the
rival legal tradition that came to carry the name of Abi Hanifa, as
well as with the Zahirite legists.) This ‘kalamization’ of usiil al-figh

continued through the time of Ghazili.

2See the lengthy introduction of Shaykh Ahmad Shakir in his
edition of Risadla; ed. Anmad M. Shakir (Cairo: Dar al-Turath, 1979).

See also Muhammad Abia Zahra, al-/mdam al-Shafi't: (Cairo: Dar al-
Fikr al-‘Arabi, 1948).

181

THIRD ISLAMIC CENTURY USULI LITERATURE

Much of the usili literature of the third century emerged
primarily as a result of the debates and ideas stimulated by al-
Shafi‘i’s Risd@la, particularly concerning giyds, khabar al-wahid
(solitary reports), and ijmd‘. Hanafite jurists, such as ‘Isa b. Abin ‏بط‎
‎Sadaqa al-Hanafi, wrote in defense of these principles.° The
Zahirites, on the other hand, formed refutations of qiyas, taqlid
(blind imitation), and the concept of the abrogation of hadith.
Dawid al-Zahiri, for one, took up al-Shafi‘i’s position on the

invalidity of juristic preference in his book al-Usil, which strongly

opposes istihsdn. 4

By the end of the third century, and certainly in the fourth,
the more established fighi schools entered a new stage in which
their respective fiqhi ideas and rules had become formalized and
rigid. The schools also became somewhat distinguished from their
founding personalities, although their names still served as the
madhhabs’ eponyms, as exemplified by the Hanafite, Milikite,
Shafi‘ite, and Hanbalite schools. Thus, original and independent
ijtihad was limited, confining the jurist’s intellectual activity to
more or less fixed interpretations within the established positions
of his school. The freedom that al-Shafi‘i himself enjoyed, for
instance, in changing his fighi views formed in Iraq after moving to

Egypt, or adopting new opinions altogether, was all but eliminated

3Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdad, 11:157.

4al-Subki, Zabagdt al-Shdfi'iyya, 2:290.

182

for the Shafi‘ite legist of the second half of the third century.
Nevertheless, usfl al-figh took its place among the literature
of the Islamic sciences in the third century. A compilation of the
titles of that period’s recorded usitli works and their authors
reflects the prevalent usili issues of the century. The legal
affiliation of their authors (noted after each grouping of book
entries below) indicates the contribution to usiil by the major fighi

schools.

Third Century Usili Books and Their Authors

°K. Ithbat al-Qiydas

eK. Khabar al-Wahid

°K. Ijtihdd al-Ra’y
‘Isa b. Aban b. Sadaga al-Hanaf?> (d. 221/835)
{Hanafite]

°K. al-Nukat
Ibrahim b. Siyar al-Nazzam® (d. 221/836)

°Abi al-Faraj M. b. Ishaq b. al-Nadim, al-Fihrist (Beirut: Dar
al-Ma‘rifa, 1978), ‏.م‎ 303; and A. Mustafa al-Maraghi, al-Fath al-
Mubin fi Tabaqat al-Ugiiliyyin (Cairo: Matba‘at Ansar al-Sunna al-
Muhammadiyya, 1947), 1:139-140.

Sal-Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:141. It is said that al-
Nazzam argued in the work against the validity of ijmd‘.

183

*Kitab fi Usiil Figh Imém Dér al-Hijra

Asbagh b. al-Faraj b. Sa‘id al-Misri_ al-Maliki? (q, 225/840)
[Malikite]

*Usil al-Figh

Muhammad b. Sama‘a_ al-Tamim;® (d. 233/847)
{Hanafite]

°K. al-Naésikh wa al-Mansitkh
Abi Muhammad al-Qasim b. Ibrahim al-Hasani al-‘Alawi? (d.
246/860)
[Zaydite and Mu ‘tazilite]

*K. al-Amr wa al-Nahi ‘ala Ma‘na al-Shafi'?

Al-Muzani Ibrahim b. Isma‘il al-Misri!° (d. 264/877)
(Shafi ‘ite}

°K. al-ljma'

°K. Ibtal al-Taqlid

°K. [btal al-Qiyés

*K. Khabar al-Wéhid

°K. al-Khabar al-Mitjib li al-‘Iim

"Muhammad al-Makhlif, Shajarat al-Nir al-Zakiyya fi
Labaqgat al-Malikiyya (n.p.: Dar al-Fikr, n.d.), p. 66,

8tbn al-Nadim, al-Fihrist, p. 289; Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:435;
and Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdad, 5:341-343,

*Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:563.

10There are nine pages remaining of this work in Damascus,
according to Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:493. See also b. al-Athir, a/-
Lubab fi Tahdhib al-Ansdb, 3 vols. (Beirut: Dar Sadir, 1980), 3:205;
and al-Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:156-158

605
da

°K. al-Hujja

°K. al-Khustis wa al-‘Umiim

°K. al-Mufassar wa al-Mujmal

°K. al-Usiil 0
Dawid b. ‘Ali b. Dawid b. Khalaf al-Asbahani Aba Sulayman al-
Zahiri!! (4. 270/884)

°K. Nasikh al-Hadith wa Mansitkhihi

Aba Bakr Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Athram 21-5 272 (d.
273/887)
[Hanbalite]

°K. Nasikh al-Qur’an wa Mansitkhihi

Abi Muhammad ‘Abd Allah b. Muslim b. Qutayba!3 (d. 276/889)
[Hanafite}

'!See b. al-Nadim, al-Fihrist, p. 319; and Maraghi, al-Fath al-
Mubin , 1:159-161. Subki quoted a short paragraph from K. al-Usiil
indicating that Dawid al-Z4hiri disallowed any ruling based on
qiyas and rejected istihsdn. See Subki, Tabaqat al-Shafi‘iya, 2:290.

Dawid al-Zahiri’s father was a Hanafite, according to Sezgin,
Geschichte, 1:521, But Dawad grew up a Shifi‘ite in fiqh and later
became an independent Zahirite. His followers were in Iraq, Persia,
and North Africa. B. Hazm revived his school. See ‘Umar Rida
Kahhala, Mu‘jam al-Mu'allifin: Taraéjim Musannafi al-Kutub al-
‘Arabiyya, 15 vols. (Beirut: Maktaba al-Muthanna, 1957), 4:139.

120nly 22 pages of this work remain in Turkey, according to
Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:509-510.

‎‘Abd al-Qadir b. Badran, al-Madkhal ilé Madhhab al-‏ م13
‎Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal (Damascus: Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-‘Arabi,‏
‎n.d),.p. 371. It is most likely that b. Qutayba is a Hanafite.‏

‎However, further investigation of his fiqhi affiliation is needed to
confirm this.

185

°K. al-Wusiil ila Ma‘rifat al-Usiil

Muhammad b. Dawid b. ‘Ali b. Khalaf!4 (4, 297/909)
(Zahirite]

*Tafsir Ma‘ani al-Sunna wa al-Radd ‘ala man Za‘ama
annahu min Rasiil Allah
°K. al-Qiyas

Al-Hadi ila al-Haqq!> (d. 298/910 )
[Zaydite]

It should be noted that many of the classical references,
biographies, and works of tabagdt have cited several scholars who
were known to have written on usiil al-figh, or were well known as
usili teachers and debators, but without Specifying their works by
title or by content. For example, Aba Ishaq Ibrahim al-Shirazi cites
Abi ‘Ali al-Husayn b. ‘Alf al-Karabisi (d. 248/862) as having
numerous works on usél al-figh and the details of fiqh but did not
specify his books.!® Similarly, Ibn al-‘Im4d al-Hanbali states that
Abia Ishaq Isma‘il b. Ish4q b. Zayd al-Azdi al-M4liki wrote on usil
al-figh.'7

I4The son of Dawid al-Zahiri, the founder of the Zahirite
school. B. al-Nadim, al-Fihrist, p. 319.

'S Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:566.

16q1-Tabagat al-Fugahd’ , ed. Ihsan ‘Abbas (Beirut: Dar al-Ra’id
al-‘Arabi, 1981), p. 102.

'7Shadhardt al-Dhahab fi Akhbar man Dhahab, 8 vols. (Beirut:
Dar al-Masira, 1979), 2:178.

186

FOURTH CENTURY USULI LITERATURE

In the fourth Islamic century the writing of usdli literature
saw the Hanafites become particularly active in defense of their
school, especially in responding to al-Shafi‘i’s attack on juristic
preference (istihsdn), which the Hanafites employed. However,
both these schools plus the Malikites offered writings that criticized
the Zahirites for their rejection of qiyds (analogical reasoning) and
restriction of ijmd‘ to the generation of the Companions. Indeed, a
number of works in this period were devoted to single issues, such
as naskh (abrogation) and ijtihdd.

But in this century a new genre of usitli writing emerged, that
is, the compiling and defining of the science’s terminology. For
example, the Hanafite legist Aba al-Mahamid Badr al-Din Mahmid
b. Zayd al-Limishi systematized the vocabulary of usiil in his book
Kashf al-Alfaz.'8 The elaboration of this genre continued into the
fifth century, perhaps to facilitate the legal debates between the
Proponents of the various schools of Law. In any case, a general
Standardization—or at least a general understanding—of the usages

of terminology by these schools was being worked out.

181 amishi’s date of death is not known; however, it is known
that he was a fourth century scholar. His book has been edited by
Muhammad Mustafa Shalabi and published in the first issue of the
journal Majallat al-Bahth al-‘ilmi wa al-Turéth al-Isldmi, 1398h,
Mecca, issued by Markaz al-Bahth al-‘Ilmi wa al-Turath al-Islimi;
King ‘Abdul ‘Aziz University. For reference see pp. 245-267, where
it is cited by Aba Sulayman in 7érikh al-Fikr al-Usitli, p. 159.

187

One can summarize the scope of the usili work and
contributions of the second half of the third and most of the fourth
century in the following points.

First, jurists examined the various intra- and inter-madhhabi
positions for their validity on rational grounds—whether or not the
verses or hadith cited as proof were logically applicable to a given
case—or on the basis of authenticity, ic. whether a hadith’s
authenticity was considered, abrogated, etc.

Second, they also exerted their efforts to discover the
underlying reasoning (‘illa) that led the founders of the fighi
schools to their respective positions. These jurists were known as
‘ulama’ al-takhrij. Every school had an abundance of scholars
engaged in the support of their madhhab's fiqhi positions. Often,
two opposing positions within the same school were eloquently
argued by each opinion’s proponents. Fighi debates flourished in
the courts of ministers and governors, especially in Iraq and
Khurasan. Out of this atmosphere emerged many works on ‘ilm al-
khildf, the science of fight dispute.!°

From another point of view, the scope and focus of the
period’s juristic activity, whether in the form of debates or
scholarship, clearly reveals the extent to which the gate of ijtihdd

had closed.2° However, Wael 8. Hallaq claims that “in theory at

19 The debates were not restricted to figh; they were often
extended to kaldmi issues as well.

20Muhammad al-Khudari, Tértkh al-Tashri' al-Islami, 8th ed.
(n.p.: Dar al-Fikr, 1967), ‏.م‎ 274-292.

188

least there is certainly nothing to indicate that ijtihdd was put out
of practice or abrogated” during the fourth and fifth Islamic

centuries as it is commonly supposed.”!

To illustrate his position,
he cites accounts of the qualifications of the mujtahid in the works
of Aba al-Husayn al-Basri, Abi Ishaq al-Shirazi, and Ghazali,
among others, implying that none of them ever explicitly stated
that the gate of ijtihdd had been closed. What seems to lead Hallaq
to this position is the absence in the available usitli literature of a
formal legal opinion (fatwa) that independent juristic endeavor had
ceased. But it nevertheless remains difficult to ignore the fact that
original juridical thinking, as expressed by the term ijtihad, had
already begun its decline in practice by the fourth century. This is
presented quite clearly, not only by modern scholars, but in the
writings of the jurists of that time. One would think that a
firsthand account more accurately reflects the practical realities of
the fiqhi establishment’s conditions than does an academic
assessment of the situation based on isolated theoretical statements
in the usili literature. A distinguished Hanafite jurist of the fourth
century, Aba Zayd al-Dabbisi, whom we shall examine more
closely in the next chapter, had this diagnosis of the deterioration

of ijtihad and the preponderance of blind allegiance (taqlid) in the

era:

Allah, the Glorious and the Exalted, created man with a

21 Wael B. Hallaq, “Was the Gate of Jjtihdd Closed?” The

International Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 16 (March, 1984):
5.

189

he was misled.

The milestone which points you Satan’s way is blind
imitation of authority in religion (taglid]. One scholar imitates
another out of appreciation for the former’s opinion. He
follows his understanding {figh] and believes that following
him is’ Godly conviction. Alas! The real motive is laziness,
laziness because he cannot investigate. If he strives to
investigate a question, he arrives at his predecessor’s
answers, and the ignorant see him and follow because they
assume that he is a man of knowledge, a man of proofs.

At other times Satan seduces people into imitating
ignorance to hasten them astray. They imitate their parents
or their peers; or they worship stones and corrupt religions.
And the evil of the ‘ulamd’ are the critical cause; they are the
underlying reason because they imitate [rather than
investigate], and they crave authority and position, all the
while competing with inheriting the true ‘ulamd’. They
merely manifest what appeals to the masses and continue to
raise doubts about the true followers of the Sunna until
religion is uprooted.

Certainly taglid is the capital of ignorance. It arises out
of the individual’s ignorance of his own human worth. This
ignorance fires his imitation of another who, like him, is
without proof; this is the problem.

And then there are those whom Satan hastens astray,
those who claim to be inspired and so follow their intuition
without proof, thinking that the original nature of man is
enlightened and guided. They forget that man is created with
desires and possessions. They claim in fact the stations of the
Prophets, yet they worship their passions, deluded that their
inspired hearts guide them. They worship their desires as
the other imitators worship wooden gods. He who allows
himself out of ignorance to be guided by passion and intuition
raises himself falsely to a level that he does not deserve. He
is exactly like one who loves his condition of worshipping a
wooden god. The latter exalts his wooden god ignorantly, and
the former exalts himself [by worshipping his passions]
ignorantly. They are ignorant of their human worth. Both
perish. There is not one who knows himself and his worth
who can be harmed. Whoever wants to be fair to himself
must base his life on the Book and the traditions, then
thinking and proofs. Surely Allah is the real guide.
190

The good among the Companions and their Successors,
and the virtuous thereafter, may Allah be pleased with all of
them, based their affairs on proofs. They first sought
guidance from the Book, next the Sunna, and then from the
Sayings of those following the Prophet, provided that what
they said was proven correct and honored by evidence. A
man would accept ‘Umar’s opinion concerning a certain issue,
and then disagree with ‘Umar and agree with ‘Ali on another
issue. I should mention here that the companions of Abi
Hanifa at times agreed or disagreed with him depending upon
their convictions and acceptance of the proofs.

The madhhab [view] in our Shari‘a was never ‘Umarite
nor ‘Alid; rather people identified themselves as being part of
the community of the Messenger of Allah. Certainly those
were the people of the blessed centuries who were praised
by the Prophet. They recognized and honored proofs before
personalities, truthful proofs came before the ‘ulamd’ or
before their very persons. But when God-consciousness
[taqw4] vanished during the fourth century, people became
lazy in seeking out evidences and replaced true proofs by
their ‘ulamd’. They then allowed for those ‘ulama’, such that
some became Hanafites, Malikites, or Shafi‘ites. They used
men to justify proofs and saw themselves as righteous and
their beliefs as right, so long as they were born within the
domain of this or that madhhab. Each one followed his
human source of knowledge until good traditions were
replaced or substituted by innovations, until the truth

evaporated in the midst of passion, desire, and intuition.22

The ethos of the madhhabiyya complex, then, was taqlid, which
effectively killed the creativity of would-be jurists. The
mechanism for reviving ijtihdd, let alone Sustaining it, was
therefore paralyzed, and adapting the Shari‘a in a meaningful and

relevant way was arrested. Even those who reached the level of

. 22 ang 2290 al-Dabbisi, Taqgwim Usiil al-Fiqgh wa Tahdid
Adillat al-Shar'‘, as cited by Muhammad Sa‘id al-Bani, ‘Umdat al-
Tahqiq (Beirut: Maktabat al-Islami, 1981), p. 60.

19]

independent judgement within their respective madhhabs were
pressed for strict loyalty to the madhhab and the production of

exclusively madhhabi works.23

It was this syndrome that prompted al-Dabbisi to write
Ta'sis al-Nazar, in the introduction of which are some very

penetrating observations about the young jurists of his time.

I saw the hardships facing students of figh in learning by
heart the questions of the differences in Law. They labored
to extract conclusions from problems of Law and to discover
the real roots of the issues. But their inadequate
understanding prevents them from seeing the issues’ real
origins, obscuring their language, which causes them to utter

perversive statements when debating the issues.24

This same message has been implied in Ghazali’s Exordium to al-
Mustasfa.

Thus, while granting that the concept of ijtihdd was sustained.

in the classical era through the writings of insightful jurists, one

23116 Hanbalite jurist and theologian Aba al-Wafa’ ‘Ali b.
“Aqil, for example, was on the threshold of ijtihad but was pressed
by the Hanbalites to stay within the boundaries of the madhhab.

In a debate with al-Kiyya al-Harrasi, the latter told ‏بط‎ ‘Adil,
concerning some issue, that “this is not the position of your school.”
B. ‘Aqil replied, “Should I be like al-Jubba’t and others, not knowing
anything,” meaning to forsake original thought for the madhhab. “I
have my own ijtihid,” he added. Also, upon attending sessions
with Mu'‘tazilite teachers, some Hanbalites wished to kill ‏بط‎ ‘Adil.
Instead, he was forced to declare his repentance and sign a petition

that he will not repeat the violation. See Dhahabi, Siyar A‘lam ‏-أه‎
‎Nubala’., 19:445,

24 Aba Zayd ‘Ubayd Allah al-Dabbisi, Ta’ sis al-Nazar, ed.
Zakariya ‘Ali Yasuf (Cairo: Imam’s Press, 1972), p. 23.

192

would have to answer “yes” to the question, “Was the gate of ijtihdd
closed?”

In fact, the flourishing of usdli literature in the fourth
century might well be explained as a reaction compensating for the
absence of original ijtihdd. To the jurist, usiil al-fiqh—a science that
was not previously reflected in the works of even the founders of
the madhhabs, with the exception of al-Shafi‘i—was a fresh field
where both originality and loyalty to his fiqhi affiliation were
possible. Thus, in usiil al-figh one found an outlet for creativity,
but under the auspices of rigid madhhab loyalties. In addition, the
ustli principles became points of reference or governing criteria in

the days’ popular fighi debates.2>

Fourth Century Usiili Books and Their Authors

°K. al-ljtihad

Abi ‘Ali Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Wahhab al-Jubba’i2® (d. 303/915)
[Mu ‘tazilite]

*SMuhammad Abi Zahra,Usil al-Figh (Cairo: Dar al-Fikr al-
“Arabi, n.d.), p. 17.

26This work was cited by Abd al-Husayn an Basri, al-
Mu'‘tamad fi Usiil al-Fiqh, 2 vols. ed. Muhammad Hamidullah
(Damascus: Institut Francais de Damas, 1965), p. 722. Also see
Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:621-622.

193

°K. al-Dhakhira fi Usiil al-Figh

Abi Bakr Ahmad b. al-Husayn b. Burhan al-Farisi2” (d. 305/917)
[Shafi ite]

°K. al-Radd ‘ala b. Dawid ft Ibtal al-Qiyds
*RisGlat al-Baydn ‘an Usiil al-Ahkaim
Abi al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Umar b. Surayj2® (d. 306/918)
[Shafi ‘ite]

eUsiil al-Figh
B. ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Muhammad al-Harithi al-Mufid b. al-

Mu‘allim2? (d. 314/1022)
[Shiite]

°K. Ithbat al-Qiyas
eK. Ijma‘ al-Ummah

27 Haji Khalifa, Kashf al-Zuniin ‘an Asdmi al-Kutub wa al-
Funiin (Damascus: Dar al-Fikr, 1982), 1:825 and 2:1188; Aba
Sulayman, Tdrikh al-Fikr, 2.110. See also Subki, Tabaqdt al-
ShGfi'iyya, 2:184; and Isnawi, Tabaqat al-Shafi'iyya, 2:254.

2851-Shirazi, al-Tabaqat al-Fugaha’, ‏.م‎ 89-90; and Sezgin,
Geschichte, 1:595. Al-Subki had a copy of b. Surayj’s epistle, Risdlat
al-Bayadn ‘an Usiil al-Ahkdm; it was about 15 pages or plates. In
one of the classes held by b. Surayj, according to Subki, he received
a sealed letter from the jurists in the “land beyond the river Oxus,”
to brief them about the fighi prinicples of al-Shafi‘i, Malik, Sufyan
al-Thawri, Aba Hanifa and his two companions, and Dawad b. ‘Ali
al-Zahiri. So b. Surayj wrote the epistle. Subki, Labaqat al-
Shafi'iyya, 3:456-457,

°Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:549-550.

14

Aba Bakr Ahmad b. Ibrahim b. al-Mundhir al-Naysabari?? (d.
318/930)

{Shafi ‘ite]

°K. Al-ljtihad
Abii Hashim ‘Abd al-Salam b. Muhammad al-Jubba’i?! (d. 321/933)

°K. Ithbat al-Qiyds
°K. al-Khass wa al-‘Amm

‘Ali 5. IsmA‘il b. Ishaq Abd al-Hasan al-Ash‘ari?2 (d. 324/935)
[Shafi ‘ite]

°K. al-Baydn fi Dald’ il al-A‘lam ‘ala Usiil al-Ahkaém

°K. al-Ijma‘ or K. al-Radd ‘ala man Ankara Ijmé‘ Ahl al-
Madina**

‘Sharh Ris@lat al-Imam al-Shéfi‘t

Abi Bakr Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Sayrafi>4 (d. 330/941)
[Shafi ‘ite]

oSezgin, Geschichte, 1:495-496. Most likely K. al-Ithbdt is
not a theoretical work. Rather, it should contain many details of

figh based on what we know on b. al-Mundhir’s other works and
contributions.

31 G6 Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:172-173; Baghdadi, Tdrikh
Baghddd, 11:55-56; and Muhammad A. Dhahabi, Siyar A‘lam al-
Nubald’, 23 vols. (Beirut: Mu’assasa al-Risala, 1982), 15:63-64.

32 See Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:602-604; and Maraghi, al-Fath al-
Mubin, 1:174-176.

33According to al-Shirazi, Tabaqdt al-Fuqahd’, p. 166, Sayrafi’s
work on ijmd‘ is cited as a reply against the ijma' of Medina. Most
likely, the two titles given are of the same work.

“According to Subki, Zabagét alShdfitiyya, 3:186, al-Sayrafi
was most knowledgeable of ugil al-figh after al-Shafi‘t.

195

°K. al-Ijma‘ wa al-Ikhtilaf

*K. al-Maqalat fi ‏افونا‎ al-Figh
Abi ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Shafi't (n.d.)°>
[Shafi‘ite}

°K. al-Luma‘
Aba al-Faraj ‘Amr b. Muhammad al-Laythi?® (d. 331/942)
[Malikite]

°K. al-Jadal fi Usiil al-Figh

Abi Mansir Muhammad b. Mahmid al-Maturidi>’ (d. 333/944)
{Hanafite]

*Musannaf fi Usiil al-Figh

Ahmad b. Ahmad al-Qass** (d. 335/946)
(Shafi ‘ite]

35 Although b. al-Nadim does not mentions his date of death,
he does place him after al-Sayrafi. al-Fihrist, p. 300.

38See al-Makhlaf, Shajarat al-Nir, p. 79.

*7Abd al-Hay al-Laknawi, Kitéb al-Fawd' id al-Bahiyya fi
Labaqat al-Hanafiyya (Cairo: al-Jamali and al-Khanji, 1906), p. 195;
Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:604-606; ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Qurashi, al-Jawdhir
al-Mudiyya fi Tabaqdt al-Hanafiyya (Cairo: ‘Isa al-Babi al-Halabi,
n.d), 3:360-361 and 4:90.

3821-Subki, Labaqdt al-Shdfi'iyya, 3:59-63.

196

°K. Usiil al-Karkhi

‘Ubayd Allah b. al-Husayn b. Dallal b. Dalham al-Karkhi2? (d.
340/952)
(Hanafite]

*Al-Fusiil ft Ma‘rifat al-Usil

Ibrahim b. Ahmad al-Marwazi Aba Ishaq’? (d. 340/952)
[Shafi ite]

°K. al-Hiddya fi Usiil al-Figh

Muhammad b. Sa‘id b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah?! (d. 344/955)
[Shafi ‘ite]

°K. al-Qiydas

*K. Usiil al-Figh

°K. Ma’ akhidh al-Usiil
Bakr b. al-‘Ala’ Muhammad 6. Ziyad al-Qushayri‘? (d, 344/955)
[Malikite]

**See Baghdadi, Térikh Baghdad, 10:353-355; Sezgin,
Geschichte, 1:444-445, According to Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin,
1:186-187, Abdi Hafs al-Nasafi has written a commentary on it.

40See Ibn al-‘Imad, Shadhardt al-Dhahab, 2:355; and Maraghi,

al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:188.

4! According to al-Subki, his work was good and useful for the
scholars of Khawarjism. Labaqat al-Shdafi'iyya, 3:164-165. See also

Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:189-190.

42 According to al-Makhlif, Shajarat al-Nir, p. 79, Qushayri

wrote one book in answer to al-Shafi‘i concerning the obligatoriness
of saying “Peace and blessings of Allah be upon him” ( plas sate wi “po )

after mentioning the name of the Prophet. See also Mardghi, al-
Fath al-Mubin, 1:191-192.

197

°K. Nazm al-Adilla fi Ustil al-Milla

Aba al-Hasan ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b. ‘Ali al-Mas‘ddi al-Mu’ arrikh?? (d.
346/957)

[Shafi ‘ite]

eImkan Dalal al-Mujtahid

Aba al-Hasan ‘Ali b. Sa‘id al-Rustughfani“4 (4. 350/961)
{Hanifite]

°K. al-Jami‘ fi al-Usiil
°K. al-Nasikh wa al-Mansitkh fi al-Qur’ an

Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Barda‘i*> (d. 351/962)
(Mu‘tazilite]

*Al-Idah fi Na&sikh al-Qur’dn wa Mansitkhiht

Abi Muhammad Makki b. Abi Talib*® (d. 355/965)
(Malikite]

°Al-Usiil wa al-Furit‘

43 According to al-Mas‘adi, Muritj al-Dhahab wa Mu‘ddin al-
Jawhar, 1:11, K. Nazm contains the prinicples of fatwa
[authoritative opinion], rules, qiyas, ijtihdd, istihsdn, the questions
of abrogation, ijmd‘, khass, al-‘dmm, the actions of the Prophet, the
tules of debates, etc. The book is edited by Charles Pellat.
According to Subki, Tabagat al-Shdafi‘iyya, 3:456-457, al-Mas‘idi
Studied ugiil al-figh under Abi al-‘Abbis b. Surayj.

44 According to Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:606, Rustughfani differed
with his teacher al-Maturidi concerning the possibility of a
mujtahid going astray.

4515 al-Nadim, al-Fihrist al-Nadim, p. 343; and Maraghi,Fath
al-Mubin, 1:195.

46al-Qadi ‘lyad, Tartib al-Madarik, 3:737-738.

198

°Al-Ishraf ‘ala al-Usiil

Abi Hamid Ahmad b. Bishr b. al- Marwazi4? (d. 362/973)
{Shafi ‘ite]

°K. [khtilaf Usiil al-Madhéhib

Al-Qadi Aba Hanifah al-Nu‘man*® (d. 363/974)
(Isma‘ilite]

°K. Usiil al-Figh
‘Sharh al-Risdla

Abi Bakr al-Qaffal 1 (d. 365/976)
[Shafi ‘ite]

*Kitab fi Usiil al-Figh

Abi al-Husayn Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad al-Tawabiqi”?
(d. 368/979)
(Shafi‘ite and Mu‘tazilite]

°K. al-Fusiil fi al-Usiil
Abé Bakr Ahmad b. ‘Ali al-Razi al-Hanafi al-Jassas°! (d. 370/981)

47 1-Subki, Tabaqat al-Shdafi'iyya, 3: 12. Also, according to
Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:497, al-Marwazi was the teacher Aba Hayyan
al-Tawhidi who praised him.

4856 was raised as a Malikite, then became an IsmA@‘ilite and
became one of their grand jurist. Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:575-578.

4° according to Maraghi, Fath al-Mubin, 1:201-202, al-Shashi
Started out as a Mu‘tazilite but was later influence by al-Ash‘ari,
who convinced him with his theological doctrine.

501-51 ‏,عاط‎ Zabagdt al-Shdfi'iyya, 3:17.

51 Baghdadi, 781] Baghdad, 4:314-315; and Sezgin,

199

[Hanafite]

°K. al-Fusil fi al-Usiil

Muhammad b. Khafif al-Shirazi?~ (d. 371/982)
(Shafi ‘ite]

°K. al-Usiil
°K. Ijm@‘ Ahl al-Madina

Abi Bakr Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Abhuri>? (d. 375/985)
[Malikite]

K. al-Nésikh wa al-Mansiikh min al-Hadith

‘Umar b. Ahmad b. Shahin Abi Hafs°4 (385/995)
{Muhaddith]

*Kitab fi al-Qiyas wa al-‘Ilal
*Adab al-Mufti wa al-Mustafti
°K. al-Shuriit

Abi al-Qasim ‘Abd al-Wahid b. al-Husayn al-Saymari>> (d.
386/996)
[Shafi ‘ite]

Geschichte, 1:444-445,
*al-Subki, Tabaqdt al-Shdfi'iyya, 3:149.
*3Makhlaf, Shajarat al-Nir, p. 91.

548 Shahin Abi: Hafs has no fiqghi affiliation. Al-Khagib al-
Baghdadi, who studied with b. Shahin’s son, cited b. Shahin saying,

“[As for] my madhhab, 1 am only a follower of Muhammad.” Térikh
Baghdad, 11:267.

*Pal-Subki, Zabagdt al-Shdfi'iyya, 3:339-342.

200

°K. al-Nihrir wa al-Munagqgir fi Usiil al-Figh

°K. al-Hudiid wa al-‘Ugqiid fi Usiil al-Figh
Al-Mu‘afa b. Zakariyyé b. Yahya b. Humayd Abii al-Faraj al-
Nahrawani al-Qadi°® (d. 390/999)
[Follower of b. Jarir al-Tabari in fiqh)

°K. al-Usiil ‘alé Madhhab ‏ك-اه‎

Abi Bakr Muhammad b. Ja‘far b. al-Daqqaq>’ (d. 392/1001)
[Shafi ‘ite]

°K. Tahdhib al-Nazar fi Usiil al-F igh

Isma‘il b. Ahmad b. Ibrahim al-Isma‘ili>® (d. 396/1005)
[Shafi‘ite]

*Kitab fi Usiil al-Figh

*Kitab fi Ahkam al-Qur’ an
Abi Bakr Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Qawwaz?? (Died approximately
at the end of the fourth century)

°K. al-Ta‘liga fi al-Usiil
*Muqaddima fi Usiil al-Fiqh

565 Ibn al-Nadim, al-Fihrist, ‏.م‎ 329; b. al-‘Imad, Shadharit
al-Dhahab, 3:134; and Maraghi, Fath al-Mubin, 1:211. The title of
al-Nihrir is not certain. According to Bayard Dodge, who translated
and edited al-Fihrist, the title is not clear even in the manuscripts.

*"Baghdadi, Térikh Baghdad, 3:229-230; and Sezgin,
Geschichte, 1:498.

*S According to b. al-‘Imad, Shadhardt al-Dhahab, 3:147, al-

Isma‘ili was a prominent ShAfi‘ite in Jurjan, and his book is said to
be sizeable.

9 Shirazi, LTabaqat al-Fuqaha’, p. 168.

201

Aba al-Hasan ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. al-Qassar°? (d. 398/1007)
(Malikite)

°K. Bayan Kashf al-Alfaz
Abi al-Mahamid Badr al-Din Mahmid b. Zayd al-Lamishi®! (Died
approximately at the end of the fourth century)
(Hanafite]}

Kitab fi Usiil al-Figh ‘alaé Madhhab Malik
Aba ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Mujahid 21-135 al-

Baghdadi®? (Died approximately at the end of the fourth century)
[Malikite]

We notice in the fourth century that al-Shafi‘i’s Risdla
continued to occupy the attention of many, as exemplified by the

abundance of commentaries on al-Risdla, mostly by ShAfi‘ites.

60 According to Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:481-482, Aba al-Hasan
also wrote ‘Uyun al-Adila fi Masé’ il al-Khilaf bayna Fuqahd’ al-
‏.4527م‎ It is said it this book is among the best on khilaf of the
fuqahad’. Also see Baghdadi, ‏غ721‎ Baghdad, 12:41-42.

®lThis book is a dictionary of technical usii/i terms that,
according to Lamishi, is useful to “the judge, the mufti, the seeker
of a question equally.” The book has 128 definitions, not following
any particular pattern of organization and has been edited by
Muhammad Hasan Mustafa Shalabi, as stated in a note above. See
Abi Sulayman, al-Fikr al-Usili; and al-Qasim b. ‘Abd Allah b.
Qutlibugha, 74j al-Tardjim fi Labaqat al-Hanafiyya (Baghdad:
Maktab al-Muthanna, 1962), p. 71. Also, al-Qurashi (d. 775/1383),

in Jawahir al-Mudiyya, 3:437, stated that he had seen a copy of al-
Alfaz.

62 was a student of Abd al-Hasan al-Ash‘ari and one of al-
Baqillani’s teachers. See Makhlif, Shajarat al-Nar, p. 92; and
Maraghi, Fath al-Mubin, 1:213.

202 |

Aside from Dald’il al-A‘lam of Abi Bakr Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah

al-Sayrafi (d. 330/941), as mentioned above, these include Abi al-
Walid Ihsan b. Muhammad al-Naysabari al-Qurashi (d. 349/960);

al-Imém Muhammad b. Isma‘il ‘Ali al-Qaffal al-Kabir al-Shashi (d.

365/975); and Abi Bakr Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Shaybani al-
Jawzaqi al-Naysabari (d. 53

FIFTH CENTURY USULT LITERATURE

By the fifth century, with the gates of ijtihdd locked tight, the
innovative energies of many jurists spilled over into the
comparatively new and fertile field of usiil. Certainly the fifth
century witnessed a gush of works of genius from all the primary
schools of Law, including the Zahirites, 4 and both the Ash‘arite and
Mu‘tazilite persuasions of theology. Al-Qadi Aba Bakr al-Baqillani,
an Ash‘arite in theology, articulated the Malikite school of figh.
The Shafi‘ites produced al-Qadi ‘Abd al-Jabbar and Aba al-Husayn
al-Basri from the Mu‘tazilites. Among the Hanbalites, there is Aba
Ya‘la al-Farra’, a muhaddith categorized as a salaft, as well as his

student, Aba al-Khattab al-Kladhani.°> Finally, of course, b. Hazm,

63k halifa, Kashf al-Zuniin, 1:873. See also Sezgin, Geschichte,
1:487-490, for the various works and commentaries on al-Risdla,

°4Certainly Ibn Hazm's al-Jhkam fi Usiil al-Ahkam, ed.
Ahmad Muhammad Shakir, 8 vols. (Cairo: Maktabat al-Khanji,
1926-1928) is the most significant Zahirite usali work.

65 Abii Ya‘la al-Farra’, al-‘Udda fi Usiil al-Figh, ed. Ahmad b.
‘Ali al-Mubaraki, 3 vols. (Beirut: Mu’assasat al-Risala, 1980); Abi
al-Khattab al-Kiathani, al-Tamhid fi Usiil al-Figh, ed. Mufid Aba

203

who lived about the same time as Abi Ya‘la, advanced the opinions
of the Zahirites.

Almost universally, these writers of ‏لقي‎ used Aristotelian
logic in arguing their points, including the salafi Abii Ya‘la, who
employs this in his book al-‘Udda. In addition, these works rely
heavily on discussions of language and usage, just as they do on.
disputes in dogma. Thus, the topics of ijmd’‘, qiyas, and the
technical usage of terminology found special treatment by a
number of scholars who devoted whole works or extensive Study to
them.

In the final analysis, the writing of usiil reached its zenith in
the fifth century both in structure and academic performance, with

Ghazali’s al-Mustasfa its crowning achievement,°®

Fifth Century ‏اشعلا‎ Books and Their Authors

°K. Adab al-Jadal
°K. fi al-Radd ‘ald al-Mu‘tazila wa Bayan ‘Ajzihim

Abd al-Hasan ‘Ali b. Ahmad al-Suhayli al-Isfrayini©” (d. approx.
400/1010)

‘Amsha and Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. Ibrahim, 4 vols. (Jeddah: Dar al-
Madani, 1985).

°Though Ghazali actually finished writing al-Mustasfa in the
second year of the sixth century, his work belongs to that of the
fifth century, where his life was lived and ideas worked out.

®7al-Subki, in Zabaqét al-Shéfi‘iyya, 5: 246, states that he saw
the two books written by Isfrayini. K. Adab al-Jadal, he comments,
has strange usiili opinions. It is not clear from Subki’s statement

204

[Shafi ‘ite]

*RisGla fi Tazkiyat al-Shuhiid wa Tajrihihim
eal-Mungidh min Shubah al-Ta’ wil

‘All b. Muhammd b. Khalaf al-Qayrawani al-Qabisi®® (d. 403/1012)
[Malikite]

°K. al-Tagrib min Usiil al-Figh 9

°K. al-Mugqni‘ fi ‏اونا‎ al-Figh

°K. Amali Ijma‘ ahl al-Madina
Al-Qadi Abi Bakr Muhammad b. al-Tayyib al-Baqillani’° (a.
403/1013)
[Malikite]

whether this book was directed against the theological positions of
the Mu‘tazilites or their us@li? opinions or both. See also Maraghi,
al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:224.

68 According to b. al-‘Imad, Shadhardt al-Dhahdb, 3:168, al-
Qabisi wrote great books on usiil al-figh and al-furi‘. See also

Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:482-483; and Kahhala, Mu'‘jam al-Mw' allifin,
7:194-195.

6° Abu Ya‘la al-Farra’, al-‘Umdah fi Usiil al-Figh, p. 556, cited
al-Baqillani’s work with this title, K. al-Tagrib min Usiil al-Figh.
Also, Makhlif, Shajarat al-Niir, p. 92, called it al-Ta‘rif wa al-Irshad
fi Usiil al-Fiqh. Al-Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:221-222, called al-
Tagrib wa al-Irshdd fi Usfil al-Figh. ‘Abd al-Ra’af Makhlof in his
doctoral dissertation al-Bdgillani wa Kitdbuhu I‘jaz al-Qur’ dn, p.
115-117, does not mention al-Tagrib among Bagillani’s works. See
also al-Qadi ‘Iyad, Tartib al-Madérik, 3:601.

‎is surprising that Sezgin neglected to make any reference‏ غ701
‎to al-Baqillani’s legal works. Geschichte,1:608-610. Perhaps this is‏
‎due to the fact that none of them is extant. Fortunately, al-Ghazali,‏
‎in al-Mankhdl and in al-Mustasfa, preserved many of al-Baqillani’s‏
‎usili opinions, Also al-Juwayni disputed 41 legally related‏
‎positions of al Baqillani throughout al-Burhdn, 2:1446-48.‏

205

°K. Usiil al-Figh

Al-Hasan b. Hamid b. ‘Ali b. Marwan Abi ‘Abd Allah al-Baghdadi’!
(d. 403/1013)
(Hanbalite]

°K. al-Radd ‘ala Ahl al-Tagqlid wa al-Nifaq
‘Abd Allah al-Mahdi?? (d. 404/1013)
[Zaydite]

°K. al-Hudiid fi al-Usiil

Aba Bakr Muhammad b. al-Hasan b. Furik?? (d. 406/1015)
(Hanafite]

eK. Usiil al-Figh
Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Aba Hamid al-Isfarayini’4 (d.
406/1015)
[Shafi'ite]

°K. Usiil al-Figh

71155 al-‘Imad, in 5124/:46) al-Dhahab, 3:166, and ‘Abd al-
Rahman b. Muhammad al-‘Ulaymi, al-Manhaj al-Ahmad fi Tarajim
fi Ashab al-Imadm Ahmad, 2 vols. ed. Muhammad Mubi al-Din ‘Abd
al-Hamid (Cairo: Madani Press, 1963-1965), 2:82.

72a1-Mahdi, in fact, is the fifth Zaydite Imam. Sezgin,
Geschichte, 1:569.

BHis book was printed in Beirut, 1324 H. Sezgin, Geschichte,
1:610-611; and Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:226-227.

74 Subki, in Zabagat al-Shafi‘iyya, 4:68, stated he has seen this
ustili work. See also b. al-‘Imad, Shadhardt al-Dhahab, 3:178. See
Ybn al-Athir, al-Lubdb , 1:55.

206

Muhammad b. Muhammad b. al-Nu‘man al-Shaykh al-Mufid b. al-

Mu‘allim’> (d. 413/1022)
[Shi'ite]

°K. al-Ikhtilaf fi ‏اونا‎ al-Figh

°K. al-‘Umad

°K. Majmit' al-‘Ahd
Al-Qadi ‘Abd al-Jabbar al-Hamadani al-Asadabadi’® (d. 415/1024)
(Mu ‘tazilite and ShAafi‘ite]

*Ta‘liga fi Usiil al-Figh

*Risdla fi Usiil al-Figh
Aba Ishaq Ibrahim b. Muhammad b. Muhram al-Isfarayini?? (d.
418/1027)
[Shafi ‘ite)

°K. al-Ifada fi Usiil al-Figh

°K. al-Talkhis fi Ugiil al-Figh
eal-Adilla fi Mas@’ il al-Khilaf
eal-Ishraf ‘ala Masa’ il al-Khilaf

™Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:549-551.

78al-Subki, Tabaqét al-Shdfi'lyya, 3:202; and Aba Sulayman,
al-Fikr al-Usili, ‏.م‎ 192. According to Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:624-626,
one copy of K. al-Ikhtilaf fi Ugiil al-Fiqh remains in the Vatican.
Also, Abi al-Husayn al-Bagri cited this work in his book al-
Mu‘tamad, 1:7, 324, 436, 498, 510, 692, 749, 860, 922, and 987.

See al-Subki, Tabaqdt al-Shdfi'iyya, 4:256; b. al-Imad,
Shadhardt al-Dhahab, 3:209, Abia Sulayman, al-Fikr al-Usiili, p. 174;
and Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:228-229. See Ibn al-Athir, al-
Lubaéb , 1:55.

207

‘Abd al-Wahhab b. ‘Ali b. Nasr al-Badhdadi al-Maliki’® (d.
422/1031)

*K. al-Mujzi fi Usiil al-Figh

Aba Talib Yahya b. al-Husayn b. Haran’? (d. 424/1033)
[Mu‘tazilite]

°K. al-Tahsil fi Usiil al-Figh
°K. al-Fisal fi Usil al-Figh
٠ al-Nasikh wa al-Mansitkh

Abi MansGr ‘Abd al-Qahir b. Tahir al-Baghdadi®® (4. 429/1038)
[Shafi‘ite]

°K. al-Wusiil ila Ma‘rifat al-Usil

Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Mu‘Aafiri al-Qurtubi®! (d. 429/1038)
[Malikite]

*Taqwim al-Adilla fi Ugiil al-Figh
eal-Anwar fi ‏اشعلا‎ al-Figh
Abi Zayd ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar b. ‘Isa al-Dabbasi®2 (d. 430/1039)

78 Makhiaf, Shajarat al-Nér al-Zakiyya, ‏.م‎ 103; and al-
Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin,1:230-231.

“Aba Sulayman, al-Fikr al-Usili, p. 174.

80.1-Subki, 1029681 al-Shéfi'iyya, 5:140; and al-Maraghi, al-
Fath al-Mubin,1:234. See also Aba Mansar Baghdadi, K. Usiil al-Din
(Beirut: Dar al-Alfaq al-Jadida, 1981), the introduction page ‘jim’
and pp. 193-227.

8!Makhlaf, Shajarat al-Nar, ‏.م‎ 113. See also al-Maraghi, al-
Fath al-Mubin, 1:232. |

82 See Ahmad Zaki Hamméd’s unpublished paper “Abi Zayd

208

(Hanafite]

°K. al-Mu‘tamad fi Usiil al-Figh

*K. Ziyddat al-Mu‘tamad

°K. al-Qiyas al-Shar‘t

°K. Sharh, al-‘Umad
Aba al-Husayn Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. al-Tayyib Abi Husayn al-
Basri®> (d. 436/1044)
[Mu‘tazilite]

*Sharh al-Risdla

‘Abd Allah 6. YOsuf Abi Muhammad al-Juwayni®4 ‏.ل)‎ 438/1046)
[Shafi‘ite]

eAhkam fi Usiil al-Ahkam
Masa’ il min al-Usiil

°K. al-Nubadh fi Usiil al-Figh
eal-Nasikh wa al-Mansiikh

Abi Muhammad ‘Ali b. Ahmad b. Hazm®5 (d. 456/1063)
[Zahirite]

°K. al-‘Uddah fi Usiil al-Figh
°K. Mukhtasar al-‘Uddah

al-Dabbisi.”

83 See our treatment of his work al-Mu‘tamad following in this
introduction.

84ite is the father of Imam al-Haramayn al-Juwayni. See
Subki, Zabaqat al-Shafi'iya, 5:73; and Abia Sulayman, al-Fikr al-
Usiili, p. 176.

85 Encyclopaedia of Islam, new ed., s.v. “Ibn Hazm,” by R.
Arnaldez. See also al-Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:243-244.

209

°K. al-‘Umdah fi Usiil al-Figh

eal-Kifadya fi Usiil al-Figh
Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. Muhammad b. Khalaf al-Baghdadi Abia
Ya‘la al-Farra’®® (4. 458/1065)
[Hanbalite]

°K. al-Yanabi‘ fi al-Usil

Aba al-Qasim Ahmad b. al-Husayn Bayhaqi®? (d. 458/1065)
{Shafi ‘ite]

°K. al-Faqgih wa al-Mutafaqqih 88
eal-Dala@’il wa al-Shawaéhid ‘alé Sihhat al-‘Amal bi Khabar
al-Wahid
Aba Bakr Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Thabit al-Khatib al-Baghdadi®? (d.
463/1070)
(Shafi ‘ite]}

°K. Ahkadm al-Fugsil fi Ahkam al-Usiil
°K. al-Ishadrah fi Usiil al-Figh
eK. al-Hudtid

86For his biography see al-‘Ulaymi, al-Manhaj al-Ahmad,
2:105-118. See also al-Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:245-248; and
Dhahabi, Siyar A‘lam al-Nubald’, 18:91.

87Khalifa, Kashf al-Zuniin, 2:2051; and al-Maraghi, al-Fath al-
Mubin, 1:249-250.

88rhe book has been published, 2nd ed., ed. Isma‘il al-Ansari,
2 vols. (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1980).

®°For his biography, see Akram al-‘Umari, Mawdrid al-Khatib
al-Baghdaédi fi Tarikh Baghdad, p. 77.

210

Sulayman b. Khalaf 5. Sa‘d al-Qurtubi Abd al-Walid al-Baji>? (d.
474/1081)
(Malikite]

°K. Ustil al-Figh
‘Abd al-Wahhab b. Ahmad b. Jalaba al-Harani al-Khazzaz°! (d.
476/1083)
[Hanbalite]

°K. al-Luma‘ fi Usiil al-Fiqh

°K. al-Tabsira fi Usil al-Fiqh
Aba Ishaq Ibrahim b. ‘Ali b. Yusuf al-Fayrizabadi al-Shirazi?~ (d.
476/1083)
[Shafi ‘ite}

°K. ‘Uddah al-‘Alim wa Tariq al-Sélim
°K. al-‘Uddah fi Usil al-Figh or al-‘Umda

30155 al-‘Imad, Shadhardt al-Dhahab, 3:344. Al-Baji’s al-
Hudid has been edited by Nazih Hammad (Beirut: Zu‘bi Press,
1973). It is devoted to uséli terminology and defines 75 terms.
See also al-Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:252-254; and Dhahabi,
Siyar A‘lam al-Nubald’, 18:538-539.

°lThe book has been published in Egypt: Mutba‘at al-Sunna

al-Muhammadiyya Press (1953). See M. Dhahabi, Siyar A‘ldm al-
Nubald’, 18:560-561.

92.a1-Subki, LTabaqat al-ShGfi'iyya, 4:215; Aba Bakr b. Qadi
Shuhba al-Dimashqi (d. 851/1448), Tabagat al-Sh4fi‘iyya, 2 vols.
ed. al-Hafiz ‘Abd al-‘Alim Khan (Hyderabad: Osmania. Oriental
Publications, 1979), 1: 251-254; and al-Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin,
1:255-257. See also the introduction to al-Tabgira, ed. Muhammad
Hasan Hit. (Damascus: Dar al-Fikr, 1980); M. Dhahabi, Siyar A‘lam

al-Nubala’, 18:452-453; and Ihsan ‘Abbas’ introduction to Shirazi’s
Labaqat al-Fuqahd.’

211

Abi Nasr 5. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-W4hid al-Sabbagh®? (d.
47711084)
[Shafi ite]

*Al-Burhan fi Usiil al-Figh
°Al-Waragat fi Usiil al-Figh
°Al-Tuhfa fi Usiil al-Figh
Abi al-Ma‘ali ‘Abd al-Malik b. ‘Abd Allah b. Yiasuf al-Juwayni

Imam al-Haramayn™* (d. 478/1085)
[Shafi‘ite]

*K. al-Ghunyé fi Usiil al-Figh
‘Abd al-Rahman b. al-Ma’mén al-Mutawalli al-Naysabari?> (d.
478/1085)
[Shafi ‘ite}

°Al-Fusiil fi ‘Ilm al-Usiil

‘Ali b. Fadal b. ‘Ali b. Ghalib al-Qayrawani?® (d. 479/1086)
[Malikite]

*Kanz al-Wusiil ila Ma‘rifat al-Usiil

93a1-Subki, Labaqat al-Shdafi‘iyya, 5:123, and al-Maraghi, al-
Fath al-Mubin, 1:258-259. Al-Sabbagh wrote an extended work
about the fiqhi disputes between the Shafi‘ites and the Hanafites, K.

al-Khilaf bayna al-Hanafiyya wa al-Shafi‘iyya. See also b. al-‘Imad
Shadharat al-Dhahab, 3:355.

>

*4al-Subki, Tabaqdt al-Shéfi'iyya, 5:165. See the following
outline on al-Burhdn in this introduction. See also al-Maraghi, al-
Fath al-Mubin, 1:260-262.

*51sma‘il Muhammad Basha, Hadiyat al-‘Arifin, 2 vols. 2nd ed.

(Tehran: al-Maktaba al-Islamiyya, 1975), 5:518.

Basha, Hadiyyat al-‘Arifin, 5:693.

212

‘Ali Muhammad 5. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Karim b. Masa al-

Pazdawi [al-Bazdawi]?” (d. 482/1089)
{Hanafite]

*Usil al-Figh known as Usiil al-Sarakhsi
Muhammad b. Ahmad Aba Bakr Shams al-A’imma Sarakhsi?® (d.
483/1090)
{Hanafite}

*Al-Qawati'‘ fi Usiil al-Figh

Aba al-Mudhaffar Mansar b. Muhammad ‘Abd al-Jabbar al-

Sam‘ani?? (d. 489/1095)

(Shafi ‘ite]

°K. Sirr al-Nazr fi ‘Ilmay al-Usiil wa al-Khilaf
Ahmad b. Sulayman b. Khalaf b. Sa‘d al-Baji!° ‏قن‎ 493/1099)

97 a1-Maraghi, Fawa’ id al-Bahiya fi Tardjam al-Hanafiya, p.
124, and al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:263. See also Dhahabi, Siyar A‘lam al-
Nubald’, 18:602-603; and Basha, Hadiyyat al-‘Arifin, 5:693.

*8al-Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:264-265: and Qurashi, al-
Jawahir Mudiyya fi Tabagdt al-Hanafiyya, 3:78-82.

*°He was a prominent Hanafite figure, who after hajj
(approximately in the 467 H.) switched madhhabs to become a
Shafi‘i. Upon his return to Marv, he was no longer welcome for
changing his fiqhi affiliation. From him descended generations of
scholars, one of whom is al-Sam‘ani (the author of al-Ansab), See
b. al-‘Imad, Shadhardt al-Dhahab, 3:39; al-Maraghi, al-Fath al-
Mubin, 1:266; and Subki, Zabagdt al-Shafi‘iyya, 5:335-346.

100 ‏وز‎ is the son of Abt al-Walid al-Baji (d. 474/1081). See
al-Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin, 1:271.

213

In summary, the abundance of the usuli literature reflects
the flowering of this science during the three centuries between al-
Shafi‘i and al-Ghazali and the competition between the various
schools of Law to participate in its development. It is evident that
the Shafi‘ite and Malikite ‏قاشع‎ works were close in their approach
and exceeded the number of the Hanafite ‏قاشع‎ works. The
Hanbalites began their major contribution to the corpus of
knowledge only in the fifth century with al-Qadi Aba Ya‘la al-
Farra’. However, his students, Aba al-Khattéb al-Kladhani (d.
510/1116) and Aba al-Wafa’ b. ‘Aqil (d. 513/1119), wrote two

1

major works.!9! The Principle activity of the Zahirites, on the other

hand, ceased after b. Hazm.

101 Aba al-Khattaéb wrote al-Tamhid fi Ustl al-Fiqh. Abia al-
Wafa’ b. ‘Aqil wrote al-Wddih fi ‏شونا‎ al-Fiqh. Al-Maraghi, al-Fath
al-Mubin, 2:9-11. Later Hanbalite authorities in the field, such as

b. al-Jawzi, b. Qudima, b. Taymiyya, b. al-Qayyam, b. Rajab, wrote
usili works.

CHAPTER X

THE SEMINAL USULI WORKS

Among the wealth of material in the science of ug/l, four
books of the Mutakallimin approach and one of the early Fuqahd’
method are singled out as the best in the field, according to Ibn
Khaldin: al-Qadi ‘Abd al-Jabbar’s al-‘Umad,! Abia al-Husayn al-
Basgri’s al-Mu‘tamad, al-Juwayni’s al-Burhdn, al-Ghaziali’s al-
Mustasfa, and the Hanafite Dabbisi’s Taqwim al-Adilla. It is useful
to outline each before introducing al-Mustasfa, giving special
attention to Dabbisi and his seminal work, in light of the fact that
Ghazali engages the Hanafite usiili positions, particularly as

represented by Dabbisi, in al-Mustasfaé and Shifa’.

AL-QADI ‘ABD AL-JABBAR’S AL-MUGHNT

Until recently, Mu‘tazilite thought and their positions on
theological and juridical issues remained largely represented in the
works of their adversaries, especially the Ash‘arites. But the

efforts of modern researchers led to the discovery of several

The book is also called Kitab al-‘Ahd. Sezgin holds that this
work is also called al-Jkhtilaf fi ‏اشعلا‎ al-Fiqh, and its manuscript is
in the Vatican. Geschichte, 1:625, Also, Abi al-Husayn al-Basri

mentions the work in K. al-Mu‘tamad, 2:7, 324, 437, 498, 510, 692,
749, 922, and 987.

214

215

important Mu‘tazilite works, the most significant of which is that of
al-Qadi ‘Abd al-Jabbar Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Jabbar al-Hamadhani (d.
415/1025).2 His book al-Mughni fi Abwaéb al-‘Adl wa al-Tawhid is

the biggest encyclopedic work of its kind on the theology of the

3

Mu‘tazilites.” In 1951, a team of researchers from Dar al-Kutub

discovered an incomplete copy of al-Mughni in Yemen, which was
printed under the supervision of Taha Husayn. While this edition
does provide access to ‘Abd al-Jabbiar’s thinking, it is deficient;
some volumes, as is the case with the seventeenth which we are
about to outline, do not even have a table of contents or index.4
But since Kitab al-‘Ahd, which has been described by b.
Khaldin as one of the most important works on usd, is not
available, a glimpse of volume seventeen of ‘Abd al-Jabbar’s al-

Mughni is useful, for the part titled al-Shar‘iyyaét has extensive

2For more information see his extended biography in ‘Abd al-
Karim al-‘Uthman’s published dissertation 0247 al-Qudah ‘Abd
Jabbar al-Hamadhdni (Beirut: Dar al-‘Arabiyya, 1967) and his other
work Nazariyat al-Taklif (Beirut: Mu’assasat al-Riséla, 1971). See
also Encyclopaedia of Islam, new ed. s.v., “‘Abd al-Jabbar b. Ahmad
al-Asadabadi,” by 5. M. Stern. For his works and biographical
references, see Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:624-626.

3He spent almost twenty years writing his extended work.
See al-Mughni fi Abwab al-Tawhid wa al-‘Adl, 20 vols. (Cairo: The
Egyptian Company for Authorship and Translation,1962), vol. 17:
al-Shar‘iyyat., ed. Amin al-Khali, 20:258. According to Sezgin,
Geschichte, 1:624-625, ‘Abd al-Jabbar is generally considered
among the last of the great Mu‘tazilite thinkers.

4See the introduction to ‘Abd al-Jabbar’s work Mutashdbih al-
Qur'an. 2 vols. ed. ‘Adnan M. Zarzdr (Cairo: Dar al-Turath, 1969),
1:27. See the introduction to al-Mughni fi Abwab al-Tawhid wa al-

216

discussion on a broad range of usili topics.’ It reflects the strong
connection between theological and juridical issues evident in all
ustli literature of the fifth century. However, ‘Abd al-Jabbar is
unique in that he openly advocates this relationship.©

The major subjects in this volume are divided into fourteen
parts which are themselves comprised of chapters. The first three
parts tend to be in disarray since some materials are missing.
However, of their remaining chapters, ‘Abd al-Jabbar begins with a
discussion on language, namely expressions that indicate the
Shari‘a intent. He continues with the general and specific moods of
these expressions and concludes with a brief discourse on the
Shari‘a address itself and how to understand it.

‘Abd al-Jabbar advances the linguistic treatise in part four
with sections on al-Baydn (elucidation) and al-Takhsts
(specification), treating them in five chapters.’

Part five finds him returning to the Shari‘a address as a

whole, the way it imparts rules, and the types of revealed and

‘rational’ rules.®

‘Adl, 20 vols. (Cairo: The Egyptian Company for Authorship and
Translation,1962), vol. 14 edited by Mustafa al-Saqqé, pp. alif -yda’.

SAmin al-Khali has edited the manuscript and introduced the
volume with a brief introduction. The book has been printed in
Cairo: Dar al-Kutub, 1963.

®-Abd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni, 17:92.
Abd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni, 17:41-77.

8sAbd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni, 17:77-110.

217

In part six, al-Qadi ‘Abd al-Jabbar resumes his linguistic
analyses, this time with a look at the imperative and prohibitive
moods, explaining that the Shari‘a rules relate to the acts of the loci

of obligation and are not directed to the physical beings of men

9

themselves.” The discussion is furthered in part seven, where he

takes up the mubdh (allowed) acts, their status and requirements,
and prohibition. !° He also examines the concepts of sabab (reason)
and ‘illa (ratio legis or underlying cause).

Next, ‘Abd al-Jabbar devotes three chapters (in part seven) to
ijma‘, where he surveys its definition, occurrence, and authority.!!
He continues through chapters eight and nine to respond to the
issue of whether ijmd‘ can be based on qgiyds and ijtihdd, as well as
the permissibility of transmitting ijmd‘ through solitary report, and
concludes with an inquiry into the conditions for establishing ijma‘.

He begins part ten with an address on the authority of the
Prophet’s acts and their Shari‘a status, classifying them into
canonical acts, others which one is not obliged to follow, and those
that have been allowed only to the Prophet.

In parts eleven and twelve, he evaluates qiyds, its validity as

a Shari‘a source, and what constitutes or invalidates it.!2 He closes

“Abd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni, 17:110-140.
10. Abd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni, 17:140-173.
Abd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni, 17:174-274,

'2.abd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni, 17:275-387.

218

out the volume with a number of chapters on ijtihdd and a
discourse on the permissibility of fulfilling religious obligations that
have been transmitted via solitary report.

It is noteworthy that al-Qadi began his studies as an
Ash‘arite, but later defected to the Mu‘tazilites.!> This may explain
his position that kaldm, the basis of dogma, is necessarily linked —
with usitl, the basis of ‘amal (conduct in compliance with the Shari‘a
commands).!4 Therefore, he intertwines the discussion of usil in
al-Mughni with both the issues and the style of kalam, especially
that of the Mu'‘tazilites. In any case, he was a Shafi‘ite in figh,
though it did not prevent him from disagreeing with the school’s
founder on a number of issues.!> Yet he is comparatively gentle in
his opposition to al-Shafi‘i, as he is in his differences with the Shi‘a,
where he cites their opinions without severe critique. !® It is
possible, however, that he may have been ‘wisely’ circumspect
regarding the legal views of the Shi‘a, since the ruling Buwayhids,
whom ‘Abd al-Jabbar lived under and served, were themselves

Shi'a. Yet in his disagreement with the Malikites, as in regard to

'3Zarzir’s introduction to al-Mutashabih al-Qur'an, 1:13.

'4.Abd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni, 5:17.

I3See ‘Abd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni, 17:90, where he openly
disagrees with al-Shafi‘i concerning the question of abrogating the
Qur’an on the basis of a mutawdtir Sunna.

18. Abd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni, 17:213,

219

their opinion of restricting ijma’ to the community of Medina, he
was harsh to the point of being offensive.!”

Still, one cannot make an absolute judgement about ‘Abd al-
Jabbar’s ugitl? positions and approach based on al-Mughni alone.
Fortunately, however, one of his students devoted a good part of
his scholarship to the writing of a commentary on al-Qadi’s work —
al-‘Ahd, and later wrote independently on the subject of usil,
leaving us another principle work on gil al-figh, namely Abd al-

Husayn al-Basri’s al-Mu‘tamad.

ABU AL-HUSAYN AL-BASRI’S AL-MU‘TAMAD

While Ghazali’s Mustasfa is clearly a milestone in the
development of ‘ilm al-usil, the inclination to capsulize and set the
subject free from other incidentally related issues had already
surfaced several generations before him in Basra, the cradle of
i‘tizal. Early in the fifth Islamic century, Abi al-Husayn b. ‘Ali al-
Tayyib al-Basri wrote one of the most important books of wsil in

the classical period, al-Mu‘tamad fi Usil al-Figh.'8

\7.abd al-Jabbar, al-Mughni, 17:214.

18A good edition of the Mu‘tamad, based on five manuscripts
located in Yemen and Turkey, has been published Muhammad
Hamidullah with Ahmad Bakr and Hassan Hanafi; 2:1066, (Beirut,
Institut Francais de Damas, 1964-5). Appended to the book are
two works attributed to the author, Kitab Ziyddat al-Mu‘tamad and
Kitab al-Qiyds al-Shar‘i.

220

Abi al-Husayn’s life (d. 436/1044), unfortunately, is not well
chronicled.!? He was trained in the traditional Muslim sciences,
particularly in kaldm and fiqgh, and cultivated a personal interest in
philosophy and the natural sciences. In fact, he, along with one of
his teachers, ‘Ali b. Asbagh b. al-Samh (d. 426/1035), is said to
have written a commentary on some of Aristotle’s work in physics,
as translated by Ishaq b. Hunayn.29 Noted as both a capable
intellectual and prolific writer, he apparently stepped away from
mainstream Mu‘tazilite thought, repudiating some of its concepts as
well as their proponents. Hence, he earned blame in staunchly
Mu'tazilite circles as being tainted by Greek philosophy and a critic
of school notables.?!

It is evident from Aba al-Husayn al-Basgri’s introduction to al-
Mu‘tamad that, after his explication of ‘Abd al-Jabbar’s prominent
work on usiil, Kitab al-‘Ahd (also referred to K. al-‘Umad), which
he described as “repetitious,” he thought it justified to restructure

and refine the study of usit/.22 He faulted ‘Abd al-Jabbar for

19Sezgin, Geschichte,1:427; and Aba Sulayman, al-Fikr al-
‏نا‎ siilt, p.224.

20‘Abd al-Rahman Badawi, Aristit ‘ind al- ‘Arab; 2nd ed. 2
vols. (Kuwait: Wakalat al-Matba‘at, n.d.), 2:293-294.

21Aba Sulayman, al-Fikr al-Usiili, p. 225.

22a1-Basri, Mu‘tamad, 1:7. Also, note that Ibn Khaldan,
Muqaddimah, 1:576, mistakes al-Mu‘tamad to be a commentary on
‘Abd al-Jabbar, al-‘Umad, whereas Abi al-Husayn states clearly in
his introduction to al-Mu‘tamad that he wrote it after completing
his commentary on al-‘Umad.

221

clouding the science’s issues with tedious and irrelevant kalami
arguments that bore the specialist and bewilder the novice.2>? In
addition, he claims to have developed views not handled by his

teacher,24

Abi al-Husayn al-Basri, like Ghazali, provides his reader with
an introductory outline that highlights the salient usitl? issues and
maps out relationships between key concepts to ease
comprehension. Although al-Mustasfa emerges the more concise
and coherent text, perhaps owing to Ghazili’s deep association with
philosophy, Abd al-Husayn al-Basri preceded him in tailoring the
topic to suit the needs of living students rather than the standards
of dead masters. Nor is there reason to believe that this went
unnoticed by Ghazali himself, and that this, to some degree, is not
reflected in al-Mustasfa's introductory assessment of the science’s
status and Ghazali’s impulse to reorganize the presentation of usiil
explicitly to enhance understanding.?> Ghazili, however, went
beyond Abi al-Husayn’s cleansing of usiil from kaldm, purging it of
excessive discussions and illustrations on language and even fiqh,

albeit without consistency.

23al-Basri, Mu‘tamad, 1:7. In his introduction he cites
examples of these kaldmi discussions, such as the classification of
the types of knowledge, the definition of necessary knowledge, and
the emergence of knowledge from discursive thinking.

24Unfortunately, since ‘Abd al-Jabbar's Kitab al-‘Umad has
not been located, one cannot examine his claim.

25Ghazali, al-Mustasfd, 1:4-5.

222

According to Abi al-Husayn al-Basri, extracting fighi rules
from their sources is dependent first and foremost on
understanding the language of the Shari‘a. Therefore, al-Mu‘tamad
opens with an elaborate discourse on the essence of speech and its
classification, where literal and figurative usage and its
applications—in general and in the technical vocabulary of the
Shari‘a—are the subjects of several early chapters.*© ‏افع نا‎ al-figh,
he argues, is the means through which the texts of the Sharf‘a are
understood and effected. This includes the awdmir (commands)
and the naw4hi (prohibitions), which he analyzes next, as to their

relationship, definitions, characteristics, conditions, and

implications.7°

In addition, since the Shari‘a address comes in either generic
or specified biddings, he devotes a lengthy section to the meaning
of ‘umim (general) and khusiis (particular) expressions, their
interaction, and the conditions under which a generic command, for

example, becomes specified.??

As for the clarity of the Shari‘a address, he divides it into the
categories of mujmal (vague) and mubayyan (precise), defining the
sub-categories of baydn in the process, such as khdss, mufassar,
mufassal, nass, and zahir. He shows why mujmal requires

26al-Bagri, al-Mu‘tamad, 1:14-42.

27al-Basri, al-Mu‘tamad, 1:43-180.

28al-Basri, al-Mu‘tamad, 1:200.

29al-Basri, al-Mu ‘tamad, 1:201-315.

223

elucidation, how a Shari‘a utterance takes precedence over a
prophetic act, and when it is permissible for the prophet to delay
conveying a Shari‘a responsibility until it becomes necessary for
the loci of obligation to fulfill it.

Next Abd al-Husayn discusses acts themselves, classifying
them into (a) those of the loci of obligation and (b) those of the
Prophet, which he regards as Shari’a proof. He categorizes acts of
the former into (1) good (the obliged or recommended) and evil
(the prohibited or reprehensible), (2) the neutral acts, and (3) acts
categorized by the Shari‘a and those based on reason.

As for the acts of the Messenger, they are placed after the
Shari‘a address because they are, in Aba al-Husayn al-Basri’s view,
valid proofs. Thus, he refines the concept of emulating the Prophet
and sets criteria for differentiating between conflicting reports
about his deeds.

This discussion is followed by a section on abrogation. Abi
al-Husayn al-Basri first defines naskh linguistically and in the
Shari'a terminology, distinguishing it from badd’ (change of mind),
and discusses its application to the Qur'an, the Sunna, Ijma@', and
Qiyds, independently, and then in relation to one source’s
abrogation of another. Naskh follows acts and precedes /jmda‘ in his
scheme because, he holds, abrogation of the Shari'a address, that is,
the statements of the Qur’dn and the Sunna, is permissible; whereas
naskh cannot be applied to ‏“ماص‎

Following abrogation he devotes a score of chapters to Ijmd'‘,
which he claims is a valid Shari'a proof, which can be reported by

either mutawatir or Ghdd traditions. He explains its constituents,
224

defines its community, and establishes the possibility of /jmda‘
being founded on ijtihdd, as well as its being a validating factor for
qiyas.

Abi al Husayn al-Basgri then treats the transmission of the
Messenger’s reports, expounding upon their classifications
according to the certainty of the knowledge they impart and the .
criteria by which the transmissions are accepted or rejected. He
explains the Companions’ terminology and its implications in
reporting traditions from the Prophet. Further, he defines the
honorific Companion.

Next, ijtihdd and qiyads are combined under one heading
where al-Basri also discusses related issues at great length, such as
the definition, validity, and conditions of qiyds; the justification of
ijtihdd as a valid way of adducing rules; and istihsdn as a
controversial method of ijtihdd.

Closely connected to the discussion of qiyas and ijtihdd, in his
view, is the state of acts prior to revelation. Here al-Basri examines
the prohibition and permissibility of acts, which brings into the
discourse the sources for deriving Shari‘a rules and the process of
their deduction, istidldl. He continues to present the Mu‘tazilite
arguments on the doctrine of good and evil, recognizing reason as a
valid source for creating rules.

Al-Basri’s hierarchy is concluded with the method used to
derive Shari‘a rules, which leads to an examination of the roles of
both the seekers and givers of fatwas (mufti and mustafti) and a

discussion of the issues relating to taqlid.
225

AL-JUWANT’S AL-BURHAN

Imam al-Haramayn Abi Ma‘ali ‘Abd al-Malik al-Juwayni (d.
478/1085) combined giftedness and early training to master the
religious sciences of kalam, usiil, and Shafi‘ite figh. This was
enhanced by the academic prestige he acquired when the great
Seljuk vazir, Nizam al-Mulk, established on his account the .
Nizamiyya college in Naysabir, where al-Juwayni taught for nearly
thirty years. It was near the end of this remarkable career that
certainly his most able student came to learn the Islamic sciences
at his hand, Abi Hamid al-Ghazali.>°

Perhaps the former’s most acclaimed usili work is his al-
Burhan fi ‏اشعلا‎ al Figh.*} B. Khaldan holds it to be one of the four
major works written on the Principles of Law following the

mutakallimin approach to ‏.لقع‎ Al-Subki praises it as both original

3

and innovative,>~ calling it ““lughz al-ummah” (“the enigma of the

39 See the unique and great praise of Juwayni in Subki,
Tabaqat al-Shafi'iyya, 5:165-222.

his other uséli works include al-Waragdt fi ‏اشعلا‎ al-Figh,
also an abridgement of al-Qadi Aba Bakr al-Baqillani’s al-Taqrib wa
al-Irshad fi Usiil al-Fiqh. Subki, Tabagat al-Shafi'iyya, 5:171-172.

32The article in the Encyclopaedia of Islam, new ed., s.v., “al-
Djuwayni” by Carl Brockelmann-[L. Gardet] notes that al-Burhdn is
the first attempt to “establish a juridical method on an Ash‘ari
basis.” However, this is not correct . For al-Baqillani’s al-Taqrib wa
al-Irshdd, which al-Subki praises as an unparalleled usili work, did
exactly this one half century before the death of Juwayni.

226

community”).°? Yet one wonders at how a book of such acclaim
failed to measure up to either the renown of its author or the
acclaim of its critics in terms of popularity. Al-Subki suggests that
the reason for this discrepancy is that al-Burhdn’s repudiation of
Malik’s maslaha al-mursala, as well as his criticism of Abi Hasan
al-Ash‘ari, caused the North African scholars of later periods to
disregard the book.24

Al-Subki’s point is substantive. Nevertheless, there are
perhaps other reasons for al-Burhdn’s limited popularity, not the
least of which is Ghazali’s abridgement of the book in al-Mankhiil.
His organizational skill and facility in making obscure topics clear
was evident even in this early work. In addition, however, al-
Juwayni assails Abi Hanifa in the latter portions of the book which
no doubt angered the Hanafite fuqahd’. Yet perhaps the most
important of reasons for its slight popularity over the generations
is Ghazali’s writing of al-Mustasfa, for its unique organization and
conciseness eclipsed his mentor’s work, leaving scholars to turn to
al-Juwayni more exclusively in theology than in jurisprudence.

Hence, it is his works on kaldm that they were more apt to engage.

33The correct Pronunciation is ‘lughz,’ or ‘laghaz,’ or ‘lughaz,’
according to Manzir, Lisdn al-‘Arab, 5:405; and Mustafa, et al.,
Mu‘jam al-Wasit, 2:836. It is not ‘laghz,’ as noted in the Carl
Brockelmann-[L. Gardet] Encyclopaedia of Islam article.

34 A1-Subki mentions that al-Maziri started a commentary on
al-Burhdn, but stopped because of Juwayni’s view on the divine
knowledge of Allah; Tabaqdr al-Shafi'iyya, 1:192-207.

227

‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Dib has edited al-Burhdn based on nine
manuscripts, and it is this edition which is referred to here. Its size
approximates that of al-Mustasfa, and both begin with a definition
of the usd! al-figh and the limits of its relation to the sciences of
kalam, fiqh, and Arabic. Also, both recognize that fiqh is an
extension of the sources, namely the Qur’an, the Sunna, and Ijma'.>>
Al-Juwayni, after briefly defining the Shari'a rules, immediately
follows with an argument against the Mu‘tazilites regarding the
status of the ‘goodness’ (tahsin) or ‘badness’ (taqbih) of acts prior to
the arrival of revelation. This gives way to a discussion on the
categories of taklif in general, the issue of bearable and unbearable
obligations, and the possibility of laying obligations upon the
intoxicated, the compelled, and the disbeliever. Finally, he defines
Reason (‘aq/), knowledge (‘ilm), the avenues of knowledge, and
rational proof. It is evident from his introduction to al-Burhan that

al-Juwayni is influenced by both the style and the issues of

kalam.>®

Al-Juwayni begins his discourse on usil itself with chapters
on language under the heading al-Baydan (Elucidation), wherein he
defines and classifies explicit and ambiguous linguistic indications
of Shari‘a rules. He devotes a number of pages to purely linguistic
matters on the origins of languages and the relationship between

etymological meanings and technical usages in the Shari‘a. He also

3S5a1-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 1:83-86.

36a1-Juwayni, al-Burhan, 1:87-158.

228

lists linguistic particles common in ugil and explains their
meanings.>” He then devotes a detailed discussion to the
imperative mood (sighat al-’amr), how it indicates Shari'a rules,
and closes with a similar analysis of prohibitive commands.°®

A chapter on the definitions of the five Shari‘a rules—wajib,
mandiib, mahzitir, makrith, and muba@éh—interrupts his examination
‏6ه‎ 9 However, he picks up the discussion showing how
various moods express Shari‘a rules in general or specific, citing
details of figh to illustrate his points.4° This treatment is also
intermitted by a discussion on circumstantial evidence (qara’in) as
a means of specifying texts, but resumes and finally closes with a
word on its indication through implication (al-mafhim).“!

A chapter on the religious validity of the Messenger’s acts
and the status of the laws of preceding nations follows.4? Here
again he uses fiqhi illustrations to explain his views, particularly in

engaging the Hanafite fugahd’ in matters of usiil.43 When he

37al-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 1:159-196.
38al-Juwayni, al-Burhén, 1:197-307.
3al-Juwayni, al-Burhén, 1:307-317.
4051-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 1:318-371.
41 al-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 1:380-482.

42a1-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 1:483-510.

43al-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 1:511-561.

229

recognizes that he has strayed from the subject, he is compelled to
“renew connection,” as he puts it, and returns to the topic of
reports, where he defines the term ‘hadith’ and introduces its
broad divisions, devoting attention to mutawdtir and ahdd reports.
He also writes on the qualifications of transmitters, their
endorsement, and delves in great detail into the ways of hadith
transmission. He closes with a chapter on the treatment of
contradicting reports.*4 With his rather detailed inquiry into ijmd’‘,
al-Dib’s edition concludes the first volume of al-Burhén4>

The lengthiest chapter of the work, on qiydas, opens the

second volume.4®

It is within this discourse that al-Juwayni sees
fit to introduce the concept of istidla!l in order to discuss the
inferring or extracting of Shari‘a rules from the texts. He calls upon
certain positions of both al-Shafi‘i and al-Baqillani to aid him in

this, particularly in their respective approaches to inferring Shari‘a

7

rules.47 It is here where al-Juwayni introduces istishab, regarding

it as simply a means of extracting rules, unlike Ghazali who holds it

to be one of the four Shari‘a sources.48

Juwayni proceeds with the matter of the enforcement of

44a1-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 1:564-669.
43al-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 1:670-725.
46a1-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 2:743-1112.
47 a1-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 2:1113-1134.

48a1-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 2:1135-1142.

230

conflicting texts before resuming his inquiry into qgiyds, where he
draws distinctions of preference between the various modes of
analogy.*? Naskh, then, emerges as the final chapter in all the
known copies of al-Burhadn except the Turkish manuscript.>°
Ghazali, in al-Mankhil, reproduces Juwayni’s criticisms of Aba
Hanifa from al-Burhadn. Upon examination, it is not difficult to
imagine why many transcribers would hesitate to include such

heavy criticism of the latter in their manuscripts.

In conclusion, the absence of most of the Mu‘tazilite usitli
works renders al-Basri’s al-Mu‘tamad as this school’s best
representative—especially since the author includes in it many
opinions of the persuasion’s prominent legists, such as ‘Abd al-
Jabbar, al-Jubba’i, Aba Ishaq al-Nazzim, and Aba Hashim.>!
Moreover, it is the best organized usdli work up until the writing of

al-Mustasfd. As noted above, he sought to sift out the usili
49a1-Juwayni, al-Burhén, 2:1202-1292

39 See the description of this manuscript in al-Burhdn, 1:70,
where there is an appendix treating the subject of ijtihdd and fatwa
that takes about 50 pages, wherein he openly attacks Aba Hanifa in
a way that reflects Juwayni’s suffering from the persecution of the

Hanafite vazir, al-Kundiri. For further details, see Subki, Tabaqat
al-Sha@fi'iyya, 4:62.

Slabs al-Husayn al-Basri cites his own commentary on ‘Abd
al-Jabbar’s al-‘Umad, and mentions the latter’s name nearly 250
times; he also cites Abi ‘Ali al-Jubba’i more than 50 times, and
others: Abi Ishaq al-Nazzim, 6; Abd Hashim al-Mu‘tazili, nearly 0
times, etc. See , al-Mu‘tamad,1:7, 8, 103, 324; 2: 552, 561, 768,
860, etc.

discussions from those of kaldm, though he too engaged excessively
in certain issues of theology. Indeed, perhaps kaldm was
unavoidable when essaying the legal Principles from the Mu ‘tazilite
point of view, for discussions of taqbih and tahsin (declaring acts
‘good’ or ‘bad’) and wujitb al-aslah (the necessity of Allah doing
what is best for his creation) seem to inevitably arise. .

It is evident, however, that Aba al-Husayn is an independent
thinker who did not hesitate to stand against even the most
seminal formulators of i‘tizal! when he was less than convinced by
their arguments.>” Still, he remains within the classical approach
to usiil initiated by al-Shafi‘i, which, as we have seen, was follwed
by al-Juwayni and most other works on the subject. |

Thus, although Ghazali did not explicitly cite Abd al-Husayn
al-Basri in al-Mustasfa, it is reasonable to assume that he was
aware of al-Mu'tamad's issues. In fact, it is very likely that he
used it as one source for identifying and defining some of the many
Mu'tazilite positions that he poses and then responds to in al-
Mustasfa.

As for Juwayni’s Burhdn, while it is true that it does not
compete with the organizational structure and conciseness of even

*?See al-Basri, al-Mu‘tamad, 1:99, where he takes issue with
his teacher ‘Abd al-Jabbar’s definition of ‘ijza’ al-‘Iba@dah,’ 1:306,
where he differs in stipulations required of texts in the general
linguisitic mood. He also differs with his definition of naskh
(abrogation). See al-Mu‘tamad, 1:396-397, In addition he
criticized many notable Mu'‘tazilites in Baghdad with reference to
the permissibility of taglid al-‘ammi li al-ijtihad (the layities’

imitation of independent juristic thought). See also Aba Sulayman,
al-Fikr al-Usiili, p. 245,

232

Aba al-Husayn’s Mu‘tamad , let alone al-Mustasfa, it without doubt
exerts the greatest influence in shaping Ghazali’s usili works. This
is not surprising when one considers that Ghazali devoted a good
part of his early scholarship to the explication of the Burhan, which
culminated in his writing of al-Mankhal.>> Indeed, Ghazali
remained loyal to al-Mankhiil—and thus to al-Burhén—in much of .

his later writings.>4

Ghazali, then, has adopted a good number of al-Juwayni’s
opinions, but without dogmatic adherence to them. Rather, some of
these find more comprehensive textual and contextual expression
in Ghazali’s ust! than in al-Juwayni’s. For example, Imam al-
Haramayn considers the Shari‘a sources to be three and does not
mention in his treatment of giyds more than a cursory statement of
its importance, accepting and endorsing al-Baqillani’s definition of
it in a footnote, continuing its discussion thereafter.>> Ghazali, on

the other hand, explicitly rules that giyds is not a Shari‘a source,

33There are spurious reports that after seeing al-Mankhil, al-
Juwayni said to Ghazali, “You have buried me alive. Could you not
have waited until I died.” This report seems dubious, especially
considering al-Juwayni’s widely-reported character of willingness
to learn from all—even his Students—long after he was an
accomplished scholar. Yet the fact remains that while the Mankhil
wins in conciseness, it falls far short of reproducing the originality,

the strength, the warmth, and the standard of Arabic found in the
Burhan.

34 Ghazali, Shifa’ al-Ghalil, pp. 8, 16; and al-Mustasfa, 1:3, for
example.

5Sal-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 1:85-86 and 2:745.

233

but rather an instrument that the mujtahid utilizes to arive at a
Shari‘a rule on something that is not specified in the Shari‘a texts.
However, Ghazali does use a number of the expressions found in his
mentor’s book; for example, the phrases ‘kashf al-ghita’ (unveiling
[this question]; to shed light); ‘wa al-mukhtdr ‘indana’ (the
preferred opinion, choice opinion with us); ‘wa al-dabit’ (the precise
[opinion or meaning 15 . . . pr®

Since Ghazali did not explicitly state his sources in citing al-
Baqillani’s views, one cannot determine whether he relied on al-
Burhan for them or went directly to al-Baqillini’s Tagrib al-Irshdd.
However, one finds in the Burhan, as in al-Mustasfé, numerous
references from the latters usili’s work. Moreover, al-Juwayni’s
independence is reflected in his controverting of forty-one of al-
Baqillani’s positions, twenty-five of al-Shafi‘i’s, and three of al-

Ash‘ari’s, a trend that is also born out in al-Mustasfa. 57-58

>al-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 1:696, 2:1196; 2:1356 and 1358
This phrase may have been used by the school in general.

STal-Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 2: 1443-1449.

581 is important for modern research to focus on al-
Baqillani’s legal views, since there is considerable research on his
theological opinions. Despite the loss of his legal works, this can be
obtained through other various usiili books that contain his
opinions. Such as the above mentioned works, as well as Aba
Ya‘la’s, K. al-‘Udda, Razi's, al-Mahsiil.

234

THE MUTAKALLIMUN VERSUS THE F UQAHA'

The above three works, al-Mughni, al-Mu‘tamad, and al-
Burhan, along with al-Mustasfa, belong to one of the two main
approaches of usiil al-figh dominating that science’s writing,
termed by Ghazali, and later b. Khaldin, as the Mutakallimiin or
Shafi ‘ite method.>? The other method, in contradistinction to the
first, is referred to as the Fuqahd’ or Hanafite approach, and its first
elaborate and comprehensive representative work is Dabbasi’s
Taqwim Usiil al-Figh.

In al-Mustasfa, Ghazali’s criticism of the Fugqahda’ illustrates

the influence of Dabbisi on their approach. Ghazali states:

The love for figh has led a group of legists of Transoxania,
namely Abi Zayd [al-Dabbisi], may Allah have mercy on
him, and his followers, to mix many questions of the details
of figh with its principles. Although they brought this by
way of examples to illustrate how a principle leads to
certain detailed legal points, they did so in excess.

B. Khaldin, in more positive language than Ghazili,
acknowledges that the “best writings on it [usiil al-fiqh] by an early
[Hanafite] scholar are the works of Abi Zayd al-Dabbisi.”°! He

further distinguishes Dabbisi for his mastery of analogical

reasoning (qiyds).

3*Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:10.
60Ghazali, al-Mustasfd, 1:10.

®'Ibn Khaldin, al-Mugaddima, pp. 576-577.

235

However, before introducing Taqwim and its author and
pointing out some of the issues that illustrate the disagreements
between Dabbisi and Ghazali, it is both useful and interesting to
give a brief account of the principle characteristics typifying each
ustili approach.

The task of usiil al-figh is to locate and develop the
mechanism for generating laws and rationalizing legislation from
the Shari‘a sources. It is worthy of note that not every legal school
elaborated an independent methodology for extracting rules.
Instead, only the two aforementioned tendencies dominated in the
classical period.

The Mutakallimiin did not care much for illustrating their
legal principles with many exemplary figh? case studies that would
have concretized their arguments. Rather, they concerned
themselves with articulating sound governing principles that did
not necessarily correspond with the particular legal views of any
madhhab. Hence, their principles were formulated from essences
gleaned from the primary sources. They were, then, necessarily
more abstract.

The Fuqgahd’, on the other hand, used specific case studies
thoroughly in their method to extract governing theoretical bases.
So they naturally depended heavily on legal precedents—which
necessarily distinguishes between the past rulings of the
madhhab’s notable jurists. They were therefore more practical
than their Mutakallimiin counterparts.

In regard to analogical reasoning (qiyds), for instance, the

consensus is that a new case may fall under the principle of a legal
236

precedent if the common essential feature (‘illa) is explicitly stated
as the reason for which the Lawgiver recognizes the principle in a
given case. But it is when the reason is not specified and
identifying it is left to interpretation that sharp legal differences
appear, as is the case between Ghazali and Dabbisi.

Ghazali argues that even if the reason is not explicitly
mentioned, qiyds is still implied. Therefore, the mujtahid is
entitled to deduce the underlying reason from the said principles
and proceed in applying 1265 on new cases that share the common
extracted ‘illa, which he recognized in the original case.

Dabbisi, on the other hand, appears to hold that the rational
Process of extracting the hikma (underlying wisdom) has the
potential of being unsystematic, leaving room for different
conclusions under various circumstances. Thus, qiyas should only
be applied to identifiable causes that are textually recognized as
necessitating rulings. So “principles [ahkdm] do not follow from
underlying wisdom [hikma],”°®

The case of breaking fast while travelling is a good
illustration of the preceding discussion. The Qur’an does not
specify the underlying wisdom for allowing the traveller, or the
sickly, to break fast during Ramadan. Following from Dabbisi’s
concern, one may extract ‘hardship’ as the underlying reason for

which permission is granted; but hardship is different from one

©2Ghazali, Shifa’ al-Ghalil, p. 604.

30ur'4n, 2:184.,

person to another, from one time to the next. Thus, a resident who
faces hardship may not be allowed to break fast according to this
verse, while a traveller who enjoys comfort may.

Dabbisi concludes that, in this case, only travel will
Systematically objectify the reason for breaking fast during
Ramadan. Therefore, he rejects Ghazali’s method of extracting an
underlying wisdom which would not systematically facilitate
giyas.®4

Dabbisi’s positions gave life to many a debate and were
widely considered by generations of legists. The distinguished
fuqaha’ of Merv, for example, were known in particular for
supporting their legal opinions with arguments they attributed to
Dabbiasi. Ghazali expressed his disappointment with the Mervans’
“misunderstanding of Dabbisi’s views and teachings.” Indeed,
Ghazali states candidly in his introduction to Shifa’ al-Ghalil that he
had hoped not to write on the subject of usiil al-fiqgh again, having
abridged al-Juwayni’s Burhan in al-Mankhil.©® Nevertheless,
“what has been repeatedly circulated of Dabbisi’s opinions [on
usil) and the misunderstandings concerning them” compelled him

to ‏ول‎ 7 According to Ghazali, Dabbisi was highly quoted in

64Ghazali, Shifa’ al-Ghalil, pp. 604-619; and al-Mustagsfa,
2:299,

®5Ghazali, Shifa’ al-Ghalil, p. 322.
S6Ghazali, Shifa’ al-Ghalil, pp. 8-9.

©7Ghazali, Shifa’ al-Ghalil, p. 9.

238

circles of law and legal debate, and his positions were equally
abused. So, Ghazali wrote on qiyds in Shifa’ al-Ghalil largely in
response to the former’s legacy.

In Shifa’ al-Ghalil, Ghazali engages Dabbisi’s Opinions (those
that he had heard quoted and those that he quotes himself,
primarily from Dabbisi’s Kitab al-Taqwim) with characteristic
alacrity. He mentions Dabbisi by name in no less than twenty-four
places scattered throughout the book.°8 15 this sense, Ghazali sets
up no rival to him.

Yet Dabbisi, himself, devoted much attention to al-Shafi‘i’s
legal views. Thus, it is no wonder that Ghazali, as champion of the
Shafi‘ite school, paid particularly close attention to Dabbasi in Shifa’
and referred to his views in al-Mustasfa. Still, if one looks
comprehensively, it becomes clear that what is being contended

here is a case of feuding between the Hanafites and the Shafi‘ites.

ABU ZAYD AL-DABBUSI
The laqab al-Dabbisi seems to have been derived from his

relatively obscure birthplace, Dabbisiyya.©? In the literature,

°SGhazali, Shifa’ al-Ghalil, pp. 9, 14, 142, 177-179, 181, 183,
310, 317, 322, 333, 379, 414, 460, 465, 510, 513, 584, 604, 650,
652.

6° Dabbassiya is village north of the river Oxus and east of
Bukhara in the region of Sughd, west of Samarqand. There are
detailed descriptions of Sughd in ‘Abd al-Mun‘im al-Himayri, Kitab
al-Rawd al-Mi‘tar fi Khabar al-Aqtar, ed. I ‘Abbas (Beirut: Library
of Lebanon, 1975), pp. 233 and 362; Shihab al-Din Aba ‘Abd Allah
Yaqit (al-Hamawi), Mu‘jam al-Bulddn, 5 vols. (Beirut: Dar Sadir and
Dar Beirut, 1957), 5:45-47; and Sufiy al-Din ‘Abd al-Haqq al-

239

Dabbisi is nearly always, if not universally, referred to by the
aforementioned lagab. But al-Hijwi refers to him as al-

Samarqandi. /°

The only source that explicitly states Dabbasi’s date of birth
is 5. al-Athir, who records it as the year 376/987)! But, for the
most part, his family background and childhood remain shrouded
in history, as is the particular process of his education. It appears,
however, that Dabbasi was raised in a traditional religious family
and that his primary Islamic education began at home. In any
case, he must have gone to Samarqand fairly young, where the
formation of his knowledge in figh and his development as a
Hanafite jurist were accelerated and refined. Moreover, it is likely
that even as a student he had contact with the great centers of
learning in Bukhara—which, along with Samarqand, rivaled
Baghdad in learning in Dabbisi’s day.’

Among his early mentors was Abd Ja‘far al-Usrashani, whose

legal training links him to Muhammad b. al-Hasan through a

Baghdadi, Masasid al-Atla‘, 3 vols. ed. ‘Ali al-Bijawi (Beirut: Dar al-
Ma‘rifa, 1954), 2:523 and 2:842.

70 a1-Hijwi, al-Fikr al-Sami ft Tdrikh al-Islami, 2:179.

bn al-Athir, al-Lubdb fi Tahdhib al-Ansdb, 3 vols. (Beirut:
Dar SAdir, 1980), 3:19.

Philip Hitti, History of the Arabs, 10th ed. (New York: St.
Martin Press, 1981), ‏.م‎ 462. Hitti notes that the Samanid ruler, Nah
11 (d. 997 C.E.), invited b. Sina and gave him access to his rich royal
library in Bukhara, which had tens cf thousands of books.

210

scholarly chain that starts with the important Hanafites, ‘Ali al-
Jassas (d. 370/980) and Muhammad b. al-Fad! al-Kamari (d.
381/991).73 Dabbisi, himself, gained widespread notoriety and

was given accolades as “one of the great followers of Imam Abit

74

Hanifa, and the “Shaykh of the Hanafites . . . judge and scholar

of the region beyond the river [Oxus].”?5

Al-Dabbisi’s Taqwim Usiil al-Fiqh
Taqwim ‏اشعلا‎ al-Figh wa Tahdhib Adillat al-Shar‘ is a
milestone in the Hanafite school for its treatment of the F uqaha’

method of usiil al- igh./® Its organization is classical: an openin
Pp 8

73 amari studied under al-Sabadhmini whose teacher was
Abi Hafs al-Saghir. His father, Aba Hafs al-Kabir, from whom al-
Saghir learned, was a student of the Hanafite notable, Muhammad
b. al-Hasan al-Shaybani. See al-Laknawi, al-Fawd’ id, p. 107.

‎Khallikan, Wafaydt al-A‘ydn, 2:251.‏ ه7415

‎75 al-Dhahabi, Siyar A‘lam al-Nubald’, 17:521. Also, al-
Dhahabi, al-‘/bar, 3:171, states that Dabbisi was “the first to

‎establish ‘ilm al-khildf (the science of legal difference) and give it
prominence.”

‎76 ‘abd al-Rahim al-Atghani has proposed to edit the second
volume of Taqwim al-Adilla as a Ph.D dissertation to the Islamic
University in Medina. 1 have seen his manuscript in March
1986 during my visit to the university. Thirteen manuscripts are
known to be in existence. Also, I have seen the manuscript of Dar
al-Kutub in Cairo. The binding was remarkably intact and it is
written on glossy paper. Fakhr al-Islam al-Pazdawi (d 482/1088)
wrote a commentary on it which is not located; however, ‘Abd al-
“Aziz al-Bukhari (d. 730/1329) quoted from that commentary in

‎Kashf al-Asrér, 4 vols. (Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi, 1974), 2:252,
356, and 3:367.

241

position followed by a statement of validity and definitions of
terminology derived from the Islamic legal sources, i.e., the Qur’an,
Sunna, Qiydas, ljma‘, etc. It therefore addresses the problems of
understanding the Islamic textual sources so as to provide a
mechanism for their application.

Dabbisi follows the classical structure also in dividing his
book into abwdb (chapters; pl. of bab). The entire work is
comprised of one-hundred and seven such chapters, the first three
of which—like most of the literature of usual written in the fourth
century—commence with a discourse on the Shari'a proofs and their
types.

In the next two chapters, four and five, he defines the Qur’an,
explaining its authority as a Shari‘a source, and develops a lengthy
argument on fawdtur, concluding that any Shari‘a rules imparted
from such texts, be it the Qur’an itself or the mutawdtir Sunna, are
compelling; therefore the loci of obligation must comply with them.

Dabbisi next introduces ijmd‘, in chapters six through eight,
first by defining it and then by specifying its forms. He, of course,
argues for its validity against those who reject it as a principle
Shari‘a source. However, in the next nine chapters, Dabbisi brings
into focus the impact of language in usiil, opening with the various
kinds of ‘speech’ and the diverse methods of interpreting the status
of the imperative and prohibitive moods.

He returns to his discourse on the Shari'a, but in a defense for
its necessity, which brings him to the nature of its rituals and
ultimately to a classification of the different sorts of Shari‘a rules

themselves. This culminates in an analysis of concepts that revolve
around performance and compliance with the rules, namely ‘azima
and rukhga, and add’ and qada.

The next ten babs, through the thirty-fourth, find Dabbiasi
resuming his discussion on language, treating in particular length
the application of technical and linguistic terminology. He also
investigates the Shari‘a texts that give ‘apparent’ indications as well
as the concept of interpretation (ta’ wil).

In the next few chapters he treats solitary reports, the
various types of reporters, and the criteria for accepting and
rejecting transmissions. This is followed by the status and
reliability of transmission by way of written copies of hadith.
Dabbisi proceeds in the next two chapters, forty-five and forty-six,
to set criteria for the acceptance and rejection of the hadith
themselves.

In bab forty-seven he addresses the topic of contradiction
between texts and the approaches to reconcile seemingly
conflicting ones through interpretations that remove the apparent
discrepancies. This, as one would expect, leads to a discussion of
abrogation (naskh) in the following six chapters. Here he begins by
defining ‘naskh,’ defending its occurrence in the Sharf‘a texts, and
then classifies and distinguishes those texts which are not liable to
abrogation from those that are.

Next he introduces the subject of the Prophet’s canonical
deeds establishing their status and devoting an interesting chapter

on what he terms the Prophet's ijtihdd and the Shari‘a value of the

his personal opinion.
243

He closes out the first volume of the Cairo manuscript with
discussions on the status of the religious laws of preceding nations,
concerning their validity for Muslims. Finally, he discusses the
authority of the Companions’ and Successors’ legal positions with
regard to the Shari‘a.

The second volume begins with Dabbisi’s most important and
most detailed inquiry, giyds. Ibn Khaldan writes, “The Hanafites
have written a great deal on their approach. . . . The best writings
on it by an early scholar are the works of Aba Zayd al-Dabbisi.”
He further states, “He [Dabbisi) wrote more widely on analogical
reasoning than any other Hanafite and completed their research
methods and conditions governing this discipline.”?? Indeed,
Dabbisi’s discourse on giyds continues for a full twenty-seven
babs.

He begins with a defense of giyds’ validity, refuting the
arguments of the Zahirites who oppose it. He defines its linguistic
and technical meanings, its conditions, its requirements, and the
qualifications of the practitioner of giyds. In great length he
analyzes the various kinds of valid and invalid analogies, which
leads him into a treatise on the ‘illa (underlying cause or ratio legis)
that forms the very basis of analogy and its effect on the Shari‘a
rules. He also considers the validity of using qiyds as means
Proving some texts as worthier, for a given case, than others.

Dabbisi then treats the supposed unacceptable sources of the

Shari'a, which revolve primarily around taqlid. He delves,

™ Ibn Khaldan, al-Mugaddima, pp. 576-577.

214

however, into its various valid expressions, such as the following of
some scholars by others and the acceptance of the ‘ulamdé’ by the
ummah, But he attacks the notion of blind following of forefathers,
or non-Muslims, and debases the concept of ‘inspiration’ (ilham) as
a valid source of Law.

Dabbisi—like Ghazali in al-Mustasféa—divides istishab into
four types. Yet he accepts only two forms as valid and does not, as
Ghazali does, hold it to be one of the four primary sources of Law.
He strongly attacks the notion of a mujtahid resorting to istishab
without thoroughly searching for Shari‘a proof or arriving at rules
solely on its basis, holding this to be untenable innovation in
religion.

Yet, as a loyal Hanafite, he recognizes the authority of
istihs@n, saying that arriving at rules of fiqh by way of this source
differs from relying on caprice, as the Hanafites opponents charge.
Rather, he contends, it is a result of a jurist’s awareness of the
Shari‘a and its aims. Thus it is a valid method even if the jurist
does not explicitly cite a Shari‘a text to substantiate his legal
judgement.

Chapters thirty-four to forty-one of volume two Dabbisi
commits to the operation of ijtihdd, where he gives the
qualifications for a mujtahid. Next, he examines the problem of
whether a mujtahid is invariably correct or is liable to error in
some circumstances.

Dabbisi then returns to the loci of obligation, outlining the

limits of their capacities and the influences that eliminate them.
245

This eventually takes him back full circle to the role of reason in
the Shari‘a and rational proof.

Like Ghazali, Dabbisi’s spiritual inclinations also find
expression in this book of ‏.لقع‎ At the close of Taqwim al-Adilla,
he writes on the conditions of the heart and the relationship
between law and ethics.

In following the fugahd’ approach, Dabbisi’s work, as Ghazili
points out, uses many illustrations from the details of Law itself.
In addition, he, again like Ghazali in al-Mustasfa, shows a number
of methodological tendencies. The most obvious of these is his

propensity to analyze things into four parts. 78

The Primary Works of Dabbisi

Although Dabbisi wrote many books, Ta’ sis al-Nazar is the
only one in print. However, an annotated list of his works may be
useful. Yet the fact that these works are not available necessarily
prevents a comprehensive evaluation of his accomplishments and
therefore limits the scholarly analysis of this important jurist. In
any case, it is hoped that what follows will in some way stimulate
the reintroduction of these works and their author to Islamicists.

*Al-Asrdr fi al-Ugal wa al-Furt‘ is considered one of

Dabbisi’s most valuable legal works. It addresses classical issues

18 For example, he says that the deniers of giyds are of four
types; to know qgiyds one must know four things; the conditions of
qiyds are four; qiyds itself is divisible into four kinds; even with
respect to the objections of applying the underlying cause of the
rules upon deductions of opinions of figh, he divides them into four
aspects; and he divides the sababs themselves into four.

246

of fiqh, but its comparative method distinguishes it from the more
common madhhabi references on the subject. It is in three

volumes, and there are at least sixteen located manuscripts in the

world. ??

*Al-Amad al-Aqs4@ addresses spirituality in Islam. I
reviewed a manuscript of this work in the al-Azhar library in
1973. It opens with a dialogue between Dabbisi and a student that
develops into a question-answer exchange where general moral
instruction and advice about Islamic character are given
throughout. It has eleven chapters, according to Haji Khalifa.8°
There are a minimum of thirteen existing manuscripts.®!

*Al-Anwar fi Ugiil al-Figh is a little book that examines
the basics of ‏اثبع‎ al-figh. According to Shishin’s Rare Manuscripts
of Turkish Libraries, the only manuscript known to be in existence
is in Burdéir, a remote town in southwestern Anatolia.°~

*Al-Ta‘liqa fi Masdé’il al-Khilaf bayna al-A’imma is a
book of comparative figh. It is referred to by this title in Turkey;
however, the Egyptian copy is titled Juz’ min Masd’il al-Khilaf. It is

in Taymir’s collection of Dar al-Kutub, Cairo.®?
9 Sezpin, Geschichte,1:456
80x halifa, Kashf al-Zuniin, 1:168.

81 Sezpin, Geschichte, 1:456;

82 Shishin, Rare Manuscripts of Turkish Libraries, 2:10.

83 Sezgen, Geschichte, 1:456.

217

Shark. al-Jami‘ al-Kabir li al-Imam al-Shaybani is
referred to in Khalifa’s Kashf al-Zuniin®4 and Hadiyat al-‘Arifin.85
However, -the location of the manuscript(s) is unknown.

*Al-Nazam fi al-Fatdwa’s manuscript is not ‏انلا‎ 6

*Tajnis al-Dabbisi is cited by Haji Khalifa; however, it may
be another title for al-Nazam ff al-Fatéwa. No other information is
available.®?

*Khazdnat al-Hédi is cited by Haji Khalifa, also.®8 Likewise,
no other information is available.

*Ta’sis al-Nazar first appeared in print in Cairo, 1902,
edited by Shaykh Mustafa Muhammad al-Qabbani. It was based on
the two manuscripts located in Dar al-Kutub. In 1972, Zakariya ‘Ali
Yasuf of The Imam’s Press poorly reprinted al-QabbAni’s edition.

There are at least five manuscripts of Ta’sis in existence (for
their location consult Sezgin’s Geschichte des Arabischen
Schrifttums). It contains eighty-four theoretical bases (ustl) that
are categorized throughout the book’s nine chapters: The first

chapter has 22 bases; the second, 4; the third, 3; the fourth, 4; the

®4khalifa, Kashf al-Zuntin, p. 568.
85Basha, Hadiyat al-‘Arifin, 2:53-4.

86 Al -Hijwi, al-Fikr al-Sami, 2:179; and al-Laknawi, Kitab ‏اه‎
‎Fawa’id al-Bahiya, p. 107.

87Khalifa, Kashf al-Zuniin , 1:352.

88k halifa, Kashf al-Zuniin , 1:703.

248

fifth, 7; the sixth, 2; the seventh, 5; the eighth, 25; and the ninth,
12.

This general account of the usdli literature and the main
trends that emerged in its development is hoped to sharpen

awareness of and appreciation for Ghazali’s articulation of its

quintessence in al-Mustasfa min ‘Ilm al-Usgil.
CHAPTER XI

GHAZALI’S AL-MUSTASFA

Al-Mustasfa is considered the last of Ghazali’s great works.
Fortunately, he does not leave his readers in the dark about the
circumstances that led him to its writing. Returning to teach in the
Nizamiyya school at Naysabir, he explains, required him to again
treat the study of figh and its principles, for they were essential
parts of the curriculum in such religious institutions.

Apparently his disciples were not satisfied with his books on
usil, namely, al-Mankhiil or Tahdhib al-Usil. For the first was a
summary of his teacher’s work, and the second it seems was
lengthy and not well organized. They expected “The Proof of
Islam” to revive the study of Law, even as he had done for the
religious sciences with the monumental /hyd’ ‘Uliim al-Din, in a
legal writing where unique and coherent organization would

coalesce with comprehensive—but not tedious—explication of the

usili issues.

Ghazali responded to this future generation of jurists,
commencing his work with the praise of figh and ustil as among the

noblest of sciences and commending their practitioners as being of
'Ghaziili, al-Mustagfa, 1:4.

249

250

the highest rank and prestige and having the most followers.2 This
in itself was a major shift from the attitude toward figh and the
fugqahd’ that Ghazali had displayed in mid-career and defended
vigorously in /hyd’, which had invited a hostile and sometimes
violent response from many jurists, especially in North Africa and
Spain, to the degree that his book was banned and even burned?
What, then, was Ghazali’s earlier position concerning figh and
the fuqaha’? Ghazali divided religious scholars into two sorts:
Those of the heart; and those of the world. The latter, whom he
called the ‘ulama’ al-zaéhir, are the ornaments of this world and of
temporal rulers. But the scholars of the inner world, ‘ulamd al-
bdtin, are the ornaments of Heaven and the kingdom of God4 Thus,
the muftis of the hearts are the scholars seeking salvation in the
Hereafter. Based on their fatwa one would be saved from the Ruler
of that realm, just as the judgement of a faqth saves one from (or
brings one to) the punishment of a ruler in this world.> In typical
fashion, he anticipates the question that will be raised against his

categorizing of figh as ‘ilm al-dunya’ (the science of this world) and

offers a response:
Know that Allah . . . has created this world as a provision for
Ghazal, al-Mustasfa, 1:3.

3sabd al-Karim al-‘Uthman, Sirat al-Ghazdali wa Aqwal al-
Mutagaddimin fihi (Damascus: Dar al-Fikr, 1961), pp. 70 and 104.

4Ghazali, Ihya@’ ‘Uliim al-Din; 1: 22.

Ghazili, Ihya’ ‘Ulim al-Din: 4:213,

251

the Day of Resurrection so that they [mankind] can utilize
from it whatever is fit for maintaining [life]. Thus, if they
handle [the world] with justice, conflicts and disputes would
cease and the fugahd’ would be of no use. But people utilized
passions and whims; that is why disputes emerge and

consequently there is great need for an authority to manage
them. And the authority needed the Law to rule in

accordance with. Thus, a fagih is the teacher of the ruler and
his guide to the ways of managing the affairs of people.®

But a faqih is not entirely removed from the Hereafter,
Ghazali concedes. For he approaches the acts which relate to it,
with reference to Islam and its rites, such as prayer, zakdt and the
rest of what is considered as lawful or unlawful. Yet close
examination of the limits of the legist’s inquiry into these affairs, in
his view, reveals that it does not transcend this world.

As for Islam, the fagih addresses the validity of the Shari'a
acts, concentrating on what is revealed and apparent. The heart,
however, is removed from his jurisdiction, for the Prophet has set
the limits of those in authority, saying, “Did you open his heart?”
meaning that one may be judged only upon conduct.’

It appears, then, that Ghazali had become disturbed by the
great attraction figh and the classical sciences held in Muslim
society. His anxiety seems to have been complicated by the feeling
that this fascination with figh came at the expense of a genuine

spiritual need for salvation. Reflecting on the fuqahd’ of his time

he writes in /hyd':

SGhazali, Ihyd’ ‘Uliim al-Din: 1:17.

7Ghazali, Ihya’ ‘Ulim al-Din; 1:17-18.

252

If a fagih is asked about the essence of the meanings of
‘sincerity,’ ‘trust in Allah,’ or ‘avoidance of being pretentious,’
he would be puzzled and stop short of responding, in spite of
the fact that it is an obligation upon him to know, and that by
neglecting this, he shall perish in the Hereafter. But if you
ask a fagih about ‘li‘dn,’ ‘zihér,’ ‘sabq,’ or ‘rami,’ he would list
for you volumes of minute details upon which time’s ages
shall pass without their need.®

This clearly shows his disillusionment with the conscience of the
legal establishment and one might infer with his society as a whole.
Yet this bitterness passed, as shall be seen.

However, Ghazili’s early controversial positions on figh and
the fugahd’ still draw fire today. Some contemporary researchers
have suggested that this shows the influence of Christianity upon
him. They cite Christ’s stand according to the New Testament

against the legal establishment of the Jews, specifically the

9

Pharisees.” ‘Abd al-Rahman Dimashqiyya, a proponent of this

thinking, holds that Ghazali’s writing of the book al-Radd al-Jamil Ii
‘Ilahiyydt ‘Isa bi Sarih al-injil, which refutes the divinity of Jesus,
is evidence for this assumption, !° He claims that Ghazali was
aware of the New Testament, and quoted much from it.

If such a position were to merit serious consideration, Ghazali

is primarily defining figh, its role, and the function of its scholars,
8Ghazali, Ihyd’ ‘Ulim al-Din: 1:21.
°New Testament, “Matthew”; 12:1-7, 15:1-3,.19:3-9.

'°-Aabd al-Rahmin Dimashqiyya, Aba Hamid al-Ghazdli wa al.
Tasawwuf (Riyad: Dar Tibah, 1986), pp. 209-211

253

while Dimashqiyya’s New Testament ‘proofs’ express Jesus’ outrage
with the Jewry’s clergy of his time. But it is dubious to assume that
a Muslim scholar’s awareness of the New Testament formed his
attitude toward the faqihs of his time. This doubt becomes
absurdity when that someone is the like of a Ghazali, the refuter of
philosophy, the mystic, the most prominent Shafi‘ite since al-Shafi‘i
himself, etc. It is more likely that Ghazali’s disenchantment with

the prevailing spirit of the religious scholarly community and his

own spiritual crisis shaped his view.!!

Indeed, by the time of his writing of al-Mustasfd, the mature

Ghazali praises both figh and usil and their specialists:

Yet the noblest kinds of knowledge are those where ‘aql
[reason] and sam‘ [revealed authority] play a role, in which
rational opinion and the Shari‘a are constant companions,
The science of jurisprudence and its principles are of this
kind, for they take, from the purity of the Shari‘a and reason,
the straight path... .

It is because of the nobility of the science of
jurisprudence and its basis that Allah has given ample
motivations to people to seek it. Those who are

‘I indeed, George F. Hourani, “A revised Chronology of
Ghazali’s writings,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 104
(1984) 289-302, contends that Hava Lazarus’ assertion that al-
Radd is fabricated is decisively correct, in spite of arguments for its
authenticity by R. Chidiac, the book’s editor.

However, it should be noted that Lazarus’ claim that the
book is not mentioned in any list of Ghazali’s works before the
twentieth century or by any biographer is somewhat misleading.
Aba ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah b. As‘ad al-Yafa‘t al-
Yamani (d. 768/1366) mentions al-Radd in his book Mir’dt al-Jandn
wa ‘Ibrat al-Yaqzdan fi Ma‘rifat al-‘Ibar min Hawddith al-Zamdn,
according to ‘Abd al-Karim ‘Uthman, Sirat al-Ghazdli, p. 84.

254

knowledgeable of it are placed as the highest of scholars, are
the greatest in prestige, and have the largest following and
helpers. 2

With this new spirit Ghazali started al-Mustasfa, aiming for a
systematic, comprehensive treatment of the principles of Law that

would ensure accessibility to the student of Islamic jurisprudence.

I. . . combine herein both compilation and investigation to
facilitate understanding of the meanings fof usiil], for one
cannot dispense with the other. I have composed and
brought to it an admirable, delicate construction. The reader
is from the beginning made aware of all the aims of this
science. Moreover, a comprehensive study of this will enable
him to grasp all the areas of thought within it.

Stressing the concern for organization and clear presentation, he
goes on to say that “every science where the student cannot get at
its crucial points and foundations at the outset leaves him no
chance of attaining its inner secrets and aspirations.” !3

How then did Ghazali construct his book? And was he
original or influenced by a predecessor? In Thya’ ‘Ulim al-Din, for
example, Ghazali divides his book into four quarters—‘/badat,
mu‘amalat, munjiyat, and muhlikét—and each of these into ten
kitabs. Thus, it seems very likely that Ghazali, in dividing al- |
Mustasfa into four poles or spheres, was influenced by the same
impulse operating in the design of the Thyaé’, namely the mystical

inclination. Indeed, in al-Mustasfa he not only maintains the
\2Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:3-4,

'3Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:4,

255

quadripartite division but calls each section a qutb, a term that aids
him linguistically and in its ‏القع‎ connotation. On the one hand, it
denotes a pole around which things are drawn out of some common
attractive force or magnetic quality. Thus each qutb, in Ghazili’s
view, is a natural axis with particular elements that necessarily
revolve around it. On the other, it corresponds to the four poles of
the mystical hierarchy in the vocabulary of tasawwuf.'4 But
whether or not Ghazali was following the pattern of the /hyd’, it
seems very clear that none among the many works of the early
centuries of Islam employ the unique construction that Ghazali uses

in his remarkable al-Mustagfaé min ‘Ilm al-Usiil (The Quintessence

of the Science of the Principles).

THE STRUCTURE OF AL-MUSTASFA

Ghazali begins al-Mustasfé with a concise Exordium that is,
again, unprecedented in the writings of ust! before him. It
resembles a detailed proposal that maps out the construction of the
work and seeks to orient the reader of usil within the realm of the

Islamic sciences in general, covering several broad topics:

٠ The meaning and definition of usil al-figh
٠ Its rank with reference to the other Islamic sciences

٠ The wisdem behind dividing the subject into four Quibs
and an Introduction

'4The Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1953 ed., s.v.,
“Tasawwof.”

256

٠ The manner in which the ustli issues are subsumed under
the four Poles

٠ The utility of the Introduction and its relationship to the
science of the principles

Ghazali begins with the linguistic and technical definition of
fiqh with the purpose of distinguishing the faqgih first from the |
ustli and second from the specialists of other fields of inquiry, such
as kalam, philosophy, language, and so on. He explains that the
scope of the faqih is limited to identifying ‘what’ the practical
details of the Sharf‘a rules are, while the concentration of the ustli

includes specifying the Sharf‘a sources as to ‘how’ they impart

rules, !5

But in clarifying the position of usi/ in man’s inquiry, Ghazali
first distinguishes between the natural and the religious sciences,
then analyzes the latter into the universal and the particular. The

only universal religious science, he continues, is kaldm. In his own

words:

The mutakallim . . . inquires into the most general of things,
namely existence. He first divides existents into those that
are eternal and those that are originated. He then divides the

originated into substances and accidents... . Next he focuses
on the Eternal being, explaining that He can be neither
multiple nor divisible. . . . He must be ‘one,’ distinguished
from originated beings by certain attributes. . . . This universe
is His possible act. . . . Also, sending messengers is among the
Possible acts on his part. He is capable of . . . demonstrating

their truthfulness through miracles. Furthermore, this

'SGhazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:4-5.

257

possible [act] has occurred.!®

Here the investigation of the mutakallim ceases and his rational
inquiry stops, for
reason can lead one to the truthfulness of the Prophet but
then abdicates itself, acknowledging that it receives with

acceptance from the Prophet what he says concerning Allah,
the Last Day, and other things that reason cannot

independently comprehend. !7”

The faqgih picks up at this point, characterizing human acts
with respect to lawfulness and unlawfulness. Finally, the uséli
examines what the Messenger has brought and inquires as to how
to impart Shari‘a rules from these sources, explicitly or implicitly.
Here also begins the work of the commentator on the Qur’an and
the traditionist in explaining and transmitting the Shari‘a texts and
authenticating them.

But kaldm, being the science through which reason
establishes the authority of the Shari‘a and the truthfulness of the
Messenger, is the inquiry of the highest rank.!8 However, Ghazali
does not require the faqih, the usili, nor the other specialists of the
particular religious sciences to master kalaém and its issues and
proofs. He holds that it is sufficient for both the ustli and the faqih

to follow the mutakallim insofar as accepting the conclusions of his

'6Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:5-6.
'7Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:6.

'8Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:7.

258

inquiry. Thus, they base their research upon his findings in
identifying the Shari'a sources, where the usiili, elucidates origins
of the ahkdm and the faqgih focuses on the details of these ahkam.,

Praising the study of kalam leads Ghazali to extol the virtues
of another branch of study closely associated with it, logic.
Therefore, he commits a relatively lengthy introduction to its
summary primarily drawn from his previous works Mihakk al-
Nazar wa Mi‘ ydr al-‘Iim, contending that logic was necessary not
only for the disciplines of kaldm and usil but rather for all
sciences. For ‘whosoever does not acquire it, his knowledge cannot
be trusted at all."!? This has instigated attack by various
muhaddiths and the Hanbalites, such as b. Salah and b. Taymiyya.
Yet Ghazali influenced nearly all wsdl? work after him.2°

Despite the fact that he has explained the use of this
introduction in defining the terminologies of usiil by discursive
argument, he immediately retracts to its usage, criticizing those
usili authors who are overwhelmed by kaldm to the extent that
they litter usa! with its discussions and problems, just as those

who are infatuated with figh cloud it with details of Law, and as

'Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:10.

200ne can hardly find an usiili work written based on the
mutakallimin approach (as well as some Hanafite books) that is not
intertwined with the issues of logic or influenced by its style. Even
b. Qudama al-Hanbali, who ‘relied’ heavily on al-Mustasfa in his
book Rawdat al-Ndzir, summarizes Ghazali’s introduction, which
invited much criticism from loyalist Hanbalites. ‘Abd al-Qadir b.
Ahmad Ibn Badran, al-Madkhal ila) Madhhab al-Imam Ahmad b.
Hanbal (Damascus: Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-‘Arabi, n.d) p. 464,

259

grammarians tend to reduce its discourse to matters of language.
It is astonishing, however, that after bringing this excess to
our attention, he concedes that al-Mustasfa should not be devoid
from such discussion so that people will not be alienated, “for
weaning one from what he is accustomed to is difficult, and human

minds shun the novel.”2! Yet it is lamentable that the great Ghazili

yielded to this pressure.

The Secret of the Qutbs

Since ugil al-figh aims toward knowing how the Shari‘a rules
are extracted from the sources, it is necessary according to Ghazali
for the discussion to focus on (1) the ahkdm (the rules), (2) the
adilla (the sources), (3) the method of extracting the rules from the
sources, and (4) the qualifications of the one who performs this
operation. To make the functional relationship between these
concepts and activities more accessible to the reader, Ghazali offers
the ‘thamara metaphor.’ The Shari‘a rules are the fruit (thamr),
each requiring, of course, a source of fruition (muthammir),
gleaning, (turuq al-istithmar), and finally a harvester (mustathmir).

Al-Muthammir: The ultimate source of the ahkdm's fruition
is God. However, He set them forth in the adilla, namely the Qur’an,
the Sunna, and Ijma‘. Thus, they are the fruit-bearing vessels.
Ghazali places their discussion in the Second Qutb.

Luruq al-Istithmar: The means by which the rules are

gleaned are the indications of the Shari‘a texts, which may be

*IGhazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:10.

260

explicit, implicit, or based on rational inference. Therefore, the
thrust of the Third Qutb, where this inquiry occurs, is linguistic

focusing on the interpretation of these texts.

Al-Mustathmir: The harvester culls the rule by the
appropriate means in accordance with the corresponding Shari‘a
sources. Ghazali of course is referring to the mujtahid and
maintains that it is necessary to know such a person’s description
and conditions, and further characterizes him relative to those who
must follow him, namely the muqallids. This discourse takes place
in the Fourth Qutb.

This, then, elucidates Ghazali’s thinking on the ‘organic
structure’ of usil, a nature he seeks to mirror in al-Mustagfa’. For

his premise is that the “body of the Principles of jurisprudence

revolve around four axes”:

The First Qutb concerns the rules—and it is best to start with
them, for they are the desired effect. The Second Qutb
regards the sources: The Book, the Sunna, and lima‘; and
they come next, for after having known the fruit there is
nothing more important than to know the source of fruition.
The Third Qutb focuses on the method of their utilization,
namely the manners in which proofs yield their indications. . .
. The Fourth Qutb [assesses] the harvester, that is, the
mujtahid, who rules on the basis of his speculation.
Corresponding to him is the mugqallid. .. . Therefore, it is
necessary to discuss the conditions of the follower and the

mujtahid and their qualifications.22

After giving the rational for dividing the subject into four quibs,

Ghazali goes on to explain how the ugiili issues are subsumed under

22Ghazali, al-Mustagfa, 1:8.

261

each qutb and surveys their topics.

A Descriptive Outline of al-Mustasfa

The First Qutb: Ghazali divides this into four aspects
(funiin, pl. of fann):

In Aspect One, he examines the essence of ‘rule,’ which
includes an opening definition and three discussions: (i) Tahsin and
taqbih, the declaring of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ based on reason (al-
Mustasfa, 1:56-61); (ii) the necessity of gratitude toward God (al-
Mustasfa, 1:61-63); and (iii) the status of rules before the coming of
revelation (al-Mustasfa, 1:63-65).

Aspect Two contains the division and characterization of the
Shari‘a rules into five categories (al-Mustasfa, 1:65-67). Ghazali
then devotes fifteen discussions to their more detailed description
with reference to human acts and one another (al-Mustasfa, 1:67-
82).

In Aspect Three he analyzes the concept of ‘rule,’ which he
holds to be composed of four constituents, namely the Ruler, the
tule itself, the locus of obligation, which he divides into two
discussions (al-Mustasfd, 1:84-86), and human acts, to which he
allots five discussions (al-Mustasfa, 1:86-93).

Aspect Four is composed of four fasls,?3 the first of which

discusses asbdb (causes) for the performance of an act (al-

23 When there are no discussions, Ghazali tends to use the

term ‘fas!, which I choose to translate as ‘section.’ It constitutes a
longer discourse on a given topic.

262

Mustasfa, 1:93-94) The validity of acts versus their invalidity is
the subject of the second fas! (al-Mustasfa, 1:94-95), while their
timely (ada’), restitutive (qadé'), and repeated! (i‘dda) performance
is investigated in the third (al-Mustasfa, 1:95-98). Here, however,
Ghazali introduces a new division in al-Mustasfa’s structural
organization, ‘dagiqa’ (‘A Subtle Point’). It does not constitute a
chapter, nor is it a discussion by itself; rather, it is simply a
relatively lengthy point that he wishes to stress (al-Mustasfa, 1:96-
97). The fourth and final fas! addresses the concepts of resolution
(‘azima) and concession (rukhga). (al-Mustasfa, 1:98-100.)

This ends Ghazali’s First Qutb, which is, incidentally, nearly
equivalent in length to the fourth one, both of which are
comparatively shorter than the middle two.

The Second Qutb: Ghazali divides this according to the four
Principles (usdl): The Qur’dn, including abrogation (naskh); the

Sunna (Prophetic tradition); Ijma‘ (Consensus); and Z/stishab.

Qur’an, the First Principle: His treatment of the Qur’an
contains four partitions, which he calls ‘Considerations’ (anazar, pl.
of nazar). The First Consideration elucidates the meaning of kalam
Allah, This has a brief fas! on the unicity of divine speech (al-
Mustasfa, 1:100-101).

The Second Consideration delves into the definition of the
Qur’an, followed by two discussions. The first examines the
recitations(qird’dat ) that have not been transmitted through

fawatur. The second, which is considerably longer, looks at the

status of basmala, the formula Bismillah al-Rahmdan al-Rahim (al-
263

Mustasfa, 1:101-105).

The Third Consideration comments on the vocabulary of the
Qur’an, inquiring into its Arabicity and the clarity or ambiguity of
its words and expressions, which entails three discussions (al-
Mustasfa, 1:105-107).

The Fourth Consideration is a concise summary of the various
methods of the Book’s interpretation. But he refers the reader here
to the Third Qutb’s elaborate treatment of the various approaches
to the Qur’4n’s interpretation.

Finally, he justifies his departure from classical usili
scholarship in placing the discourse on abrogation (naskh) before
the second principle, the Sunna, instead of directly after. For, in his
view, it is closely associated with the topic of divine speech and,
therefore, more appropriately attached to examination of the
‏انل‎ 1:107).

He employs the term ‘kitdb’ (book) as a major partition to
introduce Naskh, dividing it into two babs (chapters) and a

conclusion.

Chapter One has three fagls: (i) the definition and the essence
of abrogation (al-Mustasfaé, 1:107-111); (ii) the establishment of
abrogation and refutation of its deniers (al-Mustasfa, 1:111-112);
and (iii) six discussions on the nature and conditions of abrogation
(al-Mustasfa, 1:112-121).

In Chapter Two, he analyzes the constituents of abrogation in
an introduction and six discussions on its stipulations and
requirements (al-Mustasfa, 1121-128).

Ghazili’s conclusion to the Book of Abrogation is a summary
264

treatment of the ‘time of revelation’ as a means of distinguishing

the abrogating text from its abrogated counterpart (al-Mustasfa,
1:128-129).

Sunna, the Second Principle: Ghazali’s opening discourse (al-
Mustasfa, 1:129-132) introduces the various terminologies used by
the Companions in transmitting hadith. He then divides the inquiry
proper into two main parts, the first (al-Mustasfé, 1:132-145)
consisting of three chapters and the second of four (al-Mustasfa,
1:145- 173).

Chapter One of Part One is devoted to the concept of tawdtur
(al-Mustasfa, 1:132-134), while Chapter Two focuses on the
requirements of tawdtur and is composed of five discussions
covering the number of transmitters, circumstantial evidence, the
nature of knowledge imparted by a mutawdtir report, etc. Ghazali
closes with a segment summarizing invalidating conditions for
tawatur (al-Mustasfa, 1:139-140), Finally, Chapter Three (al-
Mustasfa, 1:140-145) divides reports into three categories with
reference to their acceptance and rejection.

Part Two treats solitary (ahdd) reports in four chapters.

The first 625 establishes the validity of laying a Shari‘a
obligation on the basis of a solitary report, which includes four
discussions (al-Mustasfa, 1:145-155).

Chapter Two analyzes the conditions and characteristics of
transmitters in two discussions, regarding integrity and the
testimony of a fasiq (heretic), (al-Mustasfad, 1:155-161).

A summary conclusion is followed by Chapter Three, which
265

inquires into al-jarh wa ta‘dil (impugnment and attestation) in four
fagls (al-Mustasfa, 1:162-165). The first of them studies the
required number for the endorsing of a witness; the second peruses
the cause for their endorsement or discrediting; the third
scrutinizes the cause for endorsement itself; and the fourth
concerns the trustworthiness of the Companions.

Chapter Four considers the valid channels of reporting,
including seven discussions that inspect the different ways of

obtaining and conveying a report (al-Mustasfa, 1:165-173).

Ijma‘, the Third Principle: This discourse is composed of
three chapters (al-Mustasfé, 1:173- 217).

The First Bab seeks to establish ijmd‘ as a valid Shari‘a source
(al-Mustasfd, 1:173-181). Here Ghazali introduces a new structural.
device, maslak (approach). Thus, Chapter One contains three such
explanatory approaches where his defense of ijma‘ is argued in
detail.

Chapter Two introduces the constituents of ijma‘. The First
Constituent examines in eight discussions those who compose and
effect consensus (al-Mustasfad, 181-191). The Second Constituent is
ijma* itself. It is viewed in three discussions (al-Mustasfa, 1:191-
198).

Chapter Three details the status of ijmd‘ in seven

discussions(al-Mustasfa, 1:198-217).

Istighadb, the Fourth Principle: Ghazali treats this principle in

one unit, explaining first the position of Reason in the Shari‘a and
2066

then four kinds of istishéb . With this he concludes what are in his
view the valid Shari‘a sources. Finally, he closes with a statement
on the four invalid Shari‘a sources, which brings the Second Qutb to

completion (al-Mustasfaé, 1:217-245).

The Third Qutb: Ghazili divides this into an opening and
three parts, discussing how the Shari‘a rules are extracted from
the principal sources (al-Mustasfa, 1:245-3).

Part One surveys the textual indications or proofs in an
introduction and seven fagls that inquire into language and the
validity of applying qiyds, to it (al-Mustasfa, 1:317-345). Next, he
devotes four sections (aqsdm, pl. of qism) to (1) texts categorized as
al-mujmal wa al-mubayyan (the obscure and the elucidated),
which is comprised of six discussions (al-Mustasfa, 1:345-384); (2)
those classified as al-Zahir wa al-Mu’awwal (the evident and the
interpreted), which includes ten discussions (al-Mustasfa, 1:384-
411); (3) al-Amr wa al-Nahi (the imperative and prohibitive
moods), which he discusses under two separate maslaks (al-
Mustasfa@, 1:411-2:32); and (4) al-‘Amm wa al-Khass (the general
and the particular) statements, which is divided into five chapters.
The first identifies general Shari‘a statements. (al-Mustasfa, 2:32-
186).

Part Two (al-Mustasfa, 2:186-228) scrutinizes the explicit
and implicit indications of the Shari‘a texts, which he divides into
five darbs (types) (al-Mustasfé, 2:186-204). He follows with an
elaborate statement on dalil al-khitdb (the indications of the Shari‘a

address) and the legal status of the prophetic acts, which he
267

discusses in three chapters (2:212-228)

Part Three (al-Mustasfé, 2:228-350) delves into giyds. It
begins with two preliminary openings that define analogical
reasoning followed by four chapters. The first establishes its
validity as an instrument that aids in arriving at the Shari‘a rules.
Ghazali commits seven arguments against those citing certain
Shari‘a texts as proof for the invalidity of qiyas, and six in refuting
‘the Assassins,’ who deny analogical reasoning on rational grounds
(al-Mustasfa, 2:234-278).

Chapter Two details the manner in which the cause of the
principle is founded, based on Shari‘a text, Ijma‘, or Reason (al-
Mustasfd, 2:278-310), while Chapter Three takes up qgiyds al-
Shabah (the analogy of resemblance) (al-Mustasfa, 2:310-325).
Finally, Chapter Four analyzes the four components of giyds and
their stipulations. Ghazali then concludes with an inquiry into

determining the ‘illa (underlying cause) (al-Mustasfa, 2:325:350).

The Fourth Qutb: This has three parts, where the status of
the mujtahid is considered.

Part One examines the constituents of ijtihdd and the latter’s
requirements, as well as the requirements of the mujtahid and the
liability of his judgements to error. Ghazali goes on to address the
question of the permissibility of the personal ijtihdd of the Prophet
or the Companions during the Prophet’s lifetime (al-Mustasfa,
2:350-387).

Part Two regards the condition of taqlid (blind imitation)

and istifia’ (the seeking of Shari‘a opinion) (al-Mustasfa, 2:387-
268

392). He continues his argument against the Assassins for their
claim of following their Imams. He further assails blind imitation,
but requires the masses to follow the opinions of the scholars.

Part Three Ghazali devotes to the apparent conflicts
between the Shari‘a sources and the manners of reconciling these
discrepancies (al-Mustasfa, 2:392-398). He divides this into three
preliminary introductions and two chapters. The First Bab
addresses the method of recognizing the preponderance of some
reports over others (al-Mustasfa, 2:395-398). The Second 82
examines the Shari‘a means of ascribing precedent to certain legal
Causes over and against others (al-Mustasfa, 2:398).

With this, Ghazali concludes the fourth and final qutb of his

great legal work, al-Mustasfa min ‘Ilm al-Usiil.

THE STYLE OF AL-MUSTASFA

In reading al-Mustasfa, one must keep in mind that Ghazali is
intensely concerned about the learning and qualifications of his
audience, classifying them into three Categories: The masses, the
elite, and a middle category, whose constituents have not acquired
enough knowledge to elevate themselves to be among the
Principles, but who are distinguished in learning from the masses.

He calls this middle category ahl-al-Shaghab, ‘the people of

argument.’24

As for the masses, Ghazali says they should be preached to in

a way that indicates the facts plainly without sophistication or

24 Ghazaili, Al-Qistds al-Mustaqim, p.86.

269

argumentation. The middle class, on the other hand, should be
invited gently to the truth, devoting special attention to the
essentials and fundamentals to which they concede. From here,
one should proceed to demonstrate the truth by way of balanced,
rational proof.2>

As for the elite, Ghazali requires of them three conditions.
First, they must be naturally gifted with penetrating insight and
strong rational ability for comprehension, which he believes cannot
be acquired through learning and training; rather one is born with
these potentialities. Second, he requires them to believe in their
teacher as possessing these capabilities; for, as he puts it,
“Whosoever doubts that you know mathematics, cannot learn it
from you.”26 The third quality that they must have is freedom
from blind imitation and prejudice, whether based on popular
opinion or previous unfounded notions; for these prevent one from
seeing the plain truth.27

In my judgement, Ghazali has written al-Mustasfé for this
last group, though it is not unlikely that he held that his opponents,
including the Mu‘tazilites and others, were from the second
category, ‘the people of argument.’ For we notice that his method

of argumentation against them is to first expose their essential

25١ ‏نطف‎ al-Karim al-‘Uthman, Sirat al-Ghazdéli, p.37.
2641-‘Uthman, Sirat al-Ghazéli, p.37.

27al-‘Uthman, Sirat al-Ghazdlt, p.37.

270

principles and then refute them.28

Ghazali’s language in al-Mustasfa is marked by frequent use
of the uséli terminology that has been employed by the jurists
preceding him, as well as the vocabularies of fiqh and kaladm. The
elegant and personalized style of Jhyd’ and al-Munqidh min al-
Dalé! is echoed in few places in al-Mustasfa, where conciseness and
precision take precedent over beauty and wit, to the extent that he
is difficult to understand in some places.” Also, he assumes his

reader to be competently aware of the Qur’an and a good number

of hadith, for he routinely cites only parts of them.

The Language of al-Mustasfa

Among the frequent expressions that he uses to convey his or

others’ opinions are the following:

٠ Wa hddhé al-’awlé—This is more adequate, appropriate,
worthier.°0

28 Ghazili’s discussion on revelation versus reason is a good
example of this approach.

22One observes, for example, that in Kitdb al-Naskh Ghazali’s
treatment is more complex and closer to the spirit of kalam than in
his general discourse on ahkdm, where he is clear and precise with
the exception of those places where he argues against the
Mu‘tazilites.

30Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:71,

271

Al-’awld—What is more appropriate, adequate.?!

٠ Walttaraznd—We have guarded against, stipulated.°~

٠ Kashf al-ghité’—Unveiling [this question]; to shed light.>3

٠ Wa’l-mukhtaér—The preferred opinion, choice opinion.*4

٠ Fi’l-mas’ala madhhabén da‘ifan—With reference to the
question there are two weak positions.>>

٠ Yulitamalu ’an yugdl—tit is possible to say.>°

٠ Wa yumkinu an yujab—tIt is possible to answer.>’

٠ Wa al-sahih—What is correct is . . 2%

٠ Wa al-mu‘tamad ‘indanéd—What is acceptable to us.2?

al-Mustasfa, 1:73.
al-Mustasfa, 1:74,
al-Mustasfa, 1:75.
al-Mustasfd, 1:87, 233.
al-Mustasfd, 1:97.
al-Mustasfd, 1:96, 188.
al-Mustasfd, 7
al-Mustasfd, 1:90 .

al-Mustasfd, 7

3! Ghazali,
32Ghazali,
33Ghazali,
34Ghazali,
35Ghazali,
36Ghazali,
37Ghazali,
— 38Ghazali,

39Ghazili,

212

٠ Wa ١8414 fasid—And this is corrupt, invalid.4°

٠ Wa qad afsadnaéh. And we have refuted it.4!

٠ Wa huwa taliakamun la dalila ‘alayh.—. This is a
baseless, arbitrary opinion that has no proof.‘

٠ Wa yasthil bi hukm al-‘éda.— It is impossible in the
nature of the case.4?

٠ Wa 164/14 al-tal.giq—And this is the investigated
position.

٠ Alladhi uqta‘u bih—What is certainly decisive is . . , 4°

٠ Wa huwa al-sahih—And this is correct.4®

In introducing most of his opinions, Ghazali’s style is one of
dialectic argument, where the phrases If it is said and We shall say
preface his opponents’ positions and his responses, respectively.
This style appeared in the third century and became popular in the

books of kaldm and usiil, and ultimately won over as the prevailing

49Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:188.
“IGhazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:187.
42Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:187.
“3Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:189.
44Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:191,197.
“SGhazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:24).

48Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:239.

213

method of written argumentation.*/

Although in his introduction Ghazali promises to be brief
without hindering meaning, he is noticably elaborate in presenting
the facets of various usdli opinions, especially regarding the
Mu'tazilites. Yet throughout these discussions he tends to avoid
semantic arguments, stressing the importance of grasping the real
meanings where usilis agree and disagree. He says in cautioning

against matters of semantics that one should

know that whosoever seeks the real meanings from mere
words will go astray and perish, just as one who turns his
back to the West—though it is the West that he seeks—[will
Stray and perish}. But whosoever seeks meaning in his mind

first, and thus allows words to follow meanings, is guided.*®

This explains his approach in treating the major aspects of al-
Mustasfa by first categorizing their subjects and the discussions
they entail and then defining their meanings.

For example, in the First Qutb, devoted to the ahkam, he
begins by dividing the discourse into four parts: The essence of

rules; their classification; their essential constituents; and that

“7See for example al-Shafi‘i, Risdla, pp. 41, 45, 108, 109, 110,
228, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, etc., Abd al-Husayn al-
Basri, al-Mu‘tamad, 2:459, 460, 461, 462, 464, 465, 466, 467, 468,
469, etc.; Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 1:85, 93, 96, 98, 106, 110, 112, etc.;
Ibn Hazm, [hkdm fi ‏اشعلا‎ al-Ahkadm, 1:68, 69, 71, 83, 87, 90, etc.;
Abi Ishaq al-Shirazi, al-Tabsira fi Usiil al-Fiqh, pp. 18, 19, 20, 21,
23, 24, 25, etc.; Aba Khattab al-Kladhani [Hanbalite], Kitab al-
Tamhid, 1:30,38, 39, 41, 75, 79, etc.

48Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 1:21.

214

which manifests them. Furthermore, in his writing of Parts One

and Two he commences with introductory statements followed by
separate discussions for each element under analysis. Moreover,
he leaves no term without defining it, not only as it is understood
in the vocabulary of the usilis, but in its general linguistic sense,
and in other usages that may exist for it. His definition for ijtihdd,

for instance, begins with its meaning in language:

Ijtihad is an expression of exerting efforts and exhausting
one’s capacity and capability in doing an action, and [the
term] is used only in regard to that which involves exertion
and effort. Hence, it is said “He exerted [himself] in carrying
the millstone”; though it cannot be said, “He exerted [himself]
in carrying a single grain.” But in the technical usage of the
‘ulama’, the term became specific to the maximum exertion of
a mujtahid in seeking out the knowledge of the Shari'a rules.

Al-Mustasfé is also a valuable source for its detailing of the
opinions of other legal and theological schools, such as the
Malikites, the Zahirites, and the Hanafites, as well as those of the
Mu‘tazilites. Further, it is important to note that Ghazali’s discourse
in al-Mustasfé is much less offensive and more objective than his
treatment in al-Mankhil. For example, though he criticized Aba
Hanifa harshly in the latter (following his teacher al-Juwayni in al-
Burhan), his name is not mentioned in al-Mustasfé without the
invocation of tarahhum, that is, the saying of “May Allah have
mercy upon him.” Yet Ghazali did not concern himself much with
the ustli opinions of the Hanbalites, perhaps because their
contribution to the science came relatively late, or he may have

been convinced that Ahmad b. Hanbal was, as al-[abari had
215

declared, primarily a muhaddith, not a faqih.4?

The Influence of al-Mustasfé

Long after Ghazali, al-Mustasfaé continued to exert a shaping
influence on the science of the principles of Law and command
great respect in ‏قاشع‎ circles.°° Both Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (d.
606/1210) in al-Mahsil>! and Sayf al-Din ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-
Amidi (d. 631/1233) in Ihkdm fi Usiil al-Ahkam.>? relied heavily
upon the past master’s work. In fact, numerous scholars abridged

or wrote commentaries on it. Among those who abridged the book

49 This Statement earned al-Tabari the displeasure of the
Hanbalite; see al-Baghdadi, Térikh Baghdad, 2:164.

50F akhr al-Din al-Razi (d.606 H) has mentioned that on one of
his journeys he visited Tas and saw many students of usdl
“investing their lives” in the Study of al-Mustasfa. Razi debated
some of Ghazali’s views on ‏أشي‎ especially the issue of prayer in a
usurped home (al-Mustasfa, 1:79-81) and criticized Ghazili’s
opinion. Fath Allah Khulayf, Mundzarét Fakhr al-Din al-Rézt fi ma
ward’ al-Nahr, (Beirut: Dar al-Mashriq, n.d.), pp. 45, 47.

°'[Taha Jabir in his valuable study on al-Razi and his usili
opinions contends that, in addition to memorizing al-Mustasfa, Razi
Telied heavily on it, along with al-Mu‘tamad, in the writing of al-
Mahsil. al-Razi, al-Mahsiil, 6 vols. ed. Taha Jabir, (Riyad: Imim
Muhammad b. S4a‘id University, 1979), 1:39.

52Both the works of al-Razi and al-Amidi have been abridged.
For example Taj al-Din al-Armawi (d. 656 H) abridged al-Mahsiil in
his book al-Hasil. Also Siraj al-Din al-Armawi (672 H) abridged al-
Mahsil in al-Taksil. From these two books al-Badawi (685 H)
produced his very concise Minhdj al-Wusiil ila ‘Ilm al-Ustil, which
many commentaries have been devoted to until modern times.
Muhammad Mustafa Shalabi, Usiil al-Figh al-Islami, pp. 42-43.

216

are the following:

* Aba al-Walid b. Rushd (d. 595/1198), Mukhtagar al-
Mustasfa fi al-Usiil. 53

٠ Abi al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Asdi al-Ishbili b.
al-Haj (d. 647/1249), Mukhtasar al-Mustasfa wa Hawéshi

‘ald Mushkilatihi. 54

Others who wrote commentaries on al-Mustasfé include:

٠ Aba ‘Ali Husayn b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz Al- Fihri al-Balansi (d.
679/1280).>>

٠ Aba Ja‘far Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b.
Mas‘id al-‘Amiri al-Ghirnati (d. 699/1299).

* Zayn al-Din Surayja b. Muhammad al-Malti (d. 788/1386),
Mustaqsa al-Wusil ila Mustasfa al-Usiil 56

53a1-Maraghi, al-Fath al-Mubin fi Tabaqat al-Usiiliyin, p. 39.
4kKhalifa, Kashf al-Zunin, 2:1673.

SKhalifa, Kashf al-Zuntin, 2:1673; and ‘Izz al-Din Ibn al- Athir,
al-Lubab fi Tahdhib al-Ansdb, 3 vols. (Beirut: Dar S4dir, 1980),
1:176.

*8Khalifa, Kashf al-Zuniin, 2:1675.

277

Ibn Qudéma’s Questionable use of al-Mustasfaé in Rawdat al-Nézir
Among those who were influenced by al-Mustasfé is the
notable Hanbalite jurist Muwaffaq al-Din ‘Abd Allah b. Ahmad b.
Qudama (d. 620/1223). Although he does not explicitly state that
he relied principally on Ghazali in the writing of Rawdat al-Ndzir
wa Junnat al-Mundzir,>! close scrutiny of both the structure and
the ustli methodology reveals clearly that b. Qudama’s work is, in
essence, an abridgement of al-Mustasfd, where he copies
abundantly from the latter—often verbatim (to the degree that he
must be admired at least for his boldness in neglecting the
traditional hostility harbored by the Hanbalites toward discussions
of kalam and issues of logic).>8 By ‘summarizing’ Ghazili’s
introduction to logic in the beginning of Rawdat al-Ndzir, he

brought the wrath of his Hanbalite contemporaries upon himself,

5’The book Rawdat al-Ndzir has been printed four times: ‘Abd
al-Qadir Mustafa b. Badran, Nuzhat al-Khdtir al-‘Atir Sharh Rawdat
al-N@zir wa Junnat al-Mundzir, 3 vols. (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-
‘Imiyya, n.d.); 2d edition 2 vols. ed. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz ‘Abd al-Rahman
Sa‘id, (Riyad: University of Imam Muhammad b. Sa‘id Press,
1979). One of them for the study and the second for the book; Ibn
Qudima, Rawdat al-Nazir wa Junnat al-Mundzir (Beirut: Dar al-
Matbu‘at al ‘Arabiyya, n.d.).

581+ is worthy of noting that Abd al-Faraj b. al-Jawzi, the
Hanbalite (d. 597/1200) has patterned one of his books, Minhdaj al-
Q4asidin, after Ghazali’s Jhyd’. Ibn Qudima has abridged al-Minhaj
and called it Mukhtasar Minhaj al-Qéasidin. Since b. al-Jawzi’s work
is not available in its entirety, one cannot decisively determine
whether b. Qudima has exclusively relied on b. al-Jawzi’s work or
has used the /hyd’ in the abridgement because one finds similarity
in the style of Mukhtasar Minhdj al-Qdsidin and that of Ghazali. A.
Badawi, Mu'allafat al-Ghazéli, p. 414-415.

forcing him in the end to omit this from later copies, although
original manuscripts had already been circulated.>?

The Hanbalite Najm al-Din al-Tafi® (4, 716/1316), for
example, has said of Rawdat al-N@zir that “Ibn Qudama has taken
the chapters of al-Mustasfa and altered them according to his

liking, basing his book upon them.” He goes on to say:
He did not see the critical necessity for what Ghazali has
cared [to do], that is, in subsuming the chapters under the
Qutbs of the book al-Mustasfa. Or [perhaps] he wanted to
Show the distinction between the two books through their
Structural differences so that [Rawdat al-Ndzir) would not be

simply an abridgement or a summary [of al-Mustasfaé] since
Ghazali was a Shafi‘ite and an Ash‘arite, while b. Qudama was

a Hanbalite and a Traditionist.°!

In addition to al-Tifi’s observations, later authors have also
acknowledged Rawdat al-Ndzir’s indebtedness to al-Mustasfa. ‘Abd
al-Qadir b. Badran (d.1346/1927), for example, in his commentary
on the work writes that the “use of an introduction on logic is
evidence that b. Qudama has followed Ghazali.” He adds that the
former “was not considered to be of those engaged in logic and

kaldm so that it could be argued that his intensive involvement

>>Consult ‘Abd al-Qadir b. Badran’s commentary on Rawdat
al-Na@zir: Al-Madkhal ilé Madhhab al-imaém Ahmad b. Hanbal,
p.464.

60For a brief biographical account, see Zirikly, al-A‘lam,
3:127-128.

81 Tafi's Statement was cited by b. Badran, al-Madkhal ila
Madhhab al-Imam Ahmad ‏بط‎ Hanbal, p. 463.

279

with these sciences compelled him to write this introduction,”©2
Also, a contemporary researcher, ‘Abd al-Aziz ‘Abd al-

Rahman al-Sa‘id, in his dissertation on b. Qudima and his usiili

works affirms that “Rawdat al-Ndzir.. . is closely related to
Ghazali’s K. al-Mustasfé .. . . indeed, it branched from it, therefore

[al-Mustasfa [ is generally its source.”©3 Furthermore, he argues
that b. Qudama “brought nothing new to usiil, that is, original or
different from the approaches of the usil? scholars in general.
Indeed, he was not innovative in this science at all, offering nothing
unprecedented. Rather he was an imitator.”©4

Sa‘id, who is himself a Hanbalite, proceeds to point out b.
Qudama’s deed, contending that the “trust of knowledge and
accuracy in transmission required [b. Qudama] to name the. source
which he drew from and the scholar whom he relied so heavily

upon and to acknowledge the precedence and excellence of Ghazili
in this field.”®5-66

62155 Badran, Al-Madkhal ila Madhhab al-Imém Ahmad b.
Hanbal, p. 464.

*Fal-Sa‘id, Ibn Qudéma wa Athdruh al-Usiliyya, 1118
5401-5510, Ibn Qudama wa Atharuh al-Usiiliyya, 5.
65a1-Sa‘id, Ibn Qudéma wa Athdéruh al-Usiiliyya, 1:151-152.

66a1-Sa‘id mentions that b. Qudama even in the few
discussions where he differed with Ghazali, attempting to refute his
opinions, does not explicitly cite him by name. He gives a number
of examples. See his valuable discussion in ‏مطل‎ Qudama wa
Atharuh al-Usiiliyya, 1:152. For more a detailed analysis, see the
comparisons made between al-Rawdat and al-Mustasfé in Ibn

280

Indeed, it is of little use to introduce Passages of the two
texts in order to demonstrate their essential similarity, for the
whole of Rawdat al-Ndazir is quite obviously extracted from al-
Mustasfa, notwithstanding minor alterations and accommodations

to some Hanbalite views.

THE DEVELOPMENT OF GHAZALI’S USULI THINKING

The prevalence of taglid (blind imitation) compelled those
claiming affiliation with the established fight schools to defend
both the rectitude of their madhhabs and the honor of their imdms,
Often, attacks were waged against the integrity of the competing
schools and their founders and prominent figures. In the prime of
his youth at the beginning of his training in Shiafi‘ite figh, Ghazali
did not escape this wave of rigid loyalty and, in fact, openly

defended the necessity of “following an imdm and adhering to a

1 267

mode Moreover, he held, it was not necessary for the “common

people or the fugahd’ to follow the best among the imams.” In
furthering this to its logical extreme, he arrived at the rather odd
opinion that “whosoever is obliged to follow an imdm is not
required to follow one of the Companions, such as Abi Bakr and
‘Umar. In fact, this is not permissible for him.”®8

In al-Mankhil, Ghazali writes pages defending the ShiAfi‘ite

Quddma wa Atharuh al-Usiiliyya, 1:118-165.
®7Ghazali, Mankhil, p. 488.

S8Ghazali, Mankhil, p. 494.

281

school—and its patriarch—which he had been indoctrinated into
since early youth, eventually becoming one of its distinguished
notables. In bolstering his defense, he often takes the offensive
against one or another of the other imams, particularly Aba
Hanifa.°? But he concedes that his assailing of these imams may
seem to lack any explanation other than his overwhelming bias for
his fighi school. So Ghazali appeals to those whom his positions
reach to (1) not suspect him of prejudice and (2) free themselves
from the influence of taqlid and accept his positions against those

of the other imams, with the exception of al-Shafi‘i. In his words:

One examining this chapter may think that we are biased
toward al-Shafi‘i and enraged against Aba Hanifa. . . . This is
absolutely out of the question, for we are only fair and just .
. Whosoever doubts this must be fair and reevaluate his
thinking and purge his heart from the polluting effects of
habits and taqlid, arresting his extreme prejudice to [Abi
Hanifa].”°

Not surprisingly, Ghazali himself went through a
“reevaluation” in al-Mustagfa in rejecting taglid and attempting to
be more objective in treating the various usili topics. Therefore, a
selection showing the development of Ghazili’s legal thinking
between these periods in his life is in order. What follows is two
excerpts on his treatment of one subject, the mujtahid. The first is

from the threshold of his usili career, al-Mankhiil. The second is,

©°Ghazali, Mankhil, pp. 496-504.

Ghazali, Mankhiil, p. 504.

282

shall we say, from the mountain top, al-Mustasfa. Nearly a quarter
century passes between the two writings, where Ghazal, having
ample time, opened to new horizons and freed himself from
extreme bias for his school and even for his shaykh, al-Juwayni.
The following preliminary observations may help in
comprehending and comparing the two texts.

٠ Ghazali’s style in al-Mankhiil is very consise and brief and

its content on the subject of the mujtahid does not exceed
fifteen percent of that of al-Mustasfa.

In al-Mankhal he focuses on the formalized personal and
academic requirements of a mujtahid, while in al-Mustasfa
he concentrates on the scholarly ability and morality of a
mujtahid, i.e., his adherence to Muslim ethics.

* He tends to be more rigid with the requriements of ijtihdd
in al-Mankhil than in al-Mustasfa, where he classifies
those requirements into minimum and maximum and
purposely leaves room in between

٠ He encourages ijtihdd in al-Mustasfé, Stating that a
mujtahid is not required to answer immediately every
question posed to him. He cites Malik and al-Shafi‘'i
answering “I dont know” to certain questions.

٠ In al-Mustasfa@, Ghazali does not require the memorization
of the entire Qur’an nor the entire collections of hadith.
Rather he confines the verses pertaining to legal issues to
nearly 500 and narrows down the number of hadith to
those relevant to legal issues, as well.

٠ Ghazali holds that the entirety of the requirements he
specified are only required to the ‘consummate mujtahid.’
He also defends his position concerning the proportionality
of ijtihad, that is, it is possible for one who has not acquired
all of the requirements of ijtihdd to examine issues within
the range of his expertise, leaving what is beyond him to
283

others.

An Excerpt from al-Mankhil

Let it be known first that the fatwa is an essential pillar of
the Shari'a. No one disputes this. The Companions relied upon it
after Allah took the life of His Messenger, and their successors have
followed these fatdwa until our time. Not everyone, however, can
independently provide [fatwds]; therefore, there must be
characteristics and conditions for mujtahids.

Now, we have [various] ways of presenting this [issue]:

The first way: In general, we shall say a mufti is one who
independently attains [facility with) the rules of the Shari‘a, both
{with regard to learning] the texts and in {acquiring] the ability to
extract them [istinbdt]. We refer by [the term) text to the Book and
the Sunna, and by istinbdt to analogies and inferences.

The second way is to enumerate requirements [that the
mujtahid must fulfill]: We shall say: [for a mujtahid), it is
necessary to have reason [‘aq/] and to be of age, for a minor’s
Statement is not accepted, nor is his report. But Slavery does not
violate [the condition of ijtihdd], nor does being female. There must
{also} be conciousness of God [war‘a], since an unrighteous person
cannot be believed; that is, one cannot rely on his statement.

Furthermore, the science of language is necessary because the
sources of the Shari‘a are conveyed through Arabic words; so he
must independently understand Arabic. It does not suffice him to
resort to books, for they do not indicate other than the [denotative]

meanings of words. As for the connotative meanings, in context
284

and sequence, they are understood only by those who
independently acquire the [language]. But deep awareness of rare
linguistic issues is not required. The science of grammar, however,
is necessary because from it stems most of the Qur’an-related

| controversies.

Knowledge of those hadiths which pertain to certain Shari'a
rules is also necessary, as is knowing the abrogated and the
abrogating text, awareness of the time [of abrogation] so that
precedent [texts] are distinguished from their antecedents, knowing
which hadiths are valid and which invalid; and knowing the
biographies of the Companions and the positions of imdms so one
does not violate ijmda‘.

Usiil-al-fiqh is [also] necessary because independent thinking
is not possible without it. Nor [is it possible] without a genuine
capacity to understand, for that is a natural characteristic,
unattainable through training, which is required [for one] to know
the Shari‘a Tules.

The third way, which is preferred and sums up these details,
is that [a mujtahid] should be of such character that it becomes
easy for him to know the Shari‘a rules after he has feared God and
come of age [so his statement is accepted]. Moreover, this character
only becomes original through the fulfillment of all the details {we
have laid before you}. But, of course, we do not require him to
memorize the rules. The authorities of hadith, for example,
classified the Prophet’s traditions, which are rules [of the Shari'a),
distinguishing the authentic [hadith} from the falsified.

Consequently, relying on [Sunan]} books is permissible, as we have
285

mentioned in the Book of Traditions.’!

An Excerpt from al-Mustasfa

The first part [of this discourse] concerns itihad and
examines [both] its essential constituents and rules. As for its
constituents, they are three: The mujtahid, the subject of ijtihdd,
and the ijtihad itself.’2

The first constituent concerns ijtihdd itself. [jtihadd is an
expression of exerting efforts and exhausting one’s capacity and
capability in doing an action, and [the term] is used only in regard
to that which involves exertion and effort. Thus, it is said “He
exerted [himself] in carrying the millstone”; while it cannot be said,
“He exerted [himself] in carrying a single grain.” But in the
technical usage of the ‘ulamd’, the term became specific to the
maximum exertion of a mujtahid in seeking out the knowledge of
the Shari‘a rules. The complete ijtihdd, then, is that a mujtahid
exerts himself in seeking [an answer based on the Shari‘a] to the
extent that he feels within himself the inability to seek more.

The second constituent is the Mujtahid. He has to meet two
requirements: First, he must have an overall understanding of the
Shari'a as well as an awareness of the avenues leading to its
knowledge. Furthermore, he must be able to use discursive

thinking to examine [the Shari'a], extracting what necessarily

"Ghazili, al-Mankhil, p. 465.

Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 2:350-354,

286

preponderates and staying what must be withheld.

Second, he should be trustworthy, avoiding sins that injur
credibility. But this is not required for the permissibility of relying
on his fatwa, for whosoever is not trustworthy, his fatwa should
not be accepted. This does not apply to him per se, however, for
trustworthiness is a condition for accepting fatwa, not a condition

for validating ijtihdd.

If it is said: When a person masters the knowledge of the
Shari'a sources, what are the details of the sciences that are
necessary to attain the rank of ijtihadd?

We shall say: A person who is capable of fatwa [attains this
rank] after he becomes familiar with the proper channels that
produce the Shari'a rules, and after knowing how [they] are
extracted. The generative sources of rules as we have detailed
them are four, the Book, the Sunna, ljmd‘ and ‘Reason. In addition,
the method for extracting rules is completed based on four
sciences. Thus, two [sciences] are [required] initially, two in the
end, and four are in the middle, totaling eight. Let us discuss them
in detail, emphasizing a few subtler points that have been
neglected by usiilis.

As for the Book of Aflah, ‏ردعاق‎ it is the principle source and
knowing it is mandatory. But we should relieve the mujtahid of
two things. One, he is not required to know all of the Book, but
only what is related to the Shari‘a rules, which amounts to five
hundred verses. Second, he is not required to memorize it by

heart. Rather, one should know {the Book’s] parts in order to
287

retrieve the desired verses as needed.

Regarding the Sunna, it is a must to know the hadiths which
relate to the Shari‘a rules. Although there are thousands, their
[number] is limited. But again, the Sunna has the two exemptions
mentioned above. It is not incumbent (upon a mujtahid) to learn
the hadiths related to preaching or the conditions of the Hereafter,
etc. Second, it is not necessary to memorize them by heart, rather
he should have an authentic hadith reference for the entire
[corpus’] rules, such as the Sunan of Aba Dawid and Ma‘rifat al-
Sunan by Ahmad al-Bayhaqi; or a reference where it is known that
careful effort has been devoted to collect the hadiths relating to the
Shari‘a rules. Moreover, it is sufficient for him to know the places
of every chapter in order to refer to them when the need for fatwa
arrives. Still, if he can memorize them, it is better and more
complete.

Concerning ‏,“مامز‎ it is mandatory that matters of consensus
be distinguished [in his mind] so that he does not issue a fatwa
contrary to them. Likewise, he is required to know the texts so
that he does not issue a fatwa contradicting them either.

The aid for this principle is that he is not required to
memorize all the instances of ijmd‘ or legal differences. Rather,
with respect to each question for which he issues a fatwa, he must
know that his fatwd is not in opposition to ijma'. As for the
condition that he should know that he is in harmony with one or
another view of the jurists, whoever they may be, or knowing that
an issue occurred at a time where the community of ijmda‘ did not

consider it, the least amount of this {awareness] is sufficient.
288

As for Reason, by this we mean the source of original
negation for the rules [before the Shari ‘a]. For Reason proves the
removal of burden from statements and acts in their endless forms
and shows that they are not [generally] classified according to the
Shari'a rules. And those [statements and acts] that are exempted
based on revealed authority, namely the Book and the Sunna, are
limited. But if they are many it is necessary to refer in each
instance to the original negation and to the Original state of
freedom. Furthermore, it should be known that this can be
changed only by a text or an analogy made on the basis of a text.
Therefore, one seeks the texts, or what is regarded as a text—such
as ijma‘ and the canonical acts of the Messenger, with reference to
what his said act proves or indicates—in fulfillment of the
requirements that we have detailed previously.

These, then, are the four sources.

As for the four sciences, [by which the Shari‘a rules are
known] through their methods of extraction, two of them follow:
One is the knowledge of establishing the proofs and their
conditions. This causes evidences and proofs to be useful and it
applies to all four sources. The second is knowing language and
grammar in a way that eases the understanding of Arabic—this is
particularly related to the Book and the Sunna. For each of these
sciences there are aids and problems.

The details of the first science are such that [a mujtahid]
Should know the categories of sources, their forms, and conditions.
Hence it must be known that sources are of three kinds: the

Rational, which is self-evident; the Shari‘a, which become proofs
289

based on the rules laid down by the Shari‘a; and posited proofs,
which are the linguistic expressions. ‘However, complete knowledge
of this accrues with no less than what we have specified in the
introduction to usiil concerning the channels that impart
knowledge. For whoever does not know the conditions of proofs
will not be able to recognize the essence of the rules, nor of the
Shari‘a; nor will he know the means of the Lawgiver, whom [the
Prophet] was sent by.

Further, they say that it is necessary for a mujtahid to know
the origination of the world [that is, that it is created] and its need
for an Originator, who is described by the attribute necessary for
Him [to create] and is above anything being considered impossible
for Him. In addition, [the mujtahid must know] He has charged His
worshippers through messengers, obliging {the worshippers] to
assent and believe in them based on their miracles. He should
have knowledge of the truthfulness of the messengers and the
ways of examining their miracles. What is meant by this, in my
view, is that the necessary element in all of this is decisive belief,
since one becomes a Muslim based on it, and Islam is necessarily a
condition for a mufti.

But as for knowing the methods of kaladm and its investigated
proofs, according to their [mutakallims') norms, this is not a
condition, since there was none among the Companions and their
Successors who was well-versed in the argumentation of kalam.

As for advancing beyond blind imitation to awareness of the
proofs (for origination of the world, etc.], it also is not a condition

per se. But it necessarily occurs {in the knowledge of the mujtahid}
290

because of the function of ijtihdd, since no one reaches its rank in
knowledge without hearing the proof of the creation of the worlds,
the attributes of the Creator, His commissioning of the messengers,
and the inimitability of the Qur’an, for all of this is in the Book of
Allah. This is the fruit of the real knowledge that carries
whosoever attains it beyond the borders of blind imitation, even
though the person may not apply the techniques of kaldm. This is
required for the rank of ijtihdd, such that if the case of a pure
imitator is conceived with regard to believing in the Messenger and
the principles of faith, ijtihdd would be permissible for him in the
details of figh {the furit‘].

As for the other introductory science, it is that of language
and grammar, by which I mean, the amount that makes [the
mujtahid] understand the address of the Arabs and their
conventions in usage, to the extent that he is able to distinguish
between explicit, apparent, and general expressions; literal and
figurative meanings; generic and particular moods; clear and
allegorical texts; unrestricted and restricted {expressions}; and
denotative and connotative meanings. The facilitating factor here
is that one is not required to reach the level of al-Khalil or al-

Mubarrad, 73 knowing ‘all’ the language and going deep into

73Two great Arabic grammarians Muhammad b. Yazid b. ‘Abd
al-Akbar al-Azdi Abd al-‘Abbas (d.285 H) known by the name al-
Mubarrad, which is a Kiéfan mispronunciation for al-Mubarrid,
according to Jalal al-Din al-Siydti, Bughyat al-Wu‘dt fi Tabaqat al-
Lughawiyyin wa al-Nuhat, 3 vols. ed. Muhammad Aba Fadl
Ibrahim (Cairo: ‘Isa al-Halabi Press, 1964), 1:269. Al-Khalil b.
Ahmad al-Farahidi (d.175 H); see al-Siyati, Bughyat al-Wu‘dt fi
Labaqat al-Lughawiyyin wa al-Nuhdt, 1:557-560.

291

grammar. Indeed, the required amount is that which is related to
the Book and the Sunna, enabling the person to master the
addrress’ meaning and usage and comprehend its real intentions.

As for the two completing sciences, one is to know the
abrogating [text] from the abrogated, and this is with regard to
specific Qur’anic verses and hadiths. The exemption for this is that
mujtahids are not required to memorize all [such abrogations]. But
in each occurrence in which he gives a fatwa, he must know that
this hadith or that verse is not abrogated, and this includes the
Book and the Sunna.

The second science, which is related to the Sunna, is knowing
reporting, distinguishing the authentic from the unauthentic and
the accepted from the rejected. For that which is not reported by a
trustworthy [reporter] on the authority of another trustworthy
[reporter] has no proof in it. The exemption here is that every
hadith—among those which the ummah has accepted—based upon
which he [the mujtahid] issues a fatwa, its isndd {chain of
reporters] need not be investigated. But if particular scholars
dispute it, he must know the reporters and their trustworthiness.
If they are well known to him, such as the case of al-Shafi‘l
reporting from Malik on the authority of Nafi‘ on the authority of b.
‘Umar, he can rely on this. For those people have been
[established] as trustworthy and the conditions of those reporters
are widely known in the community through tawdtur.

Trustworthiness, then, is known through experience,

292

association, or tawdtur. Hence, what does not reach tawdtur is
taglid; that is, imitating Bukhari and Muslim [for example], with
regard to the reports of the two authentic collections of hadith—
and [Bukhari and Muslim] did not report [hadiths] except from
those whose trustworthiness is known. This is purely blind
imitation and is removed only by knowing the conditions of
reporters. Based on hearing their circumstances, conduct,
examination, and their lifestyle, one concludes whether they are
trustworthy or not. But this is a long process and in our time—in
view of the numerous go-betweens—is very difficult. A lesser
requirement is to be sufficed with the trustworthiness of a truthful
authority in the field, after knowing that his position on
trustworthiness is based on a sound method, for opinions differ
with regard to what injures a reporter and what makes him
credible. Yet it is impossible for him [to be acquainted] through
experience or direct association with those who have died long ago .
If it were required that [a reporter’s] life-style be known
through tawdtur, this would include [as reporters] no more than the
popular imdms. Therefore a mujtahid can follow another
trustworthy reporter regarding what he reveals about [the reporter
under evaluation]. So we may follow [the trustworthy reporter’s]
accreditation after we have known the validity of his position in
acknowledging credibility. For if we allow a mufti to rely on the
authentic hadith books whose transmitters are accepted by the
specialists, this shortens the channels of transmission for the mufti.
Otherwise, the process would be too lengthy and the problem

extremely difficult in our time, especially with the numerous
293

generations [between us and the Prophet], and the situation will
worsen from one generation to the next.

These are the eight sciences that qualify one for ijtihéd. But
most of this is contained in three sciences: hadith, language, and
usul al-figh. As for kaldm and the details of fiqh, there is no need
for them [for the purposes of ijtihad]. Why should one need the
details of figh while they are developed by the mujtahids, and they
rule by them after reaching the rank of ijtihdd. Therefore, how can
Lfiqh] be a condition for attaining to the rank of itihad while the
pre-existence of ijtihdd is a condition for it. Certainly ijtihdd occurs
in our times by practicing it. Thus, that is the way to gain
experience now, while the process was different in the time of the
Companions. Yet, someone may follow the way of the Companions
as well.’4

A subtle point that is neglected by the majority [of schools] is
that the combination of these eight sciences is required with regard
to the absolute mujtahid, who gives fatwa in all (areas) of the
Shari‘a. But ijtihdd, in my view, is not an indivisible entity; rather
ijtihdd can be attributed to a scholar who is aware of its
requirements with regard to some rules to the exclusion of others.
So whoever knows the process of analogical thinking can give a
fatw4 in an issue that is based on analogy, even though he is not

versed in the science of hadith. And whoever examines the issue

74Meaning that someone who has the knowledge of Shari‘a
can act like the Prophet in teaching other students.

294

of musharraka,’> it is enough for him to have the natural fighi

inclinations and to know the foundation of the basis of inheritance
and his meanings, even if he does not attain or require the Teports
transmitted concerning the prohibition of intoxications, or the
question of marriage without a guardian, for there is no
relationship between this issue and the other; nor is there any
relationship between these hadiths and the others. Therefore, how
could unawareness of these hadiths or not knowing them be
considered incompetency?

Moreover, whoever knows the hadiths [that govern] ruling on
the execution of a Muslim or the killing of a dhimmi, and the way
to handle the matter, should not be faulted for his lack of

knowledge in grammar which leads him to misunderstand the

verse ". . . Wipe your heads and feet to the ankles.” Also, you must

make analogy based on this or what is identical in meaning.

In addition, it is not required for a mufti to answer every
question. Malik, “a2 wi gs‘, was asked forty questions; he said with
regard to thirty-six of them, “I do not know.” And many times al-
Shafi‘i, “i2 wt gw, hesitated to give an answer. Moreover, the
Companions hesitated to give answers to [some] legal questions.

So all that is required is to be fully aware of [the topic] which
he gives fatwd upon when he does so. Therefore, he issues a fatwa

in what he knows, knowing that he knows. He should distinguish

75Musharraka is an inheritance case where a woman dies
leaving her husband, mother, blood brothers, and half brothers
from her mother, all of whom share in the inheritance. Consult M.
Qal‘aji and H. Qunaybi, Mu‘jam Lughat al-Fugahd’, p. 431.

295

between what he does not know and what he knows, so he stops
with regard to that which he does not know, and issues fatwds or

gives answers with regard to what he knows.’©

18Ghazali, al-Mustasfa, 2:482.

CONCLUSION

Rather than summarize Ghazali’s views on the Shari‘a sources
and his legal doctrine as expressed in al-Mustasfad, which has been
presented in this introduction, perhaps a broad but nevertheless
more subtle observation needs to be made. Hujjat al-Isiam’s
engagement with philosophy was aimed, in the first place, at its
refutation in order to prove the excellence of revelation and its
transcendence over and above rational inquiry. One may add also
that his encounter with tasawwuf sprang from his intensive
personal quest for salvation, mindful of his final destination. He
acknowledged that salvation could only be attained through
adherence to revelation and, ultimately, its Shari‘a, a Shari‘a
detailed in the endeavor of figh and governed by the principles of
its usél. In the religion that Ghazali lived by and for, the Shari‘a
lies at its heart. Thus, if one were to measure the place of
jurisprudence and its principles in Ghazali’s lifework by comparing
his contribution in the area of Law to his other writings, it becomes
evident that Islamic jurisprudence and _ its principles formed the
core of his concerns—more so than philosophy, more so than

tasawwuf, more so than kalam.! He is first and foremost a beacon

‘Consult Ghazali’s works on figh and usiil al-figh in this
introduction where it certainly exceeds Ghazali’s writings in other

296

297

of Islamic Law, whose writings there have lighted the path of
Muslim legal thought for nearly a millennium and seem destined to
continue doing so for some time to come.

This study, it is hoped, may be an eye-opener for those
whose scholarship would reintroduce Ghazali to the world as he
was, a great Muslim jurist who never separated Islamic
jurisprudence from either other sciences or the diverse dynamics

shaping human activity in this life.

spheres of knowledge — indeed, it accounts for more than half of all
his written contribution.

