THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO

ABU HAMID AL-GHAZALI’S JURISTIC DOCTRINE
IN AL-MUSTASFA MIN ‘ILM AL-USUL WITH A TRANSLATION OF
VOLUME ONE OF AL-MUSTASFA MIN ‘ILM AL-USUL
VOLUME TWO

A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED TO
THE FACULTY OF THE DIVISION OF THE HUMANITIES
IN CANDIDACY FOR THE DEGREE OF
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY

DEPARTMENT OF NEAR EASTERN LANGUAGES

AND CIVILIZATIONS

BY
AHMAD ZAKI MANSUR HAMMAD

CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MARCH 1987
PART 2

TRANSLATION OF AL-MUSTASFA MIN ‘ILM AL-USUL VOLUME ONE
يسم الله الى كمى الى كيم

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH,
THE MERCIFUL,
THE COMPASSIONATE
INVOCATION

All praise be to Allah, the Almighty, the All-Powerful; the
Protector, the Helper; the Subtle, the Overwhelming; the Avenger,
the All-Forgiving; the Inner, the Outer; the First, the Last; He who
made the mind the most important of treasures and provisions; and
has made learning the most profitable of all trades and gains, the
most eminent of honors and glory, and the most praiseworthy of
journeys and retreats. Thus, by recording it, pens and inkwells
have become distinguished. And by hearing it, minbars and
mihrabs have become ornamented. Books and papers are graced
by its marks. Because of its honor, the young have prevailed over
the old. Faces and hearts have been illuminated by its brilliance.
Souls and insights glow with its splendor. The radiance of the
shining sun on the swirling stars is humiliated in its light. Its inner
lighting belittles the gleam in pupils and eyes. And when sights
become fatigued and the curtains and veils are thickened, a host of
thoughts penetrate by its light the depths of the greatest
obscurities. Blessings be upon Muhammad, His Messenger, whose
origin is pure, whose glory broke through, whose eminence
triumphed, the one of raining generosity who is raised as a giver of
good tidings to the believers and an admonisher to the disbelievers,
abolishing with his Shari‘a all ancient and elapsing religions, the
one supported by the glorious Qur’an, which bores neither its

300
301

listener nor transmitter. No poet nor writer can ever
comprehensively fathom its abundant [wisdom]. Nor can a
describer’s description, or a relator’s mention, exhaust its wonders.
Every rhetorician falls short of tasting comprehension of its
manifest secrets. And upon his family and Companions, lavish

peace—uncountable within the lifetime of anyone.
PREFACE

Now to proceed. The judge of reason, the ruler which has
been neither deposed nor changed, and the evidence of the
Shari‘a,' which is credible and just, have spoken. This world is the
abode of deceit, not the dwelling place of pleasure. It is the arena
of action, not the bedstead of laziness. It is a station of transit, not
a park of lasting amusement. It is only a trading post, not an abode
of everlasting residence. It is a market place whose commodity is
obedience [to Allah], the profit of which consists of success on the
Day of Reckoning.

Obedience is of two types: practice and knowledge.
Knowledge is the most profitable and prosperous part of it, for it is

1An excellent summary of the definition of this term is
provided by Rahman, /slam, ‏.م‎ 100:

“This word originally means ‘the path or the road leading to
the water,’ i.e. a way to the very source of life. The verb
shara‘a means literally ‘to chalk out or mark out a clear road
to water.’ In its religious usage, from the earliest period, it
has meant ‘the highway of good life,’ i.e. religious values,

expressed functionally and in concrete terms to direct man’s
life.”

For more information on the linguistic meaning of Shar‘ and
Shari‘a, see b. Manzir, Lisdn al-‘Arab, 8:175-179; Jurjani, Kitab al-
Ta‘rifadt, ‏.م‎ 132; Tahanawi, in Kashshaf Istilahdt al-Funiin, 1:761,
expanded on Jurjani’s definition.

302

303

also a kind of practice. But it is the act of the heart which is the
most valuable of the faculties of the body. It is the endeavor of
reason which is the noblest of things, for it is the vehicle of religion
and the bearer of trust, the trust offered by Allah to the Earth, the
Mountains, and the Heavens. But they were afraid to bear it and
resolutely refused.

Further, knowledge is of three kinds: One is the purely
rational, which the Shari‘a neither incites nor invites to; such as,
arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and other such kinds of learning.
This is situated between false uncertainties, which are
unworthy—“indeed, some conjecture is sin”*—and that knowledge
which is true but has no benefit. We seek refuge in Allah from
knowledge which has no benefit. Benefit does not reside in the
Satisfaction of worldly passions and luxurious blessings, for these
are transitory and must pass. On the contrary, benefit is the
reward of the Hereafter.

Another [kind] is the purely traditional sciences—like hadith
[prophetic traditions], and tafsir [the Qur’dn’s commentary], which
are not difficult matters. For each one, young and old, can know
them sufficiently because all that is required in traditional
knowledge is the power of memory, where there is no role for
reason.

Yet the noblest knowledge is where Reason and Tradition are
coupled, where rational opinion and the Shari'a are in association.

The sciences of jurisprudence [figh] and its principles [ustil] are of

Qur'an, 49:12.

304

this sort, for they take from the choicest part of the Sharf‘a and
Reason. They can be neither manipulated purely by Reason, such
that the Shari‘a could not accept them, nor based upon blind

following, where Reason could not attest to their Sanctity or

rectitude.

It is due to the nobility of the science of jurisprudence and its
ascendancy that Allah has provided ample motivation for people to
seek it. Those who know it enjoy the highest station among the

learned, are the greatest in honor, and have the largest following of

helpers.

Be that as it may, the religious and worldly benefits, the
rewards of the here and the Hereafter, that distinguish this science
demanded in the prime of my youth that I devote to it quite a
Stretch from that respite /1:4/ of life and that I dedicate to it a
measure from that breathing space in existence. Thus, I wrote

many books concerned with the details of figh [Law] and its

principles.
Subsequently, I devoted myself to the knowledge of the path

of the Hereafter? and the hidden secrets of religion. 1 wrote

3Ghazali refers here to his spiritual experience that
culminated in sifism, the period of isolation where he began
writing the /hyd’ and developed the concept of knowledge of the
path of @khira, distinguishing it from the knowledge of figh.
According to him, the latter, /hyd’, 4 vols (Cairo: Dar al-Ma‘rifa),
1:21, adheres to the fulfillment of obligations that ensure harmony
and preserves order in this life, while knowledge of the path of
dkhira requires awareness of the necessary qualities of the heart,
such as patience, truthfulness, sincerity, etc., and the forbidden
qualitites of the heart, like arrogance, showing off, competing for
the world, etc. For elaboration see /hyd’,1:2 and 1:19-21.

305

extensive books in this field, such as Revival of the Religious
Sciences ;concise ones, such as, The Jewels of the Qur'an; and
{books} of moderate [length], such as, The Alchemy of Happiness.

But Allah’s determination, dix, impelled me to return to
teaching and benefitting students, a group of whom, who had
acquired the science of figh, propsed to me that I should write a
book on usil al-figh, where I proceed to meticulously combine
compilation and investigation, taking a middle road between
insufficiency and being boring, composing it in a manner that
appeals to understanding—not as in Tahdhib al-Usiil [Refining the
Principles), for it is too exhausting and lengthy, but more than al-
Mankhil [The Sifted from the Science of the Principles}, which
tends to be too brief and concise. So I responded to their request,
seeking Allah’s help, joining herein both organization and precision
to facilitate comprehension of its meanings, for one cannot dispense
with the other.

I have composed and brought to it an admirable, delicate
organization. The reader can at once become aware of all the aims
of this science and benefits from the incorporation of all the areas
of thought within it. For every science where the student cannot
get at its crucial points and foundations, at the outset, leaves him
no chance of attaining its inner secrets and aspirations.

I have titled it, al-Mustasfa min ‘Ilm al-Ustil [The
Quintessence of the Science of the Principles).

Yet it is Allah, gtx, who is asked to grace [me] with His

306

success and guide [me] to the straight path. He is indeed worthy of

answering those who ask of Him.
EXORDIUM

Know that we have arranged and compiled in this book the
science known as usiil al-figh, [the principles of jurisprudence] and
structured it in the form of an introduction and four Qutbs [poles],
to which the introduction serves as an opening and preparation.
However, the Quibs contain the essence of what is intended.

In this Exordium, I will mention the meaning of the principles
of jurisprudence: First, its definition and essence; second, its rank
and its relationship with reference to other sciences; third, how it
stems into the introduction and the four Qutbs; fourth, how all
divisions of this science and its details are subsumed under the
four Qutbs; and fifth, the manner in which [ustl al-figh) is related

to the introduction.

A STATEMENT ON THE DEFINITION OF USUL AL-F 1QH

Know that you cannot understand the meaning of usiil al-figh
if you do not first define ‘figh’ itself. ‘Fiqh,’ in its original linguistic
usage, means knowledge and understanding. One says, “So and so
knows [yafqahu} good and evil.” That is, such a person knows and
understands them. But in the convention of the ‘ulamd’ [scholars],
it has come to specifically express knowledge of the Shari‘a rules
which have been established for (qualifying) the acts of the loci of

obligation.

307
308

Therefore, the term ‘fagih’ cannot customarily be applied to a
theologian (mutakallim],4 a philosopher, a grammarian, a
traditionist [muhaddith], or a commentator on the Qur’an
[mufassir]. 11:5/ Rather, (‘fagth’) specifically denotes scholars of the
Shari‘a rules which have been established to (qualify) human acts,
such as obligation [wujib], prohibition [hazr], indifference [ibdha},
recommendation [nadb], or reprehension [kardha}; the status of
contracts as valid, defective, or that which is void; and rites of
worship with reference to their being ‏'قله؟‎ [belated performance
of a religious act] or ada'{timely performance]; and the like.

It should not be difficult for you to perceive that acts have
certain rational characterizations—namely those that are
comprehended by reason—such as their being accidents inherent in
a certain locus and differing from substance, existing as beings in
motion or at rest, and so on. One who is familiar with this is called
a mutakallim, not a faqih.

As for their [acts’] characterizations—insofar as they are

obligatory, prohibited, allowed, reprehensible, or

411m al-kalam’ is translated, according to L. Gardet,
Encyclopaedia of Islam,“‘Ilm al-Kalam,” as an “approximate
rendering of theology.” Whether or not this term truly reflects
what ‘‘I/m al-kalam ' signifies is a question raised by many. Yet
theology has been widely used to describe kaldm among
Islamicists, despite the diversity of its technical application in
English. I have selected to use the English term interchangeably
with the Arabic. It may be helpful to consult for the definition of
kalam L. Gardet’s article, as well as R. J. McCarthy, The Theology of
Al-Ash‘ari (Beirut: n.p., 1953); and J. Windrow Sweetman, /slam
and Christian Theology (London, Redhill, 1945).

309

recommended—only a faqih undertakes their explanation.

Once you comprehend this, then you should understand that
usiil al-figh means the sources of these rules [ahkdm] and the
knowledge of the ways that they indicate the rules as a whole,
rather than from the point of view of details. For ‘Jim al-khildf [the
science of differences in legal opinion],> which is part of figh, also
includes the sources of rules and the ways that they indicate them;
but it concerns details, such as the indication of a certain hadith
concerning specifically the case of a marriage without [the bride’s]
guardian, or the indication of a certain verse specifically in the case
of not mentioning the name of Allah [upon the slaughter of an
animal].

As for the science of usiil, none of these questions of detail
are discussed there, even by way of providing example. Rather,
the subjects [of discussion} are devoted to the principles of the
Book, the Sunna, and Ijmd‘ [consensus]; the conditions of their
rectitude and establishment; and the ways in which they indicate
[rules], in general, either through their mood [sigha], connotation
[mafhiim], context, or the rational implications of the texts,—that is,
qiyds [analogical reasoning]°—without discussing any particular
question. In this, then, the science of the principles of
jurisprudence differs from its details [i.e. figh ].

Now, based on this you know that the sources of rules are the

> Ahmad Zaki Hammad, al-Khilaf fi Daw’ al-Nusiis al-Shar'iyya,
(Bloomington: Rabitat al-Shabab Muslim al-‘ Arabi, 1401/1981).

See Ghazili’s definition of qiyds, al-Mustasfa, 2:28.

310

Book, the Sunna, and ‏لكقسزا‎ Therefore, knowing the ways in which
these three sources are established, the conditions of their
rectitude, and the ways in which they indicate the rules is [the

function of] the science that is expressly known as usitl al-figh.

A STATEMENT ON THE RANK OF THIS SCIENCE AND ITS
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER SCIENCES

Know that the sciences are divided into natural sciences, such
as medicine, mathematics, and gcometry—which for our purposes
are not included here—and religious sciences, such as kalam, figh
and its principles; the sciences of hadith and tafsir; and the science
of inner matters, by which I mean the science of the heart and its
purification from vile conduct.® Each of the natural and religious
sciences is further divided into universal and particular [sciences].

The universal science from among the religious disciplines is
theology. But other sciences, such as jurisprudence, its principles,
hadith, and tafsir, are particular sciences. For a mufassir

concentrates only on the meaning of the Book specifically; a

4 is worthy to note that Aba Ya‘la al-Farra’ (d. 458 H.), a
Hanbalite legist, considered only these three sources and made
reference to istishdb al-hél [maintaining the primacy of
nonobligation}. Also, al-Khatib al-Baghdadi (d. 463 H.), who like
Ghazali is al-Shafi‘ite, limited the sources to three in his legal work
Kitab al-Fagih wa al-Mutafaqqih, 2 vols. 2nd edition ed. Isma‘il al-
Ansari (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Iimiyya, 1980), 1:54, and stated

that qiyds, instead of being considered a source, is the activity of
the one who applies it.

8Compare with Ghazali’s division of sciences in his Ihyd’
1:12-41,

311

muhaddith focuses only on the ways of establishing Aadith in
particular; a fagih looks exclusively at the rules pertaining to the
acts of the loci of obligation; and the ugili is attentive to only the
principles of the Shari‘a rules in particular. |

Now, the mutakallim is the one who inquires into the most
general of things, namely existence. He first classifies existents into
the eternal and the originated. He then divides the originated into
substance and accident. 11:6/ And he divides accidents into those
[attributes] which are dependent upon life, such as knowledge, will,
power, speech, hearing, and seeing, and those which are needless
{of life], such as color, odor, and flavor. He then divides substances
into animal, plant, and inorganic matter and explains whether
their differences are due to their speciation or due to accident.

Next, he focuses on the Eternal being, explaining that He can
be neither multiple nor divisible, as are originated beings. Rather,
He must be ‘one,’ distinguished from originated beings by certain
attributes which are necessarily His, other characteristics which are
impossible for Him, still other characteristics which are possible for
Him but neither necessary nor impossible. He further distinguishes
between what is possible, impossible, necessary or absurd
concerning Him. Then he explains that the principle of acting is
possible for Him and that the world is His possible act—and it is
because of its possibility that it requires an originator. Also,
sending messengers is among the possible acts on His part. He is
capable of this and of demonstrating their truthfulness through
miracles. Furthermore, this possibility has occurred.

Here, the discussion of the mutakallim ends, and the
influence of reason stops. Thus, reason can lead one to the
truthfulness of the Prophet but then abdicates itself,

acknowledging that it receives with acceptance from the Prophet
what he says concerning Allah, the Last Day, and other things that
reason cannot independently comprehend, nor determine its
impossibility. For the Shari‘a may come with that which reason
falls short of knowing independently because reason does not
independently know that obedience is a cause for bliss in the
Hereafter and that disobedience is a cause for misery. Yet it cannot
decide upon its impossibility either.

Furthermore, it necessarily concludes the truth of him [the
Prophet] whose truthfulness has been demonstrated by miracle. So
when the Prophet speaks on His behalf, reason attests to it in this
way. This, then, is the content of the science of kaldm.

Now you have known from this that the inquiry of the
theologian begins with the most general of subjects, namely
existence. He then gradually descends into the details which we
have mentioned, and there establishes the principles of the other
religious sciences, such as the Book and the Sunna, as well as the
truth of the Prophet.

Thus, a mufassir takes a particular subject from the totality
of the mutakallim’s inquiry, namely the Book, and looks into its
commentary. Similarly, the muhaddith takes one particular
[subject], the Sunna, and discusses the manners of its
establishment. The fagih takes one particular subject, the act of
the locus of obligation, and then examines its relation to the Sharf‘a

address as far as obligatoriness, prohibition, and lawfulness {are
313

concerned]. The usili takes one particular aspect, and that is the
Statements of the Prophet—whose truthfulness has been
demonstrated by the mutakallim—then inquires into the way in
which it conveys the rules [ahkdm], either through their explicit,
implicit, or logical meanings and extractions. The inquiry of the
jurist does not go beyond the utterances of the Messenger, suka ‏ليم‎
‎and his actions, for even the Book of Allah he hears only by his
utterance. Jjma@‘ too is established based on his utterances.

Now, the sources are only the Book, the Sunna, and Tjma'.
The truthfulness and validity of the statements of the Prophet are
established in the science of kalaém, which undertakes to establish
the principles of all the religious sciences, which are therefore
particular /1:7/ [sciences] relative to kalam. Therefore, theology is

the highest ranking science, for to arrive at these details one must

Start with it.

If it is said:? It should be conditional then for the ustili, the
faqih, the mufassir, and themuhaddith to have acquired the science
of kaladm; for before finishing with the higher and universal
[science], how could one descend to the lower and detailed
[sciences]?

We shall say: This is not a condition for being an usiili, a

faqih, a mafassir, or a muhaddith, even though it is required for

*Ghazali throught the book follows the prevailing dialectic
style of argumentation in the writings of kaldm and usiil,

introducing the opponents views with the conditional clause /f it is
said answered by We shall say,

314

being an unrestricted scholar [‘dlim mutlag], mastering the religious
sciences. This is because there is no science among the detailed
Sciences but that has certain primary premises which are accepted
in this science without question. Yet the proof of their
establishment is sought in another science.

Now, the faqih focuses on correlating the act of the locus of
obligation with the Shari‘a address, in relation to (the latter’s]
command or prohibition, but is not obligated to demonstrate the
proof concerning the establishment of volitional acts for the loci of
obligation. For the Predeterminists {Jabriyya] have denied man the
[freedom to] act, while another group has denied the existence of
accidents. Yet acts are accidents.

The fagih is not required to demonstrate the proof for the
establishment of the Shari‘a address, nor that Allah, gizs, has
speech inherent in Him which is either command or prohibition. He
accepts by way of taglid [blind imitation] the establishment of the
address as being from Allah, gixs, and the establishment of
[freedom to] act on the part of the locus of obligation. Furthermore,
he focuses on relating acts to the address. Thus, he he has reached
the utmost of his science. Similarly, the usili [jurist] accepts by
taqlid from the theologian that the statements of the Messenger are
authoritative proof and evidence that are necessarily true. He then
examines the manners of its indications and the conditions of its
rectitude. Therefore, any scholar knowing a particular science
necessarily accepts [without questioning] the primary premises of
his science, until he ascends to the highest science. Thus, he would

advance from his science to another.
315

A STATEMENT ON THE MANNER IN WHICH [USUL AL-FIQH]
REVOLVES ON FOUR QUTBS [POLES]

Know that if you have understood that the jurist’s focus is on
the ways in which the authoritative proofs convey the Shari'a rules,
it should be obvious to you that the purpose is knowing the modes
of extracting the rules from the sources. Therefore, it is necessary
to examine the rules, then the sources and their Classifications, and
then the method of deducing these rules from the sources, as well
as discussing the qualifications of the mugtabis, one who is able to
extract the rules, for the rules are fruits. Each fruit has a quality
and a substance in itself, and each has a source of fruition, a
cultivator, and a method of cultivation. The fruit are the rules, by
which I mean obligation, prohibition, recommendation,
reprehension, and permission; good and bad; gadd’ [restitution] and
ada’ [timely performance]; validity and invalidity; and so on.

As for the sources of fruition, they are only three: The Book,
the Sunna, and Ijmda‘.

Now, the methods of utilizing [the sources] are the manners in
which proofs yield their indications, and they are four. For
Statements either indicate an object by their case or syntax; by
their denotative, connotative or entailed {meanings}; by what they
require or necessitate; or by their rational implication and the
sense derived from it.

The person who imparts the result is the mujtahid [one who

practices independent reasoning or ijtihdd). 11:8/ It is necessary to
316

know his qualifications, conditions, and powers.

Thus, the body of the principles of jurisprudence revolve
around four Qutbs:

The First Qutb concerns the rules—and it is best to Start with
them, for they are the desired effect.

The Second Qutb concerns the sources: The Book, the Sunna,
and the /jmd‘; and they come second, for after having known the
fruit there is nothing more important than to know the source of
fruition.

The Third Qutb is concerned with the method of their
utilization, namely the manners in which proofs yield their
indications, which are four: Explicit textual indications; implicit
indications; entailed and required indications; and rational
implications.

The Fourth Qutb concerns the mustathmir, that is, the
mujtahid, who rules on the basis of his speculation. Corresponding
to him, is the mugallid [follower], upon whom it is incumbent to
follow [the mujtahid]. Therefore, it is necessary to discuss the
conditions of the follower of the mujtahid and both their

qualifications.

A STATEMENT ON THE MANNER IN WHICH A MULTIPLICITY OF
USUL AL FIQH BRANCHES ARE SUBSUMED UNDER THESE FOUR
QUIBS

You may say: ‏اثبع لا‎ al-figh contains many aspects and diverse
parts; so how can all of them be subsumed under these four Poles?

We shall say: The First Qutb, concerns hukm [a Shari‘a rule}.
317

For a rule has an essence in itself, a divisibility, and a relationship
to [1] the Ruler, that is, the Lawgiver; [2] to the ruled, which is the
locus of obligation; [3] to the subject under judgment, that is, the
acts of the locus of obligation; and [4] to that which manifests it
[the rule], namely its reason [sabab] or its underlying cause [‘illa}.!°

Now, in examining the essence of a ‘rule’ in itself, it becomes
evident that it is the Shari‘a address. It is not a qualification of the
act, nor is it a qualification of the goodness or evil of something;
reason has no place in it, for there is no rule before the revelation
of the Shari'a.

In discussing categories of rules, [we] clarify the definitions of
the obligatory, the prohibited, the recommended, the allowed and
the reprehensible; gadd’ and add’ ; validity and invalidity;
resolution [‘azima] and concession [rukhsa]; as well ‏عد‎ other
categories of rules.

In discussing the Ruler, [we] demonstrate that there is no rule
except for Allah; and [in fact], the Messenger has no rule; nor a
master over his subject; nor any creature over another. Certainly,
all Rule belongs to Allah, giz, and His imposition. None other than
Him has Rule.

Inquiry into those upon whom tule is laid [al-mahkiim
‘alayhim) clarifies addressing the forgetful [al-ndsi), the forced [al-
mukrah), and the minor {al-sabiy]. It also (clarifies) addressing the

unbeliever {al-kdfir] with the details of the Shari‘a, as well as the

10-The bracketed numbers in the text are added for the sake
of clarity

318

intoxicated [al-sakradn]}, and those upon whom the laying of
obligation is possible and impossible.

In discussing the subject of judgement [al-mahkiim fihi], it
becomes clear that the address is related to acts and not to

substance. Furthermore, it is not a description of acts in their

essence.

In treating that which manifests the Rule, [we] clarify the
essence of the reason, the underlying cause, the condition, the

locus, and the sign [of indication].

Therefore, this Qutb contains a number of miscellaneous
portions from various sections of ‏,اشع‎ which jurists have
introduced randomly in scattered places, that do not correlate and
that are linked by nothing. Consequently, a student cannot locate
their purposes, the significance of the need to know them, or the
manner in which they are related to usil al-figh.

The Second Qutb concerns the source of fruition, that is, the
Book, /1:9/ the Sunna, and Ijma'‘.

In discussing the basic nature of the Book, [we] clarify its
definition, that which is part of it and that which is not, the manner
in which the Book is established, that is exclusively through

11

tawatur, — and the explanation of what it is possible for the Book

Mtawatur ’ linguistically signifies consecutiveness or
recurrence; following one another closely; ceaselessness. In the
technical language of the Traditionists, it is applied to a report
transmitted through many different channels unbroken from one
generation to the next such that its forgery is considered
impossible. For Ghazali’s elaborate discussion on tawdtur, see his
chapter on Sunna in al-Mustasfa,1: 32-39.

319

to include as to literal and figurative [meanings] and Arabic and
foreign [words].

In discussing the Sunna, what is made clear are the
characteristics of the Statements and acts of the Messenger and the
ways they are established, either through tawdtur or solitary
reports [a@hdd], the manner of their transmission by way of a traced
chain of reporters [musnad] or an unconnected chain [mursal], and
the characteristics of their transmitters, such as trustworthiness
[‘addla] and denial {of their reports], through the end of the Book of
Traditions.

Also connected with the Book and the Sunna is the Book of
Naskh [Abrogation], for abrogation applies only to them. As for
Ijma‘, abrogation does not apply to it.

In discussing the Principle of Ijmd‘ [we] clarify its essence,
proof, and Categories, in addition to the consensus of the
Companions and the consensus of their Successors, treating all the

questions of /jmd‘.

The Third Qutb concerns the methods of extracting [the rules],
They are four:

The first concerns the indication of text by way of its mood.
Connected with this are discussions on the imperative and
prohibitive moods; and general, specific, apparent, interpretive, and
explicit modes [of expression},

Furthermore, the discussion in the Book of Commands and
Prohibitions and the Book of General and Particular [implications] is
a discussion on the requirements of the linguistic moods. As for

indication by way of signification or connotation, this is included in
320

the Book of Connotations (Kitab al-Mafhiim] and the Book of
Indicative Address [Dalil al-Khitab}.'2

As for the necessary and required indications of the Text, it
includes the sum of meanings to which the words point. For
example, a person says to another person, “Emancipate your slave
on my behalf.” So it is said, “I have emancipated him.” Now, as a
necessary part of this statement, it contains the meaning that the
mastery of this slave has been acquired by the seeker. But neither
party has spoken [explicitly] about possession. But it necessarily
follows from what they have actually said. Thus, it is its necessary

requirement,

As for indication from the perspective by way of the deduced
meaning of the Text, it is like his saying, ‏وسكم‎ suis ‏رصي اله‎ “A judge
must not rule when he is angry.” For it implies also the hungry, the
sick, or one who is urine congested—and from this [discussion]
arises giyds [analogical reasoning], leading us to explain all the
tules of giyds and its divisions.

The Fourth Qutb concerns the mustathmir, namely the
mujtahid, corresponding to the muqallid. In it [we) clarify the
characteristics of a mujtahid, those of a muqallid, and the domain

12 nalil al-Khitab, otherwise referred to as Mafhiim Mukhdlifa
implies strict adherence to the meaning of a text in the application
of the Shari‘a rules only in that which is Specified in the text, while
different, often contrary, rules apply to things not covered in the
meaning of the text. For a detailed account, see an excellent
treatment by Muhammad Adib Salih.Tafsir al-Nusis fi al-Figh al-
Islami, 2 vols. (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami, n.d.), 2:665-756. Also,

see Ibn Khalaf al-Baji(d. 474 H.), Kitab al-[ludid fi al-Ugiil, ed.
Nazih Jammad (Beirut: Mu’assasa al-Za‘bi, 1973), p. 50.

2321

where ijtihdd applies, to the exclusion of that wherein ijtihad has
no place. [This is followed by] a statement concerning the
validation of the mujtahids’ [judgments] and the totality of the
rules for ijtihdd.

This is a summary of what is studied in the science of ‏ىه‎

Thus, you have now known the manner of its issuing forth from the

four qutbs.

A STATEMENT ON THE INTRODUCTION AND THE MANNER IN
WHICH USUL IS RELATED TO IT

Know that since the definition of usil al-figh is traceable to
knowledge of the rules’ sources, it contains three terms: Ma'rifa
[knowledge], dalil [proof] and hukm {rule(s)]. Thus, it has been said
that if it is necessary to acquire knowledge of the rules to the
extent that knowing it is one of the four gutbs, it is also necessary
to be acquainted with the proofs and ma‘rifa, that is, knowledge.

Furthermore, the desired knowledge cannot be attained
except through discursive thought. Therefore, it is incumbent to
know discursive thinking [nazar]. Therefore, they [scholars]
proceeded in explaining the definitions of ‘ilm, dalil, and nazar.
They did not stop at introducing the forms of these things. Rather,
they were led to furnish proof in order to establish knowledge

against those who deny it from among /1:10/ the Sophists,!?

'3The Sophists deny the existence of knowledge. Jurjani,
Kitab al-Ta‘rifat, p. 134; and The Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
“Sophists,” s.v. by G. B. Kerferd.

322

furnishing the proof against those who deny discursive thought.
Furthermore, they were [led to treat] various divisions of sciences
and proofs.

But this is exceeding the limits of this science and mixing it
with theology. The theologians from among the usilis have
elaborated [excessively] in this regard, mainly because theology
overwhelmed their natures. The love of their profession compelled
them to mix it with this art, just as the love of the language and
[its] grammar forced some jurists to mix parts of grammar with
ustl. Thus, they mention about the meanings of prepositions and
inflections certain things which specially pertain to the science of
grammar, just as the love for figh has led a group of legists from
Transoxania, namely Abdi Zayd [al-Dabbasi], wi ‏اا‎ and his
followers, to mix many questions about the details of fiqh with its
principles. Although they brought this by way of examples to
illustrate how a principle leads to certain detailed legal points, they
did so in excess.

The mutakallims’ justification for stating the definitions of
knowledge, discursive thought, and proof in the science of usiil al-
fiqh is more acceptable than their justification for constructing
demonstrative evidence to establish them. For definition affirms in
the mind the forms of these things; at the least, one conceptualizes

them, when the discourse relates to them, just as one cannot be

14 See my library paper, “Aba Zayd al-Dabbiasi,” for the Near
Eastern Languages and Civilizations Department, University of
Chicago, supervised by Fazlur Rahman.

303

content with less than the conceptualization of Ijmd‘ and qiyds on
the part of those who study figh. But knowing the authority of
Ijm@‘ and qiyds is particular to usiil al-figh.

But bringing the argument for knowledge and discursive
thought against those denying them is to drag theological
discussion into usitl, just as a discussion of the authority of [jmda'‘,
qiyas and solitary report in figh is to bring the usitl [principles] into
their details.

However, after we have made. you aware of their
excessiveness in this mixing, we still do not think that this book
should be completely devoid of things of this sort, for weaning one
from what he is accustomed to is difficult and human minds shun
the novel. But we shall be content, with regard to this matter, with
things whose benefit is obvious to all sciences in general—such as
defining intellectual cognition and how it gradually descends from
self-evident truths to speculative thoughts—in a way that clarifies
the essence of knowledge, discursive thought, proof, and their
divisions and arguments, in a profound exposition not to be found

even in the texts of kalam,'5

'SGhazali, however, states explicitly in the beginning of this
Introduction which he speaks of that it is neither part of the
science of ugitl, mor is it a specifically required introduction to it.
Rather, in his view, it is an introduction to all sciences. He goes on
to say, “Whosoever desires not to transcribe this introduction
Should begin in the book [al-Mustasfa] with the First Qutb because
this is the beginning of usi! al-figh.” Al-Mustasfa, 1:10. In view of
this, Fazlur Rahman agreed to confine the translation to the parts of
the book more germane to the subject of uyitl, namely the Preface,
the Exordium, and the first two Qutbs, constituting the more
important part of the Rules and their sources in al-Mustasfa.

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE

THE FIRST QUTB
THE FRUITS: THE RULES

THE DISCOURSE ON [RULES] IS DIVISIBLE INTO FOUR
ASPECTS: THE ESSENCE OF RULES; ITS DIVISIONS;

ITS ESSENTIAL CONSTITUENTS;
AND THAT WHICH MANIFESTS IT
THE FIRST ASPECT

THE ESSENCE OF RULES

This is comprised of an introduction and three discussions.

As for the introduction, it concerns the rule [al-hukm}, which,
in our view, is an expression for the address of the Shdri'
{Lawgiver] in relation to the actions of the loci of obligation. Thus,
the prohibited [hardm] is as saying, “Abandon this and do not do it”;
the obligatory [wdjib] is as saying, “Do it and do not abandon it”: the
allowable [mubdh] is as saying, “If you will, do it. If you will, leave
it.” But if this address is not from the Lawgiver, then there is no
tule. For this we say that reason can neither pronounce goodness
nor pronounce badness, nor necessitate gratitude to the Bestower.

Thus there were no rules for acts prior to the arrival of the Shari‘a.

Now, let us describe each one of the questions independently.

I. DISCUSSION: The Mu‘tazilites hold that /1:56/ acts are
divisible into good or bad. Some of these can be known by self-
evident reason, like the goodness of Saving the drowning or those
who are perishing, being grateful to the Bestower, knowing the
goodness of truth and the evil of ingratitude, hurting the innocent,
and telling a purposeless lie. Some [acts] can be known by

discursive reason, like the goodness of truth, even if it has harm,

325
326

and the evil of lying, even if it has benefit. Some can be known
through revealed authority, like the goodness of prayer, pilgrimage,
and the rest of the rites of worship. Also, they [the Mu‘tazilites]
claim that these [acts of worship] are distinguished from others by
the characteristics of their essences, for they contain Grace, which
can prevent obscenity and call for piety.

But reason alone cannot recognize them. So, we say that
when one says, “This is good,” or, “This is bad,” its meaning is not
conceivable without understanding the meaning of ‘goodness’ and
‘badness,’ for the technical usage of the terms good and bad vary.
Therefore, a summary [of their usage] is necessary.

Now, there are three technical usages of [good and bad}:

The first is the popular usage that renders acts divisible into
those that agree with the objective of the doer, those that thwart it,
and those that neither agree with nor thwart it. So, the agreeing
[sort] are called good, the thwarting [kind] are called bad, and the
third [type] are termed frivolous. Based on this technical usage, if
an act is agreeable to a person and disagreeable to another, then it
is ‘good’ with respect to whom it is agreeable and ‘bad’ with respect
to whom it thwarts. The killing of a great king would be
considered good with respect to his opponents and bad with
respect to his friends.

These common folk have no qualms about describing the acts
of Allah, gtx, as bad if they disagree with their objective.
Therefore, they curse time and the heavens, saying, ‘“Accursed be
the heavens and perish time!” while they know that the heavens

are only subject [to Allah’s power]. They do nothing alone. Thus,
327

[the Prophet], ‏سكم‎ .i% gizs at ‏رصن‎ has said, “Do not curse time
because Allah is time.” Therefore, the application of the terms good
and bad to acts, as far as they are concerned, is akin to their
application [of these terms] to physical forms. So when one’s
nature becomes inclined towards a [certain] physical appearance or
the voice of a certain person, he pronounces it to be ‘good.’ But
when one’s nature becomes disinclined to a certain person, he
pronounces him to be ‘bad.’ Yet there may be a person to whom
some are disinclined and others inclined. So, he is good with
respect to the latter and bad with respect to the former, such that
the color brown is pronounced by some people to be good and by
others to be bad. So, to these people, ‘goodness’ and ‘badness’ are
used in accordance with agreement or disagreement [to their
tastes]. Thus, these are relative concepts and are not like [the
colors] black and white, for it is inconceivable that one thing be
black from the perspective of Zayd and white from the perspective
of ‘Amr.

The second technical usage of goodness is in expressing that
which the Shari‘a [has declared] as good through praising its doer.
So, the act of Allah, gixs, is good in all circumstances, whether it
agrees or disagrees with [one’s] objective. Therefore, whatever is
commanded in the Shari‘a, whether recommended or obligatory, is
good. But that which is allowable is not good.

The third technical usage is that all which one ‘may’ do is
[considered] good. Therefore, the allowable together with the

commanded [acts] are good. The act of Allah, then, is good in all

circumstances.
328

Now, these three meanings are relative characteristics, /1:57/
and are intelligible. Thus, there is no restriction on anyone who
uses the term goodness to express any of them. There is no quarrel
about these terms. This being the case, the Shari‘ a has not come
forth distinguishing one act from another except on the basis of
agreement and disagreement. But this differs with respect to an

[act’s contextual] relations. Therefore, it is not a character of its

essence.

If it is said: We do not dispute with you in the case of these
relative matters, nor with regard to the technical usages which you
have agreed to accept. But we claim that goodness and badness are
essential features of what is good and had, and are known
necessarily through reason in certain things like injustice, lying,
ungratefulness, and ignorance. Therefore, we do not permit any of
these to be [attributed] to Allah, gi, on account of their badness
per se, and prohibit them for all rational beings even before the
arrival of the Shari‘a because this is bad per se. Now, how can this
be denied if all the rational beings are in agreement [that these
things are bad] without relating them to one circumstance to the
exclusion of another?

We shall say: In what you have mentioned, you are disputed
in three of these matters. The first of them concerns ‘badness’ as
being an essential characteristic. The second questions your
Statement that this [‘badness’} is necessarily known to rational

beings. And the third concerns your assertion that if rational
329

beings agree [on ‘badness’] this would be decisive proof and an
argument that these things are necessarily so.

As for the first, claiming [‘badness’] as being an essential
characteristic, this is dogmatic assertion of the unintelligible. For,
according to them [the Mu‘tazilites], killing is bad per se, provided
that it is not preceded by a crime nor followed by compensation,
such that it is permissible to inflict pain on animals and to
Slaughter them; and this is not regarded as bad on the part of
Allah, gixs, for He will requite them in the afterlife. But killing per
se has one essence that does not differ whether it is preceded by a
crime or followed by pleasure, except in terms of its relationship
with the benefits and purposes. Furthermore, [regarding] lying,
how can it be bad per se even while there [may] be protection for a
prophet’s life by concealing his whereabouts from a transgressor
aiming to kill him? In that case [lying] is good—rather,
obligatory—and its abandonment would be sinful. Now, as for an
essential characteristic, how can it be changed by relating it to |
circumstances?

As for the second [matter] that [good and bad] may be
necessarily known, how can you conceive of this while we are
disputing it with you, whereas necessary [knowledge] is something
wherein many rational beings do not dispute? Also, your saying
that you are [naturally] compelled to know, and you agreed upon it

you think, however, that your knowledge is based on revealed
330

authority, just as al-Ka‘bi! thought that the basis of his knowledge
of mutawatir reports was discursive reasoning.

It is not impossible to confuse the source of knowledge. But,
what is impossible is to dispute knowledge itself—and there is no
disputation in this. For we say that this is a corrupt argument
because inflicting pain on animals is considered good [when it
comes] from Allah, gtx, nor do we believe that they have crimes or
will be requited. This proves that we are disputing knowledge
itself with you.

As for the third [matter], even if we concede to the
agreement of rational beings, this still would not contain proof
because it is not agreed that they are compelled to [know] this (by
the necessity of reason]. Rather, it is possible that they fell into
agreement among themselves upon that which is not necessarily
[self-evident], but yet agreed to such. For people agreed in the
established [proof] that there is a Maker and the permissibility of
Him sending messengers, and no one has differed with this except
for outcasts. Even if it so happened that these outcasts supported
them, it still would not be necessarily [self-evident]. Similarly, the
agreement of the people on this belief could be based in part on the

proof of revealed authority indicating the badness of these things,

‘Al-Ka‘bi, Aba al-Qasim ‘Abd Allah b. Ahmad b. Mahmiad (d.
319/931) is an important figure among the Mu‘taziltes, who wrote
many works on theology and founded the Mu'‘tazilite Ka‘bi school,
Information is found in Baghdadi, Tdrikh Baghdad, 9:384; Shams al-
Din Ahmad b. Muhammad Ibn Khallikan, Wafaydét al-A‘yan wa
Anba’ Abnd’ al-Zamdan, 8 vols. ed. I. ‘Abbas (Beirut: Dar al-Thaq§fa,
n.d.), 1:252; and b. Hajar, Lisén al-Mizdn, 3:255.

331

on taqlid [blind acceptance] in the understanding of /1:58/ those
who rely on the revealed authority, and [partly} on the confusion
which has occurred to the people of misguidance.

The incidental blending of these factors does not prove them
to be necessarily [self-evident]. Therefore, there is no evidence for
it being a decisive proof. If not for revealed authority forbidding
the permissibility of this, this ummah, in particular, would be
enough to [agree] on error. For it is not unlikely for [the ummah] to
together agree on error based on taglid and confusion. Why should
this not be so, while there are heretics who do not agree on the
badness of these things, nor that their opposites are good?

Therefore, how can one espouse that rational people have agreed?

They argue: We know with certainty that if truth and
falsehood are set before a person, he will choose truth and be
inclined to it—i.e., if he is rational. And this cannot be so except for
reason of its goodness. Even a great king, sovereign over many
territories, when seeing someone weak and near death would be
inclined to save him, even if the king does not believe in the
principles of religion, nor expect requital or gratitude [from him] or
his objectives favored, as well. In fact, he may be troubled by it.
Indeed, rational people have argued for the goodness of patience,
even when affronted by the sword to utter a declaration of
unbelief or reveal a secret or break a promise, while this is
contrary to the objective of the [one being] compelled. In general,

regarding moral qualities as good and giving generously are things
332

that no rational being can deny except through deliberate
obstinacy.

Our reply is that we do not deny the popularity of these
propositions among people and regard them as commonly
praiseworthy. But their basis is either religion, following the
Shari'a, or personal objectives. Rather, we only deny this with
respect to Allah, ‏.شعي‎ For He does not have personal objectives.

As for the application of these [terms] by the common people
in that which is popular among them, it is always on the basis of
their objectives. But sometimes their objectives are concealed and
are too subtle to realize except by those who thoroughly
investigate. We shall indicate the genesis of this confusion. There
are three roots to their confusion through which delusive
imagination enters.

The first [confusion] is that man applies the term bad to
whatever thwarts his objectives, even though it is in agreement
with another’s objectives, because he does not turn his attention to
others. For every personality is infatuated with itself and has
contempt for others. Therefore, he determines what is bad in
general, or he may relate evil to the essence of a thing and say that
it is bad per se. Thus, he would be deciding on three things, one of
which he is correct about—namely, the root of regarding it as
bad—while he is wrong about the other two.

The first of them is relating evil to the essence [of a thing]
because he did not recognize that it became evil because it thwarts
his objectives. The second is that his generalization in determining

what is bad stems from not taking others into consideration.
333

Indeed, [he] does not take into consideration some of his own
circumstances, for he may in certain circumstances regard as good

exactly what he considers bad when [his] objectives change.

The second [point of} confusion is that which thwarts the
objective in all circumstances, except in one rare case. The
imagination may not heed this rare case; in fact, it may not even
occur to the mind. So, he sees it as opposing [him] in all
circumstances, thus he determines it to be absolutely evil because
of the circumstances of its badness preponderating in his heart and
the elimination of the rare case from his remembrance, such as his
judgment on lying as being absolutely evil and his heedlessness
about the sort of lying that gains safeguarding the blood of a
prophet or a waii.!

Now, if he has determined [something] an absolute evil,
adhered to it for a time—and this is repeated in his /1:59/ ear and
by his tongue—then repugnant aversion would be implanted in his
mind. Furthermore, when this rare case occurs, he finds in himself
aversion for it because of being raised to dislike it. For it has been
dictated to him, by way of discipline and instruction, that lying is

evil, and that no one must approach it. Moreover, its good in

'Wali refers to the supporter, loving friend, ally, etc., of Allah
one who is chosen for his preeminent holiness and extraordinary
piety and virtue. For the linguistic and. technical meaning of wali,
see 8. Manzur, Lisdn al-‘Arab, 15:406-415, Mustafa, Mu'‘jam al-

Wasit, 2:1070; and The Shorter Encyclopedia of Islam, 1953 ed., S.v.
“Wall.”

334

certain circumstances was never shown for the fear that his
aversion from lying would not be reinforced, and thus he might
commit it. In addition, lying in most circumstances is evil. Also,
hearing at a young age is like engraving on a stone—so it is
engrained in one’s mind. Thus, he yearns to absolutely assent to it.
It is true not in all but in most circumstances. And since in his
memory there is no more than the majority of circumstances, it is,
as far as he is concerned, all of the circumstances. Hence, he
believes it absolutely.

The Third confusion’s cause is the imagination’s haste to
[conclude] the opposite. Therefore, what is seen as associated with
a thing, it is presumed that this thing is also inevitably associated
with it [its counterpart] absolutely. But he does not understand
that the more particular is always associated with the more
general; but the more general does not necessarily have to be
associated with the more particular.

An example of this is the aversion of a bitten person—that is,
one bitten by a snake—toward a multi-colored rope, for he found
harm associated with this image. Thus, he is deluded that this
image is associated with harm. Similarly, the mind is averse to
honey if it looks like dung because it found harm and filthiness
associated with a moist, yellow substance. Thus, he imagined that
filthiness is associated with yellowish, moist (objects). The illusion
overwhelms him to the extent that eating it [the honey] becomes

impossible, even though reason rules against the imagination’s

deceit.
335

However, the faculties of the soul have been created
compliant with [such] imaginations, though they may be false.
Indeed, even [one’s] nature truly shuns a beautiful women named
with a Jewish name since it finds this name associated with evil.
Hence, it presumes that evil also necessarily belongs to the name.
Thus, when an important, rational question comes to one of the
masses, he accepts it. But if you tell him that this is the Ash‘arite,
Hanbalite, or the Mu‘tazilite view, he hastens to reject it, if he hcids
a bad opinion of those to whom it is related. This is not
characteristic of the masses exclusively; rather, this characterizes
most of the discerning identified with knowledge as well, except
the learned firmly rooted in knowledge to whom Allah has shown
the truth as truth and has Strengthened them to pursue it.

The faculties of the soul of most creatures comply with false
imaginations, despite their knowing their fallacy. Most creatures’
boldness or reserve are because of these imaginations. So, truly
the imagination has great hold over the mind. Thus, man’s nature
shuns passing the night in a house where [lies] a corpse, despite his
certainty that it cannot move. However, he imagines at each
moment its movement and speech.

If you have comprehended these causes, then we shall
resume and say that, indeed, rescuing [one in distress]
Preponderates over negligence on the part of one who does not
believe in [prescribed laws of] religion out of the need to repell the
harm which afflicts humans out of natural sympathy. And it is
such a nature from which it is impossible to disengage. The reason

for this is that man depicts himself in this calamity. And he depicts
336

someone else turning away from him and his rescue. Therefore, he
finds this repugnant of him [the “someone else”} for conflicting with
his objectives. So he returns to himself, supposing this repugnance
from the person in the throws of death toward him. /1:160/ Thus,
he repels that assumed repugnance from himself. But, this is
unlikely to be conceived if it is supposed by an animal or a person
who has no kindness.

And even if it is conceived, there remains another
consideration, namely seeking praise for his good deed. So, if it is
supposed that it would not be known that he is the rescuer, still he
anticipates that it will become known. Therefore, this anticipation
becomes an incentive. Even if it is supposed in a situation where it
is impossible to become known, the inclination of the soul and
preponderance [of the imagination] remains, resembling the
aversion of a bitten person’s soul to a multi-colored rope. This is
because he saw this image [of being a rescuer] associated with
praise. Thus, he presumed that praise is associated with it in every
circumstance, just as when he saw harm associated with the image
of the rope and his nature averts from harm. So he averted from
what is associated with harm. For that which is associated with
pleasure is pleasurable, and that which is associated with hate is
hateful.

Indeed, if a man used to sit in a place with someone he
adored and returns to it, within himself he senses a difference

between this place and others. For this reason the poet said:

I pass by the dwellings, the dwellings of Layla
I Kiss this wall and that wall
337

For it is not these dwellings that obsess my heart
But the love of one who lived in them

And b. Rimi said, explaining the reason for loving homelands:

What endears men’s homelands to them,

desires youth fulfilled there

When they remember their homelands

it reminds them of times of their boyhood therein
So they yearn for this

Evidence to support this is abundant. This is the nature of

imagination. !

As for persevering under the sword with peace of mind in
regard to resisting the statement of disbelief, this would not be
acclaimed by all sane people if it were not for the Shart ‘a. In fact,
they may disclaim it. Rather, it is acclaimed only by those who
anticipate reward for perseverance or those who anticipate praise
for it because of bravery or steadfastness in religion. Furthermore,
there is often a courageous person who undertakes danger,
attacking a number greater than him while he knows that he
cannot stand [against] them. Yet he regards the harm that reaches
him as insignificant because of the compensatory feeling of

imagining praise and commendations, even if it comes after his

1 Avecena’s Psychology has a lengthy discussion on wahm,
where he defines wahm as perceiving particular meanings in a
perceptible object, for perceptible objects are perceived by senses
but there is a faculty which perceives inner meanings, which are
not given by outer sense perception. It is particular because it is
not universal. For if it were so it would be perceived by the
intellect, not by wahm. Ibn Sina was apparently the first to use it
of the philosophy. However, the traditionists used the term to
express mistake on the part of a reporter transmitting a hadith.

338

death.

Similarly, as for concealing secrets and keeping trusts, people
have counselled one another with them only for the benefits
therein and have praised them greatly. So whoever bears harm on
account of them does it only for praise. And even if it is supposed
where there is no praise, it still exists in association with praise.
Thus, the imagination’s inclination remains to what is associated
with pleasure, even though it is void of it. Now, if we suppose a
person who is not subject to this illusion and does not anticipate
reward or praise, then this is regarded as bad »ecause he
endeavors to destroy himself without benefit. Whoever does this is
certainly considered a fool. Who would concede that such a person
would prefer death over life? So on these grounds /1:61/ the
answer proceeds concerning lying and all that they have supposed.

Furthermore, we say that we do not deny that some people
customarily disclaim others committing injustice and lying. But
this discourse is only about good and bad with regard to Allah, giz.
Whoever determines this, his basis is analogy between the unseen
and the manifest. But how could an analogy be made while if, [for
example], a master leaves his slaves and slavegirls, some would
dash to others, committing obscenities while he observes them and
is able to prevent them. This would be considered bad on his part.
Yet, Allah, ‏,دعي‎ has done this concerning His servants; and this is
not considered bad on His part.

Therefore, their statement that He has left them, thus they
are restraining themselves and therefore deserve reward is

foolishness; for He knew that they would not restrain themselves.
339

Consequently, He should have prevented them by force. How many
people are prevented from obscenities because of impotency or
disability? And this is better than enabling them, knowing that

they would not restrain themselves.

Il. DISCUSSION: Gratitude to the Benefactor is not
obligatory by reason, contrary to the Mu‘tazilites.

The proof for this is that there is no meaning for obligation
except in what Allah, gixs, has obliged, commanded, and threatened
punishment for its abandonment. So if the divine address did not
come, then what meaning would obligation have? Furthermore, to
confirm this position, reason only makes it obligatory either with a
benefit or without a benefit. But it is impossible to oblige without
benefit, for this is nonsense and foolishness. Yet if it was for a
benefit, this would be either for the worshipped One—which is
absurd, since He is exalted and free from wants—or for the
worshipper, either in this world or in the Hereafter. But there is no
benefit for him in this world. In fact, he exerts himself by
thinking, speculating, and being grateful to Allah and, because of
this, is deprived of desires and pleasures. Moreover, there is no
benefit for him in the Hereafter because reward is grace from Allah
confirmed by His promise and His message. So, if he was not
informed about them, from where then would a person know he

will be rewarded for this.
340

If it is said: It occurs to him that if he were to disbelieve and
deny [faith], he may be punished, and that reason invites to follow
the way of safety?

We shall say: No. Rather, reason knows the way of safety,
then human nature impels to follow that path since every person is
naturally disposed to love himself and hate pain. So you have
made a mistake in saying that reason is a cause. Rather, it is a
guide, while the incentives and motives that emanate from human
nature follow the command of reason. You are also mistaken in
Saying that he is rewarded for gratitude and knowledge in
particular; for this notion is based on imagining a want out of
gratitude that distinguishes it from unbelief, while they are equal
with regard to the greatness of Allah, gizd.

Indeed, if the door of illusions is opened, then it may occur to.
him that Allah may punish him even if he is grateful to Him. So he
reflects on this because He has provided him with means of
obtaining blessings. Perhaps He has created him to live
comfortably and pleasantly. Thus, his exerting himself to be

grateful may be manipulation in His kingdom without His

permission.

They [Mu‘tazilites] have two obscure arguments:

The first of them is their saying that the unanimity of
rational beings on the good of gratitude and bad of ingratitude has
no way of being denied. This we concede, but {only} with regard to
them because they are excited and comforted with gratitude and

are grieved by ingratitude. But with respect to the Lord, gtx, both
341

are equal. So, [for example], obedience and disobedience are equal
with respect to Him.

This is supported in two ways. One of them is that a person
seeking nearness to /1:62/ the Sultan by means of moving his
finger tip in a corner of his home or in his room is, in fact,
demeaning himself. Yet the people’s worship in relation to the
greatness of Allah is even less in degree than this.

The second is that of a starving person to whom the king
gives a crumb of bread for charity who goes about in the land
shouting in public his gratitude [to the king]. This would be, in
relation to the king, bad and disgraceful. But all the blessings of
Allah, ‏ركعي‎ upon his servants, with respect to His capabilities, is
even less than that [crumb] in relation to the king’s treasures, for
the king’s treasures come to an end by giving similar crumbs
because it is finite. But the capabilities of Allah, yim, never end,
even by giving multiples of what He has plentifully bestowed upon
His servants.

The second obscurity is their statement that confining the
sources of obligation to the Shari'a would result in silencing the
messengers’ [arguments]. For when they present miracles, those
whom they invite say, “We are not obliged to consider your
miracles except on the basis of the Shari‘a. And the Shari‘a is not
established by our consideration of your miracles. So establish for
us the necessity of considering [the miracles} in order for us to
consider [them]. But we cannot do this as long as we do not think.”

Thus, this leads to a vicious circle. This can be answered in

two ways:
342

One of them, precisely speaking, is that you are mistaken
with regard to us in assuming that we say that the establishment
of the Shari‘a is dependent upon the reasoning of those who
speculate. Rather, if a messenger is sent and supported by his
miracle in such a manner that the possibility of knowing were to
accrue by it when a sane person examines it, then the Sharf‘a is
established and the revelation of the divine address is fixed,
obliging thinking.

For there is no meaning for the obligatory except that its
doing preponderates over its neglecting by repelling a known or
imagined harm. Thus, the meaning of the obligatory, then, is the
preponderance of doing over neglecting. The necessitating [factor]
is the preponderator—and Allah, gtx, is the Preponderator. He is
the one who informed his messenger—and commanded him to
inform people—that disbelief is fatal poison, that disobedience is
disease, and that obedience is cure. So the preponderator, then, is
Allah, gtx, and the messenger is the reporter.

Now, the miracle is a cause that enables a rational person to
arrive at an understanding of preponderance, while reason is an
instrument with which one recognizes the truthfulness of the
reporter [indicating] preponderance. Human nature, disposed to
feel pain through torture and pleasure through reward, is the
provoking incentive to be on guard from harm. After the coming of
the divine address, obligation, which is the preponderance, occurs.
So, with support through a miracle, there occurs the possibility of

truth for a rational, reflective person, since he is able through it to

know the preponderance.
343

But if he says, “I will not think until I know, and I cannot
know until I think,” it is as if a father says to his son, “Look out! For
there is behind you an attacking lion; here it is, poised to assault
you if you ignore him.”

But he replies, “I will not turn as long as I do not know of the
necessity of turning. And turning is not necessary as long as I do
not know of the lion. And I do not know of the lion as long as I do
not turn.”

So, he tells him [his son], “Certainly you will perish for
neglecting to turn. But you are not excused because you are able to
turn and abandon your obstinacy.”

So similarly, the Prophet says, “Death is [right] behind you.
Then beyond death are tortuous hawdmm! and painful punishment
if you abandon faith and obedience—and you know this with the
slightest thought on my miracle. So if you think and obey, you will
be saved. But if you are heedless and indifferent, then Allah, gtzs,
is needless of you and your actions. You will be harming only

yourself.” /1:63/ This is an intelligible matter without contradiction

'Hawadmm, pl. of hama, are insect-like creatures, often of the
flying variety, apparently nocturnal, which frequent grave yards,
eating corpses. They are mentioned in hadith. See al-Zabidi, Taj al-
‘Artis, 9:112. It appears, however, that at least in part these
creatures’ identity has been embellished by an Arab, pre-Islamic
legend, wherein they have been likened to desert owls invested
with the souls of dead men. Ibn al-Athir cites a tradition that
negated this legend. See ‘Izz al-Din Ibn Athir, al-Nihdya fi Gharib

al-Hadith wa al-Athar, 5 vols. ed. M. Tanahi (Riyad: Maktabat
Islami, n.d.), 5:283.

344

in it.

The second reply concerns an encounter with their [the
Mu‘tazilite’s] view, since they have determined that reason is the
necessitating [factor]. But it does not by its essence mandate a
necessary obligation from which no one can be released. For if it
were SO, no rational person’s reason would be devoid of knowing
the obligation. Yet there must be contemplation and thought. If he
does not think, he will not know the necessity of thinking. If he
does not know the necessity of thinking, then he will not think.

This also leads to a vicious circle, as has been indicated before.

If it is said: A sane person is not without two notions that
occur to him: one of which is that when he thinks and is thankful,
he will be rewarded; and secondly, if he abandons thinking, he will
be punished. Thus, soon apparent to him is the necessity of
following the safe path.

We shall say: To how many rational persons, in which their
lifetimes have passed, have these notions never occurred? Rather,
it may occur to someone in which, with respect to Allah, yixs, one
[notion] is indistinguishable from the other. So, why would |
punish myself without any benefit returning to me or to the
Worshipped?

Moreover, if not being without these two notions is sufficient
to make knowing possible, then when a prophet is sent and
propagates and demonstrates a miracle, the presence of these
notions is probable. In fact, one cannot rid himself from this

thought after the prophet’s admonition and his warning. Nor do we
345

deny that people, when filled with fear, are by nature impelled to
prudence. So, awareness is obtained only through contemplation
emanating from reason. Thus, if one calls the manifester of
obligation the cause, then he is being figurative in his wording.
Indeed, the truth, in which there is no figurative expression, is that
Allah is the cause; that is, [He] preponderates doing over neglecting,
whereas the prophet is the reporter, reason is the indicator, human

Nature incites, and the miracle facilitates knowing. And Allah, gixs,

knows best.

111. DISCUSSION: A group among the Mu'‘tazilites hold
that acts before the arrival of the Shari‘a were [considered]
permissible. But some have said that [they] were prohibited. Still
others have said that [they] were in suspension. Perhaps [what]
they meant by this is that upon which reason did not rule with
regard to its being good or bad on the basis of necessity or
speculation—as we have clarified their opinions.

All of these positions, [however], are false.

As for the refutation of the position regarding [acts as]
permissible, we shall say that what is permissible presupposes a
permitter, as knowledge and remembrance presuppose a knower
and recaller. But Allah, yixs, is the permitter whenever, through
His address, He gives a choice between doing and not doing. So
when there is no address, there is no choice; and, therefore, nothing
is permissible.

But if they meant by being permissible that there is no harm

in doing or in not doing, then they are correct with regard to the
346

meaning, but wrong concerning the expression. For the action of an
animal, a minor, or an insane person cannot be qualified as being
permissible, even though there is no harm in their doing or not
doing. .

Acts, with respect to Allah, g'xs, namely what emanates from
Allah, are not described as being permissible, though there is
nothing restraining Him from abandoning them. But when choice is
removed, then permissibility is removed. So, if someone dares to
apply the term permissible upon the acts of Allah, ‏,دعي‎ and
meaning by this nothing less than the nullification of restraints,

then he is right in meaning even though his expression is

reprehensible.

If it is said: Reason is the permitter because it offered a
choice between doing and not doing, since it prohibited what is bad
and obliged what is good, and offered a choice with regard to what
is neither good nor bad.

We shall say: We have refuted pronouncing good and bad by
reason, and this is based on it and is therefore refuted.
Furthermore, to call reason a permitter is figurative, as is calling it
the cause of obligation, for reason recognizes either the
Preponderance or the nonpreponderance [of doing). The meaning
of its obligatoriness is the preponderance of doing over abandoning,
and reason recognizes this.

But the meaning of being permissible is the nullification of

the preponderance. Reason is, then, an indicator, not a permitter.
347

For it is neither a preponderator nor an equiponderator. Rather, it
is an indicator of preponderance and equiponderance.

Furthermore, we ask, on what basis do you object to those
[holding the position] of suspension when they deny the
equiponderance of doing and not doing? For they say that of all
the acts that reason pronounces good or bad, there is none but it is
possible for the Shari'a to come with its obligation, and therefore
indicating that it is distinguishable by an essential characteristic
based upon which it becomes a divine grace that forbids
obscenities and calls to worship. This is why Allah, ‏,مدني‎ has
obliged it. But reason cannot independently apprehend this. It is
also possible for the Shari‘a to come with its [an act’s] prohibition,
indicating that it is distinguishable by an essential characteristic
and, thereby, calls to obscenities—nor can reason independently
obtain this, for Allah exclusively possesses its knowledge. This is
their position.

On what basis do you object to those {holding the position] of
prohibition? For they said, “We do not concede to the
equiponderance of doing and not doing because managing the
possessions of someone without his permission is bad. And Allah,

g'za, is the Possessor but did not grant permission.”

If it is said: If this was bad, it would have been prohibited
and [revelation] would have come {indicating this], and the absence

of this is an indication that it is not bad.
348

We shall say: If it was good, it would have been permitted,
and the absence of revealed authority is an indication that it is not

good.

If it is said: When Allah, ‏رمعاي‎ informs us that it is beneficial
and harmless, He is then permitting it.
We shall say: An owner’s informing of us that his food is

beneficial and without harm ought not be [considered] permission.

If it is then said: An owner from among us is vulnerable to
harm, while Allah is not vulnerable. The handling of His creations
in relation to Him is analogous to using a person’s mirror by looking
into it, or his wall for shade, or his lamp for light.

We shall say: If the evil of using another person’s possession
is based on him being harmed and not on the absence of his
permission, then it would [still] be bad even if he permitted it,
provided that he is being harmed. Why should it not be so! while
the owner’s withholding of the mirror, shade, or the lamp’s light is
considered bad, while Allah has prohibited his servants from a
variety of food, which is not considered bad? So, if this were to
harm [His] servants, then there is absolutely no act that contains a
hidden harm unattainable by reason, unless it is conceivable
regarding it, but that revelation comes Prohibiting it. Furthermore,
we ask why do you hold to your statement that since the Creator is
not vulnerable to harm by our conduct, it is therefore permissible?
For moving someone else’s mirror from one place to another, even

though its owner is not harmed by it, is prohibited. But only
349

looking into it is permissible because looking is not manipulating
the mirror, just as looking toward Allah, gizs, or toward the
heavens is not manipulating what is being seen; nor is sitting in the
shade manipulating the wall; nor is utilizing light manipulating the
lamp. But if a person was to actually manipulate these very things,

it may be ruled prohibited, unless revealed authority indicates its

permissibility.

If it is said: Allah, gtx, created flavors in [food] and tastes,
proving that He intended for us to benefit from them, for He was
/1:65/ capable of creating them without flavors.

We shall say: The Ash‘arites and most of the Mu'‘tazilites are
in agreement on the impossibility of these (foods) being void of
accidents, namely those that they [foods] are liable to have. But
this is not sound. Even if we concede, still He may have created it
not for anyone to benefit from. Indeed, He created the whole
world without a reason. Or He may have created it [flavor] so that
the reward for avoiding [the foods}, in spite of their desirability, is
known, just as one is rewarded for avoiding desirable evil [things].

As for the position of those who hold that it is prohibited, its
falsity is more manifest since its prohibition is neither known
necessarily through reason nor through a [rational] proof.
Furthermore, prohibition means that the aspect of abandoning
preponderates over the aspect of doing because of the harm
associated with the aspect of doing. So, from where is this known
while no revealed authority has come and reason cannot determine

it? Rather, one may be harmed immediately by abandoning
350

pleasurable things. So how can abandoning them become better
than doing them? |

Also, their statement that it is manipulation of someone’s
Possession without his permission is corrupt because we do not
concede to its evil if it were not for its forbiddance and prohibition
by the Shari‘a. Also, if it were Subject to ‘dda [customary norms], it
would then be bad with respect to whoever has been harmed by
manipulating his ownership. Yet what is bad is preventing that
which has no harm in it. Moreover, we have explained that the
essence of recognizing bad is reducible to the thwarting of [one's]
interests, and this is senseless.

As for the position of suspension, if they meant by it that
ruling is suspended pending the arrival of revealed authority and
that there is no rule at present, this then is correct. For the
meaning of rule is the divine address. And there is no Tule before
the coming of revealed authority. But if they meant by it, “We
suspend {judgment}; for we do not know whether they are
prohibited or allowed,” this is incorrect because we do know that
there is no prohibition. For its meaning is when Allah, ytxs, says,
“Do not do it.” However, there is no permission, since the meaning
of permission is when He says, “If you will, do it; if you will, leave

it.” But nothing of this has come [from Allah].
THE SECOND ASPECT

THE CATEGORIES OF RULES

This is comprised of an introduction and fifteen discussions.
As for the introduction, the categories of rules established for
actions of the loci of obligations are five: Obligatory [wajib],
prohibited [mahziir),! allowed [mubéh], recommended [mandub},
and reprehensible {makrih]. The reasons for this Categorization is
that the Shari‘a address comes either requiring doing, not doing, or
the option between doing or not doing. Therefore, if it comes
requiring action, it is then a command, and it is either associated
with a notification of punishment for its abandonment—therefore
becoming obligatory—or not associated [with punishment]—thus
becoming recommended. As for that which comes requiring
abandonment, if it indicates punishment for doing it, it is then a
Prohibition; otherwise, it is reprehensible. But if it comes as an
option, it is allowed.

It is necessary to mention the definition of each [category]
consecutively. As for the definition of obligatory [wdjib], we have

mentioned part of it in the introduction of this book, and we shall

'Ghazali uses the terms ‘haram’ and ‘mahziir’ interchangeably
to mean prohibited. Al-Mustasfa, 1:55.

351

352

now mention what has been stated concerning it.

Some people have said that it [wajib} is that in which
punishment is prescribed for its abandonment. But this was
objected to on the basis that the punishment for abandoning an
obligation may be waived. However, this does not remove it from
being obligatory because obligatoriness is readily realized, while its
punishment is awaiting.

Also, it has been said that /1:66/ it is that in which
punishment is threatened for its abandonment. But this is objected
to by saying that if He has threatened, then the realization of the
threat would be necessary since the speech of Allah, gis, is the
truth. However, it is conceivable for Him to waive it [the threat]
and not to punish.

It is also said that [an obligation] is that in which punishment
is feared for its abandonment. But this [position] is refuted by
[considering] that whose prohibition or obligatoriness is uncertain,
for it is not an obligation. Yet punishment is feared for its
abandonment.

Al-Qadi Abi Bakr (al-Baqillani],2 wi 2a, Said that it is best to
Say, with regard to its definition, that it [obligation] is that in which
its abandoner is denounced and punished in accordance with the

Shari‘a in a certain way. For its denunciation is readily realized,

2al-Baqillani was a prominent fourth century Ash‘ari
theologian and Malikite jurist. He is said to have been a major
element in the systemization and growth of Ash‘arite theology. See

the Encyclopaedia of Islam, new ed., s.v. “al-Bakillani” by R. J.
McCarthy.

353

while its punishment is uncertain. His (al-Baqillani’s] statement, “. .
. in a certain way,” meant to include an obligation with options
[wajib mukhayyar] because one is still blamed for abandoning it
and its alternative, as is the case with an obligation with latitude
[wajib muwassa‘}. For one is still blamed for abandoning it and

abandoning the intention to obey it.

If it is said: Is there a difference between ‘wajib’ and ‘fard'?

We shall say: In our view, there is no difference between
them. Rather, they are synonymous terms, similar to ‘hatm'
[necessary] and ‘ldzim’' [must]. The followers of Aba Hanifa have
agreed to specify the term ‘fard’ as that whose obligatoriness is
decisively established, and specify the term ‘wajib’ as that whose
obligatoriness is known only through conjecture [zan]. But we do
not [specify] the categorization of an obligation as decisive or
conjectural. And there is no restriction in the technical usage of
terms after understanding the meanings.

Al-Qadi has stated that if Allah obliged something upon us
but did not threaten punishment for abandoning it, it is still an
obligation because obligatoriness is [established] solely on the basis
of His obliging, not on the basis of punishment. But this is an open
question. For there is no sense in attributing obligatoriness to
something whose doing and abandonment equiponderate with
respect to us, since we do not conceive of the obligatoriness [of
something] except when its doing preponderates over its
abandonment with respect to our objectives. So if preponderance

is negated, there is no meaning for obligatoriness at all.
354

Now, if you know the definition of wajib, that which is
prohibited [mahziir] is its opposite. So its definition should not be
difficult to perceive.

As for the definition of allowable {mubaéh], it has been said
regarding it that it is that whose abandonment and doing are
equivalent. But this [position] is refuted by [considering] the acts of
a child, an insane person, or an animal; it is also refuted by the acts
of Allah, gtx, since many of His acts in relation to us are equivalent
to [their] abandonment. In fact, they are always indifferent with
regard to Allah, ytxs. Similarly, acts before the revelation of the
Shari‘a are equivalent to abandoning [them]. Thus, nothing of this
{sort] is called mubdh. Rather, its definition is that whose
permission to do or abandon has come from Allah, ‏.دعي‎ [It is}
neither associated with the denunciation or the praise of its doer,
nor with the denunciation or the praise of its abandoner.

It is possible to define it (mubdh] as that whose doing or
abandoning the Shari‘a declares as harmless; nor is there benefit
with respect to its performance or abandonment. This [wording]
guards against the abandonment of what is allowable for [what is]
disobedient, for one suffers not by way of abandoning mubéh, but
by way of committing disobedience.

As for the definition of what is recommended [nadb], it is said
in its regard that it is that whose doing is better than its
abandoning, where no blame follows its abandonment. But an
argument posed against this [definition] is that of eating before the
coming of the Shari‘a, for it is better [to eat] than to abandon

[eating], because of both its pleasure and sustenance.
355

The Mu‘'tazilites said that it [nadb] is that whose doer, upon
doing it, deserves praise, though he does not deserve blame for its
abandonment. But an argument posed against this concerns the
acts of Allah, gtxs, for they are not called mandiib even though He
is praised for every action and is never blamed. Thus, more
appropriately, regarding its definition, it is that which is
commanded where blame does not follow its abandonment, insofar
as abandonment without a need for a substitute is concerned,
guarding against obligations with options [wdjib mukhayyar] or
with latitude [wdjib muwassa‘),

As for makrith [reprehensible], it is an ambiguous term of
several meanings in the technical usage of the /1:67/ fugahd’. One
of the [meanings] is prohibited. For al-Shafi‘i, wi “4a%,, has often said,
“1 dislike [akraha] such and such,” meaning prohibition.

Secondly, it is that which has been prohibited, but aa a
prohibition for purity—that is, that whose abandonment is indicated
as better than its performance, even though there is no punishment
prescribed for it, just as the recommended indicates that the
performance of something is better than its abandonment.

Thirdly, it [makrih] is the neglect of a worthier [act], although
it is not prohibited—such as neglecting the mid-morning prayer
(duha)}, not because of a revealed prohibition concerning it [its
abandonment], but because of the abundance of its excellence and
reward. It has been said that its abandonment is reprehensible.

Fourthly, it is that whose prohibition is liable to doubt and
uncertainty, like the meat of predatory animals or a small amount

of nabidh. But this is an open question. For if one’s own ijtihdd
356

leads him to consider it prohibited, it is thus prohibited for him.
But if one’s ijtihdd leads him to consider it permissible, then there
is no meaning for reprehensibility in this regard, except when the
arguments of the opponents agitate his soul and leave an
impression on his heart. For he, ‏وسكر‎ suie at ‏رصن‎ said, “Sin is that
which agitates the heart.” Therefore, it is not unappropriate to
apply the term karaha here because of the fear of it being
prohibited, even though it is most likely permissible. This is valid
according to those who hold that the correct ijtihdd [musib] is one.

As for those who regard every mujtahid to be correct,
permissibility, according to them, is decisive when it overwhelms
his [the mujtahid’s] conjecture.

Now, since we have completed clarifying the categories [of

ahka@m], we shall next address the discussions that branch from

them.

I. DISCUSSION: An obligation [wajib] is divisible into that
which is fixed [wajib mu‘ayyan] and that which is unspecified
within particular categories. This is called an obligation with
options [wdjib mukhayyar], as in the case of one option among
those required for atonement; for that which is obligatory; among
them [the options], one is not specifically defined.

The Mu‘'tazilites deny this and state that there is no sense in
an obligation accompanied by options because they are
contradictory. But we claim that this is rationally possible and that

it has occurred in the Sharf‘a.

As for the possibility of its rational proof, it is like when a
357

master says to his servant, “I have made either sewing this shirt or
the construction of this wall an obligation upon you today.
Whichever you do, I will be satisfied and will reward you for it.
But if you abandon both, I shall punish you. Again, I am not
obliging both, but I only oblige one—not specifically
defined—namely which ever you wish to do.” This is an intelligible
discourse, and it is not possible to say that he did not make
anything obligatory upon him because he exposed him to
punishment for neglecting both. Therefore, he [the servant] is not
free from obligation. Nor is it possible to say that he obliged both
because he explicitly stated the opposite. Also, it is not possible to
say that he obliged one [task] specifically, either sewing or
constructing, because he explicitly stated the option. Thus, there is
no alternative but to say that the obligation is one [of the options]
but not specifically defined.

As for the proof of its occurrence in the Shari‘a, it is in the
characteristics of atonement. Indeed, the obligation of
emancipating a slave has options with regard to which individual
Slave. Similarly, the marrying of a virgin woman seeking marriage
to one of two suitable proposing men is an obligation, while there is
no way to oblige [marrying] both. Also, confirming the imamate for
one of two qualified for the imamate is an obligation, while

[confirming] both is impossible.

If it is said: The obligation is all the options of atonement.
Thus, if he abandons one, he is punished for all. But if he performs

all of them, they are regarded as fulfilling the obligation. And if he
338

performs one, the other [options] are removed. Yet an obligation
may be removed /1:68/ by reasons other than fulfillment, and this
is not absurd.

We shall say: ‘This rule is not consistent with the case of two
imdms nor of the two eligible men, for combining in this regard is
prohibited. Therefore, how could all [options] be obligatory?
Moreover, this is in opposition to the consensus concerning the
options of atonement. For the whole community is in agreement
that all [options] are not obligatory.

They [the Mu‘tazilites] have argued that if the characteristics
of the three options are equal in the sight of Allah, ytzs, with regard
to the benefit of the servant, then all must be obligated to ensure
equality between the equals. But if one of them is distinguished by
a characteristic requiring obligatoriness, then it must be the
obligation and should not be left unspecified among the others so
that it is not confused with the others.

We shall say: Who conceded to you that actions per se have
characteristics for which Allah, diza, obliges them? Rather, obliging
belongs to Him. It is for Him to identify one of three equal
[options] and specify it as an obligation to the exclusion of the
others. Furthermore, it is for Him to oblige one, but not specifically;
He entrusts the specification to the choice of the locus of obligation
for his acts, so that obedience does not become difficult for him.

They [the Mu'‘tazilites) have argued that an obligation is that
to which obligatoriness is attached. So if what is obliged is one of
the three options, then Allah, ‏,رمعاي‎ would know that to which

obligatoriness is attached; so it is distinguished in His knowledge.
359

Thus, it becomes the obligation.
We shall say: If He obliges one [option], but not specifically,
then we know it as being unspecified. For example, if a master

addresses his servant, “I have obliged you with either sewing or

”

construction,” then how could Allah, gtxs, know it, for He does not
know it except by its characterization—and its characterization is
that it is not specified. Thus, He knows it as unspecified, as it is.
Now this is the substantiated [position]; that is, the obligation does
not have an essential characteristic associated with the attachment
of obligatoriness to it. It is merely an attribute of the address, and
the address is based on utterance and remembrance.

Now, the creation of black color in one of two objects,
unspecified, and the creation of knowledge in one of two persons,
unspecified, is impossible. As for mentioning one of two [things],
not specifically, this is possible, such as when one Says to his two
wives, “One of you is divorced.” Hence, obligation is a statement

that follows utterance.

°

If it is said: [If] one who obliges seeks something, his sought
object must be distinguished in his mind.
| We shall say: It is possible that his request is related to one
of two things, such as when a woman says [to her guardian], “Marry
me to one of the two seekers, regardless of which one he is”; or,
[the statement] “Emancipate one of these slaves, whichever of them
it might be”; or, “Give allegiance to one of these two imams,
whichever of them it may be.” So what is sought after here is one

of them, unspecified. And [as for] all that can conceivably be
360

sought, its obligatoriness is also conceivable.

If it is said: Allah, gtxs, knows what the locus of obligation
will do and that through which the obligation is fulfilled.
Therefore, it is specified in the knowledge of Allah, giz.

We shall say: Allah, gtx, knows it as unspecified, then He
knows that it will be specified by his (the locus’) action, so long as it
was not specified before doing it. Furthermore, if one performs all
[the options] or does none of them, how could one [option] be

specified in the knowledge of Allah, gizs.

If it is said: Why is it not possible for [Him] to oblige one of
two persons but not specifically? And why do you say that a
collective obligation [fard al-kifaya}> is laid upon everyone
although its obligatoriness is discharged by the action of one?

We shall say: [This is] because obligatoriness is realized by
punishment, and it is not possible to punish one of the two persons,
unspecified. But it is possible to say that one will be punished for

[neglecting] one of two actions which is not specified. /1:69/

II. DISCUSSION: Obligation is divisible, with regard to

3The phrase ‘fard al-kifdya ‘refers to those obligations for
which the Muslim community at large is responsible but can be
discharged when a lesser number of individuals—or even one
person—fulfill them. Funeral prayers, greetings, etc. are a few

examples. See the Encyclopaedia of Islam, new ed., s.v. ‏"لبو"‎ by T.
W. Juynboll.

361

time, into mudayyaq [confined] and muwassa' [latitudinal].

Some people have said that [the notion of] latitude contradicts
obligatoriness. But this is false [both] rationally and on the basis of
the Shari‘a. For when a master Says to his servant, “Sew this
garment during the light of this day in either its beginning, middle,
or end, in whichever one you wish. Whenever you do it, you will
have fulfilled my obligation,” this is rational. It does not go beyond
{the three options]. Either it is said that he {the master] did not
obligate anything at all, or he obligated something which is
restricted [in time]. Both of these are absurd. So nothing remains
except that he has given an obligation with latitude.

As for the Shari‘a, ijma‘ has fixed the obligatoriness of prayer
at noon; and if a person prays [at that time], he is fulfilling the

obligation and obeying the obliged command even though there is

no restriction.

If it is said: The essence of obligation is that where
abandonment is not permissible; in fact, one is punished for it. But
[as for] prayer and sewing, if they are attached to the last part of
the [prescribed] time, one is then punished for its abandonment.
Therefore, its obligatoriness is in the last part of the time. As for
before that [time], he chooses between doing or abandoning it—but
its performance is better than its abandonment. This is the
definition of ‘nadb.’

We shall say: Unveiling this question is to state that
rationally there are three categories: First, an act in which there is

absolutely no punishment for its abandonment—and this is
362

recommended [nadb]; second, an act in which absolutely there is
punishment for its abandonment—and this is obligation [wdjib]; and
third, an act in which there is punishment for its abandonment
with respect to the entire time, but one is not punished in relation
to certain parts of the time—and this is a third category, thus
needing a third term, while its essence does not exceed nadb and
wujib, The most appropriate term for it is "wajib al-muwassa”’
[obligation with latitude] or ‘unabandonable nadb.’ But we have
found the Shari‘a calling this category wdjib on the grounds that
ijmda‘ has established that the intention to pray at the beginning of
its time duration is for (discharging) the obligation; and one is
rewarded for its performance [with] the reward of an obligation,
not of a recommendation.

These three categories then cannot be denied rationally.
Thus, the dispute is reduced to terminology. But what we have

mentioned is more appropriate.

If it is said: This is not a third category but nadb with
respect to the beginning of the time duration, since not doing it is
possible at that time. Yet with respect to the last part of the time,
it is inevitable because delaying it beyond that cannot be allowed.
Also we concede to your statement that one intends [to fulfill] an
obligation. Still, it is obligatory in the sense that it becomes an
obligation, similar to when a person pays zakat in advance,
intending to fulfill the obligation of zakdt, and is rewarded with the
reward of advancing an obligation, not the reward of nadb, nor the

reward of an obligation which is not urgent.
363

We shall say: Your statement that it is possible to delay it
with respect to the beginning of the time and is therefore
praiseworthy [nadb] is wrong because this is not the definition of
164. Rather, nadb is that whose abandonment is unconditionally
permissible, while it is not permissible to abandon this except with
a condition that it should be done afterward or {at least] intended
to be done. And whatever is permissible to abandon for an
alternative or a condition is not nadb, on the grounds that if one
was commanded with, [say], manumission, then there would not be
any slave but whose emancipation may be abandoned by him {the
master}, but on the condition of freeing another slave.

Similar [to this] is the case of the options for atonement.
There is not one [option] but whose abandonment is possible, but
for an alternative. This is not nadb. In fact, just as that is called an
obligation with options [wajib mukhayyar), this is called an
unconfined obligation [wdjib ghayr mudayyaq). Furthermore, since
the meaning is agreed upon, namely the divisibility into the above
three categories, there is no need to dispute. Moreover, that whose
abandonment is permissible through a condition is different than
that whose /1:70/ abandonment is not at all permissible and is
different than that whose abandonment is unconditionally
permissible, which is a third category.

As for what you have mentioned, that it is advancing the
obligation and is therefore called an obligation, this is contrary to
the ‏,“ةمزا‎ since the intention of advancing zakdt is obligatory. But
none among the early generations made his intention for prayer in

the beginning of its time differently than the way he made his
364

intention in the last part; they did not distinguish [between them]

at all. This is certain.

If it is said: Some people have said that {an act. of worship]
occurs as being supererogatory [nafl],4 while the obligation is
dismissed on one’s part. Others have said that it occurs as being
uncategorized. For if it continues [as a command] with the loci of
obligation until the end of the time, it then becomes evident that it
occurs as an obligation. But if he dies or becomes insane, it occurs
as supererogatory.

We shall say: If this were to occur as supererogatory, then it
would have been permissible by intending [to perform] a
supererogatory [act]. Rather, it is impossible for the intention of an
obligatory [act] to exist on the part of one who knows it to be
supererogatory, since intention follows knowledge. The position of
Suspension is invalid because the ummah is unanimous that
whosoever dies in the middle of an [obligation’s] time [period] after
completing the prayers, dies fulfilling the obligation of Allah, gtx,
as he intended and performed it; for he said, “I intend to perform

the obligation of Allah, gas.”

If it is said: You have based your statement on [the premise]
that abandoning it is permissible on a condition, namely having

determination to obey or to perform [the command]. But this is not

“For a consise defintion, consult Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-
Fuqaha’, p. 485.

365

so because an obligation with options is that which has the option
between two [or more] things, as in the case of atonement. But the
Shari‘a does not give options between performing prayer and
[simply] having the determination. For His statement, “Pray at this
time,” does not make any mention of determination. Therefore,
obligating it is additional to the requirement of the expression, for
if the person was heedless and did not actually make
determination and died in the middle of the time range, he would
not be disobedient.

We shall say: As for your statement that if such a person
forgets, he would not be sinful, this is conceded. The reason for
this is that a person who has become heedless is not responsible.
But if he was not heedless of the command, then he cannot be free
from determination except by its opposite, which is determination
to absolutely abandon it. And this is prohibited. Also, that without
which one cannot escape a prohibition is an obligation. Therefore,
this proof indicates its obligatoriness even though the literal
meaning of the expression per se does not indicate it.

Now the indication of the rational proof is Stronger than that
of [revealed] expression. Therefore, the essence of this discussion
is reduced to [the fact] that an obligation with latitude is like an
obligation with options, with respect to the beginning of [the
prescribed] time, as well as its end. For if he were to be discharged
from it by the end [of its time], he would not be disobeying,

provided he has performed it in the beginning.

111. DISCUSSION: If one suddenly dies during the time
366

period of a prayer after resolving to fulfill it, he would not be
disobeying.

Some of have said that if one were to adhere to the precise
meaning of obligatoriness {[wujib], he {who had died] would be
disobeying. But this is contrary to the ijmd‘ of the early
generations. For we know that they did not hold as disobedient he
who died suddenly when a measure {of time] for four rak‘as
elapsed after the meridian time, or when a measure [of time] for
two rak’as elapsed at the beginning of dawn. Nor did they
attribute negligence to him, particularly if he had started
performing ablution or proceeding to the Mosque but died on the
way. Indeed, it is impossible that he be disobedient while deferral
has been permitted to him. For if one does what he is allowed, how

is it possible to pronounce him disobedient?

If it is said: Deferment is permitted to him on the condition
that he remains safe.

We shall say: This is absurd because eventuality is
undisclosed to him. If he were to ask us saying, “Eventuality is
concealed from me, and I owe the fasting of one day. But I wish to
delay it until tomorrow. Is this deferment permitted despite [my]
ignorance of eventuality? Or will I be disobedient for delaying it?”
he must be answered.

But, then, if we say that he is not disobeying, why has he
been sinful for dying, which is /1:71/ beyond him? And if we say

that he is disobeying, then this is contrary to the ijmda@‘ on obligation

with latitude [wajib muwassa‘}.
367

But if we say, “If it were in the knowledge of Allah that you
will die before tomorrow, you are then disobeying; and if in His
knowledge you were to live, then you may delay,” he shall say,
“How will I know what is in Allah’s knowledge? So what is your
opinion with respect to the one who does not know?” Thus, it is

necessary to resolve its lawfulness or prohibition.

If it is said: If delay is always permitted and he is not
disobeying if he dies, then what is the meaning of its
obligatoriness?

We shall say: Obligatoriness is asserted by the fact that delay
is not allowed except on the condition of resolving [to fulfill it].
Now, the resolve to delay is permitted only for a term wherein
remaining alive preponderates in his thoughts, as in his delaying of
the prayer from one hour to the next, and his delaying of the fast
from one day to another, resolving at all times to attend to them.

Also, this is the case with his deferment of performing hajj
from one year to another. For if an ill person facing death resolves
to delay [fasting] for a month, or if a weak elderly person decides
to delay [hajj] for several years and it preponderates in his mind
that he may not live until that time, he would be sinning by such a
delay. Even if he does not die and successfully performs [the
obligations], he would {still] be accountable for the intent of his

thinking. Such is the case with a mu‘azzir> beating a person

5The term ‘mu‘azzir’ refers to one who inflicts ta‘zir, which is
the discretionary power of the judge to determine the penalty for
crimes which have no prescribed punishment in the Sharf‘a. See

368

devastatingly, or one lancing an abscess while it preponderates in
his mind that it is fatal; he would be sinning even if the man
survives.

It is for this reason that Abd Hanifa said that delaying hajj is
not permissible because surviving until the coming year is not
likely.

As for delaying fasting and zakdt for a month or two, this is
permissible because death is not very likely during this period. Al-
Shafi‘i, wi 44%, holds that surviving until the next year is highly
expected in the case of a young healthy person but not in the case
of an elderly or sick person. But, a mu‘azzir who does what he
strongly believes to be safe, and [yet] the person [being inflicted]
dies, still he is liable; not because he has committed a sin, but
because he made a mistake in his assumption, and a person in

error is liable without being sinful.

IV. DISCUSSION: They have differed regarding that
without which an obligation is not complete, as to whether it can be
characterized as an obligation.

The fact of the matter is that this is divided into that which is
not of the volition of the locus of obligation, such as the cases of the
faculty of acting, the hand in writing, and the /eg in walking. These
cannot be characterized as obligatory. Rather, their absence
prevents the laying of obligation, except in the view of those who

permit obliging the unbearable. Similar to this is the obligation of

Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-Fugaha’, p. 136.

369

the presence of the imam for Friday (prayer) and the presence of a
sufficient number [of worshippers]; for this is not in his [power].
Therefore, this cannot be characterized as obligatory. Rather, the
obligation is nullified by its infeasibility.

As for that which is contingent upon the choice of the
worshipper, [this] then is divided into a Shari‘a condition and a
perceptible [condition].

The Shari‘a [condition] is like ritual purity for prayer; it must
be characterized as obligatory at the time prayer becomes
obligatory, for obligating prayer also obligates that through which
an action becomes prayer.

As for the perceptible—such as rushing to Friday [prayer] or
walking to ‏ززعم‎ and to the places where rites of worship are to be
performed—([this] must, then, be characterized as obligatory as well.
For commanding one who is far from the House to [perform] hajj is
certainly a command to travel to it. Similarly, when it is obligatory
to wash the face and it is not possible without washing part of the
head, or when fasting is obligatory and it is not possible except by
abstaining [from food, drink, etc.) during the part of the night
before dawn, then this [also] is characterized as obligatory. So we
Say that the action of the locus of obligation, without which an
obligation cannot be achieved, is an obligation.

This is more appropriate than if we say that it is obligatory to
arrive /1:72/ at an obligation by that which is not obligatory, since
our statement, “It is obligatory to do what is not obligatory,” is

contradictory.

But our statement, “That which was not obligatory has
370

become obligatory,” is not contradictory because it is obligatory. Yet
the principle has been obligated by intending its obligatoriness.
The mean has become obligatory through the obligatoriness of the
intended obligation. It has become an obligation, in any case, even

though the cause of its obligation is different than the cause

obligating the principle one.

If it is said: If [the mean] were to be obligatory, it should be
measurable. So how much of the head is required to be washed, or
what extent of the night is [required] for abstention?

We shall say: The mean of achieving an obligation is
obligatory, and it is not specified. In fact, it is mandatory to wipe
the head. But the minimum range to which the term [mash] applies
is sufficient. But this is not specified. So, similarly, what is
obligatory is the minimum with which washing the face is possible.

This measurement is sufficient regarding obligation.

If it is said: If it [the means] were obligatory, then there
would be reward for doing it and punishment for abandoning it,
while one who abandons ablution is not punished for what he
neglected in washing the head or the face. And one who abandons
fasting will not be punished for neglecting to fast [part of the]
night.

We shall say: Who told you of this? And from where did you
know that the reward in hajj of one who comes to the Ka‘ba from
afar is not greater than the reward of one near? or that when one

toils his reward does not increase, even though it be as a means?
371

As for punishment, it is for abandoning fasting or ablution. It
is not distributable on the individual parts of the action. Therefore,

there is no sense in relating it to particulars.

If it is said: If one were capable of confining [his ablution} to
washing the face, he would not be punished.

We shall say: This is conceded, for it is obligatory only for a
person who is unable [to wash only his face]. As for the able, there

is no obligation on him [to wash part of his head).

V. DISCUSSION: Some say: If a lawful wife were to be
mistaken for an unrelated woman, then it is obligatory to desist
from both of them, though the unlawful one is the unrelated
woman and the wed wife is lawful.® However, it is incumbent to
abstain from her.

But this is contradictory. Rather, prohibition and lawfulness
are not inherent characteristics of them. In fact, they are related to
the act. Thus, [since] the act of sexual intercourse is prohibited
with regard to both of them, what is the sense, then, in our saying
that sexual intercourse with the lawful wife is lawful and with the
unrelated woman prohibited? Rather, both are unlawful. One of
them for the reason of her being unrelated, and the other for being
mistaken for the unrelated woman.

Therefore, the dispute concerns the ‘illa [underlying reason],

not the judgment as such. This has only entered imaginations

This refers to marital sexual intercourse.

312

because the characterization as lawful and prohibited resembles
the characterization of inability and ability, black and white, and
other perceptible and physical characteristics. This is a delusion, to
which we have already called attention, since (the Shart‘a] rules are
not at all essential characteristics of objects.

Indeed, we say that if a foster sister is Suspected to be among
the women of a town and the [foster brother] marries one of these
[towns-women], it [the marriage] is lawful, although it is possible
that she be the foster sister in the knowledge of Allah, gtx. But we
do not say that in the knowledge of Allah, gtx, she is not his wife,
since there is no meaning for wife other than the lawfulness of
having sexual intercourse with her on the basis of [lawful]
Matriage—and it has been lawful [for him} to have sexual
intercourse with her. Therefore, she is lawful as far as he is
concerned, and in the sight of Allah, ‏.معي‎ Nor do we say that she is
unlawful in the sight of Allah, but lawful for him based on his
assumption. Rather, if lawfulness is assumed, it is lawful in the
sight of Allah, ‏.دعي‎ A verification of this will be given in the
discussion regarding the rectitude of mujtahids,

As for when a person says to his two wives, “One of you is
divorced,” it is then possible to say that sexual intercourse with
both of them is lawful. Divorce is not in effect because he did not
specify one as the locus; it is as if he sold one of his Slaves. But it is
[also] possible /1:73/ to say that both are unlawful [to him] because
it is not required to specify the locus of divorce. But then he must
specify. Most fuqahd’ have adheredTo this. Still, what is to be

followed regarding this is what the mujtahid’s opinion necessitates.
373

As for concluding that one of them is unlawful while the
other is [a lawful] wife—just as they have imagined with regard to
confusing a legal wife with an unrelated woman—this sheds no light
here, for that [the former case] was ignorance on the part of the
man, occurring after the specification. But as for [the latter] case,
it is not in itself specified. But he is known to Allah, gtx, to have

divorced one of them, not Specifying her.

If it is said: When it is incumbent for him to specify, Allah,
gx, then, knows which one of them he will specify. Therefore, she
becomes the unlawful, specified divorced one in the knowledge of
Allah, gixs. And this is only difficult for us [to comprehend].

We shall say: Allah, giz’, knows things as they are. So, He
does not know a divorce whose locus has not yet been specified as
the particular [one]. Rather, He knows it is subject to specification
when the divorcing one specifies it. Furthermore, He knows, for
example, that he will specify Zaynab; and therefore the divorce will
be specified when he specifies it, not before.

So, we say in regard to that which is an obligation with
options [wdajib mukhayyar], Allah, ‏رمعاي‎ knows what the worshipper
will choose from among the options of the atonement. But He does
not know it as specific obligation [wajib bi‘aynihi], but as an
unspecified obligation [wdjib ghayr mu‘ayyan), which is not
specified immediately. Then He knows it as becoming identified by
way of specification. The proof is that if He knows that one will
die before atonement and before specifying it, then He knows the

obligation or the divorce the way they are, that is, as unspecified.
374

VI. DISCUSSION: They have disputed with regard to an
obligation which is not circumscribed by definite limits, such as
wiping the head, tranquillity during bowing and prostration, and
the duration of Standing [in prayer]; for if he exceeds the minimum
requirement for [fulfilling] the obligation, will the addition be
characterized as obligation? For example, if he wipes the entire
head, is it considered in its entirety an obligation? Or what is
obligated is the minimum [requirement] and the rest is
recommended?

Some people have opined that the entire {action] is
characterized as obligatory because the relationship of the entirety
to the command is one, and the command, itself, is one, which is an
obligating command. Furthermore, some [parts] are
indistinguishable from others, for [performing] all is [considered]
obeying.

It is more appropriate to Say that the addition exceeding the
minimum is recommended [manditb] because nothing was
obligated except the minimum, to which the term [‘wajib’] applies.
This is also with regard to tranquillity and standing [in prayer]. As
for those [rites] which occur sequentially, they are more evident.
And so it is with wiping [the head], when it occurs in succession,
and that of its totality, which occurs Simultaneously, though the
parts [of wiping] are indistinguishable by either gesture or
specification. Hence, it is possible to assert that the minimum
portion of it is mandatory, and what remains is recommended,

even though what is recommended is not distinguished from what
315

is obligated. For even without requiring a substitute there is
absolutely no punishment for abandoning the remainder that

exceeds the minimum. Therefore, the definition of obligatory does

not apply to it.

VII. DISCUSSION: Obligatoriness, by definition, is
distinguished from allowability and permissibility. This is why we
assert that whosoever assumes that when an obligation is
abrogated permissibility occurs is in error. Rather, the truth is that
when it is abrogated, the matter reverts to the state that preceded
obligation—be it prohibition or permissibility and obligatoriness

becomes, due to abrogation, as if it did not exist.

If it is said: Every obligation is permissible and more, for the
permissible is that which upon doing there is no punishment. Also,
there is no punishment for executing an obligation, which is the
very notion of permissibility. Therefore, when an obligation is
abrogated, the /1:74/ punishment for abandoning it is annulled, as
well, and the annulment of the punishment for doing it continues,
which is the very meaning of permissibility. ‏ش‎

We shall say: This resembles one’s Statement, “Every
obligation is permissibility and more [i.e., what makes it an
obligation); so when the obligation is abrogated, permissibility
remains.” No one adheres to this—and there is no distinction
between the two statements. Furthermore, both of them are
delusions. Rather, an obligation does not imply the notion of

permissibility; for the essence of permissibility is choosing between
376

doing and not doing, and the equiponderance between them is
determined by the Shari‘a. This is negated in an obligation.

The mention of this question here is more appropriate than
discussing it in the “Book of Abrogation.” For it is an investigation

of the essence of obligation and permissibility, not of the essence of

abrogation.

VIII. DISCUSSION: As you understand that obligation
does not contain permissibility, then understand that the
permissible does not include obligation. Furthermore, the
permissible is not obliged due to their mutual contradicting
definitions, as it has been mentioned above, contrary to al-Balkhi.
For he said that the permissible is commanded but is short of the
recommended [nadb], just as the recommended is commanded but .
is short of obligation. This is absurd, since command is requiring
and bidding, while permission is not bade, but rather there is
permissibility therein and no restriction. So when the term

command [amr] is used for permission, it is figurative.

If it said: Abandoning the prohibited is obligatory, while
permissible repose [in marriage] is abandonment of the prohibited,
such as adultery, stealing, and theft. Also, the permissibility of
silence or utterance is abandonment of infidelity and lying; and
abandoning infidelity, lying, and adultery is commanded.

We shall say: A prohibition may be abandoned by what is
recommended. Should it then be an obligation? Also, a prohibition

may be abandoned by another Prohibition. Should a single thing,
377

then, be an obligation and a prohibition? This is mutually
contradictory. This follows necessarily the position of those
claiming that the commanding of something is a prohibition of its
contrary, and the prohibition of something is commanding one of
its contraries. Furthermore, it necessarily follows that prayer is
prohibited if it is used as sanctuary by one abandoning the
obligatory zakdt. For it is one of the obligation’s contraries. All of

these are logical conclusions from their position, though they did

not state them.

If it is said: Concerning the permissible [mubah], does it fall
under religious obligation? Is it considered of the commands?

We shall say: If laying obligation means bidding what is
burdensome, this is not in the [definition of] permissible [mubdah}.
But if it means that whose freedom and permission on the basis of
the Shari‘a is known, it is [implied in] laying obligation {taklif).
Also, if it means that whose obligation on the basis of Shart ‘a is
believed, then it is obligated, but not by permissibility per se, but
on the basis of the principle of faith. Al-Ustddh Aba Ishaq [al-
Isfrayini] called it ‘taklif based on this latter interpretation. This is

remote, although it is a dispute in terminology.

If it is said: May permissible be described as good?

We shall say: If good is that which its agent is to do, this is
good. If it is that in which extolling or praising its agent has been
commanded, or that whose deservingness of praise is necessary to

believe—while bad is that which necessitates believing that its doer
318

deserves blame or punishment—then the permissible [mubGh] is
not good.

Now, we have stipulated [the definition] with “believing the
deservingness,” thereby we excluded the sins of the prophets. For
there is proof indicating that they have issued from them. But
there has not been a command to debase or blame them. Yet we do
believe their deservingness of this in spite /1:75/ of the grace of
Allah, gtxs, omitting this entitlement [from them] because He has

commanded us to extol and praise them.

IX. DISCUSSION: The permissible [subdah] is [one of the
categories] of the Sharf‘a.

Some of the Mu'‘tazilites have held that it is not [of the
categories] of the Shari‘a because the meaning of permissible is the
removal of restrictions from either doing or not doing, and this is
established before the [arrival of] revealed authority. So the
meaning of permitting something by the Shari‘a is leaving it as it
was before the arrival of revealed authority and that it, [upon
arriving], did not change its status. Everything whose prohibition
or obligatoriness has not been established remains in the original
State of negation. So it has been [categorized] as permissible

[mubah}.

This requires deep examination. To shed light on it, acts are
[divided] into three categories:

One category [is what which] remains in its original status. So
nothing from the Shari‘a has come concerning it, neither in explicit

expression nor through evidence of Shari‘a proofs. Therefore, it
379

should be said that whatever has {originally characterized it]
continues and revealed authority has not effected it. Thus, there is
no [legal] judgement concerning it.

As for the second category, Shari‘a permits choice regarding
it and states, “If you will, do it; and if you will, do not do it.” This is
an address, and command has no expression but through an
address. There is no way to reject it after it has been revealed.

The third category is that for which a choice-permitting
address was not revealed. But the evidence of revealed authority
indicates the removal of restriction with respect to doing it or
abandoning it. Therefore, it has been recognized on the basis of
revealed authority. If it were not for this proof, the rational proof
would have acknowledged the removal of restrictions from an
agent [of such acts] and his continuance in the Original state of
negation. But this is an open question, since revealed and rational
proof have joined together concerning it.

As for the other two categories, they are also open questions
because it is possible to say that the Sharf‘a Statement, “If you will,
stand; and if you will, sit,” is not renewing the command. Rather, it
is an affirmation of the previous one. The meaning of its
affirmation is that He does not change His command. Rather, He
leaves it the way it is. Therefore, this is not a command issued by
the Shari‘a. So it is not of the Shari‘a.

As for the other category, that is, where neither an address
nor a proof has arrived concerning it, it is also possible for it to be
denied by saying that the proof of revealed authority has

indicated—regarding that which nothing has arrived [from Shart‘a]
380

bidding to do or bidding not to do—that a locus of obligation has a
choice with regard to it.

This is proof for the generality [of a command] concerning
endless acts. Thus, there will not be a single act without an
indication from the Shari‘a. So its permissibility becomes from the
Shari‘a; otherwise, it could be disputed that permissibility on the
part of the Shari‘a is affirmation, not alteration. With affirmation,
there is no renewal of the command. Rather, it is an explanation
that nothing new has been originated with regard to it. In fact, it is
an abstention from treating it. Verification of this will come in the

discussion concerning the establishment of proof against a denier.

X. DISCUSSION: That which is recommended [mandiib] is
commanded, while the permissible [mubdéh] is not commanded. For
command is requiring and bidding, but the permissible is not
required.

As for the mandib, its [doing] is required but with the
omission of denouncing whoever abandons it. Wajib, however,
requires doing, but with the denunciation of whoever abandons it,
either by abandoning it absolutely or abandoning it by changing it.

Some people have said that the recommended is not implied
inacommand,. But this is corrupt for two reasons.

One of them is that it has become common knowledge in the
language of the ‘ulamda’ that command is divisible into obliging
commands famru ijéb) and recommending commands [amru
istahbab}. {t [may] also be divisible into permitting commands

[amru ibaéha| and obliging commands—considering that the
381

imperative mood may be applied to mean permission, as in His

Saying, yizs,“... And when you end your pilgrim Sanctity, then

oT

hunt..., and, “When 1:176/the [Jum‘a] prayer has ended, you

may spread throughout the land.”®

The second is that performing the permissible [mandiub] is
unanimously regarded as obedience. But it is not obedience
because of its being intended, for command, according to us, is
different from will; nor because of its being existent, contingent, or
owing to its essence or essential characters, for all of these apply to
the permissible; nor for being rewarded for it, for the commanded
person, even if he is neither rewarded or punished for obeying, is
regarded as obedient. Reward is only to induce obedience, for the
reward of his obedience is negated by infidelity. However, he is

not excluded from being obedient.

If it is said: Command means a determined requirement
wherein there is no option. But the recommended is associated
with the allowability of abandoning it and exercising choice with
regard to it. Yet your statement that he is called ‘obedient’ is
opposed by the fact that if he were to abandon [mandib], he would
not be called ‘disobedient.’

We shall say: Recommendation is a determined requirement

where there is no option. For exercising choice [between options]

Qur'an, 5:2.

SOur’an, 52:10.

382

means equiponderance. Therefore, when the side of doing
preponderates by attaching reward to it, equiponderance and the
exercise of choice are removed. For Allah, ‏رمعاي‎ has said, with
regard to prohibited acts, “So let whosoever will, believe, and let
whosoever will, disbelieve.”? Therefore, it must not be considered
that command [amr] is a determined requirement in the sense that
the Shari‘a [necessarily] bids something of it per se. Rather, the
Shari‘a seeks it for its benefit. Indeed, Allah, ‏رمعاي‎ requires of his
worshippers what is beneficial for them, and “He likes not

ingratitude from them.” !°

Similarly, He requires the

recommended for gaining the reward and says that doing or not
doing are equal with respect to “Me.” As for you, there is no
equality, nor do you have a choice, for abandoning it is abandoning
your benefit and your reward. Therefore, it is a determined
requirement.

As for their statement that one would not be called
‘disobedient,’ it is because disobedience is a term of denunciation,
while denunciation has been removed from him. Certainly, he may
be called a ‘violator,’ or ‘uncomplying,’ just as its doer is called

‘complying’ and ‘law abiding.’

XI. DISCUSSION: If you know that the prohibited is in

Opposition to the obligatory—for its abandonment is required, while

Qur'an, 18: 29,

10Our’an, 39:7.

383

fulfilling an obligation is required—then you should be well aware
that it is impossible for one and the same thing to be obligatory
and prohibited or obedience and disobedience. However, the real
meaning of one [wdhid] may be hidden from you. So one is
divisible into that which is one by species or one numerically.

As for one by species, such as prostration [sujiid}, which is
one species of acts, it may be divisible into the obligatory and the
forbidden, where its divisibility is based on attributes and
relativities, such as prostration to Allah, ‘xs, and prostration to an
idol, for one of them is obligation and the other is forbidden. Yet
there is no contradiction.

Some Mu'tazilites hold that there is contradiction because
prostration is one commanded species. Therefore, it is impossible
to forbid it. Rather one prostrating to an idol is disobeying by
intending to glorify the idol, not by prostration.

This is an obscene error. For whenever the object of
command and prohibition differ, it is not contradictory. Prostrating
to an idol is different than prostrating to Allah, giz, because the
difference of relativities and attributes necessitates dissimilarity,
and something cannot be different than itself. Also, dissimilarity is,
at times, based on the difference in species; at other times, it is
based on the difference of characterizations; and sometimes it is
based on the difference in relationships. Allah, gixs, has said:
“Prostrate not yourselves to the sun and the moon; but prostrate

yourselves to Allah, who created then . . . > And what is

Nour'an, 41:37.

384

commanded is not the same as what is prohibited. Furthermore
ijm@‘ has been constituted that he who prostrates to the sun is
disobedient /1:77/ by both the prostration itself and the intent.
Therefore, their statement that prostration is of one species is
worthless, along with the divisibility of this species into various
categories differing in purpose. For the aim of this prostration is
the glorification of the idol to the exclusion of the glorification of
Allah, gtx.

Now the difference in the aspects of the act is similar to the
difference in the act itself, insofar as the occurrence of otherness,
which removes contradiction. For contradiction exists only in

relation to one, and there is no unicity with dissimilarities.

XII. DISCUSSION: What we have mentioned concerning
that which is one by species is evident.

{This is not] the case as far as that which is one by
specification, such as the prayer of Zayd in a home that is usurped
from ‘Amr, so that his movement in the prayer is one specific act
which is attained by him and is related to his power. Therefore,
those who concede with regard to the one Species disputed here
Say that this prayer is invalid because holding that it is correct
concludes that one and the same act is both prohibited and
obligatory.

But this is contradictory. So it is said to them that this is
contrary to the ijma@‘ of the preceding generations, for they did not
instruct the transgressors, upon repentance, to make up for the

prayers performed in the usurped homes, despite the frequency of
385

its occurrence. Nor did they prohibit the transgressors from
praying in the usurped estates.

The answer to this question was problematic for al-Qadi Aba
Bakr, wi soa‘y. So he said that obligation is removed at its
[occurrence], not by it [praying in an usurped estate] being based
on the proof of ijmda‘, nor does it occur as an obligation. For an
obligation is that for which there is reward. But how could one be
rewarded for that which he is to be punished? Furthermore, his
act is one, namely being in the usurped home. His prostration and
bowing are voluntary existents for which he is to be punished and
from which he is prohibited.

Anyone who is overwhelmed by kaldm decisively affirms this
[position] due to the unicity of its existence in all of its situations.
But that from which it has come into being is none other than its
incidents. Yet he is to be punished for them and is disobeying
through them. So how can he be seeking nearness [to Allah] on the
basis of that for which he is punished and obedient on the basis of
that wherein he is disobedient?

This is not satisfactory to us. Rather, we say that it is
possible for an action having two differing aspects, even though it
is one in itself, to be sought through one of the aspects and
reprehensible from the other. What is impossible is only the
seeking of [it] through the aspect which is particularly prohibited,
while the performing of it as a prayer is sought. Yet it is prohibited
as usurpation.

Now, usurpation is conceivable without prayer; and prayer by

itself is conceivable without usurpation. But the two aspects have
356

joined in one action. But that which the command and prohibition
are dependent upon are the two differing aspects.

Similarly, it is conceivable on the part of a master to say to
his servant, “Today, pray one thousand rak‘as, sew this garment,
and do not enter this home. If you pursue the prohibition, I will
beat you. But if you obey the commands, I shall emancipate you.”
So the slave sews the garment and prays one thousand rak’as in
the home. Thus, it would be appropriate for the master to beat him
and emancipate him, saying that he obeyed by sewing and praying,
but he disobeyed by entering the home.

So it is with the case we are considering without any
difference. Furthermore, an act, even though being one, may
include the accomplishment of two different things. One of which
is demanded and the other is prohibited. Now, if a person were to
shoot a single arrow at a Muslim in such a way that it pierces a
disbeliever, or if he [shoots] it at a disbeliever in such a way it
pierces a Muslim, then he would deserve reward and punishment.
He would have rights to the booty /1:78/ of the disbeliever; but he
would be executed in punishment for {killing] the Muslim because

his one action includes two different aspects.

If it is said: It is unanimous that committing what is
prohibited annuls a rite of worship when it violates its condition, in
spite of intending to seek nearness [to Allah] by prayer. Yet
seeking nearness by disobedience is absurd. So how can one intend

nearness?

There are several ways to answer this:
387

The first is that when ijmd‘ is constituted on the rectitude of
this prayer, then, accordingly, it must be necessarily known that
the intention of seeking nearness is not a condition, or the intention
of seeking nearness with this particular prayer is possible. Now,
Abi Hashim, al-Jubba’i and those who disputed the rectitude of
this prayer are preceded by the ijmd‘ of the ummah to disregard
requiring the transgressors to make up for their prayers in Spite of
their numerousness. But how could the omission of intending
nearness be denied while they have differed in requiting the
intention of [fulfilling] an obligation and the intention of relating it
to Allah, gti?

Some people have said that it is not obligated unless one
intends the noon or afternoon prayer. Therefore, it is in the
domain of ijtihdd. Others have held that the prayer becomes
mandatory at the end of [its] time. For example, if a minor were to
pray at the beginning of [a prayer’s] time and then reach puberty
by the end of [its] time, it is sufficient for him even if he were to
reach puberty in the midst of the time, even though obligatoriness

is not established with respect to him.

If it is said: Whosoever intends to pray, his intention
includes seeking nearness [to Allah].

We shall say: When the prayer is validated on the basis of
ijma‘ and the intention of nearness is impossible, this intention is
then nullified. It is adequate to say that the intention of nearness
is related to some parts of the prayer, such as remembrance,

recitation, and ali that does not contest the rights of the
388

usurpation’s victim. For the existents are those [things] which are
the recipients of the [usurped] home’s facilities.

Moreover, how could this be correct on the part of the
Mu‘tazilites, while according to them the commanded does not
know that he is being commanded nor that the rite of worship is
mandatory before the completion of obedience, as it [its discussion]
will follow. Therefore, how can one intend seeking nearness
through an obligation while he does not know its obligatoriness?

The second answer, which is more proper, is that one
intends seeking nearness by praying, but disobeys by usurping.
We have demonstrated the separation of one of them from the
other. Therefore, one who prays finds in himself the intention of
nearness by praying even though this was in a usurped home. For
if he remains idle and does not perform any act, still he will be a
usurper in the state of sleep, even though [he] is not using [his]
power. For he only seeks nearness [to Allah] by his acts, while

those acts are not conditions for him being a usurper.

If it is said: He is usurping by his act in the state of Sitting
and standing, though he has no act other than his Standing and
Sitting. Yet he is seeking nearness by his acts. Therefore, he turns
to seeking nearness by the very thing that renders him
disobedient.

We shall say: Insofar as receiving the facilities of the home,
he is a usurper. But insofar as performing the motions of prayer,
he is [considered] to be seeking nearness, just as we have

mentioned in the discussion concerning sewing. For it is
389

conceivable for him to be a usurper while it is not known that he is
fulfilling the prayer. And it is [likewise conceivable] to know that
he is fulfilling the prayer, while it is not known that he is a
usurper. Therefore, they are two different aspects, even though
the act itself is one.

The third answer is that we say on what basis do you object
to al-Qadi, wi ‏,وجوه‎ when he concluded that an obligation is removed
at its [occurrence]—not by it—based on the proof of ijma‘? For he
conceded that it is disobedience, but that command does not
indicate fulfillment when one performs what is commanded, nor

does prohibition indicate the lack of fulfillment. Rather, fulfillment

is derived from another proof, as it will follow.

If it is said: Is this question /1:79/ subject to itihadd or is it
decisive?

We shall say: It is decisive. Only one {answer] hits the truth
concerning it because he who holds this to be correct relies on
ijma', which is decisive. Yet those who void it, they rely on the
contrariety between seeking nearness and [engaging in]
disobedience, claiming that it is impossible [to combine them] on

the basis of rational proof. Therefore, the question is decisive.

If it is said: You have cited ijmd‘ concerning this question,
while Ahmad b. Hanbal has held this prayer to be void and the
invalidation of any prohibited contract, even sales at the time of
calling for the [congregational] prayer on Friday. Therefore, how

could you argue on the basis of ijmd‘ against him?
We shall say: Jjmd‘ is a valid proof against him since we
know that the transgressors were not commanded to repeat [their]
Prayers despite the numerousness of their occurrence. At the same
time, if they had been commanded to do this, it would have been
well known. And if he [b. Hanbal] denied this, he would be
compelled [to accept] what is more evident than his [denial],
namely that a woman will not be lawful for her husband while he
is liable to a déniq'? which he took unjustly. Nor will his sale,
prayer, or conduct be adequate, leading to the position of most
women being prohibited [from him] and the relinquishment of

most properties. This is certainly a violation of the ijma‘. So this

cannot be allowed.

XIII. DISCUSSION: Just as what is prohibited is in
Opposition to what is obligated, the reprehensible is in opposition to
the obligated. Therefore, a reprehensible [act] does not fall under a
command such that one and the same thing becomes commanded
and reprehensible—unless [its] reprehensiveness is diverted from
the essence of the command to something else, such as the
reprehensibility of praying in public washrooms, in a rest area for
camels, in the bottom of a valley [in which water may flow], or
Similar places. For what is reprehensible concerning the bottom of
a valley is risking the danger of flood; regarding the public

washroom, it is exposure to slime or to Satan’s overcoming [of a

12. Daniq * is a silver coin which, according to Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam
Lughat al-Fuqahd’, p. 206, has the weight of value of 0.496 grains.

person]; and concerning the camel’s rest area, it is due to being in
risk of their stampede. All of this would occupy the heart during
the prayer and may disturb submissiveness in a manner that does
not demonstrate the diversion of the prohibition from that which is
prohibited to that which resides near it and accompanies it due to
its [the bidding’s] being outside of its [the prohibition’s] essence,
conditions, and constituents.

Therefore, command and prohibition cannot be combined, for
His statement, ‏رمعاي‎ “Let them... go about the Ancient House,” '3
does not include the circumambulation of the muhdith,!4 who has
been prohibited from it, for that which is prohibited cannot be
commanded. Likewise, what has been prohibited in the question of
praying in a usurped home is separated from what is commanded,
since the subject of command is prayer and the subject of

prohibition is usurpation. Yet it is in its vicinity.

XIV. DISCUSSION: According to those agreeing on the
rectitude of the prayer in the usurped home, prohibition is
divisible into that which returns to the essence of what is
prohibited—thus contradicting its obligatoriness; to that which
returns to other than its [essence], whereas it does not contradict

its obligatoriness; and to that which reverts to a character of the

13Qur'’an, 22:29.

14 Muhdith’ refers to a person who either does not have

ablution or has engaged in sexual intercourse. For more details, see
Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-Fugahda’, p. 410.

392

prohibited, not to its essence.

However, they have differed with regard to this third
category. The example of the first two categories is evident.

An example of the third [category] would be obliging
circumambulation but prohibiting its occurrence together with
hadath, or commanding fasting yet prohibiting its occurrence on
the Day of Sacrifice. So it is said that fasting, insofar as being
lawful, is bade, and insofar as occurring in this particular day, it is
unlawful. Also, circumambulation is lawful on the basis of His
statement, gixs, “Let them ...g0 about the Ancient House,” '5 but its
occurrence in the state of hadath is prohibited. Or trafficking,
/1:80/ insofar as being a sales transaction, is lawful. But insofar as
its occurrence in association with an invalid condition or additional
compensation with regard to usurious deals, it is prohibited.
Divorce, insofar as being divorce, is lawful. But with respect to its
occurrence during menstruation, it is prohibited. Conceiving a baby
is lawful, insofar as being of lawful intercourse. But with respect to
its occurrence with other than the lawful wife, it is prohibited. A
journey, insofar as being travel, is lawful. But the fleeing of a slave
from his master is unlawful.

Therefore, Abi Hanifa made this a third category, claiming
that this necessitates the invalidation [fasdd] of the attribute, not
the denial of the principle, for [prohibition] reverts to the
attribution, not to the principle. But al-Shafi'i, wi ‘ons, joined this

with the prohibition of the principle and did not make it a third

'SQur’an, 22:29.

393

category. So if [for example] divorce is carried out in the menstrual
period, he applies prohibition, not to the principle and its

attributes, but to the extension of the ‘idda period, or [his] following
regret upon doubting [the conception of] a baby.

Abia Hanifa, voiding the prayer of the muhdith, but not his
circumambulation, claims that the Shari‘a proof has indicated that
ritual purity (tahdra) is conditional concerning prayer. For he has
Said, wi ‏,همه‎ “There is no [valid] prayer without ritual purity.”
Therefore, it is invalidation of the prayer, not a prohibition [against
it].

But there are two considerations regarding this question. The
first of which is related to what the unqualified prohibition
necessitates with respect to the expression. This is an examination
in the requirement of the mood, which is a linguistic topic. We will
mention it in the chapter of al-Awdmir wa al-Nawéhi.'§

The second consideration examines the contradiction
between these attributes, and whether their composition is
conceivable or inconceivable in the case of being explicitly
determined by a proponent. Namely, is it conceivable for a master
to say to his slave, “I command you to sew, and I forbid you from
it”? There is no doubt that this is inconceivable for him because
one and the same thing is bade and prohibited. But it is
conceivable on his part to say, “I bid you to sew, and I forbid you
from entering this home and being in it,” without his mentioning

sewing in [his] prohibition. This is conceivable. Yet if he [the slave]

16 cee Ghazali’s treatment in al-Mustasfd, 1:411 and 2:34,

394

sewed in that home, he would be both doing his [master’s] bidding
and [violating] his prohibition.

Moreover, is it possible for [the master] to say, “I bid you to
sew, and I forbid you from doing it at noon time.” Then if he sews
at noon time, is he joining that which is forbidden with what is
bade? Or did he not fulfill what has been bade? These are open |
questions.

What is the more appropriate [opinion] is that he did not
fulfill what has been bade. What has been prohibited is this
sewing which took place at noon time, not just its mere occurrence
at noon time, despite the continuance of sewing being bade, since

occurring in time is not something separate from that which is

occurring.

If it is said: Why then does prayer become valid during the
reprehensible times? Furthermore, why are prayers occurring in
the [previous] seven places, such as the bottom of a valley, the rest
area for camels, and so on, valid? Moreover, what is the difference
between these and the prohibition of fasting on the Day of
Sacrifice?

We shall say: Whosoever validates these prayers is obliged
to divert the prohibition from the principle of prayer and its
characters to something else. But they [the fuqahd’j have disputed
concerning the constitution of prayer during the prohibited times
because of their indecisiveness concerning prohibition. That is,
whether it prohibits from performing the prayer /1:81/ insofar as it

occurs as a prayer, or on the basis of something else associated
395

with it.

As for fasting on the day of sacrifice, al-Shafi‘'i, wi ‘ja,
decisively holds its invalidity because diverting prohibition from
its essence and characteristics is not evident [to him]. Nor does he
accept their statement that it is prohibited because it has therein
abandonment of answering the call to eat, for eating is contrary to
fasting. Therefore, how could it be said to one, “Eat!” meaning,
“Answer the call!” and then again, “Do not eat!” meaning “Fast!”

Now, elaborate exposition of these questions is not incumbent
upon the [usdli] jurist. Rather, it is left to the mujtahid’s inquiry
concerning the details of figh. An usiili is only [expected] to
exhaustively list these three categories and explain their position
concerning mutual opposition or its absence.

As for considering the individual questions, and to which
category they belong, this is for the mujtahid. He may know this
through a decisive proof or he may know it by conjecture. But
none of this is incumbent upon an usiili.

The completion of the inquiry with respect to this {issue] is
{acquirable] through elucidating to which of these categories the
unqualified prohibition belongs, [whether] the [act] is prohibited in

itself, for things other than itself, or for its characteristics. This will

follow.

XV. DISCUSSION: They have disputed about whether

commanding something is prohibiting its opposite. This question

has two aspects:

One of them is related to the [linguistic] mood [sigha]. But
396

this is not acceptable to those who do not consider command as
having a mood. As for those who do accept this, there is no doubt,
then, that one’s statement “Stand!” is different than his statement
“Do not sit!” For they are two different forms. Therefore, they
must refer to the meaning, namely that his Statement, “Stand!” has
two meanings. One of them is bidding Standing, and the other is
abandoning sitting. Therefore, it indicates the two meanings. Yet
the two implied meanings are either united or one of them is
different than the other. So one must refer to what is intended.

The second aspect is inquiring about the meaning inherent
in the mind, namely whether bidding standing is identical to
bidding abandoning sitting. But this cannot be assumed with
respect to Allah, ‏,دعي‎ because His speech is one, namely command,
prohibition, promise, or warning. Nor is it liable to otherness.
Nevertheless, it is conceivable with a creature, namely in his
bidding of action. [But] is it in itself prohibiting idleness and
bidding its abandonment?

The Mu'‘tazilites have stated that commanding something is
not prohibiting its opposite. Al-Qadi Aba Bakr, wi ‘oa, has argued
against them by saying that one who commands something is
prohibiting its opposite. Therefore, if there is no proof establishing
the attachment of something else with his command, it indicates
that he is prohibiting [the opposite] by that which he is
commanding.

He says that based on this we know that idleness is identical
to abandoning action, and bidding idleness is identical to bidding

the abandonment of action. Also, the occupation of a substance in a
317

sphere to which it was transferred is identical to its evacuation
from the sphere from where it was translocated. Again, nearness
to the West is identical to remoteness from the East. It is,
therefore, one action. But in relation to the East, it is remoteness
and, in relation to the West, nearness. Also, it is one existence. But
in relation to a sphere, it is occupancy and, in relation to the other,
vacancy. Similarly, there is one bidding here. But in relation to
idleness, it is a command and, in relation to action, a prohibition.

He [further] said that the proof that [bidding] does not have
other things with it is that the other would be either opposite of it,
similar to it, or different. Its being opposite is impossible because
they cannot be joined. Yet they have come together. Still, it is
impossible for them to be similar because of their mutual contrast.
But it is impossible /1:82/ for them to be different, for were it so, it
would be possible for one of them to exist without the other—either
this to the exclusion of that or that to the exclusion of this, such as
willing something while knowing it because of the difference
concerning the conceivability of the existence of knowledge [‘ilm] to
the exclusion of will [irdda] even though the existence of will
without knowledge is inconceivable. Rather, it is possible to
conceive of its existence together with the opposite of the other.
The opposite of prohibiting an act is commanding it. Therefore, we
should consider it possible that one may command both idleness
and action. So he may say, “Act and remain still!” or “Stand and
sit!”

Now, what [al-Qadi] has mentioned is a proof against the

Mu‘tazilites because they have denied obliging the impossible.
398

Otherwise, whosoever considers it possible permits saying
“Combine standing and sitting!”

Moreover, we do not concede that everyone commanding
something is necessarily prohibiting its opposite. Rather, it is
possible that one may be commanding its opposite, let alone being
neither commanding or prohibiting.

In sum, what has been proven correct according to us based
on theological investigation stemming from the establishment of
the speech inherent in the mind is that commanding something is
not a prohibition from its opposite, not in the sense that they are
identically the same, nor in the sense that it includes it, nor in the
sense that it necessarily follows it. Rather, it is conceivable that
one may command something while being heedless of its opposite.
So, how could a statement relating to what he is heedless of be
inherently established in him?

Similarly, one may forbid something while its opposite does
not occur in his mind until he commands one of its opposites [in
general], not a particular one. Therefore, if he commands without
being heedless of the opposites of the command, then self-
reproving does not intentionally prevent a person from the
Opposites [of the command], except insofar as he knows that it is
not possible to fulfill the command without abandoning its
Opposites. Therefore, abandoning the opposites of a command
becomes a means [of fulfilling it] due to the necessity of existence,
not because of its correlation with bidding. Even if one imagines
the joining of standing and Sitting, despite the impossibility, so that

when it is said to him, “Stand!” he combines [the two], he then
399

would be complying because he was ordered only to perform
standing, which he did. But whosoever holds this position,
necessarily bears the scandals of the Mu‘tazilite al-Ka‘bi, since he
denied the permissible [al-mubdh]}, saying that there is not a
permissible [act] except that it is an abandonment of a prohibition.
Hence, it is an obligation. Yet then he is forced to characterize
[performing] prayer as being prohibited when because of it one
abandons the immediate obligatory zakdt.

If one were to distinguish [them] by saying that prohibiting is
not commanding the opposite while commanding is prohibiting the

opposite, then he would have no way [to prove it) except through

Sheer arbitrariness.

If it is said: You have stated that that without which an
obligation cannot be achieved is therefore an obligation and that
one cannot achieve the performance of something except by
abandoning its opposite. So it must therefore be necessary.

We shall say: Similarly, it is necessary. But the dispute is
only in regard to its obligatoriness, as to whether it is identical to
obliging what is commanded or something else. So when it is said,
“Wash the face!” the essence of this is not obliging the washing of
part of the head. Likewise, His statement, “Fast during the day...”
is not in itself obliging abstention [from food, etc.] during part of
the night. Therefore, one is obliged to have intention only to fast
during the day. But this becomes mandatory on the basis of the
indication of the rational proof insofar as it is a means to what is

commanded, not for its being identical with this obligation.
400

Therefore, there is no contradiction between the two statements.
THE THIRD ASPECT

CONSTITUENTS OF RULES

They are four:
AL-HAKIM (THE RULER]; AL-MAHKUM ‘ALAYHI [THE LOCUS OF
OBLIGATION]; AL-MAHKUM FIHI [THE SUBJECT OF RULE, ACTS];
AND NAFS AL-HUKM [THE RULE ITSELF]

Concerning rule [Aukm] itself, we have discussed it

{previously}, namely that it is related to the (Shari‘a] address, which

is the first constituent.!

THE SECOND CONSTITUENT: THE RULER [AL-HAKIM]

He is the addresser, for the rule is address and speech. Its
agent is every speaker. Therefore, the existence of the rule’s form
does not require more than this measure.

As for meriting the enforcement of the rule, this is for none
save He to whom belongs the creation and the command. For the
effective enforcement is the rule of the owner over his possessions,
and there is no owner save the Creator. Thus, there is neither rule

nor command save which belong to Him.

‘It should be noted that since Ghazali opened the First Qutb
by discussions concerning the nature of hukm, he starts here by

discussing the second constituent, which he lists first, al-Hakim [the
Ruler].

401

402

As for the Prophet, pfu’ sui wit “um, the sultan, the master, the
father, and the husband, when they command and oblige, nothing
becomes obligated on the basis of their mandating. Rather, it is on
the basis of Allah, ‏,دعي‎ obliging obedience to them. If it were not
for this, the situation would be, with every creature obliging
something upon others, that the one subjected to obligation could
turn the obligation upon the former, since one of them is not
worthier than the other. What is obligated, then, is obeying Allah,

giza, and obeying those to whom He obliged obedience.

If it is said: This is not so, but whosoever is capable of
threatening and realizing sensible punishment, he is, then, capable
of obliging, since obligation is only realized by punishment.

We shall say: We have mentioned the position of al-Qadi,
wi “oa, that if Allah, ‏,معي‎ obliges something, it would be obligated,
even though he does not threaten punishment for it. But upon
investigating the essence of obligation, this amounts to nothing if a
feared harm is not associated with it. Also, if it is in this world, one
may be capable of it, except that the norm specifies this term
‘darar’ by the harm which is feared in the Hereafter—none is
capable of this, save Allah, gtxs. Therefore, if it is used for every
feared harm, even though it is in this world—so that a human being
is capable of it—then, it is possible for it to be obliging, not in the
sense that we are certain of one’s capability of it, for he may fall
Short of it before realizing the threat. But we anticipate his

capability, which yields a sort of fear.
403

THE THIRD CONSTITUENT: THE LOCUS OF OBLIGATION [AL-
MAHKUM ‘ALAYHT

He is the locus of obligation. His qualifications [shuriit] are
that he be sane and comprehending of the address. Therefore,
addressing inanimate beings and beasts is not valid—and such is
the case in addressing the insane and the minor who cannot discern
[right from wrong], for taklif [laying an obligation] requires
obedience and compliance. This is not possible except by intending
to comply, while the condition for intending [to comply] is knowing
what is intended and the comprehending of taklif. For every
address implies a command to understand. For whosoever cannot
understand, how can it be said to him, “Comprehend!” Also
whatever cannot hear sound, such as inanimate things, how can it
be addressed? Even if [something] is able to hear sound but does
not comprehend, as in the case of a beast, it is similar to that which
cannot hear. Furthermore, [as for] one who hears and may
understand to some degree, but does not comprehend or sustain
[knowledge]—such as insane or undiscerning persons—requiring
compliance of him is imposssible, even though addressing him is

possible, aside from the fact that a valid intention from him is

inadmissible.

If it is said: Zakdt, compensation, and maintenance is
obligated for minors.
We shall say: This has nothing to do with taklif, since laying

obligation is impossible upon the acts of others. Blood money is
404

obligated upon the male blood relatives [‘aqilah]},? not in the sense
that /1:84/ they are obligated to do other’s acts, but in the sense
that the acts’ of others are the cause for establishing liability on
their part. Similarly, this is the case regarding damage {to others’
property and self]. Moreover, possessing the minimum amount of
assets is a cause for establishing these rights upon minors, namely
that it is the cause for addressing the guardian with immediate
performance and the cause for addressing the minor after coming
of age. This is not impossible.

What is impossible, however, is to say to whosoever cannot
understand, “Comprehend!” and to address that which neither
hears nor comprehends.

As for the capacity for rules to be established upon individuals, it is
derived from the humanness that enables {a person] to possess the power of
reason, through which one [is able to] understand taklif in the second
Stage. But since a beast does not have the capacity to comprehend address,

neither actually or potentially, it is not prepared, then, to be charged with

rules.

A condition, however, must be either existing or soon-to-be
possible. Thus it can be said that it potentially exists, such as the
condition for ownership being humanness, and the condition for
humanness being life. Yet ownership may be established for an

embryo in the womb by way of inheritance or will, while [full

2 See Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-Fuqahd', p. 301.

3Ghazali is most likely referring to a minor’s coming of age.

405

human] life does not exist actually, but potentially, since it
culminates in life. Such is the case with a minor; he becomes
rational. Therefore, he becomes eligible for laying obligation upon

his person. But he is not immediately [as a minor] eligible for
taklif.

If it is said: A discerning minor is commanded to pray.

We shall say: He is commanded through the guardian; and
the guardian is commanded from Allah, gtx, since he, ‏وسكر‎ wale ‏الله‎ “pes,
said, “Instruct them to pray when they are seven [years of age],
and hit them [for negligence] when they are children of ten.”4 This
is because they understand the address of the guardian and fear
his hitting. Thus, they become eligible for [prayer], though they do
not comprehend the address of the Lawgiver, nor do they fear his

punishment, since they do not comprehend the Hereafter.

If it is said: When one approaches puberty, the Shari‘a does
not lay obligation upon him. Does this indicate deficiency in his
mind?

We shall say: Al-Qadi Abi Bakr, a ‘soa, Said that it does
indicate this. But this is inadequate, for [the ability to] discharge
semen on his part does not increase his rationality. But the address
{of obligation] was removed from him for relief because his reason
is hidden—and it becomes evident in him gradually. So, one cannot

suddenly recognize the measure [of reason] through which he

4Wensinck, Concordance, p. 505.

406

understands the Shari‘a address and knows of the Addressor, the
Messenger, and the Hereafter. Therefore, the Sharf‘a has raised for

it [puberty] a demonstrative sign.

I. DISCUSSION: Laying an obligation on a forgetful person
or one who is unaware of what is laid upon him is impossible. For
he who does not comprehend, how can it be said to him,
“Understand!”

As for the establishment of rules based on his acts
(performed) during sleep or heedlessness, it is not denied, namely
being liable to penalties and other things. Similarly, charging an
intoxicated person who does not comprehend is impossible, as in
the case of laying an obligation upon on the unmindful, the insane,
or he who hears but does not understand. Indeed, the situation of
the intoxicated person is worse than one who is sleeping—for
waking him is possible—and the insane who does not understand
much of speech.

As for the enforcement of his divorce [statement) or
mandating penalty [upon him], this is through relating the rules to

their causes, and this is not deniable.

If it is said: Allah, ‏,مدي‎ has stated, “Do not approach prayer
while you are intoxicated,” and this is an Address for the
intoxicated.

We shall say: If addressing him has been established by a
demonstrative proof, it becomes mandatory to interpret the verse

(differently]. It has two interpretations: One of them is that it is an
407

address to one who is in the early Stage of intoxication, when the
beginnings of merriness and rapture become evident in him. Still,
his mind is not yet lost, /1:85/ for he may enjoy in playfulness and
becoming happy that which he may not like prior [to drinking].
The meaning of His statement, ytxs, “... until you know what you
Say,” becomes, “. . . until you are able to discern and your sobriety
is completely [restored],” just as it is said to an angry [person], “Be
patient until you know what you are Saying,” meaning, “until your
anger subsides so that your awareness becomes complete,” even
though, in principle, his mind remains [active]. This is because such
an intoxicated person should not engage in prayer, while uttering
the sounds of the letters is difficult for him, as is attaining humility.

The second [interpretation] is that this address was revealed
in the early stages of Islam before the prohibition of alcohol and
what was meant is not preventing the prayer, but preventing
excessive drinking at the time of prayer, such as saying, “Do not
engage in tahajjud (praying late at night) while you have a full
Stomach,” meaning do not fill [your stomach] so that tahajjud
becomes burdensome upon you.

II, DISCUSSION: If one were to say that, according to you,
command does not require that the commanded be existent. For
you have determined that Allah, giz, is commanding, his servants
in eternity before their creation. So, how could you require that
the locus of obligation be hearing and sane, while the intoxicated,

the oblivious, and the insane are closer to taklif than the

nonexistent?
408

We shall say: It is necessary to understand the meaning of
our statement, “Allah, gtx, is commanding . . . and the nonexistent
is commanded.” For we mean by this that he is commanded upon
his existence, not that he is commanded in the state of
nonexistence—for this is impossible.

However, those who assert that speech inheres in the mind.
have demonstrated that it is not unlikely that bidding the
ascertaining of knowledge could exist in the mind of a father
concerning a son who will exist. Therefore, if this bidding were to
continue until the son comes to be, he would be liable to this
bidding and commanded thereby. Similarly, the meaning inherent
in the mind of Allah, ytzs, which requires obedience from people, is
eternal and relates to his servants upon their existence. So when
they exist, they become commanded with this requirement. The
Same applies to the minor and the insane because awaiting sanity
is no different than awaiting existence.

Yet this meaning is not called, in eternity, an address, and
only becomes an address when the commanded exists and is made
to hear. Whether it should be termed ‘amr’ [command] or not,
there is a dispute concerning this. But properly speaking, it is so
termed because it is appropriate to say, with regard to a person
who charged his children to give his wealth in charity, “So and so
has commanded his children with such and such,” even though one
of his children is hidden in the womb, or nonexistent. But it is not
appropriate to say, “He addressed his children,” except if they were
present and heard. Then if he charges them and they execute his

will, it is said, “They have obeyed his command,” although the
409

commander is now nonexistent and the commanded was
nonexistent at the time of the commander's existence.

Similarly, we now, because of our obedience, are complying
with the command of the Messenger of Allah, ‏'وسكم‎ si un “us, while he
is nonexistent in our immediate realm, even though he is alive with
Allah, gtx. Therefore, if the existence of the commander is not
conditional for the commanded to be obedient and complying, the

existence of the commanded is not required because a command is

a command,

If it said: Would you say that Allah, gixa, in eternity is
commanding the nonexistent in a mandatory way?

We shall say: Yes. We state He is commanding, but pending
on existence, just as it is said a father mandates and obliges upon
his children to give charity when they become mature and reach
puberty. Mandating and obliging, then, /1:86/ accrue but
conditional on the existence and ability [of the children]. If one
were to say to his slave, “Fast tomorrow!” he would, at once, be
mandating and obliging the fasting of tomorrow. Yet fasting
tomorrow is not possible at the time [of the command]. Rather, [it

is possible} tomorrow. But it is qualified as being mandating and

obliging immediately.

THE FOURTH CONSTITUENT: THE SUBJECT OF RULE [AL-MAHKUM
FIHN
This is the [human] act because nothing except volitional acts

enter under taklif. For those [acts] coming under taklif there are
410

conditions.

The first is the rectitude of its origination because of the
impossibility of associating the command with the eternal and
everlasting, or to denature genera [into a different form], or to
combine contradictions, or other such absurdities with which taklif
cannot be laid, according to those holding it impossible to lay an
obligation which is not bearable. Therefore, there is no command
of a nonexistent [thing] except when its existence is possible. But
they have disputed regarding what is originated in the initial state
of its origination, as to whether it is commanded in the way it was
before origination or removed from being commanded, such as the
case in the second stage of existence. This, however, is a theological
[kalami] discussion whose mention is inconsistent with the aims of
the principles of jurisprudence [usil al-fiqh).

The second is the possibility of it being attainable by man,
occurring by his own volition, since charging Zayd with the writing
or the sewing meant for ‘Amr is not possible, even though its
existence is possible. Therefore, along with being possible [to exist],
it must be attainable by the addressee.

The third is that it be known to the commanded and
distinguished from other [commands], so that one’s proceeding with
it is conceivable. Moreover, it should be known that it is
commanded by Allah, ‏ركعي‎ so it becomes conceivable on one’s part
to comply; but this is restricted to [rites of worship], where

intention of obeying and seeking nearness [to Allah) is necessary.

If it is said: An unbeliever is commanded to believe in the
411

Messenger, ‏السلآر‎ siz, yet he does not know that he is commanded
with this.

We shall say: A condition must be known or considered
known, such that knowing it is possible, in the sense that proofs are
being established and reason and the power of thinking are
existent. So it is not valid where there is no proof or with regard to
one without [sound] reason, such as a minor or an insane person.

The fourth is that it [the act] must exist, whereby willing its
performance as obedience is valid, which is the case with most of
the rites of worship. However, two things are excluded.

One of them is the primary obligation, namely the thinking
that identifies obligatoriness. For intention to perform it as
obedience is not possible when a person does not know its
obligatoriness until after its performance. The second is the
essence of intending obedience and devotion. For if an act were to
lack intention, the intention would lack intention, thus leading to a

vicious circle.

Now, five discussions issue from the conditions of acts.

I. DISCUSSION: Some people have held that the subject of
taklif may exist unconditionally. Indeed, it is possible to charge
[one] with what is not bearable, command combining
contradictions, denature genera, abolish that which is eternal, and
create that which is existent. This is attributed to Shaykh Abi al-
Hasan al-Ash‘ari, and necessarily follows his position in two ways.

The first of them is that a person who is sitting, according to

him, is not able to stand for Prayer because ability, in his view,
412

becomes [available] during the act, not before it, while one is
commanded before it [the act]. The second is that originated
power has no effect in bringing that which is possible into being.
Rather, our acts are originated by the power of Allah, gtx, and His
creation. Therefore, every person, in his view, is commanded by
the doings of others. He [Ash‘ari] has supported /1:87/ this by
three things.

The first of them is His statement, gtx, “... ‘And do not
burden us beyond what we have the Strength to bear.” Yet one
does not seek the removal of what is impossible, for it is removed
by its very nature. |

But this is weak. For what is meant is what is difficult and
burdensome for us, since one may be burdened with the charge of
acts leading to near destruction due to their severity, such as His
Statement, “... ‘Slay yourselves’ or ‘leave your habitations’ ... 76
[For] it may be said with respect to him that he has been burdened
with what is beyond his ability. But the apparent, interpreted
[meaning] is weak in indicating decisive [issues].

The second is their statement that Allah, gtx, has informed
that Aba Jahl will not believe. Still, He charged him with
belief—namely to attest to Muhammad in what he has
brought—while in what he has brought is that he [Aba Jahl] will not

attest to him. [It is] as if He has commanded him [Aba Jahl) to

5Qur’an, 2:286.

Qur'an, 4:66.

413

attest to [the Prophet) that he [Aba Jahl] will not attest to him. This
is absurd.

But this is also weak. For Abi Jahl was commanded by faith,
oneness [of Allah], and the message, while the proofs are
demonstrated and reason is present, since he was not insane.
Therefore, the possibility existed. But Allah, ‏رمعاي‎ knew that he
{Aba Jahl] would abandon what is attainable by him out of envy
and obstinacy. For knowledge follows that which is known but it
does not change it.

So, if it is known that something is performable by a person
and possible for him, but is abandoned on his part despite [his]
power over it and then it becomes impossible, then knowledge
would become ignorance and no longer possible or attainable.
Similarly, we say that the Resurrection is within the power of
Allah, gtx, at this moment, even though He informed that He will
not establish it and will set it aside despite having power over it.
Yet contradicting His information is absurd because His threat then
becomes false. But this impossibility does not reflect on the thing
itself; consequently, it does not effect it.

The third is their statement that if it is impossible to lay an
impossible obligation, then it would not be possible owing to its
linguistic mode or meaning, or the harm associated with it, or its
contradiction of conventional wisdom.

However, it is not impossible due to its linguistic mode

because it is possible for Him to say, “. . . Be you apes, miserably
414

slinking?’? or for a master to say to his blind slave, “Look!” or to the
paralyzed, “Go!” As for the establishment of its meaning
independently, it is also not impossible For it is possible for one to
ask his slave to be at one state in two places in order to protect his
businesses in two cities. But, it is impossible to say that it is not
possible because of corruption or contradiction of conventional
wisdom. For establishing things on this basis with regard to Allah,
giz, is absurd, since nothing of Him is bad and {doing] what is best
is not incumbent upon Him. Also, dispute is the same either in
regard to His [acts] or human ones. Yet corruption or incompetence
on the part of humans is possible. Therefore, this is not absolutely
impossible.

The preferred opinion is the impossibility of laying an
impossible obligation, not because it is bad, nor for a corruption
that issues from it, nor due to its linguistic mode—since it is
possible for its mode to be rejected—but rather for incapacitation;

and not for bidding, as in His statement, “. . . Let you be stones, or

iron,”8 for] as in His saying, “. . . Be you apes, miserably slinking?”?

nor to demonstrate power, such as His statement, yizs,“... ‘Be!’ and

.”10__not in the sense that He has bid the nonexistent to be by

7Qur’an, 2:65; 7:166.
8our'an, 17:50.
Qur'an, 2:65; 7:166.

l0Our’ an, 40:68.

415

itself. But it is impossible for its meaning, for the definition of
‘taklif ' is bidding what is burdensome, and bidding requires a bade
object. And this bade object must, in all opinions, be understood by
the locus of obligation. Therefore, it is possible to say “Taharrak!
[Move!]” since moving is understood. Yet if one were to say,
“Tamarrak!”"! this is not a responsibility because its meaning is
neither intelligible or understood, nor has it any meaning in itself,
for it is an unconsidered word.

Even if it were to have /1:88/ meaning in some languages
known to the commander, [but] not the commanded, this also
would not be taklif. For taklif is addressing [one] with something
that is burdensome. So, that which is not understood by the
addressee is not an address to him. It is required [for the address]
to be understood only to conceive obedience on the part of [the
addressee], for taklif requires obedience.

Accordingly, if it is not comprehended in the mind, requiring
obedience will neither be conceivable nor intelligible, since it is
impossible to establish in the mind of the sane, [say], bidding
tailoring from trees because bidding first calls for an intelligibly
bade object—and this is unintelligible; that is, it cannot exist in the
mind. For a thing, before it exists in itself, has an existence in the
mind. Furthermore, bidding it can only occur after it accrues in the

mind, and the origination of the eternal does not inhere in the

'1Ghazali created ‘tamarrak,’ which has no meaning, after the

pattern of ‘taharrak ’ by changing the ‘hd’ ’ to ‘mim ' to illustrate his
point.

416

mind. So how could bidding the origination of the eternal be
established per se? Again such is the case with the “blackness of
the white”—it does not exist in the mind—and with the “standing of
the sitting.” For how can one say to another, “Stand while you are
sitting!” 1

Therefore, this bidding, because of the nonexistence of the |
bade object, is impossible to inhere in the mind. For as it is
required with respect to the bade object to be nonexistent in
reality, it is required [of it] to exist in the intellect, that is, in the
mind, in order that presenting it in reality be in accordance with
that which is in the mind. Therefore, it becomes obedience and
compliance, namely following the model which is in the mind of the
bidder. Thus, that which has no model in the mind has no image in
reality.

We shall say: This is a bidding based on ignorance. But an
ignorant person may think that this is taklif. Yet when it is
manifested, it becomes clear that it was not bidding, and this is

inconceivable from Allah, gtx.

If it is said: If the originated power, while being in the act,
does not effect performance, every taklif, then, would be obligating
that which is unbearable.

We shall say: We know necessarily the distinction between
saying to one sitting, who is not paralyzed, “Enter the house!” and
Saying to him, “Climb to the heavens!” or saying to a person, “Stand
while remaining sitting!” or, “Change blackness into motion and a

tree into a horse!” Nevertheless, examination of this distinction
417

should clarify from whence it originates. It is known that it is
related to an ability and a power in relation to one of these
commands to the exclusion of the rest. Then looking into the
details of the power’s effect at the time of the origination of the
power—in whatever way it has been established—should not cause
us to doubt this. That is why it is possible for us to say, “. . . And do
not burden us beyond what we have the strength to bear.” !2 Thus,
if all matters equiponderate, what is the sense of this supplication?
And what is the sense for this necessary distinction? Our objective
in this discussion, however, does not depend on inquiring into the
manner of the power’s effect and its time.

In sum, the reason for this obscurity is that taklif is a special
type of speech inherent in the mind, and there is difficulty in
understanding the principle of speech inherent in the mind.

Therefore, building details upon it and dividing its category would

necessarily be even more obscure.

11. DISCUSSION: Just as it is impossible to say, “Combine
motion and idleness!” it is impossible to say, “Do not move and do
not remain still!” For refraining from both of them is impossible, as

it is impossible to combine both of them.

If it is said: When one is situated in the middle of a usurped
farm, /1:89/ so that staying becomes prohibited for him and leaving

is also prohibited because with each one there is damaging of the

120ur'an, 2:286.

418

crops of others, then he is disobedient in both.

We shall say: The task of an ugiili here is to know that it
Should not be said to him, “Neither stay nor go!” Furthermore, he
cannot be prohibited from the two contraries, for it is absurd and

he is not commanded to combine both of them.

If it is said: What should be said to him?

We shall say: He is to be commanded to exit, just as a person
inserting [his penis] into a forbidden vaginal orifice is commanded
to withdraw, even though [in doing so] he will be touching the
forbidden vaginal orifice. It is said to him, “Withdraw with the
intention to repent, not with the intent of pleasure.” Similarly, in
exiting from the usurped [farm], there is a minimization of harm,
while staying increases it. The lesser of the two harms becomes
obligatory and obedience in relation to the graver of the two—just
as drinking alcohol becomes an obligation [when no other fluid is
available] on the part of one choking on a bite [of food). Similarly,
eating the food of others becomes incumbent upon a person
compelled by starvation and damaging the property of others is not
prohibited per se. This is why if one is threatened with death to do

it, it becomes obligatory or permissible.

If it is said: Why then is liability required for what he
damages in exiting [the farm]?

We shall say: Liability does not call for aggressiveness, for it
becomes necessary on the compelled—even in starvation—despite

mandating damage. Also, it [liability] is forced upon a minor or
419

whoever shoots into the ranks of the unbelievers,!> even though he

is being obedient through it.

If it is said: If proceeding with an invalidated hajj is
prohibited due to the necessity of qad4’ [restitution], it is not, then,
obligated. But if it is obligatory and binding, why then is gadd’
obligated? And why would one be disobeying because of it?

We shall say: He disobeys by [for example) the invalidating
sexual intercourse but is obedient by the completion of the invalid
{hajj}. Qadd’ is required by a renewed command or may be
required by that which is obedience if deficiencies infringe upon it.

Also, 920425 is omitted by praying in the usurped home despite it

being an offense, for qada’ is similar to liability.

If it is said: On what basis do you object to Abi Hashim [al-
Jubba’i] for holding that if such a person stays, he would be
disobeying and if he exists, he would be disobeying? For he has
thrown himself into this dilemma; therefore, his action is
characterized as disobedience.

We shall say: No one is allowed to throw himself into a
Situation of undertaking what is impossible. Therefore, whosoever
throws himself from a roof, thus breaking his leg, would not be
disobeying for praying while Sitting. Rather, he disobeys by

breaking his leg, not by abandoning prayer in the Standing position.

'3Ghazali is referring to the accidental killing of a Muslim
while aiming into the ranks of the enemy.

420

And if by stating that such [an act] is characterized as an offense,
one intends to mean only that he was prohibited from it along with
being prohibited from its opposite, then this is absurd.
Disobedience expresses the perpetration of a prohibition that has
been forbidden. Therefore, if there is no prohibition, there is no
disobedience. How could a prohibition from something and from its
opposite as well be obligated? Thus whosoever rationally permits
the laying of an unbearable obligation prevents its [occurrence] in
the Shari‘a because of His statement, ‏,دعاق‎ “Allah charges no soul

except by its capacity.”!4

If it is said: If you make preponderant the side of exiting for
minimizing harm, what do you say, then, concerning a person who
has fallen on the chest of child who is surrounded by other
children—knowing that if he stays he will kill [the child] beneath
him and that if he moves he will kill those around him—and there
is no given preference? What then is the solution?

We shall say: It is possible to tell him, “Stay!” because
moving is an initiated act which is not valid except from a living
and able [person]. As for abandoning motion, it does not employ
/1:90/ power. It is possible to say, since there is no given
preference, that he may choose. Also, it is possible to say that
Allah, gtx», does not have a judgment with regard to it. Therefore,
he does what he wills because a rule cannot be established except

on the basis of a text [nass] or analogical reasoning based on a text

'4our’ an, 2:286.

401

(giyas ‘ald mansiis]. But there is no text concerning this question
nor has it a parallel in the texts with which it can be analogized.
Thus, he remains as in the state prior to the arrival of the Shari‘a.
Nor is it unlikely for a case to be uncharacterized [by the Shari‘a}.
All of this is possible. However, charging an impossible obligation

is impossible.

111. DISCUSSION: They have differed with regard to that
which is required by taklif.

The opinion of most theologians is that what is required is
proceeding or refraining, and each is attainable by man. Therefore,
commanding fasting is a command to refrain; and refraining is an
act for which one is rewarded. Furthermore, what is required in
the prohibition of fornication and drinking [alcohol] is involvement
with one of its opposites, which is abstention. Therefore, one is
rewarded for abstaining, which is his act.

Some Mu'tazilites said that one may be required to refrain.
Thus, it becomes like an act. Or he may be required not to act but
not intend to involve with its opposite.

The above opponents, however, denied this and Stated that
whoever stops or refrains because of prohibition is rewarded; and
he will not be rewarded except for something, while not acting is
nonexistence and not a ‘thing.’ Furthermore, power does not
adhere to it, since power adheres only to something. ‏ش‎ Therefore,
nonexistence cannot be considered a fact of power. Also, if nothing
issues from a person, how could he be rewarded for nothing?

The truth of the matter is that command, here, is divisible:
422

On one hand, refraining while fasting is deliberate. This is why
intention is required for it. As for fornication and drinking
[alcohol], one is forbidden from doing them. So, those doing [either
of] them are punished. But those who do not do them are neither
punished nor rewarded, except when one controls his desires for
them in spite of being able [to commit them}. He is then rewarded
for his act.

As for those who do not commit the prohibited acts, they are
not punished for it nor rewarded because nothing has issued from
them. Still it is not unlikely that the Shari‘a intent is that one

should not commit obscenities, yet not intending that he involves

its opposite.

IV. DISCUSSION: It is possible for the acts of a compelled
person [mukrah] to be included under taklif, contrary to the acts of
an insane person or a beast, for deficiency in this case is in the
locus of obligation, not in the subject of taklif. Besides, the
conditions for laying an obligation upon a locus of obligation are
hearing and comprehension, and this is nonexistent with regard to
the insane or a beast. A compelled person, however, does
understand, and his act is within the limits of possibility because
he is able to either perform it or abandon it. Thus, if he is
compelled to kill, it is possible to oblige him to abandon killing, for
he is so able, even though it has the risk of [his] destruction. Even
if his obligation is consistent with the compulsion, it is also possible,
like when one is compelled by sword to kill a serpent heading to

kill a Muslim, for it is incumbent to kill it; or when an infidel is
423

forced to become a Muslim, if he accepts Islam, we say he has
fulfilled his obligation.

The Mu‘tazilites say that this is absurd, for it is adequate only
to do the acts forced upon him until no choice remains for him. But
this is false because he is able to abandon them. This is why it is
incumbent upon him to abandon that which has been forced upon
him when he is compelled to kill a Muslim.

Similarly, if one is compelled to kill a serpent, killing it then
would become obligatory. If he is forced to spill alcohol, it becomes
incumbent upon him /1:91/ to spill alcohol. This is obvious.
However, it has a deeper meaning because compliance becomes
obedience only if its origin is based on the incentive of command
and obligation, not because of the compulsion; for whosoever
proceeded to save himself from the sword of the compeller is not
answering the call of the Shari‘a. But if one is motivated by the
call of the Shari'a in such a way that he would have performed it if
it were not for compulsion—indeed, he would perform it even when
he is compelled to abandon it—then it is not unlikely for this to be
considered obedience. But one is not regarded as being forced,
even though the form of the threat is present. One should be

attentive to this subtle point.

V. DISCUSSION: The occurrence of the condition of a
commanded act is not required at the time of commanding. Rather,
the command is issued together with the stipulation and the
Stipulated act, and [a person] is commanded to start with the

stipulation. Therefore, it is possible for the unbelievers to be
424

addressed by the details of Islam, such as a ritually impure person
is addressed to pray with the condition that he first perform
ablution, and an atheist [is addressed] to attest to the Messenger
with the condition to first believe in the Sender.

The Hanafites have denied this. The dispute concerns either
its [rational] possibility or occurrence. As for the rational
possibility, it is evident because it is not impossible for the
Lawgiver to say, “Islam is based on five [essentials], and you are
commanded with all of them or to start with the [declaration of)
submission!> from among them.” Thus, faith is commanded in
itself and is a condition for all the rites of worship, such is the case

with the ritually impure and the atheist.

If someone prohibits everything, saying, “How could one be
commanded with that with which it is impossible to comply?
Furthermore, the ritually impure is not able to pray because he is
commanded with ablution; and upon performing ablution, the
command to pray is directed to him.”

We shall say: If he were to abandon ablution and prayer all
of his life, he would not be punished for neglecting prayer because
he was never commanded to pray. But this is contrary to ijmd‘.
And it necessarily follows that commanding him to pray after

ablution is not valid. Indeed, [it is the same with commanding]

'5Ghazali_uses the word /slam meaning the declaration that
there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is His Messenger.

425

takbir,'6 since commencing with it is required—not even with
takbir, it should be the ‘hamza’ of takbir first; then the ‘ka@f’ second,
following this sequence. Similarly, the command to proceed to
Friday congregation must not issue except for the first step and
then the second.

As for occurring in the Shari‘a, we shall say it was possible to
restrict the address’ details to believers, like the obligatoriness of
the rites of worship being restricted to the free, the resident, the
healthy, and the ritually pure—not those who are in the menstrual
period. However, proofs have come addressing them.

There are three proofs for this: First, His statement, gixa,
“‘What thrusted you into Hell-fire.’ They shall say, ‘We were not of
those who prayed...’"17 So He informed that He punished them

for abandoning prayer and cautioned Muslims by it.

If it is said: This is quoting the statement of the unbelievers.
Therefore, there is no validity in it.

We shall say: Allah, gtx, has mentioned it, according to the
consensus of the community, in the context of attesting to them

[unbelievers]. Based on it, warning accrues. For if it were false, it

l6This refers to saying of Allahu Akbar [Allah is great] at the
commencing of every prayer.

17 Qur'an, 74:42-43. Ghazali, of course, cited the first verse,
but immediately stated “al-dyah” assuming the reader’s familiarity
with the rest of the statement in the Qur’an, which continues as
follows: “Nor did we feed the needy. And we plunged along with
the plungers. And we used to deny the Day of Judgement.”

426

would be like their statement, “He punished us because we are
created and for being in existence.” How could this be, while He .
has linked to it His statement, “. . . And we used to deny the Day of

Judgment?” So, how could this be conjoined to that wherein there

is no punishment for it?

If it is said: The punishment is for (their) denial; but He
solemnly conjoined the abandonment /1:92/ of rites of worship to
it.

We shall say: It is not possible to be solemn by abandoning
the rites of worship, in the same way that it is not possible to be

solemn by abandoning the permissibles [mubah4t], which were not

addressed to them.

If it is said: They have been punished, not for abandoning
prayer, but for abandoning faith, thereby excluding themselves
from learning the evil of abandoning prayer.

We shall say: This is false on a number of grounds. One of
them is abandoning the evident meaning without necessity or
proof. For abandoning knowledge of the evil of neglecting prayer is
different than prayer; for they have said, “We were not of those
who prayed.”

Second, this necessitates equiponderance between an
unbeliever who committed murder, and other prohibitions, and an
unbeliever who was confined to disbelief. For both of them are

equal in excluding themselves from learning the evil of
427

prohibitions because of unbelief. Furthermore, equiponderance
between them is contrary to ‏"امل‎

Third, none abandoning either discursive thought or
reasoning should be punished for neglecting faith, for by
abandoning discursive thought one would then be exempting

himself from the capacity of perceiving the necessity of knowing

and believing.

If it is said: “We were not among those who prayed,” means
from among the beiievers; but they have identified themselves by
the hallmark of the believers—as he said, ‏وسكم‎ sede ‏الك‎ Sm, “I have
forbidden the killing of those who pray,” namely the believers. But
He distinguished them by that which is their mark.

We shall say: This is possible. However, the apparent cannot
be abandoned except by a proof; and the opponent has none.

The second proof is his statement, ‏,دعاق‎ “Those who call not
another god with Alléh, nor slay the soul that Allah has forbidden,
except by right, nor fornicate, for whosoever does this Shall meet
the price of sin—punishment will be doubled for him...°'8 The
verse, therefore, is explicit in doubling the punishment of he who
combines unbelief, killing, and fornication, iike he who combines
unbelief, eating, and drinking.

The third proof is that ijmad‘ has been constituted concerning

the punishment of an unbeliever for denying the Messenger as he

18 Ouran, 25:68-69.

428

is punished for disbelieving in Allah, diz. This destroys their basis
{of argument]. For they said that worship is inconceivable with

disbelief; therefore, how can it be commanded?

They argued that there is no sense for obliging zakdt and the
gada’ [restitution] of prayer upon him, despite the impossibility of
doing it while disbelieving, and despite the omission of mandating
his punishment if he were to accept Islam. Therefore, how could
that with which it is impossible to comply be obligated?

We shall say: It is obligated. Even if one were to die
disbelieving, he would be punished for abandoning it. But, upon
accepting Islam, his preceding [acts] are pardoned. For Islam
severs what preceded it. And it is not impossible to abrogate a
command before having the ability to comply with it. Thus, how

could the omission of obligatoriness be impossible by [accepting]

Islam?

If it is said: Since zakde is not obligated except with the
condition of [accepting] Islam—while Islam, which is the condition
for obligation, is itself severing [the obligatoriness]—then deducing
from this that it is not obligatory is more appropriate than
obligating it, and then ruling that it has been severed.

We shall say: There is no absurdity in our statement that
obligatoriness has been established by [accepting] Islam and
omitted on the authority of pardoning. So, there is nothing in this
that contradicts a text. Rather, passages of the Qur’an indicate the

punishment of an unbeliever who commits obscenities. Similarly,
429

ijma* indicates the distinction between an unbeliever—who killed
prophets and walis, and disrupted religion—and an unbeliever who

did not commit any of these things. Thus, what we have mentioned

is more appropriate.

If it is said: Why then do you oblige gadd’ for an apostate but
not an original unbeliever? /1:93/

We shall say: Qadda’ has been obligated only on the basis of a
renewed command. Therefore, with regard to it, the requirement
of the proof should be followed. Yet there is no valid argument in
it because gadd’ is incumbent upon a menstruating woman,
although add’ [timely performance] was not obligated upon her.
Indeed, one may be commanded by add’, yet not be commanded
with gadda’.

The faqihs have argued that an apostate has pledged
restitution by [returning to] Islam, while an unbeliever did not
pledge [this]. But this is weak because what Allah, g'xa, has obliged
is obligatory whether a person obliges himself with it or not.
Therefore, if it is omitted because of the absence of his pledge, then
the original unbeliever—who did not oblige himself with the rites of

worship and the abandonment of prohibitions—must not be obliged

with this.
THE FOURTH ASPECT

REGARDING THAT WHICH MANIFESTS THE RULE,
NAMELY WHAT IS CALLED SABAB [REASON] AND THE
MODE RELATING RULE TO IT

This has four sections.

SECTION ONE: ASBAB [REASONS]

Know that since it is difficult for people to know the address
of Allah, gis, in all conditions—especially after the discontinuance
of revelation—Allah, gtx, has manifested His address to His
creatures by way of certain perceptible things which He
established as reasons for His rules and made them necessitating
and requiring of the rules, in the same way that a perceptible cause
necessitates its effect.

So we mean by ‘asbab’, here, that they are the [reasons] to
which the rules refer, such as in His statement(s], ‏رمعاي‎ “Perform the
prayer at the sinking of the sun to the darkening of the night”;| “So
let those of you who are present at the Month [of Ramadan] fast

ir?;? and his saying, ‏وسكر‎ sale wi Go, “Fast for sighting it [the crescent],

‘Our’ an, 17:78.

2Qur’an, 2:185.

430

431

and break the fast for sighting it”?

Now this is evident in what is repeated among the rites of
worship, such as prayer, fasting, and zakdt; for that whereby
obligatoriness reoccurs, whenever it [the reason] reoccurs, is, then,
rightfully called sabab [reason].

But as for that which does not reoccur, such as [accepting]
Islam and performing hajj, it is possible to say that these are

known by His statement, ‏رمعاي‎ “Jt is a duty of all men towards Allah

to come to the House a pilgrim.”

Similar [to this] is the mandatoriness of knowledge on the
part of every locus of obligation who knows the fundamentals [of
Islam]. Thus, there is no need to relate them to a reason. However,
it is possible to say that the reason of the mandatoriness of faith
and knowledge are the demonstrated proofs; and the reason for the
obligatoriness of hajj to the ancient House, other than ability, is that
hajj is not obligated except one time, since the ancient House is
[only] one. Also, since faith is recognition, once it accrues, it
continues.

In any case, this matter is simple. This is the category of the
rites of worship. As for the category of penalties, atonements, and
legal punishments, their reasons should not be difficult to perceive.

Also, the category of human transactions has clear reasons for

a

3Consult Ismail al-‘Ajlani, Kashf al-Khafa’ wa Muzid al-'Ilbas
‘amma Ashtahar min al-Ahadith ‘ala Sunnat al-Nds, 2 vols. (Beruit:
Mu’assat al-Risala, n.d), 2:42.

4 Qur'an, 3:97.

432

the lawfulness and Prohibition of properties and sexual intercourse,
such as marriage, trading, divorce and other things. This is evident.
The intent is only to demonstrate these reasons as causes for rules
that are also considered Shari'a tules. For Allah, ytxs, concerning a
fornicator [for example], has two rules: One is the mandatoriness of
[inflicting] punishment upon him; the second is establishing
fornication as a reason for obliging punishment upon him because
fornication does not in and of itself oblige stoning, contrary to

/1:94/ rational causes. It became obliging only because the Shari‘a
made it obliging. Therefore, it is a category of rule. This is why we
have mentioned it here in this Qutb. Also, it is for this reason that
it may be rationalized.

We say, [for example], that fornication has been established
as the underlying cause {‘illa] for stoning and that theft is the
underlying cause for amputating so and so’s (hand). Thus,
homosexuality is in the Same category [as fornication], this is why it
is considered a reason for punishment. Likewise, the grave robber
is in the same category as the thief. An elaboration of this will
follow in the “Book of Analogy [Qiyas}.”>

Know that the term ‘sabab'is ambiguous in the usage of the
fagihs. It is Originally derived from ‘tariq’ [route] and from ‘habl,’

the [rope] used to draw water from a well.

5 Ghazali’s more elaborate treatment of qiydas is in his book
Shifa’ al-Ghalil fi bayaén al-Shabah wa al-Mukhil wa Masélik al-
Ta ‘lil, Ed. Hamad al-Kabisi (Baghdad: Diwan al-Awqaf, 1971). His
treatment of qgiyds in al-Mustasfa, 2:228-349, and al-Mankhiil, ‏.م‎
‎323-350, is shorter.

4033

Its definition is something through which a thing occurs, not
by it; for arriving occurs through walking, not by the route; but the
route is necessary. Also, the drawing of water is through the
vessel, not by the rope; but the rope is necessary. So the fagihs
have borrowed the term ‘sabab’ from this case and applied it in
four ways.

The first way—which is the closest of them to the original
meaning— is what is used in correspondence to performing [an act],
for it is said that a well digger along with a killer (who had pushed
someone in the well] are accomplices in the reason. But the killer is
the underlying cause, for killing is through pushing, but [only] by
the existence of the well. So that through that which killing takes
place, not by, is called sabab.

The second is their calling shooting a reason for killing,
whereas it is the reason of the underlying cause. It is, properly
speaking, the cause of the underlying cause. Since death has
occurred through shooting, not in itself but as a mean, it resembles
that without which a rule does not occur.

The third is their calling the underlying cause, itself, a
reason, despite the absence of what characterizes it, such as their
statement that an atonement is mandated by an oath, not its
breaching. So the oath is the reason, or that possessing nisab® is
the reason for zakdt, not the passing of a year, even though both of

them are required for obligatoriness. They mean by reason that to

SThis is the minimum required amount of property subject to
zakat. Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-Fugahd’, p. 480.

434

which relating the rule is appropriate. They correlate this to the
object and the condition. Therefore, they say possessing the nisdb
is a reason and the passing of year is a condition.

The fourth is their calling the necessitating [factor] a reason,
thus using reason to mean the underlying cause, which is the
furthest away from the literal meaning. For reason, linguistically,
is that through which a rule occurs, not by it. However, this is
appropriate with regard to the underlying causes in the Sharf‘a
because they do not necessitate the rule per se; rather, it is
[necessitated] through the obliging of Allah, ‏رمدي‎ and for
establishing these reasons by Him as signs to manifest the rule.
Also, because the underlying causes of the Shari‘a mean the

manifesting signs of [the obligation], they resemble that through

which the rule occurs.

SECTION TWO: THE CHARACTERIZATION OF REASON [SABAB) AS

BEING VALID [SAH/H], INVALID [BATIL], AND CORRUPT
[FASID}

Know that these [characterizations] are used at times
concerning the rites of worship and at other times concerning
contracts. The usage concerning the rites of worship is subject to
dispute.

What is correct according to the theologians is that which is
consistent with the Shari‘a, whether restitution [qada:] is required |
or not. According to the fagihs, it is that which suffices and [thus]
omits restitution to the extent that the prayer of a person thinking

that he is ritually pure is valid, according to the definition of the
435

theologians, for he has complied with the command directed to him
immediately. /1:95/

As for restitution, its obligatoriness is based on a renewed
command. Thus, the term validity cannot be derived from it. So
this prayer is invalid because it is not sufficient. So it is with the
case of one who interrupts his prayer to rescue a drowning person;
his prayer is valid according to the theologian, but invalid
according to the fagih.

These various usages, although they differ, have no harm in
them, since the meaning is agreed upon.

As for when they are used in contracts, every reason is
established for a rule. When it imparts the rule intended from it, it
is said, with regard to it, that it is validated. But if its intended
(rule] fails, it is said to be invalidated. Therefore, the invalidated
[b4til] is that which does not have effect because the reason is
sought for its impartation.

The valid, then, is that which has effect. But the corrupt
[fasid} is synonymous with the invalid {bétil] in the terminology of
the followers of al-Shafi‘i, wi sa’. Therefore, a contract is either
valid [sahih] or invalid. Thus everything that is invalid [batil] is
corrupt [fasid].

Abi Hanifa, however, has established another category
between invalidity and validity, concerning contracts, namely
creating the [category of] corrupt [fasid], claiming that a corrupt
[contract] is constituted for imparting the rule. But what is meant
by its corruption is that it is unlawful because of what

characterizes it, and what is meant by it being constituted is that it
436

is essentially lawful, such as the contract with usury. It is lawful
because it is, on one hand, selling and it is unlawful, on the other
hand, because it contains overcompensation. Therefore, this
required a category between that which is prohibited, both
essentially and for certain characteristics, and that which is lawful,
essentially and for certain characteristics.

If this category of his were to be correct, one could not argue
with describing it as fasid. But he is disputed concerning it because
every [contract] prohibited, for its character is prohibited

essentially, as has been mentioned previously.

SECTION THREE: THE CHARACTERIZATION OF WORSHIP AS ADA’

[TIMELY PERFORMANCE], QADA’ [RESTITUTION], OR 4
[REPEATING]

Know that an obligation, when it is performed in its
{prescribed] time, is called add’; and when it is performed after the
expiration of its given restricted or latitudinal time, it is called
qad4’ [restitution]; and when it is performed once in a deficient
way but then perfomed again during the prescribed time, it is
called i‘dda. So i‘dda is the term for the equivalent of what has
been [deficiently] performed, while gadd’ is the term for the
equivalent of what has missed the limitation of its time.

The discussion should address two questions:

The first of which is that if it preponderates in the mind of
someone, concerning an obligation with latitude, that he may die
before performing it, and then he delays, he is disobedient in the

delay. But if he delays and lives, then his performance, al-Qadi, wi
47

*oa4, Says, is gadd’ [restitution] because its time was determined by
the preponderance in his thinking. This is not, however, acceptable
to us because when it appeared different than what he thought, its
tule was removed, and it becomes as if he had known that he
would live. Thus he must intend to perform it, such as when an ill
person near death delays hajj to the following year and then
1600175

Second is that, according to al-Shafi‘i, wi “4a, zakat is an
immediate [obligation]. Therefore, if one delays it and then gives it,
it necessarily follows, according to al-Qadi’s position, w ‘sony, that it
would be [considered] qadd’, while the correct position is that it is
adda’ because its time was not determined for a specified or
particular [time]. |

Yet we have only considered the obligation to be immediate
by the circumstantial evidence of the need [of the poor]. Otherwise,
performance at all times is in conformity with the command’s
requirement and is in compliamce with it. Such is the case with a
person who is obligated to make restitution for a prayer
immediately but delays it. /1:96/ We do not, then, say that this is
the restitution of the restitution. This is why we say that the
mandatoriness of restitution requires a renewed command, and the
command that simply commands performance in itself is sufficient
for the continuance of its requirement. Therefore, it does not
require another proof or a renewed command.

What is correct, then, is that the term gadd’ is confined to

that wherein its [prescribed] time is determin whereas the time

lapsed before performing [the act].
438

A Subtle Point. Know that gadé’ may be used figuratively
or literally because it comes after add’ (timely performance].

Ada’ has four categories:

The first is [when] it is obligated. Therefore, when the locus
of obligation abandons it, either deliberately or inattentively, gadd’
becomes mandatory upon him. However, punishment is waived for
him by way of pardon due to his inattentiveness. Therefore,
performing its equivalent afterward is termed qada’ in the true
sense.

Second is [when] add’ is not obligated, such as fasting with
respect to a menstruating woman, for it is prohibited. Therefore,
when she fasts during ritual purity, calling this gadd’ is clearly
figurative; rather in its true sense it is primarily an obligation. But,
when this obligation is renewed because of an occurring condition
that prevented obliging add’ until it {the obligation] elapsed, due to
the elapsing of its obligatoriness, it is called qada’.

This is difficult for some people. Consequently, they say that
fasting, not prayer, is obligatory for a menstruating woman because
of the necessity of gaddé’. And considering this term to be
figurative, however, is more adequate than opposing ijmd', for
there is no dispute that if a menstruating woman were to die, she
would not be disobedient. So, how could she be commanded with
that for which she would be disobeying if she were to perform it.

However, menstruation is not like ritual impurity, for removing the

latter is possible.

If it is said: Why then does she make the intention for the
439

qada’ of Ramadan?

We shall say: If you mean by this that she makes an
intention for the gadd’ of that [span] in which menstruation
prevented its obligatoriness, this is correct. But if you mean that it
is a gad@’ for that which has been obligated for her during

menstruation, this is wrong and absurd.

If it is said: Then the adults should have the intention of
4642" for that which has not been obligated because of juvenility.

We shall say: If one were to be commanded with this, he
should have the intention to [comply]. However, suspending
obligatoriness based on juvenility was not made a reason for
mandating a new obligation after puberty. How could this be,
while figurative usage becomes appropriate [only] because of
commonness? This has been widely accepted concerning
menstruation, not juvenility.

The reason for wide-spread acceptance [concerning
menstruation] in particular is that juvenility suspends the principle
of charging with obligation, while a menstruating woman is a locus

of obligation. Accordingly, she is liable to obligation.

The third category is the status of the sick and the traveller,
since [fasting] is not obliged for them. However, when they fast,
their fasting stands in the place of obligation. It is possible in this
case to say that it also is figurative usage since there is no
obligation. But it is possible to Say that it is used in the true sense.

For if he were to do it at the prescribed time, it would be valid on
440

his part.

But when one breeches an act—inspite of its validity if he
were to do it [again]—this is like a person who is obliged but
neglects to act, either inattentively or deliberately. Or we may say
that Allah, gtxs, said, “Then a number of other days [are prescribed
to make up for fasting],”” for this opens a way for options.
Therefore, what is obligated is one of them, unspecified, except that
this option cannot be realized until after the lapsing of the first.
The first precedes in time. Therefore the [option] is called gada'
because of its being related to its lapsing, contrary to manumission
or fasting with regard to atonement, since none of them is related
to the passing of the other.

But based on this, it necessarily follows that prayer should be
called gadd’ at the end of the prescribed time, for one has an option
between immediate performance or postponment, such as the
traveller.

What is more evident /1:97/ is that calling the fasting of a
traveller ‏"قله‎ is figurative, or that 9602" is an ambiguous term
which applies on one hand to that whose mandated timely
performance has lapsed, and on the other hand to that which
exceeds its time, which is widely known.

But Ramadan has a special relationship with fasting that does
not exist for other than it, based on the proof that if a travelling
minor were to reach puberty during Ramadan, he would not be

obliged to fast. But if he were to reach puberty by the end of a

7Qur’an, 2:185,

441

prayer’s prescribed, time it [prayer] becomes incumbent upon him.
So, excluding it from the state of add’ [timely performance] on
the part of those generally [obligated] indicates mistakenly that it

is restitution [gadd@’}. But examination dictates that it is not gadda’.

If it is said: A sleeping person and one who is heedless
should perform 9244", since there is no address [directed] to them,
for they are not subject to obligation.

We shall say: They are related to heedlessness and
negligence. But Allah, gizs, has pardoned them and removed
punishment from them, contrary to a menstruating woman and a
traveller. Therefore, abstention [from food, drink, etc.} is
mandatory upon them for the remainder of the day resembling
those who are fasting, but not the menstruating woman.

Regarding the traveller, there are two weak opinions:

The first of them is the opinion of the Zahirites that a
traveller’s fasting during a journey is not valid because of His
statement, glx», “Then a number of other days [are prescribed to
make up for fasting].” For He did not command him except by “a
number of other days.” But this is corrupt because the context of
the verses indicates to us the implication of breaking the fast,
meaning that whosoever of you is ill or on a journey and breaks
fast should [fast] “a number of other days,” just as His statement,
gixs, “We said, ‘Strike with your staff the rock’, and there gushed

forth from it... 8 meaning that he struck, thus it gushed. Also,

8 our’an, 2:60.

442

the Companions of the Messenger of Allah, plan's aria wt Yea, when
travelling used to fast or break fast, and none of them objected to
either.

The second is the position of al-Karkhi that what is obligated
is “A number of other days.” But if one were to fast in Ramadan, it
is valid, and he would be advancing the obligation just as one who
pays zakdt [in advance] before the end of the year. This is corrupt
because the verse does not indicate other than concession in
delaying and latitude concerning time for a person. Thsu he who
performs in the beginning of a time with latitude is not advancing;
rather, he is performing it within the prescribed time, as

mentioned previously concerning prayer in the beginning of the

prescribed time.

The fourth category is the case of an ill person. If he does
not fear death from fasting, he is like a traveller. As for he who
fears death or grave harm, he would be disobeying by abandoning
eating. Therefore, it resembles [the case of] a menstruating woman
from this aspect. So if he were to fast, it is possible to say it would
not be valid, for he is disobeying in committing it. Thus, how can
he seek nearness [to Allah] in that by which he disobeys.

It is possible to say he has disobeyed by harming life, which
belongs to Allah, gtx». Consequently, he is like one who prays ina
usurped home, who disobeys by utilizing the property of another.

It is possible to say that it has been said to the ill person,

“Eat!” So how could it be said to him, “Do not eat!” which is the
meaning of fasting, contrary to prayer and usurpation?

It is also possible to answer that it has been said to him, “Do
not destroy yourself!” and it has also been said to him, “Fast!” So
he did not disobey by fasting, but by way of proceeding to
destruction, and it is necessarily incumbent upon him [due to this
position] to fast on the Day of Sacrifice. For it was prohibited
because [in so doing] one abandons the invitation to eat the
offerings and sacrifices, which is the hospitality of Allah, gis‘. Yet
the distinction between them {gada’ and add’) is very difficult.

These are the plausibilites engaged by mujtahids. So when
we say that his fasting is not constituted, then to call making up for

it gqada’ is purely figurative, as is the case of the menstruating

woman. Otherwise, he is like a traveller.

SECTION FOUR: ‘AZIMA [RESOLUTION] AND RUKHSA [CONCESSION]
Know that resolution {‘azima] means confirmed intent. Allah,

‎has said: “... But he [Adam] forgot, and We found he had no‏ رمعاي

‎9

‎firm resolve,”” that is, intense intent. Also, some of the messengers

‎are called the foremost of resolution’ to confirm their intent in

‎pursuing the truth.

‎And resolution in the language of the bearers of the Shari‘a
expresses that which is incumbent upon people on the basis of the
obliging of Allah, ‏.معاي‎

‎%Qur’an, 20:115,

‎10Ghazali is alluding to 46:35 in the Qur’an.

444

Concession [rukhga] linguistically means ease and facility. It
is said, “The price has eased,” if it decreases and buying is
facilitated. In the Shari‘a terminology, it expresses that for which
the locus of obligation has latitude in doing because of difficulty
and incapacity, together with the enforcement of a prohibiting
reason. For that which Allah, ‏رمعاي‎ has not obliged upon us, such as
fasting Shawwdl and the late morning prayer, is not called
concession. Also, what He has originally permitted, such as eating
-and drinking, is not called concession. However, eating carrion is
concession, and the waiving of fasting Ramaddn for a traveller is
called concession.

In sum, then, this term is used literally and figuratively.
However, the literal [usage] is of a higher degree, like the
permissibility of uttering the statement of disbelief under
compulsion; and such is the case with drinking alcohol, or damaging
the property of others because of compulsion, hunger, or choking
on a morsel [of food] that cannot be swallowed except with the
alcohol that one has.

On the other hand, the figurative usage, which is remote from
the literal, is to call concession that which is waived for us from the
burdens and the yokes that were incumbent upon those past
communities. As for that which has not been obliged upon us nor
upon others, this is not called concession. But since these [burdens]
have been imposed on past communities, when we compare
ourselves with them, then applying the term concession
figuratively becomes appropriate. For the obliging of others is not

restriction with respect to us. Concession is latitude as opposed to
445

restriction. Wavering between these two degrees are [various]
modes, some of which are closer to the literal and some of which
are closer to the figurative, for example, shortening [the prayer]
and breaking the fast for a traveller. This is appropriately termed
concession literally because the reason [of fasting], that is, the
month of Ramadan, is in existence. Yet the traveller's [case] comes
under His statement, ytxs—“So those of you who are present in the
Month, let him fast therein.”'!—and has been exempted from the
generality by an excuse and hardship.

12

As for tayammum’“ in the absence of water, it is not

appropriate to call it concession because it is not possible to oblige
the use of water in its absence. Therefore, it is not possible to say
that the reason in effect, in spite of the impossibility of the
obligation, is contrary to the {case of] being compelled to disbelief
or to drink [alcohol], for one is able to resist. Certainly, allowing
this during sickness or injury, or the remoteness of water from a
person, or selling it at more than normal is concession. In fact,

tayammum in the absence of water is like feeding [the needy] !3
11 ‏ممه‎ .
Qur’an, 2:185.

12Tayyammum is a substitute for the ritual ablution before
prayer in the absence of water or in Special circumstance. For
details see The Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam, p. 588; and W.
Zahili’s Al-Figh al-Islami wa Adillatuhu, 1:406.

13Ghazali here is referring to the prescribed acts for the
atonement of zikhadr (a man prohibiting the lawfulness of his wife by
declaring her as his mother), that is fasting two consecutive months

or feeding 60 needy people only if freeing a slave is unattainable.
See the Qur'an, 58:3-4

46

when there is no slave [to free]—and this is not concession. On the

contrary, [freeing] the slave is obligatory in one case, while feeding
[is incumbent] in another. Therefore, we do not say that the reason
is in effect in absence of the slave. Rather, zihdr is the cause

obliging the manumission in one case and obliging feeding in

another.

If it is said: If the reason for obliging ablution is removed by
the absence of water, then the reason prohibiting disbelief,
drinking, and [eating] carrion would be removed by fear of
destruction, as if the unlawful is prohibited on the condition that
fear is not present.

We shall say: What is prohibited in [eating] carrion is
repulsiveness; in alcohol, intoxication; and in disbelief, being
ignorant of Allah, yixs, or attributing falsehood to Him. But these
prohibitions /1:99/ are in effect, while their rule has been removed
by fear. Therefore, the suspension of every prohibition, which is
removed by hardship or fear despite the possibility of resisting it,
is termed concession; and changing the expression does not prevent
this by making the discontinuance of hardship an added condition

to the obligating [command].

If it is said: Concession is divisible into that which one
disobeys by abandoning it—like the abandonment of eating carrion
or breaking fast from fear of destruction—and into that which one
does not disobey [for abandoning it), like breaking fast, shortening

[prayer], resisting the statement of disbelief, and abandoning the
417

killing of the person who is compelled to kill him. So how could
that whose fulfillment is necessary be called concession? And how
is the distinction made between one and the other?

We shall say: As for describing it as concession, although it is
mandatory, it is because it has latitude, since a person is not
obligated to kill himself by thirst while it is permitted for him to
relieve it with alcohol, while punishment would be waived for him.
Thus, insofar as waiving punishment for his act, it is latitude and
concession. But with respect to necessitating punishment for
abandonment, it is resolution [‘azima].

As for the reason for the distinction, it is a matter of interest
acknowledged by the mujtahids, and they have differed with
regard to it. So some of them do not allow surrender to an
attacker, while others allow [it], saying that the killing of another
by him is prohibited, just as is his own killing; yet it has been
permitted to him only because of [the attack on) him, although he
may waive his own right when it confronts an equal [right].

Nor is he to destroy himself for the sake of abstaining from
carrion or alcohol. For preserving life is of greater importance in
the Shari‘a than abandoning carrion and alcohol in a rare
circumstance.

For instance, [regarding] salam'4 [futures], which is selling

what one cannot deliver immediately, it may be said that this is

14In addition to Ghazali’s definition of ‘salam,’ see Ahmad
Sharabasi, al-Mu'jam al-Iqtisédi al-Islami (Beirut: Dar al-Jil,
1401/1981), ‏.م‎ 225,

48

concession because of [the Prophet’s] general prohibition,
‏اك عليه و سام‎ “Sen, in the hadith [related by] Hakim b. Hazam against
selling what one does not have, necessitating its prohibition. But
the need of the insolvent individual requires concession regarding
salam.

Also, there is no doubt in that giving in marriage an escaped
female slave is correct. However, that is not termed concession.
But when compared with the sale of a male fugitive slave, then it
[the former case] has latititude.

However, it is said that marriage is another kind of contract,
where its conditions differ from the conditions of sale. Thus, there
is no correlation between them. Furthermore, it is possible to say
that salam is a another contract, for it is sale of debt while the
latter is sale of corporeal property, so they are distinguished. So
their differing as to conditions does not necessarily enter one of
them under concession. It is likely, then, that this is figurative.
Thus, the statement of the reporter, “He prohibited a person from

selling what he does not have, and gave concession regarding

salam,” is a figurative expression.

You should know that some of the Hanafites have stated that
the definition of concession is that which has been allowed despite
being prohibited. But this is contradictory, for that which has been
allowed is not to be prohibited.

Others cleverly state that it {concession] is that to which
concession is granted despite its being prohibited. But this is like
the former because concession is also permission.

They have based this on their Principle, for they say that
449

infidelity is bad per se; therefore, it is prohibited. Yet because of
compulsion, one is granted concession concerning what is bad per
se. Accordingly, if one were to persist and not pronounce infidelity,
he would be rewarded.

In addition, they claim that if one compelled to break fast
does not break it, he would be rewarded because breaking fast is
bad and fasting is fulfilling the right of Allah, diz». Furthermore, if
one compelled to destroy [another’s] property yields, they say that
he will also be rewarded. Also, they claim that a person compelled
to eat carrion and drink alcohol sins if he does not partake of them.

However, in these details, there is legal discussion that does
not pertain to pure usil. Yet the intent is to [indicate] that their
Statement that there is concession in what is prohibited is
contradictory and has no validity, and Allah, dixa, knows best.

Examination of the First Qutb is complete, namely examining
the essence of hukm and its parts. Let us now examine what

imparts the hukm, namely the sources.
THE SECOND QUTB

THE SOURCES OF THE RULES
THEY ARE FOUR: THE BOOK, THE SUNNA, THE IJMA‘, AND
THE RATIONAL PROOF ESTABLISHED ON THE ORIGINAL
STATE OF NEGATION

(AS FOR THE STATEMENTS OF THE COMPANIONS AND THE SHARI‘AS OF THOSE
PRECEDING US, THERE IS DISAGREEMENT ON THESE.)
THE FIRST PRINCIPLE OF THE SOURCES

THE BOOK OF ALLAH, gtx

Know, upon actual examination, that the source of rules is
one, that is, the statements of Allah, ‏رمعاي‎ for the statements of the
Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكم‎ sale gizd ‏اله‎ Ge, do not establish rules nor
obligations. Rather, he informs on the authority of Allah, gizs, that
He has ruled on such and such. Therefore, ruling is for Allah, giz,
alone. Jjmd‘ indicates the Sunna, and the Sunna, the ruling of Allah,
g'z. As for reason, it is not a cause! of the Shari‘a rules; rather, it
proves that rules are nonexistent in the absence of revealed
authority. So, calling reason a source from among the principles of
the sources is figurative, as will be substantiated later.

However, when we consider the manifestation of rules in
relation to us, they do not become manifest except by the
Statements of the Messenger, ,‘vés sale, for we do not (directly] hear
the words from Allah, ‏,معي‎ nor from Jibril. Thus, the Book is
manifested to us through the utterances of the Messenger,
‏وسكم‎ sei wi ‏.صن‎ So, if we consider that which manifests these rules, it is

'The root ‘dalla’ linguistically means directed, guided, or
caused. See Lane, 3:900. In view of Ghazali’s position on reason

with regard to revelation, the term cause is more reflective of the
meaning of this word. See Zabidi, Taj al-‘Ariis, 7:324-25.

451

452

only the utterances of the Messenger, since ijm4@‘ indicates that
they {jurists} relied on his statements.

When we consider the cause of obligation, it is [only] one,
namely the rule of Allah, ‏.معاي‎ Yet if we do not make rational
abstractions but {instead] combine the established avenues of
knowledge, the Principles—which must be €xamined—would become
four, as mentioned above.

Thus, let us begin with the Book and examine its essence, its
definition—which sets it apart from what is not the Book— its

expressions, and then its ruling.

THE FIRST CONSIDERATION: ITS ESSENCE

This refers to the speech subsisting in the being of Allah, ix,
which is one of His eternal attributes. The term Speech is
ambiguous and may be applied to utterances indicating what is in
the mind. You say, [for example], “I heard the speech of so and so
and his eloquence.” Or it may apply to what the expressions
represent, that is, the meanings in the mind, as has been said:
“Indeed, words inhere in the mind, and the tongue is made only to
convey what is in it.” Allah, gizs, Said, “And they said to
themselves, ‘Why does not Allah punish us for what we say?’"3 and,
“Whether you conceal your words or proclaim them . 4 1“) is

2This verse is attributed to al-Akhtal, “Ghiyath al-Taghlibi.”

But, according to A. Haran, it is not in his diwdan. See al-Jahiz, al-
Bayan wa al-Tabyin, 1:218

Qur'an, 58:8.

4Qur’an, 67:13.

453

impossible to deny the ambiguity of this term.

Some people have said that it originally stood for utterances
and, metaphorically, for their meanings. The reverse also has been
Stated. But this serves no purpose after its ambiguity has been
established.

The speech inherent in the mind is divisible into predicates,
inquiries, commands, prohibitions, and admonitions. These are
meanings that differ in their genre by [their] various volitions and
cognitions. They are by their essence related to their objects, just
as power, will, and knowledge are likewise related. Some people
claim that they are reducible to knowledge and will, and are not

independent genres. But establishing this is the task of a

theologian, not a jurist.

Fasi:® The speech of Allah, yixs, is one. And in its unicity, all
the meanings of words are contained, just as His knowledge is one,

yet [with] its unicity, it encompasses the infinity of what is known

و

to the extent that not an atom’s weight, neither in the heavens nor

the Earth, escapes His knowledge.’ But this is difficult to

5For this technical meaning of ‘khabar ’ (i.e. statements that
are either affirmed or denied), see al-Jurjani, Kitab al-Ta'rifat, p.
101 and Tahanawi, KashshGf Istilahat al-Funtin, 1:412.

®Ghazali, not following the classical conventions of book

divisions, chooses ‘fasi’ here as a division approximately equivalent
to a ‘Discussion.’

7Ghazali is echoing the two verses in the Qur'an, 10:61 and
34:3.

454

comprehend. Again explaining it is the task of the theologian, not
the jurist.

As for speech inherent in the mind, with respect to us, it is
multiple just as knowledge is multiple. His speech differs from
ours in another way, namely no creature is capable of expressing
words inherent in his mind except through utterances, signs, or
gestures. But Allah, gis, has the power to create necessary
knowledge of His speech in whomsoever He wills among His
servants without the intermediary of letters, sounds, or Signs. He
also creates in them hearing of [His] speech without the
intermediary of letters, sounds, or senses. Whosoever hears it
without an intermediary has definitely heard the speech of Allah.
That was the privilege of Moses, may the blessings of Allah, giz, be
upon him, upon our Prophet, and all other prophets. As for one
who hears it from other than Him, such as from an angel or a
prophet, calling it hearing the speech of Allah, giz, is just like
hearing the poetry of al-Mutanabbi [recited] from other than him
and saying that he has heard the poetry of al-Mutanabbi. This is
also permissible. Because of this, Allah, giza, said, “Jf any one of the

pagans seeks your protection, grant it to him, so that he may hear

the word of Allah,”8

THE SECOND CONSIDERATION: ITS DEFINITION

The Book is defined as that which has been transmitted to us

8Our’an, 9:6.

455

through tawdtur between the two covers of the Mushaf [Codex]
based on the well known seven recitations.? What we mean by the
Book is the revealed Qur’an; we have qualified it by the [term]
‘Mushaf’ because the Companions took great precautions in
transmitting it to the extent that they prohibited ta‘adshir [marking
the Qur’4n in tenths] and nagt [inserting diacritical marks],
requiring a bare [text] so that the Qur’4n would not be mixed with
what was not [of the] Qur’an.

It [the Qur’an] has been transmitted to us via tawdtur. Hence
we know that what is written in the agreed upon Mushaf is the
Qur’an. What is apart from this is not of it. For it is, by custom and
habit, impossible—in the face of the super-abundant impetus to
preserve it—that a part of it was neglected and not transmitted or

that it was mixed with that which is not part of it.

If it is said: Do you not define it as mu‘jiz [inimitable]?

We shall say: No, [for] its inimitability demonstrates the
truth of the Messenger, ‏السلار‎ s.iz, not necessarily that it is the Book
of Allah, gtx, since inimitability is conceivable for other than the

Book of Allah, and a portion of a given verse is not inimitable, yet it

is part of the Book.

If it is said: Then why do you require tawdtur?

For details on the various readings of the Qur’an, see
Encyclopaedia of Islam, s.v. “Qur'an,” by J. D. Pearson; and Kristina

Nelson, The Art of Reciting the Qur’adn (Austin: University of Texas
Press, 1985), pp.133-135.

456

We shall say: So that certain knowledge accrue by it because
ruling based on what is not [certainly] known is ignorance. For
something to be the speech of Allah, gtxs, is an actual fact, and is
not based on supposition, so that it depends on our presumptions.
So it could be said, “If you think this way, then we have prohibited
or made lawful for you certain acts.” Thus, prohibition would be
known to us by our presumption. In fact, our presumption would
be an indication that prohibition is dependent on it, for prohibition
is based on supposition. So, it becomes possible to base it on
supposition at times of presumption. But considering that
something is the speech of Allah, gixs, is an actual fact and is not
based on supposition; so judging based on it is ignorance. Two

discussions stem from the definition of speech.

I. DISCUSSION: Consecutive fasting for the atonement of
breaking an oath is not mandatory, according to one view, in spite
of Ibn Mas‘ad reciting, “Then fast three days consecutively... 210
For this addition has not come through tawdtur and, therefore, is
not from the Qur'an. So it should be construed that he mentioned it
in the course of expressing what he held as an opinion. He may

have believed in consecutive [fasting], construing the general to

10The verse in the Qur’an, 2:196, does not include the word
consecutive, although in this report attributed to Ibn Mas‘id it 15
added. For references to the hadith, see Wensinck, Concordance,
1:263. However, according to Malik, al-Muwatta’, 1:305, and

Zamakhshari, Kashshdaf, 1:345, this addition is attributed to ‘Ubay b.
Ka‘b.

457

[mean] the specific as in the consecutive [months of fasting) for

zihar|!

Abi Hanifa said that [consecutive fasting] is obligatory, even
though it was not established as being of the Qur’an. It is, at the
very least, a report; and it is incumbent to act according to a
solitary report. But this is weak because there is no proof denying
a solitary report. If he considers it part of the Qur’an, he is
definitely wrong. For it is incumbent for the Messenger of Allah,
plus seie wt jm, tO Convey it to a group of the community such that
proof is established by their statement. To secretly entrust it to
one person was not permissible for him

If he (Abii Hanifa] does not consider it part of the Qur’an, it is
possible that this may be one of his opinions based on proof
indicated to him. Another possibility is that it may have been a
report. However, it is not permissible to act based on what wavers
between being accepted as a report or not. It is only permissible to

act based on what a reporter explicitly states that he heard from

the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ sui ‏ص اله‎

This is in reference to the Qur’dn (58:3-4) prescribing the
atonement of fasting two consecutive months for the act of zihar,
which refers to a pre-Islamic form of divorce consisting of the
statement of repudiation, “You are to me like my mother's back.”
For details on its definition and its tulings, see al-Zahili’, al-Figh al-

Islami wa Adillatuhu, 7:585-620, and Ibn Rushd, Biddyat al-
Mujtahid, 2:90-5

458

II. DISCUSSION: Al-Basmala!? is a verse of the Qur'an.
But whether it is the first verse of every sitra is disputed. The
inclination of al-Shafi‘i, a «oa, is that it is a verse of every siira, be
it “al-Hamd” [the opening siira] or the rest of the Stras. But it is, in
the beginning of every siira, a verse by itself, or it is a verse with
the first verse of those siiras. This has been obscurely reported
from al-Shafi‘i, ui “4a. But this is more sound than the position of a
those who construed the ambiguous statements of al-Shafi‘i to
mean whether or not it is a part of the Qur’an [at all] at the
beginning of every sira. Indeed, the correct view is that wherever

it has been written in the Qur’an in the script of Qur’an, it is of the

Qur’an.

If it is said: The Qur’an cannot be established except through
decisively mutawdtir transmissions, and if this is decisive, then
how could they differ with regard to it? If it is undecisive, how
can the establishment of the Qur’an rest on conjecture? If this is
permissible, then it would be permissible to establish the
mandatoriness of fasting consecutively for the atonement of
(breaking an] oath, based on Ibn Mas‘iid’s statement. Also, it would
be permissible for the Rafidites to Say that the Imamate of ‘Ali,

«32 wi gx, has been determined by the text of the Qur’an and that

there were verses revealed about him which the Companions

l2This term Tefers )0 ‏مسم الله الى كوي الى هيم‎ , (In the Name of
Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate), the first verse of all but
one of the séras of the Qur'an.

439

concealed because of prejudices against him.

Our way of refuting them is to say only that the Qur’an has
been revealed as a miracle for the Messenger, puis suite, and the
Messenger, ‏,علوم السلار‎ has been commanded to present it to a group
of people by which proof is established. And since they are the
people [constituting] tawd@tur, it is not suspected of them to agree to
conceal it, nor to confidentially relate it to a few individuals, so that
know one brings forth denials. For the Companions exerted
themselves to preserve the Qur’an, to the extent that they were
strict with the letters [of the Qur’a4n] and prevented writing the
names of the séras together with the Qur'an, ta‘dshir, and the
[placing of] diacritical marks, so that the Qur’an is not mixed with
other than it. Since the customary practice makes concealment
impossible, it is necessary that the manner of establishing the
Qur’an be decisive.

It was for this idea that al-Qadi held decisively the
incorrectness of those who hold basmala as part of the Qur’an,
except in “Sarat al-Naml.” He further stated that if it was part of
the Qur’an, it would have been mandatory for the Messenger,
‏السلام‎ sui, to clarify that it is from the Qur’an in a way that precludes
all doubts and uncertainties. Yet he [al-Qadi] stated, “He who holds
this, I consider him mistaken, but do not charge him with unbelief.
For its exclusion from the Qur’an has also not been established by
an explicit and mutawa@tir text. Therefore, an adherent of this is
mistaken and not an unbeliever.” He admitted that the basmala
was revealed to the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ puis ‏له‎ 4m, at the

beginning of every siira and was written as part of the Qur’an in
460

the script of the Qur’an by the command of the Messenger of Allah,
‏وسكر‎ gale ‏الله‎ (am «

Indeed, Ibn ‘Abbas, ase wi ge, said that Messenger of Allah,
‏وسكر‎ seie wt Gm, did not know the end of one séra from the beginning of
the next séra until Jabril came to him with “Jn the name of Allah,
the Merciful, the Compassionate” [pga ‏الى‎ yor ‏[يسم اك الى‎ But it is not
impossible that what was not Qur’an[ic] was revealed to him.

Al-Qadi rejected the opinion of those who attribute bid‘a
[heretical innovation] to ‘Uthman, ‏اك عله‎ gs, for writing “Jn the
name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate” [ ‏دمن الى حير‎ oll ‏[يسم الله‎ IN
the beginning of every sitra, and stated that if he has created bid‘a,
then it would have been customarily impossible for the people of
religion to remain silent with him, despite their firmness in
religion. How could this be since they objected to those people who
entered the names of the s#ras, diacritical marks, and ta‘ashir? So
why did they not reply by saying, “We have innovated it as
‘Uthman, ‘32 wt gm, did in writing the basmala,” especially when the
names of the siras are written distinguished from the Qur’dn itself,
while the basmala is written similar to the text of the Qur’an and is
adjoined to it in a way that is not distinguish from it. Therefore,
being silent with one who innovates this is customarily impossible
unless it was a command of the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ sis a “pao.

As for the reply, we shall say: There is no validity in al-
Qadi’s categorical faulting of al-Shafi‘i, wi ‏ررحم‎ because adding what

is not the Qur’an to the Qur’an is infidelity, such that he who adds
461

the qunit [specific supplication] or tashahhud or ta‘awwudh'3 to
the Qur’n is an infidel. So why doesn’t he who adds basmala
become an infidel? [For] he has no excuse, except when it is said
that its negation from the Qur’an is not established through a
mutawatir text.

Thus, we shall say that if it is not part of the Qur’an, it would
have been incumbent for the Messenger, ‏وسكمر‎ syie ‏رسن اله‎ to explicitly
State that it is not part of the Qur’an and to promulgate it in a way

that uproots doubt such as in ta‘awwudh and tashahud.

If it is said: What is not part of the Qur’dn is unlimited and so
can be denied, and, on the contrary, that which must be specified is
what is actually from the Qur’4n.

We shall say: This would be correct if the basmala was not
written by the command of Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ gaia ‏اله‎ Gm, with
the Qur’an in script, and if it had not been revealed to the
Messenger, ‏وسكر‎ sie ‏اله‎ 4m, at the beginning of every sira, which
decisively impresses {upon one] that it is from the Qur’an. It is
inconceivable that the Messenger of Allah, plus ante wt Go, did not
know of its suggesting this and that it was permissible for him to
remain silent from negating it—especially when adding it to [the

Qur’an) is suggested.

3The qunit is a supplication said during a prayer, while
ta‘awwudh is saying a'‘iidhu billah min al-Shaytan al-rajim, 1 seek
refuge with Allah from Satan, the accursed. Tashahhud is the
declaration of faith, witnessing that there is no god but Allah and
Muhammad is His messenger.

402

However, 21-0301, a 4a‘, said that if it was from the Qur’an,
then doubt would be uprooted by a mutdwatir text that constitutes
proof.

We shall say: If it is not part of the Qur’n, it would have
been incumbent upon the Messenger of Allah, plus puie wt Go, tO
explicitly state that it is not part of the Qur’an and to promulgate
{this}. And he would have negated it by a mutdwatir text after he
had commanded its writing in the script of the Qur’an, since there
is no excuse for being silent from uprooting this notion.

As for not explicitly stating that it [the basmala] is from the
Qur’an, this is based on circumstantial evidence, since it was
dictated to the scribe with the Qur’an. But the Messenger, ‏نيم السكلار‎
in the course of dictating [the Qur’an], did not repeat with every
word and verse that it was part of the Qur’an. /1:104/ Rather, his
sitting for it and his circumstantial evidences indicate that it was.
All of this is known decisively.

Furthermore, since the basmala was ordered to be said at the
beginning of all important matters, and since it appears at the
beginning of siras, some people think that it was written as a
blessing. But this thinking is false. This is why Ibn ‘Abbas said,
“Has Satan stolen a verse of the Qur’an from the people,” ! 4 when
some of them neglected reciting basmala at the beginning of the

stiras. So he decisively stated that it is a verse. Yet he was

١4155 ‘Abbas’ Statement is reported in various ways. Some

are in interrogative form. See al-Suyati, al-Durr al-Manthar fi al-
Tafsir bi al-Ma' thir, 1:19-23.

463

unopposed, as was the case with those who added ta‘awwudh and
tashahhud to the Qur'an. Therefore, this proves that it was held as

decisive and that doubt arose afterwards.

If it is said: After the occurrence of doubt and speculation,
basmala became subject to ijtihdd, thus exiting the sphere of
decisiveness. So how can the Qur’an be established on the basis of
ijtihad?

We shall say: Al-Qadi, wi “<a, has held that differing in the
numbering and length of the verses is permissible. He has
admitted that this matter depends on the ijtihdd of the reciters; it
was not sufficiently clarified in a manner that uproots doubt. But
the basmala is part of the Qur’an in “Strat al-Naml”; thus, it is
decisively part of the Qur’an. The dispute is only whether it is part
of the Qur’4n once or as many times as it has been written. In this
regard, it is possible for doubt to occur. Yet certainty is obtained
through ijtihdd because it is an inquiry to determine the specific
place of the verse after it has been written in the script of the
Qur’an. The occurrence of this is possible. Proof of the possibility
of its occurrence and that it is permeable to ijtihdd is that the
negator does not charge infidelity to he who adds it nor does he
who adds it charge the negator with infidelity, contrary to [adding]
the qundt and tashahhud. Thus, basmala has been opened to
speculation. But writing it in the script of the Qur’an with the
Qur’an, when considering the firmness of the Companions and their
determination in preserving the Qur’an from additions, has made it

decisively or near decisively part of the Qur’ an.
404

If it is said: This issue has become speculative and has exited
from being known through tawdtur as necessary knowledge, and is
yet either decisive or speculative.

We shall say: Objectively, it is not decisive, but is subject to
ijtthad. The proof for the permissibility of [applying] ijtihdd upon it
is the occurrence of differences about it during the time of the
Companions, pare wi ‏رركم‎ to the extent that Ibn ‘Abbas, wase wi peo
said, “Has Satan stolen a verse of the Qur’an from the people,” and
he was not charged with infidelity for adding it to the Qur’an, nor
did he face objections. Also, we know that if {Aba Bakr] al-Siddigq,
a2 wt ‏برضي‎ has transmitted that the Messenger, ‏سكم‎ sie wi “um, has said,
“Basmala is [part) of ‘Strat al-Hamd’ and is at the beginning all
siiras written with it,” this would have been accepted for the
reason that it is written by the command of the Messenger of Allah,
‏وسكم‎ seie at Ge. Had it been transmitted that the quniit is part of the
Qur’an, then its falsity would be known in a decisive way in which
there is no doubt in it.

In sum, if we are to be objective, we find ourselves in doubt
concerning the issue of the basmala, but certain in the case of the
ta‘awwudh and the quniit. But when we examine it being written
with the Qur’an by the command of the Messenger of Allah,
‏وسلكم‎ sale ‏للك‎ Gem, together with his silence on explicitly denying that it is
part of the Qur’dn, and after the cause of this impression is
determined, this then becomes an evident proof or nearly decisive

[for it] being part of the Qur'an, proving that ijtihadd does not extend

to the origin of the Qur’an.
465

As for what is of the Qur’an and is written in its script, ijtihdd
does extend to it with regard to the specification of its placement
and whether it is in /1:105/ the Qur’an once or twice. We have
presented proofs concerning this in the book, Hagqiqat al-Qur’ an,
and explained what has been thrusted against al-Shafi‘i, w ‘eno, for

wavering in his positions concerning this issue.

If it is said: You have made reciting the basmala in prayer
mandatory, and this is based on it being part of the Qur'an. But its
being of the Qur’an cannot be established by conjecture because
conjecture indicates the mandatoriness of acting with regard to
what is subject to ijtihdd, otherwise it is ignorance, that is, not
certain knowledge. Thus, it should be considered similar to
consecutive fasting in the reading of Ibn Mas‘dd.

We shall say: Sound and explicit reports have been
transmitted concerning the obligatoriness of reciting the basmala;
and the fact that it is part of the Qur’an is mutawdtir and certain,

But what it is doubtful is only whether it is part of the Qur’an
[only] in “Sarat al-Naml” or many times at the of beginning every
sura. So how can it be equated with the reading of Ibn Mas‘id
while the Qur’an is not established by it, nor is it a report? where
sound reports have come to us concerning the mandatoriness of
basmala, and it has been authenticated by tawdtur that it is part of

the Qur'an. In sum, the difference between the iwo issues is

evident.
466

THE THIRD CONSIDERATION: THE WORDS OF THE QUR’AN
Three Discussions

I. DISCUSSION: The words of the Arabs contain literal and
figurative [expressions], as their distinction shall follow.'5
Therefore, the Qur’an contains figurative [expressions], contrary to
what it held by some.

We shall say that the term figurative is ambiguous and may
apply to falsities that have no reality. But the Qur’an is exonerated
from this. And this may have been what was taken by those who
deny the existence of figurative usage in the Qur’an.

Also, it may apply to a word that has exceeded its literal
meaning. This, in the Qur’an, cannot be denied, for He, gixs, has
said:

‘... And ask the village where we have been and the
caravan, ,’ 16

“,..And they found a wall willing to fall, and he repaired
+, 17
ih.

“... There surely would have been pulled down Monasteries,
Temples, Prayers, and Mosques... “18 But how can “prayers”

13See the seventh chapter of the Third Qutb, 1:341-45. For
more information consult, al-Zarkashi, Burhan fi ‘Ulim al-Qur' an,

2:255-98, where he lists 26 types of metaphorical usages in the
Qur’ an.

Qur'an, 12:82.
"Our an, 18:77.

'8Qur’ an, 22:40.

407

be pulled to the the ground.

a

. When some of you return from the call of nature ...”'°

. Allah is the light of the heavens and the Earth .. . "2°

. Those who annoy Allah... nel meaning His Messenger;

“a

4

. The one who assaults you, assault him in a like

manner.”22 ‏ع[‎ retribution is just, how can it be called assault?
“Recompense an offense with an equal offense... 23
“. . And then Allah mocks them... 4

“They plot and Allah plots... "29

“Whenever they light a fire of war, Allah extinguishes it,726

'9Qur’an, 2:43.
0Qur’an, 35:24.
71 Our’ an, 33:57.
220uran, 2:194.
23Qur’ an, 42:40.
24 Our’ an, 2:15.
*5Qur’an, 8:30.

26Qur’an, 5:64.

468

“We have prepared for disbelievers a fire, its tent encloses

them ... 27

{There are] countless cases like these. All are figurative, as it will

be discussed below.

11. DISCUSSION: AlI-Qadi, wi ‏ررحم‎ said that the entire Qur’an
is Arabic and that there are no foreign elements in it. But some
people have said that there are non-Arabic words in it.28 They
argue that ‘mishkah’ [niche] is Hindi and that ‘istabraq’ [type of

silk] is Persian. And, [concerning] His saying, “And fruits and abb [a

29

type of grass]... some have said that ‘abb’ is not Arabic.

Arabs may use foreign words. In some poetry, the word

‘athjat 30 means the head position and it has become Arabicized,

just as mishkah. A\-Qadi forced the addition of these words to
27 Our’ an, 1829.

28 al-Shafi‘i’s Risdla, ‏.م‎ 41, contains the oldest recorded
discussion on the Arabicity of the language of the Qur’an, where he
States that the Qur’4n is purely Arabic. Others held the same
opinion, like Ab& ‘Ubayd, al-[abari, and al-Baqillani. The majority
of the fugahd’ hold the opinion that foreign words found in the
Qur’an have become Arabicized. For details, see al-Zarkashi,
Burhan fi ‘Uliim al-Qur' an, 2:289.

29Our’an, 80:31.

30 According to Muhammad al-Bilbasi al-Husayni, the editor of
the Amiri edition of al-Mustasfaé, in another manuscript the word is
‘ashjat. According to Ibn Manzir, Lisdn, 2:318; and Zabidi, Taj al-
‘Artis, 2:70, the root ‘‘ayn' ‘thd’ ‘jim’ means a group journeying, a
large number, or a huge, solid, and speedy camel.

469

Arabic, and explained its forms. He said that every word in the
Qur’an that has been used by people of other languages has its
roots in Arabic. But other people altered them to a degree, as did
the Hebrews. For illah [God], they say lahiit and for nas [people],
nastt. And he denied that there are in the Qur’an non-Arabic
words. He argued on the basis of His Saying, gixs, “... The tongue of
he whom they wickedly point to is outlandish, while this is clear
Arabic speech ...°>! “Had we sent this as a Qur’Gn in a foreign
tongue, they would have said, ‘If only its verses were expounded.
Not in Arabic? And an Arab? ...’ 132 Thus, if there were in it non-
Arabic words, then it would not be pure Arabic, Rather, it would
be Arabic and non-Arabic. The Arabs would have used this as an
argument saying, “We are not impotent as far as Arabic is
concerned. As for the foreign tongues, we are unable to
comprehend them.” |

This is unacceptable to us in view of the fact that the entire
Qur’an contains two or three [words] of foreign origin. Moreover,
the Arabs had used them, so they had occurred in their language.
This does not change the Qur’4n from being Arabic nor the use of
this term [Arabic] to describe it. There would be no smooth way
for Arabs to argue [on this basis]. For Persian poetry is Persian,
even though it contains certain Arabic words, since those words are

common in Persian. There is no need to belabor this.

31 Qur'an, 16:103.

32Our'an, 41:44.

470

111. DISCUSSION: The Qur’an contains perspicuous and
allegorical verses, just as the Exalted said, “. . . The Book, wherein
there are perspicuous verses—they are the essence of the Book—and
others which are allegorical . . 2733 They have differed on its
meaning. And since no text?* came explaining these words, they
should be interpreted based on what the philologists recognize and
what corresponds with the literal meaning of the words. Thus, it is
inappropriate to say that the allegorical are the individual letters
occurring at the beginning of some siras and that the rest are the
perspicuous; nor [is it appropriate] to say that the perspicuous is
known to the well-grounded in knowledge and that the allegorical
is known only to Allah, gtxs; nor [is it appropriate] to say that the
perspicuous are the promises and threats or the lawful and
unlawful and that the allegorical are the stories and examples—and

this is more remote.

Rather, the correct position is that the perspicuous is reduced
to two meanings:

The first of which is that its meanings are open and is not
permeable by ambiguities and probabilities, while in the
allegorical, probabilities are contradictory. The second is that the

perspicuous is what has been Systematized and arranged

33Qur’ an, 3:7.

34Here Ghazali uses the term tawgif, which means decisive

authoritative text. Consult Zabidi, Taj al-‘Ariis, 6:270, and Madkir
et al., al-Mu‘jam al-Wasit, 2:1064.

471

sequentially to impart meaning, either based on what is evident or
interpreted, as long as there are neither contradictions nor variance
in it. The perspicuous is opposite to the obscure and the corrupt,
not to the allegorical.

As for the allegorical, it is possible to express through it
ambiguous terms such as qgur’;35 and as in his saying, ygiza, “...He
who has in his hand the knot of marriage . . .°— for he wavers
between the husband and the guardian— also ‘lams’, which wavers
between touching and sexual intercourse ,36

It may apply to what has been transmitted regarding the
attributes of Allah, in which its apparent meaning deludes
assigning direction and ascribing human characteristics to Him,

requiring interpretation.

If it is said: [In] His saying, ytxs, “None knows its
interpretation except Allah and those who are well-grounded in

. 37 is and conjoining what precedes it with what

knowledge . .
follows it, or is it more appropriate to stop after [the word] Allah?

We shall say: Either one is tolerated. So, if what is intended
by this is at the time of resurrection, stopping is more appropriate;
if otherwise, conjoining is. For it is evident that Allah, gitzs, does

not address Arabs with that which there is no way for any creature

35This term may mean either menstruation or purity. See
Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam al-Lughat al-Fugaha’, p. 359.

36See Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam al-Lughat al-Fuqahda’, p. 393.

37 Qur'an, 3:7.

472

or any person to know.

If it is said: What is the signification, then, of the letters in
the beginning of some siiras since no one knows their meanings?

We shall say: People have said much about this. One of the
more likely assertions is that they are names of the sdras so that
they can be recognized by them. Hence, it is said that the séra’s
name is “Ya Sin” or “TA Ha.”

It has also been said that Allah, gtx», has mentioned them to
focus the attention of the Arabs to listen because it differs with
their conventions. It thus awakens them from heedlessness, such
that it moves their hearts to attentiveness. Hence, he did not
mention them for a stated meaning.

Then again, it is said that He only mentioned them alluding to
the rest of the alphabet, which none of the Arabic words exceed,
alerting that He does not address them except through their
language and their alphabet, and one may alert by using part of
something for the whole.

It is said, “He recited ‘Strat al-Baqara’ and sung ‘Ala Hubbi,’
"38 meaning the entire séra and the whole poem. A poet has said,
“He implores me with ‘Ha Mim.’, at the piercing of the spear; but

why did he not recite ‘Ha Mim’ before attacking?” He eluded to the

38This is the opening phrase of the first verse in ‘Amr b. al-
Kulthim’s poem. For more information, see Paulis Salama, al-
Mu‘allaqdt al-‘Ashr (Beirut: Dar Sa‘b, 1981), p. 113; and Ahmad al-
Shangiti, Sharh al-Mu'allagdt al-'Ashr wa Akhbar Shu‘ara thd,
(Beirut: Dar al-Andulus, 1402/1982), p. 137.

473

Qur’an with ‘Ha Mim.’ Thus, it is established that there is nothing

in the Qur’an that Arabs do not understand.

If it is said: Arabs only understand a direction and settling

from His statement, yizs, “He is the Omnipotent over His

worshippers .. . 39 oThe Beneficent One, who is established on the
throne...”4° But what is intended by this is different. Therefore,

it is allegorical.

We shall say: This is preposterous! These are metonymical
and metaphorical expressions understood by the believers among
Arabs who testify that nothing resembles Allah, yt, and these

verses are interpreted in a way suitable to the comprehension of
the Arabs.

THE FOURTH CONSIDERATION: THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
QUR’AN

Part of these characteristics include the penetration of
interpretations to the apparent meaning of its words, the
penetration of specification to the general cases, and the
penetration of abrogation to its requirements. As for specification
and interpretation, they will follow in the Third Qutb. For we have
elaborated on the manners of its utilization and deduction from

expressions, connotations, etc.

390Qur'an, 6:61,

40Our’an, 20:5.

474

As for abrogation, the general custom has been to place it
after the book of traditions because abrogation permeates the Book
and the Sunna altogether. But we have placed it with the
characteristics of the Book for two reasons: One of which is its
ambiguity and obscurity in view of it being permeable by the
speech of Allah, gixs, despite the impossibility of bada’ [His change
of mind]. Second is that the discussion on traditions has been
extended because of its connection with knowing its various types
of tawdtur and ahdd [reports]. Therefore, we have decided that it

is more appropriate to place it after the characteristics of the Book.
THE BOOK OF ABROGATION

EXAMINATION OF ITS DEFINITION AND ESSENCE; ESTABLISHING
IT AGAINST ITS DENIERS; ITS ESSENTIAL CONSTITUENTS AND
CHARACTERISTICS
Outlined in [Two] Chapters

CHAPTER ONE: ITS DEFINITION, ESSENCE, AND ESTABLISHMENT

[Section one of this Chapter: Its definition]

As for its definition, know that in its original linguistic sense
abrogation [‘naskh’] means to obliterate or eliminate, as in saying,
“The sun eliminated [nasakhat] the shade, and the wind obliterated -
the traces,” when it signifies ‘abolition.’ At times, however, ‘naskh’
applies to the abrogation of documents. Thus, it is ambiguous. For
our purposes, abrogation denotes obliteration or elimination.
Therefore, we say that it can be defined as an address—which must
be in delay of the address it obliterates—that indicates the
elimination of an established rule of a prior address in such a
manner that, were it not for [the new address], the prior would

have remained standing. !

We prefer the term address to text so so as to be inclusive of

lAL-Razi copied this definition and stated that Ghazali took it

from al-Baqillani because he was satisfied with and agreed to it; al-
Razi, al-Mahsiil, 1:423.

475

476

form, signification, implication, and each proof, since abrogation is
possible on the basis of any of these. In addition, we have made
the phrase prior address a provision in the definition, for locating
the obligations of worship in the Shari‘a abolishes the authority of
Reason in [man’s pre-Shari‘a] state of nonresponsibility. This, then,
cannot be termed abrogation, for it does not ‘eliminate’ a rule of an
address.

Indeed, we have made ‘elimination of a rule’ a provision—and
not simply the elimination of ‘commands’ or ‘prohibitions’—so as to
include every type of rule, including the recommended, the
reprehensible, and the permissible, for each of these may be
abrogated.

We state that ‘were it not for [the new address], the prior one
would have remained standing’ because the essence of abrogation
is obliteration. Thus, if the one were not established, the other
would be eliminating nothing. For /1:108/ if a command comes
with a time-specific rite of worship, and a second obliges a certain
worship outside that [rite’s] time, the second is not considered to be
in abrogation of the first. Therefore, when He says, “Completing

2

fasting until night..”“ and then instructs, “Do not fast at night ...,”

this is not abrogation. Rather, an eliminating address is one
without which a rule cannot be removed.

We also say “in delay of the address” simply because if there
were no interruption it would be merely explanation for or

completion of the prior address, setting its duration or condition.

Qur'an, 2:187.

477

Also, it can be elimination only if it comes after the prior rule has
arrived and been established in such a way as to remain [in effect]
but for the abrogating address.

As for the fuqaha’, they do not accept the elimination of the
speech of Allah, gtxs. So they say, in defining naskh, “It is an
address which indicates or reveals the duration of the rites of

worship or the time of their expiration. This necessitates that His

Statement, “Fast in the daytime, and eat at night...” be a case of
abrogation, and also His statement, diza, “... Then complete fasting
till night...” be one of abrogation. But this verse does imply

elimination, nor is it sufficient for the fugqaha’ to add the condition
of delay; for since His first statement is confined to daytime only, it
in itself excludes night. So where is the notion of abrogation?

In fact, what is eliminated is only that which comes under the
earlier address—and the expression is intended to indicate this.
Rather, what they have mentioned is specification. However we
shall explain how abrogation is distinct from specification.
Furthermore, we shall even demonstrate that one act, when it is
commanded at a certain time, may be abrogated even before the
ability to comply with it exists, or before its time. Therefore, this
cannot be merely indicative rite of worship’s duration or
expiration.3

As for the Mu‘tazilites, they define abrogation as an address

indicating that the equivalent of a rule established by a prior text

3See al-Razi, al-Mahsiil, 1:467-478, for his discussion on this
point.

478

has ceased, and that [address] without which {a given rule] would
have remained established. Sometimes they substitute the term
ceased with dropped. At other times they substitute it by the word
unestablished. All of this is to avoid {using} the term elimination.
Yet the essence of abrogation is elimination. Thus, it is as if

they have emptied the definition of the essence of what it defines.

If it is said: Substantiating the meaning of elimination with
respect to the [Shari‘a] rules is objected to for five reasons:

First, an eliminated rule must be either established or not
established. It is not possible to eliminte an established rule, and
there is no need to eliminate what has not been established, which
proves that abrogation is the obliteration of an equivalent to the
established rule, not the rule’s elimination per se; or it is an
explanation for the time of the rites of worship, as the fugahd'’ have
Stated.

Second, according to you, the speech of Allah, ytxa, is
eternal.4 Yet the obliteration of the eternal is inconceivable.

Third, what Allah, gixs, has established has been so purely
because of its goodness. Therefore, if He then were to prohibit it,
this would result in changing the good into bad, which is absurd.

Fourth, whatever He commands is willed into existence.

How, then, could it be prohibited, such that its existence would be

‘unwilled’ and abhorred?

4 This refers to the Ash‘arites.

479

Fifth, abrogation indicates change of mind (bada'},° for He
would have forbidden something ‘after’ ordering it to be. Thus, it is
as though something occurred to Him about a judgement He made,
which He regretted.

So the first absurdity arises from the impossibility of
elimination per se. The second concerns the eternity of speech.
The third regards an attribute of what is commanded, as to
whether it is essentially good or bad. The fourth concerns the
coalescence of will to command. The fifth concerns knowledge in
relation to [the act of abrogation] and the occurrence of a

subsequent change of mind.

In answer to the first objection, eliminating the obliterated is
like the breaking of what is broken, or the annulment of a contract.
For if someone says, “What is the meaning of ‘breaking’ a utensil
/1:109/ but the destruction of its form, be it quadrangular,
hexagonal, or circular? For what is obliterated by the breaking [in
the latter case] is the ‘roundness,’ which either ‘is’ or ‘is not.’ As for
the nonexistent, there is no need to eliminate it; and as for the
existent, there is no way to eliminate it.” Thus, it must be said that
this implies that the integrity of the utensil’s form necessitates the

continuity of its form perpetually, so long as a ‘breaking’ cause does

5Linguistically bada@’ means appearance or emergence. In the
terminology of kaldm, it refers to the appearance of new situations
causing a change in a prior divine judgement. See The
Encyclopaedia of Islam, new ‏.لع‎ s.v. “Bada’,” by I. Goldziher’s [A. S.
Tritton]; and Mulla Sadra for a philosophical discussion on badd’,

480

not occur. Therefore, the breaking cause disrupts what the
integrity of the utensil’s structure would perpetually necessitate,
were it not for the ‘breakage.’

Similarly, annulment terminates a contract's validity, where
it would be perpetual, provided that nothing new enters upon it,
were it not for the annulment’s occurrence. This is because sale is
a cause for exclusive ownership, so long as no unforeseen
disruptions occur. But, with respect to annulment, the occurrence
of an unanticipated disruption does not prove to us that at the time
of contraction the sale was temporarily extended to the point of
annulment.

We do not comprehend when you say, “I sold you this house
for a year.” But we do understand your statement, “I sold and
granted possession of this house to you forever. Then we can annul
it after the passing of one year.” We realize the difference between
the two forms: The first establishes a limited ownership, per se;
and the second establishes absolute ownership, perpetuating until
disrupted by annulment. But when it is annulled, the annulment
terminates its perpetual nature, which were it not for the
disrupting clause, exists by virtue of the contract; nor is the
annulment a qualification of limitation per se.

Based on this, abrogation is distinguished from specification.
For specification clarifies to us that an expression was intended to
include only some [of its meanings), while abrogation lifts out from
an expression that which it was intended to indicate. But owing to
the obscurity of the meaning of elimination, it became problematic

for the fugahd’; who fell into denying the meaning of abrogation
481

altogether.

As for the reply to the second objection, namely the
impossibility of obliterating eternal speech, this is corrupt. For the
meaning of abrogation is not [actually] obliterating the speech;
rather, it denotes terminating its relationship with the locus of
obligation.

Moreover, eternal speech is related to the able and the sane.
So, if incapacitation or insanity occurs, this relationship terminates.
But when sanity and capacity are restored, the relationship
resumes, though eternal speech does not change per se.
Furthermore, the incapacitation or the death of the addressee are
‘causes’ for severing the relationship between the address and the
person. But the abrogation of the Addressor is a ‘means’ of
terminating the relevance of the address (to the person]—just as
with the status of sales, where granting ownership to a buyer [of a
Slave, for example] is at times annulled by the death of the sold
slave and at other times by the annulment of a contracting party.

Due to the obscurity of these ideas, a group denied the eternity of
[Allah’s] speech.

In answer to the third objection—the trnasformation of good
into evil—we have already refuted the [Mu‘tazilites‘] notion of good
and evil, and the fact is that they have no meaning. This is better

than an argument based on the excuse that it is possible for a thing
482

to be good at times and bad at other times.© For He has said, in
tegard to Ramaddn, “Do not eat in the day,” and “Eat at night.” For
abrogation is not confined, according to us, [only] to like things.
Rather, it is possible for Him to command something at one time
and prohibit it before the beginning of [the given] time. Thus, He

would be prohibiting what He has commanded to be fulfilled, as

will follow.

As for the reply to the fourth objection, namely that what is
willed becomes abhorred, this is false because command, according
to us [i.e., Ash‘arites], is distinct from will. For disobedience, in our
view, is intended [by Allah] but is not commanded. A full

examination will come in the Book of Commands.’

In response to the fifth objection, namely the necessity of
change of mind [on Allah’s part], this is false. For if what is
intended is that it necessarily follows from abrogation that He
prohibits what He has allowed and forbids what He has
commanded, then this /1:110/ is permissible. “Allah blots out and
He establishes whatsoever He wills... .”® Nor is there contradiction

in this, just as He allowed eating at night and prohibited it during

the day {in Ramaddn].

®See Lane, 5:1984, for the various meanings of ‘‘uthr.’
'Ghazali, al-Mustasfé, 1:411-417.

8Our’an, 13:39.

483

But if what was intended is that something had become
unveiled to Him of which He was not previously aware, this is
impossible. Nor does this follow necessarily from abrogation.
Rather, Allah, ‏,معي‎ knows that He orders people with a general
command and perpetuates the obligation until a determined time.
Then He terminates the obligation by abrogating it for them. So He
abrogates it at the time which He has determined for its abrogation.

Hence, this does not entail learning after ignorance.

If it is said: Are people commanded in Allah’s knowledge up
until the time of abrogation only, or forever? If it be until the time
of abrogation, then abrogation specifies the duration of worship, as
the fugahd have stated. But if they are commanded forever, then
His knowledge and its object have changed.

We shall say: They are commanded in His knowledge until
the time of abrogation, which is the termination of the general
command for them, without which the command would continue,
just as Allah, gtx, knows that the general contract imparts
ownership until it is terminated by annulment. But He does not
know the contract, per se, to be limited to a period. Rather, He
knows it to be necessitating Ownership perpetually, provided that
no annulling factor occurs. Still, He knows that abrogation shall
occur. Thus, the command is terminated for the elimination of its
condition, not for its inadequacy, per se. Therefore, abrogation
does not necessitate a change of mind.

As a result of the failure of the Jews to comprehend [this],

they denied abrogation. Also, the Rafidites committed bada’’due to
484

their failure to comprehend. They have related about ‘Ali,
‘saa ail ges, that he did not report on the unseen, for fear that
something might appear to Allah, gtx, with regard to it and cause
Him to change His mind. Also, they said of Ja‘far b. Muhammad
that he said, “Allah has never changed His mind with regard to
anything as He changed it concerning Isma‘il’”— that is, His
command to sacrifice him. This is unadulterated infidelity, relating
Allah, gtx, to ignorance and change! What demonstrates its
absurdity is the proof that He encompasses everything in His
knowledge. Furthermore, He is not a locus for accidents or changes.
Sometimes they argue on the basis of His statement, yixs, that
“Allah ‘blots out,’ and He ‘establishes’ whatsoever He wills. . . ‏بذ‎
‎But it means only that He “biots out” the abrogated command and
“establishes” the abrogating [one]. Or, He “blots out” misdeeds with
repentance, as He, gtxs, said, “. . . Surely the good deeds will drive
away the evil deeds. . . 10 Or, He “blots out” the good deeds with
infidelity and apostasy. Or, He “blots out” what the guardian

Angels take up to Him from that which is permissible and affirms

obedience.

If it is said: What is the distinction between specification and

abrogation?

We shall say: In one respect, both share common meaning,

Qur'an, 13:9.

Mour'an, 11:114.

485

since each necessitate specifying the command {in the sense of
restricting it] to ‘part’ of what is obtained in the meaning of the
[target] expressions. But specification clarifies that what has been
excluded from the [implications] of the general [linguistic] form is
not meant to be denoted by its expression, while abrogation
eliminates from the expression [exactly] what it was intended to
denote. For example, His statement, “Do everlastingly!” is possible
to be abrogated, though the expression is not intended for a specific
time, but for all time. But its continuation [depends] upon the
condition that no abrogating command occurs, as when someone
says, “I grant you ownership forever”; but then says, “I annul it.”
Therefore, this annulment expresses what contradicts the condition
of the command’s continuity after its establishment, that is, what is
meant to be indicated by the expression. Therefore, they differ on
five points.

First, the abrogating command must come later [than the
Standing one], while it is permissible for specification to be
adjoined, for it is an explanation. In fact, its adjoinment is
necessary according to those who do not permit a delay for the
explanation.

Second, specification does not apply to a command if only
one thing is commanded, /1:111/ though abrogation does apply.

Third, abrogation occurs only through a statement and an
address, while specification may occur by rational proof,
circumstantial evidence, or other authoritative proofs.

Fourth, specification preserves the meaning of the

expression which is applied to that portion of it which remains
486

unspecified—whether the expression is literal or figurative and
irrespective of any dispute concerning this. But abrogation
abolishes entirely the indication of the abrogated [expression] for
the future.

Fifth, specification of a general [expression] which has a
decisive base is permissible through qiyds, solitary reports, and
other proofs, though abrogation of what is decisive is not
permissible except by what is likewise decisive.

So the position that some of them espouse, namely that
abrogation applies only to time, is not a correct distinction, though
specification applies to time, entities, and circumstances. But this is
figurative and vague because entities and time are not of the acts
of the loci of obligation. For abrogation applies to an act at certain
times, and specification applies to an act in certain conditions.

Therefore, if He says, “Kill the misbelievers {mushrikin],
except those with whom you have a compact [mu‘ahada],”!! which
means do not kill them in the state of compact, but kill them in the
state of war. What is intended is for each of them [specification
and abrogation] to apply to acts.

Now, this is sufficient for revealing the essence of abrogation.
Section Two of this Chapter: ‘Establishing Abrogation Against its
Deniers

The occurrence of abrogation based on either rational

possiblity or revealed authority is denied.

This term refers to a Christian, a Jew, or a Sabian who is
Subject to Muslim rule.

487

As for its rational possibility, it is proven by the fact that if
abrogation were impossible, it would then be impossible either per
se, in form, or in the falsehood it generates or the absurdity it leads
to.

It is not impossible in itself or in its form, based on the
evidence that we have established regarding the meaning of
elimination [raf‘} and our clarifications of its obscurities. Nor is it
impossible as a result of its leading to corruption and evil, for we
have refuted this whole principle. Even if we granted this, it is not
out of the question that Allah, ‏,مسي‎ may know that the benefit of
His worshippers [lies] in ordering them [first] with a general
command so as to prepare them with the determination to refrain
from disobediences and passions; and then He lightens their
burden.

With reference to its occurrence on the basis of revealed
authority, it is proven by ijmd‘ and the texts.

As for the ijmd‘, the consensus of the entire ummah is that
the Shari‘a of Muhammad, plas seize wt Go, has abrogated the shari‘as
preceding him, either in their entirety or only with regard to that
where he disagrees with them. This is agreed upon. Thus,
whoever denies this is violating ijmd‘. Indeed, a few Muslims have
denied abrogation, though ijmd‘ preceded them. Therefore, this
ijma‘ is proof against them, even though it is not proof against the
Jews.

As for the text, there is His statement, gtxa, “And when We
substitute a verse in place of another verse—and Allah knows very

well what He sends down—they Say you are a forger. Rather, most
488

of them have no knowledge.” '2 Substitution [here] includes
elimination and affirmation, and what is eliminated is either
recitation or a standing rule. Whatever the case may be, it is
elimination and abrogation. ٠

If it is said: What is meant by this is not the elimination of
what is revealed, for the elimination or the substitution of what has
been revealed is not possible. Rather, it means substituting the
place of a verse by revealing one instead of another that has not
been revealed. So, it is as if what has not been revealed is
substituting what has been revealed.

We shall say: This is a senseless, convoluted [argument]. For
how can what has not been revealed be substituted, while the
substitute requires something to substitute? Furthermore, how
could the term substitution be applied to the first [instance] of
revelation? This is foolishness and absurd.

The second proof /1:112/ is His statement, gtxs, “As for the
wrongdoings of the Jews, We have forbidden them good things
which were permitted to them... .”'3 There is no meaning for
abrogation except the forbidding of what has been permitted. So it
is with His statement, gixs, “And whatever verse We abrogate or

cause to be forgotten,We bring one better or its like... . "4
120ur’an, 16:101.
130ur'’an, 4:160.

M4Our’ an, 2:106.

489

If it is said: He may have meant specification by this.

We shall say: We have distinguished between specification
and abrogation. Therefore, there is no way to change the
expression. How could this be, while specification does not require
a substitute that is like or better than it? Rather, it is only an
explanation of the meaning of the discourse.

The third proof is an example well known in the Shari‘a,
concerning the abrogation of a widow’s waiting period of one year
by [a period] of four months and ten days; and the abrogation of

the obligation of giving charity before having private counsel with

the Messenger, ‏وسكم‎ suis at Go, since the Exalted has said, “ . . . Give
charity before having private counsel with the Messenger. . . ris

Such is the case with the abrogation changing the gibla from
Jerusalem to the Ka‘ba by His statement, ‏رمعاي‎ “.. . Turn your face
toward the Sacred Mosque. . . 16 In sum, the Muslim ummah has

agreed upon the application of the term abrogation in Shari‘a.

If it is said: Abrogation means copying what is in the
Preserved Tablet on the tablet of messengers and prophets, and
this has the connotation of copying or transcribing the Book.

We shall say: Our Shari‘a then is abrogated like the Shari‘as

preceding us! But this expression is, by consensus, heres. How

'SQur'an, 68:12.

16Qur'an, 2:149,

490

could this be, while we have been changed from one qibla to
another gibla and from one ‘idda!7 period to another? Therefore,

abrogation is decisively a change, a substitution, and an

elimination.

Section Three of this Chapter: Discussions Stemming from the
Examination of the Essence of Abrogation—Six discussions

I. DISCUSSION: The abrogation of a command is
permissible, in our view, even before the ability to obey it [exists],
contrary to the Mu‘tazilites. ‏ش‎

Its form is, for example, when the Lawgiver says in the
month of Ramadan, “Perform pilgrimage in this year.” Then, before
the ninth day of Dhul Hijjah, He says, “Do not perform pilgrimage
because I have abrogated this command for you.” Also, He said,
“Sacrifice your son.” So he [Prophet Abraham] hastened to prepare
means for it. But then He said before the sacrifice, “Don’t sacrifice
{him] because I have abrogated the command for you.” For
abrogation, in our view, is obliterating the command, that is, the
effect of the command and its meaning.

Nor is it an explanation for excluding the abrogated [portion
of] the expression of the command, unlike specification. For if He
Says, “Pray everlastingly!” then it is permissible for Him—even after

a year—to abrogate the obligatoriness of the prayers for the future,

'7This refers to the waiting period of a woman after the
death of her husband, which is four months and ten days; or
divorce, which last through three menstrual pericds. See Qal‘aji,
Mu‘jam Lughat al-Fuqahd’, p. 439.

491

not in the sense that He did not intend by the first expression to
indicate all time; rather, He meant the elimination of the effect of
the expression after its [intended] continuance, since its
continuance is conditioned on the absence of abrogation.

Furthermore, each command includes a condition that it not
be abrogated, as if saying, “Pray everlastingly, as long as I do not
prohibit you or abrogate My command from you.” If this is the
case, then it is comprehensible for the abrogation of pilgrimage to
appear before the tenth of Dhul Hijjah and the abrogation of the
sacrifice before it is performed; for a command exists prior to
ability, even though it is a command conditional upon ability, since
commanding the condition is established.

It is for this reason that the commanded person knows he is
being commanded before being able [to comply]. But since the
Mu'tazilites did not understand this, they denied the establishment
of commands with a condition. The discussion of the wrongness of
their opinion will follow in the Book of Commands. The closest
proof of its incorrectness, however, is that a person praying
determines to pray an obligatory prayer and to obey the command
at the commencement of the prayer. Yet he may die during it or
before he is able to complete it. But if he died before {completion},
it would not be clear that he was not commanded. Rather, we say
that he was obliged by a command stipulated /1:113/ by a
condition. This command stipulated by a condition is established
immediately, whether the condition exists or not. But they say that
if the condition does not exist, we know that the command was

never established from the beginning, but we [the Mu‘tazilites]
492

mistook its obligatoriness. Yet it became clear that it was not. So
this question stems from the preceding one.

This is why the Mu‘tazilites hold abrogation to be impossible
prior to ability. They also say that it leads to a situation where one
thing at one time and in one respect becomes commanded and
prohibited, good and evil, undesirable and desirable, and useful
and corrupting. But all that relates to good and evil and benefit
and corruption, we have already refuted.

However, there remains for them two grounds [for argument]:

First, how could one thing at one time and in one respect be
both prohibited and commanded?

There are two ways to answer this. One is that we do not
submit to the fact that it is prohibited in the same respect as it is
commanded. Rather, it is commanded in two respects: For
example, prayer is prohibited while in the state of impurity, but
commanded in the state of purity, as it is with prohibiting
prostration to an idol while commanding prostration to Allah,
‏جل‎ 352. For they are of two distinct aspects.

Again, they disagree about the way the two aspects differ.
Some have said that [an act] is commanded on the condition that
when the command is eliminated it becomes prohibited. So the
[aspects] are two different cases. Others have substituted the clause
the command's continuance with the nonexistence of prohibition or
the nonexistence of impediments; the expressions are close.

Some people have said that a person is commanded to act at a
specified time on the condition that he chooses to act or is

determined [to act], and is only prohibited from it if it is known
493

that he cannot choose it. They attribute the occurrence of this in
the knowledge of Allah, ‏,رمعاي‎ to its being conditional to abrogation.

Some have said that He commands on the condition of the
command being beneficiary and that it is only beneficial for the
duration of the command. But after the prohibition, it is no longer
beneficial.

Still others have said that He only commands when it is
beneficial. But when the circumstances change, what is prohibited
becomes beneficial. However, Allah, gtxs, orders it knowing that
commanding it is beneficial for the duration of the command. But
after the prohibition, it is no longer beneficial. However, some
people have said that Allah orders it knowing that the contexts are
{subject to] change and that its performance is determined for the
locus of obligation on the condition that its benefit remains.

All of these [arguments] are close but weak. For a condition
is not conceived of as being existent or nonexistent. So there is no
sense in making the inevitable conditional. Moreover, what is
commanded cannot occur as such except within the duration of the
command and in the absence of prohibition. Therefore, how could
He say, “I command you on the condition that I do not prohibit
you.” It is like saying, “I command you on the condition that I
command you,” provided that the command is not related to the
one who is commanded; and on the condition that the commanded
act be either incidental, originated, or some other inevitability, for
this is not suitable for conditionality.

But it is not like praying with impurity or prostrating before

an idol because [these acts] are capable of being divided. [For]
494

those who prefer this way, a more comprehensive expression for
them to say is, “As for commanding something before its time, it is
permissible for its effect to remain applicable on the commanded
[person] until its appointed time. Also, it is permissible for the
effect of its command to be eliminated before its appointed time.”
Thus, it is permissible that the continuance of its effect be made a
condition of the command. For it can be said, “Do what I have
commanded you as long as the effect of my command to you is not
obliterated by a prohibition.” /1:114/ Thus, when he prohibits it,
the effect of the command will be eliminated. It is not, then,
prohibited in the same way that He has commanded it.

The second ground [for argument] is that we do not deem it
necessary to reveal the differences in the aspects [of a command].
But we say that it is possible for Him to State, “As for what We
have commanded you to perform in one respect, We thus prohibit
you from this act in the same respect.” This is not impossible. For
the commanded [act) is not good per se or by an inherent
peculiarity present before the command which would render it
contradictory. Nor does the willing or unwilling of the command
render it contradictory. Rather, all of these are principles of the

Mu‘tazilites, which we have refuted.

If it is said: If Allah, yixs, knows that He is going to prohibit
something, what is the sense of Him commanding what He
decisively knows will be annulled, since He knows the outcome of

all events?

We shall say: This is not true if the outcome of His command
495

is known to the commanded person. But if it is unknown to the
commanded person and known only to the Commander, then the
command is possible in order to test him for his determination and
preoccupation with being ready [to obey], thus preventing him
from various kinds of amusements and corruptions, in order that
he be liable through his determination to reward, or in abandoning
it, to punishment. This may contain Grace and reclamation for a
person. Its examination will come in the Book of Commandments.!8

What is astonishing, however, is the Mu‘tazilites’ denial of the
establishment of a command with a condition while they
themselves have held it permissible for promises to be conditional
on the part of one who knows the outcome of affairs. Furthermore,
they have stated that the promise of Allah, g'xs, to give reward for
obedience is conditional on the nonexistence of what nullifies it,
such as sinfulness or apostasy, and that the punishment for
disobedience is conditional on it being void of that which atones for
it, such as repentance.

But, Allah, gixs, knows the outcome of the affairs of whoever
dies, whether in apostasy or repentance. Yet He has made this
conditional with His promise. So why is it impossible for a
condition to be attached to His commands and prohibitions, though
its conditionality is in relation to a servant who does not know the
outcome of affairs? He may say, “I shall reward you for your
obedience as long as you do not nullify it by apostasy,” while He

knows whether or not he will nullify it. Similarly, He may say, “I

18o1-Mustasfa, 2:15-24,

496

command you on the condition that you remain [alive] and have

ability, and on the condition that I do not abrogate it for you.”

The second way [of replying] concerns the impossibility of .
abrogation before the ability [to obey], as in their statement,
“Command and prohibition, according to you [Ash‘arites], is the
eternal speech of Allah, gts. How then can the one statement be
commanding and prohibiting the same thing at the same time?
Furthermore, how can the eliminating [verse] and the eliminated
one be the same, considering that the abrogating [command] and
the abrogated one are both the speech of Allah, giza?”

We shall say: This indicates two controversies. One of them
concerns the nature of the unicity of the speech of Allah, ‏.معاي‎ But
that issue is not confined to this question. Rather, according to us,
this is similar to their statement that “knowledgeableness” is one
state which subsumes knowing the infinity of details. This
controversy can be clarified only in theology.

As for the second controversy, it is that of His speech being
one, commanding something and prohibiting it {simultaneously]. If
the locus of obligation were to know this at one time, then it is
inconceivable that he would believe {in its] obligatoriness and be
determined to fulfill [it]; nor would this be worthier to him than
believing in its prohibition and being determined to abandon it.

So we shall say: The speech of Allah, gts, is in itself one. But
it is in relation to one thing a command and in relation to another
thing, a predicate. But testing by it is conceivable only when the

locus of obligation has heard both of these at two different times.
497

This is the reason we require a delay for abrogation, while if he
heard both at the same time it becomes impossible. /1:115/

As for Jibril, ui Lie, it is possible for him to hear it at one
time since he is not a locus of obligation. Moreover, he conveys it
to the Messenger of Allah, pti’ shite ‏اله‎ d=, at two different times only
if the Messenger is included in the command. But if he is Not, then
it may be conveyed to him at one time. Yet he is ordered to convey
(them) to the ummah at two times. So he orders them, generally, to
make peace and abandon fighting the unbelievers and generally to
face Jerusalem in all Prayers, and then prohibits them from this
afterward. Thus, he severs the standing rule of the general
command from them, just as he severs the standing rule of a
contract by annulment

Some of our fellows [i.e. Ash‘arites] Say that a command does
not become a command before reaching the commanded person.
Therefore, it is not a command and a Prohibition in the same
Situation, but in two [different] situations. This also eliminates
inconsistencies and refutes it.

Thus, the decisive Proof that it is possible in revealed
authority is the Story of Abraham, x4 sei, namely, the abrogation
of [the command to] sacrificing his son before {his} performance [of
the act], and the statement of Allah, gtx’, “We ransomed him
[Isma‘il] with a great sacrifice.” 19 So he was commanded with one
act and did not neglect hastening and submitting [to obey]; then it

was abrogated. This is difficult for the Mu‘tazilites to comprehend,

0ur'an 37:107.

498

to the extent that they arbitrarily interpret it and are divided into
different groups.

They sought to resolve this in five ways. The first of which
is [holding] that this was a dream [of Abraham], not a command.

The second is that he was commanded; but it was intended
to oblige him with [only] the determination to perform the act in
order to test his heart for patience in determination. Thus
slaughtering was not commanded per se.

The third is that the command was not abrogated, but Allah,
g'xa, changed [Isma‘il’s] neck into copper or iron so that it was not
cut. Thus, the obligation was terminated because of the
impossibility [to fulfill it}.

The fourth concerns disputing what has been commanded,
which was to throw him down on his forehead, passing the knife
without actual slaughtering.

The fifth is rejecting abrogation and saying that he
slaughtered him obediently, then it [his neck] was rejoined and
healed. Those who hold this interpretation agree that Isma‘il was
not slaughtered. But they differ with regard to Abraham being the
Slaughterer. Some have said that he was the Slaughterer for he did
cut [him], while the son was not slaughtered because of the healing.
Others have said that being a slaughterer without a slaughtered
object is impossible.

All of this is abusive and artificial.

As for the first, namely that it was a dream, the dreams of
prophets are part of prophethood; they came to know the

commands of Allah, d'xs, through them. Indeed, the prophecy of
409

various prophets was solely through dreams. What indicates his
comprehension of His command is the statement of his son, “Do as
you have been commanded.”" If he [Abraham] had not been so
commanded, he {Isma‘il] would be a liar. Also, intending to
Slaughter and to throw [his son] down on {his] face is not possible
on the basis of an unfounded dream. Furthermore, He has called it
“a manifest trial"?! And what trial is there in a dream? And what
is the sense of sacrifice?

As for the second, namely that he [Abraham] was
commanded in order to test his determination, this is impossible
because He who knows the unseen is not in need of testing. Also,
Since testing occurs only through obligation, then if obligation does
not exist, testing does not occur. Moreover, their statement,
“Determination is the obligation,” is absurd because determination
[to obey] what is not obligatory is not mandatory [in itself], for it
follows the [rule] of the determined object; and determination is
not obligatory as long as one does not believe in the obligatoriness
of the determined object.

Even if the determined object was not mandatory, then
Abraham, ‏الكلار‎ 412, would have been more deserving to know this
than the Mu‘tazilites. Why should it not be so when he [Abraham],
said, “ . . . [ saw in a dream that I shall Sacrifice you.” And so his

son said to him, “Do as you have been commanded,” meaning

200ur’an 37:102.

21Our'an 37:106,

500

slaughtering. Also, His saying, gtx, /1:116/ “ . . . He threw him
down on his face,” is surrendering to the action of slaughtering, not
to determination.

As for the third, namely that laying down and nothing more
than it is what is commanded, this is absurd. For this cannot be
called sacrificing, nor is it an affliction. Nor does it need sacrifice
after obedience

As for the fourth—denial of abrogation and that he
[Abraham] had obeyed, but his ({Isma‘il’s] neck turned to iron, thus
it was beyond [his] ability, terminating the obligation—this is
incorrect according to their principles. For commanding what is
conditional is not established according to them. Rather, since
Allah, gtx, knew that He will turn his ({Isma‘il’s] neck into iron, He
would not, therefore, be commanding that which He knows its
impossibility and will not need ransom. Thus, it would not be an
affliction on his part.

As for the fifth, namely that he did [sacrifice Isma‘il], but it
healed, this is absurd because how could ransom be needed after
the healing? And if this were true, this would have been known
and become one of His manifest signs. Yet this has never been

reported. Rather, it is just an invention on the part of the

Mu ‘tazilites.

If it is said: Did He not say, “You have already fulfilled the

visi on722

220ur'an, 37:105.

501

We shall say: It means, “You have performed in the
[command’s] first parts a performance that only a believer in the
vision does.” But attesting is different than realization and

performance.

II. DISCUSSION: [This Concerns] whenever part of a rite of

worship [‘ibdda], or its condition, or one of its recommended

Sunnas2>

is abrogated—such as omitting two rak‘as from four, or
omitting the condition of ritual purity [for prayer).

Some people have said that it is an abrogation of a part of a
rite of worship, not of its foundation. Others have said that it is an
abrogation of the foundation of the rite of worship. Still others
have said that abrogating a condition is not an abrogation of the
foundation, while abrogating a part is an abrogation of its
foundation. They did not allow calling a condition [of a rite} a part
[of it]. But some of them did call it [as such].

To shed light on this issue, in our view, is to say that if He
obliged four rak‘as then restricted them to two rak‘as, He then
abrogated the foundation of the rite of worship. For the essence of
abrogation is removal and change. Now certainly the rule
[characterizing] the four [rak‘as] was that of obligation. Then its
obligatoriness was abrogated entirely. The two rak‘as are a

different rite of worship. They are not [to be considered} part of

the four. For if they were part of them, then he who prays four for

23756 term ‘Sunna ' here means the nonobligatory parts of a
rite of worship.

502

the morning prayer would be fulfilling the obligation and more, as

if he has prayed with two taslimas,24 or as when a dirham is

obligatory on a person [for charity] and then [he] gives two.

If it is said: If He reduces the four to one rak‘a, while the one
rak‘a was already characterized as being insufficient—thus now
becoming sufficient—is this then an additional abrogation besides
abrogating the four [rak‘as]?

We shall say: Considering the rak‘a as insufficient means that
its existence is the same as its nonexistence. This is basically a
rational judgment that is not of the Shari‘a, while abrogation is
obliterating what has been established by the Shari‘a.

So if the term abrogation means only elimination—in
whatever manner and without regard to what is being
eliminated—then this is abrogation. But we have explained it
differently than this in the definition of abrogation. Yet, if the
[condition of] ritual purity is dropped, then the obligatoriness of
ritual purity is abrogated, while prayer remains an obligation.
Certainly, if the status of prayer without ritual purity is such that it
was insufficient, then it has now become sufficient. Still, this is
changing an original [rational] rule, not a Shari‘a rule. For prayer

without ritual purity is not sufficient because it is not commanded
by the Shari‘a.

24Taslima is the salutation pronounced upon finishing the last
rak‘a of a prayer. See Lane, 4:1412.

303

If it is said: The validity of prayer is dependent upon ritual
purity, then the dependence of its validity was abrogated by
/1:117/ the Shari‘a. Consequently, it is an abrogation related to the
rite of worship itself, and prayer with ritual purity is different
from prayer without ritual purity, as three is different than four.
So let this be an abrogation of a particular prayer, while obligating
another one.

We shall say: This is why some people imagined that
abrogating a condition of a rite of worship is similar to the
abrogation of a part [of it]. There is no doubt that if He had
obligated prayer without ritual purity, then it would be an
abrogation of its mandatoriness with ritual purity. This, then,
would be another rite of worship.

But if prayer is permitted in any case, with or without ritual
purity, then prayer without ritual purity would not be sufficient
because it remains under the original [rational] rule, for it was not
commanded then, but is now made sufficient, and the original rule
is eliminated.

As for the validity of prayer and the fact that it is dependent
upon ritual purity, abrogating this dependence is an abrogation of
the foundation of the rite of worship, or an abrogation of the.
dependence of the validity (of prayer upon ritual purity], or
[abrogation] of the significance of conditionality. But this is an open
question and an insignificant issue. There is no great benefit
associated with it.

But regarding one of its parts prescribed as Sunna [i.e.

nonobligatory] upon which sufficiency is not dependent—such as
504

Standing to the right of the imam or covering the head—then there
is no doubt that this does not expose the rite of worship to
abrogation. Therefore, reducing the scope of the rite of worship is
an abrogation of its foundation, while the reduction of the Sunna
aspects does not expose a rite of worship [to abrogation]. Also,
there is dispute about the reduction of a condition; but when
investigated, it appears more appropriate to attach it to the

reduction of the scope of a rite of worship.

111. DISCUSSION: An addition to the text is an abrogation
according to some people, but it is not according to others. To us,
analysis [of the issue] is preferable. Therefore, we say that one
should examine the relationship of an addition [ziyada} with the
recipient [al-mazid ‘alayhi }.

This has three ranks:

The first is knowing that [the addition) is not related to [the
recipient], as in the case when He obligates prayer and fasting and
then obliges alms and pilgrimage. In such a case, the rule of the
recipient does not change since its obligatoriness and sufficiency
remain, while abrogation either eliminates a rule or changes it. But
[here] it was not eliminated.

The second rank, which is furthest from the first, is when
the addition is attached to the recipient in a unified manner that
eliminates diversity and separation. For example, if two rak‘as are
added to the morning prayer, this is then abrogation, since the
Status of the [original] two rak‘as was sufficient and valid; but this

has been eliminated. Surely the obligation of the four [rak‘as] has
505

been initiated and was not obligatory. But this is not abrogation
because what has been eliminated is the original [rational] rule, not

the Shari‘a rule.

If it is said: The four rak‘as include the two and more;
therefore, they are fixed, not eliminated, and the two rak‘as were
added to them.

We shall say: Abrogation is obliterating the standing rule, not
eliminating the subject of the rule. As for the status of the two
rak‘as, they were sufficient and valid; but this has been eliminated.
Why should it not be so, while we have explained that four is not
three plus more.2> Rather, it is a different kind. For if it were the
same, then five would equal four and more. Thus, it necessarily
follows that whoever prays five [rak‘as], this should be sufficient.
But know one holds this.

The third rank, which is between the two ranks, is the
addition of twenty flogs to the [prescribed] eighty flogs for false
accusation [of fornication].26 But [in this case] the separation of this

addition is not like separating fasting and prayer; nor is their

25 Ghazali here uses the term ‘ziydda,’ meaning addition or
more, Because of its vagueness, what is more could be one, two,
three, four, etc. In the case of prayer, performing three rak‘as then

separately performing one is not equivalent to the prescribed four;
therefore it is insufficient.

26For the definition of ‘gadhf (false accusation of fornication)

and its details, see al-Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami wa Adillatuhu, 6:69-
91.

506

connection similar to the connection between the rak‘as.

Abi Hanifa, unt ‏ررحم‎ said that it is abrogation. But this is not
correct. Rather, it resembles separation because the obligatoriness
and sufficiency of the eighty lashes per se was annulled. But an
addition to it was made an obligation simultaneously with the
continuance [of the eighty]. Thus the hundred (lashes) is eighty
and more. /1:118/ Because of this, the sufficiency of the eighty is
not annulled by adding on to them, contrary to [the case of] prayer.
The issue, with us, is used to permit the establishment of the
punishment [of expulsion] based on a solitary report, and
prohibiting it according to them (Hanifites}.2’ For the Qur’dn cannot

be abrogated by a solitary report.

If it is said: The eighty [lashes] was considered complete
punishment, and, therefore, abrogating the quality of being
complete is necessarily an elimination of its rule.

We shall say: It is elimination, but this is not intended to be
a Shari‘a rule. Rather, what is intended is its existence and
sufficiency. Indeed, it remained as it was. So, if one establishes
that it is intended to be a Shari‘a rule, then its abrogation would be
impossible by way of a solitary report. Rather, it is as if the Shari‘a
obligates only prayer. So whoever performs it, he would be fully

executing the entirety of what Allah, ‏,شعني‎ has obliged him to do. If

27 For more details about the Hanafite and the Shafi‘ite
opinions on whether or not the punishment of taghrib (expulsion)

Should be added to flogging, see al-Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami wa
Adillatuhu, 6:38-40.

507

He then makes fasting an obligation, prayer would not be

considered the entirety of obligations. But this is not an intended

rule.

If it is said: It is abrogation because of the obligatoriness of
limiting [the punishment] to eighty [lashes], since obligating eighty
prevents excessiveness.

We shall say: The prevention of excess is not in an explicit
[statement], but rather an implicit one. In any case, they do not
hold this [here]; nor do we. Furthermore, the elimination of what is
implied is similar to specifying a general case because it is
eliminating a part of what the expression requires. So it is possible
based on a solitary report. Moreover, this can be considered sound
only if it is established that the implied rule has come and been
fixed, and then [the punishment] of expulsion came afterward. Yet
there is no way of knowing this. Rather, it may have come in

explaination for eliminating the implied [expression] attached or

close to it.

If it is said: The pronouncing of [someone] as unrighteous
and the rejection of [a person’s] testimony is related to the eighty
[lashes]. But when the {lashes] are exceeded, the attachment {of the
rule] to it is eliminated.

We shall say: Pronouncing [someone] unrighteous and
rejecting testimony is related to false accusation, not to the [Shari‘a]
punishment. Were we to concede, then this would be a rule

adherent to the punishment, not the intended one. It would be like
308

the lawfulness of marriage after an elapse of four months and ten
days, as pertaining to the ‘idda of death [for the widdow], and the
disposition of the Sharf‘a toward ‘idda in reducing it from one year
to four months and ten days. This is not disposing of the

lawfulness of marriage, but rather the ‘idda itself. For marriage is

dependent [upon it].

If it is said: If it is commanded generally to pray, then the
condition of ritual purity is added, is this then an abrogation?

We shall say: Yes. For the standing rule of the first
[command] was that prayer is sufficient without ritual purity; then

its sufficiency was abrogated and was commanded with ritual

purity.

If it is said: Then it is incumbent upon you to hold that
circumambulation {around the Ka‘ba] by one who is not ritually
pure is sufficient because He, diz, said, “. . . And let them
circumambulate the Ancient House.”28 But He did not require
ritual purity, while al-Shafi‘i, wi ‘ea, prohibited its sufficiency due
to his saying, ‏وسكم‎ shi wt ‏رحن‎ “Circumambulating the House is [like}
prayer,”9 Yet this is a solitary report. Abi Hanifah, wi say,
concluded that this report effects the obligatoriness of ritual purity.

As for voiding circumambulation and its sufficiency, which is

8Our'’an, 22:29,

‎the various sources and versions of this hadith, see‏ م29
‎Wensinck, Concordance, 4:50-51.‏

509

known by the Book, it does not [void it).

We shall say: If the general intent in the Book is fixed and it
requires the sufficiency of circumambulating without ritual purity
or with ritual purity, then requiring ritual purity is elimination and
abrogation, which is not allowed based on a solitary report.
However, His statement, gixs, “... And let them circumambulate the
Ancient House,” is possible to be a command for the basis of
circumambulation. However, clarifying its conditions was left to
the Messenger, ,u&n sui. Thus his statement is regarded as an
explanation and specification of the general [case], not an
abrogation. For it is an omission of the text, not an addition to it
because the generality [of the text] necessitates sufficiency of
circumambulation, with ritual purity or without it.

So a/1:119/ solitary report has excluded one of the two
implications of the expressions of the Qur’an. Thus, it is an
omission from the text, not an addition to it. Yet it is possible for it
to be an elimination, if the general [command] is decisively fixed, or
an explanation, if it is not fixed. But there is no sense to claim that

it is fixed arbitrarily

This is similar to His statement, gtxs, “... And let him freea
slave ... "30 for it includes the believer and the unbeliever. So it is

Possible to specify the general since the verse may have been
intended to relate the basis of atonement, and it would be a
command on the basis of atonement without its restrictions and

conditions. Therefore, if the [command’s] generality becomes fixed

30See Qur'an, 58:3. In 4:92, slave is qualified as a believer.

510

and decisiveness accrues indicating that the generality is intended,
then its abrogation and elimination would be impossible through

giyas or by solitary report.

If it is said: What do you Say concerning the permissibility of
wiping over one’s khuff??! Is it an abrogation of washing the two
feet?

We shall say: It is not an abrogation of its sufficiency, nor of
its obligatoriness. But it is an abrogation of the restrictiveness of
its obligatoriness, thus specifying it and making it one of the two

obligations. It is possible for it to be established based on a

solitary report.

If it is said: The Book has obligated washing both feet,
restrictively. |

We shall say: Its restrictiveness remains on the part of he
who did not wear khuffs in ritual purity, and excluded from its
generality he who wore khuffs in ritual purity, that is, for the

duration of three days, or a day and a night.

If it is said: His sayin » giza, “... And call to witness from
ying, g
among your men, two witnesses . , "32 The verse requires the

arrest of judgement [contingent] upon two witnesses. So when ‏عمو‎

31A pair of Shoes, slippers of light leather without heels; pl.
akhfaff.

32Qur’an, 2:282.

511

judges based on a witness and an oath established by a solitary
report, then the arrest of judgement is lifted. Is this, then,
abrogation?

We shall say: It is not like this, for the verse does not
necessitate other than the two witnesses for evidence and the
permissiblity of judging based on their statement. As for
disallowing judgement by other evidence, it is not in the verse.
Rather, it is like judgement based on confession. Furthermore, the
mention of one bit of evidence does not prevent the existence of
another bit of evidence.

Their statement that the apparent meaning of the verse is
that there is no evidence other than {the two witnesses] is not so
because this is not the literal meaning of the text. According to
them, there is no proof in what is implicit. Even if there were, then
the removal of what is implied is removing part of what the
expression requires. But all of this [may be so], if the implied is
fixed and [what is] established is conceded. Also, the report of a

witness with an oath has occurred after it. But all of this is not

conceded.

IV. DISCUSSION: It is not a condition of abrogation to
establish a substitute for what is abrogated. Some people have said
that this is impossible.

So we shall ask: Is this impossible on rational grounds or
[according to] revealed authority?

Its possibility is not rationally inconceivable, since if it were

impossible, its impossibility would be due to either its form,
512

opposition to the public’s welfare, or some underlying reason. Yet
it is not impossible due to form, for He may say, “I have made
fighting obligatory for you”; and [then] “I have abrogated it for you,
returning you to what was before, concerning the original rule.”

Nor is it impossible on the basis of public benefit, for the
Shari‘a is not founded on this. But even if it is so founded, it is not
unlikely that the public benefit is in eliminating the [rule] without
establishing a substitute.

Now, if they disallow its possibility on the basis of revealed
authority, this, then, would be arbitrary. Yet the prohibition from
Saving the meat of sacrificed animals was abrogated, and the
requirement of paying charity before having private counsel [with
the Prophet] was abrogated—and it had no substitute. However,
the qibla was abrogated by a substitute and the testament of
[granting possessions] to relatives was (abrogated) by a substitute,
and there are other examples.

The essence of abrogation is solely elimination. As for His
Saying, gixa, “For whatever verse We abrogate or cause to be
forgotten, We shall bring the better or the like of it.” If they
adhere to this as [evidence], this can be answered in several ways.

First, this does not bar the possibility [of abrogation without
substitue] even though it denies its existence, even to whoever
holds the general case [to be fixed]. But for those who do not
adhere to this, it does not oblige them at all. But even for those
who hold this position, it does not necessarily follow that it

[abrogation] is only possible with a substitute in all situations,

/1:120/ Rather, [the general case] is subject to specifications based
513

on the proofs of the sacrificial animals and [giving] alms before
private counsel [with the Prophet].

Furthermore, it appears [from the verse] that He meant that
abrogating a verse by a similar verse does not imply that
abrogation means only the elimination of the abrogated. It could

mean other things in conjunction with this. All of this is possible.

V. DISCUSSION: Some people have said that abrogation is
possible only by {a rule] that is less burdensome but not by one
that would be more burdensome.

We shall say: With reference to the impossibility of
abrogation by that which is more burdensome, do you know this on
the basis of reason or Shari‘a? For it is not rationally impossible,
since it is neither deniable per se nor deniable based on public
welfare. For we deny it.>> Even if we accept it [the argument of
public goodJ, why is it not possible that the public good be
[pursued] in the upgrading and elevation of what is less
burdensome to what is more burdensome, as was so with the
public good at the beginning of the divine obligation and the

elimination the original state of rules.

If it is said: Allah, gtzx>, is gracious and merciful to His
creatures and rigidity is not suitable for Him.

We shall say: It follows necessarily, then, that initiating

33Ghazali disputes the validity of istislah (public good) as a
source of law. See his discussion in al-Mustasfd, 1:284-315.

514

divine obligation or afflicting illness, poverty, and various

sufferings upon people is not suitable for Him.

If it is said: It is impossible on the basis of revealed
authority according to His saying, gtx, “Allah desires ease for you
and desires not hardship for you,’34 and His Statement, giz, “And
Allah desires to lighten things for you,”35

We shall say: It necessarily follows, then, that He must leave
them [in a state] of permission to do [or not to do]; for there is ease
in this. Moreover, He must not abrogate [anything] with its like, for
there is no ease in this, since there is only ease in eliminating [a
rule) either without substitute or with what is easier.

On the contrary, these verses were [revealed] for special
cases intended to ease. There is nothing in them that prevents the

intention of [establishing] what is burdensome and rigid.

If it is said: He has said, “And whatever verse We abrogate
or caused to be forgotten,We bring one better or its like...” This
better is universal, and good is what is beneficial to us. Otherwise,
the entire Qur’an is good. But what is good for us is what is less
burdensome.

We shall say: This is not the case. Rather, better is what is

more rewarding and more beneficial to us in the Hereafter,

34Qur’an, 2:185.,

35Qur’an, 4:28.

515

although it is more burdensome in the present condition.

If it is said: This is not impossible rationally; but it is so on
the basis of revealed authority, for abrogation by that which is
more burdensome is not found in the Sharf‘a.

We shall say: This is not so because the Companions were
commanded to abandon fighting and avoid it at first, then [were
commanded] with a declaration to fight, along with hardship, (such
as] requiring one to stand firm against ten. Similarly, the choice
between fasting or compensation with food was abrogated by
specifying fasting, which is a restriction. Alcohol, temporary
marriage, and [eating] domesticated asses*° were prohibited ‘after’
they had been unrestricted. Again, the permissibility of delaying
Prayer out of fear was abrogated and then mandated during
fighting. In addition, fasting the tenth day [of M uharram] was
[abrogated] by the fasting of Ramadan. Prayer, according to some

people, was two rak‘as and was then abrogated by four when one

is at home.

VI. DISCUSSION: They disputed abrogation with regard to
a person who has not received {its} report.

Some people have said that abrogation has occurred with
respect to him though he is unaware of it. Others have said that

what has not reached a person is not an abrogation for him.

36For various fighf opinions on the lawful and unlawful
animals, see al-Zahili, al-Figh al-lslamit wa Adillatuhu, 3:506-513.

516

The preferred opinion is that abrogation has an essence, that
is, obliterating the previous rule. It has an effect, namely, the
obligatoriness of gada’ [belated performance of an obligation] and
the nullification of what used to be sufficient for the previous act.

As for its essence, which is eliminating the command, it is not
established for anyone whom it did not reach. For whosoever was
commanded to face Jerusalem [should have done so]; but when the
abrogation to [face] Mecca [was revealed], the [previous] command
was not immediately void for one who was, say, in Yemen. In fact,
he would be commanded to hold to the previous command. /1:121/
If he abandons it, he would be sinning even though it is discovered
that it was abrogated. He is not obliged to face the Ka‘ba. Indeed,
if he had faced it, he would be sinning. There is no way for this to
be disputed.

As for the necessity of gadd’ for prayer when abrogation is
known, this is acknowledged by either the proof of the text or
‏.كربو‎ Also, it may be that an act of gadé’ becomes obligatory,
where an act of add’ [timely performance] is not obliged. Such is
the case with a menstruating woman; if she fasts, she is sinning,
though qadd’ is obligatory for her.

Similarly, it is permissible to say about a person that if he
faces the Ka‘ba, he is sinning; and in his act of qada’, he is obligated
to face it, just as we say, concerning a person who is sleeping or
unconscious [while an obligation is revealed}, when they are awake
and alert they are obligated to perform gadd’ for what was not

obligatory for them [previously]. For one who cannot discern is not

addressable.
317

If it is said: When he knows of the abrogation, does he
abandon the qibla on the basis of abrogation or on the basis of his
knowledge of the abrogation? For mere cognition has no effect;
thus indicating that the rule has been terminated by the revelation
of the abrogating [command]. Although he was unaware of it, he is
in error; yet he is excused.

We shall say: The abrogating [command] is the eliminator;
but knowledge is a condition. Upon the occurrence of the condition,
the abrogating [command] is referred to. However, there is no
abrogation before the existence of the condition, for the abrogating
{command] is an address. Yet it cannot become so for those whom
it did not reach.

Their statement, ‘He is in error,” is absurd because the term
error is applied to whoever seeks something but misses it or to
whoever is obligated to seek something but neglects it. But nothing

of this is substantiated in the domain of controversy.

CHAPTER TWO: THE ESSENTIAL CONSTITUENTS OF THE DOCTRINE
OF ABROGATION AND ITS CONDITIONS

This comprises an introduction which deals with the
comprehensive, essential constituents and conditions. It further
comprises certain discussions which follow from the rules of
abrogation. As for the introduction, know that the essential

constituents of abrogation are four: The abrogation, the
518

37

abrogator,’ the abrogated, and those who something is abrogated

for.

Since the essence of abrogation is the elimination of a rule,
the Abrogator, then, is Allah, gs, Himself, for it is He who is the
Eliminator of the rule. That which is abrogated is the eliminated
rule, and those from whom it is eliminated are the worshippers, the
loci of obligation. Abrogation resides in His statement indicating
the elimination of the standing rule.

However, the text [dalil} may be called, figuratively, an
‘abrogator.’ Thus, it is said, “ ‘This’ verse abrogates ‘that’ one.”
Thus, the kukm, may also be figuratively called an ‘abrogator.’
Therefore, it can be said that the fasting of Ramadan abrogates the
fasting of the tenth day of Muharram. But the actual meaning is
the previous one because abrogation is elimination, and Allah, yrs,
is the Eliminator for establishing the proof that indicates
obliteration and through His statement which manifests it.

As for the comprehensive conditions [of abrogation], they are
four:

First, that which is abrogated should be a Shari‘a rule, not an
originally rational rule; for example, the original freedom of man is

eliminated by the imposition of the rites of worship.?°.

37156 term abrogator may refer to Allah—since He is the one
actually sanctioning the abrogation—or to the verse or hadith
removing and replacing the prior rule. Here, if the abrogator is
used in reference to Allah, A shall be in upper case. Otherwise,

abrogator should be assumed to mean the verse or hadith, i.e., the
abrogating rule.

38 Bara’ at al-Asliya

519

Second, abrogation should occur through an address. Thus
the obliteration of a rule caused by the death of the locus of
obligation is not called abrogation, for that which eliminates, in this
case, is not an address eliminating the rule of a previous address.
Rather, it is said in the first place, “This rule is imposed upon you
as long as you are alive.” Therefore, the imposition of a rule is
confined to the life [of a person], so it does not need elimination.

Third, the rule of the removed address should not be
restricted to a time whose entrance requires the removal of the

rule, as in the saying of Allah, yixs , “. . . Then complete your fast

until night .. 2939

Fourth, the abrogating address should occur after the first

one, not as in the statement of Allah, gies , “... Do not approach
them until they are clean. . 7,40 and His saying, “. . . Until they pay

jizya [pole tax] from their hands [and are] subdued,”4!

The following nine conditions are not required for abrogation:
First, it is not required to replace something with something

else identical to it, but only with what eliminates it.
Second, it is not required that abrogation occur after the

time when the abrogated [rule] has comes. Rather, it is permissible

39Qur'’An, 2:187,
40Qur'an, 2:222.

4lOur'an, 9:29.

520

before the time of its arrival.

Third, it is not required that the abrogated [rule] be affected
by exceptions and specifications. Rather, the arrival of abrogation
is permissible upon a lone command to do a single action at one
time,

Fourth, it is not required that the Qur’an be abrogated by the
Qur’an and the Sunna by the Sunna. Therefore, belonging to the
same genre is not required. It is enough that it be something
capable of sound abrogation.

Fifth, it is not required that they [the abrogating and
abrogated texts] be clearly decisive texts; for it is permissible to
abrogate a solitary transmission through a similar or mutawatir
transmission, even though it is not permissible to abrogate a
mutawatir transmission with a solitary one.

Sixth, it is not required for the abrogating [text] to be
transmitted in words similar to those of the abrogated one. Rather,
it can be established by any means, for facing Jerusalem [during
prayer] has not been transmitted to us through either the Qur’dn or
the Sunna, but its abrogator is an explicit text in the Qur’an,

Similarly, a rule that has been expressly stated [in Shari‘a]
may be abrogated by the ijtihdd of the Prophet, pho's sania ‏اك‎ “um, or his
own qiyds, even if they have not been established through a text
that has a mood and form, which would require transmission.

Seventh, it is not required for the abrogating [text] to be
contrary to the abrogated, such that a command could not be
abrogated except by a prohibition, nor a prohibition except by a

command, Rather, it is possible that both be abrogated by, say, a
521

{text] of permission . Also [not required] is that a time-restricted
obligation not be abrogated except by an obligation with latitude.
What is required is that the abrogator eliminates a rule arising
from that which is abrogated in whatever way possible.

Eighth, it is not required that the two [the abrogated and
abrogator] be established [that is, in sequence] only through a text.
Rather, it can be done by the implied, assumed, or literal meaning
of a statement in whatever way possible. The proof of this is when
the Prophet, jit ui, clarified that the verse stipulating bequest in
favor of near relatives was abrogated by his statement, “Allah, gizs,
has given each deserving person a due right in inheritance. So,
beware that there is no bequest in favor of an inheritor.” Although
it is possible to combine both bequest and inheritance, they are not
mutually contradictory.

Ninth, it is not required that a rule be abrogated only by its
substitute or by that which is less burdensome than it.

Now, we shall discuss certain questions which arise out of the
consideration of the two basic elements [the abrogated and the
abrogating text]: Two concern the abrogated and four are in

reference to that which abrogates.

I. DISCUSSION: There is no Sharf‘a rule but it is
abrogatable.

This is contrary to the view of the Mu'tazilites, who state that
some acts have intrinsic characteristics that necessitate their
‘goodness’ or ‘badness.’ Therefore, their abrogation is not possible.

For example, the knowledge that Allah, J'zs, is just, or that there
522

must be gratefulness to the bestower of favors; these obligations
cannot be abrogated. Furthermore, the prohibition against acts of
disbelief, injustice, and lying cannot be abrogated .

Now, they built this doctrine upon their theory that reason is
capable of ruling upon things as ‘good’ or ‘bad,’ and that it is
‘necessary’ /1:23/ for Allah, yixs, to do always the most salutary
thing to His creatures. For this reason they laid restrictions on
Allah, gtxs, with regard to His commands and prohibitions. At times
they raise this [doctrine] in [the position that] the Islam of a minor
is lawfully sound, for it is necessitated by reason. Therefore, to
exempt the minor from these obligations are impossible.

These are doctrines that we have refuted, and we have
shown that merely entertaining the imposition of obligation upon
Allah, gta, is not possible—whether or not the salutariness of His
servants lies in it. Of course, after Allah has bestowed obligations
upon His servants, then it is not possible to abrogate all obligations,
for a person cannot know abrogation if he does not know the
Abrogator, that is, Allah, ‏.عزو جل‎ It is necessary for the locus of
obligation to know the abrogating [text] and the proof that has been
established for abrogation, therefore to know this is an obligation
that necessarily remains.

We concede, however, that it is not so that Allah bestow upon
them an obligation not to know Him or forbid them from knowing
Him, for His statement, “I oblige you not to know Me,” would in
itself contain the idea of knowledge. In other words, it means
“Know Me because I have made it obligatory upon you not to know

Me,” which is absurd. Therefore, this kind of obligation cannot be
303

established according to those people who do not allow for the
Creation of an obligation which is impossible to bear. Similarly, it is
not possible that someone be obliged to know something from
among the contingencies in a way that is contrary to reality, for

this is impossible. And, therefore, it is neither conceivable to do

nor abandon,

II. DISCUSSION: When a verse contains a tule, it is
possible to abrogate its wording, even if its rule remains, just as it
is possible to abrogate its rule while its wording remains. Thus, it
is possible that both be abrogated.

A group of people think of this as impossible. But we say
that it is possible rationally and has actually occurred in the
Shari‘a. As for its rational permissibility, the recitation and writing
of it in the Qur’an, as well as its validation of prayer, all are its
tules, just as its prohibitions or permissions, which are understood
from its wording, are also its rule. These rules are then capable of

being abrogated because every rule is capable of being abrogated.

Some people say that the abrogation of the recitation is
essentially impossible. For if what is thereby intended is the Tule,
it would have been mentioned at the tongue of the Prophet,
‏وسكم‎ sete ‏.سي اله‎ Moreover, Allah, gtx, has not sent this down upon
him except for the reason of its recitation and reward. So how can
this be abrogated?

We shall say: What difficulty is there in the intention being

simply the [imparted] rule and not the actual recitation. Indeed, it
524

ae

was sent to Allah’s Prophet, ‏وسكم‎ sai wi “om, through definite wording.

If it is said: If [recitation’s) abrogation is permissible, then its
tule may also be abrogated, for rule follows recitation. Can what is
derived remain while the original source is abrogated?

We shall say: No, since recitation has its rule. To establish
prayer on its basis is another rule. Therefore, the recitation is not
the original source; rather, its indicativeness is. Nor does it consist
in the abrogation of its recitation.

Now, ruling that prayers are not established on its basis is an
abrogation. In fact, it is an abrogation of its indicativeness, for how
many proofs are there which are not recited and on the basis of
which prayers are not established? This verse, then, is proof by its
revelation and descent [from Allah] for its being recited in the
Qur’an. But abrogation cannot remove its revelation and descent
[from Allah]. Nor does it render it as though it were never
revealed. Rather, it brings it into a category which has been
revealed but not recited. This must be 50, since it is permissible
that a proof may perish, while that which it proved remains; for a
proof is a sign, not a cause. Once it has demonstrated the proof,
then there is no harm in it perishing.

Why should it not be so, while that which necessitates rule is
the eternal speech of Allah, ‏,معني‎ which does not perish and whose
elimination and abrogation cannot be conceived? So when we say
that a certain verse is abrogated, we mean thereby that its
connection with /1:124/ the servant has been terminated and its

indication and rule is eliminated, but not its essence.
If it is said: The abrogation of a rule while the recitation of
its words remain is self contradictory, for in that case the proof
remains and that which it indicates is obliterated.

We shall say: It becomes a proof only when it is severed
from that which eliminates it from being a rule. When a new
address comes which abrogates the rule, then the condition of
being a proof is eliminated. What validates its occurrence in
revealed authority is the saying of the Exalted: “. . . And upon
those who can afford it, is the feeding of one poor person. ...” Now,
while the recitation of this verse remains, its rule was abrogated
when fasting became decidedly obligatory.

Also, when rendering a will in favor of one’s parents or near
relatives remains recited in the Qur'an, its rule has been abrogated .
by [his] statement, ,f.’, sete wi Sm, “There is no bequest in favor of an
inheritor.” In addition, before having a private audience [with the
Prophet] one was to give some charity. This rule has been
abrogated even though the recitation remains. Again, for a widow
to wait for one year before remarrying has been abrogated, and
imprisonment and punishment of those women who commit
obscenities has been replaced by the punishment of flogging and
lapidation, though its recitation remains [as well]. |

As for the abrogation of recitation, the reports are
overwhelming that the recitation of the verse concerning lapidation
has been abrogated though its rule remains. And this is the saying
of the Exalted: “The adult man and adult woman, when they

commit adultery, stone them as a punishment from Allah. And
526

Allah is mighty and wise.” It is widely reported, on the authority
of ‘A’isha, tare ‏ررضى اكه‎ that she said, “Suckling ten [times] was
originally revealed as making marriage unlawful. Then they were

abrogated with five. But none of these are in the Book.”

III. DISCUSSION: It is permissible that the Qur’an be
abrogated by the Sunna and the Sunna by the Qur’an because both
of them come from Allah, ‏.عزو جل‎ So what prevents it? Also, why is
being of the same genre not required, even though reason does not
render it impossible? How is it that the traditional argument
actually indicating facing Jerusalem [during prayers] is not
mentioned in the Qur’4n but is in the Sunna, while its abrogator is
in the Qur’4n? Similarly, the saying of the Exalted, “So therefore,
now have sex with them,” abrogates banning sex during [the nights]
of fasting. But that which made it unlawful is not in the Qur’an.
Similar [to this] is the abrogation of the fasting of ‘Ashird’ [the
tenth day of Muharram] with the fasting of Ramadan , while
[fasting] ‘Ashiiré’ was established on the basis of Sunna. Also, the
prayer of fear [in war] occurred in the Qur'an as abrogating that
which was established earlier on the basis of the Sunna, namely
that prayer [during war] could be delayed until the fighting has
finished, to the extent that the [Prophet], ‏الكلار‎ «iz, said on the day of
khandaq [of the battle of the ditch], when he had actually delayed
the prayer, “May Allah fill their [the enemy’s] graves with fire,”
because they kept him from praying on time. And so it is with the
saying of the Exalted, “Do not return these [women] to the

unbelievers [i.e., the Meccans].” This is an abrogation of what the
527

[the Prophet], ,iis saiz, established in the treaty [with the Meccans].

The fact that the Qur’an can be abrogated by the Sunna [is
illustrated) in the abrogation of rendering a will in favor of one’s
parents and near relatives by the the saying [of the Prophet],
‏وسكم‎ sale wt ‏رصبي‎ “No. There is no will in favor of the inheritor.” For
the verse of inheritance itself does not render it impossible to
make a will in favor of ones parents or near relatives, for it is
possible to combine them.

Similarly, he, Lu‘, ‏رصي اله علي‎ said, “Now Allah has opened a way
for them. [When] a virgin [commits obscenity] with a virgin,
{punishment] is one hundred lashings and exile for a year; and the
married with the married is one hundred lashes and lapidation.”*2
Now, this abrogated [the mule] confining women to their homes.
This is something which is subject to discussion because he,
‏وسكمر‎ sulle ‏اك‎ “ge, made it clear that the verse of inheritance abrogated
the verse of the will. But he, ‏وسكر‎ a.ie wi ‏,رصي‎ did not abrogate it
himself. He also made it clear that Allah, ytxs, has made a
{alternative] way for such women, which is what He had promised

earlier when He said, “... Or Allah will show another way for

them.”

If it is said: Al-Shafi‘i, wi “4a, has said that it is not

permissible to abrogate the Sunna by the Qur'an, as it is not

42The Prophet said this in response to a verse of the Qur’an
abrogating the punishment for adultery from permanent
confinement in-home to lashes or lapidation or exile. For a
complete account of the hadith, see al-[abari, Tafsir, pp. 291-294.

528

permissible to abrogate the Qur’an by the Sunna. Certainly he is
above not knowing the types of abrogation. In addition, he Says it
as though the Sunna can only annul the Sunna because the Prophet,
‏وسكم‎ sale ‏اله‎ om, [can abrogate] a Sunna with a Sunna and can clarify
his own speech and the Qur’an, while the Qur’an cannot clarify the
Sunna. If this is not to be found, it is because it has not been
transmitted to him [the Prophet]. Otherwise, abrogation cannot
take place except in this way.

We shall say: If this relates to its permissibility on the basis
of reason, then it is not difficult to perceive that it is understood
from the Qur’an that the direction {during prayer] toward the Ka‘ba
is necessitated [by the Qur’dn], even though facing Jerusalem was
established by the Sunna. Hence, its reverse is possible, although
he used to say that this has not actually occurred. Yet we have
related that it has actually occurred. Thus, we do not need to
recourse to a supposition of a hidden Sunna which has been
obliterated, for on this supposition you do not need this. But to say
that this [type of abrogation] has not occurred is pure dogma. In

fact, most say that this has occurred—and that is undisputed.

Our opponents use the saying of the Exalted, “Those people
who do not expect to meet Us, they say [to the Prophet], ‘Bring
another Qur'an different than this or change this one.’ Say, ‘It is
not possible for me to change it myself. I only follow that which is
revealed to me.‘" This [they say] indicates that the Qur’an cannot

be abrogated by the Sunna.

We shall say: It is undisputed that he {the Prophet] could not
529

abrogate on his own. Rather, only by inspiration revealed to him
[could he do so]. But it is not necessary that it should be in the text
of the Qur’4n. Even though we allow that abrogation can occur by
the ijtihdd [of the Prophet] also, the permission of ijtihdd comes
only from Allah, ‏.عو جل‎

Therefore, the essence of the matter is that the Abrogator is
He, Allah, ‏,عزو جل‎ through the tongue of the Messenger, plus’ sui wi “pon.
The point here is that it is not a condition that a rule of the Qur’an
be abrogated [only] by the Qur’an. Rather, it can be done at the
tongue of the Messenger, pfu‘s sui ‏اله‎ “us, through revelation that is
not Qur’anic. The speech of Allah, gtza, is one. It itself is the
abrogator in one sense and is the abrogated in another sense. But
He does not have two speeches, one being the Qur’an , and the
other not the Qur’an. The difference being only in the expression.
Perhaps He indicates His speech in a Systematic text by which He
orders us to recite; wherefore it is called the Qur’an. Perhaps He
may indicate it without any recited text; whence it is called Sunna.
And all of this is heard from the Messenger, ‏الكلار‎ oui. But the
Abrogator, in any case, is Allah, gizs.

When they [the unbelievers] demanded [from the Prophet] “a
Qur'an like this Qur'an,” he replied, “I am not capable of doing it
myself.” And they did not request anything else. So what
relevance does this have with the abrogation of the Qur’dn by the
Sunna and its possibility?

They [the opponents] also argue on the basis of the saying of
the Exalted, “Whatever verse We abrogate, We bring one better

than it or one similar to it.” This [verse] made it clear that a verse
530

cannot be abrogated except by one similar to it or one better than
it. However, Sunna is not like this. Then He praised Himself and
said, “Do you not know that Allah has power over all things.” This
made it clear that no one has power [of abrogation] other than He.
We shall say: We have established that Allah, gixs, is the
Abrogator, and that it is He Who manifests it at the tongue of the
Messenger, plu‘s sgiz wt Gem. It is He Who causes us to understand the
intermediacy [of the Prophet] in the abrogation of His Book—and
there is none else who can do it. Also, if Allah, ytxs, abrogates a
verse by way of the tongue of the Messenger, pfu’, gale wi ‏,رصي‎ and
then brings another verse like it, [He] then has fulfilled His
promise. But He did not make it a condition that the other verse be
an abrogator of the first. So, we say that the intention is not to
bring another Qur’an better than it, for the Qur’an cannot be
described as [having a] part of it being better than another part.
However you conceive [of Allah’s speech], eternal or created, it
means, instead, that He would bring an act better than the earlier

one because either it would be lighter than the earlier one or its

reward would be greater. /1:126/

IV. DISCUSSION: Jjmé‘ cannot be used to abrogate
because there can be no abrogation after revelation was
terminated. But what has been abrogated by ijmd‘ can be indicated
by consensus itself as an abrogating factor present at the time of

the revelation of either the Book or the Sunna.
As for the Sunna, a mutawd4tir report can abrogate a

mutawatir report, and a solitary report, a solitary report. As for
531

the abrogation of a mutawdtir report by a solitary report, they
differ among themselves as to whether it has actually occurred in
revealed authority or is rationally permissible.

Some people said that in revealed authority it has actually
occurred because the people of the mosque of Qubd’ turned toward
the Ka‘ba on the word of one person who informed them {about
this]. This has been established in a decisive manner. They
accepted its abrogation [on the basis] of a solitary report. The
preferable view, however, is that it should be regarded as
permissible on the basis of reason if it is a means to worship and if
it has actually occurred in the time of the Messenger of Allah,
‏وسكم‎ siz ‏انه‎ Gm. This is based on the the proof of the Story of Quba’,
and also on the proof of [the prophet’s] delegating individual
governors to various places, for they used to convey both the
abrogating and the abrogated [rules]. But this (the latter} is
impossible after [the Prophet's] death. The proof of this is the
consensus of the Companions that the Qur’an and the known
mutawa4tir [reports] cannot be eliminated by solitary report{s].
Therefore, none among the earlier generations, nor among the later
ones, has held this to be permissible.

Religious practices on the basis of a solitary report have been
accepted by the Companions in areas where it does not eliminate a
decisive [rule]. The Kharajites, in fact, have held the view that the
Qur’an cannot be abrogated by a mutawatir report, to the extent
that they said the lapidation of MA‘iz, although a mutawdatir report,
is not suitable for abrogating the Qur'an. Al-Shafi‘i, an ‘son's, Said that

it is not permissible for the Qur’an to be abrogated by the Sunna,
532

even if it is a mutawdtir report. This is not absurd because it is
possible to say, “We cast a duty upon you to abrogate on the basis
of a solitary report at the time of revelation, but we make it

unlawful thereafter.”

_ If it is said: How is it permissible on the basis of reason,
when a decisive [proof] is being obliterated by a conjectural one?
As for the report about Quba’, it is possible that circumstantial
evidence accumulated and [thus] imparted necessary knowledge.

We shall say: The assumption of indicative circumstantial
evidences necessitates the annulment of solitary reports. This is
like taking the practice of the Companions to be based on
awareness of circumstantial evidences. But there is no way to
establish what has not been transmitted.

As for their contention that this would constitute removal of
something decisive by something subject to error, this is false. For
if that were the case, we would have to definitely decide that the
transmitter is lying. But we cannot decisively do so. Rather, we
allow that he can be truthful. This is decisive proof, then, on the
condition that there exists no report that can abrogate it. For if one
is in the original state of freedom, this is something that is
decisively known and can be removed by a solitary report, since
this yields decisiveness—provided that there does not exist any

solitary report.

If it is said: Why do you object to one who says decisively

that such a transmitter is a liar, for the Messenger, ‏وسكر‎ sla wt Spee,
533

promulgated the rules, and if its abrogation had been established,
then it would have been incumbent [upon the Prophet] to
promulgate it also?

We shall say: Why is it impossible that he should promulgate
its rule but entrust its abrogation to individuals, like specifications

{of a generally promulgated rule} to a particular person?

V. DISCUSSION: It is not permissible to abrogate a
decisive, mutaw4tir text on the basis of qiyas or ijtihad, which are
known through conjecture, regardless of its rank, manifest or
hidden. This has been the decisive position of the majority [of
legists], except for an isolated number, who say that that which
permits specifications also permits abrogation.

But this is refuted on the grounds of reason, ijma‘, and
solitary reports, for through all of these, specification is possible,
but not abrogation. Then how can the two be equal, while
specification is an explanation and abrogation is elimination? Also,
explanation is elaboration, while elimination is nullification.

Some of the companions of al-Shafi‘t 5210 that abrogation is
permissible on the basis of obvious qiyas,

We say that the term obvious is ambiguous. If they mean
decisive proof, then they are correct. But if it means something
conjectural, then they are not.

That which is thought to have decisive proof has three ranks:

First, that which has the same force as the texts, or is more
explicit than them, as the saying of the Exalted, “And do not Say to

them [your parents] even fye.” Thus, the unlawfulness of Striking
334

(your parents] is © fortiori [understood] from it. If a clear text
arrived permitting the striking [of one’s parents], then it would be
capable of abrogating, for then it would preponderate over that
which is already in [the text]. In the same rank is the Saying of the
Exalted, “Whosoever does an atom's weight of good shall see it.”
This proves a fortiori that this is also true for that which is more
than an atom. And so it is with the saying of the Exalted, “When
parents inherit [from their child], the mother receives one-third.”
Included in this is [the understanding that] the father receives
two-thirds.

The second rank is such that if there were a text Stating that
emancipation has no effect on a female Slave and then comes his
Statement, ‏اك ليو وسكم‎ Gm, “Whosoever emancipates his own share in
a slave is obligated to appraise the remaining share.” Thus, we
would conclude that emancipation does have an effect on the
female slave, for her case would be made analogous to the male
Slave due to the explicitness of [the male’s case], since it is known
decisively that the intent of the Shari‘a was aimed at the male
slave because he is subservient.

The third rank is if there were a text, for example, allowing
the consumption of nabidh, but then the Lawgiver said that alcohol
has been made unlawful because of its intoxiccation. The
permissibility of nabidh would then be abrogated based on its
being analogous to alcohol, if we are obliged by the Shari'a to
accept qiyds.

Some say that even if we are not obliged by the Shari'a to

[accept] qiyds, we would still abrogate it. There is no difference
535

between his statement, “I have made all nabidh unlawful,” and his
clear statement, “I have made alcohol unlawful because of its
intoxication.” It is for this reason that al-Nazzam admitted to there
being an ‘illa [underlying cause] in the text, though he denied the
basis of qiyds.

We must make it clear that if we were not obligated by the
Shari'a to use qiydas, then his [the Prophet’s] saying, “I have made
unlawful alcohol upn you because of its intoxication,” would not be
conclusive proof for the prohibition of nabidh. Rather, it is
permissible that the ‘illa of prohibition be particularly the
intoxication of the alcohol, just as the ‘illa of lapidation of an
adulterer is particularly [the state of] being married. In summary,

something decisive cannot be eliminated by something conjectural

9

but by [what is] decisive.

If it is said: Is the impossibility of it being eliminated by
conjecture based on reason or revealed authority?

We shall say: The correct [answer] is revealed authority. But
it is not impossible to say on a rational basis that we have laid a
Shari‘a obligation upon you to abrogate one text on the basis of
qiyds, which is based on another text. Of course, it is impossible
that we be obligated by the Shari‘a to abrogate a text on the basis
of qiyas, which is deduced from that very text itself, since this
would lead to self contradiction. Thus, it would be an obligation to

act and a prohibition to act [at the same time], according to [the
text].
536

If it said: What about the proof of its impossibility based on
revealed authority? 1

We shall say: It is proved by ijmd‘ that every giyds which
contradicts a clear text is void. Furthermore, Mu ‘adh, ‘2 wi ‏رضم‎
‎said, “When I cannot find a clear text, I will exert my own opinion.”
And the Messenger of Allah, ‏سكم‎ suis ut “ua, approved of the
Statement. Also, there is the ijma‘ of the Companions to abandon
giyas based on a solitary report. So what about a decisive
mutaw4tir text and the well-known fact of their statement, upon
hearing a solitary report, “But for this report we would have
decided by our opinion.”

Moreover, the probity or indicativeness of the text is a
decisive proof of whatever it is a text for. If the proof of the
principle regarding a minor is conjecture, how then can the
stronger be abandoned for the weaker? This is the basis for the

Companions’ ijmd‘ in their rejecting qiyads when it contradicts a text.

If it is said: When two decisive proofs are mutually
contradictory and the later one is difficult, can the delay of the
establishment of one of them on the basis of a solitary report [be
permissible} so that it can be considered as the abrogating [text]?

We shall say: It is possible, for if it is the establishment of
marriage, it requires the word of two [witnesses] and to establish
adultery requires four. This shows that the caution necessary for
the condition is not sufficient for that which is itself the condition.
It is also possible to say that if the abrogation is established on the

basis of a later event, while the abrogated [text] is something
3237

decisive, then it is not sufficient for the abrogating [text] to be
reported by a solitary report, for then this would be the proper
occasion for ijtihdd. What is obvious should be accepted, since in
this case one of the two texts is definitely abrogated. This is the

objective of its acceptance of the specification.

VI. DISCUSSION: A mule cannot be abrogated by a
Companion saying, “Such and such rule has been abrogated,” if he
has not stated, “I have heard the Messenger of Allah, ‏سَنَييْر وسكم‎ an “um,
say, ‘I have abrogated such and such rule.’ ” If he Says this, then
the rule will be considered. If it [the rule] is established on the
basis of a solitary report, then it is abrogated based on his
Statement. But if it is a decisive [rule], then it is not. As for his (the
Companion’s] statement, “such and such tule,” it cannot be given
decisive meaning because he may have considered what is not
abrogation as abrogation.

Some consider an addition to a text as abrogation, which has
been [reviewed] in other discussions.

Other people say that should the Companion relate to us what
he holds to be abrogating, we would not follow him. However, we
shall look into it. But if he categorically states this, then we accept
it. He would not be categorical except on the basis of decisive
knowledge.

But this [argument] is corrupt. Rather, the correct position is
that if he mentions the abrogator, we shall consider it and decide
upon it by our opinions. But if he does not actually mention [the

abrogator], then we will not follow him. We may allow that he
538

could be saying this on the basis of his own ijtihadd alone. This is
what al-Qadi [Abi Bakr al-Baqillani], ‏,يجمه اله‎ has mentioned. But in
our view, the more correct position is to accept it as a statement of
a Companion, when [for example] the Companion says, “[the
Prophet] commanded ‘this’ and prohibited ‘that,’ ” for this kind of
Statement is acceptable, as it will be discussed in the Book of

Reports. There is no difference between the forms.

If it is said: ‘A’isha, tase wt ‏,وضع‎ Said, “The Messenger of Allah,
‏وسكم‎ sei ‏الله‎ Sm, did not die without releasing [the forbiddeness] of
those women who were unlawful to him by the saying of the
Exalted, ‘We have made your wives lawful to you.’ ”43 This
[statement by ‘A’isha] is then accepted.

We shall say: This is not satisfactory with us. Moreover,
those who accept it, accept this as having an abrogating proof and

is suitable for abrogation. But they do not follow her position.

CONCLUSION TO THE BOOK [OF ABROGATION]: REGARDING THAT
WHICH INDICATES THE TIMING OF THE ABROGATING RULE

KNOW that when two texts are mutually contradictory the
abrogating one is the latter and its delay cannot be known through
the proof of reason or giyds from the Shari ‘a, but solely on the
authority of revealed authority. This can be done is several ways.

The first is when the expression itself indicates it, as in his

43Qur’an, 33:50. ‘A’isha’s position here, which is not adhered

to by Ghazali, lifts the restriction imposed on the Prophet in Qur’an,
33:52.

339

Saying, ,ifui ‏,كيام‎ “I had previously prohibited you from storing the
meat of sacrificial animals, now store them,” and like in his saying,
“I have forbidden you from visiting the graves, now visit them.”

The second is the ijmda‘ of the ummah regarding rules that
are abrogated, with the abrogating [text] being the latter.

The third is when the transmitter mentions the date—for
example, when he says, “I heard it during the Year of the Trench or
the conquest of Mecca,” while the abrogated has been known to be
before it. There is no difference as to whether the abrogator or
abrogated is transmitted by the same reporter or by two reporters.

There are [six] ways in which dating cannot be established.

The first is when a Companion states, “This was a rule laid
upon us; then it was abrogated.”

For it is possible that he may have said this on the basis of
ijtihad. ‏ش‎

The second (way in which dating cannot be established] is
for one of the [texts] to be established in the Qur’an.

For the siras and verses are not set in the chronology of their
revelation. Rather, the later ones may have come first.

The third [way in which dating cannot be established] is for
the transmitter to be one of the younger Companions.

For a minor may have transmitted from someone whose
Companionship is more senior, and at times senior [Companions]
transmitted from the younger.

The fourth [way in which dating cannot be established) is if
the transmitter became a Muslim in the year of the conquest of

Mecca and does not say, “I heard it in the year of conquest.”
540

For he may have heard it as an unbeliever and transmitted it
after becoming a Muslim; or perhaps he heard it from someone
who preceded [him] in Islam.

The fifth [way in which dating cannot be established] is the
possibility that the transmitter’s Companionship was severed.
Thus, it may be that his report is of an earlier date than the report
of someone whose Companionship endured.

Although [the one of severed Companionship] may be suspect,
, it is does not necessarily follow that the report of the one whose
Companionship endured occurred after the time when the other’s
Companionship was severed.

The sixth [way in which dating cannot be established] is that
one of the two reports should be in accordance with the judgment
of reason and the original [state] of freedom, for it would seem to
have come earlier.

But, it is not necessarily so, as found in his saying,
plas sale ‏اله‎ Gm, “Ablution is not required after eating that which
contacts fire.” This does not necessarily precede the obligatoriness
of making ablution [after eating] that which has contacted fire, for
it is possible that it used to be obligatory but was then abrogated.

Allah knows best. We have now finished the first of the four
principles, namely the Book. This is followed by an account of the

Sunna of the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ sate ‏اك‎ So.
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO

ABU HAMID AL-GHAZALI’S JURISTIC DOCTRINE
IN AL-MUSTASFA MIN ‘ILM AL-USUL WITH A TRANSLATION OF
VOLUME ONE OF AL-MUSTASFA MIN ‘ILM AL-USUL
VOLUME THREE

A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED TO
THE FACULTY OF THE DIVISION OF THE HUMANITIES
IN CANDIDACY FOR THE DEGREE OF
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY

DEPARTMENT OF NEAR EASTERN LANGUAGES

AND CIVILIZATIONS

BY
AHMAD ZAKI MANSUR HAMMAD

CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
MARCH 1987
THE SECOND PRINCIPLE OF THE SHARI‘A SOURCES

THE SUNNA OF THE MESSENGER OF ALLAH

مهام

صب الله عليم

see

The statements of the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ sul wi ‏رصي‎ are
proofs, for his truth has been proven by miracles and by the
command of Allah, yixs, to follow him. He did not speak on caprice.
It was but revelation revealed to him.! But a part of the revelation

is recited, and is therefore called the Book, and a part is not recited,

and this is the Sunna.”

The statements of the Messenger of Allah, plan's axle ‏رصي الك‎ are
proof for whosoever heard him verbally. As for us, his statement
cannot reach except at the tongue of transmitters, either via
tawatur or ahdd reports. Thus, the discourse on this principle

comprises an exordium, a division on mutawatir reports and one on

'Ghazali is referring to the Qur’an, 53:4-5

For more discussion on the concept of Sunna, see Rahman's
extensive chapter in Jslam, pp. 43-71; ‘Azami, Dirdsdt St al-Hadith
al-Nabawi, pp. 1-20; Ignaz Goldziher, Muslim Studies, tr. M. Stern,
2: passim; Shawkani, Irshad al-Fuhil, pp.33-69; Amidi, /hkdm,
1:247; al-Shafi‘i, Risdla, pp. 64-117 and 369-401; Shirazi, al-Tabsgira
fi Usil al-Fiqh, pp. 289-348; and compare with Ghazili’s earlier
treatment of Sunna in al-Mankhil, pp. 235-87.

541

ahdd reports. Each division is comprised of several chapters.

As for the Exordium, it is an explanation of the terms of the
Companions, pase wi 9%, in transmitting reports from the Messenger
Of Allah, ‏وسكم‎ suite at “us. This has five ranks.

The first, which is the strongest of them, is when a
Companion states, “I heard the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكم‎ sole wt ‏رصي‎
‎saying” such and such; “he has informed me”; “has told me”; or “has
verbally told me.” This [form] is impenetrable to doubt. Therefore,
this is the basis of transmission and conveyance. For he said,
‏وسكام‎ sole ‏رصن اك‎ “May Allah make prosperous he who hears my
speech, retains it, and then delivers it as he has heard it...."°

The second is when [a Companion] says that the Messenger
of Allah, ‏وسكم‎ suite wt “eo, “said” such and such or “informed” or “told.”
This has the appearance of being a transmission when it issues
from a Companion, but it is not a decisive textual [statement]. For
one of us may say that the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكم‎ sale wl Sm, “Said

. .,” relying on what has been related to him, though not [actually)
hearing it from him. /1:130/ Therefore, it is not impossible for a
Companion to say this relying on a tawdtur report or the tongue of
one he trusts. Evidence that doubt enters [this type) is in Aba
Hurayra’s report that the Messenger of Allah, ‏السكلام‎ sui , has said,
“Whosoever wakes up in the state of jJandba [ritual impurity from

sexual intercourse] should not fast.” But when he {Aba Hurayra]

3Wensinck, Concordance et Indices de la Tradition
Musulmane, 6:472, makes reference to this hadith as being
reported by Abi Dawid, Tirmidhi, b. Majah, Darimi, and b. Hanbal.

343

was questioned further, he said, “It was related to me by al-Fadl b.
“Abbas.” In the first case, he related the report but did not
explicitly [link it to the Prophet].

Similarly, his statement, ‏وأسكم‎ aie an = , “Riba [usury] is only in
a loan,” was reported by b. ‘Abbas, ‏مهم‎ wt en's But when asked
about it, he reported that he had heard it from Usama b. Zayd.
Although this [form] may be liable to doubt, it is, nevertheless,
unlikely. Indeed, more unlikely [in this rank] is when a Companion
says, “The Messenger of Allah, ,£., sale ‏رسي اله‎ said...” He would not
Say this unless he had actually heard Allah’s Messenger,
‏وسكم‎ sae wi Sm. This differs from someone who was not a
contemporary [of the Prophet] and who then says, “The Messenger
of Allah, pha‘ sui ‏اله‎ “um, Said . . .”; for the evidence of his
circumstance indicates that he did not hear it, and his claim of
hearing it is not deluding, unlike the [case] of the Companion,
because his statement, “The Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكم‎ sale wi Gm , Said

- »” suggests hearing. Thus he would not proceed except upon
hearing. This is evident.

All reports have been transmitted [to us] this way. For it is
[commonly] said, “Abdi Bakr has said that the Messenger of Allah,
plas ‏عَلَيْءِ‎ ut ‏رصي‎ said”; or “ ‘Umar has stated that the Messenger of
Allah, ‏وسكم‎ suite an “es, said.” Thus, we can only understand from this

that [it was] heard.

The third [rank] is when a Companion says that the

4In referring to ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas, the phrase radiya
Alldhu ‘anhu becomes‘anhumd to include his father.

544

Messenger of Allah, pfs eae wit ‏رصي‎ “commanded” such and such, or
“prohibited” such and such. This is liable to two interpretations.

One of them is that it was actually heard, just as it is said,
“(The Prophet] said.” The second, concerning a command, is that
{the Companion] may have considered that which is not a command
to be a command, for people have differed regarding the
[Prophet’s] saying “do,” as to whether it is a command [or not].

Hence, some of the Zahirites have said that there is no
[Shari‘a] proof in this if the [actual] words are not stated. However,
the truth is that it is inconceivable that a Companion would
unconditionally [state] this unless he decisively knew {the Prophet]
commanded it and unless he heard him say, “I command you to do
this” or “do this,” along with circumstantial evidence expressing
that it is a command or giving the necessary understanding that he
intended it to be a command.

As for the possibility that it may have been mistakenly taken
as a command and is presumptuous, this we cannot necessarily
attribute to a Companion. Rather, the apparent meanings of their
statements and actions should be taken as they are. And because
of this, if he said, “The Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ sai wi “aa, Said” such
and such, but laid a condition and specified a time, it then becomes
incumbent upon us to follow him; and it is not permissible for us to
say that perhaps [the Companion) misunderstood the condition and
the timing, and considered what is not a condition to be one.

Hence, it is obligatory to accept the statement of a Companion
that some rule has been abrogated. Otherwise, there is no

distinction between a statement of abrogation or a statement of
545

command.

Thus, ‘Ali, «a2 wi =, unconditionally stated, “I have been
commanded to fight those pact breakers, rebels, and transgressors.”
It is inconceivable that someone like him would say “I have been

commanded” unless he had a compelling basis requiring it to be a

_

command.

However, this is liable to a third interpretation, with
reference to its generality or specificity, such that some have
assumed that when [a statement] is made unconditionally, it is
necessarily a command for the entire community. The truth is that
despite those who say that it has a general meaning /1:131/, one
must suspend [judgment] on this because it is possible that what he
[the Companion] heard could have been a command for the ummah,
for a group, or for a specific individual. All of this makes it
permissible for him to say it is a command. Therefore, one should
suspend [judgment] for the proof.

However, one proof for this is that [the Prophet’s] command
to one is a command to everyone unless it concerns a particular
Situation, like travelling or being resident. If this is so, the
Companion would explicitly state it, like his Statement, “We were
given the order that when on a journey we were permitted to not
take off our shoes for three days and nights.” Of course, if he had
said, “We were commanded” such and such—and it is known from
the practice of the Companions that one would not unconditionally
state this unless it was a command for the ummah—then it is to be

taken as is. Otherwise, it could be a command for the wmmah, for

him, or for a group.
546

The fourth [rank] is when it is said, “We are commanded”
such and such or “prohibited” from such and such. This is liable to
the previous three interpretations plus a fourth one, which
concerns the commander, for it cannot be known whether he is the
Messenger of Allah, ‏سكم‎ sui wt “a, or one other than him, such as
from among the imdms or scholars. Thus a group has said that this
[report] does not embody proof because of its many interpretations.
But most maintain that it cannot be interpreted except as being a
command from Allah, ‏رمعي‎ or a command from His Messenger,
‏وسكم‎ seize wi ‏رصي‎ for he intends either to establish a Shar‘? a [rule] or
raise a proof. Thus, it should not be interpreted to be a statement
by someone whose word has no authority.

Similar to this is [the Companion’s] statement that “part of the
Sunna” is such and such or that the “Sunna has continued to be”
such and such. Thus, the obvious meaning is that he did not intend
this to indicate other than the ‘Sunna’ of Allah’s Messenger,
‏وسكم‎ sia ‏اك‎ m,which must be followed; not the sunna of someone else
to whom obedience is not mandatory. Furthermore, it makes no
difference whether the Companion Says this during the lifetime of
the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ suie wi ‘4m, OF after his death.

As for the Successor, when he says, “We are commanded,”
this may be taken as the command of Allah’s Messenger,
‏وسكم‎ sie wt ‏رصني‎ or the command of [anyone in} the entire smmah.

The proof for this is established by its [form]. It is also possible
that it is a command of the Companions. But it does not behoove a
Scholar to state this unconditionally unless he intends it to come

from one whose obedience is mandatory. Still, the liability of a
547

second interpretation is more likely in the statement of a Successor
than in the words of a Companion.

The fifth [rank] is saying, “They used to do” such and such.
If this refers to those of the time of the Messenger, sia .ui2, then
this is proof that the said action was permitted; for mentioning this
in the context of [establishing] a proof indicates that his intended
meaning was that the Messenger of Allah, plas ‏,رصب اك عَلَيْمٍ‎ knew of
and kept silent about it, meaning that it was permissible—excluding

what did not reach him.

An example of this is the statement of Ibn ‘Umar, “he wi g's,
“During the time of Allah’s Messenger, ‏وأسكم‎ siz wi “am, we used to
confer and say that the best of the people after the Messenger of
Allah, pfu’s sui wit “um, were Abi Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Uthman.
When this reached Allah’s Messenger, ‏وسكم‎ suite wi “es, he did not

object to it.”

He also said, “We used to Practice sharecropping during the
time of the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكم‎ sai wi “us, and for forty years
after him until Rafi‘ b. Khadij informed us of the hadith [against
sharecropping].”

Also, Abi Sa‘id said, “During the time of the Messenger of

Allah, ‏وسكم‎ suite ut ‏رصت‎ we used to give one sa‘a> of wheat for zakat al-
fitr.”®

5A measure of quantity equaling 3,261.5 grams according to
the Hanifites. Others take it be 2,172 grams, Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat
al-Fugaha', p. 270.

Alms given in Ramadan.

548

Similarly, ‘A’isha, tase wit ‏روضح‎ said, “They used to amputate [the
hand of] a thief for [stealing] something insignificant.”

As for the statement of a Successor that “They used to do”
such and such, this does not indicate the entire ummah. Rather, it
indicates [the actions] of some. Therefore, this does not constitute
proof unless he explicitly reports that it is from the people of /jmd‘.
\1:132\ In that case, it would be merely reporting ijmad‘—and a
discussion will follow concerning the validity of this when based on
a solitary report.

So, from this Exordium it should have become clear which
report can be taken as originating from the Messenger of Allah,
‏سكم‎ sui at Gem , and which is not to taken as reported from him. Now
let us explain the avenues by which reports reach us, that is,

through tawdtur or ahdd {channels}.

DIVISION ONE OF THIS PRINCIPLE: A DISCOURSE ON TAWATUR
Consisting of [Three] Chapters

Chapter One: Tawdtur Establishes Certain Knowledge

Before this [discourse], however, we should define ‘khabar.’
This is a statement which is liable to be true or false; or, it is a
Statement which either truth or falsehood may enter. This
definition is better than when they say “. . . Truth and falsehood
enter,” for one report cannot be characterized by both. Indeed the
speech of Allah, gtx, cannot by any means be characterized by

falsehood. Nor can reports of impossible things be characterized by

any means as truth.
549

A report is one of the types of speech which inheres in the
mind. As for its expression, this consists of segmented sounds
which have a form, like in saying, “Zayd! is standing or hitting
[someone].” This is not a report per se; rather, it becomes a report
by the issuer’s intention to express by it what is in his mind. For
this reason, what issues from a sleeping or insane person is not a
report. As for the speech of the mind, it is a report per se by its
very genus; for if it is found, it is immutable by the intention of the
intender.

As for establishing that tawdtur indicates certainty, this is
obvious and is contrary to what the Sumaniyyah® say, for they
restrict knowledge to the senses and therefore deny this. Their
restriction is false because we necessarily know that a thousand is
greater than one, or the impossibility of one and the same thing
being [both] eternal and originated, or other things that require
other than sense perceptions, which we have mentioned in Madarik
al-Yagin.?

Rather, we say that their restriction of knowledge to the

senses is known to them, and this in itself is something that is not

Tin the text, Ghazali uses the name ‘Zayd’ generically.

8 According to Tahanawi, Kashshdaf Istilahat al-Funtin, 1:702,
2:1390, they are idol worshippers who also believe in reincarnation
and maintain that knowledge can only be apprehended only

through the senses. See Ghazali, al-Mankhil, p. 235. See also al-
Juwayni, al-Burhdn, 1:124,

°Ghazali is most likely referring to his discussion in the
introduction of al-Mustasfa, p.11-12.

550

perceivable through the five senses. Furthermore, no sane person
can doubt that there is a city in this world called Baghdad, even if
he has never entered it; nor can he doubt the existence of prophets,
nor the existence of al-Shafi‘i or AbG Hanifa, may Allah have mercy

on them, nor the states and the great events.

If it is said: If these were necessarily known, then we would
not differ with you.

We shall say: Anyone who differs with this, he only differs
by his tongue, or through the malfunction of his reason, or through
sheer obstinacy. This denial cannot issue from many people, for
their denial is customarily impossible on the very basis of what
they have known and their stubbornness. If we were to abandon
what we necessarily know because of your view, then it should
necessarily follow that you must abandon perceptibles because of
the dispute of the Sophists.

As for the falsity of the opinion of al-Ka‘bi, who holds that
this kind of knowledge is discursive, we shall say that discursive
knowledge is that in which it is possible for doubt to enter and for
its conditions to change. So some people know it, but not others.
/1:133/ Women and children do not know it; nor do those who are
not discursive thinkers; and even those who deliberately abandon
discursive thinking do not know it.

All discursive knowledge is such that a scholar [who has it]
would find himself doubting it and then seeking [it]. But we do not
find ourselves doubting the existence of Mecca, or the existence of

al-Shafi‘i, wi ‏,وجوه‎ then seeking after them. If you mean by being
351

discursive anything pertaining to this, then we deny it.

But if you mean by it that the mere statement of a reporter
does not yield decisive knowledge so long as two premises are not
set in the mind—the first of which is that these {reporters], despite
the difference of their circumstances, the diversity of their
objectives, and their large number cannot together conspire to lie
under any circumstance and that they will not agree except on
truth; and the second being that they do agree on the reports about
the eventand that knowledge about the truth is based upon these
two premises having come together—then to this we concede.

It is necessary for the mind to become conscious of these two
premises so that it can acquire knowledge to assent with. Even if
these premises are not formed in the mind systematically by
words, [the mind} is conscious of them. Thus, the affirmation is
obtained while one is not conscious of being conscious of it. The
truth of the matter about this is that it becomes necessary
knowledge if it is an expression of what accrues to [the mind]
without any intermediary, like our statement that the eternal
cannot be that which is originated, and the originated cannot be
that which is nonexistent. Therefore, this is not necessary, for it
resulted through the intermediacy of the two mentioned premises.
But if it is an expression of what accrued to without the formation
of an intermediary in the mind, then it is necessary.

There may be an intermediary present in the mind, though
the person is not conscious of the way it intermediates and how
knowledge accrues through it. Hence, it is called primary; but it

actually is not so, as in our statement “Two is half of four.” For this
552

is not known except through an intermediary, i.e. a half of the
whole’s parts equals the other half, where ‘two’ is one of the two
parts, which is equal to the second part of the total, which is four;
therefore, it is half. Thus, this kind of knowledge has accrued
through an intermediary that is clear and [actively] present in the
mind. This is why when it is said, “Is thirty-six half of seventy-
two?” one needs to think about it until one knows this totality is
divisible into two equal parts, each of them being thirty-six.
Therefore, knowledge about the truth of a tawdtur report accrues
through these premises—and that which is similar cannot be
primary.

As for whether this is to be called necessary knowledge [or
not}, the technical use of the terminology may vary. That which is
necessary, according to most [logicians], expresses that which is
primary, not that which we find ourselves compelled to, for all
mathematical sciences yield necessary knowledge and are
discursive.

The meaning of being discursive is that they are not primary.
Knowledge of the truth of a tawdtur report is similar to this.
Approaching this is knowledge acquired through experience,
namely what is expressed or described by a systematic
reoccurrence of events, as in our statement, “Water satiates thirst,”

or, “Alcohol intoxicates,” as we have already indicated in the

introduction of this book.

If it is said: If someone argues that this kind of knowledge is

not necessary because if it were necessary, then we would
553

certainly know that it is necessary, and thus disputing /1:134/ it
would be inconceivable, is this argument correct or not?

We shall say: If what is necessary expresses that which we
find ourselves compelled to, then necessarily we know in our
minds that we are compelled to it. But if it is an expression of what
accrues without an intermediary, then it is possible that in order to
know this one may need to contemplate; yet doubt may occur here,
just as it is imagined that we assume believing in something

decisively but also hesitate as to whether our belief is certain or

not.

Chapter Two: The Conditions of Tawdtur, which are Four

The first [condition] is that they [the reporters] must report
on the basis of [certain] knowledge and not on assumption.
Therefore, if the people of Baghdad were to report to us about a
bird they assumed to be a pigeon or about a person they assumed
to be Zayd, then certain knowledge would not accrue to us that it is
a pigeon or that he is Zayd. Nor does this need to be reasoned out.
Rather, the state of the informed is no more than the State of the
informer, for it is in the power of Allah, gizs, to create in us
[certain] knowledge through their report, even though it is
conjectural. But ordinarily such [practice] does not systematically
occur.

The second condition is that their knowledge must be
necessary {and} based on perceptibles; for if the people of Baghdad
were to inform us about the world's temporal origin and about the

truthfulness of some of the prophets, then [certain] knowledge will
554

not accrue to us. This also is ordinarily known. Otherwise, it is
possible for the power of Allah, gtx, to have made this report yield
the source of [certain] knowledge in us.

The third condition is that the ends and intermediary [links

of mutawdatir reports} must equally secure the previous

10

conditions, ~ as well as the complete number [of reporters]. So, if

the succeeding generations continued as time went on to report
from the preceding ones, with the conditions not being fulfilled
through out the time, then [certain] knowledge concerning their
truthfulness would not have accrued because reports of the people
of each generation are independent per se; therefore, each one
must satisfy these conditions.

For this reason, [certain] knowledge did not accrue to us
regarding the truthfulness of the Jews—in spite of their large
number—when reporting of Moses, blessings of Allah upon him,
that he rejected any abrogation of his Shari ‘a; nor regarding the
truthfulness of the Shi‘ites, the ‘Abbasids, or the Bakriyya!! when
they reported a text concerning the imamate of ‘Ali, or al-‘Abbas,
or Abii Bakr, was wt ¢s2, [respectively], even though the number of
transmitters has increased greatly in recent times. For some of
these [reports] were first forged by individual reporters, circulated,
and then, from that time onward, the [number of] reporters

multiplied, while the conditions were satisfied only a few times.
This refers to the first and second conditions.

‘This refers to those claiming that Abi Bakr’s caliphate was
appointed by revelation.

555

So, not all eras commonly share this; therefore, assent does
not accrue. The contray holds true with reference to the existence
of Jesus, ‏السلار‎ siz, and the challenge to his prophethood, or the
existence of Abi Bakr and ‘Ali, ‏عدهما‎ wi @., and their rise to the
imamate. Since these have the ends and the intermediary [as
mutawatir Jj, then [certain] knowledge necessarily accrues to us
such that we are unable to doubt ourselves about it. But we are
able to doubt what they reported from Moses and Jesus, ‏السلام‎ prize,
or about the determination of the imamate, based on the texts [i.e.
Qur’an or Sunna}.

The fourth condition concerns number. So let us refine [the

understanding of] its aim by addressing it in the [following]

discussions:

I. DISCUSSION: The number of reporters is divisible into
what is deficient, which does not generate [certain] knowledge,
what is complete, which generates [certain] knowledge, and what is
Superabundant, /1:135/ which a portion of imparts [certain]
knowledge, while the rest consists of more than what is sufficient.

The complete number, namely the minimum that generates
{certain] knowledge, is unknown to us. But when necessary
knowledge accrues to us, we can discern that the completeness of
the number is. But it is not the case that through the completeness
of the number we may prove that certain knowledge accrues. Once
you know this, concerning the complete number through which
assent to an event is established, is it then conceivable for {the

complete number] not to indicate certain knowledge in some
556

events?

Al-Qadi [al-Baqillani], un ‘ony, Said that this is impossible.
Rather, all that is sufficient to produce [certain] knowledge in one
event is sufficient for every event. Moreover, when certain
knowledge accrues to one person, it then must accrue to every
person who shared in hearing it. It is inconceivable to be any other
way.

This would be correct if reports were isolated from other
circumstances. But [certain] knowledge is not merely a function of
number, The relationship of the multitude of numbers to all events
and individuals is the same. Yet when other circumstances are
conjoined to them, this leads to assent. In this, therefore, it is
permissible for events and people to differ. But al-Qadi denied this
and did not consider circumstantial evidences and did not attribute
any effect to them. This is not Satisfactory because it is possible for
reporting alone to produce [certain] knowledge when there are
numerous reporters, even if there is no circumstantial evidence.
On the other hand, mere circumstantial evidence also can generate
[certain] knowledge, even if there are no reports. Therefore, it is
not impermissible for circumstantial evidence to be conjoined with
reports, in order that some circumstantial evidences can
supplement the [lacking] number of reporters.

This will not be clear until one knows the meaning of
circumstantial evidence and how it is probative. So, we say that
there is no doubt that we know certain things which are not
perceptible. For we recognize one’s love, hate, or fear of a person,

or one’s anger and shame. Yet these are states in the mind of the
237

one who loves or the one who hates which sense perception is
unconcerned with. Sometimes they are indicated by evidences
within individual units which are not [independently] regarded as
decisive. In fact, they are liable to doubt. But with them the mind
is inclined to form a weak opinion, while the second and the third
[bits of evidence] confirm it. But when each exists in isolation, then
doubt may enter them. However, certain [knowledge] accrues with
their conjunction, just as the statement of each member of the
tawatur reporters is liable to doubt if each is taken individually,
while decisiveness accrues as a result of their conjuncticn.

For example, we can recognize the love of an admirer not by
one’s statements but through actions which belong to those who
love—serving one’s beloved, spending on one’s beloved, attending
one’s sittings, visiting one, accompanying one in one’s whereabouts,
and things of this kind. For each act has an evidence which, if
isolated, may individually point to a motive concealed in the mind
other than loving. But the multiplicity of evidences reaches a point
where [certain] knowledge of one’s love accrues to us. And so it is
with one’s hatred when actions resulting from it are seen to come
from the person. Likewise, we recognize one’s anger and shame
not simply because of the redness of the person’s face, for redness
is but one of the evidences.

Similarly, we see an infant who continues suckling milk, thus
certain knowledge accrues to us with regard to knowing that milk
is reaching his stomach, /1:136/ even though we do not see the milk
in the breast because it is concealed. Nor do we see it emerging

because it is covered by the mouth. But the suckling motion of the
5358

infant and the motion of his throat provides evidence, although this
[movement] may occur without milk reaching him. In addition to
this, the breast of a young woman is not usually without milk, nor
is her nipple normally without an opening. Moreover, the infant’s
instinct drives him to suckle to extract milk. Although anomalies of
each of these may occur, they are not frequent. But if the ceasing
of the infant’s crying is added to this, while he did not take in any
other food, then this too becomes circumstantial evidence, though it
is possible that his crying was due to pain and his ceasing was due
to its removal. While it is also possible that he ate something else
that we did not witness even though most of the time we were
with him, in spite of this, the conjunction of all these evidences is
like the conjunction of reports and their tawdétur. For every
evident proof is liable to doubt, just as is the statement of each
individual reporter, though their conjunction yields [certain]
knowledge.

It is as if this faculty is the sixth of the faculties of knowledge
in addition to what we have mentioned in the introduction, i.e. the
primaries, perceptibles, intrinsic visions, experiences, and tawdtur
reports. So, this may be appended to it. Since this is undeniable, it
is not impossible for assent to accrue based on the statements of an
incomplete number [of reporters] when circumstantial evidences
are conjoined to them. For if they were individually isolated from
circumstantial evidences they would not indicate certain
knowledge.

Indeed, if five or six people report the death of a person,

their truthfulness may not be affirmed as certain knowledge. But
559

if this is conjoined by the emergence of the deceased’s father from
his home, bareheaded and barefoot, in torn clothes and disturbed,
Slapping his face and head—though he is a senior man of high status
and nobility who does not customarily deviate from his conduct
and honor unless it is out of compulsion—then it is permissible that
this become circumstantial evidence added to the Statements of
those people. So, in effect, it accomplishes the same thing as does
[completing] a lacking number [of reporters].

The permissibility of this can be established with certainty;
and experience indicates this as well, for numerous reporters may
report an affair which concerns the acquisition of power and its
policy of proclamation. But those reporting it are from the king’s
chief officers; so it is conceivable that they have assembled to
conspire to lie for control of power. If they were separated and
expelled from power, they would not be conceivably liable to such
[accusation]. This indeed affects the mind in a fashion undeniable.
Thus, I do not know why 21-0301 denied this and what his proof is
for its impossibility.

It should, therefore, have become clear from this that it is
permissible for the number of reporters to differ depending on the
events and persons. There may be an individual in whose
personality [various] characteristics have been enrooted, which
render him readily inclined to accept certain things. Therefore, this
acceptance may assume the position of circumstantial evidence,
which in turn assumes the status of some reporters. Thus, arising

from this is the lack of proof for its impossibility.
560

If it is said: Is it permissible for certain knowledge to accrue
from the statement of an individual? —

We shall say: It has been related from al-Ka‘bi!2 that this is
permissible. However, if the circumstantial evidences are lacking,
its permissibility is inconceivable, even for a fool. But on the other
hand, when circumstantial evidences are conjoined it is not
improbable that a point be reached where /1:137/ only one bit of
circumstantial evidence remains to establish certain knowledge.
Then the statement of one reporter can assume the place of that
piece of circumstantial evidence. This is another case where
impossibility cannot be established. Nor can its occurrence be
decisively proven because its occurrence is only ascertained
through experience which we have not tested.

Yet we have often tested what we have come to believe in
with certainty on the basis of an individual reporter's statement.
But when conjoined with the circumstances of his conditions, they
were then exposed as being deceptive. Due to this, al-Qadi held
{the accrual of certain knowledge from the statement of an
individual] to be impossible.

Now, this discourse is in reference to events together with the
ordinary continuing in its expected way. If we assume this custom
to be broken, then Allah, ‏رمعاي‎ is able to impart in us certain
knowledge on the basis of an individual’s statement, '3 without

12a1-Ka‘bi (319/931) was a Mu‘tazilite of the Baghdad school.
For more on his moves, see Jar Allah, al-Mu‘tazila, p. 155.

'3The construction in the text is ambiguous. It may also be
taken to mean “one statement.”

561

circumstantial evidence.

II. DISCUSSION: Al-Qédi, wi ‏ررحم‎ decisively concluded that
four falls short of the complete number [for tawdtur], though it [the
number four] is founded upon the Shari‘a and permissible for a
judge to restrict it to credible witnesses on the basis of ijma‘, such
that the preponderance of an opinion accrues. But for that which is
necessarily known, speculation is not required. What he [al- Qadi]
mentions is correct, provided there is no circumstantial evidence;
for we do not find ourselves compelled to accept the report of four.
If along with this, on the other hand, circumstantial evidences are
assumed, obtaining affirmation is not impossible. But this does not
occur on the basis of reporting alone, but rather on the basis of
circumstantial evidence along with reporting. But, 21-0891, wi ‘a5,
regards this as impossible even with the addition of circumstantial

evidences.

III. DISCUSSION: AlI-Qadi said, “I know by ijmd‘ that four
is incomplete. As for five, I suspend my judgment with regard to it
because ijmd‘ has not established proof for it.” But this is weak
because we know this on the basis of experience, for there are
many reports where we hear from five or six and certain

knowledge does not accrue in us. They are, thus, incomplete; here

we have no doubt.

562

ITV. DISCUSSION: If we assume the absence of
circumstantial evidence, then the least number of reporters by
which necessary knowledge accrues is known to Allah, gG&s , and
unknown to us. We have no way of knowing it because we do not
know at which point [certain] knowledge accrues—as in the
existence of Mecca, al-Shafi‘i, and the prophets, ‏الكلآر‎ ,aui2— or the
moment at which the tawdatur of the reports is established in us,
whether it be after, say, the hundredth of two-hundred reports. It
is very difficult for us to establish this kind of experience even if
we were to contrive this.

One way of contriving this is to observe ourselves when a
man, for example, is killed in a marketplace and a group leaves the
scene of the killing and comes to inform us of his killing. Now, the
statement of the first person arouses our speculation while the
Statement of the second and the third strengthens it. Thus, it will
continue to be strengthened until it becomes necessary such that
we cannot doubt ourselves about it. If it were conceivable to know
the moment in which certain knowledge accrues necessarily,
together with an account of the numbers of reporters, then it would
be possible to know [the number]. But it is very difficult to know
this moment, for the strength of belief increases in hidden
gradations, like the increase of reason in a child capable of
discernment until he reaches the point of taklif, and like the
increase of the morning light until it reaches the limit of its
completion. For this reason, it remains shrouded in controversy,
and its knowledge is very difficult for human power to attain.

However, there is an opinion held by some that specifies
563

/1:138/ [the number of reporters at] forty, taken from Friday
prayer; !4 some specify seventy, taken by the statement of the
Exalted, “Moses chose among his people seventy men for Our

15

appointment, and some specify the number according to the

number of the participants at the Battle of Badr.

All these are corrupt and lifeless dogmas which neither suit
the purpose nor prove it. The conflict between these positions is
enough to prove their corruption. Therefore, we have no way of
determining the number. But through necessary knowledge we can
rationalize that the number for [tawdtur]—which is complete in the

sight of Allah, gixs—{is the number of reporters] who have agreed to

report.

If it is said: How can you know the accrual of certain
knowledge on the basis of tawdtur when you do not know its

minimal number?

We shall say: It is as we know that bread satiates hunger,
water quenches thirst, and alcohol intoxicates, even though we do

not know their minimal amount. We know that circumstantial

l4The analogy implied here is the requirement of forty
repoters as the minimum number for tawdtur based on another
position held by the ShAfi‘ites and the Hanbalites, namely that the
minimum number of attendees required for the validation of
Friday prayer is forty. For an elaborate discussion and references
to the major fighi positions, see al-Zahili, al-Fiqh al-Islami wa
Adillatuhu, 2:272-314,

15 Qur'an, 7:155.

564

evidences yield certain knowledge even though we are not able to

determine their genera and determine their minimal degrees.

V. DISCUSSION: If the complete number [for tawdtur} has
reported and certain knowledge does not accrue about their
truthfulness, then necessarily the (report] is decisively a lie, since
for the accrual of certain knowledge there are only two conditions: |
One of them being completeness of number, and the second being
that they should report on the basis of certainty and their own
eyewitness [accounts].

If the number is complete, then the impossibility of certain
knowledge can come only due to insufficiency of the second
condition. So we know that they have lied, or some of them have
lied in saying, “I have witnessed this.” Rather, they have based this
on imagination and conjecture, or deliberate lie, for if they tell the
truth and their number is complete, then knowledge would
necessarily accrue. This incidentally is another proof that four does
not constitute the number for tawdtur, since certain knowledge of
their truthfulness did not accrue to a judge. But it is permissible
for him to judge by the preponderance of (credible) opinion based
on ijmda‘.

If their number were to be complete, then a lack of certain
knowledge with reference to their truthfulness is decisive proof
that they all lied or that one of them lied. Therefore, we would
hold conclusively that there is certainly among them a liar or a
conjecturer— and testimony is not accepted from four who are

known to have a liar or conjecturer among them.
565

If it is said: If certain knowledge does not accrue on the basis
of their statement, and if they are of such large number that it is
by the nature of the case impossible to claim that they
unanimously agreed on lying, and if in addition to it being
impossible that they would all have come under one command, or
that they would mutually support each other in lying so that the
truth would remain hidden to all of them and not one of them
speaks about it, then on what basis can they be held to be lying,
and how can it be conceived?

We shall say: This is possible only if they were to be divided
into those who are truthful and those who are liars. As for the
truthful, their number falls short of the range which independently
yields certain knowledge. As for the liars, it is possible that they
could have conspired because their number falls short of the range
in which it becomes impossible for them to conspire and conceal it.
But if they are of such number that it is not impossible for them to
conspire and conceal it, then concealment of the truth is not
impossible in this case until it is disclosed in the next case.

The Shi‘ites’ report concerning the divine appointment of the
imamate, although their number is large, does not yield certain
knowledge because they do not report on an eyewitness basis or on
any authority. Yet if they have heard this from an earlier
generation, then they are telling the ‘truth.’ But the number of the
earlier generation that forged this lie is short of reaching the range
where conspiracy and concealment is impossible for them. /1:139/

Furthermore, the succeeding generation may have assumed that
566

their [the previous generation’s] number was complete, such that it
would be impossible to conspire. Therefore, they are mistaken in
their assumption, and yet hold their judgment to be decisive; and
this is the source of their error.

Conclusion of this Chapter. Concerning the explanation of
corrupt conditions [for tawdtur] which some people have held;
there are five.

First, some people have made it conditional that the number
reporting tawdtur should be such that they are countless and
cannot be confined to a town. This is corrupt, for if all the pilgrims
report an event which blocked them from completing their
pilgrimage and prevented them from reaching ‘Arafat, then certain
knowledge accrues from their Statement, even though they are
limited in number. Also, if the people of a Mosque report a
calamity preventing them from Jum‘a prayer, their truthfulness
would be known with certainty in Spite of the fact that a Mosque
can contain them, let alone a town. Similarly, when the people of
Medina report something from the Messenger of Allah,

or eae

‎sula wt Gm, Certain knowledge accrues, even though one town‏ و
‎holds them.‏

‎Second, some people have made it conditional that the
kinship of the reporters must differ, that is, they may not be
children of one father; and their homelands must differ so that
they are not from a single quarter; and they must differ in religion
so that they are not from one denomination. This also is corrupt
because their being from one quarter and one ancestry have no

‎effect except in the possibility of them conspiring. But the
567

enormity of the complete number averts this possibility. Yet if it is
not such a large number, then conspiracy is possible among
relatives, as it is possible among brothers or the inhabitants of one
town, and as it is possible among the inhabitants of a quarter. Still,
how can difference in religion be considered while we know the
truthfulness of Muslims when they report a killing, riot, or battle.
In fact, we know the truthfulness of the people of Constantinople

when they report the death of a Caesar.

If it is said: We should then recognize the truthfulness of
Christians in reporting the trinity from Jesus, ‏الكلآر‎ sez, and their
truthfulness about his crucifixion.

We shall say: They did not report the trinity as if through
tawgif'® or hearing it from Jesus in a decisive, explicit text that
does not tolerate different interpretations. Rather, they have
imagined this on the basis of elusive words and have failed to
grasp their significance, just as the anthropomorphists have made
conclusions based on various verses and traditions while not
understanding their meanings.

The taw4Gtur [report] must emanate from that which is
perceptible. As for the killing of Jesus, ,van selz, they were right in
that they saw a person resembling Jesus, ‏رعقيم السلام‎ being killed. But

they were confused with regard to him.

l6The term here refers to that which has been designated by
God. See Qal'‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-Fugahd’, ‏.م‎ 151; and Tahanawi,
Kashshaf Igtilahdt al-Funiin, 2:1497,

3268

If it is said: Is confusion possible in the case of perceptibles?
And if it is possible, then each of us may have doubt when seeing
his wife or child and may think that perhaps he is confused.

We shall say: If it is a time of intervention into the ordinary
[i-e., miracles}, then it is possible that a mistake may occur in
perception. But this occurs in the time of prophethood to establish
the truth of the Prophet, ,uéui sui; but it does not necessarily
produce doubt at other than that time, for there is no dispute that
the power of Allah, gtx, can turn a staff into a serpent. Again, this
intervention into the ordinary is to support the truth of the
Prophet, ‏الكلار‎ s4i%. But in spite of this, if we were to grasp a staff in

our time, we would not fear it turning into a serpent, for we trust

the ordinariness of our time.

If it is said: Intervention into the ordinary in our time
\1:140\ is also possible to establish the kardma!7 of the walis, for
perhaps one of the walis supplicated to Allah, gixs, for this [karama}

and He answered him. We should then doubt [sense perception]

because of its possibility.

17Kardma means miraculous gifts and graces from Allah who
protects and aids His wali(s), that is, a supporter, beloved, friend,
ally, etc. of Allah, one who is chosen for his preeminent holiness
and extraordinary piety and virtue. For the linguistic and technical
meaning of ‘wali,’ see Manzir, Lisdn al-‘Arab, 15:406-15; Mustafa,
et al, Mu‘jam al-Wasit, 2:1070; and The Shorter Encyclopedia of
Islam, 1953 ed., s.v. “Walt.” For ‘kardma,’ see The Shorter
Encyclopedia of Islam, 1953 ed., s.v. “Karima.”

569

0

We shall say: When Allah, giz, causes this, he removes the
necessary knowledge which accrues from the ordinary from within
us. But since we find in ourselves necessary. knowledge that a staff
does not turn into a serpent, nor a mountain into gold, nor pebbles
in the mountain into jewels and sapphires, then we decisively hold
that Allah, gixs, did not intervene in the ordinary even though He is
able to do so.

Third, some people have made it conditional that they
[reporters] should be walis and believers.!® This is corrupt because

knowledge can accrue based on the statements of fasiqs, the
Murji‘ites, !9 or the Qadarites.? Moreover, certain knowledge may
accrue based on the statements of the Romans when reporting the

death of their king,

Fourth, some people have made it conditional that reporters
must not be forced by the sword to report. This is corrupt because
if they have been forced to tell a lie, then certain knowledge would
not accrue because of the absence of the required condition of
reporting based on necessary knowledge. And if they tell the
truth, knowledge accrues. For example, if the Caliph forces the

IB-This is similar to the Shi‘ite positions. See al-Muzaffar,Usiil
al-Figh, 2:57-81.

'9For an Ash‘arite definition, see Aba al-Husayn ‘Ali b. Isma‘il
al-Ash‘ari, 1 al-Islamiyin wa Ikhtilaf al-Musallin, ed. Helmut
Ritter, (Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag GMBH, 1980), pp. 132-154.

20-Qadarites’ is a name given to the Mu‘tazilites by their

opponents. See al-Ash‘ari, Maqdlat al-Islamiyin wa Ikhtilaf al-
Muyallin, pp. 155-278.

570

inhabitants of Baghdad by sword to report on something they have
actually seen or to testify on something that they have concealed,

and then they give the report, certain knowledge can accrue based

on their statement.

If it is said: Is it possible to conceive of a number {of
reporters] by which certain knowledge accrues on the basis of their
Statement if they report voluntarily and does not accrue if they
report under force?

We shall say, al-Qadi, ‏ررحم ان‎ held this to be impossible
because he did not allow circumstantial evidence to enter [as a
factor]. But, as far as we are concerned, this is not impossible, for
we have already clarified that the mind can realize that those
[reporters], in spite of their great number, have no purpose uniting
them to lie. Then, it [the mind] accepts [what they say]. But if it
appears that the sword is a unifying factor, then it is not unlikely
that certain knowledge cannot accrue.

Fifth, the Rafidites?! made it conditional that the infallible
imam should be among the reporters, and this necessitates certain
knowledge of the reports of the Messenger, pfu‘; ‏تير‎ wt “am, for he [the
imam) is infallible. So what need is there for other than him to
report?

It is necessary, then, that no certain knowledge accrues based

on their tawdtur which reports the explicit statement of the

21 Arabic, it is al-Rafida (pl. Rawafid), one of the names
given to the Shi‘a. See The Shorter Encyclopedia of Islam, p. 466.

571

appointment ‘Ali, “2 ‏اله‎ gm, for among them none was infallible.
Furthermore, the imdm's proof would not be binding except on
those who witnessed and heard him from among the people of his
town to the exclusion of other territories. The proof would not
remain binding by the statement of his commanders,
propagandists, agents, and his judges because none of them is
infallible. Moreover, the report of the death of the governor or his
killing could not be certainly known, nor the occurrence of civil
unrest, nor fighting in another country. All of this necessarily

follows their hallucinations.

Chapter Three

The Classifications of Reports: What Must Be Assented to,
What Must Be Denied, and What Must Have its Judgement
Suspended

The First Classification: What must be assented to

This has seven [categories].

First, there is that which has been reported through a
number sufficient for tawdtur. Thus, one is obligated to assent to
such a report necessarily, even though there is no other
corroborative proof for it. For there are no reports whose truth can
be known purely through reporting, except the mutawdtir. As for
other reports, their truths are known only through a proof
independent of the report itself /1:141/.

Second, what Allah grea, has reported [must be assented to];

It is truth because lying is impossible for Him. This is supported
by two proofs. The stronger of them is the report of the
Messenger, ‏الكلتر‎ siz, concerning the impossibility of lying for Him,
g'za. The other is that His speech, dixa, is self-subsisting, and lying
is impossible with self-subsisting speech and for whom ignorance is
impossible. For in this case, reporting is self-subsistant in the
mind, in accordance with knowledge, and ignorance is impossible
on the part of Allah, giz.

Third, there are the reports of the Messenger, ‏الكلار‎ oui. The
evidence for his truthfulness is the proof of his miracles, which
indicate his truthfulness, together with the impossibility of
miracles being manifested at the hands of imposters. For if that
were possible, then the Creator would be unable to confirm the
messengership of His messengers, and inability is impossible for
Him.

Fourth what the ummah has reported (must be assented to];
for its infallibility is established based on the statement of the
Messenger, ,u&s ui, who is immune from lying (as are all those
whom Allah, gtx, and His Messenger, ‏وأسكر‎ sete ‏اله‎ “tan, Say are truthful
and do not lie).

Fifth comprises every report which is in agreement with the
reports of Allah, ‏,دعي‎ His Messenger, ‏وسكم‎ sole wi ‏رصي‎ the nenmah—or
whosoever they have affirmed as being truthful—or one whose
truthfulness is evident by reason and revealed authority. For if
such a report were to be a lie, then that with which it is in
agreement would [also] be a lie.

Sixth is every authenticated report whose narrator has been

established as having stated it in the presence of the Messenger of
573

Allah, ‏سكم‎ sai ‏انه‎ Go, that is, within the range of his hearing when he
was not unaware of him, and he [the Prophet] remained silent
toward him. For if such a person were lying, the Prophet would not
have remained silent toward him, nor would he not have charged
him with lying. By this we mean [affairs] related to religion.

Seventh is every report that has been mentioned in the
presence of a group who kept from calling it a lie, where in a
similar case it would ordinarily require denouncing it as a lie. In
addition, it would be impossible to keep silent if the report were a
lie. This is because this report would have an impact on their
minds, and ordinarily it would be impossible for such a number to
conspire in a manner that [their] conspiracy is concealed and that
they would not speak about it.

It is through this channel that most of the events of the
Messenger of Allah, ‏سكم‎ suie ut “us, have been established, for they
occurred in front of crowds who kept silent from dening their
[subsequent reports], even though it is impossible for people like
them [the Companions] to keep silent about a lie. So when the
condition is fulfilled and the denial is abandoned, as it has been

mentioned, then it will have the same status as saying, “You have

spoken the truth.”

If it is said: When a person claims something in front of a
crowd and claims their awareness of it, and they keep silent from
denying the claim, will his truthfulness be established?

We shall say: If his claim is such that it is subject to

examination and ijtihdd, then his truthfulness cannot be
574

established because of the possibility that they believed what he
claimed on the basis of speculation. But if he was referring to
something that has been witnessed, and their number is such that
it would become impossible for them to come under one
motivation, then silence [as opposed] to denying him is

confirmation on their part.

If it is said: Will the truth be indicated through the rawdtur
of a report of such a group, on whose part it is impossible for them
to deliberately conspire to lie or concur to agree?

We shall say: Al-Qadi, ut ‏روجو‎ held this to be impossible and
said that their statement necessarily yields certain knowledge
{only} if in Allah's knowledge they reach the number of tawdtur.
But if it did not yield necessary knowledge, this indicates the
incompleteness /1:142/ of the number. Nor is it permissible to
conclude truthfulness by examining their conditions. Rather, we
would know decisively that they are lying, or that among them
there is a liar or a conjecturer.

This necessarily follows his [al-Qadi’s] position since he does
not consider circumstantial evidence [as valid]. But for whoever
accepts circumstantial evidence, it is not unlikely that he may

know their truth through a sort of ratiocination.

If it is said: Is it necessary that a solitary report upon which
the ummah acted be regarded as true?
We shall say: If they have acted in harmony with it, they

may have acted in accordance with a different source. Moreover, if
575

they did act in accordance with this, they have been ordered to act
upon solitary reports, even if they do not know its truth.

Consequently, it is not necessary to judge that it is truth.

If it is said: If the reporter were to be a liar, then the ummah
would be acting upon falsehood. This would be an error, which is
not permissible for the ummah.

We shall say: The ummah is only charged to worship by
acting in accordance with reports in which their truthfulness
preponderates—and it did so in their minds, as when a judge rules
on the basis of testimony from trustworthy [reporters]. He is not in

error even if the witness is a liar. Rather, he is correct for he was

not ordered but to do this.

The Second Classification of Reports: Those which are Known to be
False

They are four.

First is that whose contrary is established by the necessity of
reason, fratiocination, sense perception and experience, mutawatir
reports, and, in general, all that contradicts what is known through
the mentioned six avenues—like one who reports contraries
together, or the immediate resurrection of the dead,*? or that we
are sitting on an eagle’s wing, or are in the whirl of an ocean, as
well as al! that whose contradictions are perceived.

Second is anything which contradicts decisive textual

22That is, distinguished from Resurrection Day.

5316

evidence from the Book, mutawétir Sunna, and the ijma‘ of the
ummah, for they come in denial of Allah, gtx, His Messenger,
‏سكم‎ sade ‏الله‎ Goo, and the ummah,

Third is that which has been openly denied by a large
number, such that it is impossible by the nature of the case that
they conspire to lie when they state, “We were present with the
reporter at the given time, and we did not at all find what he
reported.”

Fourth are those [reports] which a large number has kept
from reporting and speaking about, in spite of the fact that the
event [was reported to have] occurred in their presence and that it
would be customarily impossible for them to keep from mentioning
it when there is abundant impetus to report it. For example, if one
Should report that an amir of a town has been killed in the market
place in the presence of a large number of people and none of them
spoke about it, then his lie is decisively concluded. For were he
truthful, there would be abundant impetus to report this.
Ordinarily, it would be impossible that this person exclusively
report it.

It is in this way that we know the falsity of anyone who
claims opposition to the Qur’an, or [the existence] of a statement
from the Messenger specifying another prophet to come after him,
or that he left a number of male children, or that he stated the
identity of a particular imam in the presence of a large number of
people; or that he made obligatory fasting in the month of Shawwél

or the prayer of the late morning, and such things which are by the

nature of the case impossible to conceal.
577

If it is said: Solitary reporters have transmitted news for
which there is abundant impetus to report, to the degree that
difference of opinion has occurred about such things as his ifrdd , or

017211 of hajj, ‏وسكم‎ sate ‏الك‎ “pom 23 or that he entered the Ka‘ba and

24

prayed in it;“" or that he married Maymana while he was in the

State of ihrdm; ,uén ‏لي‎ or that he entered Mecca by force; or that

he accepted the testimony of an individual bedouin concerning the
sighting of the crescent, though the bedouin’s isolated sighting was
such that no one else shared it with him /1:143/:26 or about the

report of the splitting of the moon which no one reported except b.

*3The technical usage of ‘ifrdd ‘describes the state of ihrdm
when one intends to perform only Hajj; if the intention is to
combine ‘umrah with Hajj, it is called girdn. A third term closely
associated with these in legal works is tamattu‘, describing the
performance of ‘umra then Hajj, each with an independent thrdm in
the same year during Hajj. For an elaborate discussion, see al-
Zahili,al-Figh al-Islami wa Adillatuhu, 3:133-44, where he also
refers to other sources; and al-Kasani, Bad@‘i‘ al-Sanda’i‘, 2:167.

*4The Prophet’s prayer inside the Ka‘ba is a subject of dispute
among the fugahd’. See details in al-Kasani’s 800815 al-Sand’i‘ ,
1:115; Ibn al-Humim, Fath al-Qadir; 1:479; Ibn Athir, al-Lubdb,
1:138; al-Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami wa Adillatuhu, 1:602-4; and Ibn
al-Qayyim, 224 al-Ma‘dd, 3:429-64, which has an extended
discussion on the Prophet’s prayer and entering Mecca by force.

25Reports on Maymuna’s marriage are cited by many. See
al-Tirmidhi, Sunan, , ed. M. Shakar, (: Halabi, ) 3:580-83; Ibn al-
Hajjaj, Sakih Muslim, 2:1030.

26For a full discussion on the problem of sighting the crescent,
see Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami wa Adillatuhu, 2598

378

Mas‘id, ‘44% an gs, and a small number with him, while it should

have been seen by every believer, disbeliever, bedouin, and city

7

dweller; or the Christians’ reports of the miracles of Jesus,

‎siz, although they do not report his speech in the cradle, while‏ السلام
‎it was one of his greatest miracles; or the transmission of the‏
‎Qur’an by the ummah, though they did not report other miracles of‏
‎oui, as broadly as they did the Qur’an; or people‏ السلار ‎the Messenger,‏
‎transmitting the major events of the messengers while they did not‏
‎report the ones of Shu‘ayb, ,ii&s .uie; or the ummah reporting the‏
‎stras of the Qur’an while the mu‘awwidhatdn were not reported‏
‎like the others so that b. Mas‘iid, si2 wi @#., disputed whether they‏
‎are from the Qur’an;78 or what has become a general necessity,‏
‎such as coming into contact with or touching [a woman]. So all of‏
‎these are in contradiction to this principle [of abundant impetus].‏

‎The reply is that the ifrdd or the qirdn of the Messenger of
Allah, ‏وسكم‎ seis wt ‏رصن‎ are of no necessity to be promulgated or
proclaimed to all by the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكم‎ sete ‏اك‎ Geo. Rather,
no one need know this except for whomever [the Prophet] informs,
or discloses his intention to inform him. Yet, his instruction to
people concerning ifrdd and qirdn together has been broadly
disseminated. |

‎As for his entrance into the Ka‘ba and his prayer in it, this

‎may have been with a few people or with one or two, which may

‎27 Consult Wensinck, The Concordance et Indices de la
Tradition Musulmane , 1

‎8The last two siras of the Qur’an, 13, 14.

579

not have occurred often. Even if it occurred often, there would not
be abundant impetus to perpetuate its transmission, for it is not a
principle of religion, nor is it one of its obligations or important
factors.

As for his forceful entrance into Mecca, there are sound,
widely-known reports indicating his entrance bearing arms and
carrying standards, in full control and domination, and that he
granted amnesty to whomever entered the house of Abia Sufyan or
to whomever laid down his weapons and took refuge in the Ka‘ba.
All these reports are not disputed. However, some fugaha’ have
adduced that they entered peacefully based on what has been
transmitted to the effect that he, pfu’, ‏علوم‎ wi Gm, paid blood money for
the people killed by Khalid b. Walid, ‏عن‎ wi ‏.رضم‎ The occurrence of
Such controversy is possible for such individuals until it is removed
by ratiocination. Also, this may have been on the basis of a
particular prohibition for identified people for a special purpose, or
that this should have occurred by a particular or specific
prohibition on the part of particular people for special reasons.

As for the isolated sighting of the crescent by the bedouin, it
is possible. Similar occurrences may take place on the first night of
the month even in our times. Owing to the crescent being faint and
thin, it is possible only for a sharp-sighted person's eye, who
genuinely desires to seek it, to hit the place of the
crescent—whether it is based on experience or chance.

As for the splitting of the moon, it is a sign that occurred at
night while people slept and were heedless; and it only happened

momentarily. So those who saw it were the ones among Quraysh
580

with whom the Prophet, pfu’ sie wi “ue, disputed and thus pointed it
out to them. In addition, only a fraction [of the moon) split for a
moment and returned complete. There are many occurrences of a
shooting star or an earthquake or other frightening events, like
wind and night storms, that no one pays attention to except for a
few individuals. Add this to the fact that such things are only
known to those who are told look for them. Also, the moon split
following the statement and challenge [of the Quraysh]. Whosoever
did not know about such an event and his sight fell upon it may
have thought it was something illusionary which disappeared, or
that it was a star under the moon that moved away from it, or a
that a portion of cloud covered part of the moon. /1:144/ Thus, its
transmission was not mutawa@tir.

As for their [mutaw4tir] transmission of the Qur’an and not
other major events, this is so for two reasons. One is that the
impetus to transmit [things] in a perpetual manner did not increase
after the establishment of prophethood and its independence on
the basis of the Qur’dén due to the contentment with its
establishment by the Qur’4n, which is the greatest of signs. Second,
things other than the Qur’an may have occurred only once in
anyone’s lifetime, or may have occurred in front of a few people,
while [the Prophet] used to repeat the Qur’dn throughout his life,
time after time. Furthermore, he used to deliberately address it to
all of them, and he ordered them to preserve it and to recite it for
him and to act accordingly.

As for the mu‘awwidhatdn, their broad transmission as being

of the Qur’an has been established like the other siiras—and Ibn
581

Mas‘id, «2 wt ‏ررضيج‎ never denied that they are of the Qur’an. He
denied recording them in the text, and also the recording of al-
Hamd.”? For, according to him, the Sunna was not to record except
what the Prophet, ‏وسكم‎ si wt ‏رصي‎ had ordered to be recorded and
written. So when he found that he did not write these, nor did he
hear the Prophet’s command to write them, he then denied them.
This was an interpretation, not a rejection of their being of the
Qur’an. If he had rejected this, it would have been a great
departure from the truth, which cannot be attributed to a person
like him, nor any one of the Companions.

As for the negligence of Christians to report the speech of
Jesus, ‏رليم انسلام‎ in the cradle, this may be because he spoke only in
the presence of a few people, and only once, in order to declare the
innocence of Mary, ‏الكلار‎ tasiz, from what they have accused her of. so
it may not have been disseminated. Therefore, certain knowledge
did not accrue based on the statement of those from whom it was
heard. Hence, it was obliterated.

As for Shu‘ayb and other [prophets] like him, ‏السلام‎ pruiz, they
did not have a shari‘a of their own, but called to the sharf‘a of those
preceding them. Therefore, there was no abundant impetus to
report their miracles, for they did not have prominent miracles.
But their truthfulness has been established on the basis of texts
and divine reports from a prophet who has a miracle.

As for the report of touching or contacting the genitals°° and

2°This refers to the first chapter of the Qur’an, The Opening.

30 Surists have differed regarding the annullment of ablution

582

things that commonly occur, it is possible that the Messenger,

pial giz, informed only a few people and then they would
individually report it. That it was not popularized [by the Prophet]
does not bring distress in the mind. There, nevertheless, would be

abundant impetus to report it perpetually.

The Third Classification: [Reports] whose Truth or Falsehood is
Unknown, thus [Judgment] on them is Necessarily Suspended

This [classification] includes all of the transmitted reports
regarding the rules of the Shari‘a and worship, besides the two

divisions mentioned. It includes every report whose truth or

falsehood is unknown.

If it is said: The lack of evidence for a report’s truth proves
its falsehood. For if it were true, Allah, dtxa, would not have
isolated us from such a proof of its truth.

We shall say: Why is it impossible for Him to isolate us from
a decisive proof of its truth? If this is reversed and said that its
truth is known—for if it were false then Allah, giz, would have not
isolated us from a decisive proof of its falsehood—then this would
be a response to this discourse. But how is this permissible, since
from this it is necessary to conclude decisively the falsehood of

every eyewitness whose truthfulness is not decisively established

due to one’s touching his or her genitals or the touching of a women
by a man, or vice-versa. For details, see Zahili, al-Figh al-Islamt wa
Adillatuhu, 1:274-282; Zayla‘i, Nagb al-Raya, 1:60; and al-Farra’, al-
‘Udda, 3:762.

583

as well as the infidelity and the immorality of every judge and
mufti whose Islam and piety is not known decisively?

Similarly, every giyds and Shari‘a proof that is not
conclusively held to be accurate, one must decisively pronounce it
to be false. This is different than the case where a miracle is not
demonstrated, yet one challenges to be a prophet. Therefore, we
become certain of his falsehood, for a Prophet, ‏سكم‎ seize un “on, is one
who charges us to believe in him. Yet belief without proof is
impossible, as laying an impossible obligation is impossible. So
from this we are certain that we have not been obligated to believe
him, and he definitely was not a messenger to us.

As for a solitary report or the testimony of two, we are not
charged by the Shari‘a to confirm their truth, but to act when its
truthfulness is conceivable—and this did accrue, so acting is
possible. Furthermore we would be right, even if they are a liars.
But if we were to act in accordance with the deposition of a single

witness, then we would be in the wrong, even if he be truthful.

If it is said: The establishment of a miracle has become
necessary only to know [the Prophet’s} truth, so we follow him in
what he brings as Shari‘a. Thus, it is incumbent upon him to
remove all doubts concerning the Shari‘a that he conveys verbally,
and he must spread it to the extent of tawdtur so that certain
knowledge can accrue to those whom he did not [directly] state it
to.

We shall say: It is not absurd that the Lawgiver divides the

Shari'a into that which charges worshipping through knowledge
584

and action—where what you have mentioned in this regard would
be necessary—and into that which charges us only to act according
to the Shari‘a, but without having certain knowledge. Therefore, it
is obligatory upon those who hear it from the Messenger to
combine certain knowledge and action. But the obligation for those
who were not present is action, not knowledge. Thus, action is
anchored by a zan [working knowledge] of the truth in the report,
even though he [the reporter] may be a liar in the sight of Allah,
gtza. So, zan accrues through giyds, the testimony of one witness
and an oath of a defendant, or an oath of a plaintiff, when the other

person refuses to take an oath. We do not regard any of this as

impossible.

DIVISION TWO OF THIS PRINCIPLE: SOLITARY REPORTS
Consisting of [Four] Chapters

Chapter One: The Establishment of the Rites of Worship Although
they Fall Short of Yielding Certain Knowledge
This has four discussions

I. DISCUSSION: Know that in this context what we mean
by solitary report is those reports which do not reach the point of
tawatur to yield certain knowledge. So, what has been transmitted
by five or six individuals, for example, may be a solitary report.

As for the statement of the Messenger, ‏الكلار‎ suiz, whose
rectitude is known certainly, it is not called solitary report. If you
know this, we shall say that solitary reports do not yield certain

knowledge. This can be necessarily known.
585

We do not believe all that we hear. But, even if we believe
and assume the contradiction of two reports, how can we believe in
both opposites? What has been related from traditionists
{muhadidthin], namely that this necessarily yields certain
knowledge, perhaps they mean that it yields knowledge on the
basis of necessitating action, for sometimes zan is called‘ ilm >}
Thus, some of them say that it yields outward knowledge, while
certain knowledge neither has an outer nor an inner. But it is only
zan, and they cannot hold a proof based on His statement, gia, “If
you ascertain that they are believing women. . . 32 thinking it
means obvious [knowledge], while its intended meaning is actual
knowledge by the declaration of shahdda, which is the manifest
side of faith but not the interior side, where a person is not [legally]
responsible or charged. Faith [proclaimed] by the tongue /1:146/ is
called imdn, figuratively. Nor can they hold a proof based on the

saying of the Exalted, “Do not follow that wherein you have no

knowledge . . 33 and that if reports do not yield certain

knowledge, acting according to it is not permissible. For the
intended meaning of this verse is to prevent a witness from

decisively testifying, except on what he is certain of.

3'Ghazali here is pointing out that ‏,انمع‎ i.e. knowledge
appearing worthy of belief, is at times interchangable with ‘ilm, i.e.
certain knowledge, and thus confuses those who do not recognize
the usage of the terms and their contexts.

32Our’An, 60:10.

Our’ an, 17:36.

As for acting according to a solitary report, it is necessarily
known by a decisive proof that necessitates action when truth is
assumed, and the assumption accrues decisively. The
obligatoriness of acting according to zan is also necessarily known,
as is ruling according to the testimony of two, or the oath of a

plaintiff in the event of the defendant's denial.

II. DISCUSSION: Some people deny on a rational basis the
permissibility of worship according to solitary reports, its
occurrence on the basis of revealed authority notwithstanding.

It should be said to them, “How do you know it is impossible?
Through necessity? We differ with you about this—and dispute
cannot occur in what is necessary. Or do you deny it by some
proof?”

But they have no way to establish it. For were it impossible,
its impossibility would be either per se or because of some evil that
it begets. Yet it is not impossible per se; nor is its evil considered.
Even if we do consider it, we do not concede it. For it is necessary

to explain the signification of its evil.

If it is said: The signification of its evil is that when an
individual transmits a report, Say, regarding the shedding of blood
or permitting intercourse, he may be lying. Yet it would be thought
that this shedding blood is by the command of Allah, ‏,دعي‎ while it
is not His command. How can it be permissible to be hasty based
on ignorance? On the contrary, it is not permissible to rush after

whoever we regard with doubt concerning the permissibility of
587

intercourse or the shedding of blood based on ignorance. It would
be bad for the Lawgiver to abandon people to ignorance and to
rush into falsehood based on speculation. Rather, when Allah, gtx’,
commands, He must make it known to us so that we are informed,
regardless of our being obedient or disobedient.

The reply is that if this question issues from one who denies
religion, we shall say to him, what is the impossibility of Allah, gtx,
saying to His worshippers, “When a bird flies by and you think it is
a crow, then I have made ‘such and such’ obligatory upon you, and
I have made your supposition a sign for the necessity of acting, just
as I have made the declination of the sun to be a sign for the
obligatoriness of prayer.” Therefore, zan itself would become the
sign of obligatoriness, while the existence of zan is known through
sense perception. Thus, obligatoriness becomes known. So,
whoever performs the obligation in the state of zan has decisively
fulfilled it and is right.

Accordingly, if it is permissible to make the declination of the
sun a sign or thinking a bird is a crow, why is it not possible to
make one’s zan a sign? It should be said to him that when you
have a working knowledge of the truth of a reporter, a witness, or
an oath giver, rule by it [zan]. However, you are not charged
through the certain knowledge of his truthfulness, but with acting
when working knowledge of his truthfulness accrues. Furthermore,
you are right and have fulfilled [your obligation], whether he is
telling the truth or lying. You are not charged with having certain
knowledge of his truthfulness, but with action in accordance with

your zan that you feel in yourself.
388

This also is what we believe regarding giyds, the solitary
report, ruling based on a witness or an oathgiver, and other than
this. But if this emanates from a believer of the Sharf‘a—but there
is no way for him to do so, for he has been charged to act according
to testimony, injunction, fatwd [authoritative opinion], an
eyewitnessing of the Ka‘ba, and the report of the Messenger,
‏رصي اله عليه وسكمر‎ which total five.

Now, testimony can be regarded as giving decisive
knowledge, like the testimony of the Messenger, plu‘y sie ‏اله‎ “or,
/1:147/ or the testimony of Khuzayma b. Thabit?+ when the
Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ suiz wi “us , confirmed his truthfulness, and
the witness of Moses and Aaron and other prophets, Allah's
blessings be upon them. Their testimony may be regarded like
that of others. So what it is assumed is appended to that which is
decisive concerning the obligatoriness of action. And so it is with
the fatwd of the Prophet, ‏َي وأسكمر‎ an ‏,رصي‎ and his rule, which is
decisive, and the fatwds of other imdms or the injunctions of other
judges, which are of zan and are appended to what is decisive. In
addition, the Ka‘ba is decisively known when eyewitnessed. Yet it
is also known by zan through ijtihad. Thus, acting is necessary
upon zan, as it is necessary upon [one’s] being an eyewitness.

Similarly, the report of the Messenger, pfu‘s sie wi “am,
necessitates acting if it is mutawdtir. Why should it be particularly

impossible for what is known through zan to be categorized as

344 Companion from the Ansar. See Ibn Hajar, al-Tahdhib al-
Tahdhib, (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, 1985), 3:121.

589

certain knowledge in making action mandatory?
Thus, whosoever wants to distinguish between these five

things, as to their evil or goodness, there is no way for him to do so

at all.

If it is said: Is it permissible to command acting based on the
report of a fasiq?35

We shall say: Some people have stated that it is permissible
provided that truth is likely [to accrue]. To us, this condition is
corrupt. Rather, just as it is permissible to make the motion of the
falak*® a sign for performing the obligation of prayers, it is likewise
possible for the motion of a fasiq’s tongue to be a sign. For laying
the obligation to act when the report exists is one thing, while the

report being true or false is another.

III. DISCUSSION: Some people have held that reason
indicates the mandatoriness of acting in accordance with solitary
reports independent of the Shari‘a proofs.

They have supported this with two proofs.

The first of which is that when a mufti does not find decisive

proof from the Book, /jmé‘, or the mutawdatir Sunna, but finds a

35The term refers to one who commits a great sin(s). See L.
Gardet’s article in The Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2:833-44.

36Ghazali here makes an analogy between the motion of the
solar system (falak) that produces night and day — indicating the

times for prayer — and the motion of the tongue stating reports,
etc.

590

solitary report and does not rule according to it, then rules would
be suspended. Since the Prophet, pfu‘; si wi =, was sent to all of
{his] contemporaries, he needed to send envoys [carrying rules], for
he could not verbally speak to everyone, nor could he broadly
promulgate all the rules through tawdtur to everyone. For had he
attempted to send the number required for tawdtur to every
nation, the number of people in his town would not have been
sufficient.

This is weak because if the mufti does not find decisive
proofs, he has recourse to the state of al-bard’a al-asliyya [the
original state of freedom] and istishdb,37 just as if he misses the
solitary report.

As for the Messenger, piu‘, «sie wi “4m, he is limited to those
whom he can convey to. From among people, there were those on
Islands to whom the Sharif‘a was never conveyed, who therefore
were not liable to its obligation, for commissioning all people is not
mandatory. Of course, if a prophet were charged to commission all
people and that he should not leave any Single event without the
tule of Allah, gixs, nor should he leave any person from
responsibility, then for him it may be necessarily sufficient to rely
on a solitary report.

The second proof is their position that the reporter’s
truthfulness is possible. So, if we do not act according to the
solitary report, we will be abandoning the command of Allah, gizs,

and the command of His Messenger, ‏وسكم‎ ani ‏اله‎ Ses. Therefore, actin
8 0 i 58

37See the introduction to this translation, 1:124-129.

591

is being prudent and resolute.

This is false on three accounts.

The first of them is that the reporter’s lying is also possible.
So our actions may be contrary to what is obligatory.

The second is that it is necessary to act based on the report
of an unbeliever or a fdsiq, for their truthfulness is possible.

The third is that freedom from responsibility is ascertained
by reason and original negation [of responsibility]. /1:148/ This
cannot be abrogated by delusive imagination. Some have used this
as proof for negating solitary reports, even though this is a corrupt
argument. But it is better than the one stating that if the truth [of

a solitary report] is possible, then one must act according to it.

IV. DISCUSSION: The correct position, which the majority
in the preceding generations of the ummah held—that is, the
Companions, the Successors, the fagihs, and the theologians—is that
it is not impossible, rationally, to fulfill Shari‘a charges based on
solitary reports. Nor is it mandatory, rationally, to fulfill Shari‘a
charges based on them. But, fulfilling Shari‘a obligations based on
them has occurred in tradition.

The majority of the Mu‘tazilites and those who follow them of
the Zahirites, like al-Qasani,?® hold that it is not permissible to act
according to a solitary report on grounds of tradition.”

38Muhammad b. Ishaq al-Qasani was a student of Dawdad al-

Isbahani, the founder of the Zahirite school. See Ibn Hajar, Tabgir
al-Muntabih bi Tahrir al-Mushtabih, 3:1147.

3°For further discussion, see al-Bazdawi, Kashf al-Asrar,

592

The falsity of their opinion is indicated in two decisive
approaches. One is the ijmd‘ of the Companions to accept solitary
reports; the second is that there are tawdtur reports that the
Messenger, ‏وسكم‎ sai ‏اله‎ Gm, has sent governors and envoys to various
territories, and he obliged the people of the territories to assent to
what they transmit from the Shari‘a.

We shall resolve both of these approaches.

The first approach concerns what has come through tawdtur
and become well known, like those practices of the Companions in
numerous, countless events that were based on solitary reports,
though none of them reached tawdtur, though certain knowledge
accrues from their conjunction.

Here, we shall indicate some of them:

For exmple, there are many events that have been reported
from ‘Umar, ab2 ‏.ضيح اله‎ One is the story of the fetus.4° ‘Umar stood
[before the Companions] and said about this, “I remind you of
Allah. Has any one of you heard from the Messenger, ‏وسكم‎ suia ‏اله‎ “um,

anything about fetuses?” Haml b. Malik b. al-Nabigha‘! stood and

2:370; b. Hazm, /hkdm, 1:107; Amidi, Ihkaém, 1:234; and al-
Dumayni, Magayis Naqd Mutin al-Sunna, p. 276.

40For an elaborate discussion on the legal aspects concerning
the fetus, see Muhammad Salam Madkair’s comprehensive,
comparative figh work, al-Janin wa al-Ahkam al-Muta‘alligatu  bihi
fi al-Figh al-Islami (Cairo: Dar al-Nahdah al-‘Arabiyya, 1969). See
also Kuwait Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic Affiars, Mu‘jam al-Figh
al-Hanbali, (Kuwait: Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic Affiars Press, n.
d ), 1:206; and al-Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami wa Adillatuhu , 6:362-67.

41 Consult Ibn Hajar, al-Tahdhib al-Tahdhiib, 3:32.

593

said:

I was between two females, [i.e., co-wives], and one of them
hit the other with a rolling pin. The other, then, delivered a
dead fetus. So, the Messenger of Allah, ‏سكم‎ sate wt ‏رصي‎ ruled
that a prime male or female slave be freed.

‘Umar, 42 wit ‏,رضي‎ replied:

Had we not heard this, we would have ruled differently, that
is, we would not have ruled for [the freeing of] a prime slave
in the first place.

The death of the fetus is distinguished because their is doubt about
whether it was originally alive.

Also, ‘Umar, ‘32 wi @%, used to hold that a woman could not
inherit a share of the blood money of her [deceased] husband. But
when al-Dahhak reported to him that the Messenger of Allah,
‏وسكم‎ seiz wi Go, had written to him that he should give to the widow
of Ushaym al-Dababi a share of his blood money, he [‘Umar] then
changed his opinion in this regard.

Another involves a question about the Magians, of which

numerous reports have come down. ‘Umar said:

I do not know what to do with them. I beseech anyone who
has heard something about them to report it to us.

Then ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Awf said:

I bear witness that I heard the Messenger of Allah,

‎Gm, say “Treat the Magians as you treat the People‏ الك ‎sale‏ وسكم
‎of the Book.”‏

‎So he then collected jizya from them and confirmed the status of
594

their religion.

Also, there is was an occurrance during [the lifetimes] of
‘Umar, ‘Uthman, and a great number of the Companions, pare ‏اله‎ 925,
where they changed their minds about cancelling the
mandatoriness of making ghusl {bathing} when the two genitalia
[male and female] touch. This was a result of the report of ‘A’isha,
tase ail gy, for she said, “I did this with the Messenger of Allah,
‏وسكم‎ sale wi ‏حصن‎ , and we made ghusl.”

Then there is that which has come down correctly about
‘Uthm4n, 442 ‏اك‎ 92%, when he decided the case of the housing of a
widow on the basis of the report of Fari‘a, the daughter of Malik,42
after he sent a message to her asking her about this.

Also, it is widely known that ‘Ali, “ia at qo, whenever he
accepted solitary reports /1:149/ relied on oaths, to the extent that

he once said, according to a popular report:

Whenever I heard a hadith from the Messenger of Allah,
‏وسكم‎ cele ‏صب ال‎ , Allah has benefited me from it to whatever
extent He willed. But if other than {the Prophet] related a

١ report to me, I would seek an oath from him. If he complied,
then I would believe him. Aba Bakr reported to me—and
Abi Bakr spoke the truth when he said—“The Messenger of
Allah, ‏وسكم‎ suite wt “um , said that Allah will forgive any
worshipper, who after committing a sin. . . .”49

42A daughter of Sinan, a women from the Ansar of Medina.
See Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, 12:472. ١

“3 The following is the full of the hadith, which Ghazali
mentions, as reported by Ahmad b. Hanbal in his Musnad (Beirut:
al-Maktab al-Islami, 1969), 1:10:

". . . Allah will forgive any worshipper who after committing a

sin perfoms ablution and prays two rak‘as, then asks Allah, the

305

So, ‘Ali requested any reporter to take an oath, not because he
accused him of lying, but for Cautiousness in the narration of a
hadith at its face value, and to avoid the Possibility of its words
being changed such that the report would be transmitted on the
basis of meaning, and so as not to have [reports] transmitted
hastily through conjecture, but rather through actual hearing.

And from this is what has been transmitted from Zayd b.
Thabit, «2 wi 5.05, namely that he used to hold that it was not
permissible for a menstruating woman to leave (Mecca) unless the
last rite she performed was the circumambulation around the
House. He disapproved of Ibn ‘Abbas’s disagreement with this. He
was then told that Ibn ‘Abbas had asked such and such woman of
the Ansar whether the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكم‎ sake ‏رص اله‎
commanded her with this, and she reported to him. Therefore,
Zayd b. Thabit changed his opinion; laughing, he said to b. “Abbas, “I
do not see anything other than you being right.” Thus, he changed
his opinion on the basis of an Ansari woman,

Also, there is what has been transmitted from Anas, ‘a ‏رب‎ oe,

namely that he said:

I was serving Aba ‘Ubayda, Aba Talha, and Ubay b. Ka‘b with
fadikh*4 drinks when someone came to us saying that wine

Exalted, for forgiveness.” Then the Prophet recited the verse
([3:135], “. . . Those who, when they commit an indecency or
wrong themselves, remember Allah, and pray forgiveness for
their sins—and who shall forgive sins but Alléh?—and do not
perservere in the things they did and that knowingly.”

596

has been forbidden. Upon this Aba Talha stood and said, “O
Anas, rise and shatter these jars.” I then stood and went to

our mihrds*> and 1 Struck the jars against their bases until
they broke.

And among these [examples] is what has become popular of
the practice of the people of Quba’*6 when they changed their gibla
based on a solitary report. One person came.to them and informed
them that the qibla had been changed. So on the basis of his report
they turned toward the Ka‘ba.

Another such example is what is well-known about b. ‘Abbas,
‏هذه‎ wi gm , when it was said to him that such and such man from
among the Muslims claims that Moses, al-Khadir’s companion, was

not the Moses of the Children of Israel, ‏.عليم كر‎ Upon this, b.
‘Abbas said:

This enemy of Allah is lying. Ubay b. Ka‘b has said to me,
“The Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكم‎ suite ‏اله‎ Sm, addressed us and
mentioned Moses and al-Khadir in a way indicating that

Moses, al-Khadir’s companion, was in fact the Moses of the
Children of Israel.”

Therefore, Ibn ‘Abbas went beyond acting upon a solitary report

44 According to Ibn Manzir, Lisdn, 3:45, this is a type of wine
made from grape juice.

45 According to Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, 8:2891, this is a

large, heavy, and bulky stone vessel which was used to store water
or to grind grain.

46 According to Yaqit, Mu‘jam al-Buldén, 4:301-03, ‏"قطن‎ was
originally the name of a well near Medina, which hence became the
name of a nearby village.

597

and hastened to call its source a liar, and did so decisively, because
of tie report of Ubay b. Ka‘b. |

Also, there is what has been reported from Aba al-Dard3’
that when Mu‘awiyya sold a utensil made of gold and silver for
greater than its weight, Abi Darda’ told him, “I heard the
Messenger of Allah, ‏سكم‎ suite wt “pn, forbidding this.” Mu‘awiya

replied to him, “I see no harm in this.” Abd al-Darda’ said:

Who would excuse me if I requite Mu ‘awiyya, for I relate to
him from the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكمر‎ onic wi “uo, and he tells
me his opinion. I shall never live with you in the same land.

Then, there is what has been popularly reported from all of
them referring to ‘A’isha, Hafsa, and Fatima bint Asad, and to
countless other women, as well as to Zayd, Usama b. Zayd, /1:150/
and other Companions, men, women, slaves, and clients. Thus,

continued the practice of the Successors after them, to the extent

that al-Shafi‘*, wi ‏رحو‎ , said:

We found ‘Ali b. Husayn, ‘2 ‏,رضم انك‎ relying on solitary reports,
as well as Muhammad b. ‘Ali, Jubayr b. Mut‘im, Nafi‘ b.
Jubayr, Kharija b. Zayd, Abi Salama b. ‘Abd al-Rahman,
Sulayman b. Yasar, ‘Ata’ b. Yasar, as was the case with Tawts,
Ata’, and Mujahid.

Sa‘id b. al-Musayyib used to say, “Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri related
to me from the Prophet, fa’, gala at Gum, on the trade of currencies.”
Thus, he confirmed his report as a Sunna and said, “Abi Hurayra
told me...”

‘Urwa b. Zubayr also said, “ ‘A’isha told me that the
Messenger of Allah, ‏سكم‎ suite ‏اله‎ “am , ruled for al-kharaj bi al-
598

47

daman. On this basis, he objected to ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, who

reversed his judgment upon hearing the report, and so it was with
Maysara in Yemen and Makhal in Syria.

Also, the fighis of al-Basra, like al-Hasan and Ibn Sirin, and
those of Kéfa and their successors, like “Alqama, al-Aswad, al-
Shi‘bi, Masriq, and the fuqahd’ after them. No one has objected to
them at any time. If their were any objections to this, it would
have been transmitted to us. In accordance with common practice,
it would have necessarily become well known. There would be a
great impetus to have transmitted these objections just as there
was impetus to transmit Practice based on [solitary report]. It has,
therefore, been established that there was a consensus of the

earliest generation upon this and that dispute occurred only after

them.48

If it is said: Perhaps they have used solitary reports along
with circumstantial evidence in practice, or other ‘accompanying

reports, or other phenomena, Standards, or reasons which

47The term has been attributed to the Prophet and used by
most fugaha’ to mean that the revenue generated from the
purchase of a slave or other Properties belongs to the purchaser if
he discovers a fault which the seller had neglected to mention; the
purchaser is entitled to return his purchase and also receive back
his payment in full. See Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, 2:719; and
Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-Fuqahd, p. 194,

48Ghazali here summarizes al-Shafi‘i’s argument in defense of

solitary report. For the full text see al-Shafi‘i, al-Risdla, pp. 401-
460

599

accompanied them; but not simply on the basis of these reports as
you have claimed, as in your statement: Their practice with regard
to general statements, or the imperative or prohibitive moods, is
not a decisive textual proof that they have acted simply based on
them. Rather, they have acted based on them together with other
circumstantial evidence.

We shall say: [This is] because no words have been
transmitted from them and we have only to know through the
mood’s being a command, prohibition, or general statement.
Furthermore, they have said here, “But for this [report] we would
have ruled differently.” Ibn ‘Umar, yase wi ¢s22, has explicitly stated
that they have changed their position regarding sharecropping and
the contact of the two genitalia based on the report of ‘A’isha,
tase wl gy. Why should it not be so! while the general, imperative, |
and prohibitive moods are never free from circumstantial evidence
about the condition of the commanded, the command, and the
commander?

As for what a reporter transmits from the Messenger of
Allah, pfu's’ suite wt ‏رصي‎ what is conjoined to it that causes it be a proof?
Thus, determining this is like determining the circumstantial
evidence of their practice based on the text of the Qur’in,
mutawa4tir reports, or [jma‘. But this would nullify all these proofs.
In sum, asking them to seek reports has no other motivation than

acting accordance with them.

If it is said: They have also abandoned the practice of many

reports.
600

We shall say: This is so because of the absence of conditions
rendering them acceptable—as will follow [below]—just as they have
not proceeded to act in accordance with certain texts of the Qur’ an,
or mutawatir reports. For they came to know of their abrogation,

the lapse of the command, or of the disappearance of that to which

/1:151/ the address pertains.

The second proof is what has been transmitted through
tawdtur, namely that the Messenger of Allah, ‏الك عَلَيهٍ وسكر‎ Sum ,
dispatched governors, judges, envoys, and mediators—but each of

them individually to various regions only to collect zakdét, or cancel

or confirm pacts.

The following are examples of this:

* He appointed Abd Bakr as an amir of the Hajj in the ninth
year.

٠ He sent ‘Ali, “42 wi qa, with “Sarat Bara’a,” charging him to
cancel the pacts and agreements that existed between the
Prophet, ‏وسكر‎ sui wi “am, and the unbelievers.

٠ He appointed ‘Umar, 432 wt gs’, , to collect zakdt; he
appointed Mu‘adh to collect zakdt from Yemen and to
govern its people.

٠ He dispatched ‘Uthman b. ‘Affan, ‘i wt ‏ررضو‎ to the people of
Mecca carrying and transmitting a message on his behalf
(where [the Prophet] was told that the Qurayshites had
assassinated ‘Uthman, and he became disturbed and for
this reason conducted the Bay‘a of Ridwan, saying, “By

Allah, if they did kill him, I shall certainly light the fire of
war against them”).

٠ He, ‏سكم‎ suis wt ‏رسي‎ appointed Qays b. ‘Asim to collect zakdt
601

and duties, as [he did] with Malik b. Nuwayrah, Zubrugin
b. Badr, Zayd b. Harithah, ‘Amr b. al-‘As, ‘Amr b. Hazm,
Usama b. Zayd, ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Awf, Aba ‘Ubaydah b.
al-Jarréh, and others whose mention would be lengthy.

Moreover, the specialists of sira have unanimously
established that he used to enjoin the people of the outer regions to
accept the statements of his envoys, mediators, and governors. If
he would have needed to send with every envoy the required
number for tawdtur, not even all of his Companions would be
sufficient for this, and his 26 al-Hijra [i.e. Medina] would have
become empty of his Companions and Supporters. Consequently, his
enemies from among the Jews and others would have overpowered
him, and the order and management of affairs would have been

upset. This is clearly absurd imagination.

If it is said: He, plu’, suite wt ‏رصي‎ had verbally and through
mutawatir reports informed them [the outer regions] of the details
of zakat and only sent the collectors to collect it.

We shall say: Why is it necessary for them to believe their
claim of collection while they are (only) individuals? Moreover, his
dispatches, ‏"سكم‎ sie wt “am, were not only for collection of zakdt, but
also for teaching them religion, arbitrating between disputants, and

explaining the duties of the Shari‘a.

If it is said: Then it must be necessary for them to accept the
essentials of prayer and zakdt, as well as the essentials of the

mission, the message, and the miracle [of the Prophet].
602

We shall say: As for the essentials of zakdét and prayer, it is
incumbent to accept them because the [envoys] were dispatched to
explain the duties of the Shari‘a after the promulgation of the
essentials of the mission, while it is not [incumbent] with regard to
the essentials of the message, faith, and the miracles of his
Prophethood. For how could an envoy of the Messenger of Allah,

‎Sm , Say, “He has made it obligatory upon you to believe‏ الك ‎suds‏ وسكم

‎me,” while they were not familiar with his messengership. But
after believing in him, it becomes possible for them to give heed to

‎the envoys conveying his command and to listen to them.

‎If it is said: Accepting a solitary report is necessary only if
there is a decisive proof indicating the obligatoriness of acting on
its basis, such as Ijmd‘ and tawdtur indicate proof according to you.
But on what basis would those {people} believe the governors if
they said, “It is obligatory for you to act according to our
statement?”

‎We shall say: It has been reported to them by way of
tawatur from the sira of the Messenger of Allah, ‏سكم‎ suite ‏رصي ان‎
/1:152/ that he dispatched governors and envoys individually, like
other dignitaries and leaders. But were it not for their knowledge
of this, it would have been possible for any doubter to dispute this
if doubt occurred. But with circumstantial evidence, doubt rarely
arises about this. For if someone comes to our land with a decree
of his appointment as judge, no doubt contends with us about his
truthfulness, even though it has not come to us through tawdtur,

‎but through circumstantial evidence, namely awareness of the
603

scribe’s writing, the unlikelihood of his boldness to lie while being

exposed to danger, and so on.

The third proof is that a common person, according to
consensus, is ordered to follow a mufti and believe him, although
he [the muft?] may relate to him his conjecture. Therefore, a
person who reports based on a revealed authority, which he does
not doubt, is more deserving of assent. But lying and error are
possible on the part of both the mufti and the reporter. Indeed, a
mistake on the part of a reporter is less likely because every
mujtahid, even when he is correct, is so only if he has not fallen
short of completing his examination. But it may be that he thinks
that he did not fall short of completing it, while he did. This?®? is
more acceptable on the part of, say, whoever permits adherence to
a follower of al-Shafi‘i, w «oa, When he reports from his madhhab;

for if he transmits the opinion of others, why should he not report

{his own madhhab’'s] statements?

If it is said: This qiyds yields only conjecture. But it is nor
permissible to establish principles on the basis of conjecture and
qiyas, while acting on the basis of a solitary report is a principle.
How could this not be so, while the tendency of conjecture is not to
enlighten? Yet a mujtahid is one to whom recourse is necessary.
Thus, if a common man is obliged to obtain ijtihdd, it would become

impossible, accordingly. Hence, he is compelled to follow the mufti.

4°This refers to the beginning of paragraph.

604

We shall say: There is no necessity for this. Rather one
should have recourse to the al-bard’a al-asliyya [original state of
freedom] if there is no way for him to have knowledge, just as,
according to you, it becomes necessary for the mufti—when tawdtur
becomes impossible and a solitary report is related to him—to reject
it and refer to al-bard’a al-asliyya. Furthermore, we say that this is
not conjectural giyds. Rather, it is decisively proven to be of
similar meaning. For if it is valid to act on the basis of a solitary
report in matters of marriage, then we should regard it as decisive
in sales transactions. Variation in what is reported makes no
difference. So here there is no difference except with the source of
the report. For the mufti reports on the basis of his conjecture,
while the transmitter reports the statement of someone else—just
as there is no discrimination with two witnesses as to whether they
report about themselves or others, as to the integrity of others or

their own conjecture about others’ trustworthiness.

The fourth proof is His statement, ‏عا‎

.. ‏[أدع ع ألم ]الهلا '0غ © كرأ‎ from every expedition remained

behind, devoting themselves to acquiring deeper knowledge

of religion and admonishing their people when they return to
them... 59

A ‘ta’ifah ’is a small number of people, say three, and certain
knowledge does not accrue with their statement. But this is subject

to examination; for if it is decisive, then it is so in relation to the

590ur'’an, 9:122.

605

mandatoriness of admonition, but not in relation to the
mandatoriness of action on the part of the admonisher, since he is
included in the admonition. Similarly, it is necessary for a lone
witness to establish testimony, not to act upon it alone, until it is
corroborated by other [evidence]. This objection is the one that
weakens [their argument], as does holding to His statement, yG> ,

“. . . And those who conceal what We have sent down from the clear

signs and guidance... 71

and his saying, phu's sie wie , “May
Allah make prosperous he who heard my speech, retains it, and

then delivers it as he has heard it. . . .” /1:153/ and others.

Know that the opponent in this issue has two doubts:

The first is their statement that the establishment of solitary
reports has no basis save Jjmad‘. But how can this be claimed, while
there were none from among the Companions but he [at times]
rejected solitary reports? The following are examples of this:

The Messenger of Allah, pfu‘, sui ‏اك‎ Gea, hestitated to accept the
report of ‏قطط‎ al-Yadayn that he {the Prophet] had made salam
[indicating the end of prayer] after just two [rak‘as], until he asked
Aba Bakr and ‘Umar, tase wt gm, and they confirmed what he said.
Then he [the Prophet] performed the prostration of forgetfulness;

Abi Bakr, ‘h2 wi ‏ررض‎ rejected [the report of] al-Mughirah b.

Shu‘ba, concerning a grandmother’s°~ share of inheritance until
S1Qur’an, 2:159.

5215 the two available editions, the text reads as
“grandfather,” which is a misprint according to the sources citing
the hadith. See Wensinck, Concordance et Indices de la Tradition

606

Muhammad b. Maslimah reported to him in collaboration with al-
Mughirah;

Aba Bakr and ‘Umar rejected ‘Uthman’s 1001], prre ‏الك‎ gos,
when he related that he sought permission to return al-Hakam b.
Abi al-‘As. They asked him for someone to testify on this with him;

Also it has been widely reported that ‘Umar, ‘ie a ‏رطق‎
‎rejected Aba Misa al-Ash‘ari's report about permission [to leave
one’s door] until Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri, sie wt ‏ررضو‎ testified for him;

“Ali, 452 at g24, [rejected] Aba Sinan al-Ashja‘i’s report
concerning the story of Buri‘ bint Washaq. Moreover, it has been
established about [‘Ali] that he used to ask for an oath upon the
reporting [to him] of a hadith:

‘A’isha, tase wi @22, rejected ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar's report
regarding punishment [in the grave] for a deceased person on
account of one’s relatives’ bewailing;

Also, it is known that ‘Umar prohibited Abi’ Misa and Abia
Hurayra from reporting from the hadith of the Messenger of Allah,
‏اله عَلَيْهٍ سكو‎ Gm;

And other such [examples} abound.

Most of these reports indicate the opinions of those who
require a certain number of reporters and not the opinion of those
who require tawdtur, for they never assembled nor, therefore,

waited for tawdtur to occur.

But we shall say, in reply to what they have asked about, that

Musulmane , 2:443-44; and al-Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami wa
Adillatuhu, 8:297-308.

607

what we have reported is decisive concerning their [the
Companion’s] practice. Moreover, what you have mentioned is
refutation on the basis of non-essential causes which do not
indicate the falsity of the principle— just as their rejection of some
of the texts of the Qur’an, their abandonment of some forms of
qiyas, and a judge’s rejection of certain testimonies do not indicate
the falsity of the [corresponding] principle.

Let us point out various alternative interpretations:

As for the hesitation of the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ ate ‏رصن الك‎
with Dhé al-Yadayn, this is liable to three interpretations:

The first is that he {the Prophet] may have considered [this
to be] illusion on his [Dhu al-Yadayn’s] part because of the large
number of the congregation and the unlikelihood of him alone
being aware of it while all the rest were heedless. Error on his part
was more likely than heedlessness on the part of the large
congregation. Once the signs of illusion appear then suspension of
judgment becomes necessary.

The second is that even if he knew of his truthfulness, it is
possible that the reason of suspension of judgment was to teach
them the necessity of suspension in similar cases. If he did not
suspend [judgment], then affirming by way of the silence of the
group would become an established Sunna, so he cut this
possibility.

The third is that ‏قطط‎ al-Yadayn made a statement that if
known to be true its effect would have become evident and they
would concern themselves with it. So, it is associated with

testimony. Therefore, he did not accept the statement of just one
608

person regarding it.

The strongest [of the interpretations] is what we have
mentioned above. Certainly, if one who requires the [legal] number
of testimony holds to this, then it is necessary for him to require
three. Furthermore, it is necessary that they must be among a
large congregation, where the remaining /1:154/ keep silent, for
this is the way it was.

As for Abi Bakr's hesitation concerning the hadith of al-
Mughirah, 432 wi ‏,رضح‎ on the share of inheritance of the
grandmother, perhaps there was a reason necessitating hesitation.
It may have been that no one else was aware of it; or it may have
been for [Abi Bakr] to see whether it was an established or
abrogated rule, or to know whether others had a report similar to
his [al-Mughirah] so that the rule would be stronger, or, if contrary,
removed; or perhaps he hesitated while waiting for additional
Support, just as a judge seeks corroborative support after the
testimony of the two witnesses—not for the purpose of rejecting
their testimony—but in order to pass judgement if he does not find
additional support; or Aba Bakr may have demonstrated hesitation
so that haste in reporting carelessly would not occur often.

It is necessary to understand [his hesitation) in accordance
with this. For it has been confirmed about him [Aba Bakr]
decisively that he accepted solitary reports and withheld denial
against those who held them.

As for the rejection of ‘Uthman's hadith concerning al-Hakam
b. Abi al-‘As, it may have been due to its being a report that

established a right for a [specific] person. Thus, like a testimony, it
609

‘iS not established by the statement of one person. Or [perhaps) he
hesitated because of ‘Uthman's kinship with al-Hakam, since he
was known for his attachment to his relatives. Thus, he [Abdi Bakr]
hesitated in order to exonerate his (‘Uthman's) honor and status, so
that a stubborn and obstinate person would not hold that he said
this because of his kinship—and this has been established by the
Statements of others. Or it may be that they hesitated in order to
establish for people the practice of restraint concerning the right of
a friendly near relative so that verification in similar cases would
be learned.

As for the report of Abi Misa seeking permission, he was in
need of it in order to repeal himself from ‘Umar’s practice. For he
left ‘Umar's door after knocking three times, as though he were
above waiting at his door. He [‘Umar] feared, then, that this would
become a precedent for others, that is, to report hadith for personal
purposes. The proof of this is that when Abi Mésa returned with
Aba Sa‘id al-Khudri who testified on his behalf, ‘Umar said, “It was
not because I suspected you, but I was afraid that people would
relate fabrications to the Messenger of Allah, pfu‘s sie wt “san.” It is
permissible for the political authority to hesitate even without
Suspicion in similar cases. Why should it not be so! while similar
reports cannot be equal in their prominence and in their rectitude
to our [cited] hadiths’ reporting their acceptance [of solitary
reports].

As for ‘Ali's rejection of al-Ashja‘i, he has already mentioned
his reason in saying, “How can we accept the statement of a

bedouin who urinates on his heels,” demonstrating that ‘Ali did not
610

know his trustworthiness and exactitude. This is why he attributed
to him crudeness and abandonment of cleanliness after urinating.

This is similar to what ‘Umar said about Fatima b. Qays

regarding the hadith on residence:

We cannot abandon the Book of our Lord and the Sunna of
our Prophet for a statement of a woman whom we do not
know whether she is telling the truth or lying.

These, then, are ways through which hesitation may be accounted

for with reference to the reports.

The Second Doubt. They hold to His Statements, gtx :

. . And do not concern yourself with anything which you
have no knowledge 3

. . . Saying to Allah which you have no knowledge ofs4

. . . And we can bear witness to more than has come known to
10555

. . . If a fasiq comes to you with any news, ascertain the truth
lest you harm a people in ignorance56

claiming that ignorance ocurs in the statements of trustworthy

33Qur'an, 17:36.

34 Qur’n,7:33, where this quotation comes as part of a list of
forbidden things.

SSQur’an, 12:81.

56Qur’an, 49:6.

611

witnesses.

This is a false argument on several grounds:

First, their denial of the assertion of solitary reports is not
known through any decisive proof. In fact, it is liable to error.
Therefore, it is a judgment without certain knowledge.

Second, the mandatoriness of acting on their bases is known
through the decisive proof of Ijmd‘. Therefore, there is no
ignorance in it.

Third, what is intended from these verses is the prevention
of the witness from decisively testifying on that which he did not
see or hear, or giving fatwd on the basis of what he did not report
or on the basis of what has not been transmitted by trustworthy
persons.

Fourth, if this were to constitute a rejection of the solitary
report then a rejection of the testimony of two, four, a man and two
women, judgment based on an oath, and so on could also adduced.
Just as the mandatoriness of judging based on these matters has
been known decisively in the Qur’dn, even though lying is possible,
it is the same case with reports.

Fifth, the prohibition of installing Caliphs and judges is
necessary because we are not certain of their faith, let alone their

piousness. Nor do we know certainly the purity from jandba?' or

>This term Signifies a person who has the obligation of
performing a total ablution (ghus!) because of sexual intercourse or
seminal discharge. For details of its rules and conditions, see al-
Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami wa Adillatuhu, 1:311, 58, 62; for praying
behind an imdm in relation to jandaba, see 2:177, 79, 99.

hadath®® of a prayer’s imdm. Thus no one must follow them.

Chapter Two: The Conditions of the Transmitter and His Character

Now, if the necessity to act according to a solitary report is
established, then know that not all reports are acceptable. First,
however, understand that by acceptance we do not mean
affirmation, nor by rejection do we mean denial. Rather, it is
incumbent upon us to accept the statement of a trustworthy
reporter though he may lie or err, while it is not permissible to
accept the statement of a fasiq though he may tell the truth.
Rather, by accepted we mean that necessitates action, and by
rejection we mean that which we bear no responsibility to act
according to.

What is acceptable is the transmission of every locus of
obligation who is trustworthy, a Muslim, and accurate, whether he
is transmitting alone or with others. So these are five points which
we must examine.

First, the transmission of an individual is accepted even
though his testimony is not acceptable.>? This is contrary to al-
Jubba’i and others who require a specific count, not accepting less

than the statements of two men; and then, the transmission of

38This refers to the state of annuling legal purity, thus

preventing one from performing prayer. For details see Zahili, al-
Figh al-Islami wa Adillatuhu, 1:284, 94, and 2:17.

°Ghazali, al-Mankhil, p. 255.

613

neither one is acceptable unless each transmits it from another two
men [and so on]—until it reaches our times, when it would be
transmitted by a great number, to the degree it would not be
possible to establish any Aadith at all.

Some people say that not less than four is necessary, as taken
from the [number] of witnesses for adultery. But as a proof of the
falsity of their position, we shall say that if accepting the
Statements of individuals is established, even though it does not
yield certain knowledge, then setting conditions is dogmatism and
cannot be known accept on the basis of a text, or qiyas based on a
text, though there is no way to claim a text.

As for what has been transmitted from the Companions
seeking corroboration, this relates to two or three incidents, for
reasons we have mentioned. But as for what they have decided on,
based on the statements of ‘A’isha alone, or the wives of the
Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ sie a =, or ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Awf, or
Aba Hurayra, and others, it is beyond encompassment. Thus, we
know decisively from their conditions that they accepted solitary
report, just as we also decisively know the rejection of a [lone]
individual’s testimony.

If they rely on analogy to testimony—which is a false analogy,
for it is known that there is a distinction based on their
Practice—then why should analogy not be applied on requiring
freedom, maleness, and four [witnesses] as in reporting fornication;
or with regard to sighting the crescent, or the testimony of a
midwife, which are the same. Abiding by this is a violation of

ijm@'. There should be no distinction if /1:156/ qiyas is necessarily
614

applied.

The second condition—which is actually the first, for count,
according to us, is not a condition—is responsibility. Thus, the
transmission of a minor is not accepted, because he does not fear
Allah, gtx , and has no deterrent from lying. Therefore, relying on
his statement is not established. In accepting testimony, they have
relied also on inspired peace of mind®® and the accrual of zan. A
fasiq is more reliable than a minor because he is fearful of Allah,
gixa, and has a deterrent in his religion and reason, while a minor
does not fear Allah, ‏,معي‎ at all. Therefore, he is rejected, a fortiori.

It is more appropriate to hold this than to posit the rejection
of his admission. Certainly, if his statement regarding what he
reports about himself is not accepted, then not accepting what he
reports about others is more appropriate. For this can be refuted

by the case of a slave whose admission is not accepted while his

61

report is. And certainly if the reason is that it encompasses the

authority of a master and is withheld from him {the slave], then the
authority of a child is also withheld from him in his [own] interest.
Therefore, concerning what is not related to him, his statement
may have an effect, as well as his condition, to the extent that it is

permissible to follow him [in prayer] based on his statement that

60 Ghazali reapetedly uses the term sukiin al-nafs, meaning
relying or trusting upon the validity or truth of something based on

inner tranquility or an ease or peace of mind. For the linguistic
meaning

Sl For the Status of the slave’s testimony and admission, see
Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami wa Adillatah, 6:563 and 6:16, respectively.

615

he is ritually pure and does not pray unless he is so. In so doing, it
is like following the righteous or the unrighteous, and so it is with a
minor and an adult.

The testimony of a fasiq is not accepted, and the minor is
bolder than him in lying. But if the minor was capable of
discernment when he received the report, and of age when he
delivered it, then it is acceptable, for there is no flaw in his
reception nor in his delivery. A proof for accepting his {the
minor’s} report is the consensus of the Companions to accept the
reports of Ibn ‘Abbas, b. Zubayr, Nu‘man b. Bashir, and others from
among the minors of the Companions, without distinction between
what they have heard before or after coming of age. For this
reason, they were accustomed to bringing children into their
Sessions. Based on this, the earlier and later generations proceeded
to bring minors to reporting sessions and accepted their testimony

with regard to what they have received while juveniles.

If it is said: Some scholars have stated that the testimony of
minors is accepted when concerning mischief that occurs between
them. .

We shall say: Their adduction is based on circumstantial
evidences if they [minors] are numerous and they report before
dispersing. But if they disperse, they become liable to false
instruction and have no deterrent. So, whoever rules based on this
does so only because of the frequency of mischief between them
and the great need of knowing by way of circumstantial evidences.

Therefore, this does not parallel testimony.
616

The third condition is that he should be accurate. So,
whoever at the time of receiving [a report] was not capable of
discernment, or was inattentive, or does not properly retain what
he has received, delivering it in the same form, there should be no
reliance on his statement, even if he was not a fasiq.

The fourth condition is that he be Muslim, for there is no
dispute that the report of an unbeliever is not accepted because he
is suspected with respect to religion, even though their testimonies
about one another are accepted according to Abi Hanifa, who does
not dispute rejecting their reports. Reliance in rejecting it is based
on the ijma‘ resolved to deprive him of this capacity in religion,
even if he is trustworthy in his own religion. This is more
appropriate than our statement that a fdasiq’s testimony is rejected,
for unbelief is the greatest form of fisq. /1:157/ And Allah, gtx , has
said, “.../fa fasiq comes to you with any news, ascertain [the
truth] lest you harm a people in ignorance ... "62 This is because a
fasiq is suspected for his boldness in disobeying, while the fearful
unbeliever may not be suspected. Still, reliance is on ijmd‘

concerning depriving the unbeliever from this status.

If it is said: This is in reference to the Jews, Christians, and
those who do not believe in our religion—since it is not suitable
policy for them to exercise authority in a religion in which they do
not recognize its reverence. But what do you say concerning al-

kafir muta’awwil, who holds grave innovation, such that it

620ur’ an, 49:6.

617

necessitates charging him with unbelief on its basis, although he
reveres religion and refrains from disobedience while not knowing
he is an unbeliever. Why should not his report be accepted?
Indeed, al-Shafi‘i accepted the report of some of the grave
innovators, even though they were fasiqs because of their
innovation, for they were fdsiqs because of their misinterpretation.

We shall say: With regard to the report of the grave
innovator, who is 2 muta’awwil, a discussion will follow.

As for the unbeliever, even though he is a muta'awwil, his

report is not accepted, since all unbelievers are muta’awwil. Thus,

a Jew also does not know that he is an unbeliever. As for he who is
not a muta’awwil, but is obstinate by tongue after knowing the
truth in his heart, such cases are rare. The piety of a muta'’awwil,
such that he does not tell a lie, is like the piety of a Christian, which
should be disregarded. Rather, his status is acquired only on the
basis of Islam. This is known through ijmd‘, not through qiyds.

The fifth condition is trustworthiness.°? Allah, giz , has said,
“+ . . ‏وأكة] ه /آ‎ comes to you with any news, ascertain [the truth)
lest you harm a people in ignorance ... 64 This forbids against
relying on the statement of a fdsiq, and it is a proof for requiring
trustworthiness in transmission and testimony.

Trustworthiness expresses uprightness in conduct and in

63 Trustworthiness (‘adala) is the quality of religious piety and

personal morality which lends legal credibility to a reporter or a
witness.

©40ur’ an, 49:6.

618

religion and is reducible to a stable disposition of the heart that
enforces consistency of both righteousness and virtuousness so that
trust of the people in one’s truthfulness accrues. For there is no
trust in the statement of a person who does not fear Allah, yixs, in
such a manner that deters him from lying. Furthermore, there is
no dispute concerning the fact that impeccability from all sins is
fot required. Yet neither is it sufficient to avoid major sins.
Rather, some minor ones void [trustworthiness], like stealing an
onion, the deliberate undermeasuring of grain, and, in general, all
that indicates the lowliness of one’s religion, to the extent of being
bold in lying for worldly gains.

Why should this not be so! while it is required for
trustworthiness that one refrain from some permissibles that
injure one’s credibility or virtuousness, such as eating en route,
urinating in the streets, accompanying the wicked, and jesting
excessively. The governing criterion in this, outside of the locus of
ijmdG‘, is that it must refer to the ijtihdd of a judge. So that which
indicates to him his boldness in lying, is the basis for his [the judge]
rejection of the testimony, and what does not is not.

Now this differs with respect to various mujtahids; but
detailing this belongs to figh and not to usidl. There may be a
person who is accustomed to backbiting and the judge is aware of
this being his habit which he cannot refrain from. But if he was
forced to testify falsely he would not testify at all. Therefore,
accepting his testimony based on ijtihdd is permissible in this case;
and this differs in the customs of various lands. Also, the position

of various people differ in regard to the gravity of some minor
619

[sins] versus others.

I. DISCUSSION: Some people of Iraq say that
trustworthiness expresses only the manifesting of Islam and-
staying free from any open fisqg. So every unacknowledged
Muslim, according to them, is trustworthy. But according to us, his
trustworthiness /1:158/ is not acknowledged accept through
familiarity with his inner character and exploring his public and
private conduct. Indications of the falsity of their position are as
follows.

First, a fasiq’s testimony and transmission are rejected based
on the text of the Qur’dn and on our knowledge that the proof of
accepting solitary report is its acceptance by the Companions and
their ijmd‘; for this has not been reported from them save in the
case of the trustworthy. But, if a fdsiq’s transmission is accepted it
Should be through proof of ijmd‘ or his analogy to the trustworthy
person, who is accepted by all. Yet there is no consensus on a fasiq;
nor does he resemble a trustworthy person concerning the accrual
of trust in his statements. Therefore, fisq hinders transmission,
like childhood, unbelief, and Slavery with regard to testimony. The
Status of an unacknowledged person regarding these characters is
that his statement cannot be accepted.

Similar to this is the status of an unacknowledged person
with regard to fisq, for if he is a fasiq his transmission is rejected;
and if he is trustworthy, he is also not accepted because of
unfamiliarity with him, exactly as we would be in doubt about his

being a child, slave, or unbeliever—there is no difference.
620

Second, the testimony of the unacknowledged is not
accepted. Neither is his transmission. Even though they disallow
his testimony with regard to Possessions, they indeed assent to
testimony with regard to penalties. Again, the unacknowledged is
rejected with regard to penalties. The manner of trust concerning
transmission and testimony is one, even though they differ in the
rest of the conditions.

Third, for the unfamiliar mufti —whom it is not known
whether he has reached the rank of itthad or not—it is not
permissible for the common person to accept his statement, and
such is the case if one does not know whether he is a scholar or not.
Rather, they assented to the fact that if neither his trustworthiness
nor his fisg is known, he is not accepted. What is the difference
then between the reporting of the mufti on his own ijtihadd and him
relating a report from others?

Fourth, the testimony of a secondary [witness] should not be
heard as long as he does not identify the primary, who cannot be
unacknowledged by the judge. Accordingly, it would not be
necessary to specify and identify him if the statement of the
unacknowledged were acceptable. This also answers those who

accept the testimony of the unacknowledged, which cannot be

contested.

If it is said: It is incumbent for him to mention the primary
[witness] so the judge may recognize his [the unacknowledged’s]
fisq and therefore reject his [the primary’s] testimony.

We shall say: If the definition of trustworthiness is his Islam
621

without manifestations of fisq, then this {condition] has been
established. Therefore, it is not necessary to investigate until fisg
is manifested, which voids what he has mentioned by way of
mursal [unconnected] report, for they did not make it necessary to
identify the shaykh [the source], while it may be that the
transmitter knows his fisq.

Fifth, our reliance on solitary reports is from the practice of
the Companions, but they have rejected the report of the
unacknowledged. So ‘Umar, 432 wi ga, rejected the report of
Fatima b. Qays saying, “How could we accept a statement of a
woman whom we do not know whether she is telling the truth or
lying.” And ‘Ali rejected al-Ashja‘i's report on al-Mufawwida®>
and he put reporters to oath, while putting to oath only those
whose trustworthiness, not fisg, was outwardly known. Also, any
of them [the Companions] who rejected the statement of the
unacknowledged, was not rejected by others. So, they were either
those who objected or those who remained silent. In this way,
their consensus regarding the acceptance of the trustworthy is
evident, since they were either those who accepted or those who
kept silent, not denying nor objecting.

The sixth is what has been evident in the case of the
Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكمر‎ suite wt “poo, pursuing trustworthiness,

chasteness, and genuine piety in those he dispatched on

S5This refers to a woman authorizing her husband to

determine her dowery. See Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-Fuqahda’, p.
448.

622

assignments /1:159/ or for the delivery of the message. He only
pursued the most pious because he Charged them not to accept
Save the statement of the trustworthy. These are Strong proofs
within the domain of ijtihad, which is close to being decisive. But

the question is subject to ijtihad and is not decisive.

Suspicions of the Opponents

There are four:

First, [they say] he, ‏سكم‎ seis wt Gem, accepted the testimony of
the bedouin alone regarding the sighting of the crescent though all
he knew of him was his being a Muslim.

We shall say: As for him being a bedouin, it does not disallow
him from being acknowledged as trustworthy to the Prophet
through revelation, experience, or attestations of his
trustworthiness from those who knew his Status or character. So,
who grants you that he was unacknowledged to him [the Prophet]?

Second, [they say] the Companions accepted the statements
of slaves, women, and bedouins because they did not know them to
be fdsiqs, but knew them to be Muslims.

We shall say: They have accepted the statements of the
wives of the Messenger of Allah, ‏عَلَيْمٍ وسكم‎ wi “me, and the wives of his
Companions, while their trustworthiness, as well as that of their
clients, were well known to them. But when they did not know
[the the person], they rejected [them], as in the Statement of al-
Ashja‘i and that of Fatima b. Qays.

Third, they Say, “Regarding an unbeliever who becomes a

Muslim and then immediately testifies or transmits, if you say you
623

do not accept his testimony, this is inconsistent. But if you accept,
there is no base for acceptance but him being a Muslim and not
knowing fisq from him. When a period passes wherein we do not
know of any fisq from him throughout the duration of him being a
Muslim, then we do not hold the necessity of rejecting him.”

We shall say: We do not concede accepting his transmission
because a liar may become a Muslim and maintain his habit. For if
we do not become aware of fear in his heart and a deterrent from
lying, we do not accept his testimony. Piety is in the heart and
based on fear [of Allah]; but it is indicated through his actions and
his comings and goings. If we concede accepting his transmission,
it would be because of the occurrence of his Islam and his newness
to the religion. But, there is a sizable difference between he who is

Starting and is fresh and he whose heart is hardened by a long

intimacy [with lying].

If it is said: Since trustworthiness is reducible to an inner
disposition of the soul whose basis is fear {of Allah}, this is not
observable. Rather, it is inferred from evidence which does not
yield certain knowledge but Preponderates over conjecture [zan).
Then the basis of this fear is faith, which is a clear indication of
fear. Therefore, we should be satisfied with it.

We shall say: It does not indicate this because observation
and experience indicate that the number of fasiqgs among believers
outnumber the trustworthy. So, how could we doubt ourselves
regarding what we have known with certainty? Furthermore, is

this not sufficient with regard to testimony for punitive measures
624

[‘ugibdt], the testimony a first hand [witness], the status of the
mufti’s credibility, and the rest of what they have conceded to.

Fourth is their saying that the statement of a Muslim who is
unacknowledged is acceptable as to whether meat is properly
slaughtered, bathwater is pure, a woman for sale is an unmarried
slave or in her ‘idda®°® so that intercourse is permissible according
to his statement,.or one’s state of purity for prayer from major or
minor jandba and hadath®! were he to lead. And such is the case
with the statement of one who reports on the purity or impurity of
water based on his manifestation of Islam; or the statement of one
who informs /1:160/ the blind of the direction of the prayer.

We shall say: As for the {unacknowledged] contractor, his
Statement is acceptable, not due to his being unacknowledged, but
given the prevalence of fisq, this is a concession, since fdsigs are so
numerous and are urgently needed for transactions. This is
[allowed] also for the permissibility of following [in prayer] the

righteous and the unrighteous. So sitr®® is not required.

66This refers to the waiting period of a woman after the
death of her husband, which is four months and ten days; or
divorce, which last through three menstrual periods. See Qal'‘aji,
Mu‘jam Lughat al-Fugaha’, p. 439.

67 Hadath is ritual impurity; consult Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-
Fuqaha’, p. 176.

68 Sitr linguistically means veil or cover in the technical
vocabulary of the mukaddiths. It refers to a person who is not

known as being discredited. Consult Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-
Fuqahd’, p. 176.

625

As for the reports about the direction of prayer and the
purity of water, it is not necessary to accept these reports if peace
of mind does not accrue—and peace of mind will not accrue with
regard to the unacknowledged. In fact, peace of mind accrues
regarding the statement of a fasiqg who is known to refrain from
lying more so than by the statement of the unacknowledged. But
in matters which concern a person’s relationship with Allah, giz, it
is not uncommon for them to be reduced to one’s peace of mind.

As for transmission [of hadith] and testimony, their status is
much higher and their importance is extensive. Therefore, they
cannot be compared with other cases [simply] because they are
plausible forms and are subject to ijtihdd. As for the rejection of

hadiths from a fasiq and the unacknowledged, this is nearly

decisive.

II. DISCUSSION: Now, they have differed concerning the

testimony of the muta’awwil fasiq who does not recognize his own
fisq. Al-Shafi‘i said:
I accept the testimony of a Hanafite, although I penalize him
for drinking nabidh, for this is undecisive fisq. Rather, the
decisive sort is the fisq of the Kharajites, who pillage the

lands and kill children while not recognizing that they
(themselves) are fdasiqs.

Al-Shafi‘i also said that the testimony of the heretics is accepted,
with the exception of the Khattabiyya from among the Shi'ites

because they hold the opinion of testifying falsely on behalf of

their sectarian allies.
626

Al-Qadi opined that the transmission and testimony of the
heretics should not be accepted, for they are fasigs by their actions
and their ignorance of the prohibition of their acts. So their fisq is
doubled. He asserts that a heretic’s ignorance of his own fisq is like
his being ignorant of his own unbelief or his own enslavement.

Dispute arises from [the question] of whether fisq disqualifies
testimony for its non-status, as does unbelief and slavery, which
negates the capacity [of credibility], or negates one’s statement due
to suspicion. But if it is [a matter] of suspicion and the heretic
refrains from lying, he should not be suspected. In fact, al-Shafi‘i's
Statement refers to this. This falls, however, within the domain of
ijtihad.

So, Abi Hanifa’s position is that unbelief and fisq cannot
negate capacity, but necessitate suspicion. Therefore, he accepted
the testimony of the dhimmis against one another, while al-Qadi’s
position is that both of them lack the Status, therefore negating
capacity. But, al-Shafi‘i's position is that unbelief lacks (status],
while fisq necessitates rejection because of Suspicion. This is the

preponderating opinion in our view.

If it is said: Al-Shafi‘i's position is disputatious in two ways:

First, he declared that marriage cannot be contracted based
on the witness of a fasiq due to lack of Capacity. Second, even if
there is suspicion but one’s truthfulness preponderates in the
thinking of the judge, he should accept it.

We shall say: As for the first, it is based oa his statement,

‎“There is no marriage save with a guardian and two‏ , حل ‎pole wt‏ وسكم
627

trustworthy witnesses.” But it is only for the Shari‘a to add
requirements to the capacity of witnessing, like the requirement
concerning the guardian, or the requirement of an additional
number [of witnesses} concerning fornication.

As for the second, this is caused by differing opinions, since
[trustworthiness] is an inner quality that the Shari‘a has linked to
evident means, namely, a specific number and a special character,
i.e., trustworthiness. So, it is necessary to follow the evident
meaning, not the inner meaning, as in the case of penalties and the
case of rejecting the testimony of a father in favor of one of his
children against the other; for he is Suspect and his testimony is
rejected because fatherhood is liable to suspicion. So, the
circumstance is disregarded. But the likely cause of suspicion is the
deliberate perpetration of fisq, versus indeliberate fisq.

Another proof for al-Shafi‘i’s opinion is the Companions’
acceptance of the Kharajites’ statements concerning traditions and
testimonies, though they are fdsigs and muta’awwils. The
Successors followed the Companions because the Kharajites

abstained from lying and were ignorant of fisq.

If it is said: Could Jjmd‘ be claimed with regard to this?

We shall say: No. For we do know that ‘Ali and other imams
assented to the statements of the killers of ‘Uthman and the
Kharajites. But we do not know this about all the Companions, for
there may have been among them those who concealed their
objections but did not object to the imam since it is in the domain

of ijtihdd. So how could this be? Even if all of them accepted their
628

report, it would not established that all believed they were fasig?
How can this be imagined, while the Kharajites are included as part
of the people of ijmd‘ and they did not believe that they were
fasiqs themselves; rather, they regarded their opponents to be so,
believing in the fisq of ‘Uthman and Talha? In fact, ‘Ammar b.
Yasir, ‘Adiy b. Hatim, b. al-Kawwa’, and al-Ashtar al-Nakh‘i, along
with a group of dignitaries, agreed with them [the Kharajites], while

“Ali concealed his objection against them for fear of civil war.

If it is said: Even though they did not believe in the fisq of
the Kharajites, they are fasiqs.

We shall say: This is not true because ignorance of what
constitutes unbelief and fisq is not in itself unbelief and fisq. In
general, the acceptance of their [the Kharijites’] reports indicates
that they [the Companions] have believed in rejecting the tradition
of a fasiq for suspicion, but they did not suspect the muta’ awwil.

Allah knows best.

A Concise Conclusion about Transmission and Testimony

Know that responsibility, Islamicity, trustworthiness, and
accuracy are common in transmission and testimony. As for
freedom, maleness, sight, kinship, fixed number, and animosity,
these six affect testimony, not transmission, for transmission has a
general rule which is particular to a person so that he is not
effected by friendship, kinship, and animosity. The children of the

Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكم‎ suis wt Sum, reported from him—and every

child reports from its father.
629

As for the blind person who accurately records utterances,
his transmission is accepted even though his testimony is not, since
the Companions transmitted from ‘A’isha relying only on her voice.
Thus, with her, they were like the blind.

Nor is it required for a reporter to be a scholar or a faqih,
whether or not his reporting confirms or contradicts qgiyds, since a
carrier of figh may not be a faqih, but he may convey it to one
Possessing a greater knowledge of fiqh. Therefore, only
memorization is required. Furthermore, attending scholarly
sessions for hearing hadith is not required, for the Companions
have accepted a report from a bedouin who only reported one
hadith. Indeed, if it is contradicted by the hadith of a specialist
scholar, then one preponderates over the other. A discussion will
follow regarding this.

The transmission of a person who is known for his trifleness
or looseness /1:162/ regarding the affairs of hadith, or excessive
heedlessness, should not be accepted; for all of this nullifies trust.
As for trifleness or looseness regarding his own statements, this
does not necessitate rejection.

It is not required for the reporter’s genealogy to be known.
Rather, if the trustworthiness of a person is known through
experience, then his transmission should be accepted even though
he does not keep his genealogy, let alone not know it. If a
transmission comes from a totally unknown person, we do not
accept it. Rather, those who accept the transmission of a person
whose character is unknown do not accept it from one whose

identity is not known; for if one knows his identity he may know
630

him for his fisqg, contrary to the one whose identity is known
though his fisq is not. But if a report comes from a person whose
name is mentioned inconsistently as trustworthy or untrustworthy,

his report is not accepted because of this inconsistency.

Chapter Three: Discrediting and Attesting
There are four Subdivisons

First: The Number of Attestors

They have differed in this regard. Some muhaddiths have
required a fixed number concerning attestors and discreditors, just
as in attesting witnesses. Al-Qadi said that there is no fixed
number regarding the attestation of a witness or reporter, even
though it is circumspect to seek corroboration in the number of
attestors with regard to testimony. Others have stated that it is
required for testimony but not for transmission. This, however, is
a fiqhi discussion. In our view, it is more evident to require it with
regard to testimony and not transmission because the number

establishing transmission is no more than the transmitters

themselves.

If it is said: Accepting the report of an individual has been
authenticated by the Companions while accepting the attestation of
an individual is not so. It must be referred to the qiyas of Shari'a.

We shall say: We know much of what they did not do from
what they have done. In our view, for example, upon accepting the
hadith of Aba Bakr, ‘2 ‏نب‎ eu, they used to accept his attestations of

those reporting the hadith. So how could it be that a condition of a
631

thing be greater than its principle? Matrimony is established by
the statement of two, although fornication is not established with
less than four—and qiyds is not applicable here. We hold that,
similar to the acceptance of a transmission from a slave or a
woman, their attestation is also accepted. These are fiqhi matters
that have been established by qiyds, and there is no sense in

dwelling upon them in the science of the principles.

Second: Qualifying Attestation and Discrediting

Al-Shafi‘i said that one must qualify a discrediting
[statement] but not an attestation. For {a transmitter] may be
discredited with with what he does not consider to be discrediting
because of the diverse opinions about it. As for trustworthiness, it
has only one quality.

Others have said that unqualified discrediting nullifies trust
and that unqualified attestation does not yield trust because people
hasten to rely on superficialities. Therefore, stating its qualification
is necessary. Still others have said that qualification is necessary
for both, thus integrating the statements of both sides.

Al-Qadi holds that it is not necessary to qualify either of
them, for if the attestor is not acquainted with this matter, then he
is not eligible for attestation; and if he is acquainted, there is no
sense in questioning him.

In our view, the correct opinion is that this varies depending
on the condition of the attestor. When trust accrues regarding his
insight and accuracy, his unqualified statement is sufficient. But

regarding a person whose trustworthiness is known while his
632

acquaintance with the conditions of trustworthiness is not known,
we may reexamine him, i.e. seek details if we do not find one who
knows him. But if attestation and discrediting are in contradiction,
we give preference to discrediting because the discreditor pursued
additional information that the attestor was neither aware of nor
refuted. Even if he refutes it, the trustworthiness of the attestor is
nullified, in view of the fact that refutation is not ascertainable,
unless the discreditor, say, accuses him of killing a person but the
attestor says, “I have seen him alive afterward.” Therefore, they
would be in {open] contradiction.

It is said that if the number of attestors is greater than the
discreditors, then attesting is given preference over the
discrediting. But this is weak, for the preponderance of
discrediting is because the discreditor is aware of additional

information. This cannot be negated by additional numbers.

Third: Attestation

[Attestation] occurs by statement, transmission from a
person, acting in accordance with one’s report, or ruling based on
one’s testimony. The highest among these four is the explicit
Statement, as in saying, “He is trustworthy and agreeable because |
have known about him.” But if one does not qualify it while he is
acquainted with the conditions of trustworthiness, it is sufficient.

The second is when one transmits a report from him [the
witness]. But they have differed as to whether this is attestation.
The truth is that if it is known from his practice or his explicit

Statement that he does not accept transmission except from those
633

worthy of trust, then his report is attestation. Otherwise it is not.
For the practice of a large number is to report from all whom they
hear. But when they are asked to commend them, they keep silent.

So there is nothing in his transmission specifying attestation.

If it is said: If one knows of fisq from him but still transmits
from him, he will then be deceiving in religion.

We shall say: He did not oblige others to act, but simply said,
“I hear so and so saying such and such.” Therefore, he is telling the
truth. Moreover, he may not have known of his fisq, nor his
trustworthiness. Thus, he transmitted it, leaving investigation to
whoever is willing to accept it.

The third is acting on the basis of transmission when at all
possible to interpret it as being circumspect to act, or acting on the
basis of another proof that agrees with it. But this is not attestation
unless we know certainly that he has acted based on a tradition;
then it is; for if the attestor acts in accordance with the
transmission of an untrustworthy person, he then becomes a fasiq,

and his trustworthiness is nullified.

If it is said: He may have simply thought that Islam and the
absence of fisq qualifies as trustworthiness.

We shall say: This applies to attestation by statement. We
said that action is similar to statment, but this possibility is
removed by qualifying trustworthiness. What we have mentioned
stems from the sufficiency of unqualified attestation, for if it is

required here to qualify [trustworthiness], it must be required,
634

with regard to the testimony of sales and Marriage, to survey all

the validating conditions, which is unlikely.

If it is said: He may know him to be trustworthy while
others know him to be a fasiq.

We shall say: Certainly whoever knows him {as a fasiq] is not
obliged to act according to [his report], as in the case of regarding
the discredited, trustworthy person.

The fourth is that ruling is based on his testimony. This is
stronger than attesting to him by statement.69 As for the
abandonment of ruling based on his testimony or his report, this is
not discrediting because one may hesitate with regard to the
testimony and transmission of the trustworthy for reasons other
than discrediting. /1:164/ Why should this not be so! while
abandoning action is no more than unqualified discrediting, which
is not accepted by the majority. In sum, if no reason emerges to

attest to an action by way of giving preference or another proof, it

is like unqualified discrediting.

Fourth: The trustworthiness of the Companions, pase wt gu,

What has been held by the early generations of the ummah

69 Ghazali appears to be contradicting himself for he has
Stated in the beginning of Attestation that its highest form is an
explicit statement, unless he means that the explicit statement is
included in a judge's ruling based on the reporter’s testimony.
This, then, would be a higher form, for it combines both explicit
endorsement and acting according to it. However, the wording
could have been clearer.

635

and the majority of their successors is that their trustworthiness is
known by Allah’s, attestation and praise of them in His Book, Ja ‏.مز و‎
Therefore, this is our belief in them unless it is decisively
established that one of them knowingly has committed fisq—but
this has never been established. So, they are not in need of

attestation. Allah, ‏معدي‎ , said:

“You are the best of peoples come for mankind. . . .”"°

“Thus We have made of you a people justly balanced that you
might be witnesses over mankind... "7!

This is an address to those present in that time. Also, the Exalted
said:

“Allah, indeed, was well pleased with the believers when
they swore allegiance to you under the tree... .°!2

“And the foremost, the first of the emigrants and the helpers
and those who followed them in goodness—Allah is well

pleased with them... "73

Indeed Allah, gizs, has mentioned the emigrants and the helpers in
various places, praising them.

Moreover, [the Prophet], ‏صب اه عليه وسكر‎ , has said:

Qur'an, 3:110
“Qur'an, 2:143.
72Qur’an, 48:18.

73Qur'an, 9:100.

6316

“The best of people are my generation; then those succeeding
them... . -”74

“If one of you were to spend enough gold to fill the Earth you

would not reach the full stature of a Companion, not even
half.”75

“Allah, indeed, has chosen for me Companions, in-laws, and
helpers.”76

So which attestation is more sound than the attestation of the
Knower of all that is unseen and His Messenger, ‏وسكم‎ sais ‏اله‎ ‘pom ?

Why should it not be so! while even if their praise was not
received, still what has been broadly reported of their
conditions—with regard to emigration, jihad, sacrifice of life and
wealth, including the loss of parents and relatives for devotion to
and support of the Messenger of Allali, ‏وسكم‎ site ‏اله‎ @=2—is decisively
sufficient for their attestation.

Some people have claimed that their situation is similar to all
others with regard to the necessity of investigation. Others have
said that they were worthy of trust from the beginning of Islam
until the advent of [civil] war, disputes, changing conditions, and
shedding of blood; thereupon investigation became necessary.

The majority of the Mu‘tazilites have stated that ‘A’ isha,

4 See Wensinck, Concordance et Indices de la Tradition
Musulmane, 5:372.

15 See Wensinck, Concordance et Indices de la Tradition
Musulmane, 6:515-516.

7615 Hajar, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, 5:227.

637

Talha, Zubayr, and the people of Iraq and Syria are fasigs for
fighting the legitimate imdm. A group of earlier Mu‘tazilites have
Stated that it is necessary to refute the testimony of ‘Ali, Talha, and
Zubayr whether they are together or separated from one another
because among them their is a fasiq whose person is not known.
But, some have said that the testimony of each one of them
individually is acceptable because his fisq is not identified. But
when he is with his adversary, both of their testimonies are to be
rejected, since we are certain that one of them must be a fasiq.
Some even suspect the fisq of ‘Uthm4n and [doubt] that of his
assassins.

Yet all of this is insolence against the early generation and
the Companions, contrary to the way of the Sunna.

Some peopie have even said that what has happened
between them was based on ijtihdd, and that every mujtahid is
correct, or that one is correct while the mistaken one is excused,
thus his testimony cannot be rejected.

Others have said that this does not fall within the domain of
ijtihdd; and certainly the assassins of ‘Uthman and the Kharajites
are decisively wrong, but they are not aware of their error. /1:165/
Therefore, they are muta’ awwils and the transmission of a fdsiq
muta’awwil cannot be rejected.

This [position] is more understandable than arriving at a

position refuting the unqualified attestation of the Qur’ in.

If it is said: The Qur’an praised the Companions. But who is a

Companion, he who was a contemporary of the Messenger of Allah,
638

‎one who met with him once or accompanied him for‏ لصب انه ‎seis‏ وسكم
‎an hour? or one who had an extended companionship? And, [if‏
‎yes], specifically for how long?‏

‎We shall say: The term applies only to those who
accompanied him. Literally speaking, it is sufficient to apply
companionship if it was [only] for an hour. But ordinarily, the term
is used specifically for he whose companionship was lengthy. This
is ascertainable through tawdtur, an authentic transmission, or the
explicit statement of a Companion, “My companionship was
lengthy.” But determining the length can only be approximated

‎and not exactly measured.

‎Chapter Four: The Tansmitter’s Base and the Quality of his
Reporting

‎[The transmitter’s] base of reliance is [1] the shaykh's reading
to him, ]2[ his reading to the Shaykh, [3] the shaykh’s authorization,
[4] the shaykh’s passing of the book by hand to him, or [5] the
reporter seeing the shaykh’s hand writing in a book. These, then,
are the five ranks-77

‎The first, which is the highest, is the Shaykh reading the
book to him in the context of reporting in order for it to be
transmitted from him. This empowers the reporter to say, “So and

‎so informed me,” or “he said to me, ” or “I heard him say.”

‎kor an elaborate discusion on this, see Ibn al-Salah,

‎Muqadima, ed. ‘A’isha Abd al-Rahman (Cairo: Dar al-Kutb Press,
1974), p. 245-95,

639

The second is the reporter reading before the shaykh, who
keeps silent as if saying, “This is correct.” On this basis,
transmission is permitted—contrary to [the opinion of] some
Zahirites. For if this is not considered correct, then the [shaykh's]
silence and approval would be considered fisq, injuring his
trustworthiness. Furthermore, if we hold this to be permissible, we
would then have to hold that it is possible that he is lying when he
States that it is correct. Indeed, if there were the slightest
Suggestion of carelessness or heediessness, then silence would not
suffice.

This empowers the transmitter to say only, “So and so
' reported to us and informed us by our Teading to him.” But they
have differed with regard to his unqualified statement, “So and so
has reported to us” or “I heard so and so.”

The correct position is that this is not permissible because it

implies verbal transmission, for the terms ‘khabar,’ ‘hadith,’ and
78

‘masmit all give the impression of verbalization. This would be

lying on his part unless it is known by his explicit statement or his
circumstances that he means by it reading to the shaykh, not
actually hearing his hadith.

The third is authorization, as in saying, “I authorize you to
transmit from me a certain book . . .”; or, “I authorize you to

transmit what you authenticate from among my reports.” At this

78 Often these terms are used interchangably with some
stipulations. By ‘khabar ‘and ‘hadith,’ they mean reporting; and
masmu‘ means that which has been heard.

640

point circumspection becomes necessary in identifying the report
specifically heard. But if he is restricted to saying, “This is what I
heard from so and so,” then transmission is not permissible from
him because he did not permit transmission. He may not allow
transmission because of his awareness of a defect in it, even though
he has heard it.

Similarly, if one says, “I have a testimony,” he cannot testify
unless he is told, “I permit you to testify based on my testimony.”
Otherwise, this testimony is not recognized before the judge, since
transmission is a testimony and a person may be speaking loosely.
But when seeking decisive testimony he may hesitate as well.

Furthermore, authorization empowers the reporter to say, “He
has reported or told us by way of authorization.” As for his
unqualified statement, “He has reported to us,” some hold this to be
permissible. But this is corrupt because it implies hearing his
statement, which is not true, as we have mentioned in (the phrase]
reading to the shaykh.

The fourth is passing the book by hand. Its form comprises
the shaykh’s saying, “Take this book and transmit it on my
authority because I have heard it from so and so.” /1:166/ Simply
passing the book by hand without this statement is meaningless.
But even when these words are present, passing the book is useless
because this is an unwarranted formality which some muhaddiths
have invented. But it is useless. Just as the transmission of a
hadith is permissible by authorization, so it is necessary to act
based on it—in contradistinction to (the opinion of) some of the

Zahirites. Thus, the purpose is to know the rectitude of the report,
641

not to identify the channel which makes it known. His statement,

“1 heard this book; therefore, you may transmit it on my behalf,” as
far as identification, is similar to his own reading of it or his being

read to.

As for their statement that he is capable of reporting it to
him, so let it be—what is the need for it? It necessarily follows that
reading to him becomes invalid because he is himself capable of
reading. Furthermore, he must not report during the life of the
Shaykh because he is capable of referring to the original source, as
in the case of testimony. Therefore, this indicates that this [form] is
not valid in transmission.

The fifth is reliance on handwriting, that is, on seeing a
script in his handwriting and stating, “I have heard such and such
from so and so.” It is not, however, permissible to transmit on his
(the shaykh’ s] authority because transmission is the same as
testifying that the shaykh has said this. But the handwriting by
itself cannot identify him in this fashion.

Indeed, it is possible for him to say, “I have seen it
handwritten in a book and I thought it was the handwriting of so
and so.” For one’s handwriting may be confused with another's.
But if he says, “This is my handwriting,” then his statement would
be accepted. Yet he [the transmitter] should not transmit on the
shaykh's authority as long as the shaykh did not authorize him to
transmit, either by his explicit statement or through the
circumstantial evidence of him being poised to transmit hadith.

Now if a trustworthy person says, for example, that this is an

accurate copy of Bukhari’s book and he sees in it a hadith, then he
642

is not permitted to transmit it.

As for being obligated to act accordingly, it is incumbent for a
muqallid [a follower] to ask a mujtahid. But some have held that it
is not permissible for a mujtahid to act on its basis if he did not
hear it. Others have stated that if the mujtahid knows it to be
correct on the basis of a trustworthy person’s statement, then
acting according to it is permitted. For the Companions of the
Messenger of Allah carried the documents of zakét to various
territories, and people honored these documents on the testimony
of the bearer that they were true documents, though all did not
hear it from him [the Prophet]. For this imparts peace of mind and
the likelihood of their being true.

In sum, one ought not transmit except what he knows, that is,
what he has first heard and preserved and then recorded, until the
time of transmission, so that he knows that what he has
transmitted is exactly what he has heard, nor has a [single] letter
been changed. For if he doubts anything of it, he must abandon

transmission. From this principle stems several discussions.

I. DISCUSSION: If from among what he has heard from al-
Zuhri’? there is a hadith, for example, in which he doubts whether
he has heard it from al-Zuhri or not, then he is not permitted to say

“I heard al-Zuhri” nor say “Al-Zuhri said” because his statement

7Muhammad b. Muslim b. ‘Abd Allah b. Shihab al-Zuhri (d.

124/742). See Zirikli, al-‘Alam, 7:97; and Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib al-
Tahdhib, 9:395.

643

“Al-Zuhri said” is like a testimony on behalf of al-Zuhri, which is
not permitted except by knowing because he may have heard it
from other than him. Thus, he is like one who heard a statement
not knowing whether Zayd or ‘Amr stated it. So, he is not

permitted to testify on behalf of Zayd. Further, we say if he has
heard a hundred hadith from one source, and among them there is
one he knows he did not hear, but is confused as to which one it is,
he should not transmit it. Furthermore, he should not transmit any
of them on behalf [of the source], since it is possible for any of the
/1:167/ hadiths to be the one he did not hear. Even if he presumes
that he most likely heard a particular hadith from al-Zuhri, still it is
not permissible for him to transmit it on the basis of the
presumption of its likelihood.

Others have said that it is permissible because reliance, in
this case, is based on his presumption of its likelihood. This is far-
fetched because a judge’s reliance on the likelihood of his
presumption regarding a testimony is because he does not know
the truthfulness of the witness. As for the witness himself, he
must be sure because it is conceivable to charge him with the
obligation to testify only on what is certainly known and what may
be witnessed. However, obligating a judge not to rule except on the
basis of the eyewitness’s truthfulness is absurd. Similarly, it is not
possible for a transmitter to know the exactly the truthfulness of
the source. But, he has a way of identifying his statement by
hearing. But if this is not realized then he must not transmit.

If it is said: It is permissible for one in our age to say that

the Messenger of Allah, ‏رسي اه مَثَيْر وسكر‎ said this but does not know its
644

truth with certainty.

We shall say: There is no way for him to verify this.
Moreover, when he says that the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ plc ‏رصي اله‎
Said this, it does not convey that he has heard it. Rather, it is
understood from his statement that he heard this hadith from
someone else or from what someone has transmitted in a book that
he relied on. But it is not incumbent for everyone who hears this
to act accordingly because this is a mursal 0 [unconnected] hadith.
It is not known from what source he is repeating it. Rather, acting
becomes necessary only when the source is identified so that his

condition and trustworthiness can be examined—and Allah knows.

II. DISCUSSION: If the shaykh rejects the hadith—and his
rejection is similar to a denier decisively holding the transmitter to
be lying—and does not act on its basis, then the transmitter does
not become impugned because impugnment may not be established
by the statement of one person. For he is accusing his shaykh of
lying, just as the shaykh is accusing him of lying, while both are
trustworthy. It is like two clear proofs which are mutually
contradictory. Therefore, this does not necessitate impugnment.

But if he rejects it with hesitation, saying, “I do not remember
it,” then it is permissible to act in accordance with the Teport, since

the transmitter was certain that he heard it from him, and the

80This refers to a hadith based on a chain of transmiters that
is not traced further back than the generation of the Successors,

failing to identify the source among the Companions who related it
from the Prophet.

645

latter is not decisively accusing him of lying, and both are
trustworthy. Therefore, the truthfulness of both is possible.

Al-Karkhi is of the opinion that the shaykh’s forgetfulness of
the hadith nullifies it. And upon this he built the rejection of the
report of al-Zuhri—“Any woman who marries without the
permission of her guardian... 781 __arpuing that the shaykh is the
source, and it is not for him to act according to the hadith, since the
transmitter is his subordinate. So how can he act on its basis?

We shall say that the shaykh may act in accordance to it if a
trustworthy [transmitter] reports to him what he heard from him.
But if some doubt lingers in him in spite of the trustworthy
person’s transmission, then he should not act according to it. But as
for the transmitter, he should act in accordance with it if he is
certain that he has heard him. As for all others, they should act
based on it to maintain the attestment of both.

Furthermore, it is incumbent upon the judge to rule in
accordance with the statement of a lying witness who is overtly
trustworthy. But this is forbidden for the witness.

For the common Muslim, it is incumbent to act according to
the fatwa of the mujtahid —even if his ijtihad has changed, as long
as he is unaware that his ijtihdd has changed. But the mujtahid
cannot act according to his previous opinion if it has changed, for

he knows it. Therefore, the action of each one is based on his

situation.

81 The rest of the hadith, according to al-Tirmidhi, 2:398-401
is, “. . . her marriage is void.”

646

Malik, al-Shafi‘i, and the majority of the theologians have
held this view because forgetfulness is common to humans—and
what muhaddith can recall in a moment all that he has received
during his lifetime? Therefore, it is similar to the Shaykh’s doubt
of an addition to a hadith, /1:168/ or the inflectional variances in a
hadith, since this does not void it as result of the frequency of

doubt occurring in it. And so it is with refernce to the text of a
hadith.

111. DISCUSSION: A trustworthy reporter individually
reporting an addition to a hadith to the exclusion of the group of
transmitters is acceptable to the majority, whether or not the
addition is in words or in meaning. For if he exclusively transmits
a hadith not reported by the other transmitters, it would still be
acceptable. This is similar to his individual reporting of an

addition, for a trustworthy reporter is not held suspect on the basis

of possibilites.

If it is said: It is unlikely that he alone recorded this addition
while all the rest listened attentively.

We shall say: It is better for others to corroborate if possible.
But he is decisive about hearing it and others did not decisively
negate it. Thus, it may have been that the Messenger, ptu‘s’ suie a ‘pany
mentioned it in two sittings. So, when he mentioned the addition,
perhaps only one [of the reporters} was present. Or he may have
repeated it in only one sitting and mentioned the addition only at

one time with only one [reporter] present.
647

It is also possible that whoever reported the incomplete text
joined the sitting later and did not hear it completely. Or they may
have joined in attendance and all but one forgot the addition. Or a
surprising distraction may have occurred while the hadith was
being given and the attention of some was distracted. Thus, only
he who was attentive recorded the addition. Or occupying thoughts
may have occurred in some, preventing them from recording the
addition. Or a temporary disturbance may have compelled some to
leave before completion. So if all this is possible, the trustworthy

should not be impugned, as far as possible.

IV. DISCUSSION: The transmission of part of a report is
not permitted according to most of those who have forbidden the
transmission of hadith through their meaning.82 But those who
permit transmission on the basis of meanings hold this to be
permissible if the transmitter had transmitted it once in its
entirety and that the mentioned part is not dependent on what has
been omitted in a way that alters its meaning. But if it is
dependent—like a condition of a particular worship or its essentials,
or what completes it—then to transmit only a part of it is distortion
and deception. But if he has transmitted a hadith once in its
entirety and another time incompletely in a way that does not alter

it, then it is permissible, but on the condition that suspicion and

82. Ghazali refers here to one side of a sublte dispute among
muhaddiths regarding the transmission of a hadith by relating its
general meaning as opposed to its verbatim transmission.

648

accusation does not reach the transmitter. Yet if he knows that he
may be accused of confusing transmission, then it is incumbent

upon him to be cautious.

V. DISCUSSION: Transmitting a hadith by its meaning,
versus verbatim, is prohibited for one who is ignorant of the
[various] contexts of addresses and of the subtleties of words.

As for one who knows the difference between the likely and
the unlikely, the overt and the more overt, and the common and
the most common, al-Shafi'‘i, Malik, Abi Hanifa, and the majority of
the fugahd’ have permitted him to transmit it by its meaning if he
has understood it. But another group has said that it is only
permissible for him to substitute a word with its synonym or what
equals it in meaning, like Substituting sitting for sitting down or
cognizance for knowledge or ability for capability or viewing for
seeing or prohibited for forbidden, or others whose meanings
cannot be confused. In sum, it is all that cannot be exposed to
differences in inference and understanding. However, this is only
in regard to what is decisively understood, not what is understood
through reasoning, which is disputed by researchers.

Proof for the permissibility of this for a scholar is the
consensus on the permissibility of explaining the Sharf‘a to non-
Arabs in their own tongue. Therefore, if it is permissible /1:169/ to
Substitute Arabic with corresponding non-Arabic [words], then
Arabic into corresponding or equivalent Arabic is a priori
permissible. This has been the way of the envoys of the Messenger

Of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ si ‏لله‎ “oo, in various lands, conveying his commands in
649

their own tongue.

Similarly, he who hears the testimony of the Messenger of
Allah, ‏وسكر‎ gi ‏لله‎ Gem, may testify on the testimony in another
language. And this is because we know that there is no divine
obligation with regard to words. Rather, the purpose is to
understand the meaning and convey it to people. But this does not

apply to tashahhud 33 or takbir 84 and religious duties requiring

specific words.®5

If it is said: He said, peace be upon him:

May Allah make prosperous he who heard my speech,
retained it, and then delivered it as he has heard it; for a
receiver may be more aware than the one who heard it; and
there may be bearer of figh who is not a faqih; and it may be

that a bearer of figh may convey to one who is more of a
faqih.

We shall say: This is the proof because he mentioned the
ratio legis as being the difference in understanding among people.
Therefore, nothing prevents [the occurrence of] what people do not
differ about, like synonymous words. Furthermore, this hadith

itself has been transmitted in different words, though the meaning

83 The term refers to the Muslim declaration that God is one
and Muhammad is His Messenger.

84 This refers to the phrase Allahu Akbar meaning God is
great

85 Al-Subki, al-Ibhdj fi Sharh, al-Minhdj, 2:345, in his
discussion of mursal tradition almost repeats Ghazali’s words here
verbatim.

650

is one, although it is possible that all the words may be from the
utterances of the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ sui ‏له‎ So, at different times.

But most likely it was one hadith transmitted in different words;

for it has also been reported as:

“May Allah have mercy on one who... .”
“May Allah make prosperous he who... . ”

And it has been reported: “

“A bearer of figh may have no figh himself... .”
“A bearer of figh may not be a fagih....”

And so it is with single addresses and single events which have

been reported by the Companions, pase wt gm, in different words.

This, then, indicates permissibility.

VI. DISCUSSION: The mursal [hadith] is acceptable,
according to Malik, Aba Hanifah, and the majority [of legists], but is
rejected by al-Shafi‘i and al-Qadi,®® which is the preferable opinion.
Its form is such that he who was not a contemporary of the

Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ sie ‏اه‎ 4m, states, “The Messenger of Allah,

‎Ge, Said ...”; or one who was not a contemporary of Abi‏ اله ‎sale‏ وسكر
‎Hurayra states, “Aba Hurayra said...” The proof for this is that if‏

‎a [transmitter] mentions his Shaykh without attesting to his

‎86 Ghazali attributes a different opinion to al-Qadi regarding
mursal hadith in his earlier work, al-Mankhil, p. 275. Al-Subki, al-
lbhaj fi Sharh, al-Minhéj, 2:339, cites al-Qadi as saying, “We in
general do not accept mursal traditions, even in the places where
al-Shafi‘i accepted them to solve controversies. . . .”

trustworthiness, and he remains unacknowledged to us, we would
not accept. Moreover, if he does not identify his [shaykh’s] name,
then ignorance is even greater; for how can the trustworthiness of
one whose person is not known be known?

If it is said: The trustworthy person’s transmission from him
is an attestation [to his trustworthiness].

The answer to this has two bases:

First, we do not submit to this because a trustworthy person
may report from someone such that if asked about him, he would
either hesitate about him or discredit him. We have seen
(traditionists] reporting from those who, when questioned about
them, at times attest to their trustworthiness and at other times
discredit them or state, “We do not know.” Therefore, a reporter
transmitting from such a person is actually silent with regard to his
trustworthiness. For if abstention from discrediting is taken as
attesting to trustworthiness, then silence about trustworthiness
should likewise be taken as discrediting. It necessarily follows that
if a transmitter discredits his source, he is, in fact, rendering
himself a liar.

Moreover, the testimony of an indirect witness does not
attest to the source, so long as he does not explicitly state it. The
distinction between transmission and testimony, regarding certain
divine obligations, does not necessarily change in this respect, just
as it did not necessitate a change in the prohibition against the
acceptance of reports from the discredited or the unacknowledged.
Thus, if it is not permissible to Say that a trustworthy person may

only testify on the basis of a trustworthy person’s testimony, then
652

it is not permissible with respect to transmission. Therefore, it is
necessary to specify the identity of the shaykh and the source so

that their conditions can be investigated.

If it is said: ‘An‘ana®’ transmission is sufficient in reporting,
although when it is said that someone /1:170/ has transmitted from
someone, and he in turn from someone else, this may imply that he
himself has not heard it; rather, it has reached him through an
unspecified intermediary. But with this possibility, it is still
acceptable. However, in the case of testimony it is not acceptable.

We shall say: This is so provided that it does not necessarily
alter the status of the transmission of the unacknowledged. But
mursal hadith are transmitted from unacknowledged persons. So,

it must not be accepted.

An‘anah transmissions, however, became the practice among
the scribes [of hadith] because they found it burdensome to write
with every name that he transmitted the report from so and so by

actually hearing it from him, and thus withheld from wasting paper

87This term is derived from the Arabic ‘‘an ’ and is used
among traditionists to mean from or on the authority of, but not
necessarily indicating actual hearing of a report. The dispute
regarding the reliability of such reports became visible by the 3d
century. Muslim b. al-Hajjaj defended ‘an‘anah transmissions in
the introduction of his collection of hadith, known as Sahih Muslim,
18 vols. 2nd ed. (Beirut: Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1972),
1:127-44, Later sources accepted this form of reporting provided
that it was transmitted by those whom they considered to be
trustworthy and not deceitful. Also, when it is established, the
reporter actually meets with his source. Consult al-Baghdadi, al-
Kifdya, ‏.م‎ 389 and Salih, Usal al-Hadith, p. 250.

653

and time; so they used abbreviations. This is only accepted in
transmission if by his explicit statement or through his practice it is
known that he means actually hearing. But if he does not mean
actual hearing, then it is not be accepted because it wavers
between musnad and mursal.

The second answer is that even if for the sake of argument
sake we concede that transmission is attestation, still, unqualified
attestation is not acceptable so long as one does not state the
reason. Furthermore, if he explicitly states that he heard this
report from a trustworthy, credible source, its acceptance is not
necessary.

Also, if we concede to the acceptance of unqualified
attestations, it would only be in regard to a person whose identity
is known and who is not known for any fisqg. As for he whose
identity we do not know, perhaps if he were to be identified we
would know of his fisg, which the attestor may have been unaware
of. It is sufficient for every locus of obligation to accept the
characterization of others when he is incapable of knowing himself.
But his incapability cannot be known unless he identifies him
specifically. It is for such reasons that the unqualified attestation
of an indirect witness is not accepted so long as he does not
identify and specify the source. For if he does, the judge may know
of his fisq, prejudices, or other things.

Now, they argue [their position] on the basis of the
Companions’ and the Successors’ agreement to accept mursal hadith
from a trustworthy person. For example, it is said that ‘Abd Allah

b. ‘Abbas, with all his numerous transmissions, did not hear the
654

Messenger of Allah, fu‘, aie a im, —excepting in four
hadiths—because of his young age. He openly stated this in
reported the hadith about usury in a loan,®8 saying, “Usama b. Zayd
has reported it to me.” Also, he reported that the Messenger of
Allah, ‏سكم‎ sie wt ‏رصي‎ repeated talbiya 89 until he threw stones at
‘Aqaba.?° When questioned, he said, “My brother al-Fad! b. ‘Abass
has told me about it.”

Similarly, Ibn ‘Umar reported from the Messenger of Allah,
‏وسكم‎ selec wt ‏رصي‎ that he said, “A person who participates in a funeral
prayer has measurable reward... .”?' He then related that this was
on the authority of ‏نطة‎ Hurayra.

Also, Abi Hurayra reported, “Whosoever wakes up in
Ramadan in the state of jandba, should not fast.” But then he said,
“I, by the Lord of the Ka‘ba, did not Say it; But, Muhammad,
‏وسكمر‎ guia wt ‏رصب‎ Said it.” But when questioned he said, “Fadl b. ‘Abbas

reported it to me.”

88 Consult Wensinck, Concordance et Indices de la Tradition
Musulmane, 2:217.

8°The literal meaning is to follow, obey, or respond. The term
refers to the chant that Pilgrims make during hajj, “Labayk

Allahuma labayk ... ,” meaning, “Here I am Lord, answering Your
call.”

This is one of hajj’s symbolic rituals where Pilgrims throw
stones in three places, known as jamardt, east of Mecca, near Mina.
See al-Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami wa Adillatuhu, 3:192-206.

91 For the sources of this hadith, consult Wensinck, et al.,
Concordance et Indices de la Tradition Musulmane, 1:386-87.

655

Again, al-Bara’ b. ‘Azib said:

Not all that we have transmitted to you we have heard from
the Messenger of Allah, pfu‘ suite wn ‏رصي‎ but we have heard some

of it [from him], while some has been transmitted to us by his
Companions.

As for the Successors, Ibrahim al-Nakhi‘i said:

If I say, ‘So and so has related from ‘Abd Allah (b. Mas‘ddj,’
then it is indeed he who has told me. But if I say that ‘Abd

Allah said . . . ,’ then I have heard it from more than one
person.

Similarly, the acceptance of mursal hadith has been
transmitted from a group of Successors. The answer has two sides:
The first is that this is correct; and lends proof to the
acceptance of mursal hadith by some. But this discussion is in the
domain ijtihad; and the ijma‘ with regard to this is not established

at all. For there is even evidence that not all (the Companions]
accepted mursal hadith. For this reason they questioned /1:171/ b.
‘Abbas, b. ‘Umar, and Abi Hurayra—in spite of their prominent

Status—not out of doubt for their trustworthiness, but to disclose

the transmitter.

If it is said: Some of them accepted [mursal hadith} and
others remained silent, and thus constituted ijma'.

We shall say: We do not submit to the establishment of ijma‘
based on their silence, particularly when it is in the domain of
ijtihdd, Rather, it may be that a person remains silent while he

harbors disapproval or is hesitant about it.
656

The second answer is that among those rejecting mursal
hadith are those who have accepted the mursal of the Companions
because they report from other Companions, and all are
trustworthy. Some added the mursal of the Successors to that of
the Companions, for they transmit from the Companions. Some
specifically accept only the mursal hadith of the senior Successors.

The preferred opinion, based on the analogy of rejecting
mursal [hadith], is that when a Successor or a Companion is known
for his clear report or for his practice of transmitting only from a
Companion, then his mursal hadith is acceptable. But if this is not
known, then it is not acceptable because they may transmit from
other than a Companion, like the Arabs who had no Companionship.
Yet only the trustworthiness of the Companions has been
established for us.

Al-Zuhri, after narrating a mursal hadith, said, “A man at the
door of ‘Abd al-Malik told me this.” ‘Urwah ‏بط‎ Zubayr, with regard

to his mursal reports narrated through Busra, said, “One of the

guards told ‏2م‎

VII. DISCUSSION: A solitary report [instructive] about
common necessities fie. every day needs or occurrences] is

acceptable—contrary to what al-Karkhi holds and some of the

°2Ghazali_ here adapts a different opinion than what he has
expressed in al-Mankhil, ‏.م‎ 275, where he, oddly enough, accepted
the mursal hadith from anyone at all times.

657

Hanafites.”? For it is necessary to believe all that a trustworthy
person transmits, so long as his truthfulness about it is possible.
For example, the hadith concerning the touching of the genitals has
been narrated by a trustworthy person whose truthfulness is
possible; therefore, we do not decisively accuse its transmitter of
lying, as opposed to a situation where a reporter solitarily
transmits a report which is by the nature of the case impossible for
it not to be well known, as with the murder of a governor in the
marketplace, the dismissal of a minister, the occurrence of a
mishap in a Mosque preventing people from Friday prayer, an
earthquake, the the sinking of the earth, the falling of a big star, or
other wonders. For there is abundant impetus to promulgate all of
these, and their concealment is impossible.

Similarly, no solitary report can be accepted in reference to
the Qur’an; for we know that the Prophet was charged to
promulgate it and bring it to the attention of all the people.
Therefore, the impetus to promulgate and transmit it is .
overwhelming because it is the foundation of religion. Thus, a
single, individual reporter transmitting a sdra or a verse is
decisively a liar.

But with reference to common necessities, we cannot

conclusively charge one who reports on such things to be a liar.

*3Ghazali, al-Mankhil, ‏.م‎ 284 relates this opinion to Abi
Hanifa himself. For another Shafi‘ite opinion, see al-Khatib al-
Baghdadi, al-Fagih wa al-Mutafaqqih, 1:137.

658

If it is said: [Since you cannot conclusively charge one who
reports on common necessities to be a liar], then how would you
base your rejection of a person whose lying is known decisively?
Take, for [instance], the evacuating of excrement from either bodily
Passage, since man needs to relieve himself repeatedly during the
course of a day and night. Yet [precisely] because this annuls ritual
purity, the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ sie ‏له‎ Sas, could not be allowed to
not promulgate its rules, or confidentially reveal it to only a few
individuals. For this would lead to the concealing of the Shari‘a and
the annullment of the worshippers’ prayers, for they would be
unaware. Therefore, in such cases, promulgation is necessary.
Thus, great impetus to transmit this would necessarily emerge.
Likewise, how can rules pertaining to the touching of the
genitals—which also occurrs commonly—remain concealed?

First, we shall say: This is refuted by the [examples of]witr
prayer, rules concerning cupping and bloodletting, guffaw, the
necessity for bathing after washing the dead, and reciting the
second call for prayer either once or twice—all of which are
common necessities that have been established by solitary reports.
So, if they claim that the commonality of these necessities is not the
Same as the common occurrence of excretions, we shall say that the
common necessities with regard to the touching and feeling [of the
genitals) is not like excretions because a long period may pass
without a person touching or feeling his genitals except when
excreting, just as he only occasionally resorts to cupping or
bloodletting. Therefore, there is no difference.

The second answer, which is substantiated, is that cupping
659

and blood letting, although not repeated daily, occur frequently; so
how could their ruling be concealed such that it results in nullifying
the prayers of many people? And even if it did not occur
frequently, still how was it entrusted to solitary reporters?
Actually, there is no reason for it except that Allah, gtxs, did
not oblige His Messenger, fu‘) iz ‏اله‎ 4m, to promulgate all rules
himself. Rather, He obliged him to promulgate some and permitted
him to leave people to learn others through solitary reports, as He
_ permitted him to leave people to qiyds in regard to the rule of
usury. Otherwise, it would have been easy for him to say, “Do not
sell food in exchange for food . . . ,” or “Do not sell that which is
measured in exchange for that which is measured . . . .” so that

their would have been no need to make an inference from the six
mentioned [commodities}.24

Accordingly, it is possible to include common necessities as
part of the public interest, requiring recourse to solitary reports.
There is no absurdity in this. for in these cases, the truthfulness of
the transmitter is possible, which necessitates believing him. The
reason for promulgation is neither the ‘commonness’ nor the ‘rarity’
of needs. Rather, its reason is the charging of worship and

obligation by Allah. Yet what many people need, such as cupping

°4This is in reference to a hadith in which the Prophet
specifically prohibitted the exchange of six commodities except in
direct exchange of equal volumes — gold for gold, silver for silver,
wheat for wheat, dates for dates, raisins for raisins, and salt for
salt. For the various opinions held by the fiqhi schools, see the
elaborate treatment in Zahili’s al-Fiqh al-Islami wa Adillatuhu,
4:671-702 and Ibn Rushd, Biddyat al-Mujtahid, 2:111-128.

660

and blood letting, is similar to what most commonly need in that

they must not be hidden according to the Sharf‘a.

If it is said: What is the criterion for what the Messenger,
piu’ sale ‏صن اله‎ , has been obligated to promulgate?

We shall say: If you want a criterion for its rational
permissibility, there is none. For it is the right of Allah to obligate
His Messenger with whatever He wills. But if you are searching for
its actual occurrence, it is known only from the practice of the
Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ gute ‏اله‎ So.

When we examine the revealed sources, we find that they are
of four types:

First, there is the Qur’4n. We know that there was great
concern to widely promulgate it.

Second, there is the five pillars of Islam, that is, the
declaration of faith, prayer, alms, fasting, and pilgrimage. The
Prophet has promulgated them in a way that they are known to the
common and the elite alike.

Third, there is the principles of transactions—which are not
necessary [matters of widespread promulgation]. For example,
there are the principles of sales and marriage, for they have
reached us via tawdtur. Even matters like divorce, manumissions,
possession of properties, freeing a slave upon the owner’s death or
payment, and freedom contracts for slaves have reached the
scholars via tawdtur. Decisive proof has been established on the
basis of either tawdtur or the Teporting of individuals before a

large congregation who remained silent [in approval]. Indeed,
661

proof is established based on this, even though the common people
did not share certain knowledge with the scholars. Rather, in such
cases the common people are obligated to accept [knowledge] from
the scholars.

Fourth, there are the details of this principle, namely what
voids prayers or other types of worship, or what nullifies purity,
such as touching and feeling, vomiting, and repeatedly wiping the
head {for ablution]. Some of these [details] have become widely
known, /1:173/ while others have been transmitted via solitary
reports.

Indeed, it is possible for them to be among the common
necessities. So, there is neither absurdity nor impediment in what
has been transmitted via solitary reports. For it is possible that
Allah did not oblige the Prophet to promulgate what he did,
although it was permissible.

As for what was entrusted to individuals [by the Prophet], it
is possible that they were obliged to promulgate it. But what
actually had happened indicates that the religious obligation was
fulfilled. Never did [the Prophet] disobey the command of Allah,
gix> , In any way.

This is the completion of the discussion on reports. Allah

knows best.
THE THIRD OF THE PRINCIPLE SOURCES

AL-IJMA‘ [CONSENSUS]

Comprising [Three] Chapters

CHAPTER ONE: ESTABLISHING 8 '[ AS A VALID PROOF
AGAINST THOSE WHO DENY IT

One who attempts to establish that ijma‘ is a valid proof must
first clarify the meaning of the term ijma‘; second, explain its
concept; third, demonstrate that it is possible to ascertain it; and
fourth, explain the reasons for its being a valid proof.

As for the clarifiying the term ima‘, we use it exclusively to
mean the unanimity of the ummah of Muhammad, ‏علي وسكر‎ wi “pm,
particularly on certain religious issues. Its linguistic meaning is
unanimity and resolution; thus it combines both of these.

So whosoever resolves something and completes his
determination to implement it, it is Said, ‘Ajma‘a.’ When a group
agrees upon something, it is said, ‘Ajma‘u.’ This may apply to the
ijma‘ of the Jews or the Christians, as well as unanimity in other
than religious affairs.

But in technical usage, this term has been specified as we

have mentioned. Al-Nazzam! held that ‘ijma“’ is an expression for

‘Aba Ishaq Ibrahim b. Sayyar b. Hani al-Basri al-Nazzam is a
662

663

every statement whose proof is evident, even if it is a statement of
an individual—which is contrary to both the linguistic and technical
{usages}. But he tailored it to his own view, for he did not see ijmd'‘
as a proof. Yet he had heard, by way of tawdtur, of the prohibition
against opposing ijmda‘. So he said that it is every position whose
proof has been established.

As for the second [point], namely its concept, the proof of its
conception is its existence. For we have found the ummah in
unanimous agreement that the [daily] prayers are five and that the
fasting of Ramadan is obligatory. How could it be impossible to
conceive this when the whole ummah is religiously charged to
adhere to the (Shari‘a] texts and decisive proofs, and they are
subject to punishment in opposing them. So, just as their
unanimity is not impossible on things like eating and drinking, for
the impetus [of ali] agree here, similarly their [unanimity] is not

impossible on following the truth and avoiding the fire.

If it is said: With all its numerousness and diversity of
motives in admitting the truth or being obstinate about it, how will
the ummah's opinions agree? This is impossible on its part, as is,
say, their agreement to eat raisins on the same day.

We shall say: There is nothing preventing their consuming

raisins particularly. Yet all of them have motive to admit the truth.

well-known Mu'tazilite (d. 230/845). For reference to his works,

see Sezgin, Geschichte, 1:618; and The Shorter Encyclopaedia of
Islam, pp. 445-446.

664

Why should it not be so! when the unanimity of all Jews on
falsehood—despite their large numbers—is conceivable? So, why is
it not conceivable that all Muslims should agree unanimously on
truth? For numerousness is effective only when like things,
motives, and impediments conflict, /1:174/ while ijma@‘ is mainly
based on mutawatir texts and matters necessarily known by
circumstantial evidences. All sane people are on one path in this
regard. Certainly as to whether ijmd‘ can be conceived on the basis
of ijtihdd or qiyds, this is a matter about which there can be
discussion, which will come, God willing.

Now, on the third point, namely whether it is conceivable for
ijma‘ to be ascertained, some have said: If ascertaining of ijma‘ is
conceivable, then who will pursue it, considering their [peoples]
dispersal through the lands?

We shall say: Knowing their [opinions] is conceivable by
communicating with them verbally if they are of such numbers
that their meeting is possible. If it is not possible, then the
opinions of certain people can be known verbally, while the
opinions of others can be known through mutawdtir reports about
them, just as we have. known of the prohibition against executing a
Muslim for [killing] a dhimmi* is the opinion of all the Shafi‘ites, as
well as the annulment of marriage without a guardian; and as we

hav come to know that the view of all Christians is [belief in]

2For comprehensive treatment of the subject on the definition
and the status of dhimmis, see ‘Abd al-Karim Zaydan, Akkdm al-
Dhimmiyyin wa al-Must’ aminin fi Dar al-Islam (Baghdad:
University of Baghdad, 1963).

665

trinity, and that the belief of all the Magians is dualism.

If it is said: The opinions of the Shafi‘ites and Hanafites are
based on one source, which is al-Shafi‘i and Aba Hanifa, and the
opinion of one person can be known. Similarly, the belief of
Christians is based on Jesus, wisn sziz. But as for the opinion of an
unencompassable number of people, how will it be known?

We shall say: The positions of the ummah of Muhammad,
‏وسكر‎ sete ‏اله‎ Ge, CONCerning the affairs of religion are based on what
they understood from Muhammad, fay ssi ‏,رصي نه‎ and what they
heard from him. Furthermore, since the influentials? are limited,
and it is possible to know the view of one, it is also possible to

know the view of the second, or up to ten or twenty.

If it is said: Perhaps one of them would be in the captivity of
the infidels or the lands of Byzantium.

We shall say: It is necessary to have recourse to him. The
opinion of a captive can be transmitted like the opinion of others;
50 it is possible to know it. Whoever doubts his [the captive’s]

agreement with the rest would not be establishing consensus.

If it is said: If his opinion can be known, perhaps he may

revert from it afterward.

We shall say: His retraction has no influence after ijmda‘ has

occurred, for he is compelled by it [the ijmda‘]. Nor is retraction

3People who are determinants of affairs.

666

conceivable by all of them, for then one of the two ijma‘s would be
in error, which is absurd, based on the proof of revealed authority.
As for the fourth point, namely establishing valid proof for
the impossibility of error on the part of the ummah, the whole
importance of the matter resides in this point, and its being proof is
known only through the Book, mutawdatir Sunna, or Reason. As for
IjmaG‘, it is not possible to establish it on the basis of ijma‘. Indeed,
they [the establishers of ijmd‘] desire to receive [proof] from the

Book, the Sunna, and Reason. But the Strongest of.these is the

Sunna.
We shall now mention these three approaches.

The first approach. Adhering to the Book, namely His

Statements, gtx:

“Thus We have appointed you a middle ummah that you
might be witnesses upon the people. . . ."4

“You are the best ummah ever brought forth for people,
bidding good and forbidding evil. . . .”5

“Of those We created are an ummah who guide by the truth
and by it act with justice.”6

“And hold fast to Alléh’s bond, together, and do not scatter.”

4Qur’an, 2:143.
5 ra .
Qur’an, 3:110.
6 Lr .
Qur’an, 7:181.

7Qur’an, 3:103.

667

“And in whatsoever you differ, its judgment belongs to
Alléh.”8 (implying that what you have agreed upon is, indeed,

truth).
“. . . If you dispute in anything, refer it to Allah and the
Messenger. . . .”9 (Also, its implication is /1:175/ that. what

you have agreed upon is truth).

All these are extrinsic [proofs] which do not specify the objective.
In fact, they do not even point out extrinsic indicators, though the

Strongest of them is His statement, gtx:

And whosoever opposes the Messenger after guidance has
become clear to him and takes a path other than the path of
the believers, We shall turn him over to what he has turned
to and We shall roast him in Jahannam—an evil
homecoming 0

For this necessitates the following of the path of the believers. This
is the verse that al-Shafi‘i relied upon.

We have treated this at length in [our] book, Tahdhib al-Usiil
[Refinement of the Principles},\| raising questions about this verse
{as a proof for Jjmd‘] and rebutting it. As we see it, this verse is not
a decisive text for this purpose. Rather, what is obvious is that its
intended meaning is that whosoever fights the Messenger, opposes

him, and follows other than the path of the believers in supporting,
8Qur’an, 42:10.
°Qur’an, 4:59.
100ur’an, 4:115,

This is the second reference to this extensive work on usiil,
which, unfortunately, is unlocated.

668

aiding, and repelling enemies from him,“We turn him the way he
turns.” Thus, it is as if He was not content with abandoning the
opposition [against the Messenger] until they joined him, following
the path of the believers in aiding, defending, and submitting to
him in what he commands and prohibits. This is evident and
Spontaneous to the understanding. But if it is not apparent, then it
is [at least] plausible. So if the Messenger, ,pfu'y asic at jum, had
explained the verse in that manner, it would have been accepted.
Nor would it render this an abrogation of the text, as if one

explained, for example, opposing as agreeing and following the path

of the believers as deviating from their path.

The second approach. This is the strongest, namely

holding fast to his saying, ‏سكم‎ gate ‏حل اله‎ , “My ummah shall not agree

#12

on a mistake. Now this, with respect to its wording, is stronger

[than the above verses] and more indicative of [our] purpose. Yet it
is not mutawdatir, like the Book. While the Book is mutawd4tir,
however, it is not an explicit {proof for ijmd‘].

So the way to establish the proof, in our view, is [to show]
that the transmissions from the Messenger, ‏وسكم‎ sui at Son, display in
varied words agreeing in meaning that this ummah is protected
from error. It has become well-known at the tongue of the

notables and the most reliable Companions, like ‘Umar, b. Mas‘id,

12The hadith is found in Sunan b. Majah, 2:1303; al-Nisabari,

Mustadrak, 1:115-116; and al-Haytami, Majma‘ al-Zawa@' id, 5:217-
219.

669

Abi Sa‘id al-Khudri, Anas b. Malik, b. ‘Umar, Aba Hurayra,
Hudhayfa b. al-Yaman, and others whose mention would be too

lengthy, to the effect that he said, ‏وسكر‎ suis « “pu:
“My ummah will not be unanimous on an error.”
“Allah will not let my ummah come together on an error.”

“I have asked Allah, ‏رمعي‎ that He not bring together the
whole of my ummah on an error. And He granted it.”

“Whosoever is pleased by making the wide space of Paradise
his abode, he must keep to the ummah. For their supplication
shields them from others.”!>

“Satan accompanies the loner. He is more remote from two.”

“Allah’s hand is with the ummah, and Allah gives no attention
to the divergence of one who splits [from the ummah).

“One group shall always remain predominating over truth,
unharmed by whosoever disagrees with them.”

which has also been transmitted:

“The disagreement of whosoever differs with them shall not
harm them, except for the hardship that confronts them.”

“Whosoever secedes from the ummah or separates even the

span of a hand, he has doffed the noose of Islam from his
neck.”

“Whosoever separates from the ummah and dies, his death is
in jahaliyah.”

I3This translation is based on ‘Izz al-Din b. al-Athir’s
interpretation in al-Nihdya fi Gharib al-Hadith wa al-Athar, 5 vols.
ed. M. Tanahi (Riyad: Maktabat Islami, 1963), 1:461 and 2:122.

670

These reports have remained prevalent among the Companions and
the Successors up to our times. None among the transmitters of the
ummah’s forbearers and its successors repudiated them. Rather,
they are accepted by those favoring the ummah and those differing
with it. The ummah has ever continued /1:176/ to use these

reports as arguments both in the fundamentals of religion and its

applications.

If it is said: Where is the proof when the claim of tawdtur
concerning these individual reports is impossible and ahdd
[solitary] transmission does not yield certain knowledge?

We shall say: There are two ways to establish the grounds
for proof:

First, we claim necessary knowledge that the Messenger,
‏وسكم‎ seis wt Gm, has exalted the status of this ummah. He also informed
on its immunity from error by the totality of these various reports,
though solitarily they do not attain tawdtur. Yet is in this very way
that we find ourselves compelled to recognize the bravery of ‘Ali,
the generosity of Hatim, the legal insight of al-Shafi‘i, the eloquence
of al-Hajaj, the preference of the Messenger, ‏سكم‎ suis wit Gem, for
‘A’isha from among his wives, and his great regard for his
Companions and praise of them, though no single report from
among these is mutawdtir. Rather denial of each one them is
possible, if we consider it in isolation. But this is not possible with
regard to the totality.

٠. This case resembles what is known from the totality of

circumstantial evidences, which Singly are not immune from doubt.
671

However, this doubt is removed from its totality so that necessary

knowledge accrues.

The second way is that we do not claim compulsory but
discursive knowledge from two aspects:

The first is that these hadiths remained well known among
the Companions and the Successors, who relied on them in
establishing Jjmd‘. No one has voiced opposition or rejection to it
until the time of al-Nazzam. It is impossible in light of deep-seated
habit that the peoples of varied ages agree to submit to something
on whose rectitude a proof was not raised, over and agaist differing
dispositions and the disparity of ambitions and views in rejecting
or accepting [things]. Therefore, a judgement established by a
solitary report never ceases to be based on an opponent’s dispute
or an expression of irresolution.

The second aspect is that those people who brought these
reports as their argument established with them a decisive
principle, namely Ijmd‘, which they ruled upon the Book of Allah,
gtx, with, as well as the mutawdtir Sunna. It is ordinarily
impossible to submit to a report abrogating the Book of
Allah—which is decisive—except when [the report] relies on a
decisive base. As for the abrogation of a decisive [text] by that
which is not decisive, this is unknown. So let none be astonished,
nor should one question how one may abrogate the decisive Book
by /jma‘, which relies on a report whose authenticity is unknown?
Rather, how did the whole ummah remain heedless of it until the

time of al-Nazz4m, so that he particularly points it out?
672

Here is the point of proof.

Those who oppose ijmd‘ use three approaches: Rejection,
interpretation, and contradiction. The first position concerns
rejection, and there are four discussions here.

The first is their saying: Perhaps someone did oppose these
reports or refute them, but it has not been transmitted to us.

We shall say: This also is belied by ‘dda [the nature of the
case} 14, for [jmd‘ is the greatest of the religious principles. Hence, if
any opponent would have differed with it, indeed it would have
been a great affair and that opposition would have become well
known. For if the dispute of the Companions concerning the blood
money for the fetus did not become effaced, nor the question of
hardm. nor the punishment of {alcohol} consumption, then how did
this opposition to a great principle become obliterated, where
pronouncing [one] astray and a heretic is required for him who errs
/1:177/ in its rejection and affirmation? And how did the
Opposition by al-Nazz4m become so well known despite the fact
that he was insignificant and of mean rank, while the
disagreements on the part of great Companions and Successors are

concealed? This is something which has no place at all in rational

thought.
The second discussion is their Saying: You have brought as

14Fazlur Rahman suggests that the technical meaning of ‘dda,

in this context, would be best expressed in English by the phrase
the nature of the case.

673

proof for Ijmd‘ a hadith. Then you use / 77:4“ as a proof for the
authenticity of that hadith. Granted, they agreed on the soundness
{of the report]; but what is the proof that that upon which they
agreed—upon its soundness—is correct? Is not this the conflict?

We shall say: No. Rather, we brought as proof for Ijmd‘ the
hadith, and for the soundness of the report, the fact that it
remained through the ages without repudiation and
dispute—despite the fact that it by the nature of the case requires
rejecting the establishment of a decisive principle that rules over
[other] decisive [principles] by a report whose rectitude is not
known. Therefore, we know through ‘dda that this report is
decisive, not through ijmd‘. |

Now, ‘ada is a principle from which [several kinds} of
knowledge are obtained, for through it the falsity of the
opposition’s claim against the Qur’an and its arbitration is known.
Also through it one knows the falsity of the claims that there is a
text about the imamate, that the late morning prayer [duh@] is
obligatory, and that the fasting of Shawwdi is obligatory . For if
these were so, this would have been by the nature of the case

impossible to have remained silent about it.

The third discussion is their saying: On what basis do you
object to one who says that perhaps they established 11714“ not on
the basis of these reports but by another proof.

We shall say: It is evident that they have argued on the basis
of these reports for prohibiting opposition to the ummah and

threatening whoever secedes from the ummah and opposes it. This
674

is better than saying that if they had a sound basis for this, it
would be manifest and well known. For it has been transmitted

that they relied upon verses [of the Qur’an] as well.

The fourth discussion is their saying: Since the Companions
knew the rectitude of these reports, why did they not mention to
the Successors the way their rectitude [was established] so that
doubt would have been uprooted. Thus, they would have shared
with them this knowledge?

We shall say: For they knew his specification, ‏السلار‎ «ui%, of the
immunity of this ummah—on the basis of a totality of
circumstantial evidences, other indications, and the reiteration of
words and reasons—necessarily indicated that his intention was to
elucidate the repudiation of error from this ummah. These
circumstantial evidences do not fall under narration, for there is no
end to their expressions.

If they were to narrate them, then each one of them would
be liable to doubt. Hence, they were content with the Successors
knowledge, in that through a suspect report, one cannot establish a
decisive principle, and according to‘dda, it is to be accepted. So ‘dda

was much stronger with reference to the Successors than narration.

The second position concerning interpretation is that those
{denying /jmda‘] have three interpretations.

The first is that his statement, ‏وأسكر‎ sie ‏اله‎ Gm, “My wmmah will
not agree on an error,” addresses infidelity and innovation. So

perhaps he meant the immunity of the whole [ummah] from
675

infidelity based on interpretation and doubt. As for his saying,
“‘ala al-khata’,” it is not mutawdétir. Even if it is correct, then the
term ‘khata’’ [mistake] is generic, and it is possible to take it to
mean kufr [infidelity].

We shall say: The term ‘daldl,’ in its original linguistic sense
does not correspond to ‘kufr.’ Allah, ‏,معي‎ has said, “And He found
you dallan /astray], then He guided [you]” 15 and He said, ytzs,
relating about Mis4, "1 did it then, being one of those that stray
[dallin] /1:178/°!6 He did not allege ‘from the kafirin.’ Rather, he
meant ‘from the mistaken.’ Thus, it is said, “So and so strayed from
the path”; and, “Astray is the endeavor of so and so.” All this is
‘error.’ Why should it not it be so! when indeed necessarily
understood from these words is the exaltation of the prestige of
this ummah, and its peculiarity in this moral excellence?

As for immunity from infidelity, He has bestowed this upon
‘Ali, (‘AbdAIah] b. Mas‘id, ‘Ubay [b. Ka‘b], and Zayd [b. Thabit],
according to the view of al-Nazzam. For they died abiding by the
truth.

But how many individuals have been immune from infidelity
until they died? So what is the peculiarity for the ummah? Hence,
this implies that he meant something from which individuals are
not immune—forgetfulness, mistakes, and lying—whereas the

ummah is immune from them, attaining the same status as the

15Qur’an, 93:7.

16Qur’an, 26:20.

676

Prophet, ‏وأسكر‎ suite an =, regarding immunity from error in religion.
Now, that which is generated from without religion—war,
peace, developing a town—in general, this requires immunity for
the ummah, as well. However, this is dubious. Yet in religious
affairs, the necessity of immunity from error is decisive, as it was
for the Prophet, tu‘, sui wt “os. For he did err in the matter of the
pollenization of date palms; then he said, “You know the affairs of

your world, and I know the affairs of your religion.”

The second interpretation is their saying: The thrust of this
{argument] is that it be general, necessitating the ummah’s
immunity from all errors, where it is possible that its meaning be
some kinds of error, such as testifying on the Day of Judgement,
what conforms to a mutawdtir text, or that which conforms to
rational proof, excluding whatever is based on itihdd and giyds.

We shall say: No one from the ummah has gone to such
minute exposition that whatever rationally indicates 3 basis
warranting their error in something indicates its warranting in
something else. Furthermore, since there is no differentiation,
there is no specification with which to proceed arbitrarily without
any proof. In addition, no one specification is worthier than next.

Or perhaps he has blamed whosoever opposes the ummah,
and has commanded that we conform. If it were not known where
the immunity lies, following it would be an impossibility, unless
immunity is absolutely established and the virtue and nobility of
this ummah is proven by it.

As for immunity from some [errors] to the exclusion of
677

others, this is established for every infidel, let alone the Muslim,
for there is no person that errs in everything. Rather, every

human being is immune from error in some things.

The third interpretation is that [they say] his ummah,
‏وسام‎ suie ‏اله‎ Yo, namely all of those who believe in him until the Day of
Resurrection, the whole of them—from the beginning of Islam until
the end of the life of this world—will not agree on an error. Rather,
every judgment that has been passed unanimously by [Muslims} of
all the generations after the raising of the Prophet, ‏وسكر‎ sie «n ‏رصي‎ iS
correct. For ummah expresses the whole.

How could this be! when those who have died in our times
are of the ummah, and the consensus of those after them is not the
consensus of the entire ummah. The Proof for this is that if they
had opposed {consensus} and then had died, consensus after them
would be inconsequential. Also, it is as if those before us who
opposed [consensus] are not in agreement—even though they are
dead.

We shall say: Just as it is not possible that one intends by
ummah to include the insane, the children, the still born, and those
in-womb, though they are part of the ummah, it is not possible that
one intends by it the dead and those who have not yet been
created. Rather what is understood (by the word ummah] is people
for whom differing and agreeing is conceivable /1:179/. But
agreement or disagreement is inconceivable on the part of the non-
existent and the dead. The Proof for this is that [the Prophet]

commanded the following of the ummah. He denounced those who
678

deviated from conformity. Thus, if the intended meaning was what
they mentioned, then following and disagreeing are conceivable
only on the Day of Resurrection, not in this world. It is therefore
known decisively that its intended meaning is a consensus that can

be violated and opposed in this world, which means those who

exist in each generation.

Now when a person dies but the influence of his Opposition
remains, then his opinion does not die with his death. Sufficient

discussion of this will come later, Allah, gtx, willing.

The third position is objections based on {Qur’anic] verses

and hadiths.

As for the verses, all that they contain is prohibition against
infidelity, apostasy, and wrong doing. This is general for everyone.
If this were not possible, the how would they be prohibited from

this, as with His statement, gtx:

“And that you say concerning Allah what you do not know,"7

“Whosoever among you turns from his religion and dies
disbelieving. 18

“And consume not your goods from among yourselves in

vanity” 719

17Qur’an, 7:33.
18Qur’an, 2:217.

19Qur’an, 2:188.

679

and other such examples?

We shall say: This is not a prohibition for them from coming
together as a whole”9; rather, this is a prohibition for individuals,
even though everyone per se is included in the prohibition. But
even if we concede this, still, neither the existence of what is
prohibited nor the possibility of its occurrence is a condition for
prohibition. For Allah, gtx, knew that not all sins would occur with
them. Yet, He prohibited them from all. Also, that which is
contrary to what is known does not occur. He said to His
Messenger, ‏وسكم‎ suis wi Ye, “If you were to commit shirk, all your

deeds would come to naught"?! and “Do not be of the ignorant

w22

ones... while He knew that He had made him immune from

these [sins].

Then there are the reports of his Saying, ‏:نيدم الكلام‎

Islam began alien, and it shall return to being alien as it
began.?>

The best generation is mine; then those who succeed them;
then those who succeed them; then lying will become
rampant, so much so that a man will swear without being
asked to take an oath and will offer himself as a witness

20The context necessitates this interpretation. The Arabic

text has ‘an al-ijtimad', meaning from coming together which does
not make sense.

21Qur’an, 39:65,
22Qur’an, 6:35.

23Wensinck, Concordance et Indices de la Tradition
Musulmane, , 7

680
without being asked to give testimony.

The Hour will not come except on the evil ones of my ummah,

We shall say: These and their like indicate that disobedience
and lying will become rampant. But it does not indicate that none
will remain who hold fast to the truth. Nor does it contradict his
SAYING, ‏وأسكم‎ cui wt “peo:

A group from among my ummah will always remain with the

truth until Allah’s command comes and until the Dajjal [anti-
Christ] appears.

Why should it not be so! since these reports do not approach in

rectitude and prevalence the hadiths which we have relied upon.

The third approach is reliance on rational method. An
explanation of this is that the Companions, when they came to a
decision and declared that they were conclusive in it, would only
hold it as conclusive on decisive grounds. And since they were so
numerous that their numbers reached the point of tawdtur, then by
the nature of the case it is impossible for them to deliberately lie,
and it is impossible for them to err such that not one of them
would become aware of the truth.

In addition, their arrival at a final decision without any
decisive proof is an error. Thus, their being decisive
inappropriately is, in the nature of the case, impossible. So, when
they ruled on the basis of ijtihdd and agreed /1:180/ upon it, it
should be known that the Successors emphatically disapproved of

their [the Companions’] opponents and that they would decisively
681

hold to [the Companions’ position]. Thus, their decisiveness in this
would be out of place. This [decisiveness] is also impossible except
on conclusive grounds. Otherwise, it is impossible by the nature of
the case that truth should evade all them, in spite of their
numerousness, such that not one of them realizes the truth.

Similarly, we know that if the Successors agreed upon
something, the successors of the Successors would disapprove and
decisively denounce the opponents [of the Successors]. But this
decisiveness would be out of place since this is impossible in the
nature of the case except on conclusive [proofs].

In this manner, they say: If the people of influence?4 were
reduced to a number short of tawdtur, then, in the nature of the
case, it is not impossible for them to be liable to error or to
deliberately lie for a motive. Therefore, there is no valid proof for
this.

But this approach is weak in our view because the source of
error is either deliberate lying or their assumption of that which is
not decisive as decisive. The first is not conceivable with a number
[required] for tawdtur. As for the second, it is conceivable, since
the Jews, [for example], have decisively held the falsity of the
prophethood of Jesus and Muhammad, juin assis, and they exceed
the number [required] for tawdtur. But their decisiveness is

improper, for they assumed what is not decisive to be decisive.

24Literally, the people of loosening and binding, meaning the

influential people in society whose opinions hold sway, more or
less, over the masses.

682

Those who deny the temporal origin of the world and
prophethood, and commit all kinds of [heretical] innovations and
aberrations, their number reaches the number (constituting)
tawdtur, and truth can accrue by their reports; but they have erred
by being decisive inappropriately. One who posits this must
consider the consensus of the Jews and the Christians as valid proof
and that it is not peculiar to this [Muslim] ummah. Yet they [the
Jews and the Christians] have agreed upon the falsity of the

religion of Islam.

If it is said: This is reliance on customary behavior, and in
supporting the second approach you were inclined to ‘dda.

We shall say: ‘Ada does not [usually] prevent the number
constituting tawdtur from deeming what is indecisive as decisive.
Therefore, we said that the condition of a mutawé4tir report is that
it should be based on something perceptible. Yet the nature of the
case bars compliance with and silence about those who reject the
Book and mutawdtir Sunna on the basis of an ijma‘ whose proof is
an uncertain report that is not decisive.

Now, all that is necessary is known through sense perception,
circumstantial evidence, or intuition—and their mode is one. People
are agreed on its attainment, and the nature of the case makes it
impossible for the people of tawdtur to neglect it. But as for that
which is discursive, its methods vary. So, it is not inconceivable in
the nature of the case for the people of tawdtur to agree upon error

with regard to it. Thus, this is the difference between the two

approaches.
683

If it is said: [As for] your reliance on this second approach,
that is, that what they agreed upon is truth and not error, what is
the proof for the obligatoriness of its observance? For every
mujtahid attains the truth, and it is not obligatory upon another
mujtahid to follow him. Although a false witness is a liar, a judge
must heed him. Consequently, requisite compliance is one thing,
but a thing being true is something else.

We shall say: The ummah has agreed on the necessity of
adhering to /jm4‘, and that it is [the kind of] truth which must be
followed. In accordance with their being true in their statements,
it is necessary to follow /jmdé‘. Furthermore, we say that the
principle for every truth whose truth is known is /1:181/ necessary
compliance. Complying with a mujtahid, however, is obligatory,
except on the part of [another] mujtahid who also is correct. So,
truth that accrues through his ijtihdd is preferred to that which has
accrued by the ijtihdd of others, as far as the former is concerned.
Also, a lying witness—if it is known that he is a liar—must not be
followed.

This is supported by his [the Messenger’s] denunciation of
one who opposes the ummah, and by [the fact] that he [the
Messenger] has mentioned this in the context of praising the
ummah. But this is realized only by the obligatoriness of
compliance [with /jmd‘]. Otherwise, the only meaning that remains
is that they are correct if they attain the proof of the truth. This is
Possible with respect to everyone of the individual believers. So it

offers neither praise nor any [peculiar] distinction.
684

CHAPTER TWO: EXPLANATION OF THE CONSTITUENTS OF L/MA‘

IT HAS TWO CONSTITUENTS: THE PARTICIPANTS AND JJMA‘
ITSELF

The First Constituent: The Participants

The [participants] are the ummah of Muhammad, fu‘ suis a “po.
The apparent [meaning] of this includes all Muslims. But for every
apparent [meaning] there are two distinct extremes concerning
omission and confirmation [of participants], as well as similar
intermediates.

As for what is clear concerning confirmation, this refers to
every mujtahid whose fatwd is accepted. He is definitely of the
people of influence {ahl-al-hall wa al-‘aqd] and his agreement is
necessary for ljma‘.

As for what is clear concerning omission, this refers to the
children, the insane, and those in the womb, even though they are
regarded as part of the community. We know certainly that he,
‏سكم‎ sate ‏رصي اله‎ did not intend with his saying, “My community will
not agree on error,” other than those whose agreement is
conceivable. Furthermore, dispute in a question occurs only after
understanding it. Therefore, one who does not understand does not
enter into [dispute].

Between these two extremes are the common people, the
faqih [legist] who is not an wsili [jurist], an ustil? who is not a faqih,
the fasiq [unrighteous] mujtahid, the heretic, and the novice among
the Successors who approached the rank of ijtihdd in the time of

the Companions. Therefore, we shall describe each one in a
685

discussion.

I. DISCUSSION: It is conceivable to include the common
pecple in Ijma‘ because the Shari‘a is divisible into that which the
common people and those of distinction share in understanding,
such as the five prayers, the obligatoriness of fasting, 22/464, and
hajj. This has been unanimously agreed upon. The common people
concur with those of distinction on [this] ijma‘. But [it is further
divisible] into that whose [knowledge] is confined to specialists,
such as the details of the conditions of prayer, business
transactions, manumissions, and istildd.2> The common people are
in agreement that the truth with regard to this is that upon which
influential people and the specialists unanimously agree, without
concealing any opposition to it at all. Thus, they are also in
agreement about it. It is appropriate to call this the /jmd‘ of the
entire ummah, such as in the case when the army empowers a
group from among the people of wisdom and reflection to make
peace with the community of a fortress. When they agree with
them on something, it is said that this occurred with the agreement
of the whole army. Therefore, all that has been agreed upon by the
/1:182/ mujtahids is agreeable with regard to the common people,

and based on it the consensus of the ummah is completed.

If it is said: When a common person is in opposition to an

25This refers to seeking children from a slave girl. Consult
Qal'aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-Fuqahd’ , p. 67.

686

occurrence that the specialists of the same era have unanimous
agreement on, is ijmd‘ constituted without him? And if it is, how is
the common person excluded from the entire ummah? And if it
were not constituted, how could the position of a common person
be considered?

We shall say: People have disputed this. Some of them say
that it is not constituted because he is of the ummah.

Consequently, his concession is required either in general or in
particular. Some others have said—which is more correct—that it is
constituted based on two evidences.

The first is that a common person does not possess the
capacity to seek the truth because he does not have the skill for
this purpose. So he is similar to a child or an insane person with
regard to the deficiency [of the skill]. Nothing is understood by
“immunity of the community from error” other than immunity on
the part of those for whom it is conceivable to arrive at the truth,
that is those who have the capacity.

The second, which is stronger, is that the first generation,
the Companions, agreed that the common people should not be
taken into consideration concerning this matter—I mean the leading
personalities of the Companions and their masses. For if a common
person makes a statement [on a technical issue], it is certain that he
is saying it out of ignorance, that he does not know what he is
Saying, and that he does not possess the capacity to agree or
disagree about it. Therefore, it is not conceivable for this to issue
from an intelligent common man because an intelligent person

would delegate what he does not know to he who knows. But this
687

case is imaginary and does not actually occur at all.

What indicates the validity of ijmd‘ is that a common man
disobeys by his opposition to the ‘ulamd.’ This has been made
unlawful for him. What, for example, indicates his disobedience is
what has come down concerning the denunciation of ignorant
rulers when they go astray and lead {others] astray without
knowledge, as in His saying, ‏,رمعاي‎ “. . . Those of them, whose task is
to investigate, would have known the matter... .” 26 So He turned
them from dispute to the people of investigation. Also, many
reports have been transmitted obliging recourse to the ‘ulamd’ and
prohibiting the fatwds [authoritative opinions] of the common
people based on ignorance and whim. But this does not indicate
the occurrence of ijma‘ without them because it is possible for a
common man to disobey by opposing [the ‘ulamd’], just as
disobeying by opposing a solitary report. But the existence of ijma‘*
is not realized because of his opposition. Rather, the proof is in the
ijma‘. So if it does not occur because of disobedience or by what is
not disobedience, then it is not proof and the evidence is what we

have mentioned before.

II. DISCUSSION: When we say that the opinions of the
common people should not be taken into consideration for lacking
the skills, then many a theologian, grammarian, commentator on

the Qur’an, and traditionist may be deficient in the skill through

which rules are known.

26Qur’ an, 4:83.

688

So, some people have said that only the opinions of the
independent imdms of the madhhabs should be accepted as fatwds,
such as al-Shafi‘i, Malik, Abi Hanifa, and their likes from among
the Companions and the Successors.

Some of them added to the [independent] imdms the
faqihs—who have memorized the details of the rules and upheld
them—but excluded the usili, who neither masters nor memorizes
the details [of figh].

But the correct [position] is that the statement of an
ugiili—who knows the avenues of [deriving] rules and how to
extract them from the implied meanings, the texts, the cases of
command and prohibitions, the general statements, and who knows
how the texts impart their meanings, and [knows] how to reason—is
worthier of consideration than a fagih who memorizes details.
Indeed, he who possesses this expertise is the one who can
apprehend rules at will, even if he does not memorize /1:183/ the
details.

Now an usiili is capable of this, while a fagih memorizing
details is not capable of this. And the proof that the memorization
of details is not to be considered is that al-‘Abbis, Zubayr, Talha,
Sa‘d, ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Awf, Sa‘id b. Zayd b ‘Amru b. Nufayl, Aba
‘Ubayda b. al-Jarrah, and their likes did not poise themselves for
fatwas and did not show themselves as such, as did the three ‘Abd

Allahs,”” ‘Ali, Zayd b. Thabit, and Mu‘4dh. But they considered

27This is in reference to ‘Abd Allah b. Mas‘id, ‘Abd Allah b.
‘Abbas, and ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar.

689

their opinion [al-‘Abb4s, Zubayr, etc.] if they were in opposition.
Why should this not be so! for they were capable of the supreme
imamate and since, in particular, most of them were in the shdra
{counsel] and did not memorize [fiqhi] details. In fact, those details
were not yet complied; but they knew the Book and the Sunna and
were capable of understanding them. But, {even] one who
memorizes may not remember the minute details of, say,
menstruation and testaments. So the basis of the details is
analgous to these minute details. Therefore, their memorization is
not required.

So, the usili’s opposition must be considered as well as the
opposition of a distinguished faqih because they possess the skill in
general. They say what their opinion is on the basis of a proof. As
for the grammarian or the theologian, they should not be
considered because they are [considered] among the masses with

respect to this science, except in the case that falls under a question

based on grammar or theology.

If it is said: Is this a decisive issue or is it open to ijtihdd?

We shall say: It is open to ijtihad. However, if we allow his
Statement [the grammarian or the theologian] to be considered,
ijma‘ would become suspect were it to be opposed. Thus, it would
not be a decisive proof. On the contrary, it is a decisive proof only
when they do not oppose.

As for the opposition of the masses, this does not occur. And
if it does happen, it is only in words by the tongue, for he admits

his ignorance by what he says. The falsity of his statement is
690

decisive, such as the statement of a child. As for this case,

however, it is not the same.

If it is said: Should, then, an usiili follow the faqihs
concerning details they have agreed upon and acknowledged as
correct, and will ijma‘ then be constituted?

We shall say: Yes, for their is no opposition. The usdli has
generally agreed, though he was not aware of the details, just as
the fagihs have agreed upon that which the theologians have
unanimously decided as correct, such as the questions of ability
[istita‘a],2° inability, substance, accidents, contradiction, or
variations. So ijmaé‘ occurs by general agreement, just as it occurs
on the part of the masses because each party is like a commoner in

relation to that science which he has not obtained, even though he

has acquired another science.

III. DISCUSSION: When a heretic dissents, ijmd‘ cannot
be concluded without him if he has not become an unbeliever.

Rather, he is like a fasiq [corrupt] mujtahid, and the opposition of a

fasiq mujtahid is considered.

If it is said: Perhaps he deceives in manifesting dissent while

he himself does not believe it.

28 According to Jurjani, Kitab al-Ta‘rifat, ‏.م‎ 19, this term is
linguistically synonomous to ‘qudrah,’ ‘quwa,’ ‘wus,’ and ‘taqa.’ But

in the technical usage in theology it refers to a character that
enables creatures to act or not to act.

691

١ We shall say: Perhaps he is telling the truth. His assent is
inescapable, even if we do not confirm his conformity. Why should
it not be so! For we can know the belief of a Jasiq by the
circumstantial evidences of his positions in his debates and
arguments, while an innovator is credible in that his statements are
acceptable, for he does not perceive that he is a fasiq. But when he
becomes an infidel through his innovation, then, at that point, his
opposition is disregarded, even though he prays toward the qibla
and believes himself to be a Muslim. For [the word]‘ummah’ does
not /1:184/ mean those who pray toward the qibla. Rather, [it is]
the believers—and he is an infidel, even if he does not perceive that
he is a disbeliever. Certainly!

But if he is a proponent of anthropomorphism and the
corporeality [of God] and we charge him with infidelity, then one
cannot infer falsity of his view on the basis of the consensus of his
Opponents on the falsity of corporealism, concluding that they
constitute the entire ummah without him. For their being the
whole ummah rests on his removal from the ummah. Yet
elimination from the ummah is conditional on proof of [his]
infidelity. Therefore, it is impermissible that the proof of [his]
infidelity be dependent upon charging him with infidelity. This
leads to proving something by itself. Of course, after we have
declared him an infidel on the basis of a rational proof, if he
dissents on another question, he will not be considered.

If he repents, but still insists on Opposing that question which
they agreed upon while he was an infidel, then his opposition

would not be taken into account after (his return to] Islam because
692

he was preceded by the ijmd‘ of the entire ummah, and the
Participants of the ijmd‘ at that time were the entire ummah

without him. Therefore, he is similar to an infidel opposing the
whole ummah who then he becomes a Muslim but still insists on
this opposition. Indeed, this should not be taken into account, ‘
except in the view of those who require the expiration of the

generation of this ‏"قصل‎

If it is said: If a few of the faqihs abandon the ‏“قصل‎ on the
basis of the opposition of a heretic charged with infidelity—were it
not known that his heresy necessitates infidelity—and assume that
the ijmd‘ cannot be constituted without him, then should he be
excused, since the fagihs do not possess awareness of what
interpretations render him an_ infidel.

We shall say: This question has two forms. One of them is
that the fagihs say, “We do not know whether his heresy
necessitates infidelity or not.” So, in this case they will not be
excused about him since they are obliged to have recourse to the
scholars of usiil. Furthermore, it is incumbent upon those scholars
to inform them. Then when they rule upon his infidelity, they
[fugahd’] must comply. But if they are not content with complying,
then they must inquire about the proof, so that when its proof is
mentioned to them, they understand it absolutely because its proof
is decisive. But if one does not comprehend it, he is not excused,
just as one who does not understand the proof for the truth of the
Messenger, ‏سكم‎ guia ‏اه‎ “=, [is not excused]. For there is no excuse

when Allah, ytxs, has manifested decisive proofs.
693

The second form is when the innovation and convictions of
[the heretic] have not reached [the faqih]. So he abandons the ijma‘
because of his [the heretic’s] opposition. Thus, he [the faqgih] is
excused in his mistake and not accountable for it. Moreover, ijma‘
is not a conclusive proof with respect to him, just as when an
abrogating proof does not reach him. For he is not attributed with
negligence, contrary to the first form, where he is able to refer [to
the usilis] and investigate.

So, there is no excuse for him in his abandonment, similar to
one who accepts the witness of the Seceders [Khaw4rij] and judges
by it. He is mistaken because the proof for the infidelity of the
Kharijites [rebelling] against ‘Ali and ‘Uthman, jase w es —holding
them to be infidels and believing the [shedding of their] blood and
the [seizure of their] property [as lawful]—is evident and quickly
realized. Therefore, there is no excuse for one who is not aware of
it, in contrast to one who judges by false evidence while he is not
aware; for there is no way for him to know the truthfulness of the

witness. But he has a way of knowing his infidelity.

If it is said: What makes him an infidel?
We shall say: This discussion is lengthy. We have pointed out

something /1:185/ of it in [our] book, Fasl 2941-Tafriga bayna al-

291) appears that the editor of the Amiri edition has either
made a mistake in the title or that this is a ‘misprint, for the name
is found in the sources as Faysal not Fasl. This work has been
translated into German in 1938 by A.I. Runge, and it has been
abridged in Spanish in 1929 by Asin Palacios. See Badawi,
Mu'allifat al-Ghazdii, p. 167. Check also Ghazaii, al-Munqidh min
al-Daldl, ed. Jamil Saliba and Kamil ‘Ayyad, (n.p.: Dar al-Andulis,

694

Islam wa al-Zandaga [A Clear Distinction Between Islam and
Heresy]. The extent that I can mention here is that this is reduced
to three categories.

The first is that the very believing of it [kufr] is infidelity,
like denying the Maker and his attributes and rejecting
prophethood. The second is believing in what prevents him from
acknowledging the Maker and His attributes and assenting to His
messengers. Consequently, he is compelled to reject this since they
are mutually contradictory. The third is that which revealed
authority states cannot emanate except from an infidel, like
worshipping fire, prostrating to an idol, disclaiming a séra of the
Qur’an, denying some of the messengers, regarding as lawful
adultery and alcohol, abandoning prayer, and, in sum, rejecting that

which is known by tawdtur and necessarily as part of the Shari‘a.

IV. DISCUSSION: Some people have said that the ijma‘ of
other than the Companions should not be considered. But we shall
refute this. Also, some people have said that after the Companions,
the ijma‘ of the Successors may be considered. However, the
opposition of a Successor in the time of the Companions is
disregarded. But the ijmd‘ of the Companions cannot be repudiated
by his disagreement. —

But this [position] is corrupt when the Successor has reached
the rank of ijtihdd before the formation of the ijma‘ because he is

part of the ummah. So the ijmd‘ of those other than him cannot be

1401/1981), p. 55.

695

the ijmd‘ of the entire ummah. Rather, it is the consensus of some,
while valid proof is in the ijmda‘ of all. Certainly if they arrive at
ijma‘, and he reaches the rank of ijtihdd after their consensus, then
he is preceded by the ijmd‘. So now he must not dissent, as one
who becomes a Muslim after the completion of ijmd‘. Proof for this
is the statement of Allah, ytxs, “And whatever you are at variance
on, the judgment thereof belongs to Allah.” 30

But there is disagreement on this. This is proven by the
concensus of the Companions to tolerate a Successor’s difference [of
opinion] and by the absence of their objection against him.
Therefore, it is ijma@‘ from them concerning the permissibility of
differing. Why should it not be so! For it is known that many of
the associates of ‘Abd Allah [b. Mas‘id], such as ‘Alqama, al-Aswad,
and others used to give fatwds during the generation of the
Companions, as did Hasan al-Basri and Sa‘id b. al-Musayyab.?! So
how can their dispute not be considered?

In general, a Companion has no excellence over a Successor
except by virtue of his Companionship. Thus, if this virtue [were
what] qualified ijmda‘, then the opinions of the Ansar could be
annulled by the statements of the Muhdjirin, the opinions of the

Muhdjirin by the statements of the ten,- the opinion of the ten by

30Qur’an, 42:10.

31Sa‘id b. al-Musayyab b. Hazn al-Makhzimi was a prominent
Successor (d. 93 H.); see Dhahabi, Tadhkirat al-Huffadz, 1:54; Ibn
Hajar, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, 4:84; and Suydti, Tabaqdt al-Huffaz,
p.17, for his biography.

32This refers to the ten Companions to whom the Messenger

696

the statements of the four Caliphs, and their opinions by the

statements of Abi Bakr and ‘Umar, pase wt gm.

If it is said: It has been reported from ‘A’isha, tase wt eee», that
she rebuked Abi Salama b. ‘Abd al-Rahmaan for equating himself
with the Companions, saying, “A chick is crowing with the roosters.”

We shall say: What we have cited is decisive. What you have
attributed to ‘A’isha has not been established except by a solitary
report. Even if it were established, it is her opinion. There is no
proof in it. Furthermore, perhaps she intended to prevent him
from opposing them in what they previously have agreed upon. Or
perhaps she disapproved of his dissent in a question which, in her
opinion, was not liable to ijtihdd, as she objected to Zayd b. Arqam
on the issue of ‘ina,?? thinking that the necessity of discontinuing
the pretext was decisive.

Know that controversy is conceivable in this question,
according to those who agree that the ijmd‘ of the Companions can
be repudiated by the opposition of one of the Companions. As for
one who holds that the opinion of the majority cannot be voided by

the minority, however it may be, his statement is not specific to the
gave tidings that they shall go to Paradise.

33‘Jna is a controversial sales transaction where the form
satisfies, in appearance, the letter of the Shari'a Law. An example
is given as follows: A commodity is sold at a certain price. But it
is—at the time of sale—resold by the buyer to the original seller for
a higher price, with the payment deferred until a fixed time. See
Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami wa Adillatuhu, 4:68, 509; and Qal‘aji,
Mu'jam Lughat al-Fuqahé’', p 326.

697

Successors.

V. DISCUSSION: /1:186/ The ijma‘ of the majority holds
no proof when accompanied by opposition of a minority. Some
people say it is a proof. Others say if the minority’s number
reaches the number of tawdtur, it annuls the ima‘; but if it is less,
there is no anullment. The more founded [opinion], according to us,
is that infalibility is only established by the unanimity of the
ummah. But this [case] is not the ijmd‘ of all; rather, it is disputed.

He said, ygixs, “And whatever you are at variance on, the judgment

thereof belongs to Allah.” 34

If it is said: Sometimes the word ‘ummah’ is applied,
meaning the majority, just as one says, “Band Tamim protect their
neighbors and honor their guests,” meaning the majority.

We shall say: Those who are proponents of the generic
[usage] relate this to the totality. But arbitrary qualification [of the
term] is not allowed, except with proof or necessity. Yet there is no
necessity for it here. As for those who do not hold this, it is
Possible that they intend by this less [than the totality). But the
intended portion [of the ummah] is not distinguished from what is
not intended. Rather, the ijmd‘ of the entirety is necessary; so it is
known that the intended portion is included [with them).

Why should it not be so! while reports have come confirming

the scarcity of people of the truth, since he Said, ‏عليه سكم‎ at Gm, “And

34Qur’an, 42:10.

698

they, on that day, shall be few”; also, he said, ‏وسكر‎ sie ‏انه‎ Gm, “And this
religion shall return to being alien, as it began alien.” Also, Allah
giz, said:

“Most of them do not understand.”35

“Few among my servants are thankful.”*®

“How often a little company has overwhelmed a numerous
company by Allah's leave.”37

Since there is no precept and no resistance, there is no escaping

considering the view of the entirety.

The second proof is the ijmda‘ of the Companions on allowing
the dissent of individuals.

Upon how many questions have individuals stood alone in
opinion, like the solitude of b. ‘Abbas regarding ‘awl,?® which he

rejected?

If it is said: No. Rather they rejected b. ‘Abbas’ view of
35Qur’an, 29:63; 49:4.

36Qur’an, 34:23.

37Qur’an, 2249,

38Linguistically the term means imbalance. When applied to
inheritence it means the reduction in the shares of the heirs in
order to include other beneficiaries. See Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-
Fugahd’, p. 325. For an elaborate discussion on ‘awl complete with

case examples, see Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami wa Adillatuhu, 8:353-
358.

699

“temporary marriage” as lawful and that usury was [only]
associated with loans. Also, ‘A’isha disputed b. Arqam in the

question of ‘ina.>?

In addition, they [the Companions] contested
Abi Masa al-Ash‘ari’s claim that Sleep does not void ablution.
Again, they disapproved of Abé Talha ({al-Ansgari’s] opinion that
eating hailstones did not break the fast. This is because they stood
alone with regard to their (position).

We shall say: No. Rather, they dissented in their opinions
against the conveyed Sunna which was well known among them.
Or, they opposed obvious proofs which had been established in
their {the Companions’] view. Then, we say, grant that they
rejected this solitary stand {in opinion]. But this individual denies

their rejection of him, so ijma' is not constituted. Thus, there is no

valid proof in their denial in the presence of individual dissent.

They? have two doubts.

The first doubt is their saying, “A statement of an individual
where he reports about himself does not impart [certain]
knowledge.” So how can this void a Statement of a number where
certain knowledge accrues through their report about themselves,
owing to their attaining the number of tawdtur? As a result of this,
some people have said that the number of a minority, when it

reaches the point of tawdtur, disproves ijmd‘.

39 See note above.

40Ghazali is refereing to those holding the opposing view in
the above argument.

700

This is faulty on three points:

The first is that the truth of the majority, even if it is known,
is not the truth of the whole ummah and their compact. Yet valid
proof lies in unanimous agreement. So, this proof is null and void
because they are not the whole ummah.

The second is that a lie of an individual cannot be known
[conclusively], for he may be truthful. Consequently, the issue
{under consideration] would not be of unanimous agreement on the
part of all the truthful, if he [the individual] were to be truthful.

The third is that one cannot consider what they conceal {in
their hearts]. Rather, worship is connected to what they manifest.

Hence, this is their opinion and their way, not that which they

conceal.

If it is said: Is it possible that the ummah conceal a
contradiction to what it manifests?

We shall say: This, if it is so, /1:187/ however, is only
conceivable on the basis of dissimulation and compulsion—and that
becomes apparent and well known. But if it does not become well
known, it is absurd, for this leads to the concurrence of the wnmah

on error and falsehood, which is impossible on the basis of revealed

authority.

The second doubt: Dissent of the individual is deviation
from the community, and this is forbidden for him. For the loner is

blameworthy, and he is like the isolated sheep [separated] from the
flock.
701

We shall say: 51247 ’describes one who secedes from the
community after entering into it. Now, one who enters into ijma',
his dissent cannot be accepted after it—and this would be deviation.

As for one who did not originally enter, he cannot be called shaddh

[deviant].

If it is said: The Prophet said, ‏,ليم السلام‎ “Stick to the large
majority of the ummah because Satan accompanies an individual,
and he is remoter than two.

We shall say: He meant by this the deviant who rebells
against the legitimate leader [imdm] and opposes the majority in a
way which leads to sedition. Also, his statement, “and he is
remoter from two,” intends to urge the request of a friend in travel.
Therefore, he said, ‏اكير‎ sie, “Three are a company.”

Some of [the opponents] have said: The opinion of the
majority is a proof, but it is not ijmé'. But this is arbitrary with
regard to their opinion that it is a proof, for there is no evidence for
it.

Others have said: Our aim in this is that it is better to follow
the majority.

We shall say: This is correct concerning reports and with
regard to a follower when he finds no preponderance among
mujtahids other than quantity. As for the mujtahid, he must follow
proof to the exclusion of the majority because if one individual
opposes him he is not bound to follow him. Even if he (the

individual] is joined by another opponent, he is not obliged to

follow.
702

VI. DISCUSSION: Malik said that validity lies only in the
ijma‘ of the people of Medina. Others have said: The valid ijmd‘ is
that of the people of the two sanctuaries, Mecca and Medina, or the
two cities, Kifa and Basra.

Those involved [with this discussion] mean by this only that
these locations gathered, during the time of the Companions, the
people of influence. So if Malik meant that Medina was their place
of assembly, then this is conceded to him, provided it did collect
[them]. But otherwise, the place itself has no effect.

But even this cannot be conceded. Indeed, Medina never
housed all the scholars, neither before the hijra nor after it. On the
contrary they remained dispersed on journeys, in battles, and in
[various] cities. Therefore, there is no sense in Malik’s statement,
unless he says that the [normative] Practice of the people of
Medina holds proof because they are the majority and reliability is
with the opinion of the majority, which we have already
undermined; or if he says that their agreement on an opinion or an
action indicates that they depended upon an explicit, revealed
authority. For the abrogating revelation came down among them.
Therefore, the discernments of the Shari‘a cannot elude them. But
this would be arbitrary, for it is not impossible that someone other
than them heard a hadith from the Messenger of Allah,
‏وسكم‎ gaia ‏اله‎ Gm, ON 2 journey or in Medina, but left [Medina] prior to its
conveyance. Thus, the valid proof would lie in ijma‘ while there is
no ijma’.

Many interpretations and excuses have been affected for
703

Malik, which we have exhausted in our book, Tahdhib al-Usiil, and
there is no need for them here. They may argue on the basis of the
praise of Allah’s Messenger, ‏وسكر‎ is « ‏رصن‎ for Medina and its people,
that this indicates their excellence and the abundance of their
reward for living in Medina. But this does not indicate the
designation of ijmd‘ to them [only].

Some people say that proof lies in the unanimity of the four
Caliphs. But this is arbitrary. There is no proof for this, except
what a group has imagined, that is, that the statement of a

Companion is a valid proof. This will come /1:188/ in its [proper]

place.

VII. DISCUSSION: They [scholars] have disputed about
whether it is conditional that the people of ijmd‘ reach the number
of tawdtur. As for those who rely on rational proof and the
impossibility of error [for the ummah] by virtue of the nature of
case, then it requires of them the condition [of tawdtur).

But those who take this [position] on the basis of revealed
authority disagree. Some of them require this because even if their
number is insufficient [for tawdtur], we do not know certainly their
faith on the basis of their statements, let alone through other
means.

This is corrupt from two aspects:

The first of them is that one knows their faith not by their
statements but on the basis of Ais statement, ‏وسكر‎ uie at ‏رصن‎ “A portion

of my ummah will remain on the truth until the command of Allah
704

[for the end of time] arrives and until the anti-Christ appears.”4!
Therefore, if there are no Muslims on the face of the Earth besides
them, they are, indeed, holding to truth.

Second, we were not charged to worship on the basis of the
esoteric. However, the ummah of Muhammad are those who
believe openly in Muhammad, ‏وسكر‎ sie ‏رصي اله‎ since there is no
knowing the esoteric. If it is evident that we are charged to
worship on the basis of following them, then it is possible to
conclude by this that they are truthful. For Allah, gtx, has not

charged us to follow, exalt, and emulate a liar.

If it is said: How is the reduction in the number of Muslims
to what is short of the number of tawdtur conceivable? This leads
- to the discontinuance of obligation, for obligation lasts for the
duration of the proof. The proof is founded upon a tawdtur report
attested to by the miracles of prophethood, by the existence of
Muhammad, ‏وسكر‎ cis wt Gm, and his challenge [to the people] with
prophethood. The unbelievers do not endorse the promulgation of
the miracles of prophethood. Rather, they strive to obliterate them.
But the preceding generations of imdms are unanimous on the
perpetuity of obligation until the Day of Judgement. This implies
that there is ijm@‘ on the impossibility of the effacement of the
miracles. But the deficiency of the number of tawdtur leads to

effacement. If the existence of this eventuality is inconceivable,

41 For various references and versions of this text see
Wensinck, Concordance et Indices de la Tradition Musulmane, 4:53

705

how can we speculate about its status?

We shall say: It is possible to say this is inscrutable because
of these proofs. But what is meant by the conceivability of this
issue is the reduction of the numbers of the people of influence to
less than the number of tawdtur. Even if we are decided that the
opinion of the masses is not regarded, the signs of the Shari‘a
endure through the tawdtur of the masses.

But it is possible to say that this eventuality is conceivable,
and that Allah, gtx’, will perpetuate these signs through tawdtur,
which accrues on the part of Muslims and disbelievers—for they
speak about the existence of Muhammad, ‏وسكر‎ sole wl ‏رصب‎ and the
presence of his miracle, even if they do not acknowledge it as being
a miracle. Or, Allah, gtx, will intervene in the ordinary. Thus,
certain knowledge accrues based on the statement of fewer (than
tawatur] so that the valid proof continues. In fact, we say that
[through] the statement of a few together with known
circumstantial evidences, say of one’s debates and his tendencies,
certain knowledge can accrue without intervention in the ordinary.

Therefore, on the basis of all these aspects, the Shari‘a can continue

to be preserved.

If it is said: Since it is allowed for the number of the people
of influence to be reduced, if it is reduced to one, then can his lone
statement become a decisive proof?

We shall say: If we consider the conformity of the common
people to what he says—and the masses Support him and do not

oppose him in it—then it is the ijma‘ of the ummah, and it becomes
706

a valid proof, since, if this were not so, the ummah will have agreed
on a mistake and an error.

But if we do not acknowledge the opinion of the masses, then
that through which materialized [the essence of] the terms
concurrence and ima‘ is not found, since it necessarily calls for a
[certain] number so that it can be named ijma‘—and not less than
two or three. /1:189/ All this is conceivable in the view of one who
regards ijmda‘ from [those who came] after the Companions.

As for one who advocates only the ijma@‘ of the Companions,

he is obliged by none of this because the number of the

Companions surely exceeded the number of tawdtur.

VIII. DISCUSSION: Dawéd and his supporters, from the
people of Zahir, hold that there is no valid proof in the ijmd‘ of
those after the Companions. This is faulty, for the three proofs
which evidence that ijmd‘ is a valid proof—I mean the Book, the
Sunna, and Reason—do not differentiate between one generation
and another. For when the Successors concurred, then it was the
ijma' of the whole ummah. Whosoever opposed them, followed
other than the way of the faithful. It is impossible, in customary,
normative behavior, that truth escape them while they were so
numerous, according to those who consider customary, normative
behavior [as a basis for argument].

But they have two doubts. The weaker of the two is their
position to rely on a report and a verse—namely, His statement,

‎“One who follows a path other than the path of the‏ ,دعاق
707

faithful’*?—which treats those characterized by faith, that is, those
who were present at the time the verse came down. For the non-
existent cannot be credited with faith and for them there is no
path. Also, his saying, ‏رليم الكلآر‎ “My ummah will not concur on a
mistake,” encompasses his ummah, those who believed in him and
whose concensus or disagreement was conceivable; namely those
present.

This is false, for from the drift [of their arguments] it follows
necessarily that ijmd‘ could not be concluded after the death of Sa‘d
b. Mu‘adh, Hamza, and those martyred from among the Muhajirin
and the Ansar, of those who existed when this verse was revealed.
Thus, the ijmd‘ of those after them is not the ijmd‘ of all the
believers and the totality of the ummah. In addition, it requires
disregarding the dissent of those who became Muslims after the
revelation of this verse, though their skill was perfected thereafter.

But our concurence, theirs, and the Companions is that the
death of one of the Companions does not shut the door of ijma‘.
Rather, the ijma: of the Companions after the Prophet, ‏وسكر‎ siz an “0, is
unanimously a valid proof. How many a Companion was martyred
in the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ «ie ‏له‎ 4, after the
revelation of this verse!

The second doubt is that it is incumbent to follow the path
of all the faithful and the ijmd‘ of the entire ummah; but the
Successors are not the whole ummah. For the Companions, even

though they died, they were not, by their death, excluded from the

420ur’an, 4:115.

708

ummah. Therefore, if one of the Companions were to oppose the
‏“زا‎ of the Successors, it is not the position of the whole ummah,
and it is not prohibited to accept the opinion of a Companion. So, if
the dissent of some of the Comapanions repudiates the ijmd‘ of the
Successors, their [the Companions] non-agreement also repudiates
this, for in their death they were not excluded from being part of
the ummah.

They say: Argument by this analogy requires that the
description totality also not be applied to the Companions. Rather,
one should await the arrival of the Successors and their agreement
with those after them until the Day of Ressurection, for they are all
the ummah. But if this were to be considered, ijma‘ could not be
enjoyed except on the Day of Judgment. Thus, it is established that
the description totality, then, is only [applicable] on whosoever has
come into existence to the exclusion of whosoever has not.
Therefore, there is no way to exclude the Companions from the
entirety [of the ummah]. Hence, the description totality of the
ummah is not established for the Successors.

The answer is that just as it is decisively untenable to
consider the succeeding generations, so is it untenable to consider
the predecessors. But for this, ‏“فصر‎ would be inconceivable after
the death of even one of the Muslims in the time of the Companions
/1:190/ or the Successors, or after Hamza was martyred. Yet they
recognize the rectitude of the ijmd‘ of the Companions after the
Messenger of Allah, pfu 4’ syis ‏رسن لله‎ and after the death of those who
died after the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ tela ‏.سن اك‎ This cannot be so

except if the past is not regarded and the future is not awaited, and
709

that the description sotality of the ummah, stems from all those
existing in each period.

As for the ijmd‘ of the Successors in Opposition to a
Companion’s position, some people have said: The Statement of the
Companion is forsaken because they are the whole ummah.

If we concede this—and it is correct—we Say, if they concurred
in accordance with his opinion, ijma‘ would be constituted, since his
agreement, if it does not confirm the ijmd‘, does not impair it. Yet
even if they resolve to oppose his position, in our view this opinion
will not be abandoned, to the extent that it is prohibited for the
Successors of the Successors to agree with it. For after he gave a
legal opinion regarding the issue, the fatwa of the Successors

concerning it is not the fatwd of the whole ummah. Rather, it is the

fatwa of a portion.

If it is said: If the qualifier totality is established for the
Successors, then let dissent from their position after them be
prohibited, even if a Companion held that [dissenting] opinion
before them. And if they are not the whole of the wmmah,then it is |
incumbent that the proof not be constituted by their ijmd‘; nor is
opposing them prohibited, Since dissent of a part of the ummah is
not unlawful. However, when the totality of the ummah is in
something to the exclusion of something else, then this is
contradictory, holding together negation and affirmation.

We shall say: This has no contradiction because totality is
established only in relation to the question which they have

engaged. But when a question occurs after the Companions, then
710

the Successors are the entire ummah with respect to it, if they
agreed upon it. As for a Companion who gave an authoritative
opinion upon a question, his fatwa and his view do not expire with
his death. This is like [the case of] the Companion who dies after
delivering a fatwa, while those who remain concur in opposing him.
This cannot constitute the ijmd‘ of the ummah. But if he dies then
an event occurs after him, then ijmd‘would have been effected

according to all views, and the totality is attained in relation [to

them].

If it is said: If a person of the ummah were to be absent,
ijm@‘ would not be constituted without him, even if the missing
{individual] had no information thereof about the incident, nor an
opinion concerning it. However, we say if he were present, he
would have had an opinion regarding it. Thus, his agreement is
necessary. Hence, the case of the dead before the Successors is like
the [that of] the absent.

We shall say: This becomes void with the death of the first
Companion, for ijmd‘ has been concluded without him. If he were
absent, it would not have been constituted because he who was
absent at the time [of ijmd‘] Posesses a view and an opinion
inherently. Thus his assent or dissent is possible. So it is possible
that he may agree or disagree if the question were presented to
him, contrary to the dead; for in his case Opposition or agreement is
inconceivable potentialy or actualy. Yet [the Opinion of] the insane,
the sick of vanishing reason, and the minor, is not awaited because

the possibility of concurrence and dissent on their part is
711

invalidated.

If it is said: So what the Successors agree on can be
overturned by the dissent of one of the Companions if [his opinion]
is transmitted. Even if it is not related, perhaps he did disagree.
But it has not been reported to us. Therefore, the ijmda‘ of the
entire ummah cannot be ascertained.

We shall say: This is voided with the first dead of the
Companions, for the potentiality of his opposition is not like the
actuality of his dissent. This is the truth [of the matter]. It is so for
were the door of possibility to be opened, then all arguments would
become void, /1:191/ since there is no rule whatsoever but that its
supposed abrogation is conceivable, as is its report by a solitary
individual, whose death is possible Prior to his conveying it to us.
In addition, the ijmd‘ of the Companions would be void because of
the possibilty that one of them concealed his Oppositon and only
manifested his agreement for some reason. Also, a solitary report
can be refuted for the possibility of it being false. Again, if the
ijma‘ is known and the generation has passed, the reversal [of a
position] on the part of one of them is possible before his death,
although it may not have been related to us. Thus, ijma‘ would be

void in the view of those who require the passing of the generation.

If it is said: The basic rule is that there is no abrogation and

no reversion.

We shall say: The basic rule is the nonexistence of his

involvment in the issue and the nonexistence of either his assent or
712

dissent. But while the basic rule is nonexistance, still, possibility is
not negated. But when possibility is established, doubt accrues. So
ijma@‘ becomes unascertainable with doubt. However, it can be said

that ijma‘ is not repudiated by every doubt.

If it is said: On the question of the possibility of abrogation
and reversal, there is doubt after the ascertaining of the original
argument. However, the doubt is in regard to its continuation. But
here the doubt is in the basis of ijma‘, for ijima‘ to them rests upon
the accruance of the qualifier totality, and the description totality
depends upon the knowledge of the absence of opposition. So,
when we doubt the absence of opposition, we doubt the totality,
and, thus, we doubt ijmd‘.

We shall say: No. Rather, the qualifier totality has accrued to
the Successors. But it can be annulled only by knowing the
opposition. Thus, if it is not known, totality remains. What they
mention resembles the opinion of one who says that the proof is in
the text. The Messenger, juts ssi, died before its abrogation. So if
his death was not known before it was abrogated, we shall doubt
this proof, and the proof is the ijmé‘ upon which the generation has
passed. So if we doubt the reversal [of a person’s opinion], we
doubt the proof. And such is the opinion on the position of the first
dead of the Companions. Therefore, we do not acknowledge that
the totality of the remaining [Companions] is doubtful.

This is the completion of discussion on the first constituent [of

ima‘).
713

The Second Constituent: Ijma‘ Itself

We mean by this the unanimity of fatwds of the ummah ona
question in one matter—whether the generation has passed or not,
whether they have given their fatwd on the basis of ijtihdd ora
text—as long as the fatwa is an explicit articulation. The completion
of the inquiry in this constituent is in elucidating that silence is not
like utterance, that the passing of the generation is not a condition,
and that ijmd‘ can be constituted on the basis of ijtihdd. These,

then, are three discussions.

I. DISCUSSION: When one of the Companions pronounces a
fatwa and the others keep silent, ijma‘ is not constituted, for
opinion cannot be attributed to the silent.

Some people have said: If it is propagated and they remain
silent, then their silence is like articulation, so that ijmd‘ is fulfilled.
Some people have required that the generation passes in silence
{i.e. without dissent]. Others have said: It is a valid proof, but it is
not ijma@‘. Still others have said: It is neither a proof nor ijma';
however, it is evidence of their sanctioning of ijtihdd on this
question.

The choice [opinion] is that it is not an ijma‘, nor a proof, nor
evidence for sanctioning ijtihdd in this issue, unless circumstantial
evidences indicate that they kept silent, concealing their consent,
and [indicate] the permissibility of relying on this [position] in view
of [their] silence. The proof for this is that {a Companion’s] fatwa is
known only on the basis of his explicit statement, which /1:192/ is

not open to ambiguity and uncertainty, while silence is irresolute,
714

for one may be silent without concealing assent due to seven
reasons.

The first is that in his heart something prevents him from
the expression of an opinion, while we do not perceive it.
Indications of displeasure show on him despite his silence.

The second is that he is silent because he deems it a
plausible opinion for a person whose ijtihdd leads him to such [a
position], although he, himself, disagrees with it; in fact, he believes
it to be an error.

The third is that one may believe that every mujtahid is
correct. Thus, he does not consider contestation in cases of ijtihad
at all and views repudiation as a collective obligation only.
Therefore, when a qualified {mujtahid], who is correct, [rules], he
keeps silent, even though he differs with his ijtihdd.

The fourth is that he remains silent while he disapproves.
But he awaits an opportunity for denial, for he does not believe it
beneficial to hasten due to some impediment whose disappearance
he awaits. Then he dies before this obstacle’s cessation, or he
becomes distracted from it.

The fifth is that he knows that if he differs, no one will pay
attention to him and that he would be debased. It is like the
Statement of b. ‘Abbas about his silence concerning the denial of
‘awl during the lifetime of ‘Umar, “He was an awe-inspiring man; so
I feared him.”

The sixth is that one keeps silent because he is undecided on
the question, for he is still in the time of reflection.

The seventh is that he may remain silent because he
715

Suspects that someone else requited him from the denial and
dispensed with his declaration, but is mistaken in this. Thus, he
abandons rejection under a delusion, since he views repudiation to
be a collective obligation. So he thinks that he has been spared,

while he is mistaken in his supposition.

If it is said: If there were disagreement in this, it would be
evident.

We shall say: And if there were unanimity in this, it would
be evident, [as well]. For if one can conceive of an obstacle which
prevents manifestation of accordance, one can imagine its like in
manifesting dispute. On this basis, the opinion of Jubba’i becomes
false, since he makes the passing of the generation in silence a
condition; for the impediments mentioned may not endure to the
end of the generation.

As for those who hold that it is a valid proof—although it is
not ijma‘—this is arbitrary because it is the opinion of a portion of
the ummah, while infallibility, rather, is established for the whole

[ummah] alone.

If it said: We know conclusively that the Successors, when a
question was difficult for them—and a widespread opinion of a
Companion was conveyed to them, upon which the others
{Companions] remained silent—did not permit renunciation of it.
Therefore, it is ijmd‘ on their part that it is a valid proof.

We shall say: This ijmd‘ is not conceded. On the contrary,

scholars are still divided on this issue; moreover, the astute know
716

that silence is indecisiveness and that the opinion of a portion of

the ummah contains no valid proof.

II. DISCUSSION: When the opinion of the ummah is
unanimous—even if it is momentary—ijmd‘ is constituted, and its
immunity from error necessarily [follows].

Some people have said that it is necessary for the generation
to pass and for all [its people] to die. This is corrupt because the
validity of the proof is in their agreement, not in their death.
Moreover, it took place prior to their death. Thus, death does not
increase its confirmation. The validity of ijma‘ is the verse [of the
Qur’an] and the report [of the Messenger], and they do not require

consideration of the generation.

If it is said: So long as they remain alive, their retraction
may be anticipated, and their fatwds unsettled.

We shall say: The argument, then, is in their retraction, and
we disallow retraction from all of them, since one of the two ijma‘s
is wrong—and this is absurd. As for some of them, reversal is not
permissible for them because in their reverting they oppose the
ijma‘ of the ummah, whose immunity /1:193/ from error is
necessarily established. Certainly it is possible that the retraction
may occur from some of them, and thereby they become
disobedient and unrighteous. However, disobedience is possible on

the part of some of the ummah, but not all.

If it is said: How can one be controverting ijmd‘, while ijma'
717

is not completed? For it is completed only when the generation
passes.

We shall say: If you mean by this that it is not called ijma',
this is a startling lie against language and norms. But if you mean
that the reality of ijmd' has not been realized, then what defines it?
And what is ijma‘ except the accordance of their fatwds, and that
agreement has occurred? What comes thereafter is the
continuation of conformity, not the completion of the agreement.

Also we say, how can one claim this, while we know that the
Successors during the lifetime of Anis b. Malik and the later
Companions used to argue on the basis of the ijma*‘ of the
Companions? But the possibility of argument on the basis of ijma‘
was not fixed to the death of the last of the Companions. Therefore,
some of them have said that the death of the majority [of the
generation) is sufficient—and this is another arbitrary, baseless
[point]. Furthermore, we say that this leads to the impossibility of
ijma*. For if there remains one of the Companions, it is possible for
the Successor to contravene [the Companions], since the ijmd‘ is not
completed. And as long as one of the generation of the Successors
remains, likewise, ijma‘ cannot be decided from them because it is
possible for a successor of the Successors to dissent. This is
baseless hallucination.

Yet they have doubts.

The first doubt is their statement: Perhaps some of them
may have said what they said due to imagination and error, but
then they realize it. So how can one be forbidden from /1:194/

retracting an error? And how can this be secured by an agreement
718

momentarily?

We shall say: If he should die, from where shall indemnity
against his error be attained? And is there protection from error
other than the text indicating the necessity of the infallibility of the
ummah?

But if he retracts and says: I realize that I was mistaken.

We shall say: One may presume your error only when you
stand alone. As for what you said in conformity with the ummah,
it is not liable to error.

If he says: I have realized that I said what I said on the basis
of such and such a proof. But its contrary has become manifest to
me, decisively.

Then, we shall say: You have only erred in the method, not
on the question itseif. Rather, your agreement with the ummah is a
proof that the judgment was correct, even if you were mistaken in
your process of deduction.

The second doubt is that perhaps they issued [an opinion]
based on ijtihdd and conjecture, and there is no hindrance on a
mujtahid from retraction when his ijtihdd changes. Thus, if
withdrawal is allowable, it indicates that the ijmd‘ was not
complete.

We shall say: There is no restriction on the mujtahid from
reversing, if he stands alone in his ijtihdd. As for where his ijtihad
agrees with the ijtihadd of the ummah, then its error is not possible.
It must be correct, and withdrawal from the truth is forbidden.

The third doubt is that if the opponent dies, the question, vis

4 vis his death, does not become ijmd‘. The survivors are the whole
719

ummah; however, they are in a phase of this generation.
Therefore, the view of the opponent does not become abandoned.
But if the generation were to be disregarded, then the opinion of
the opponent would be annulled. /1:195/

We shall say: Some people have held that his view is voided
and it becomes abandoned because the remaining are themselves

the entire ummah at that time. But this is not correct, according to

‎us. Rather, the correct [opinion] is that they are not the whole‏ ش
‎ummah in relation to this question, upon which the dead person‏
‎had given his fatwa, for the judgment of his fatwa does not expire‏
‎with his death. But this is not because of the generation. For it is‏
‎possible for a sole Companion to hold an opinion, while the‏
‎Successors, throughout their whole period, are unanimous in‏
‎opposing it. For we have [already] clarified that this does not‏
‎nullify his view because they are not the entire ummah in relation‏
‎to this question.‏

‎The fourth doubt concerns what has been transmitted

‎concerning ‘Ali, «iz wi ‏ررضو‎ that he said:

‎My opinion and the opinion of ‘Umar conformed on
prohibiting selling female slaves who have born [their
master’s] children. But I now think their sale [is lawful].

‎Then ‘Ubayda al-Salmani said, “Your opinion in the time of

‎harmony is dearer to us than your view in the time of division.”
We shall say: If the ijmd‘ of all the Companions is correct,

‎then this would not prove—on the basis of the opinion of ‘Ali—that

‎the passing of the generation is conditional; even if he held this
720

distinctly, it is not obligatory to follow him. How could it be so,
while only his opinion and ‘Umar’s were in accord, as he said?

As for the statement of ‘Ubayda, “your view in the time of
harmony,” he did not mean by this that conforming with the
Community constituted ijmd‘; rather, he meant by this that your
opinion in the time of harmony, union, unanimity, and obedience to
the Jmdm, is dearer to us than your opinion in the time of sedition,
division, and dissension, while accusation may reach ‘Ali /1:196/ of
disavowal of the two Shaykhs,43 ,ase an emu. Thus, there is no proof

in what is not explicit in itself,

III. DISCUSSION: It is conceivable that ijma‘ be concluded
on the basis of ijtihdd and giyds, and it becomes a valid proof.

Some people have said: The agreement of a large number of
people is not conceivable in a place of conjecture. But if it were
conceivable it would be a valid proof. Ibn Jarir al-Tabari holds this
[opinion]. And others have said: It is conceivable, but it is not a
valid proof, for advocating ijtihad opens [further] the gate of
ijtihdd, instead of prohibiting it. But the choice [opinion] is that it is
conceivable and it is a valid proof.

And [as for) their statement: How will a large number of
people be consistent on one judgment in a question of conjecture?

We shall say: This is only denied where possibilities are
equiponderant. As for the more likely conjecture, each one may be

inclined to it. So what improbability is there that all of them may

‎of course, refers to Aba Bakr and ‘Umar.‏ و43

721

ugree that nabidh is in the category of alcohol with respect to
intoxication? Thus, it is like it in being prohibited. Why should it
not be so! while most of the ijmd‘s depend upon generalities,
perceptibles, and solitary reports which are correct according to the
muhaddiths, while these [things] are liable to [other
interpretations]. Again, why should it not be so! when they
{people] have consensus on the unicity [of Allah] and prophethood,
while in both is mystery, which is of greater attraction for many
people than possible interpretations as opposed to [these] more
evident interpretations. Furthermore, many false ideologies have
agreed upon the falsity of prophethood, although they have no
proof, decisive or conjectural. So why is agreement not allowable
based on obvious evidence and preponderating probability?

Evidence for this is the possibility /1:197/ of agreement by
way of ijtihdd, not by the method of giyds, similar to assent on the
requital for hunting [in ihrdm], the amount of a [crime’s] fine, the
assessment of [a wife’s] support, and the credibility of the imams
and judges. Alli these are conjectural, even though there is no giyds
[applicable].

But they have doubts.

The first is their statement: How will the ummah agree in
spite of the diversity of their natures, and the difference in their
understandings, intelligences, and Stupidities regarding the
conjectural? |

We shall say: This kind of agreement is prevented at one
time and in one specific moment because during the time of

reflection they may disagree. But over extended periods of time, it
722

is not unlikely that the intelligent ones will proceed to the evident
proofs and that they will establish this for the dull. So they accept
it from them and corroborate it. Now, the people of this view have
permitted ijmda‘ on the basis of the negation of 91225 and its
invalidation, while the proofs of its rectitude are manifest. So how
can ijma‘ be prevented by this?

The second doubt is their statement: How can the ummah
concur on qiyds, while the principle of giyds is disputed.

We shall say: It is only supposed that this is on the part of
the Companions, while they were unanimous on it, and
disagreement occurred after them.

If it is presupposed that it happened after the emergence of
dispute, then those who endorse giyds may depend on qiyds, while
those who reject it may depend on ijtihdd—which they think is not
giyas, while in reality it is giyés. For one may be deluded that the
non-general is a generality, that the non-command is an
imperative, and that the non-qiyds is qiyas—and vice-versa. /1:198/

The third doubt is their statement that error in ijtihad is
possible. So how can the ummah agree on what has a possibility of
error in it? Moreover, they may say that ijmd‘ is constituted on the
permissibility of opposing a mujtahid. Therefore, if ijma' was
concluded on the basis of qiyds, its opposition would be rendered
unlawful—which is, by ijmd‘, permissible. Thus, the two ijma‘s
would be contradictory.

We shall say: Error is possible only in ijtihdd that is held by
lone individuals. As for the ijtihdd of the infallible ummah, it is not

liable to error, like the ijtihdd of Allah's Messenger, ptm’ syie wi pom,
723

and his qiyads. For his contravention is not permitted since
immunity from error is established. And such is the case with the

infallibility of the ummah, without any difference.

CHAPTER THREE: THE STATUS OF L/MA‘

[/jma@‘s’] status necessitates adherence, prohibition of
dissension, and refraining from all that accuses the ummah of
neglecting the truth. The examination of that which is a breech and
a violation [of Jjmda‘] and that which is not a contravention may be

refined by outlining a few discussions.

I. DISCUSSION: If the ummah concurs upon two opinions
concerning a question—as in their ruling regarding, for example, the
purchase /1:199/ of a handmaiden whose [buyer] has sexual
intercourse with her and discovers a defect. Some hold that she
should be returned with ‘ugr,“4 while others prohibit return. But if
they consented to both of these positions, then the result of the
return [of the slave girl] without payment would be a breech of the
ima‘, according to the vast majority [of jurists], save some eccentric
characters from among the Zahirites. But then, al-Shafi‘i held that
the slave girl could be returned without compensation because the

Companions as a whole did not treat this issue. The opinions of

44‘Uar is financial compensation given by a sane male of legal
age for mistakenly having sexual intercourse with a free or slave
woman provided that his act is not legally recognized as adultery.

See al-Jurjani, Ta‘rifat, ‏.م‎ 158, and Qal‘aji, Mu‘jam Lughat al-
Fuqahd’ .

724

only some of them have been related. Yet if an overwhelming
number of them did engage in this and if all together were
resolved on the two views, then the issuance of a third opinion
would not be permitted. The proof for this is that this would
necessitat2 accusing the ummah of neglecting the truth, since the
third view must have a proof, and it requires accusing the ummah

of being heedless and neglectful of it—which is absurd.

Still, they have [several] doubts.

The first doubt is their statement: They [the Companions]
took up the discussion as mujtahids and did not articulate the
prohibition of a third position.

We shall say: If they agreed on one opinion on the basis of
ijtihad, then this is acceptable. And it would not be permissible to -
oppose them because it necessitates accusing them of negligence of

the truth and ignorance of its proof—and so it is the case here.

The second doubt is their statement: If the Companions
argued on the basis of a proof or an underlying reason, it would be
permissible then to argue on the basis of another underlying
reason because they did not explicitly specify its falsity. And such
is the case with the third opinion. They did not explicitly regard it
as false.

We shall say: Thus, let disagreement with them be
permissible when they agree on the basis of ijtihdd, since it is
possible to reason /1:200/ by another underlying reason in what

they are agreed upon. But the answer is that familiarity with all
725

evidences is not an obligation of their religion. Rather, the
knowledge of truth suffices them on the basis of one proof.
Therefore, issuing and extracting another underlying reason is not
an accusation of neglecting the truth. But opposition to their
rule—if they [the Companions] agree—is an accusation of neglecting

the truth. Such is the case when they come to two opinions.

The third doubt is that some of the Companions hold that
touching or feeling [a female) void ablution and others opine that
they do not annul ablution, without distinguishing between the two
of them. So if a Successor were to hold that one of the two nullifies
{ablution] without the other, this would be permissible, even
though it is a third opinion.

We shall say: This is because his position in each question
confirms a certain position of one group. But the two questions do
not have one answer, nor is equiponderance intended. Even if it
were intended and they held that there is no difference and they
concurred upon this, distinction would not be permitted.

However, if they distinguished between the two questions
and agreed upon the distinction, intentionally, then both of them
would be refused. But since they did not combine, nor distinguish
between them, one ruling, therefore, does not emerge from these
two questions. Rather, I say explicitly that no human is free from
disobedience or error on a question. And the Community is
unanimous on the occurrence of disobedience and error.

None of this is impossible. Error is only impossible when it

results in neglecting the truth, to the extent that it is held by no
726

group, despite his [the Prophet’s] statement, ,uén taiz, “A group from
among my Community will continue abiding by /1:201/ the truth.”
Because of this, we say that it is possible for the ummah to be
divided into two groups on two issues. But one group would be
mistaken in a question, while the other group would hold to the
truth concerning it. But those who hold to truth may error
concerning another question, whose truth will be held by those
erring in the first question, such that part of the ummah may say,
for example, that giyds is not a valid proof and that the Khirajites
are false, while the other part says that giyds is a valid proof and
that the Khiarajites are correct. So, error applies to both groups, but
in two different aspects. Therefore, the truth on both of these

matters will not be abandoned among the ummah in either case.

The fourth doubt: Masriiq*> issued a third opinion on the

4

question of haram*® while no one objected to him.

We shall say: The firmness of the entirety of the Companions
on two opinions on this issue has not been established. Rather,

some of them, may have been reflecting upon it or were not engage

43 Masrag b. al-Ajda‘ (d. 63 H.), a prominent Successor whose
name, “the stolen one,” came from his being kidnapped as a child.
He was a Kufan muhaddith and faqih. See al-Mizzi, Tahdhib al-
Kamal, 3:1320-21; b. Hajar, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, 10:110; and
Dhahabi, Siyar ‘Alam al-Nubald’, 4:63-69.

46 Ghazali is most likely refering to Masriq’s position on
nadhr (swearing to kill a son for not fulfilling a committment),

which is hardm. Masraq holds that such an oath must be atoned
for. See al-Razi, al-Mahsiil, 1:252.

727

in it; or perhaps Masriq differed with the Companions at that time
and did not voice his agreement with them. For he was capable of
ijtihdd at the time this issue occurred. /1:202/ How could this be,

while this [report] from Masraq has not been proved correct except

through solitary reports. Therefore, it cannot repudiate what we

have mentioned.

II. DISCUSSION: If one or two from the ummah dissent,
then ijmd‘ is not constituted without them. And if [they] die, still
ijma@‘, on this question, is not constituted, contrary to [the opinion
of] others. And our proof is that what is forbidden is Opposition to
the entire ummah. But he who assumes the opinion of the dead
person after his time, then it cannot be said that his opinion is
against the entire ummah because the opinion of a dead person
from among the ummah does not cease with his death. For this
reason, it is said that so and so agrees with al-Shafi‘i or disagrees
with him. This is after the death of al-Shafi‘i. Thus the opinion of
the dead person does not become abandoned with his death. If it
were to be abandoned, then an opinion of an entire generation
would be as if it were annulled after their death, to the extent that

it would be permissible for those who come after them to disagree

with them.

If it is said: If one should die during the time of inquiry,
while abstaining from judgment, what do you say, then, with

regard to him?

We shall say: We are decided on two clear ends: One of
728

them is that if he dies before treating the question or even before
it is posed to him, then those who remain after him are the whole
ummah. But if he did treat the question /1:203/ and issued his
fatwd, then the remaining are only part of the ummah. But if he
dies while in the process of considering it, this is liable to

[different] interpretations. For this person has neither disagreed
nor agreed with them. Rather, a person who is undecided is in
disagreement with a person who is decided. But he is in the
Process of coming into agreement. And this question, in our view, is

liable to [different] interpretations. And Allah knows best.

111. DISCUSSION: If the Successors are in agreement on
one of the opinions held by the Companions, the other opinion does
not become abandoned. Nor is one who holds that opinion charged
with violating Ijmd‘, contrary to what al-Karkhi says of a group
from among the followers of Aba Hanifah, those of al-Shafi‘i, and
many of the Mu‘tazilites, such as al-Jubba'i and his 508.47 For he iS
not opposing the whole ummah because those who died adhering to
that opinion are from the ummah. And the Successors, concerning
this question, are part of the ummah, as well. Even though they
were the whole ummahk, their position to choose one of the two
opinions [of the Companions] does not, therefore, prohibit the other

opinion. But if they [the Successors] explicitly forbid the other

“7 aba Hashim ‘Abd al-Salam b. Muhammad al-Jubba’i (d. 321
H.), a famous Mu‘tazilite, was, for some time, the teacher of Aba al-
Hasan al-Ash‘ari. For more on him, see the work of his student
‘Abd al-Jabbar, Firag wa Labaqat al-Mu'tazila, pp. 100-104.

729

opinion, we are then left with two alternatives: Either we say that
the existence of this [prohibition] is impossible because it leads to
contradictions between the two ijmd‘s, since the generation of the
Companions passed, explicitly permitting difference of opinion,
/1:204/ while they [the Successors] agreed on prohibiting what the
[Companions] have allowed; or we may Say that this is possible but
they constitute only part of the ummah regarding this question,
and disobedience of a portion of the ummah is possible, even
though they constitute the entirety of the ummah on all questions
which the Companions did not treat. But this contradicts his
Statement, ‏أوسكر‎ cuits ‏رصن اله‎ “A group from among my ummah will
continue openly abiding by truth,” since the truth about this would
be [considered] lost at this time. Then perhaps one who is inclined

to this view may consider this hadith as a solitary report.

If it is said: On what basis do you object to those who say
that this is an ijma‘ which must be followed, while, as for the
Companions, they agreed upon two opinions, on the condition that
after them no one discovers a proof which corroborates the truth of
one of the two.

We shall say: This is arbitrary and a fabrication against them
because they did not require this condition, for Ijmd‘ is a decisive,
valid proof. Therefore, it is not possible for there to be a condition
in the case of a decisive proof, since doubt may enter it, and thus it
would cease to be decisive. But if this were possible, then it would
be possible to say that if they were agreed on one opinion on the

basis of /1:205/ ijtihdd, then they would agree on the condition that
730

no one after them discovers a proof which corroborates the truth
concerning one’s opposition. But the [generation of the]
Companions passed agreeing to permit each of the two views.

Therefore, it is not permitted to violate their ijmd‘.

IV. DISCUSSION: If the [consensus] of the ummah is on
two different opinions, but then adheres to one position, what they
now agreed upon becomes a decisive ijmd‘, according to those who
require the termination of the generation. They, thus, escape the
controversy.

As for us, since we do not make this a condition, the first
ijma‘, even though it was momentary, was completed allowing
difference of opinion. So if they resort to one of the two opinions,
then it is not possible for us, in that case, to say that they are [only]
part of the ummah in this issue, as we have said concerning the
unanimity of the Successors on one of the opinions of the
Companions. Therefore, the controversy intensifies. This can be
resolved in five ways:

The first is that we say the occurrence of this is impossible.
It is like supposing their ijm@‘ upon something, then all of them
reverse their opinion to a different one, or in the unanimity of the
Successors to oppose it. Now, those who require the passing of the
generation, /1:206/ take this point as their basis.

They say: If, for example, they disagree on the question of
marriage without a guardian, it is possible then to insist on [the
opinion] of he who regards it as false. So why is not permissible for

others to agree with him whenever the proof of falsity becomes
731

evident to them? How can a mujtahid be restricted from agreeing
with his opponents if his opinion changes?

We shall say: This is clearly farfetched, and we disallow it
because it would lead to contradictory ijma‘s, since the first ijmda‘
indicated the permissibility of the difference [of opinion] and the
necessity for all common people to follow whosoever they will from
among the mujtahids. But unanimity on permitting this is not
possible without decisive proof or near-decisive [proof] for allowing
it. So how can its removal be conceived, while the impossibility of
the occurrence of this contradiction between the ijma‘s is closer to
arbitrariness than requiring the passing of the generation.

Then there remains the controversy regarding the unanimity
of the Successors after the passing of the first generation
[acknowledging] different views. Thereupon there is no dispute
that it is permissible to resort to one of them in definitive issues
/1:207/—such as their [the Companions’] resorting to fighting those
who withheld zakdt after disagreement about it, or that the imdms
are to be from Quraysh [after originally disagreeing]. For each
party faults its opponent and does not acknowledge its opinion,
unlike issues liable to ijtihdd, where differing in them is coupled
with the permissibility of difference of opinion and the justification
of adhering to any position resulting from the ijtihdd of the two
parties.

The second escape is to require the passing of the
generation. But this is controversial because rendering this a

condition is arbitrary.

The third escape is to Stipulate that ijmd‘ be based solely
732

upon something decisive, not on qiyds nor ijtihdd, for those who
require this say that their [the Companions’} differences do not
impart consensus on the permissibility of all opinions. In fact, this
also rests on ijtihdd. So if they resort to an opinion, then what
must be considered is that upon which they have agreed, for truth
is conclusively determined in one of the two opinions. But this is
controversial because if this door were to be opened, there would
be no relying on ijma‘, since it is conceivable with every ijmd‘ that
it may be based on ijtihdd.

So were ijmd‘ to be divided into that which is a valid proof
and that which is not a valid proof, /1:208/ with no
distinction—[thus] annulling adherence to it—then it would cease
being a valid proof. For if the decisive proof, which is their basis,
becomes evident to us, then this ruling would be solely dependent
on this decisive [evidence] and founded on it, not on ijmda‘. For his

‘

Statement, ‏السكلام‎ aie, “My ummah shall not agree on error,” did not
distinguish between one kind of ijmd‘ and another. There is no
escape from this [argument], except for those who deny conceiving
ijma" on the basis of ijtihdd. And in that case, the conclusion of
their statements contradicts their premises, in view of their
statement that the unanimity of [the Companions’} acknowledging
difference of opinion is based on ijtihad,

The fourth escape is to say that the last agreement should
be considered. As for the earlier one, difference of opinion is only
permitted on the condition that ijma‘ is not constituted on

determining the truth to be in an opinion.

But this is controversial because this adds another condition
733

to ijma‘. Yet decisive valid proofs cannot accept a condition for
which it is possible to occur /1:209/ or not to occur. If this were
Possible, it would be possible to say that the second ijmda‘ is not a
valid proof. Rather, it can become a valid proof only on the
condition that it not be an agreement [that arrives] after difference
of opinion. And this is worthier because it severs possible
conditions from the ijmd‘

The fifth escape is [to say] that the last [opinion] is not a
valid argument and that the abandoned opinion is not prohibited
because ijmd‘ only becomes a valid proof with the condition that it
not be preceded by dispute. But if it is preceded, it cannot become
a valid proof. But this is also controversial because his statement,
‏السّلام‎ gai, “My ummah shall not agree on error,” cuts off conditions
entirely and it. necessitates that every ijma@‘ be a valid proof
regardless of how it came to be. Therefore, each one of the two
ijma‘s will be a valid proof. But this is contradictory.

Perhaps the most appropriate is the first approach, namely
that this is inconceivable because it leads to contradiction. Its
conception is like conceiving that the people of ijmda‘ have all
withdrawn from what they have agreed upon /1:210/ or like
conceiving that the Successors have agreed in opposition to the
‏“قرزا‎ of the Companions. Now the occurrence of this is impossible

on the basis of revelation. Therefore, such is the case with this.

If it is said: The whole of the community of the Companions
upheld ‘awl, except b. ‘Abbas, and (upheld) the prohibition of the

sale of female slaves who have born children to their masters,
734

except ‘Ali. So, if a proof appears to these two on ‘awl or on the
prohibition of the sale, why, then, is it unlawful for them to return
to agreement with the rest of the ummah? How can it be
impossible that what became evident to them has not become
evident to the ummah? Indeed, your opinion leads to this
impossibility if you follow the first approach?

We shall say: There is no controversy in the first approach
other than this. And the way to settle it is to say that withdrawing
is not forbidden for them when a reason for it becomes evident to
them. But we say that it is impossible for a reason to appear to
them or for them to dissent, not because it is impossible per se, but
because it leads to what is prohibited by revealed authority. Now
something can become impossible per se or because of something
else, such as the agreement of the Successors on voiding qiyds and
solitary report. For this is impossible not per se but because it
leads to accusing the Companions of error, or faulting all of the
Successors. And this is impossible on the basis of revealed

authority. And Allah knows best.

V. DISCUSSION: If someone says: If the Companions
agreed upon a rule, but one of them remembers a hadith
contradicting it and transmits it, then if they resort to it, the first
ijma‘ would be false—where their persistence in opposing the
report is impossible, particularly on the part of the one who
remembers it certainly. Now, if he retracts, he would be dissenting
from the ijmd‘. But if he does not retract, he would be opposing the

report. Now, there is no escape from this except through
735

acknowledging the passing of the generation. This should be given
consderation.

We shall say: There are two ways out of this. One of them is
that this is an impossible supposition, for Allah protects the ummah
from a consensus which contradicts a hadith or He protects /1:212/
the transmitter from forgetfulness until ijma@‘ has been completed.

The second is that we should examine the people of ijma‘. If
they are insistent, then it is sure that it [the ijmd‘] is correct; and, as
for the hadith, either the transmitter has made a mistake
concerning it, such that he heard it from someone other than the
Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ syie a Ge, but thought that he heard it from
the Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ suie an Sum, OF it was subject to abrogation
but the narrator did not hear it while the people of ijmd‘ knew it.
But if this is not clear to us, [and] then if the narrator retracts, he is
in error because he is opposing the ijmd‘ while it is a decisive, valid
proof.

But if the people of ijmd‘ return to the hadith, we shall say
that what they agreed upon was correct at that time because Allah
has not obligated them [by the report], so long as it did not reach
them, just as an abrogated rule is valid before the arrival of the
abrogation, or as if an ijtihdd [postion] changes. Or, it could be that

each one of the two opinions was correct according to the view of

those who hold the opinion of every mujtahid as correct .

If it is said: If this is permissible, then why is it not /1:213/
permissible to say that if the entire community agreed on the basis

of ijtihdd, it would be permissible for those after them to disagree
736

[with their ijmda‘]? Indeed, it is permissible for them to revoke
[that ijmd‘] because what they have opined is correct so long as that
ijtihad is valid. But if it changes, then the supposition changes as
well. All [of this} is correct, particularly when they disagree based
on ijtihadd and then return to one opinion. Should you not say that
this is permissible in order to express their opinion as long as it
preponderates in their thinking? For they used to permit those
who denied ‘awl and the sale of a female slave who has born her
master’s child. But when their minds change their obligation
changes. Thus, what has been allowed for them becomes
prohibited. But this does not constitute the removal of ijma',
Rather, it is permission to have recourse to an Opinion on the
condition that it preponderates in one’s mind. But if one’s mind
changes, it no longer remains permissible (also, this becomes a
sixth solution for the discussion prior to this issue).

We shall say: [As for} what they agreed upon by way of
ijtihad, it is not permissible to dispute it thereafter, not only
because it is true, but because it is the truth upon which the
ummah has concurred. /1:214/ Certainly, the ummah has agreed
that whatever the ummah assents to is prohibited to contravene,
unlike correct [positions] held by individuals.

As for when they differ on the basis of ijtihad, they have
agreed on the permissibility of the second opinion. Thus the
permission to have recourse to it becomes a matter of agreement.
But it is not permissible to stipulate the condition of the
continuation of ijtihdd, as if they agreed on one statement on the

basis of ijtihdd. Now in this, it cannot be Stipulated that ijtihdd will
737

not change. Rather, contravention is made unlawful absolutely

without any condition. So it is with this [case].

If it is said: What if that report becomes known to the
Successors in contradistinction to what the Companions have
agreed upon, and the person narrating it to them was present at
the ijmd‘ of the people of influence, but the narrator was not from
among them?

We shall say: It is prohibited for the Successors to agree with
him, and it is incumbent for him to follow the decisive ijma‘
because a solitary report is liable to /1:215/ abrogation or [is liable]

to be forgotten, while ijmd‘ is not liable to this.

VI. DISCUSSION: Ijmd‘ cannot be established by a solitary
report, contrary to what some of the fugahd’ hold. The underlying
reason for this is that ijmd‘ is a decisive proof by which judgement
is made [in interpreting] the Book of Allah and the mutaw4tir
Sunna, while a solitary report is not decisive. So how can a decisive
proof be based on it when it is not rationally impossible to fulfill
religious obligations on its basis, provided it occurs {in religion], just
as we have mentioned concerning the abrogation of the Qur’an by a

solitary report, although it has not taken place?

If it is said: So let the obligatoriness of acting on its basis be
established if acting in accordance with it is not in Opposition to the
Book nor the mutawdtir Sunna, since Ijma" is like a text with regard

to the obligatoriness of action; and acting on the basis of what a
738

reporter transmits of the text is incumbent, even if it is not held as
decisive due to the rectitude of the text. And so it is in the case of
ima‘.

We shall say: Acting on the basis of solitary reports has been
established only on the precedence of the Companions and their
ijma‘ upon it, concerning that which has been reported from the
Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكر‎ yie «nt ‏صق‎ . /1:216/

As for what has been reported from the ummah by way of
agreement or ijma', no report or ijmd' has been established by
[text]. But if we were to establish it, this would be on the basis of
giyas. Yet the rectitude of giyds has not been established for us
concerning the establishment of the fundamental principles of the
Shari'a. This is the most likely [position]. But we do not decisively
hold as false the view of one who adheres to it, particularly with

regard to acting [based on it]. And Allah knows best.

VII. DISCUSSION: To adopt the least common factor of
what has been held is not the same as adhering to Jjmd‘, contrary
to what some of the fuqahd’ hold. An example of this is that people
disagree concerning the blood money of a Jew. Thus, it has been
said that it is the same as the blood money of a Muslim. It has also
been said that it is half. Again, it is has been said that it is a third.
So, al-Shafi‘i adopted [the view] of one-third, which was the least.
Thus, speculators presumed that he (al-Shafi'i) adhered to this on
the basis of ijmd‘. But this is thinking ill of al-Shafi‘i, ‏يجمه" اله‎
because what is agreed upon is that this amount is obligatory. So

there is no dispute concerning this.
739

But what is subject to dispute concerns the waiving of what is
greater [than one-third]. Furthermore, there is no ijma@‘ on this. On
the contrary, if the ijmd‘ on the obligatoriness of one-third were to
be regarded as ijmd‘ on the waiving of the excess, then the person
who obligates the greater would be violating the ijma‘. Moreover,
his opinion would be decisively false.

But al-Shafi‘i regarded as obligatory that which was agreed
upon. He then investigated the approaches of the proofs. But no
proof was correct to him which obligated greater [than one-third].
So, he returned to istishab, a stage in bard'at al-asliya [the original
State of non-obligation], which has reason as its proof. Therefore,
~al-Shafi‘i adhered to istighdb and rational proof—the meaning of
which will come later, Allah, gtx, willing—not the proof of Ijma‘,

This is the completion of the discourse concerning ‏لفسا‎

which is the Third Principle.
THE FOURTH PRINCIPLE

RATIONAL PROOF AND ISTISHAB

Know that the revealed rules are not ascertainable through
reason. But reason establishes one’s exoneration from /1:218/
obligation, and the omission of restriction from man in all his
doings prior to the raising of the messengers, ‏السلآار‎ ,auie, who are
supported with miracles.

The nonexistence of rules before the arrival of revealed
authority is known through rational proof. We assume this [state]
until the revelation arrives. Thus, when a prophet comes and
obliges five prayers, a sixth prayer remains unobliged—not because
the prophet has declared its negation, but because its obligatoriness
has been [already] negated since nothing has established its
mandatoriness. Accordingly, it remains in its original state of
negation because his [the prophet’s] pronouncement of obligation is
restricted to the five [prayers]. So, negation continues with respect
to the [obligation of the) sixth [prayer], as though revealed
authority never came.

Similarly, when he makes the fasting of Ramadén obligatory,
the fasting of the month of Shaww4l remains in the original state of
negation. If he obliges an act of worship at a [specific] time, then

after the passage of that time one remains in the original state of

740
741

freedom. Also, when he lays an obligation on an able person,
/1:219/ a disabled person remains as he was [i.e., unobliged].
Therefore, an examination of the [Shari ‘a) rules concerns
either their establishment or negation. As for their establishment,
reason is incapable of demonstrating them. Regarding their
negation, however, reason has [already] indicated them, until a
revealed proof comes with an expression changing them from their
original state of negation. Therefore, [reason] stands as a proof for

one of the two aspects, namely negation.

If it is said: If reason is a proof [but] on the condition that
revealed authority does not come, then after the raising of the
messengers and the establishment of the Shari‘a the negation of the
revealed proof cannot be certain. Therefore, the negation of rules
cannot be certain. So the ultimate point of your [argument] is the
lack of knowledge of the arrival of revealed authority, while not
knowing cannot be a valid proof.

We shall say: The nonexistence of revealed proof is either
known certainly or conjectured, for we know certainly that there is
no proof for the obligatoriness of fasting Shawwéal, nor for the
obligatoriness of a sixth prayer, since we know that if they existed,
they would have been transmitted and promulgated, and they
would not have been hidden from the entire ummah. This is
knowing the lack of proof, /1:220/ not lacking knowledge of the
proof, since a lack of knowledge of proof is not a valid argument.
But knowledge of the nonexistence of proof is valid.

As for conjecture, when a mujtahid investigates the avenues
742

of proof concerning the obligatoriness of witr [prayer], sacrifice,
and their likes, and finds them weak and proof does not become
evident to him—in spite of his thorough investigation and
preoccupation with research—then the lack of proof preponderates
in his mind. Therefore, he gives this the same status as certain
knowledge with respect to action because it is conjecture based
upon investigation and ijtihad—which is the extent of a mujtahid’ s

obligation.

If it is said: Why is it impossible for it [witr, for example] to
be obligatory while there is no proof for it or that its proof has not
yet reached us?

We shall say: ‘As for making obligatory that which it has no
proof, it is impossible because it is the laying of an unbearable
obligation. It is for this reason that we negated all rules before the
arrival of revealed authority.

As for that whose proof has not reached us, this is not valid
proof in our view, since there is no obligation upon us except for

that which has been conveyed to us.

If it is said: /1:221/ Then every common person will be able
to deny [obligation] arguing that proof had not reached him.

We shall say: This is possible only for an investigating
mujtahid, who studies the approaches of proof and is capable of
thorough examination, as [for example) one is able to move about in
his house seeking a piece of furniture; when he searches for it

exhaustively, it is possible for him to decisively [conclude] the
743

negation of the furniture’s [existence]. Or he may claim that his
impressions fof its nonexistence] are overwhelming. As for a blind .
person who does not know the house and cannot see what is in it, it
is not for him to claim that the furniture does not exist in the

house.

If it is said: Does istishaéb have any meaning other than what
you have mentioned?

We shall say: Istishab is used in four ways. Three of them
are correct:

The first is what we have mentioned.

The second [usage] is the continuation of an unspecified
[case] until [the Shari‘a} specification arrives, or the continuation of
a [Shari‘a] text until an abrogation arrives.

As for the unspecified [case], this is a valid proof for those
who acknowledge it. As for the text, this is proof for the
continuation of a rule on the condition that no abrogation arrives,
11:222/ just as reason has indicated that the original state of
freedom [continues] on the condition that a revelation changing it
does not come.

The third [usage] is affirmation {istishab) of a rule which the
Shari'a indicates both its establishment and its continuation, such
as possession when the contract of ownership is in effect, or the
liability of one [under obligation] when damage or liability occurs.
For this—although not an original rule—is a Shari‘a rule for which
the Shari'a demonstrates both its establishment and continuation.

Were it not for the evidence of the Shari'a concerning its
744

continuation until freedom from responsibility occurs, istishab
would not be permissible. Therefore, it is not a valid proof except
for that which a [Shari‘a] proof has indicated its establishment and
continuation—on the condition that there is nothing to change it—as
reason indicates its original state of freedom; revelation, [its]
liability; or the Shari ‘a, [its] ownership.

Also from among this sort is the Principle requiring the
renewal of necessity and obligatoriness [of acts] when their causes
recur—like the recurrence of the month of Ramadan, the recurrence
of the times of prayers, and supporting near relatives when their
needs /1:223/ recur.

[This is so] provided that the appearance of these Signs is
understood as a cause based on Shari‘a proof for these rules, either
by the general implications {of the Shari‘a address}, which is in
accordance to those who acknowledge it, or on the basis of {both]
their general implications and a number of circumstantial
evidences, according to all. These circumstantial evidences are
restatements, corroborations, and signs for the bearers of the
Shari‘a who know that the intent of the Lawgiver is to raise them
as causes, provided that they are not prevented by obstacles.

So, were it not for the proof acknowledging them as causes,
(applying) istishab [on them] would not be permissible. Therefore,
istishab is an expression of adhering to a rational or Shari‘a proof.
It is not attributed to the lack of knowledge of proof. Rather, it is
[adhering to] a proof with the knowledge of the absence of its
modifier or with the assumption, upon the exertion of effort in

research and investigation, that the modifier does not exist.
745

The fourth is istishadbu' l-ijma‘ (applying the the rule of
ijm@‘] on points of dispute. But this is not correct. So we shall

compose two discussions, [one] for this and {one for] a denier’s need

for proof.

I. DISCUSSION: /1:224/ There is no validity for istishabu’ I-
ijma@* when there is a difference of opinion, contrary to [the views
of] some of the fugahd’. An example of this is when a
mutayyammim,| sees water during [his] prayer. [It is said that] he
should continue his prayer because consensus is constituted on the
rectitude of his prayer and its continuance. Therefore, the
coincidental occurrence of the existence of water is just like the
occurrence of the blowing of the winds, the coming of the dawn,
and other events. Therefore, istishab will be applied concerning
the continuation of prayer until a proof establishes that seeing the
water definitely breaks the prayer.

But this is corrupt because he who applies istishab is either
admitting that he did not establish a proof for the issue saying, “I
am denying [this], and proof is not required for a denier,” or
thinking that he has furnished proof. So if he admits to not
furnishing a proof, we shall explain the necessity for furnishing a

proof on the part of a denier. But if he thinks he has furnished a

1A person who performs tayammum, which is a substitute, in
the absence of water or in special circumstances, for ritual ablution
before prayer. For details see The Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam,

1953 ed., s.v. “Tayammum”; and Zahili, al-Figh al-Islami wa
Adillatuhu, 1:406.

746

proof, he has erred, and we say that only a rule for which a proof
has established its continuance can remain [standing]. /1:225/

So the proof for the continuance of the prayer in this case is
either the statement of the Lawgiver or Jjma‘. But if it is a
Statement, it is necessary to have an explication for this statement.
For it may indicate its [the prayer’s] continuance in the absence [of
water], but not in [its] presence. So if it indicates by its generic
case [‘umim] its continuance in both the absence and presence [of
water], this would be adherence to the generic case, according to
those who acknowledge it. Therefore, it is necessary to present the
proof for [its] specification.

But if this is based on ‏“فقسلا ,“قزل‎ is constituted on the
continuance of prayer in the case of the absence {of water]. In the
case of its presence, this is subject to dispute—and there is no ijmd'‘
with dispute.

If the ijma‘ were to include the state of the presence [of
water], then the dissenter would be violating the ijmd‘, just as one
who disputes the termination of prayer upon the blowing of the
winds or the rising of the dawn is violating the ijmd‘. For the
constitution of the ijmd‘ is not stipulated by the absence of the
winds, but is constituted on the condition of the absence of water.
So, if it is found, there is no ijmd'. 11:226/

Therefore, it is necessary to draw analogy on the basis of a
common denominator between the case of presence [of water] and
the case of [its] absence, the latter being subject to ijmd‘. But
applying istishabu'l-ijma‘ when ijmd‘ does not exist is absurd.

This is similar to rational proof corroborating the original
747

State of freedom, provided that revealed proof does not furnish
evidence. Therefore, there remains for it no proof by the existence
of revealed proof. But here ijmd‘ is constituted on the condition of
the absence [of water], while ijmd‘ is lacking concerning [its]
presence.

Now this is subtle. That is, [regarding] every proof opposing
disagreement itself, its istishéb cannot be upheld simultaneously
with dispute because ijmd‘ is contradicted by differing per se, since
there is no ijma‘ with dispute—in contradistinction to the generic
{import of a statement], the Text, and the rational proof. For
difference of opinion does not oppose them, and the opponent
acknowledges that the generic [import of a statement] includes, by
its linguistic mode, the locus of disagreement.

For his statement, ‏وسكم‎ sete wt Sua, “There is no fast for him who
did not intend to fast from /1:227/ night,” includes, in its linguistic
mode, the fast of Ramadan, despite the disagreement of the
opponent. For he says, “I concede the inclusion of the linguistic
mode; however, I specify it with a proof.” He must, then, furnish
the proof. But here the opponent does not concede ijmd‘s inclusion
of the locus of disagreement, since ijmd‘ is impossible together with
disagreement, while it is not impossible that the generic linguistic

mode come together with the proof. Therefore, attention must be

paid to this subtlety.

If it is said: Ijmda‘ forbids dispute. So how can it be removed

by dispute?

We shall say: This difference of opinion is not prohibited by
748

ijm@‘, and the reason the dissenter is not breeching ijmd‘ is that
ijma@* is constituted only in the case of the absence [of water], not in
the case of [its] presence. So one who conjoins the presence with

the absence, he must furnish a proof.

If it is said: /1:228/ The proof indicating the rectitude of the
commencement [of prayer] is, then, indicative of its continuation,
until a proof arises for its termination.

We shall say: Let this proof be examined. Is it generic or a
clear Text that includes the case of the presence [of water] or not?
But then if it is ijmd‘, the ijma@‘ is conditional on the absence [of

water]. Therefore, it is not a proof for the {case of] presence.

If it is said: On what basis do you object to one who says,
“The basic rule is that all that has been established continues until
the presence of a terminator.” Therefore, continuation does not in
itself require proof. Rather, establishment is what is in need of
proof, just as when the death of Zayd is established, or the building
of a house, or a town. Their continuance is inherent, not based on
{another] cause.

We shall say: This is baseless conjecture because it is
possible for all that has been established to continue or not
continue. /1:229/ Therefore, its continuation requires a cause and a
proof besides the proof of its establishment. If it is not of the
natural proof—that is a person who dies does not revive, and a
house when it is built does not collapse until it is destroyed or a

long time passes—we will not known its continuation by its mere
749

establishment, just as if it is reported about the Amir's sitting,
eating, or his entry into the house, while there is no natural proof
for the continuation of these conditions. For we cannot at all
determine the continuation of these conditions. Similarly, the
Shari‘a report on the continuation of prayer in the absence of water
is not a report on its continuation with the presence of (water).

Therefore, its continuation needs another proof.

If it is said: One is not commanded with the commencement
(of prayer) only, but rather, with its beginning and completion.

We shall say: Certainly, he is commanded to start /1:230/ and
complete in the absence [of water]. However, with the presence fof
water], this is the locus of disagreement. Therefore, what is the
proof that one is commanded, in the case of its presence, to

complete [the prayer]?

If it is said: This is a result of him being prohibited from
nullifying an act [i.e., the prayer], and using the water [requires]
voiding the act.

We shall say: This position is shifting to where we have led
you and is admitting to the need of proof. However, this proof,
though it is weak; exposing its weakness is not the task of an usiili.
Yet, it is weak, because if you mean that void is to nullify its
reward, then we do not concede that one is not rewarded for its
doing. However, if you mean that He obliged him with something
like it, the [action’s] rectitude does not mean that doing its like is

not obligatory, based on what we established previously.
750

If it is said: The basic rule is /1:231/ that something cannot
be obliged on the basis of doubt, and the obligation of
recommencing the prayer is doubtful. Therefore, certainty cannot
be removed based on it.

We shall say: This is contradicted by [the fact] that the
obligatory continuation of this prayer is doubtful. And the
discharge of responsibility by this prayer, when water is found, is
also doubtful. Thus, certainty cannot be removed by it. Further,
we say that those who oblige renewal require it with a proof that
preponderates in the mind, just as the original state of freedom is
removed with a preponderating conjectural proof.
| And why should it not be so! when certainty can be
eliminated by doubt in some situations. Hence, the questions
regarding this are conflicting, for example, when a corpse is
confused with a duly slaughtered animal: or a foster Sister is
confused with an unrelated woman; or pure water is confused with

impure water; or one forgets one of the five prayers. /1:232/

They argue that Allah, ‏رمعي‎ consented to the nonbelievers’
demand for proof from the messengers when He said: “You desire
to bar us from what our fathers worshipped? Then bring us a
manifest authority.”2 Hence, people have occupied themselves

with proofs that change istishdab.

We shall say: This is because they did not maintain the

2Qur’an, 14:10.

751

istishab of ijma‘, but rather, they maintained the original state of
negation, which has been established by reason, since the basic rule
concerning human nature is that one is not [naturally] a prophet.
This can be known only through miracles and signs. Therefore,
they are correct in requesting proof, but wrong in their stand upon
the religion of there forefathers simply on the basis of ignorance

without any proof.

11. DISCUSSION: They have differed with regard to the
disclaimer. Must he bring a proof?

Some people have said that he is not required to bring proof.
Others say that proof is necessary. A third group distinguishes
between rational and Shari‘a matters. Thus they require the proof
of rational matters to the exclusion of those of the Shari'a.

But the appropriate position is that what is not necessary
cannot be known except through proof, and negation in its regard is
just like affirmation.

To be more precise therein, it should be said to the denier,
“Regarding that which you have claimed negation, have you known
certainly its negation, or are you doubtful about it?”

If he admits doubt, then one cannot demand proof from the
doubtful because he admits his ignorance and lack of knowledge.
But if he says, “I am certain about the negation,” it should be said,
“(About) this certainty of yours, did it accrue from necessary
evidence or from a proof?”

But [claim to] necessary knowledge of negation is discounted.

For we know that we are not in a whirl of sea water, nor sitting on
752

the wing of an Eagle; and that the river Nile is not before us!

/1:234/ The knowledge of negation is not counted as necessary. So
if one does not know it necessarily, then one knows it only on blind
faith, or on the basis of conjecture.

Now, blind faith does not impart knowledge, for error is
possible for a blind follower. Moreover, a blind follower, by
definition, admits his own blindness, and he claims insight only
from others. But if it [his negation] is from conjecture, then he
must demonstrate it, and this is the basis for proof. Upon
relinquishing the proof on the part of the denier, two heinous
difficulties that necessarily follow are corroborated.

The first is that the proof of the denier of the temporal
origination of the world, the existence of the Maker, prophethood,
the prohibition of adultery, alcohol, eating carrion, and the
prohibited degree of marriage will not be necessary—and this is
absurd.

The second is that if the proof is removed from these
[people], a person affirming could express the intent of his
affirmation through negation; for he can say, instead of /1:235/

‘muhdath’ [an originated object],’ non-eternal; and instead of saying

able, not unable, and so forth.

Now they have two doubts regarding this issue.

One doubt is that they say the [burden of] proof is not on

the defendant debtor because he denies [the claim].
The answer is [based] on four grounds.

First, this is not because he is a denier. Nor is it because
753

reason indicates the removal of proof from the denier. Rather, this
is based on the Shari‘a proof, due to his statement, ‏وسكم‎ sate ‏الك‎ Go,
“The (burden) of evidence is upon the plaintiff, and the oath is upon
the denier.”> Nor is it possible to draw analogy from another case
on its basis, for the Shari‘a has called for it only because of
necessity, since there is no way to establish a proof on denial. For
this can be known only if a number constituting tawdtur 11:236/
would follow this man from the very first moment of his existence
until the time of the claim. Thus, the negation of the reason of
necessity may be known by a statement or by way of action
through constant observance of (him).

So how can he be charged with establishing a proof on
something upon which it is impossible to establish a proof. In fact,
even the plaintiff is not required to show proof because the
Statement of two witnesses does not achieve sure knowledge.
Rather, it [achieves] an assumption of the effect of the necessitating
cause. This is in regard to what occurred in the past.

As for the present, the witness does not know the liability of
a person, for his exoneration is possible through payment or
remission of the debt. Furthermore, there is no way for people to
know the liability of a person or his exoneration except by a
statement of Allah, gixs, and the saying of the infallible Messenger.

It ought not be assumed that a proof is required from the

3For the authenticity of the hadith and its wordings, see al-
‘Ajlini, Kashf al-Khafa’, 1:342-343; also, Zayla‘i, Nasb al-Rayyah li
Aliddith al-Hiddya, 4:95-99

754

plaintiff, as well, for even the statement of the witness becomes
proof only on the basis of Shari‘a ruling. So if this is possible, then
the oath of the defendant is likewise necessary. Thus let this be
proof.

The second answer is that the defendant claims that he
necessarily knows /1:237/ his own innocence, since he is certain
that he neither caused harmed nor assumed [liability]. Yet all other
people are incapable of knowing this, for no one knows it except
Allah, giz. Therefore, in the sphere of rational matters, it is
impossible for a denier to necessarily claim the knowledge of
negation.

But if he states that he alone knows it in such a way that it is
not possible for anyone other than Allah to share it with him, then,
in that case, he should not be asked for proof, just as when he tells
about himself of not being hungry or not being afraid, and so on.

In this case, affirmation and negation equiponderate. For should he
claim the existence of hunger or fear, then he must self-evidently
know them, and it is difficult for others to know them.

Furthermore, negation and affirmation are common to rational

matters, and negation and affirmation equiponderate with respect

to perceptibles, as well.

The third [answer] is that the denier is obliged to show
proof, namely an oath, before the court, just as the plaintiff must
bring proof, /1:238/ namely evidence.

But this is weak, since the oath may be false. So what is its

evidence with respect to reason if it were not for the consideration
755

of Shari‘a? Indeed, it is like evidence, for the statement of the two
witnesses may also be wrong and false, and utilizing it from this
point of view is correct, as mentioned before.

Or it may be said: Just as the negator in the seat of
judgement is obliged to support his side in addition to his claim of

denial, let it then be mandatory regarding the ahkdm. This too has

validity.

The fourth [answer] is that possession on the part of the
defendant is proof for negating the ownership of the plaintiff. But
this is weak because possession annuls in the Shari‘a the claim of
the plaintiff, otherwise possession can come about by usurpation or

loan. So what evidence does it have?

The second doubt is how could proof be required for
denial, while it is impossible, as is raising a proof against one’s
freedom from obligation.

We shall say: 15 impossibility is not conceded to, for the
dispute /1:239/ either concerns matters of reason or Shari‘a.

As for matters of reason, it is possible to prove their negation
on the grounds that their affirmation leads to absurdity, and that
which leads to absurdity is itself absurd. For Allah, ‏,ردعاي‎ has said:
“If there were gods in the heavens and the Earth other than Allah,
they would surely go to ruin.”4 But it is known that they [the

heavens and the Earth] are not ruined. Thus, this proves the

4Qur’an, 21:22,

756

negation of a second [god].

It is also possible to establish this negation by a conditional
syllogism, which we have called in our introduction ‘the way of
{mutual] entailment.’ For all affirmation has necessary
consequences. Thus, the negation of the consequent is proof for the
negation of the antecedent. Similarly, a challenger is not a prophet;
for were he a prophet, he would Possess a miracle, since obliging

the absurd is absurd. So this is one approach which is correct.

The second approach is that it is said to one who affirms, “If
what you have claimed is established, it should be known either
necessarily or through a proof—and there is no necessary
[knowledge] with disagreement; nor is there proof. So, this
indicates negation.”

But this is corrupt, for it can be turned against the denier. It
would be said to him, “If the rule is negated, /1:240/ its negation
would be known necessarily or by a proof. But there is no
necessity, nor is there a proof.”

Nor is it possible for him to adhere to istishdb by saying, for
example, that the original [premise] is the nonexistence of a second
god, for whoever claims this must show proof, since it is not
conceded to him that the original premise is nonexistence, in
contradistinction to the case of original freedom. For reason proves
the nonexistence of rule prior to revelation, in view of its proof that
ruling is laying of obligation.

But the Address is from Allah, dtza, while obligating the

absurd is absurd. However, it He were to charge us with obligation
757

without a messenger confirmed by a miracle, who conveys to us His
commandments, this would be the laying of an absurd obligation.
Therefore, the original state of freedom is based on rational proof,

contrary to the nonexistence of the second god.

As for their statement that were a second god to be proven,
then proof would be incumbent upon Allah, d'zs, this is arbitrary
from two aspects:

One of them is that it is possible that Allah, gtzs, may not
raise proof for certain things, and takes exclusive possession
/1:241/ of its knowledge.

The second is that it is possible that Allah has raised proof
for [these things} but we are not aware of it.; But some of the
privileged and prophets perceive it, or a person who has been
privileged with a sixth sense and a different sensibility. Indeed,
what can be conclusively stated is that the prophets comprehend
matters that we do not comprehend.

Furthermore, within the possibilities of Allah are matters that
are not within human power to know. Also, it is possible that Allah
has attributes that cannot be comprehended by these senses, nor
by this mind, but rather through a sixth sense or a seventh.
Indeed, it is not at all impossible that the words ‘yad ’ and ‘wajh’
{in the Qur’an] express attributes that we do not understand, and
for which there is no proof.

Moreover, even if revelation had not arrived, their negation
would be wrong. Therefore, perhaps there are attributes of this

sort that revelation has not expressedly shown. Nor do we have
758

the power to comprehend them. Indeed, if He had not created
hearing for us we would have denied sounds, and we would not
have understood them. And if He did not create for us a taste for
poetry, we would have denied the distinction [drawn] by a master
of metrics between metered and unmetered [poetry]. So how can
we know if there is in the power /1:242/ of Allah, gtx, kinds of
sensibilities that had he created for us we would comprehend
through them other affairs that we now deny. Therefore, this
rejection is based on ignorance, shooting in the dark.

As for Shari'a matters, the proofs for them have come to pass
on the basis of ijma‘, as in negating the obligation of fasting in
Shawwal and the late morning prayer; or by evident Text, as in his
Statement, ‏ه عَنَيه وسكر‎ Gm, “There is no zakdt on jewelry, and there is no
zakat on a stall-fed animal”; or by qiyds, as in drawing analogy
from vegetables to pomegranate, or a watermelon specified as
exempt from zakdt, like the statement of a reporter, “There is no
zakat on pomegranate and watermelon”; rather, they are free; the
Messenger of Allah, ‏وسكم‎ sui wt “um, exempted them.

But sometimes this kind of proof is useless. Therefore, we
must search for avenues of affirmation. When we do not find
[affirmation], we have recourse to istishdb for the original [state of]
negation, established by the proof of reason, which is a [valid] proof
in the absence of the arrival of revelation.

Moreover, wherever we have cited in our writings on khildf
that proof is not incumbent on a denier, we meant thereby that
there was no revealed proof for it because the istishab 11:243/ of

original freedom is sufficient for it, by which we would have [been
759

compelled] to judge, but for the raising up of the Messenger and

the arrival of revelation.

If it is said: Rational preof is conditional upon the absence of
revelation, and the absence of revelation is unknown and the lack
of its knowledge does not prove its nonexistence. Furthermore,
there is no way to claim sure knowledge of its negation, for this
cannot be known.

We shall say: We have already clarified that sometimes its
negation can be known, like the negation of the obligatoriness of
fasting Shawwdl and [praying] the late morning prayer. But at
times, it is assumed that some of those capable of research should
investigate the Shari‘a channels; and conjecture therein is like
[certain] knowledge, for it emanates from ijtihdd, since the
[mujtahid] may say, “If this were there, I would have found it. But
since I have not found it, despite my thorough search, this proves
that it does not exist,” just as the furniture seeker in the house

after he has investigated [thoroughly].

If it is said: Is it not the case that penetrating inquiry has a
defined end? In fact, for investigation there is a beginning, a
middie, and an end. So when is it lawful for him to negate the
proof from revelation changing [the original state of freedom]?
11:244/

We shall say: Whenever he recommences, he reflects to
himself, then he knows that he has exhausted his full effort in

١ investigation, like the searcher for furniture in the house.
760

If it is said: The house is circumscribed and the seeking of
certainty in it is possible; but the avenues of Sharf‘a are unlimited.
For although the Book is limited, reports are not, and a narrator of
a hadith may be unacknowledged.

We shall say: If this were the case in the beginning of Islam
before reports became widespread, then the duty of every
mujtahid would have been the full exertion of his judgement until
reports reached him. But if this were the case after the reports
were related and the sahih collections compiled, then whatever has
entered in them is limited, according to their authorities.
Moreover, they have now come to mujtahids, and they have cited

them in the issues of dispute.

In sum, the rational proof’s indication for the original
negation is conditional on the absence of a changing [proof], like the
implications of a general statement are conditional upon the
absence of a specifying [proof]. Furthermore, for each one, /1:245/
that is, the specifying and the changing [proof], at times its negation
can be known, and at times it is conjectured. Yet each one of them
is a valid proof in Shari‘a.

This is the completion of the discussion of the Fourth
Principle. Here also ends the discourse on the Second Qutb, which

includes the well-spring of principle sources, namely, the Book, the

Sunna, ljma‘, and ‘Aql.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

‘Abd al-Baqi, M. Fu’ad. al-Mu‘jam al-Mufahras li-al-Faz al-Qur’dn
al-Karim. Cairo, 1378 H.

‘Abd al-Jabbar al-Asadabadi, al-Qadi. Firaq wa Tabagét al-
Mu‘tazila. Edited by ‘A. Sami al-Nashshar and ‘Is4m ‘Ali.
Alexandria: Dar al-Matbu‘at al-Jami‘iyya, 1972.

. al-Mughni fi Abwdb al-Tawhid wa al-‘Adl. vol. 17: al-
Shar'‘iyyét. Edited by Amin al-Khili. 20 vols. Cairo: The
Egyptian Company for Authorship and Translation, 1962.

-Mutashabih al-Qur'dén, 2 vols. Edited by ‘Adnan M. Zarzar.
Cairo: Dar al-Turath, 1969.

Abi al-Baqa’ al-Husayni al-Kaffawi. Kulliyét. 4 vols. Damascus:
n.p., 1974,

Aba Dawid. Sunan. 4 vols. Cairo: Sa‘ada Press, 1935.

Abi Nu‘aym al-Isfahani. Hilyat al-Awliya’ wa 1040981 al-Asfiya’.
10 vols. Beirut: n.p., 1967-68.

Abi Sulayman, ‘Abd al-Wahhab Ibrahim. al-Fikr al-Usiili. Jedda:
Dar al-Shuriq, 1983.

>
ao
=

i Zahrah, Muhammad. Abii Hanifah: Hayatuhu wa

Asruhu—Athdruhu wa fighuhu, Cairo: Dar al-Fikr al-‘ Arabi,
n.d.

. Térikh al-Madhéhib al-Islamiyya. Cairo: Dar al-Fikr al-
‘Arabi, n.d.

_- Malik: Haydtuhu wa Asruhu—Arthéruhu wa Sighuhu,
Cairo: Dar al-Fikr al-‘Arabi, n.d.

761
762

Abi Zahrah, Muhammad. Usiil al-Figh. Cairo: Dar al-Fikr al-‘Arabi,
n.d.

al-Ahmadnagari, ‘Abd al-Nabi. Jami‘ al-‘Ulim fi Istilahdt al-Funiin
al-Mulaqqab bi Dustir al-‘Ulamé’. 4 vols. Beirut: n.p.,1975.

al-‘Ajlani, Isma‘il. Kashf al-Khafa wa Muzil al-'Ilbas ‘ammé
Ashtahara min al-Ahadith ‘alé al-Sinat al-Naés. 2 vols.
Beruit: Mu’assasat al-Risala, n.d.

al-Amidi, Sayf al-Din. al-Ihkam fi ‏افولا‎ al-Ahkadm. 4 vols. Beirut:
Dar al-Kutub al-‘IImiyya, 1980.

. Al-Ihkam fi ‏افدلا‎ al-Ahkém. 4 vols. Edited by Sayyid al-
Jumayli. Beirut: Dar al-Kitaéb al-‘Arabi, 1984. (Unless I
specify the edition mentioned in the previous entry, I rely
upon this one.)

al-Ansari, ‘Abd al-‘Ala Muhammad. Fawatih al-Rahamit bi Sharh
Musallam al-Thubit. (Printed with al-Mustasfa) 2 vols.
Baghdad: Maktabat al-Mathanna, 1970.

Arberry, A. J. Sufism: An Account of the Mystics of Islam. London:
Unwin Paperbacks, 1979.

_- The Koran Interpreted. 2 vols. New York: Macmillan
Publishing Co., Inc., 1974.

al-Asafahani, al-RAghib. Mu'‘jam Mufradét al-Faz al-Qur'’an. Edited
by Nadim Mar‘ashli. Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi, n.d.

al-Ash‘ari, Aba al-Hasan. Al-/bdnah ‘an Usiil al-Diydna. Edited by
F. H. Mahmiid. Cairo, 1977.

_ . Magq4lat al-Islamiyin wa Ikhtilaf al-Musallin. Edited by H.
Ritter. 2 vols. and index vol. Istanbul, 1929-33.
[Bibliotheca Islamica, 1).

. The Theology of al-Ash‘ari. The Arabic Texts of Ash‘ari’s
K. al-Luma and Risdlat Istihsén al-Khawd fi ‘Iim al-Kalam.
Edited and translated by Richard J. McCarthy. Beirut, 1953.
763

Asin Palacios, Miguel. La Espiritualidad de Algazel y su Sentido
Cristiano, Vol. 4: Crestomatia algazeliana. Madrid, 1941.

al-‘Asqalani, Ahmad b. Hajar. al-Durar al-Kadminah fi A'‘yian al-
Mi‘ah al-Thdminah. Hyderabad, 1348-50.

. Lisan al-Mizan. ‘vols. 2nd ed. Beruit: Mu’assasat al-
A‘lami li al-Matbu‘at, 1390/1971.

. Tabsir al-Muntabih bi Tahrir al-Mushtabth. Edited by ‘Ali
Muhammad al-Bajawi. Cairo: The Egyptian Organization for
Authorship and Translation, 1965.

. Tahdhib al-Tahdhib. Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, 1985.

A‘zami, Muhammad Mustafa. Dirdsdt fi al-Hadith al-Nabawi. 2vols.
Beruit: al-Maktab al-Islami, 1980.

Badawi, ‘Abd al-Rahman. Mu’ allafat al-Ghazéli [Les Oeuvres D’al-
Ghazaéli]. 2nd ed. Kuwait: Wakalat al-Matbu‘at, 1977.

. Aristu ‘inda al-‘Arab. 2nd ed. Kuwait: Wakala al-
Matbu ‘at, n.d.

Badran, Badran Abi al-‘Aynayn. ‏اشعلا‎ al-Figh al-Islami. Mu’ assasat
Shabab al-Jami‘a, 1984.

al-Baghdadi, al-Khatib. Kitab al-Fagth wa al-Mutafaqqih. 2 vols.
2nd ed. Edited by IsmA‘il al-Ansari. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub
al-‘Iimiyya, 1980.

__ .al-Kifaya fi al-Riwdya. Edited by ‘Abd al-Halim M. ‘Abd
al-Halim and ‘Abd al-Rahman Mahmid. Cairo: Dar al-Kutub
al-Haditha, 1972.

_- TGrikh Baghdad. 14 vols. Madina: al-Maktabat al-Salafi,
n.d.

al-Baghdadi, Sayf al-Din ‘Abd al-Mu'min b. ‘Abd al-Haqq. Mardsid
al-Atla'. 3 vols. Edited by ‘Ali al-Bijawi. Beirut: Dar al-
Ma‘rifa, 1954.
764

al-Baghdadi, Abi Mansir ‘Abd al-Qahir b. Tahir al-Tamimi. Kitab
Usil al-Din. Beruit: Dar al-’Afaq al-Jadida, 1401/1981.

. al-Farq bayna al-Firag. Edited by M. Badr. Cairo,
1328/1910.

al-Baji, Aba al-Walid. Kitab al-Hudiid ft al-Usiil. Edited by Nazih
Hammad. Beirut: Mu’assasa al-Za‘bi, 1973.

_. al-Muntaga: Sharh Muwatta’ al-Imém Malik. 6 vols.
Cairo: Matba‘at al-Sa‘ada, 1332 A.H.; reprint ed., Beirut: Dar
al-Kitab al-‘Arabi, n.d.

al-Bani, Muhammad Sa‘id. ‘Umdét al-Tahqiq. Beirut: Maktab al-
Islami, 1981.

al-Baqillani, Aba Bakr M. Kitdb al-Tamhid. Edited by Richard J.
McCarthy. Beirut, 1957.

Basha, Isma‘il Muhammad. Hadiyat al-‘Arifin. 2nd ed. 2 vols.
Tehran: al-Maktaba al-Islamiyya, 1975.

_-/déh al-Makniin fi al-Dhayl 84 Kashf al-Zuniin. Tehran,
1967.

al-Basri, Aba al-Husayn. al-Mu'tamad fi Ugiél al-Figh. 2 vols.
Edited by Muhammad Hamidullah Hasan Hanafi. Damascus:
Institut Frangais de Damas, 1964-65.

al-Bayanini, Muhammad. Dirasdt fi al-Ikhtilafat al-Fighiyya.
Haleb: Maktaba al-Huda, n.d.

van den Bergh, Simon. ‘Ghazali on ‘Gratitude towards God’ and its
Greek Sources.” Studia Islamica 7 (1957): 77-98.

Bouyges, Maurice. Essai de Chronologie des Oeuvres de al-Ghazdli
(Algazel). Edited by Michel Allard. Beirut: Imprimerie
Catholique, 1959.

Brockellmann, Carl. Geschichte der Arabischen Litteratur, 2d ed. 2

vols. Leiden, 1943-49; and Supplement (to 1st ed.). 3 vols.
Leiden: E.J. Brill,1937-42. .
765

Brockellmann, Carl. Tdérikh al-Adab al-‘Arabi. 6 vols. Translated
by A. al-Najjar. Cairo: Dar al-Ma‘arif, 1977.

. History of the Islamic Peoples. Translated Joel Carmichael
and Moshe Perlmann. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1980.

al-Bugha, Mustafa Dib. Athdr al-Adillah al-Mukhtalaf fihé fi al-
Fiqh al-Islami. Dar al-Imam al-Bukhari, n.d.

al-Bukhari, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. Kashf al-Asrdr ‘ala Usul al-Pazdawi. (also

Bazdawi) 4 vols. Edited by Ahmad Ramiz. n.p.: Hasan Hilmi
al-Rayzawi, 1307 A.H.

al-Bukhari, M. b. Isma‘il. Sahfh. 12 vols. Edited by ‘Abd al-Aziz b.
Baz and M. Fu’ad ‘Abd al-Baqi. Cairo: Al-Maktaba al-
Salafiyya, n.d.

al-Bati, Muhammad Ramadan. Ddbit al-Maslaha fi al-Shari‘a al-
Islamiyya. Beirut: Mu’assisat al-Risala, n.d.

Corbin, Henry. “The Ismd‘ili Response to the Polemic of Ghazaili,” in:
S. H. Nasr (ed.), Ismda‘ilf Contributions to Islamic Culture
(Tehran, 1398/1977), pp. 69-98

Coulson, Noel J. A History of Islamic Law. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 1964.

al-Dabbisi, Abii Zayd ‘Ubayd-Allah. Ta’sis al-Nazar. Edited by
Zakariya ‘Ali Yasuf. Cairo: Imam’s Press, 1972.

5 _.١ Taqwim Usil al-Fiqgh wa Tahdid Adillat al-Shar‘Cairo, Dar —
al-Kutub MMS, 255.

Dimashqiya, ‘Abd al-Rahman. Abii Hamid al-Ghazéli wa al-
Tagawwuf. Riyad: Dar Tibah, 1986.

al-Dhahabi, Muhammad b. Ahmad. ai-‘/bar ft Khabar man Ghabar.
Edited by S. al-Munjid and F. al-Sayyid. 3 vols. Kuwait:
Da’ira al-Matbi‘at wa al-Nashr, 1961.

‎Kitab al-Mushtabih fi al-Rijél: Asma’ ihim wa Ansdbihim. 2‏ .ب
‎vols. Beruit, 1962.‏
766

al-Dhahabi, Muhammad b. Ahmad. Siyar A‘lam al-Nubald’. 23 vols.
Beirut: Mu’assasa al-Risala, 1982.

. Tadhkirat al-Huffaz. 4 vol. Dar ’Ihya’ al-Turath al-‘Arabi,
n.d.

al-Dhurawi, Ahmad Ibrahim. I/thbét al-‘Illa al-Shar'iya bi al-Adilla
al-Aqliya. Jeddah: Dar al-Shariq, 1982.

Diraz Muhammad ‘Abd Allah. Dustir al-Akhlaq fi al-Qur’dn. 4th ed.
Translated by ‘Abd al-Sabir Shahin. Beirut: Mu’assasat al-
Risala, 1982.

al-Dumayni, Misfar. Magayis Nagd Mutiin al-Sunna. Riyad:
Published by the author, 1984.

The Encyclopaedia of Islam. New Edition. Leiden, 1954—

The Encyclopaedia of Islam. 4 vols. and Supplement. Leiden,
1913-1938.

The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Reprint edition Edited by Paul
Edwards. 8 vols. New York: Macmillan Publishers Co., Inc.
& the Free Press, 1972.

van Ess Josef. “Neuere Literature zu Gazzali,” Oriens, 20 (1967):
209-308.

al-Farra’, Aba Ya‘la. al-‘Udda fi Usil al-Figh. Edited by Ahmad b.

‘Alf al-Mubaraki. 3 vols. Beirut: Mu’assasat al-Risala, 1980.

al-Fariqi, Harith Sulayman. Fédriqi’s Law Dictionary: English-
Arabic. 3d revised edition. Beirut: Librairie du Liban,
1980.

al-Fayrizabadi, Majd al-Din Muhammad b. Ya‘qib. Basd’ir Dhawi
al-Tamyiz fi Latd’if al-Kitab al-‘Aziz, 8 vols. Edited by
Muhammad ‘Ali al-Najar. Beirut: Maktaba al-‘IImiyya, n.d.

Gairdner, W. H. T. “Al-Ghazali’s Mishkdét al-Anwar and the Ghazali-
Problem.” Der Islam 5 (1914): 121-153.
767

Gairdner, W. H. T. Al-Ghazzéli’s Mishkat al-Anwar (“The Niche for
Lights”): A Translation with Introduction. London: Royal

Asiatic Society,1924; reprint ed., Lahore: Sh. Muhammad
Ashraf, 1952.

al-Ghazali, Abi Hamid Muhammad. Jawéhir al-Qur’dn. Edited by
Muhi al-Din Sabri al-Kurdi. Cairo: Kurdistan Press, 1911.

_- Mihakk al-Nazar fi al-Mantiq. Edited by Muhammad Badr
al-Din Al-Na‘sani. Beruit: Dar al-Nahda al-Haditha, 1966.

. al-Mankil min Ta‘liqat al-Usél. Edited by Muhammad H.
Haytu. Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, n.d.

. al-Ma‘drif al-‘Agliya. Ed. ‘Abd al-Karim al-‘Uthman.
Damascus: Dar al-Fikr, 1383/1963.

.al-Mungidh min al-Dalal, Edited by Jamil Saliba’s and
Kamil ‘Ayyad. n.p.: Dar al-Andulis, 1401/1981.

. al-Mustasfa min ‘Ilm al-Usfl. 2 vols. Bulag, Egypt:
Amiriyya Press, 1322-24/1905-7.

. al-Qistas al-Mustagim. Beirut: n.p., 1959.

. Shifa’ al-Ghalil fi Bayan al-Shabah wa al-Mukhil wa
Maséalik al-Ta‘lil. Edited by Hamd al-Kubaysi. Baghdad:
Mataba‘at al-Irshad, 1390/1971.

_- al-Wasit fi al-Madhhab. 2 vols. Edited by ‘Ali Muhi al-Din
al-Daghi. Cairo: Dar al-I‘tisam, 1983.

Goldziher, Ignaz. Muslim Studies. 2nd volume. Translated by C.R.

Barber and S.M. Stern and edited by S.M. Stern. Chicago:
Alden-Atherton, Inc, 1971.

. Introduction to Islamic Theology and Law. Translated by

Andras & Ruth Hamori. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1981.

_- The Zahirites: Their Doctrine end their History. Translated
by Wolfgang Behn. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1971.
768

von Grunebaum, Gustave E. “Concept and Function of Reason in
Islamic Ethics.” Oriens 15 (1962): 1-17.

al-Hakim, Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Nisabari. al-Mustadrak. 4
vols. Hyderabad: n.p., 1334 H. 1

Hallaq, Wael 8. “Was the Gate of Ijtihad Closed?” International
Journal of Middle East Studies. 16 (1984): 3-41.

_: “Considerations on the Function and Character of Sunni
Legal theory” Journal of the American Oriental Society 104
(1984): 679-689.

Hanafi, Hassan. Les méthodes d'’exégése. Le Caire: Le Conseil

Supérieur des Arts, des Lettres et des Sciences Sociales,
1385/1965.

Hanbal, Ahmad b. al-Musnad, Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami: 1969

Hasab Allah, ‘Ali. Usél al-Tashri‘ al-Islami. Cairo: Dar al-Ma‘arif,
1971.

Hasan, Ahmad. The Doctrine of Ijma‘ in Islam: A Study of the
Juridical Principle of Consensus. Islamabad: Islamic
Research Institute, 1978.

Hassan, Husayn Hamid. al-Hukm al-Shar‘t ‘inda al-Usiiliyyin. Cairo:
Dar al-Nahda al-‘Arabiyya,1972.

_- al-Madkhal li Dirdsat al-Figh al-Islami. Cairo: Dar al-
Nahda al-‘Arabiyya,1972.

ee -Usiil al-Figh. Cairo: Dar al-Nahda al-‘Arabiyya,1970.

al-Hijwi, Muhammad. al-Fikr al-Sami fi Tarikh al-figh al-Islami. 2

vols. Edited by A. al-Qari. Medina: Al-Maktaba al-‘Ilmiyya,
1977. 1

al-Himayri, ‘Abd al-Mun‘im. Kitab al-Rawd al-Mi‘tar fi Khabar al-
Aqtar. Edited by I ‘Abbas. Beirut: Library of Lebanon,
1975.
769

al-Himyari, Sa‘id ‘Ali Muhammad. Al-Hukm al-Wada'i ‘ind al-
Usiiliyin. Mecca: Al-Faysaliyya, 1404/1984.

Hitti, Philip. History of the Arabs. 10th edition. New York: St.
Martin Press, 1981.

Hitt, Muhammad Hasan. al-Wajiz fi Usiil al-Tashri‘ al-Islami.
Beirut: Mia’assasat al-Risala,1983.

Hourani, George F. Islamic Rationalism: The Ethics of ‘Abd al-
Jabbaér. London: Oxford University Press, 1971.

_- “A Chronology of Ghazali’s Writings.” Journal of the
American Oriental Society 79 (1959): 225-233

_. “A Revised Chronology of Ghazali’s Writings.” Journal of
the American Oriental Society 104 (1984): 289-302.
Huma’i, Jalal. Ghazzdli-ndmah. Sharh-i hal va asrér va ‘aqa’ id.
Tehran, 1342/1963.

Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, Yasuf b. ‘Abd Allah. Al-Jsti‘db fi Ma'rifat al-
Ashab. 4 vols. Beruit, n.d.

Ibn ‘Abd al-Salam, ‘Izz al-Din. Qawd‘id al-Ahkam fi Masédlih al-
Andm. 2 vols. Edited by Taha A. Sa‘ad. Beirut: Dar al-Jil,
1980.

Ibn Abi al-Wafa’ al-Qurashi, ‘Abd al-Qadir b. Muhammad. al-

Jawahir al-Mudiyya fi Labaqat al-Hanafiyya. 4 vols. Edited
by ‘Abd al-Fattéh al-Hilw Cairo: ‘Isa al-Babi al-Halabi,
1979-1985.

Ibn al-Amir al-Hajj. al-Tagrir wa al-Tahbir. 3 vols. Egypt: Amiri
Press, 1316-1318 H.

Ibn Athir, ‘Izz al-Din. al-Nihdya fi Gharib al-Hadith wa al-Athar. 5
vols. Edited by M. Tanahi. Riyad: Maktabat Islami, n.d.

2 _:4l-Kamil fi al-Tarikh. 10 vols. Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-
‘Arabi, 1980.
770

Ibn Athir, ‘Izz al-Din. al-Lubdb fi Tahdhib al-Ansaéb. 3 vols.
Beirut: Dar Sadir, 1980.

Ibn Badran, ‘Abd al-Qadir b. Ahmad. al-Madkhal ila Madhhab al-
Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal. 20 ed. Damascus: Dar Ihya’ al-
Turath al-‘Arabi, 1981.

. Nuzhat al-Khdatir al-‘Atir Shark, Ruwdat al-Na@zir wa Junnat
al-Mundzir. 3 vols. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, n.d.

Ibn. Hajar, al-Haytami. Majma‘ al-Zawdé’ id wa Manba al-Fawia’ id‘ ,
10 vols. Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi, n.d.

Ibn al-Hajib. Mukhtasar al-Muntaha with Hashiyat al-Taftazani.

Edited by Sha‘ban Isma‘il. Cairo: Maktabat al-Kulliyyat al-
Azhariyya, 1976.

Ibn Hazm, ‘Ali b. Ahmad. al-Fisal fi al-Milal wa al-Ahwé’ wa al-
Nihal. 5 vols. Edited by Muhammad Nasr and ‘Abd al-
Rahman ‘Umayra. Jeddah: ‘Uk4z, 1982.

_lhkam fi Usiil al-Ahkdm. 8 vols. (in two). Edited by
Ahmad Muhammad Shakir. Cairo: Maktabat al-
Khanji, 1926-1928.

. Maratib al-ljmad‘. (Published with Naqd Mardib al-ljma‘
by Ibn Taymiyya) 2nd ed. Beirut: Dar al-Afaq al-Jadida,
1980.

_+ Mulkhas Ibtdal al-Qiyds wa al-Ra’y wa al-Istihsan al-Taglid
wa al-Ta‘lil, Damascus: Jami‘a Damashq, 1379/1960.

Ibn al-Humam, Kaml al-Din Muhammad. Sharh Fath al-Qadir.
Beirut: Dar SAdir, n.d.

_.al-Tahrir fi Usil al-Figh al-Jami‘ bayn Istilahay all-

Hanafiyyah wa al-Shafi‘iyyah. Cairo: Mustafa al-Babi al-
Halabi wa Awladuhu, 1351 H.

Ibn al-‘Imad, ‘Abd al-Hayy. Shadhardt al-Dhahab fi Akhbar man
Dhahab. 8 vols. Beirut: Dar al-Masira, 1979.
771

Ibn Khaldin, ‘Abd al-Rahman. The Muqaddimah: An Introduction
to History. Trans. by Franz Rosenthal. 3 vols. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1967.

_- Kitab al-‘Ibar, Vol. 1. al-Muqaddima. Beirut: Dar al-Fikr,
1981.

Ibn Khallikan, Shams al-Din Ahmad b. Muhammad. Wafayat ‏اه‎
‎A'yadn wa Anbd’ Abnd’ al-Zamdn. Edited by I. ‘Abbas. 8
vols. Beirut: Dar 21-1530843, n.d.

Ibn Majah, M. b. Yazid. al-Sunan. 2 vols. Edited by M. Fa’ad ‘Abd
al-Baqi. Cairo: ‘Is4 al-Babi al-Halabi, 1952.

Ibn Manzir, Abd al-Fad! Jamal al-din ‏بط‎ Mukarram. Lisdn al-‘Arab.
15 vols. Cairo: Dar SAdir, n.d.

Ibn al-Murtada. K. Zabagdt al-Mu‘tazilah. Ed. S. Diwald-Wilzer.
Beirut, 1961. [Bibliotheca Islamica, 21]

Ibn al-Muthanna al-Taymiy, Aba ‘Ubayda. Majdz al-Qur’dn. 2 vols.

Edited by Fuat Sezgin. Cairo: Muhammad Sami Amin al-
Khanji, n.d.

Ibn al-Nadim, Abi al-Faraj M. b. Ishaq. The Firhrist of al-Nadim. 2
vols. Translated and edited by Bayard Dodge. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1970.

. al-Fihrist b. al-Nadim. Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifa, 1978.

Ibn Nujaym, Ibrahim. al-Ashbéh wa al-Nazé’ir. Damascus: Dar al-
Fikr, 1983.

Ibn Qadi Shuhbah al-Damashqi, Abi Bakr b. Ahmad b. Muhammad.
1600981 al-Shafi'iya, Ed. Dr. al-Hafiz ‘Abdul ‘Alim Khan.
Hyderabad. D4é’ira al-Ma‘arif al-‘Uthminiya, 1399/1979,

Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, Shams al-Din Muhammad. /‘ldm al-
Muwaqqi'in. 4 vols. Edited by Taha A. Sa‘d. Cairo:
Maktabat al-Kulliyyat al-Azhariyyah, 1980.
772

Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, Shams al-Din Muhammad. 224 al-
Ma‘ad fi Hady Khair al-‘Ibéd. Edited by Shu‘ayb al-Arnd' ut
and ‘Abd al-Qédir al-Arn@’ ut, Beirut: Mu’ assasat al-Risdla,
1979.

Ibn Qudama, Muwaffaq al-Din. Rawdat al-Naézir wa Jannat al-
Mund@zir fi Usiil al-Figh ‘ala Madhhab al-lmém 4/1764 b.
Hanbal. 2 vols. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1981.

_.Rawdat al-Nazir wa Jannat al-Mundzir fi Usiil al-F igh ‘ala
Madhhab al-Imém Ahmad b. Hanbal. Edited by Syaf al-Din
al-Katib. Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi, 1981.

. Rawdat al-Naézir wa Jannat al-Mundzir fi Usil al-F igh ‘ala
Madhhab al-Imém Ahmad b. Hanbal. 2 vols. Edited by
‘Abd al-‘Aziz ‘Abd al-Rahman Sa‘id. Riyad: University of
Imam Muhammad b. Sa‘iid Press, 1979.

. Rawdat al-Nazir wa Junnat al-Mundzir. Beirut: Dar ‏اج‎
‎Matbu‘at al ‘Arabiyya, n.d.

Ibn Qutlitugha, al-Qasim b. ‘Abd Allah. Taj al-Tardjim fi ‏عط‎
‎al-Hanafiyya. Baghdad: Maktab al-Muthanna, 1962.

Ibn Rushd, Abi al-Walid. Bidéyat al-Mujtahid wa Nihdyat al-
Muqtasid. 2 vols. Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, n.d.

_. Kitab Fasl al-Magal. Edited by George F. Hourani. Leiden,
E.J. Brill, 1959.

Ibn al-Salah, ‘Uthman b. ‘Abd al-Rahman. Muqaddima, Edited by
‘Ay'isha ‘Abd al-Rahman. Cairo: Dar al-Kutb Press, 1974.

Ibn Taymiyya, Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Salam Aba ‘Ubayda. Baydn
Muwafagat Sarih al-Ma‘qil li Sarth al-Manqil. 2 vols.
Edited by ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Wakil. Beruit: Dar al-Kutub
al-‘IImiyya, 1985.

_:Majmu‘ al-Fatéwa. 39 vols. Rabat: Maktabat al-Ma‘arif,
n.d.
773

Ibn Zarriq, Ahmaa b. Muhammd al-Fasi. Sharh ‘Aqida al-Imam al-
Ghazali, on margin of: ‘Abd ai-Qadir b. A. al-Fakihi. al-
Kifdya fi Sharh Biddyat al-Hidéyah. Cairo, 1296/1879.

Idlibi, Salah al-Din. Manhaj Naqd al-Matn ‘ind ‘Ulamé’ al-Hadith.
Beirut: D’dar al-Afaq al-Jadida, 1983.

al-Isnawi, Jamal al-Din. Nihdéyat al-Usiil fi Sharh Minhdj al-Wusiil
ila al-Usil li al-Qadi al-Baydaéwi. 4 vols. Beirut: al-Maktba‘a
al-Salafiyya, 1982.

. Labaqat al-Shafi'iyya. 2 vols. Edited by ‘Abd Allah al-
Jubiri. Baghdad: Ministry of Awqaf, 1391 H.

‘lyad, Abi Fadl b. MasA 21-0301. Tartib al-Maddrik wa Taqrib al-
Masalik li Ma‘rifat A‘lam Malik. 4 ovis. Edited by Ahmad B.
Mahmid. Beirut: Maktabat al-Hay4t, 1967.

al-Jahiz, Aba ‘Uthman ‘Amr b. Bahr. al-Baydn wa al-Tabyin. 4 vols.
4th ed. Edited by by ‘Abd al-Salam M. Haran. Cairo:
Maktabat al-Khanji, 1975.

. K. al-Hayawan. Edited by ‘Abd al-Salam M. Haran. 7 vols.
Beirut: al-Majma‘ al-‘Ilmi al-‘Arabi al-Islami, 1979.

aga

al-Jawhari, Isma‘il b. Hammad. Al-Sihah. 6 vols. Cairo, 1957; rpt.
Beirut, 1979.

al-Jurgani, ‘Ali. Kitab al-Ta‘rifat. Beirut: Maktaba Lubnan, 1978.

al-Juwayni, Abi al-Ma‘ali ‘Abd al-Malik. Al-Burhdn fi Usil al-Figh.
2 vols. Edited by ‘Abd al-‘Azim al-Dib. Qatar: University of
Qatar, 1980.

. al-Irshad ila Qawati‘ al-Adilla fi Usil al-I‘tigad. Edited
and translated by J.D. Luciani. Paris, 1938.

al-Kalabadhi, M. b. Ibrahim. The Doctrine of the Sufis. Translated
by A.J. Arberry, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1935; reprint ed., Lahore: Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, 1977.
774

Kahhala, ‘Umar Rida. Mu‘jam al-Mu'allifin: Tarajum Musannafi ‏ناه‎

Kutub al-‘Arabiyya. 15 vols. Beirut: Maktabat al-Muthanna,
1957.

al-Kankaihi, Muhammad Fayd. Usil al-Shdshi. Beirut: Dar ai-Kitab
al-‘Arabiya, 1982.

al-Karkhi, Aba Hasan ‘Ubayd Allah. Usal al-Karkhi. Printed with
Dabbasi’s Ta’sis al-Nazar.

al-Kasani, Abi Bakr b. Mas‘id. Kitab Badd’ i‘ al-Sana’ i‘ fi Tartib al-
Shard’i'. 7 vols. Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi, 1982.

al-Katténi, ‘Abd al-Hayy. Fihris al-fahdéris wa al-Athbat wa Mu‘jam
al-Ma‘djim. 2 vols. Fez, 1346-47/1927-28.

Khadduri, Majid. The Islamic Conception of Justice. Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984.

. The Islamic Law of Nations, Shabdni’s Siyar. Baltimore:
The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1966.

Khalifa, Haji. Kashf al-Zuniin ‘an Asami al-Kutub wa al-Funiin. 6
vols. Damascus: Dar al-Fikr, 1982.

al-Khallaf, ‘Abd al-Wahhab. Masddir al-Tashri‘ al-lslami fi ma la
Nass fihi. Kuwait: Dar al-Qalam, 1978.

5 . ‏العلا‎ al-Figh. Kuwait: Dar al-Qalam, 1978.

al-Khunn, Mustafa. Athar al-Ikhtilaf fi al-Qawé id al-Usiiliyyah fi
Ikhtilaf al-Fugqahd'. Beirut: Mu’assisat al-Risalah, 1972.

al-Khudari, Muhammad b. ‘Afifi al-Bajari. Ugiil al-Figh. Sixth
edition. Cairo: al-Maktaba al-Tujariya, 1969.

_:Tarikh al-Tashri‘ al-Islami. Eighth edition. n.p.: Dar al-
Fikr, 1967. ‏ش‎

al-Kladhani, Abd al-Khattab. al-Tamhid fit ‏افولا‎ al-Figh, Edited by
Mufid Abi ‘Amsha and Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. Ibrahim. 4
vols. Jeddah: Dar al-Madani, 1985.
775

al-Laknawi, ‘Abd al-Hay. Kitab al-Fawd’ id al-Bahiya fi Tabaqat al-
Hanafiyya. Cairo: al-Jamali and al-Khanjli, 1906.

Lane, Edward. An Arabic-English Lexicon. 8 vols. (parts). Beirut:
Librairie du Liban, 1980.

Laoust, Henri. La Politique de Gazdli. Paris: Librairie Orientaliste
Paul Geuthner, n.d.

Lazarus-Yafeh, Hava. “Philosophical Terms as a Criterion of
Authenticity in the Writings of al-Ghazzali,” Studia Islamica,
25 (1966): 111-121.

_- Studies in al-Ghazéli. Jerusalem: The Magnes Press, The
Hebrew University, 1975.

MacDonald, Duncan B. “The Life of al-Ghazzali, with Especial
Reference to His Religious Experiences and Opinions.”
Journal of the American Oriental Society 20 (1899): 70-132.

Madkér, Muhammad Sallam. al-Hukm al-Takhyiri or Nazariyyat
al-Ibaha ‘ind al-Usiiliyyin wa al-Fugahd’. 3d ed. Cairo: Dar
al-Nahda al-‘Arabiyya, 1965.

_. al-Janin wa al-Ahkam al-Muta‘aliqatu bihi fi al-Figh al-
Islami. Cairo: Dar al-Nahda al-‘Arabiyya, 1969.

. Manahij al-ljtihad fi al-Islam. Kuwait: Kuwait University
Press, 1974.

al-Mahdi, al-Wafi. al-Ijtihdd ft al-Shari‘a al-lslamiyya. al-Dar ‏عاج‎
‎Bayda’ al-Maghrib: Dar al-Thaqaf, 1984.

Majma* al-Lugha al-‘Arabiyya. Mu‘jam al-Falsafa. Beruit: ‘Alam al-
Kutub, 1399/1979,

Makdisi, George. “Ash‘ari and the Ash‘arites in Islamic Religious

History.” Studia Islamica 17 (1962): 37-80; 18 (1963): 19-
39,

5 _ . fbn ‘Aqil et la résu;rgence de I’Islam traditionaliste au XI¢
siécle. Damascus, 1963.
776

Makdisi, George. “Muslim Institutions of Learning in 11th Century

Baghdad,” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African
Studies 24 (1961): 1-56.

Makhléf, ‘Abd al-Ra’ df. Al-Baqillanit wa Kitdbuhu I ‘J@z al-Qur’ an,
Beruit: Maktabat al-Hayyat, 1973.

al-Makhlaf, Muhammad, Shajarat al-Nir al-Zakiyya fi Tabaqét al-
Malikiyya. n.p.: Dar al-Fikr, n.d.

Malik b. Anas. al-Muwatta’ 2 vols. Edited by Muhammad ‘Abd al-
Baqi n.p.: Dar al-Turath al-‘Arabiy, n.d.

al-Marghinani, Burhan al-Din Abd al-Hasan ‘Ali b. Abi Bakr. Al-
Hidayah. 4 vols. Cairo: Matba‘at Mustafa al-Halabi, n.d.

al-Maraghi, ‘Abd Allah Mustafa. al-Fath al-Mubin fi Tabaqdt al-
Usiliyin. 3 vols. Cairo: Matba‘at Ansar al-Sunna al-
Muhammadiyya, 1947,

Marmura, Michaele. “Ghazali’s Attitude to the Secular Sciences and
Logic,” in: G. F. Hourani (ed.) Essays on Islamic Philosophy
and Science. Albany: SUNY Press, 1975, pp.100-111.

Mas‘ad, Muhammad Khilid. J/slamic Legal Philosophy: A Study of
Abi Ishaq al-Shatibi's Life and Thought. 1slambad: Islamic
Research Institute, 1977.

al-Mas‘adi, Aba al-Hasan ‘Ali b. al-Husayn. Muriij al-Dhahab wa
Mu‘ddin al-Jawhar. 7 vols. Edited by Charles Pellat Beirut:
Publications de L’Universté Libanaise, 1966 -1979.

al-Mata‘ni, ‘Abd al-‘Athim Ibrahim. Al-Majaz fi al-Lugha wa fi al-
Qur’Gn al-Karim. Cairo: Maktabat Ruhba, n.d.

McCarthy, R. J. The Theology of Al-Ash‘ari. Beruit, 1953.

Mez, A. The Renaissance of Islam. Translated by S. Khuda Bakhsh
and D.S. Margoliouth. Patn, 1937.

Ministry of Awgqaf and Islamic Affiars of Kuwait. Mu'jam al-Figh

al-Hanbali. 2 vols. Kuwait: Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic
Affairs, 1973. ‏ش‎
777

Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic Affiars of Kuwait. al-Mawsit‘a al-

Fighiyya, 3 vols. Kuwait: Ministry of Awgéaf and Islamic
Affairs, 1982

al-Mizzi, Jamal al-Din Yasuf. Tahdhib al-Kaméal fi Asma’ al-Rijal. 3
vols. Beirut: Dar al-Ma’min, 1982.

Mudarris, Muhammad Mabris ‘Abd al-Latif. Mashayikh Balkh min
al-Hanafiyya, 2 vols. Iraq: Ministry of Awaéf, n.d.

Muslim 6. al-Hajjaj, al-Qushayri. Sahih. 5 vols. Cairo, 1955-56.

_- Sahih Muslim. 18 vols. 2nd edition. Beirut: Dar Ihya’ al-
Turath al-‘Arabi, 1972.

Mustafa, Ibrahim; Hamid ‘Abd al-Qadir, Ahmad Hasan al-Zayat; and
al-Najar, Muhammad ‘Ali. al-Mu‘jam al-Wasit. 2 vols.
Tehran: Maktabat al-‘IImiyya, n.d.

Nakamiéra, Kojiro “A Bibliography on Imam al-Ghazali.” Orient 13
(1977): 119-134,

al-Nashshar, ‘Ali Sami. “Aba Hamid al-Ghazzali wa Mu‘ariddhu min
ahl al-Sunna,” Majallat Kulliyat al-Adab [Baghdad] 1 (1959):
195-211.

al-Nawawi, Muhi al-Din Aba Zakariyya. Takmilat al-Majmit' Sharh

al-Muhadhdhab. 20 vols. Medina: al-Maktaba al-Salafiyya,
n.d.

Nelson, Kristina. The Art of Reciting the Qur'adn. Modern Middle
East Series, no. 11. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1985.

Nicholson, Reynol A. “A Moslem Philosophy of Religion.” Le Muséon
(3d Series] 1 (1915): 83-87.

_+ Studies in Islamic Mysticism, Cambridge, 1921.

Pasha, M. Mukhtar. Kitab al-Tawfigat al-IlIhamiyya fi Muqdranat
al-Tawarikh al-Hijriyya bi al-Sinin al-Ifranjiyya wa al-
Qibtiyya. 2 vols. Edited by Mulammad ‘Imara. Beirut:
Mu’assasa al-‘Arabiyya li al-Dirdsat wa al-Nashr, n.d.
778

al-Pazdawi, Fakhr al-Islam ‘Ali Muhammad. ‏افع لا‎ Fakhr al-Islam
al-Pazdawi. Printed on the margin of Bukhari’s Kashf al-
Asrar,

.K. Usiil al-Din. Edited by Hans Linss. Cairo, 1383/1963.

Pellat, Charles. Mas‘iidi’s Murij ‘al-Dhahab wa Ma‘édin al-Jawéhir.
7 vols. Beirut: University of Lebanon Publication, 1966.

Peters, J. R. T. M. God's Created Speech: A Study in the Special
Theology of the Mu'tazili 0207 I-Quddt Abi al-Hasan ‘Abd
al-Jabbaér bn Ahmad al-Hamadéni Leiden, 1976

Qal‘aji, Muhammad and Qunaibi, Hamid. Mu'jam Lughat al-Fuqahd’.
Beirut: Dar al-Nafa’s, 1985.

al-Qanaji, Muhammad SAdiq Hasan Khan. Abjad al-‘Ulim. 3 vols.
Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilm, 1975-78.

al-Qarafi, Abmad b. Idris. al-Ihkam fi Tamyiz al-Fatéwa ‘an al-
Ahkam wa Tasarrufat al-Qédi wa al-lmam. Edited by ‘Abd
al-Fattah Abi Ghudda. Allepo: Maktab al-Matbu‘at al-
Islamiyya, 1967.

.Sharh Tanqih al-Fusiil fi Ikhtisadr al-Mahsil. Cairo:
Matba‘at al-Khayriyya, 1306 H.

al-Qushayri, Aba al-Qasim. al-Risdlah al-Qushayriyah. 2 vols.
Cairo, 1966.

al-Rabi‘a, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. al-Sabab ‘ind al-Usiiliyyin. 3 vols. Riyad:
Muhammad b. Sa‘id University Press, 1980.

Rahman, Fazlur. /slam. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1979.

al-Razi, Abi Bakr M. b. Zakariya’. Rasd'il falsafiyah. Ed. Paul Kraus.
Cairo, 1939; rpt. Tehran, n.d.

al-Razi, Fakhr al-Din. K. al-Arb‘in fi Usiil al-Din. Hyderabad, 1353.
779

al-Razi, Fakhr al-Din. al-Mahsil fi ‘ilm Usiil al-Figh. 2. vols. Edited
by Taha Jabir al-Ulwani. Riyad: Islamic University of Imam
Muhammad b. Sa‘id, 1980.

Sadr al-Shari‘a al-Mahbabi. al-Tawdih li al-Tanqgih. Printed on the
margin of Taftazani‘s Sharh al-Talwih. 2 vols. Cairo: Dar al-
‘Ahd al-Jadid li al-Taba‘a, n.d.

Sahnién, b. Sa‘id al-Tanikhi. a@l-Mudawwana al-Kubréa. 6 vols.
Cairo: Matba‘a al-Sa‘ada, 1323 H.

al-Sa‘id, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz. Jbn Qudémé wa Athdéri al-Usiiliyya. 2 vols.
Riyad: Muhammad b. Sa‘id University Press, 1979.

Salama, Paulis. Al-Mu‘allagét al-‘Ashr. Beirut: Dar Sa‘b, 1981.

Salih, Muhammad Adib. Tafsir al-al-Nusis fi al-Figh al-Islami. 2
vols. Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami, n.d.

Salih, Subhi. Usil al-Hadith. 9th ed. Beirut: Dar al-‘IIm li Malayin,
1977,

al-Sam‘ani, ‘Abd al-Karim. al-Ansdb. Edited by A. Amin.
Hadrabad: Da’ira al-Ma‘rifat al-‘Uthmaniyya, 1966.

al-Santawi, ‘Abd al-Rahman. Al-Sayf al-Husdm fi al-Dhabb ‘an
kalam Hujjat al-Islam. Arabic ‏ركم‎ Yahuda Collection, vol.
2249. (Mach 3028).

al-Sarakhsi, Shams al-A’immah Aba Bakr Muhammad. al-Mabsiit.
30 vols. Beirut: Dar al-Ma'‘rifa, 1978.

_ . ‏العلا‎ al-Sarakhsi. 2 vols. Edited by Abd al-Wafa’ al-
Afghani. Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifa, n.d.

Schacht, J. An Introduction to Islamic Law. Oxford, 1964.

_: “New Sources for the History of Muhammadan Theology,”
Studia Islamica 1 (1953): 23-42.

_ _- Origins of Muhammadan Jurisprudence. Oxford, 1950.
780

Sezgin, Fuat. Geschichte des Arabischen Schrifttums. 8 vols.
Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1937-1984,

al-Shafi‘i, Muhammad b. Idris. Risdla. Edited by Ahmad M. Shakir.
Cairo: Dar al-Turath, 1979.

.al-Umm. 7 vols. Cairo: Kitab al-Sha‘b, n.d.

al-Shahrastani, M. b. ‘Abd al-Karim. Al-Milal wa al-Nihal. Edited
by M. Badran. Cairo, 1370/1951.

Shalabi, Muhammad Mustafa. al-Madkhal fi al-Ta‘rif bi al-Figh al-
Islami. Beirut: Dar al-Nahza al-‘Arabiyya, 1969.

_ _- Usil al-Figh al-Islami. Beirut: Dar al-Nahda al-‘Arabiyya,
1978.

al-Shanqitt, Ahmad. Sharh al-Mu‘allaqat al-‘Ashr wa Akhbdar
Shu‘arad'ihé, Beirut: Dar al-Andulis, 1402/1982

Sharabasi, Ahmad. Al-Mu‘jam al-IqtisGdi al-Islam. Beirut: Dar al-
Jil, 1401/1981.

al-Sha‘rani, ‘Abd al-Wahhab. Al-Tabaqat al-Kubré. 2 vols. Cairo,
1373/1954.

al-Sharif al-Tilmsani. Muftah al-Wusitl fi ‘Ilm al-Usiil. Cairo: Dar
al-Kitab al-‘Arabi, 1962.

Shatibi, Aba Ishaq. al-I‘tis4m. 2 vols. Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifa, n.d.

_-a4l-Muwafaqat. 4 vols. Edited by ‘Abd Allah Draz. Beirut:
Dar al-Ma'rifa, n.d.

Shawkani, Muhammad b. ‘Ali Irshdd al-Fuhiil 6 Tahqiq al-Haqq
min ‘Ilm al-Usiil. Cairo: Mustafa Halabi Press, 1356 H.

al-Shirazi, Aba Ishaq Ibrahim.b. ‘Alf b. Ydsuf al-Fayrazabadi. al-
Lam' fi Usiil al-Figh. Cairo: Muhammad ‘Ali Sabih wa
Awlad, n.d.

_-K. al-Tabsira fi Usiil al-Figh. Edited by Muhammad Hasan
Haniq Hitt. Damascus: Dar al-Fikr, 1980.
781

al-Shirazi, Aba Ishaq Ibrahim.b. ‘Ali b. Yasuf al-Fayrizabadi. al-
Labaqgat al-Fugahd’. Edited by Ihsan ‘Abbas. Beirut: Dar al-
Ra’id al-‘Arabi, 1981,

Shishin, Ramadan. Nawddar al-Makhuitdat al-‘Arabiyya fi Maktabét
Turkiya. 2 vols. Beirut: Dar al-Kitaéb al-Jadid, 1980.

Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam. Ed. H.A.R. Gibb and J.H. Kramers.
Leiden: E J. Brill, 1953.

al-Siydti, Jalal al-Din ‘Abd al-Rahman. al-Dir al-Manthir fi al-
Tafsir bi al-Ma’ thar. Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, 1983,

. Labaqgat al-Hufféz. Edited by ‘Ali ‘Umar. Cairo: Maktabat
Wahba, n.d.

_- al-ltgan fi ‘Ulam al-Qur'dn. 4 vols. Edited by Muhammad
Aba Fad) Ibrahim. Cairo: Dar al-Turath, n.d.

_- Bughyat al-Wu'dt fi Labagat al-Lughawiyyin wa al-Nuhét,
3 vols. Edited by Muhammad Abia Fad] Ibrahim. Cairo: ‘Isa
al-Halabi Press, 1964

al-Subki, ‘Abd al-Wahhab b. ‘Ali and al-Subki, ‘Ali. al-Ibhdaj fi

Sharh al-Minhaj. 3 vols. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘IImiyya,
1984,

al-Subki, ‘Abd al-Wahhab b. ‘Ali. Labaqat al-Shafi'iyya al-Kubré.
10 vols. Edited by ‘Abd al-Fattah al-Huld and Mahmid al-
Tanahi. Cairo: Halabi Press, 1966.

Sweetman, J. Windrow. Islam and Christian Theology. London,
Redhill, 1945,

Tabari, Muhibb al-Din. al-Riydd al-Nddira fi Mandaqib al-‘Ashara. 2
vols. Cairo, 1327/1909. .

al-Tabari, Aba Ja‘far Muhammad b. Jarir. Jami‘ al-Baydn ‘an Ta'wil

‘ay al-Qur‘én. 30 vols. 3d edition (in 12) Cairo: al-Halabi
Press, 1968.
782

al-Taftaézani, Sa‘d al-Din. Sharh al-Talwih ‘ald al-Tawdth. 2 vols.
Cairo: Dar al-‘Ahd al-Jadid li al-Taba‘a, n.d.

al-Tahanawi, M. Kashshdf Istilahét al-Funin. Edited A. Sprenger. 2

vols. Calcutta, 1854; reprint ed. Istanbul: Dar Qahrman,
1984,

Tashképriizade, Ahmad. Miftadh al-Sa‘ddah wa Misbaéh al-Siyadah.
3 vols. Hyderabad, 1328-56/1910-37.

al-Tirmidhi, M. b. ‘Isé. Sunan. 10 vols. Hims, 1965-68.

al-‘Ulaymi, ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Muhammad. al-Manhaj al-Ahmad fi
Tardjim ft Ashab al-Imém Ahriad. 2 vols. Edited by
Muhammad Muhi al-Din‘ Abd al-Hamid. Cairo: Madani
Press, 1963-1965.

al-‘Umari, Akram. Mawdrid al-Khatib al-Baghddadi fi Tdrikh
Baghdad. Beirut: Dar al-Qalam, 1975.

al-‘Umari, Nadia. al-Ijtihdd fi al-Islam: Usali Ahkami Afaqa.
Beirut: Mu’assasa al-Risala, 1981.

.al-Naskh fi Dardését al-Usiliyyin. Beirut: Mu’assasa al-
Risala, 1980.

al-‘Uthman, ‘Abd al-Karim. Sirat al-Ghazdli wa Aqwal al-
Mutaqaddimin fihi. Damascus: Dar al-Fikr, 1961.

Watt, Montogmery. “The Authenticity of the Works Attributed to

al-Ghazali.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (1952): 24-
45.

_- “A Forgery in al-Ghazali’s Mishkdt?” Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society (1949): 5-22.

_+ Muslim Intellectual: A Study of Ghazdli. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 1963.

Weiss, Bernard. “The Primacy of Revelation in Classical Islamic

Legal Theory as Expounded by Sayf al-Din al-Amidi.” Studia
Islamica 59 (1983): 79-110.
Weiss, Bernard. “Knowledge of the Past: The Theory of ‏ه17‎ 147
According to Ghazali.” Studia Islamica 61 (1985): 86-106.

Wensinck, A. J. Concordance et Indices dé la Tradition Musulmane.
7 vols. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1936-1969.

. The Muslim Creed. Cambridge, 1932.
_.La pensée de Ghazzéli. Paris, 1940.

Yale. Arabic Manu;scripts in the yale University library. Compiled
by L. Nemoy. New Haven, 1956.

Yaqit al-Hamawi, Shihab al-Din. Kitab Mut‘jam al-Buldan. 5 vols.
Beirut: Dar al-Sadir and Dar Beirut, 1957.

.K. Irshad al-Arib ila Ma‘rifat al-Adib. 7 vols. Edited by D.

S. Margoliouth. W. Gibb Memorial Series, no. 6. Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 1913. 0)

al-Zabidi, Muhammad . Murtada al-Husayni. I/thdf al-Sddat al-
Muttagin bi Sharh Asrér Ihyd’ ‘Ulim al-Din. 10 vols. Cairo,
1311/1894.

_. Taj al-‘Ariis. 10 vols. Cairo: Khayriyya Press, 1306.

al-Zamakhshari, M. b. ‘Umar. al-Kashshaéf ‘an Haqa’iq Ghawdmid al-
Tanzil wa ‘Uy;iin al-Aqaéwil fi wujith al-Ta’wil. 4 vols.
Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifa, 1947; rpt., n.d.

al-Zarakshi, Badr al-Din. Burhan fi ‘Ulim al-Qur’dn, 4 vols. 3d

edition. Edited by Muhammad Abu Fadl Ibrahim. n.p.: Dar
al-Fikr, 1980.

.al-Manthiir al-Qawd‘id. Edited by Taysir Fa’iq Ahmad
Mahmid. Kuwait: Mu’assasa al-Fulayj, Ministry of Awgaf’s
Encyclopedic Series, 1982.

al-Zarqa, Mustafa. al-Madkhal al-Fighi al-‘Am. 3 vols. Damascus:
Mataba‘ Alif Ba’, 1967-68.

al-Zawi, al-Tahir Ahmad. Tartib al-Qamiis. 2nd ed. 4 vols. Beirut:
Dar al-Fikr, n.d..
74

Zaydan, ‘Abd al-Karim. Ahkdm al-Dhimmiyyin wa al-Must’ aminin
fi Dar al-Islam. Baghdad: University of Baghdad, 1963.

Zayla‘i, Jamal al-Din Abi Muhammd ‘Abd Allah b. Yusuf al-Hanafi.

Nasb al-Rayyah li Ahadith al-Hidaya. 4 vols. 2d ed. a.p.: —

Maktabat al-Islamiyya, 1973.

al-Zahili, Wahba. al-Figh al-Islami wa Adillatu. 2nd ed. 8 vols.
Damascus: Dar al-Fikr,1985.

al-Zirikli, Khayr al-Din. al-A‘lam Qdamits Tardjum. 8 vols. Beirut:
Dar al-‘Ilm li al-Malayin, 1980.
